            The Adventure of the Dancing Men

  Holmes had been seated for some hours in silence with his
long, thin back curved over a chemical vessel in which he was
brewing a particularly malodorous product. His head was sunk
upon his breast, and he looked from my point of view like a
strange, lank bird, with dull gray plumage and a black top-knot.
  "So, Watson," said he, suddenly, "you do not propose to
invest in South African securities?"
  I gave a start of astonishment. Accustomed as I was to Holmes's
curious faculties, this sudden intrusion into my most intimate
thoughts was utterly inexplicable.
  "How on earth do you know that?" I asked.
  He wheeled round upon his stool, with a steaming test-tube in
his hand, and a gleam of amusement in his deep-set eyes.
  "Now, Watson, confess yourself utterly taken aback," said
he.
  "I am."
  "I ought to make you sign a paper to that effect."
  "Why?"
  "Because in five minutes you will say that it is all so absurdly
simple."
  "I am sure that I shall say nothing of the kind."
  "You see, my dear Watson" -- he propped his test-tube in the
rack, and began to lecture with the air of a professor addressing
his class -- "it is not really difficult to construct a series of
inferences, each dependent upon its predecessor and each simple
in itself. If, after doing so, one simply knocks out all the central
inferences and presents one's audience with the starting-point
and the conclusion, one may produce a startling, though possi-
bly a meretricious, effect. Now, it was not really difficult, by an
inspection of the groove between your left forefinger and thumb,
to feel sure that you did not propose to invest your small capital
in the gold fields."
  "I see no connection."
  "Very likely not; but I can quickly show you a close connec-
tion. Here are the missing links of the very simple chain: 1. You
had chalk between your left finger and thumb when you returned
from the club last night. 2. You put chalk there when you play
billiards, to steady the cue. 3. You never play billiards except
with Thurston. 4. You told me, four weeks ago, that Thurston
had an option on some South African property which would
expire in a month, and which he desired you to share with him.
5. Your check book is locked in my drawer, and you have not
asked for the key. 6. You do not propose to invest your money
in this manner."
  "How absurdly simple!" I cried.
  "Quite so!" said he, a little nettled. "Every problem becomes
very childish when once it is explained to you. Here is an
unexplained one. See what you can make of that, friend Wat-
son." He tossed a sheet of paper upon the table, and turned once
more to his chemical analysis.
  I looked with amazement at the absurd hieroglyphics upon the
paper.
  "Why, Holmes, it is a child's drawing," I cried.
  "Oh, that's your idea!"
  "What else should it be?"
  "That is what Mr. Hilton Cubitt, of Riding Thorpe Manor,
Norfolk, is very anxious to know. This little conundrum came by
the first post, and he was to follow by the next train. There's a
ring at the bell, Watson. I should not be very much surprised if
this were he."
  A heavy step was heard upon the stairs, and an instant later
there entered a tall, ruddy, clean-shaven gentleman, whose clear
eyes and florid cheeks told of a life led far from the fogs of
Baker Street. He seemed to bring a whiff of his strong, fresh,
bracing, east-coast air with him as he entered. Having shaken
hands with each of us, he was about to sit down, when his eye
rested upon the paper with the curious markings, which I had
just examined and left upon the table.
  "Well, Mr. Holmes, what do you make of these?" he cried.
"They told me that you were fond of queer mysteries, and I
don't think you can find a queerer one than that. I sent the paper
on ahead, so that you might have time to study it before I
came."
  "It is certainly rather a curious production,'' said Holmes.
"At first sight it would appear to be some childish prank. It
consists of a number of absurd little figures dancing across the
paper upon which they are drawn. Why should you attribute any
importance to so grotesque an object?"
  "I never should, Mr. Holmes. But my wife does. It is fright-
ening her to death. She says nothing, but I can see terror in her
eyes. That's why I want to sift the matter to the bottom."
  Holmes held up the paper so that the sunlight shone full upon
it. It was a page torn from a notebook. The markings were done
in pencil, and ran in this way:


  Holmes examined it for some time, and then, folding it carefully
up, he placed it in his pocketbook.
  "This promises to be a most interesting and unusual case,"
said he. "You gave me a few particulars in your letter, Mr.
Hilton Cubitt, but I should be very much obliged if you would
kindly go over it all again for the benefit of my friend, Dr.
Watson."
  "I'm not much of a story-teller," said our visitor, nervously
clasping and unclasping his great, strong hands. "You'll just ask
me anything that I don't make clear. I'll begin at the time of my
marriage last year, but I want to say first of all that, though I'm
not a rich man, my people have been at Riding Thorpe for a
matter of five centuries, and there is no better known family in
the County of Norfolk. Last year I came up to London for the
Jubilee, and I stopped at a boardinghouse in Russell Square,
because Parker, the vicar of our parish, was staying in it. There
was an American young lady there -- Patrick was the name --
Elsie Patrick. In some way we became friends, until before my
month was up I was as much in love as man could be. We were
quietly married at a registry office, and we returned to Norfolk a
wedded couple. You'll think it very mad, Mr. Holmes, that a
man of a good old family should marry a wife in this fashion,
knowing nothing of her past or of her people, but if you saw her
and knew her, it would help you to understand.
  "She was very straight about it, was Elsie. I can't say that she
did not give me every chance of getting out of it if I wished to do
so. 'l have had some very disagreeable associations in my life,'
said she, 'I wish to forget all about them. I would rather never
allude to the past, for it is very painful to me. If you take me,
Hilton, you will take a woman who has nothing that she need be
personally ashamed of; but you will have to be content with my
word for it, and to allow me to be silent as to all that passed up
to the time when I became yours. If these conditions are too
hard, then go back to Norfolk, and leave me to the lonely life in
which you found me.' It was only the day before our wedding
that she said those very words to me. I told her that I was content
to take her on her own terms, and I have been as good as my
word.
  "Well, we have been married now for a year, and very happy
we have been. But about a month ago, at the end of June, I saw
for the first time signs of trouble. One day my wife received a
letter from America. I saw the American stamp. She turned
deadly white, read the letter, and threw it into the fire. She made
no allusion to it afterwards, and I made none, for a promise is a
promise, but she has never known an easy hour from that
moment. There is always a look of fear upon her face -- a look as
if she were waiting and expecting. She would do better to trust
me. She would find that I was her best friend. But until she
speaks, I can say nothing. Mind you, she is a truthful woman,
Mr. Holmes, and whatever trouble there may have been in her
past life it has been no fault of hers. I am only a simple Norfolk
squire, but there is not a man in England who ranks his family
honour more highly than I do. She knows it well, and she knew
it well before she married me. She would never bring any stain
upon it -- of that I am sure.
  "Well, now I come to the queer part of my story. About a
week ago -- it was the Tuesday of last week -- I found on one of
the window-sills a number of absurd little dancing figures like
these upon the paper. They were scrawled with chalk. I thought
that it was the stable-boy who had drawn them, but the lad swore
he knew nothing about it. Anyhow, they had come there during
the night. I had them washed out, and I only mentioned the
matter to my wife afterwards. To my surprise, she took it very
seriously, and begged me if any more came to let her see them.
None did come for a week, and then yesterday morning I found
this paper Iying on the sundial in the garden. I showed it to
Elsie, and down she dropped in a dead faint. Since then she has
looked like a woman in a dream, half dazed, and with terror
always lurking in her eyes. It was then that I wrote and sent the
paper to you, Mr. Holmes. It was not a thing that I could take to
the police, for they would have laughed at me, but you will tell
me what to do. I am not a rich man, but if there is any danger
threatening my little woman, I would spend my last copper to
shield her."
  He was a fine creature, this man of the old English soil --
simple, straight, and gentle, with his great, earnest blue eyes and
broad, comely face. His love for his wife and his trust in her
shone in his features. Holmes had listened to his story with the
utmost attention, and now he sat for some time in silent thought.
  "Don't you think, Mr. Cubitt," said he, at last, "that your
best plan would be to make a direct appeal to your wife, and to
ask her to share her secret with you?"
  Hilton Cubitt shook his massive head.
  "A promise is a promise, Mr. Holmes. If Elsie wished to tell
me she would. If not, it is not for me to force her confidence.
But I am justified in taking my own line -- and I will."
  "Then I will help you with all my heart. In the first place,
have you heard of any strangers being seen in your neighbour-
hood?"
  "No."
  "I presume that it is a very quiet place. Any fresh face would
cause comment?"
  "In the immediate neighbourhood, yes. But we have several
small watering-places not very far away. And the farmers take in
lodgers."
  "These hieroglyphics have evidently a meaning. If it is a
purely arbitrary one, it may be impossible for us to solve it. If,
on the other hand, it is systematic, I have no doubt that we shall
get to the bottom of it. But this particular sample is so short that
I can do nothing, and the facts which you have brought me are
so indefinite that we have no basis for an investigation. I would
suggest that you return to Norfolk, that you keep a keen lookout,
and that you take an exact copy of any fresh dancing men which
may appear. It is a thousand pities that we have not a reproduc-
tion of those which were done in chalk upon the window-sill.
Make a discreet inquiry also as to any strangers in the neigh-
bourhood. When you have collected some fresh evidence, come
to me again. That is the best advice which I can give you, Mr.
Hilton Cubitt. If there are any pressing fresh developments, I
shall be always ready to run down and see you in your Norfolk
home."
  The interview left Sherlock Holmes very thoughtful, and sev-
eral times in the next few days I saw him take his slip of paper
from his notebook and look long and earnestly at the curious
figures inscribed upon it. He made no allusion to the affair,
however, until one afternoon a fortnight or so later. I was going
out when he called me back.
  "You had better stay here, Watson."
  "Why?"
  "Because I had a wire from Hilton Cubitt this morning. You
remember Hilton Cubitt, of the dancing men? He was to reach
Liverpool Street at one-twenty. He may be here at any moment.
I gather from his wire that there have been some new incidents
of importance."
  We had not long to wait, for our Norfolk squire came straight
from the station as fast as a hansom could bring him. He was
looking worried and depressed, with tired eyes and a lined
forehead.
  "It's getting on my nerves, this business, Mr. Holmes," said
he, as he sank, like a wearied man, into an armchair. "It's bad
enough to feel that you are surrounded by unseen, unknown folk,
who have some kind of design upon you, but when, in addition
to that, you know that it is just killing your wife by inches, then
it becomes as much as flesh and blood can endure. She's wear-
ing away under it -- just wearing away before my eyes."
  "Has she said anything yet?"
  "No, Mr. Holmes, she has not. And yet there have been times
when the poor girl has wanted to speak, and yet could not quite
bring herself to take the plunge. I have tried to help her, but I
daresay I did it clumsily, and scared her from it. She has spoken
about my old family, and our reputation in the county, and our
pride in our unsullied honour, and I always felt it was leading to
the point, but somehow it turned off before we got there."
  "But you have found out something for yourself?"
  "A good deal, Mr. Holmes. I have several fresh dancing-men
pictures for you to examine, and, what is more important, I have
seen the fellow."
  "What, the man who draws them?"
  "Yes, I saw him at his work. But I will tell you everything in
order. When I got back after my visit to you, the very first thing
I saw next morning was a fresh crop of dancing men. They had
been drawn in chalk upon the black wooden door of the tool-
house, which stands beside the lawn in full view of the front
windows. I took an exact copy, and here it is." He unfolded a
paper and laid it upon the table. Here is a copy of the hiero-
glyphics:


  "Excellent!" said Holmes. "Excellent! Pray continue."
  "When I had taken the copy, I rubbed out the marks, but, two
mornings later, a fresh inscription had appeared. I have a copy of
it here":


  Holmes rubbed his hands and chuckled with delight.
  "Our material is rapidly accumulating," said he.
  "Three days later a message was left scrawled upon paper,
and placed under a pebble upon the sundial. Here it is. The
characters are, as you see, exactly the same as the last one. After
that I determined to lie in wait, so I got out my revolver and I sat
up in my study, which overlooks the lawn and garden. About
two in the morning I was seated by the window, all being dark
save for the moonlight outside, when I heard steps behind me,
and there was my wife in her dressing-gown. She implored me to
come to bed. I told her frankly that I wished to see who it was
who played such absurd tricks upon us. She answered that it was
some senseless practical joke, and that I should not take any
notice of it.
  " 'If it really annoys you, Hilton, we might go and travel, you
and I, and so avoid this nuisance.'
  "'What, be driven out of our own house by a practical
joker?' said I. 'Why, we should have the whole county laughing
at us.'
  " 'Well, come to bed.' said she, 'and we can discuss it in the
morning.'
  "Suddenly, as she spoke, I saw her white face grow whiter
yet in the moonlight, and her hand tightened upon my shoulder.
Something was moving in the shadow of the tool-house. I saw a
dark, creeping figure which crawled round the corner and squat-
ted in front of the door. Seizing my pistol, I was rushing out,
when my wife threw her arms round me and held me with
convulsive strength. I tried to throw her off, but she clung to me
most desperately. At last I got clear, but by the time I had
opened the door and reached the house the creature was gone.
He had left a trace of his presence, however, for there on the
door was the very same arrangement of dancing men which had
already twice appeared, and which I have copied on that paper.
There was no other sign of the fellow anywhere, though I ran all
over the grounds. And yet the amazing thing is that he must have
been there all the time, for when I examined the door again in
the morning, he had scrawled some more of his pictures under
the line which I had already seen."
  "Have you that fresh drawing?"
  "Yes, it is very short, but I made a copy of it, and here it is."
  Again he produced a paper. The new dance was in this form:


  "Tell me," said Holmes -- and I could see by his eyes that he
was much excited -- "was this a mere addition to the first or did
it appear to be entirely separate?"
  "It was on a different panel of the door."
  "Excellent! This is far the most important of all for our
purpose. It fills me with hopes. Now, Mr. Hilton Cubitt, please
continue your most interesting statement."
  "I have nothing more to say, Mr. Holmes, except that I was
angry with my wife that night for having held me back when I
might have caught the skulking rascal. She said that she feared
that I might come to harm. For an instant it had crossed my mind
that perhaps what she really feared was that he might come to
harm, for I could not doubt that she knew who this man was, and
what he meant by these strange signals. But there is a tone in my
wife's voice, Mr. Holmes, and a look in her eyes which forbid
doubt, and I am sure that it was indeed my own safety that was
in her mind. There's the whole case, and now I want your advice
as to what I ought to do. My own inclination is to put half a
dozen of my farm lads in the shrubbery, and when this fellow
comes again to give him such a hiding that he will leave us in
peace for the future."
  "I fear it is too deep a case for such simple remedies," said
Holmes. "How long can you stay in London?"
  "I must go back today. I would not leave my wife alone all
night for anything. She is very nervous, and begged me to come
back."
  "I daresay you are right. But if you could have stopped. I
might possibly have been able to return with you in a day or two.
Meanwhile you will leave me these papers, and I think that it is
very likely that I shall be able to pay you a visit shortly and to
throw some light upon your case."
  Sherlock Holmes preserved his calm professional manner until
our visitor had left us, although it was easy for me, who knew
him so well, to see that he was profoundly excited. The moment
that Hilton Cubitt's broad back had disappeared through the door
my comrade rushed to the table, laid out all the slips of paper
containing dancing men in front of him, and threw himself into
an intricate and elaborate calculation. For two hours I watched
him as he covered sheet after sheet of paper with figures and
letters, so completely absorbed in his task that he had evidently
forgotten my presence. Sometimes he was making progress and
whistled and sang at his work; sometimes he was puzzled, and
would sit for long spells with a furrowed brow and a vacant eye.
Finally he sprang from his chair with a cry of satisfaction, and
walked up and down the room rubbing his hands together. Then
he wrote a long telegram upon a cable form. "If my answer to
this is as I hope, you will have a very pretty case to add to your
collection, Watson," said he. "I expect that we shall be able to
go down to Norfolk tomorrow, and to take our friend some very
definite news as to the secret of his annoyance."
  I confess that I was filled with curiosity, but I was aware that
Holmes liked to make his disclosures at his own time and in his
own way, so I waited until it should suit him to take me into his
confidence.
  But there was a delay in that answering telegram, and two
days of impatience followed, during which Holmes pricked up
his ears at every ring of the bell. On the evening of the second
there came a letter from Hilton Cubitt. All was quiet with him,
save that a long inscription had appeared that morning upon the
pedestal of the sundial. He inclosed a copy of it, which is here
reproduced:


  Holmes bent over this grotesque frieze for some minutes, and
then suddenly sprang to his feet with an exclamation of surprise
and dismay. His face was haggard with anxiety.
  "We have let this affair go far enough," said he. "Is there a
train to North Walsham to-night?"
  I turned up the time-table. The last had just gone.
  "Then we shall breakfast early and take the very first in the
morning," said Holmes. "Our presence is most urgently needed.
Ah! here is our expected cablegram. One moment, Mrs. Hudson,
there may be an answer. No, that is quite as I expected. This
message makes it even more essential that we should not lose an
hour in letting Hilton Cubitt know how matters stand, for it is a
singular and a dangerous web in which our simple Norfolk squire
is entangled."
  So, indeed, it proved, and as I come to the dark conclusion of
a story which had seemed to me to be only childish and bizarre, I
experience once again the dismay and horror with which I was
filled. Would that I had some brighter ending to communicate to
my readers, but these are the chronicles of fact, and I must
follow to their dark crisis the strange chain of events which for
some days made Riding Thorpe Manor a household word through
the length and breadth of England.
  We had hardly alighted at North Walsham, and mentioned the
name of our destination, when the stationmaster hurried towards
us. "I suppose that you are the detectives from London?" said
he.
  A look of annoyance passed over Holmes's face.
  "What makes you think such a thing?"
  "Because Inspector Martin from Norwich has just passed
through. But maybe you are the surgeons. She's not dead -- or
wasn't by last accounts. You may be in time to save her yet --
though it be for the gallows."
  Holmes's brow was dark with anxiety.
  "We are going to Riding Thorpe Manor," said he, "but we
have heard nothing of what has passed there."
  "It's a terrible business," said the stationmaster. "They are
shot, both Mr. Hilton Cubitt and his wife. She shot him and then
herself -- so the servants say. He's dead and her life is despaired
of. Dear, dear, one of the oldest families in the county of
Norfolk, and one of the most honoured."
  Without a word Holmes hurried to a carriage, and during the
long seven miles' drive he never opened his mouth. Seldom have
I seen him so utterly despondent. He had been uneasy during all
our journey from town, and I had observed that he had turned
over the morning papers with anxious attention, but now this
sudden realization of his worst fears left him in a blank melan-
choly. He leaned back in his seat, lost in gloomy speculation.
Yet there was much around to interest us, for we were passing
through as singular a countryside as any in England, where a few
scattered cottages represented the populatlon of to-day, while on
every hand enormous square-towered churches bristled up from
the flat green landscape and told of the glory and prosperity of
old East Anglia. At last the violet rim of the German Ocean
appeared over the green edge of the Norfolk coast, and the driver
pointed with his whip to two old brick and timber gables which
projected from a grove of trees. "That's Riding Thorpe Manor,"
said he.
  As we drove up to the porticoed front door, I observed in front
of it, beside the tennis lawn, the black tool-house and the
pedestalled sundial with which we had such strange associations.
A dapper little man, with a quick, alert manner and a waxed
moustache, had just descended from a high dog-cart. He intro-
duced himself as Inspector Martin, of the Norfolk Constabulary
and he was considerably astonished when he heard the name of
my companion.
  "Why, Mr. Holmes, the crime was only committed at three
this morning. How could you hear of it in London and get to the
spot as soon as l?"
  "I anticipated it. I came in the hope of preventing it."
  "Then you must have important evidence, of which we are
ignorant, for they were said to be a most united couple."
  "I have only the evidence of the dancing men," said Holmes.
"I will explain the matter to you later. Meanwhile, since it is too
late to prevent this tragedy, I am very anxious that I should use
the knowledge which I possess in order to insure that justice be
done. Will you associate me in your investigation, or will you
prefer that I should act independently?"
  "I should be proud to feel that we were acting together, Mr.
Holmes," said the inspector, earnestly.
  "In that case I should be glad to hear the evidence and to
examine the premises without an instant of unnecessary delay."
  Inspector Martin had the good sense to allow my friend to do
things in his own fashion, and contented himself with carefully
noting the results. The local surgeon, an old, white-haired man,
had just come down from Mrs. Hilton Cubitt's room, and he
reported that her injuries were serious, but not necessarily fatal.
The bullet had passed through the front of her brain, and it
would probably be some time before she could regain conscious-
ness. On the question of whether she had been shot or had shot
herself, he would not venture to express any decided opinion.
Certainly the bullet had been discharged at very close quarters.
There was only the one pistol found in the room, two barrels of
which had been emptied. Mr. Hilton Cubitt had been shot through
the heart. It was equally conceivable that he had shot her and then
himself, or that she had been the criminal, for the revolver lay
upon the floor midway between them.
  "Has he been moved?" asked Holmes.
  "We have moved nothing except the lady. We could not leave
her lying wounded upon the floor."
  "How long have you been here, Doctor?"
  "Since four o'clock."
  "Anyone else?"
  "Yes, the constable here."
  "And you have touched nothing?"
  "Nothing."
  "You have acted with great discretion. Who sent for you?"
  "The housemaid, Saunders."
  "Was it she who gave the alarm?"
  "She and Mrs. King, the cook."
  "Where are they now?"
  "In the kitchen, I believe."
  "Then I think we had better hear their story at once."
  The old hall, oak-panelled and high-windowed, had been
turned into a court of investigation. Holmes sat in a great,
old-fashioned chair, his inexorable eyes gleaming out of his
haggard face. I could read in them a set purpose to devote his
life to this quest until the client whom he had failed to save
should at last be avenged. The trim Inspector Martin, the old,
gray-headed country doctor, myself, and a stolid village police-
man made up the rest of that strange company.
  The two women told their story clearly enough. They had
been aroused from their sleep by the sound of an explosion,
which had been followed a minute later by a second one. They
slept in adjoining rooms, and Mrs. King had rushed in to Saunders.
Together they had descended the stairs. The door of the study
was open, and a candle was burning upon the table. Their master
lay upon his face in the centre of the room. He was quite dead.
Near the window his wife was crouching, her head leaning
against the wall. She was horribly wounded, and the side of her
face was red with blood. She breathed heavily, but was incapa-
ble of saying anything. The passage, as well as the room, was
full of smoke and the smell of powder. The window was cer-
tainly shut and fastened upon the inside. Both women were
positive upon the point. They had at once sent for the doctor and
for the constable. Then, with the aid of the groom and the
stable-boy, they had conveyed their injured mistress to her room.
Both she and her husband had occupied the bed. She was clad in
her dress -- he in his dressing-gown, over his night-clothes. Noth-
ing had been moved in the study. So far as they knew, there had
never been any quarrel between husband and wife. They had
always looked upon them as a very united couple.
  These were the main points of the servants' evidence. In
answer to Inspector Martin, they were clear that every door was
fastened upon the inside, and that no one could have escaped
from the house. In answer to Holmes, they both remembered that
they were conscious of the smell of powder from the moment
that they ran out of their rooms upon the top floor. "I commend
that fact very carefully to your attention." said Holmes to his
professional colleague. "And now I think that we are in a
position to undertake a thorough examination of the room."
  The study proved to be a small chamber, lined on three sides
with books, and with a writing-table facing an ordinary window,
which looked out upon the garden. Our first attention was given
to the body of the unfortunate squire, whose huge frame lay
stretched across the room. His disordered dress showed that he
had been hastily aroused from sleep. The bullet had been fired at
him from the front, and had remained in his body, after penetrat-
ing the heart. His death had certainly been instantaneous and
painless. There was no powder-marking either upon his dressing-
gown or on his hands. According to the country surgeon, the
lady had stains upon her face, but none upon her hand.
  "The absence of the latter means nothing, though its presence
may mean everything," said Holmes. "Unless the powder from
a badly fitting cartridge happens to spurt backward, one may fire
many shots without leaving a sign. I would suggest that Mr.
Cubitt's body may now be removed. I suppose, Doctor, you
have not recovered the bullet which wounded the lady?"
  "A serious operation will be necessary before that can be
done. But there are still four cartridges in the revolver. Two have
been fired and two wounds inflicted, so that each bullet can be
accounted for."
  "So it would seem," said Holmes. "Perhaps you can account
also for the bullet which has so obviously struck the edge of the
window?"
  He had turned suddenly, and his long, thin finger was pointing
to a hole which had been drilled right through the lower window-
sash. about an inch above the bottom.
  "By George!" cried the inspector. "How ever did you see
that?"
  "Because I looked for it."
  "Wonderful!" said the counlry doctor. "You are certainly
right, sir. Then a third shot has been fired, and therefore a third
person must have been present. But who could that have been,
and how could he have got away?"
  "That is the problem which we are now about to solve," said
Sherlock Holmes. "You remember, Inspector Martin, when the
servants said that on leaving their room they were at once
conscious of a smell of powder, I remarked that the point was an
extremely important one?"
  "Yes, sir; but I confess I did not quite follow you."
  "It suggested that at the time of the firing, the window as well
as the door of the room had been open. Otherwise the fumes of
powder could not have been blown so rapidly through the house.
A draught in the room was necessary for that. Both door and
window were only open for a very short time, however."
  "How do you prove that?"
  "Because the candle was not guttered."
  "Capital!" cried the inspector. "Capital!"
  "Feeling sure that the window had been open at the time of
the tragedy, I conceived that there might have been a third
person in the affair, who stood outside this opening and fired
through it. Any shot directed at this person might hit the sash. I
looked, and there, sure enough, was the bullet mark!"
  "But how came the window to be shut and fastened?"
  "The woman's first instinct would be to shut and fasten the
window. But, halloa! what is this?"
   It was a lady's hand-bag which stood upon the study table -- a
trim little handbag of crocodile-skin and silver. Holmes opened it
and turned the contents out. There were twenty fifty-pound notes
of the Bank of England, held together by an india-rubber band --
nothing else.
   "This must be preserved, for it will figure in the trial," said
Holmes, as he handed the bag with its contents to the inspector.
"It is now necessary that we should try to throw some light upon
this third bullet, which has clearly, from the splintering of the
wood, been fired from inside the room. I should like to see Mrs.
King, the cook, again. You said, Mrs. King, that you were
awakened by a loud explosion. When you said that, did you
mean that it seemed to you to be louder than the second one?"
   "Well, sir, it wakened me from my sleep, so it is hard to
judge. But it did seem very loud."
   "You don't think that it might have been two shots fired
almost at the same instant?"
  "I am sure I couldn't say, sir."
  "I believe that it was undoubtedly so. I rather think, Inspector
Mattin, that we have now exhausted all that this room can teach
us. If you will kindly step round with me, we shall see what
fresh evidence the garden has to offer."
  A flower-bed extended up to the study window, and we all
broke into an exclamation as we approached it. The flowers were
trampled down, and the soft soil was imprinted all over with
footmarks. Large, masculine feet they were, with peculiarly
long, sharp toes. Holmes hunted about among the grass and
leaves like a retriever after a wounded bird. Then, with a cry of
satisfaction, he bent forward and picked up a little brazen cylinder.
  "I thought so," said he; "the revolver had an ejector, and
here is the third cartridge. I really think, Inspector Martin, that
our case is almost complete."
  The country inspector's face had shown his intense amazement
at the rapid and masterful progress of Holmes's investigation. At
first he had shown some disposition to assert his own position,
but now he was overcome with admiration, and ready to follow
without question wherever Holmes led.
  "Whom do you suspect?" he asked.
  "I'll go into that later. There are several points in this problem
which I have not been able to explain to you yet. Now that I
have got so far, I had best proceed on my own lines, and then
clear the whole matter up once and for all."
  "Just as you wish, Mr. Holmes, so long as we get our man."
  "I have no desire to make mysteries, but it is impossible at the
moment of action to enter into long and complex explanations. I
have the threads of this affair all in my hand. Even if this lady
should never recover consciousness, we can still reconstruct the
events of last night, and insure that justice be done. First of all, I
wish to know whether there is any inn in this neighbourhood
known as 'Elrige's'?"
  The servants were cross-questioned, but none of them had
heard of such a place. The stable-boy threw a light upon the
matter by remembering that a farmer of that name lived some
miles off, in the direction of East Ruston.
  "Is it a lonely farm?"
  "Very lonely, sir."
  "Perhaps they have not heard yet of all that happened here
during the night?"
  "Maybe not, sir."
  Holmes thought for a little, and then a curious smile played
over his face.
  "Saddle a horse, my lad," said he. "I shall wish you to take a
note to Elrige's Farm."
  He took from his pocket the various slips of the dancing men.
With these in front of him he worked for some time at the
study-table. Finally he handed a note to the boy, with directions
to put it into the hands of the person to whom it was addressed,
and especially to answer no questions of any sort which might be
put to him. I saw the outside of the note, addressed in straggling,
irregular characters, very unlike Holmes's usual precise hand. It
was consigned to Mr. Abe Slaney, Elrige's Farm, East Ruston,
Norfolk.
  "I think, Inspector," Holmes remarked, "that you would do
well to telegraph for an escort, as, if my calculations prove to be
correct, you may have a particularly dangerous prisoner to con-
vey to the county jail. The boy who takes this note could no
doubt forward your telegram. If there is an afternoon train to
town, Watson, I think we should do well to take it, as I have a
chemical analysis of some interest to finish, and this investiga-
tion draws rapidly to a close."
  When the youth had been dispatched with the note, Sherlock
Holmes gave his instructions to the servants. If any visitor were
to call asking for Mrs. Hilton Cubitt, no information should be
given as to her condition, but he was to be shown at once into
the drawing-room. He impressed these points upon them with the
utmost earnestness. Finally he led the way into the drawing-room,
with the remark that the business was now out of our hands, and
that we must while away the time as best we might until we
could see what was in store for us. The doctor had departed to
his patients and only the inspector and myself remained.
  "I think that I can help you to pass an hour in an interesting
and profitable manner," said Holmes, drawing his chair up to
the table, and spreading out in front of him the various papers
upon which were recorded the antics of the dancing men. "As to
you, friend Watson, I owe you every atonement for having
allowed your natural curiosity to remain so long unsatisfied. To
you, Inspector, the whole incident may appeal as a remarkable
professional study. I must tell you, first of all, the interesting
circumstances connected with the previous consultations which
Mr. Hilton Cubitt has had with me in Baker Street." He then
shortly recapitulated the facts which have already been recorded.
"I have here in front of me these singular productions, at which
one might smile, had they not proved themselves to be the
forerunners of so terrible a tragedy. I am fairly familiar with all
forms of secret writings, and am myself the author of a trifling
monograph upon the subject, in which I analyze one hundred and
sixty separate ciphers, but I confess that this is entirely new to
me. The object of those who invented the system has apparently
been to conceal that these characters convey a message, and to
give the idea that they are the mere random sketches of children.
  "Having once recognized, however, that the symbols stood
for letters, and having applied the rules which guide us in all
forms of secret writings, the solution was easy enough. The first
message submitted to me was so short that it was impossible for
me to do more than to say, with some confidence, that the
symbol ~ stood for E. As you are aware, E is the most common
letter in the English alphabet, and it predominates to so marked
an extent that even in a short sentence one would expect to find
it most often. Out of fifteen symbols in the first message, four
were the same, so it was reasonable to set this down as E. It is
true that in some cases the figure was bearing a flag, and in some
cases not, but it was probable, from the way in which the flags
were distributed, that they were used to break the sentence up
into words. I accepted this as a hypothesis, and noted that E was
represented by ~.
  "But now came the real difficulty of the inquiry. The order of
the English letters after E is by no means well marked, and any
preponderance which may be shown in an average of a printed
sheet may be reversed in a single short sentence. Speaking
roughly, T, A, 0, I, N, S, H, R, D, and L are the numerical
order in which letters occur; but T, A, 0, and I are very nearly
abreast of each other, and it would be an endless task to try each
combination until a meaning was arrived at. I therefore waited
for fresh material. In my second interview with Mr. Hilton
Cubitt he was able to give me two other short sentences and one
message, which appeared -- since there was no flag -- to be a
single word. Here are the symbols. Now, in the single word I
have already got the two E's coming second and fourth in a word
of five letters. It might be 'sever.' or 'lever,' or 'never.' There
can be no question that the latter as a reply to an appeal is far the
most probable, and the circumstances pointed to its being a reply
written by the lady. Accepting it as correct, we are now able to say
that the symbols ~~~ stand respectively for N, V, and R.
  "Even now I was in considerable difficulty, but a happy
thought put me in possession of several other letters. It occurred
to me that if these appeals came, as I expected, from someone
who had been intimate with the lady in her early life, a combina-
tion which contained two E's with three letters between might
very well stand for the name 'ELSIE.' On examination I found
that such a combination formed the termination of the message
which was three times repeated. It was certainly some appeal to
'Elsie.' In this way I had got my L, S, and I. But what appeal
could it be? There were only four letters in the word which
preceded 'Elsie,' and it ended in E. Surely the word must be
'COME.' I tried all other four letters ending in E, but could find
none to fit the case. So now I was in possession of C. 0, and
M, and I was in a position to attack the first message once more,
dividing it into words and putting dots for each symbol which
was still unknown. So treated, it worked out in this fashion:

              . M . ERE . . E SL . NE.

  "Now the first letter can only be A, which is a most useful
discovery, since it occurs no fewer than three times in this short
sentence, and the H is also apparent in the second word. Now it
becomes:

              AM HERE A . E SLANE.

  Or, filling in the obvious vacancies in the name:

              AM HERE ABE SLANEY.

I had so many letters now that I could proceed with considerable
confidence to the second message, which worked out in this
fashion:

             A . ELRI . ES

Here I could only make sense by putting T and G for the missing
letters, and supposing that the name was that of some house or
inn at which the writer was staying."
  Inspector Martin and I had listened with the utmost interest to
the full and clear account of how my friend had produced results
which had led to so complete a command over our difficulties.
  "What did you do then, sir?" asked the inspector.
  "I had every reason to suppose that this Abe Slaney was an
American, since Abe is an American contraction, and since a
letter from America had been the starting-point of all the trouble.
I had also every cause to think that there was some criminal
secret in the matter. The lady's allusions to her past, and her
refusal to take her husband into her confidence, both pointed in
that direction. I therefore cabled to my friend, Wilson Hargreave,
of the New York Police Bureau, who has more than once made
use of my knowledge of London crime. I asked him whether the
name of Abe Slaney was known to him. Here is his reply: 'The
most dangerous crook in Chicago.' On the very evening upon
which I had his answer, Hilton Cubitt sent me the last message
from Slaney. Working with known letters, it took this form:

               ELSIE . RE . ARE TO MEET THY GO.

The addition of a P and a D completed a message which showed
me that the rascal was proceeding from persuasion to threats, and
my knowledge of the crooks of Chicago prepared me to find that
he might very rapidly put his words into action. I at once came
to Norfolk with my friend and colleague, Dr. Watson, but,
unhappily, only in time to find that the worst had already
occurred."
  "It is a privilege to be associated with you in the handling of a
case," said the inspector, warmly. "You will excuse me, how-
ever, if I speak frankly to you. You are only answerable to
yourself, but I have to answer to my superiors. If this Abe
Slaney, living at Elrige's, is indeed the murderer, and if he has
made his escape while I am seated here, I should certainly get
into serious trouble."
  "You need not be uneasy. He will not try to escape."
  "How do you know?"
  "To fly would be a confession of guilt."
  "Then let us go to arrest him."
  "I expect him here every instant."
  "But why should he come?"
  "Because I have written and asked him."
  "But this is incredible, Mr. Holmes! Why should he come
because you have asked him? Would not such a request rather
rouse his suspicions and cause him to fly?"
  "I think I have known how to frame the letter," said Sherlock
Holmes. "In fact, if I am not very much mistaken, here is the
gentleman himself coming up the dnve."
  A man was striding up the path which led to the door. He was
a tall, handsome, swarthy fellow, clad in a suit of gray flannel,
with a Panama hat, a bristling black beard, and a great, aggres-
sive hooked nose, and flourishing a cane as he walked. He
swaggered up the path as if the place belonged to him, and we
heard his loud, confident peal at the bell.
  "I think, gentlemen," said Holmes, quietly, "that we had
best take up our position behind the door. Every precaution is
necessary when dealing with such a fellow. You will need your
handcuffs, Inspector. You can leave the talking to me."
  We waited in silence for a minute -- one of those minutes
which one can never forget. Then the door opened and the man
stepped in. In an instant Holmes clapped a pistol to his head, and
Martin slipped the handcuffs over his wrists. It was all done so
swiftly and deftly that the fellow was helpless before he knew
that he was attacked. He glared from one to the other of us with
a pair of blazing black eyes. Then he burst into a bitter laugh.
  "Well, gentlemen, you have the drop on me this time. I seem
to have knocked up against something hard. But I came here in
answer to a letter from Mrs. Hilton Cubitt. Don't tell me that she
is in this? Don't tell me that she helped to set a trap for me?"
  "Mrs. HiLton Cubitt was seriously injured, and is at death's
door."
  The man gave a hoarse cry of grief, which rang through the
house.
  "You're crazy!" he cried, fiercely. "It was he that was hurt,
not she. Who would have hurt little Elsie? I may have threatened
her -- God forgive me! -- but I would not have touched a hair of
her pretty head. Take it back -- you! Say that she is not hurt!"
  "She was found, badly wounded, by the side of her dead
husband."
  He sank with a deep groan on to the settee, and buried his face
in his manacled hands. For five minutes he was silent. Then he
raised his face once more, and spoke with the cold composure of
despair.
  "I have nothing to hide from you, gentlemen," said he. "If I
shot the man he had his shot at me, and there's no murder in
that. But if you think I could have hurt that woman, then you
don't know either me or her. I tell you, there was never a man in
this world loved a woman more than I loved her. I had a right to
her. She was pledged to me years ago. Who was this Englishman
that he should come between us? I tell you that I had the first
right to her, and that I was only claiming my own."
  "She broke away from your influence when she found the
man that you are," said Holmes, sternly. "She fled from Amer-
ica to avoid you, and she married an honourable gentleman in
England. You dogged her and followed her and made her life a
misery to her, in order to induce her to abandon the husband
whom she loved and respected in order to fly with you, whom
she feared and hated. You have ended by bringing about the
death of a noble man and driving his wife to suicide. That is
your record in this business, Mr. Abe Slaney, and you will
answer for it to the law.
  "If Elsie dies, I care nothing what becomes of me," said the
American. He opened one of his hands, and looked at a note
crumpled up in his palm. "See here, mister," he cried, with a
gleam of suspicion in his eyes, "you're not trying to scare me
over this, are you? If the lady is hurt as bad as you say, who was
it that wrote this note?" He tossed it forward on to the table.
  "I wrote it, to bring you here."
  "You wrote it? There was no one on earth outside the Joint
who knew the secret of the dancing men. How came you to write
it?"
  "What one man can invent another can discover," said Holmes.
"There is a cab coming to convey you to Norwich, Mr. Slaney.
But, meanwhile, you have time to make some small reparation
for the injury you have wrought. Are you aware that Mrs. Hilton
Cubitt has herself lain under grave suspicion of the murder of her
husband, and that it was only my presence here, and the knowl-
edge which I happened to possess, which has saved her from the
accusation? The least that you owe her is to make it clear to the
whole world that she was in no way, directly or indirectly,
responsible for his tragic end."
  "I ask nothing better," said the American. "I guess the very
best case I can make for myself is the absolute naked truth."
  "It is my duty to warn you that it will be used against you,"
cried the inspector, with the magnificent fair play of the British
criminal law.
  Slaney shrugged his shoulders.
  "I'll chance that," said he. "First of all, I want you gentle-
men to understand that I have known this lady since she was a
child. There were seven of us in a gang in Chicago, and Elsie's
father was the boss of the Joint. He was a clever man, was old
Patrick. It was he who invented that writing, which would pass
as a child's scrawl unless you just happened to have the key to it.
Well Elsie learned some of our ways. but she couldn't stand
the business, and she had a bit of honest money of her own. so
she gave us all the slip and got away to London. She had been
engaged to me, and she would have married me, I believe, if I
had taken over another profession, but she would have nothing to
do with anything on the cross. It was only after her marriage to
this Englishman that I was able to find out where she was. I
wrote to her, but got no answer. After that I came over, and, as
letters were no use, I put my messages where she could read
them.
  "Well, I have been here a month now. I lived in that farm,
where I had a room down below, and could get in and out every
night, and no one the wiser. I tried all I could to coax Elsie
away. I knew that she read the messages, for once she wrote an
answer under one of them. Then my temper got the better of me,
and I began to threaten her. She sent me a letter then, imploring
me to go away, and saying that it would break her heart if any
scandal should come upon her husband. She said that she would
come down when her husband was asleep at three in the morn-
ing, and speak with me through the end window, if I would go
away afterwards and leave her in peace. She came down and
brought money with her, trying to bribe me to go. This made
me mad and I caught her arm and tried to pull her through
the window. At that moment in rushed the husband with his
revolver in his hand. Elsie had sunk down upon the floor,
and we were face to face. I was heeled also, and I held up my
gun to scare him off and let me get away. He fired and missed
me. I pulled off almost at the same instant, and down he
dropped. I made away across the garden, and as I went I heard
the window shut behind me. That's God's truth, gentlemen,
every word of it: and I heard no more about it until that lad came
riding up with a note which made me walk in here, like a jay,
and give myself into your hands."
  A cab had driven up whilst the American had been talking.
Two uniformed policemen sat inside. Inspector Martin rose and
touched his prisoner on the shoulder.
  "It is time for us to go."
  "Can I see her first?"
  "No, she is not conscious. Mr. Sherlock Holmes. I only hope
that, if ever again I have an important case, I shall have the
good fortune to have you by my side."
  We stood at the window and watched the cab drive away. As I
turned back, my eye caught the pellet of paper which the pris-
oner had tossed upon the table. It was the note with which
Holmes had decoyed him.
  "See if you can read it, Watson," said he, with a smile.
  It contained no word, but this little line of dancing men:


  "If you use the code which I have explained," said Holmes,
"you will find that it simply means 'Come here at once.' I was
convinced that it was an invitation which he would not refuse,
since he could never imagine that it could come from anyone but
the lady. And so, my dear Watson, we have ended by turning the
dancing men to good when they have so often been the agents of
evil, and I think that I have fulfilled my promise of giving you
something unusual for your notebook. Three-forty is our train,
and I fancy we should be back in Baker Street for dinner."
  Only one word of epilogue. The American, Abe Slaney, was
condemned to death at the winter assizes at Norwich, but his
penalty was changed to penal servitude in consideration of miti-
gating circumstances, and the certainty that Hilton Cubitt had
fired the first shot. Of Mrs. Hilton Cubitt I only know that I have
heard she recovered entirely, and that she still remains a widow,
devoting her whole life to the care of the poor and to the
administration of her husband's estate.

============================
            The Adventure of the Devil's Foot

  In recordinc from time to time some of the curious experiences and
interesting recollections which I associate with my long and intimate
friendship with Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I have continually been faced by
difficulties caused by his own aversion to publicity. To his sombre and
cynical spirit all popular applause was always abhorrent, and nothing
amused him more at the end of a successful case than to hand over the actual
exposure to some orthodox official, and to listen with a mocking smile
to the general chorus of misplaced congratulation. It was indeed this
attitude upon the part of my friend and certainly not any lack of
interesting material which has caused me of late years to lay very few of
my records before the public. My participation in some of his adventures was
always a privilege which entailed discretion and reticence upon me.
  It was, then, with considerable surprise that I received a telegram from
Holmes last Tuesday -- he has never been known to write where a telegram
would serve -- in the following terms:

       Why not tell them of the Cornish horror -- strangest case
I have handled.

I have no idea what backward sweep of memory had brought the matter
fresh to his mind, or what freak had caused him to desire that I should
recount it; but I hasten, before another cancelling telegram may arrive, to
hunt out the notes which give me the exact details of the case and to lay the
narrative before my readers.
  It was, then, in the spring of the year 1897 that Holmes's iron constitution
showed some symptoms of giving way in the face of constant hard work of a
most exacting kind, aggravated, perhaps, by occasional indiscretions of his
own. In March of that year Dr. Moore Agar, of Harley Street, whose dramatic
introduction to Holmes I may some day recount, gave positive injunctions
that the famous private agent lay aside all his cases and surrender himself to
complete rest if he wished to avert an absolute breakdown. The state of his
health was not a matter in which he himself took the faintest interest, for
his mental detachment was absolute, but he was induced at last, on the threat
of being permanently disqualified from work, to give himself a complete change
of scene and air. Thus it was that in the early spring of that year we found
ourselves together in a small cottage near Poldhu Bay, at the further
extremity of the Cornish peninsula.
  It was a singular spot, and one peculiarly well suited to the grim humour of
my patient. From the windows of our little whitewashed house, which stood
high upon a grassy headland, we looked down upon the whole sinister
semicircle of Mounts Bay, that old death trap of sailing vessels, with its
fringe of black cliffs and surge-swept reefs on which innumerable seamen
have met their end. With a northerly breeze it lies placid and sheltered,
inviting the storm-tossed craft to tack into it for rest and protection.
  Then come the sudden swirl round of the wind, the blustering gale from
the south-west, the dragging anchor, the lee shore, and the last battle in the
creaming breakers. The wise mariner stands far out from that evil place.
  On the land side our surroundings were as sombre as on the sea. It was a
country of rolling moors, lonely and dun-coloured, with an occasional church
tower to mark the site of some oldworld village. In every direction upon
these moors there were traces of some vanished race which had passed
utterly away, and left as its sole record strange monuments of stone,
irregular mounds which contained the burned ashes of the dead, and curious
earthworks which hinted at prehistoric strife. The glamour and mystery of
the place, with its sinister atmosphere of forgotten nations, appealed to the
imagination of my friend, and he spent much of his time in long walks and
solitary meditations upon the moor. The ancient Cornish language had also
arrested his attention, and he had, I remember, conceived the idea that it
was akin to the Chaldean, and had been largely derived from the Phoenician
traders in tin. He had received a consignment of books upon philology and
was settling down to develop this thesis when suddenly, to my sorrow and to
his unfeigned delight, we found ourselves, even in that land of dreams,
plunged into a problem at our very doors which was more intense, more
engrossing, and infinitely more mysterious than any of those which had
driven us from London. Our simple life and peaceful, healthy routine were
violently interrupted, and we were precipitated into the midst of a series of
events which caused the utmost excitement not only in Cornwall but
throughout the whole west of England. Many of my readers may retain some
recollection of what was called at the time "The Cornish Horror," though a
most imperfect account of the matter reached the London press. Now, after
thirteen years, I will give the true details of this inconceivable affair to
the public.
  I have said that scattered towers marked the villages which dotted this part
of Cornwall. The nearest of these was the hamlet of Tredannick Wollas, where
the cottages of a couple of hundred inhabitants clustered round an ancient,
moss-grown church. The vicar of the parish, Mr. Roundhay, was something of
an archeologist, and as such Holmes had made his acquaintance. He was
a middle-aged man, portly and affable, with a considerable fund of local lore.
At his invitation we had taken tea at the vicarage and had come to know, also,
Mr. Mortimer Tregennis, an independent gentleman, who increased the
clergyman's scanty resources by taking rooms in his large, straggling house.
The vicar, being a bachelor, was glad to come to such an arrangement, though
he had little in common with his lodger, who was a thin, dark, spectacled man,
with a stoop which gave the impression of actual, physical deformity. I
remember that during our short visit we found the vicar garrulous, but his
lodger strangely reticent, a sad-faced, introspective man, sitting with
averted eyes, brooding apparently upon his own affairs.
  These were the two men who entered abruptly into our little sitting-room
on Tuesday, March the 16th, shortly after our breakfast hour, as we were
smoking together, preparatory to our daily excursion upon the moors.
  "Mr. Holmes," said the vicar in an agitated voice, "the most extraordinary
and tragic affair has occurred during the night. It is the most unheard-of
business. We can only regard it as a special Providence that you should
chance to be here at the time, for in all England you are the one man we need."
  I glared at the intrusive vicar with no very friendly eyes; but Holmes took
his pipe from his lips and sat up in his chair like an old hound who hears the
view-halloa. He waved his hand to the sofa, and our palpitating visitor with
his agitated companion sat side by side upon it. Mr. Mortimer Tregennis was
more selfcontained than the clergyman, but the twitching of his thin hands
and the brightness of his dark eyes showed that they shared a common
emotion.
  "Shall I speak or you?" he asked of the vicar.
  "Well, as you seem to have made the discovery, whatever it may be, and the
vicar to have had it second-hand, perhaps you had better do the speaking,"
said Holmes.
  I glanced at the hastily clad clergyman, with the formally dressed lodger
seated beside him, and was amused at the surprise which Holmes's simple
deduction had brought to their faces.
  "Perhaps I had best say a few words first," said the vicar, "and then you
can judge if you will listen to the details from Mr. Tregennis, or whether we
should not hasten at once to the scene of this mysterious affair. I may
explain, then, that our friend here spent last evening in the company of his
two brothers, Owen and George, and of his sister Brenda, at their house of
Tredannick Wartha, which is near the old stone cross upon the moor. He left
them shortly after ten o'clock, playing cards round the dining-room table, in
excellent health and spirits. This morning, being an early riser, he walked in
that direction before breakfast and was overtaken by the carriage of Dr.
Richards, who explained that he had just been sent for on a most urgent call
to Tredannick Wartha. Mr. Mortimer Tregennis naturally went with him.
When he arrived at Tredannick Wartha he found an extraordinary state of
things. His two brothers and his sister were seated round the table exactly
as he had left them, the cards still spread in front of them and the candles
burned down to their sockets. The sister lay back stone-dead in her chair,
while the two brothers sat on each side of her laughing, shouting, and
singing, the senses stricken clean out of them. All three of them, the dead
woman and the two demented men, retained upon their faces an expression
of the utmost horror -- a convulsion of terror which was dreadful to look
upon. There was no sign of the presence of anyone in the house, except Mrs.
Porter, the old cook and housekeeper, who declared that she had slept
deeply and heard no sound during the night. Nothing had been stolen or
disarranged, and there is absolutely no explanation of what the horror can
be which has frightened a woman to death and two strong men out of their
senses. There is the situation, Mr. Holmes, in a nutshell, and if you can help
us to clear it up you will have done a great work."
  I had hoped that in some way I could coax my companion back into the
quiet which had been the object of our journey; but one glance at his intense
face and contracted eyebrows told me how vain was now the expectation.
He sat for some little time in silence, absorbed in the strange drama which
had broken in upon our peace.
  "I will look into this matter," he said at last. "On the face of it, it
would appear to be a case of a very exceptional nature. Have you been there
yourself, Mr. Roundhay?"
  "No, Mr. Holmes. Mr. Tregennis brought back the account to the vicarage,
and I at once hurried over with him to consult you."
  "How far is it to the house where this singular tragedy occurred?"
  "About a mile inland."
  "Then we shall walk over together. But before we start I must ask you a few
questions, Mr. Mortimer Tregennis."
  The other had been silent all this time, but I had observed that his more
controlled excitement was even greater than the obtrusive emotion of the
clergyman. He sat with a pale, drawn face, his anxious gaze fixed opon Holmes,
and his thin hands clasped convulsively together. His pale lips quivered as he
listened to the dreadful experience which had befallen his family, and his
dark eyes seemed to reflect something of the horror of the scene.
  "Ask what you like, Mr. Holmes," said he eagerly. "It is a bad thing to
speak of, but I will answer you the truth."
  "Tell me about last night."
  "Well, Mr. Holmes, I supped there, as the vicar has said, and my elder
brother George proposed a game of whist afterwards. We sat down about nine
o'clock. It was a quarter-past ten when I moved to go. I left thern all
round the table, as merry as could be."
  "Who let you out?"
  "Mrs. Porter had gone to bed, so I let myself out. I shut the hall door
behind me. The window of the room in which they sat was closed, but the blind
was not drawn down. There was no change in door or window this morning, nor
any reason to think that any stranger had been to the house. Yet there they
sat, driven clean mad with terror, and Brenda lying dead of fright, with her
head hanging over the arm of the chair. I'll never get the sight of that room
out of my mind so long as I live."
  "The facts, as you state them, are certainly most remarkable," said Holmes.
"I take it that you have no theory yourself which can in any way account for
them?"
  "It's devilish, Mr. Holmes, devilish!" cried Mortimer Tregennis. "It is not
of this world. Something has come into that room which has dashed the light of
reason from their minds. What human contrivance could do that?"
  "I fear," said Holmes~, "that if the matter is beyond humanity it is
certainly beyond me. Yet we must exhaust all natural explanations before we
fall back upon such a theory as this. As to yourself, Mr. Tregenrlis, I take
it you were divided in some way from your family, since they lived together
and you had rooms apart?"
  "That is so, Mr. Holmes, though the matter is past and done with. We were a
family of tin-miners at Redruth, but we sold out our venture to a company,
and so retired with enough to keep us. I won't deny that there was some
feeling about the division of the money and it stood between us for a time,
but it was all forgiven and forgotten, and we were the best of friends
together."
  "Looking back at the evening which you spent together, does anything
stand out in your memory as throwing any possible light upon the tragedy?
Think carefully, Mr. Tregennis, for any clue which can help me."
  "There is nothing at all, sir."
  "Your people were in their usual spirits?"
  "Never better."
  "Were they nervous people? Did they ever show any apprehension of
coming danger?"
  "Nothing of the kind."
  "You have nothing to add then, which could assist me?"
  Mortimer Tregennis considered earnestly for a moment.
  "There is one thing occurs to me," said he at last. "As we sat at the table
my back was to the window, and my brother George, he being my partner at
cards, was facing it. I saw him once look hard over my shoulder, so I turned
round and looked also. The blind was up and the window shut, but I could
just make out the bushes on the lawn, and it seemed to me for a moment
that I saw something moving among them. I couldn't even say if it was man
or animal, but I just thought there was something there. When I asked him
what he was looking at, he told me that he had the same feeling. That is all
that I can say."
  "Did you not investigate?"
  "No; the matter passed as unimportant."
  "You left them, then, without any premonition of evil?"
  "None at all."
  "I am not clear how you came to hear the news so early this morning."
  "I am an early riser and generally take a walk before breakfast. This
morning I had hardly started when the doctor in his carriage overtook me.
He told me that old Mrs. Porter had sent a boy down with an urgent
message. I sprang in beside him and we drove on. When we got there we
looked into that dreadful room. The candles and the fire must have burned
out hours before, and they had been sitting there in the dark until dawn
had broken. The doctor said Brenda must have been dead at least six hours.
There were no signs of violence. She just lay across the arm of the chair
with that look on her face. George and Owen were singing snatches of songs
and gibbering like two great apes. Oh, it was awful to see! I couldn't stand
it, and the doctor was as white as a sheet. Indeed, he fell into a chair in
a sort of faint, and we nearly had him on our hands as well."
  "Remarkable -- most remarkable!" said Holmes, rising and taking his hat. "I
think, perhaps, we had better go down to Tredannick Wartha without
further delay. I confess that I have seldom known a case which at first sight
presented a more singular problem."

  Our proceedings of that first morning did little to advance the
investigation. It was marked, however, at the outset by an incident which
left the most sinister impression upon my mind. The approach to the spot at
which the tragedy occurred is down a narrow, winding, country lane. While we
made our way along it we heard the raffle of a carriage coming towards us and
stood aside to let it pass. As it drove by us I caught a glimpse through the
closed window of a horribly contorted, grinning face glaring out at us. Those
staring eyes and gnashing teeth flashed past us like a dreadful vision.
  "My brothers!" cried Mortimer Tregennis, white to his lips. "They are taking
them to Helston."
  We looked with horror after the black carriage, lumbering upon its way.
Then we turned our steps towards this ill-omened house in which they had
met their strange fate.
  It was a large and bright dwelling, rather a villa than a cottage, with a
considerable garden which was already, in that Cornish air, well filled with
spring flowers. Towards this garden the window of the sitting-room fronted,
and from it, according to Mortimer Tregennis, must have come that thing of
evil which had by sheer horror in a single instant blasted their minds.
Holmes walked slowly and thoughtfully among the flower-plots and along
the path before we entered the porch. So absorbed was he in his thoughts, I
remember, that he stumbled over the watering-pot, upset its contents, and
deluged both our feet and the garden path. Inside the house we were met
by the e1derly Cornish housekeeper, Mrs. Porter, who, with the aid of a
young girl, looked after the wants of the family. She readily answered all
Holmes's questions. She had heard nothing in the night. Her employers had
all been in excellent spirits lately, and she had never known them more
cheerful and prosperous. She had fainted with horror upon entering the
room in the morning and seeing that dreadful company round the table. She
had, when she recovered, thrown open the window to let the morning air in and
had run down to the lane, whence she sent a farm-lad for the doctor. The lady
was on her bed upstairs if we cared to see her. It took four strong men to
get the brothers into the asylum carriage. She would not herself stay in the
house another day and was starting that very afternoon to rejoin her family
at St. Ives.
  We ascended the stairs and viewed the body. Miss Brenda Tregennis had
been a very beautiful girl, though now verging upon middle age. Her dark,
clear-cut face was handsome, even in death, but there still lingered upon it
something of that convulsion of horror which had been her last human
emotion. From her bedroom we descended to the sitting-room, where this
strange tragedy had actually occurred. The charred ashes of the overnight fire
lay in the grate. On the table were the four guttered and burned-out candles,
with the cards scattered over its surface. The chairs had been moved back
against the walls, but all else was as it had been the night before. Holmes
paced with light, swift steps about the room; he sat in the various chairs,
drawing them up and reconstructing their positions. He tested how much of
the garden was visible; he examined the floor, the ceiling, and the fireplace;
but never once did I see that sudden brightening of his eyes and tightening of
his lips which would have told me that he saw some gleam of light in this
utter darkness.
  "Why a fire?" he asked once. "Had they always a fire in this small room on a
spring evening?"
  Mortimer Tregennis explained that the night was cold and damp. For that
reason, after his arrival, the fire was lit. "What are you going to do now,
Mr. Holmes?" he asked.
  My friend smiled and laid his hand upon my arm. "I think, Watson, that I
shall resume that course of tobacco-poisoning which you have so often and so
justly condemned," said he. "With your permission, gentlemen, we will now
return to our cottage, for I am not aware that any new factor is likely to
come to our notice here. I will turn the facts over in my mind, Mr. Tregennis,
and should anything occur to me I will certainly communicate with you and
the vicar. In the meantime I wish you both good-morning."
  It was not until long after we were back in Poldhu Cottage that Holmes broke
his complete and absorbed silence. He sat coiled in his armchair, his haggard
and ascetic face hardly visible amid the blue swirl of his tobacco smoke, his
black brows drawn down, his forehead contracted, his eyes vacant and far
away. Finally he laid down his pipe and sprang to his feet.
  "It won't do, Watson!" said he with a laugh. "Let us walk along the cliffs
together and search for flint arrows. We are more likely to find them than
clues to this problem. To let the brain work without sufficient material is
like racing an engine. It racks itself to pieces. The sea air, sunshine, and
patience, Watson -- all else will come.
  "Now, let us calmly define our position, Watson," he continued as we skirted
the cliffs together. "Let us get a firm grip of the very little which we do
know, so that when fresh facts arise we may be ready to fit them into their
places. I take it, in the first place, that neither of us is prepared to admit
diabolical intrusions into the affairs of men. Let us begin by ruling that
entirely out of our minds. Very good. There remain three persons who have
been grievously stricken by some conscious or unconscious human agency.
That is firm ground. Now, when did this occur? Evidently, assuming his
narrative to be true, it was immediately after Mr. Mortimer Tregennis had
left the room. That is a very important point. The presumption is that it was
within a few minutes afterwards. The cards still lay upon the table. It was
already past their usual hour for bed. Yet they had not changed their position
or pushed back their chairs. I repeat then, that the occurrence was
immediately after his departure, and not later than eleven o'clock last night.
  "Our next obvious step is to check, so far as we can, the movements of
Mortimer Tregennis after he left the room. In this there is no difficulty, and
they seem to be above suspicion. Knowing my methods as you do, you were,
of course, conscious of the somewhat clumsy water-pot expedient by which I
obtained a clearer impress of his foot than might otherwise have been
possible. The wet, sandy path took it admirably. Last night was also wet, you
will remember, and it was not difficult -- having obtained a sample print --
to pick out his track among others and to follow his movements. He appears to
have walked away swiftly in the direction of the vicarage.
  "If, then, Mortimer Tregennis disappeared from the scene, and yet some
outside person affected the cardplayers, how can we reconstruct that person,
and how was such an impression of horror conveyed? Mrs. Porter may be
eliminated. She is evidently harmless. Is there any evidence that someone
crept up to the garden window and in some manner produced so terrific an
effect that he drove those who saw it out of their senses? The only
suggestion in this direction comes from Mortimer Tregennis himself, who
says that his brother spoke about some movement in the garden. That is
certainly remarkable, as the night was rainy, cloudy, and dark. Anyone who
had the design to alarm these people would be compelled to place his very
face against the glass before he could be seen. There is a three-foot
flowerborder outside this window, but no indication of a footmark. It is
difficult to imagine, then, how an outsider could have made so terrible an
impression upon the company, nor have we found any possible motive for
so strange and elaborate an attempt. You perceive our difficulties, Watson?"
  "They are only too clear," I answered with conviction.
  "And yet, with a little more material, we may prove that they are not
insurmountable," said Holrnes. "I fancy that among your extensive archives,
Watson, you may find some which were nearly as obscure. Meanwhile, we
shall put the case aside until more accurate data are available, and devote
the rest of our morning to the pursuit of neolithic man."
  I may have commented upon my friend's power of mental detachment, but
never have I wondered at it more than upon that spring morning in
Cornwall when for two hours he discoursed upon Celts, arrowheads, and
shards, as lightly as if no sinister mystery were waiting for his solution. It
was not until we had returned in the afternoon to our cottlge that we found
a visitor awaiting us, who soon brought our minds back to the matter in
hand. Neither of us needed to be told who that visitor was. The huge body,
the craggy and deeply seamed face with the fierce eyes and hawk-like nose,
the grizzled hair which nearly brushed our cottage ceiling, the beard --
golden at the fringes and white near the lips, save for the nicotin stain
from his perpetual cigar -- all these were as well known in London as in
Africa, and could only be associated with the tremendous personality of Dr.
Leon Sterndale, the great lion-hunter and explorer.
  We had heard of his presence in the district and had once or twice caught
sight of his tall figure upon the moorland paths. He made no advances to us,
however, nor would we have dreamed of doing so to him, as it was well
known that it was his love of seclusion which caused him to spend the
greater part of the intervals between his journeys in a small bungalow
buried in the lonely wood of Beauchamp Arriance. Here, amid his books
and his maps, he lived an absolutely lonely life, attending to his own
simple wants and paying little apparent heed to the affairs of his
neighbours. It was a surprise to me, therefore, to hear him asking Holmes in
an eager voice whether he had made any advance in his reconstruction of
this mysterious episode. "The county police are utterly at fault," said he,
"but perhaps your wider experience has suggested some conceivable
explanation. My only claim to being taken into your confidence is that
during my many residences here I have come to know this family of
Tregennis very well -- indeed, upon my Cornish mother's side I could call
them cousins -- and their strange fate has naturally been a great shock to me.
I may tell you that I had got as far as Plymouth upon my way to Africa, but
the news reached me this morning, and I came straight back again to help
in the inquiry."
  Holmes raised his eyebrows.
  "Did you lose your boat through it?"
  "I will take the next."
  "Dear me! that is friendship indeed."
  "I tell you they were relatives."
  "Quite so -- cousins of your mother. Was your baggage aboard the ship?"
  "Some of it, but the main part at the hotel."
  "I see. But surely this event could not have found its way into the Plymouth
morning papers."
  "No, sir; I had a telegram."
  "Might I ask from whom?"
  A shadow passed over the gaunt face of the explorer.
  "You are very inquisitive, Mr. Holmes."
  "It is my business."
  With an effort Dr. Sterndale recovered his ruffled composure.
  "I have no objection to telling you," he said. "It was Mr. Roundhay, the
vicar, who sent me the telegram which recalled me."
  "Thank you," said Holmes. "I may say in answer to your original question
that I have not cleared my mind entirely on the subject of this case, but
that I have every hope of reaching some conclusion. It would be premature
to say more."
  "Perhaps you would not mind telling me if your suspicions point in any
particular direction?"
  "No, I can hardly answer that."
  "Then I have wasted my time and need not prolong my visit." The famous
doctor strode out of our cottage in considerable ill-humour, and within five
minutes Holmes had followed him. I saw him no more until the evening, when he
returned with a slow step and haggard face which assured me that he had made
no great progress with his investigation. He glanced at a telegram which
awaited him and threw it into the grate.
  "From the Plymouth hotel, Watson," he said. "I learned the name of it
from the vicar, and I wired to make certain that Dr. Leon Stemdale's
account was true. It appears that he did indeed spend last night there, and
that he has actually allowed some of his baggage to go on to Africa, while
he returned to be present at this investigation. What do you make of that,
Watson?"
  "He is deeply interested."
  "Deeply interested -- yes. There is a thread here which we have not yet
grasped and which might lead us through the tangle. Cheer up, Watson, for
I am very sure that our material has not yet all come to hand. When it
does we may soon leave our difficulties behind us."
  Little did I think how soon the words of Holmes would be realized, or how
strange and sinister would be that new development which opened up an
entirely fresh line of investigation. I was shaving at my window in the
morning when I heard the rattle of hoofs and, looking up, saw a dog-cart
coming at a gallop down the road. It pulled up at our door, and our friend,
the vicar, sprang from it and rushed up our garden path. Holmes was
already dressed, and we hastened down to meet him.
  Our visitor was so excited that he could hardly articulate, but at last in
gasps and bursts his tragic story came out of him.
  "We are devil-ridden, Mr. Holmes! My poor parish is devilridden!" he cried.
"Satan himself is loose in it! We are given over into his hands!" He danced
about in his agitation, a ludicrous object if it were not for his ashy face
and startled eyes. Finally he shot out his terrible news.
  "Mr. Mortimer Tregennis died during the night, and with exactly the same
symptoms as the rest of his family."
  Holmes sprang to his feet, all energy in an instant.
  "Can you fit us both into your dog-cart?"
  "Yes, I can."
  "Then, Watson, we will postpone our breakfast. Mr. Roundhay, we are
entirely at your disposal. Hurry -- hurry, before things get disarranged. "
  The lodger occupied two rooms at the vicarage, which were in an angle by
themselves, the one above the other. Below was a large sitting-room;
above, his bedroom. They looked out upon a croquet lawn which came up to the
windows. We had arrived before the doctor or the police, so that everything
was absolutely undisturbed. Let me describe exactly the scene as we saw it
upon that misty March morning. It has left an impression which can never be
effaced from my mind.
  The atmosphere of the room was of a horrible and depressing stuffiness.
The servant who had first entered had thrown up the window, or it would
have been even more intolerable. This might partly be due to the fact that a
lamp stood flaring and smoking on the centre table. Beside it sat the dead
man, leaning back in his chair, his thin beard projecting, his spectacles
pushed up on to his forehead, and his lean dark face turned towards the
window and twisted into the same distortion of terror which had marked the
features of his dead sister. His limbs were convulsed and his fingers
contorted as though he had died in a very paroxysm of fear. He was fully
clothed, though there were signs that his dressing had been done in a hurry.
We had already learned that his bed had been slept in, and that the tragic
end had come to him in the early morning.
  One realized the red-hot energy which underlay Holmes's phlegmatic exterior
when one saw the sudden change which came over him from the moment
that he entered the fatal apartment. In an instant he was tense and alert, his
eyes shining, his face set, his limbs quivering with eager activity. He was
out on the lawn, in through the window, round the room, and up into the
bedroom, for all the world like a dashing foxhound drawing a cover. In the
bedroom he made a rapid cast around and ended by throwing open the
window, which appeared to give him some fresh cause for excitement, for he
leaned out of it with loud ejaculations of interest and delight. Then he
rushed down the stair, out through the open window, threw himself upon his
face on the lawn, sprang up and into the room once more, all with the energy
of the hunter who is at the very heels of his quarry. The lamp, which was an
ordinaly standard, he examined with minute care, making certain
measurements upon its bowl. He carefully scrutinized with his lens the tale
shield which covered the top of the chimney and scraped off some ashes
which adhered to its upper surface, putting some of them into an envelope,
which he placed in his pocketbook. Finally, just as the doctor and the
official police put in an appearance, he beckoned to the vicar and we all
three went out upon the lawn.
  "I am glad to say that my investigation has not been entirely barren," he
remarked. "I cannot remain to discuss the matter with the police, but I
should be exceedingly obliged, Mr. Roundhay, if you would give the inspector
my compliments and direct his attention to the bedroom window and to the
sittingroom lamp. Each is suggestive, and together they are almost conclusive.
If the police would desire further information I shall be happy to see any of
them at the conage. And now, Watson, I think that, perhaps, we shall be
better employed elsewhere."
  It may be that the police resented the intrusion of an amateur, or that they
imagined themselves to be upon some hopeful line of investigation; but it is
certain that we heard nothing from them for the next two days. During this
time Holmes spent some of his time smoking and dreaming in the cottage; but
a greater portion in country walks which he undertook alone, returning after
many hours without remark as to where he had been. One experiment
served to show me the line of his investigation. He had bought a lamp which
was the duplicate of the one which had burned in the room of Mortimer
Tregennis on the morning of the tragedy. This he filled with the same oil as
that used at the vicarage, and he carefully timed the period which it would
take to be exhausted. Another experiment which he made was of a more
unpleasant nature, and one which I am not likely ever to forget.
  "You will remember, Watson," he remarked one afternoon, "that there is a
single common point of resemblance in the varying reports which have
reached us. This concerns the effect of the atmosphere of the room in each
case upon those who had first entered it. You will recollect that Mortimer
Tregennis, in describing the episode of his last visit to his brother's house,
remarked that the doctor on entering the room fell into a chair? You had
forgotten? Well, I can answer for it that it was so. Now, you will remember
also that Mrs. Porter, the housekeeper, told us that she herself fainted upon
entering the room and had afterwards opened the window. In the second
case -- that of Mortimer Tregennis himself -- you cannot have forgotten the
horrible stuffiness of the room when we arrived. though the servant had
thrown open the window. That servant, I found upon inquiry, was so ill that
she had gone to her bed. You will admit, Watson, that these facts are very
suggestive. In each case there is evidence of a poisonous atmosphere. In each
case, also, there is combustion going on in the room -- in the one case a
fire, in the other a lamp. The fire was needed, but the lamp was lit -- as a
comparison of the oil consumed will show -- long after it was broad daylight.
Why? Surely because there is some connection between three things -- the
burning, the stuffy atmosphere, and, finally, the madness or death of those
unfortunate people. That is clear, is it not?"
  "It would appear so."
  "At least we may accept it as a working hypothesis. We will suppose, then,
that something was burned in each case which produced an atmosphere
causing strange toxic effects. Very good. In the first instance -- that of the
Tregennis family -- this substance was placed in the fire. Now the window was
shut, but the fire would naturally carry fumes to some extent up the chimney.
Hence one would expect the effects of the poison to be less than in the second
case, where there was less escape for the vapour. The result seems to indicate
that it was so, since in the first case only the woman, who had presumably the
more sensitive organism, was killed, the others exhibiting that temporary or
permanent lunacy which is evidently the first effect of the drug. In the
second case the result was complete. The facts, therefore, seem to bear out
the theory of a poison which worked by combustion.
  "With this train of reasoning in my head I naturally looked about in
Mortimer Tregennis's room to find some remains of this substance. The obvious
place to look was the talc shield or smoke-guard of the lamp. There, sure
enough, I perceived a number of flaky ashes, and round the edges a fringe of
brownish powder, which had not yet been consumed. Half of this I took, as you
saw, and I placed it in an envelope."
  "Why half, Holmes?"
  "It is not for me, my dear Watson, to stand in the way of the official
police force. I leave them all the evidence which I found. The poison still
remained upon the talc had they the wit to find it. Now, Watson, we will
light our lamp; we will, however, take the precaution to open our window to
avoid the premature decease of two deserving members of society, and you will
seat yourself near that open window in an armchair unless, like a sensible
man, you determine to have nothing to do with the affair. Oh, you will see it
out, will you? I thought I knew my Watson. This chair I will place opposite
yours, so that we may be the same distance from the poison and face to face.
The door we will leave ajar. Each is now in a position to watch the other
and to bring the experiment to an end should the symptoms seem alarming.
Is that all clear? Well, then, I take our powder -- or what remains of it --
from the envelope, and I lay it above the burning lamp. So! Now, Watson, let
us sit down and await developments."
  They were not long in coming. I had hardlv settled in my chair before I was
conscious of a thick, musky odour, subtle and nauseous. At the very first
whiff of it my brain and my imagination were beyond all control. A thick, black
cloud swirled before my eyes, and my mind told me that in this cloud, unseen
as yet,  but about to spring out upon my appalled senses, lurked all that
was vaguely horrible, all that was monstrous and inconceivably wicked in the
universe. Vague shapes swirled and swam amid the dark cloud-bank, each a
menace and a warning of something coming, the advent of some unspeakable
dweller upon the threshold, whose very shadow would blast my soul. A freezing
horror took possession of me. I felt that my hair was rising, that my eyes
were protruding, that my mouth wag opened, and my tongue like leather. The
turmoil within my brain was such that something must surely snap. I tried to
scream and was vaguely aware of some hoarse croak which was my own voice, but
distant and detached from myself. At the same moment, in some effort of
escape, I broke through that cloud of despair and had a glimpse of Holmes's
face, white, rigid, and drawn with horror --  the very look which I had seen
upon the features of the dead. It was that vision which gave me an instant of
sanity and of strength. I dashed from my chair, threw my arms round Holmes,
and together we lurched through the door, and an instant afterwards had
thrown ourselves down upon the grass plot and were lying side by side,
conscious only of the glorious sunshine which was bursting its way through
the hellish cloud of terror which had girt us in. Slowly it rose from our
souls like the mists from a landscape until peace and reason had returned,
and we were sitting upon the grass, wiping our clammy foreheads, and looking
with apprehension at each other to mark the last traces of that terrific
experience which we had undergone.
  "Upon my word, Watson!" said Holmes at last with an unsteady voice, "I owe
you both my thanks and an apology. It was an unjustifiable experiment even
for one's self, and doubly so for a friend. I am really very sorry."
  "You know," I answered with some emotion, for I had never seen so much of
Holmes's heart before, "that it is my greatest joy and privilege to help you."
  He relapsed at once into the half-humorous, half-cynical vein which was
his habitual attitude to those about him. "It would be superfluous to drive
us mad, my dear Watson," said he. "A candid observer would celtainly
declare that we were so already before we embarked upon so wild an
experiment. I confess that I never imagined that the effect could be so
sudden and so severe." He dashed into the cottage, and, reappearing with
the burning lamp held at full arm's length, he threw it among a bank of
brambles. "We must give the room a little time to clear. I take it, Watson,
that you have no longer a shadow of a doubt as to how these tragedies were
produced?"
  "None whatever."
  "But the cause remains as obscure as before. Come into the arbour here and
let us discuss it together. That villainous stuff seems still to linger round
my throat. I think we must admit that all the evidence points to this man,
Mortimer Tregennis, having been the criminal in the first tragedy, though he
was the victim in the second one. We must remember, in the first place, that
there is some story of a family quarrel, followed by a reconciliation. How
bitter that quarrel may have been, or how hollow the reconciliation we
cannot tell. When I think of Mortimer Tregennis, with the foxy face and the
small shrewd, beady eyes behind the spectacles, he is not a man whom I
should judge to be of a particularly forgiving disposition. Well, in the next
place, you will remember that this idea of someone moving in the garden,
which took our attention for a moment from the real cause of the tragedy,
emanated from him. He had a motive in misleading us. Finally, if he did not
throw this substance into the fire at the moment of leaving the room, who
did do so? The affair happened immediately after his departure. Had anyone
else come in, the family would certainly have risen from the table. Besides,
in peaceful Cornwall, visitors do not arrive after ten o'clock at night. We
may take it, then, that all the evidence points to Mortimer Tregennis as the
culprit."
  "Then his own death was suicide!"
  "Well, Watson, it is on the face of it a not impossible supposition. The man
who had the guilt upon his soul of having brought such a fate upon his
own family might well be driven by remorse to inflict it upon himself.
There are, however, some cogent reasons against it. Forturlately, there is one
man in England who knows all about it, and I have made arrangements by which
we shall hear the facts this afternoon from his own lips. Ah! he is a little
before his time. Perhaps you would kindly step this way, Dr. Leon Sterndale.
We have been conducting a chemical experiment indoors which has left our
little room hardly fit for the reception of so distinguished a visitor."
  I had heard the click of the garden gate, and now the majestic figure of the
great African explorer appeared upon the path. He turned in some surprise
towards the rustic arbour in which we sat.
  "You sent for me, Mr. Holmes. I had your note about an hour ago, and I have
come, though I really do not know why I should obey your summons."
  "Perhaps we can clear the point up before we separate," said Holmes.
"Meanwhile, I am much obliged to you for your courteous acquiescence. You
will excuse this informal reception in the open air, but my friend Watson and
I have nearly furnished an additional chapter to what the papers call the
Cornish Horror, and we prefer a clear atmosphere for the present. Perhaps,
since the matters which we have to discuss will affect you personally in a
very intimate fashion, it is as well that we should talk where there can be no
eavesdropping."
  The explorer took his cigar from his lips and gazed sternly at my companlon.
  "I am at a loss to know, sir," he said, "what you can have to speak about
which affects me personally in a very intimate fashion."
  "The killing of Mortimer Tregennis," said Holmes.
  For a moment I wished that I were armed. Stemdale's fierce face turned to a
dusky red, his eyes glared, and the knotted, passionate veins started out in
his forehead, while he sprang forward with clenched hands towards my
companion. Then he stopped, and with a violent effort he resumed a cold,
rigid calmness, which was, perhaps, more suggestive of danger than his hot-
headed outburst.
  "I have lived so long among savages and beyond the law," said he, "that I
have got into the way of being a law to myself. You would do well, Mr.
Holmes, not to forget it, for I have no desire to do you an injury."
  "Nor have I any desire to do you an injury, Dr. Sterndale. Surely the
clearest proof of it is that, knowing what I know, I have sent for you and
not for the police."
  Sterndale sat down with a gasp, overawed for, perhaps, the first time in
his adventurous life. There was a calm assurance of power in Holmes's
manner which could not be withstood. Our visitor stammered for a
moment, his great hands opening and shutting in his agitation.
  "What do you mean?" he asked at last. "If this is bluff upon your part, Mr.
Holmes, you have chosen a bad man for your experiment. Let us have no
more beating about the bush. What do you mean?"
  "I will tell you," said Holmes, "and the reason why I tell you is that I
hope frankness may beget frankness. What my next step may be will depend
entirely upon the nature of your own defence."
  "My defence?"
  "Yes, sir."
  "My defence against what?"
  "Against the charge of killing Mortimer Tregennis."
  Sterndale mopped his forehead with his handkerchief. "Upon my word, you
are getting on," said he. "Do all your successes depend upon this prodigious
power of bluff?"
  "The bluff," said Holmes sternly, "is upon your side, Dr. Leon Sterndale,
and not upon mine. As a proof I will tell you some of the facts upon which my
conclusions are based. Of your return from Plymouth, allowing much of
your property to go on to Africa, I will say nothing save that it first
informed me that you were one of the factors which had to be taken into
account in reconstructing this drama --"
  "I came back --"
  "I have heard your reasons and regard them as unconvincing and
inadequate. We will pass that. You came down here to ask me whom I
suspected. I refused to answer you. You then went to the vicarage, waited
outside it for some time, and finally returned to your cottage."
  "How do you know that?"
  "I followed you."
  "I saw no one."
  "That is what you may expect to see when I follow you. You spent a
restless night at your cottage, and you formed certain plans, which in the
early morning you proceeded to put into execution. Leaving your door just
as day was breaking, you filled your pocket with some reddish gravel that
was lying heaped beside your gate."
  Sterndale gave a violent start and looked at Holmes in amazement.
  "You then walked swiftly for the mile which separated you from the
vicarage. You were wearing, I may remark, the same pair of ribbed tennis
shoes which are at the present moment upon your feet. At the vicarage
you passed through the orchard and the side hedge, coming out under the
window of the lodger Tregennis. It was now daylight, but the household was
not yet stirring. You drew some of the gravel from your pocket, and you
threw it up at the window above you."
  Sterndale sprang to his feet.
  "I believe that you are the devil himself!" he cried.
  Holmes smiled at the compliment. "It took two, or possibly three, handfuls
before the lodger came to the window. You beckoned him to come down. He
dressed hurriedly and descended to his sitting-room. You entered by the
window. There was an interview -- a short one -- during which you walked up
and down the room. Then you passed out and closed the window, standing
on the lawn outside smoking a cigar and watching what occurred. Finally,
after the death of Tregennis, you withdrew as you had come. Now, Dr.
Sterndale, how do you justify such conduct, and what were the motives for
your actions? If you prevaricate or trifle with me, I give you my assurance
that the matter will pass out ol my hands forever."
  Our visitor's face had turned ashen gray as he listened to the words of his
accuser. Now he sat for some time in thought with his face sunk in his
hands. Then with a sudden impulsive gesture he plucked a photograph
from his breast-pocket and threw it on the rustic table before us.
  "That is why I have done it," said he.
  It showed the bust and face of a very beautiful woman. Holmes stooped
over it.
  "Brenda Tregennis," said he.
  "Yes, Brenda Tregennis," repeated our visitor. "For years I have loved her.
For years she has loved me. There is the secret of that Cornish seclusion
which people have marvelled at. It has brought me close to the one thing
on earth that was dear to me. I could not marry her, for I have a wife who
has left me for years and yet whom, by the deplorable laws of England, I
could not divorce. For years Brenda waited. For years I waited. And this is
what we have waited for." A terrible sob shook his great frame, and he
clutched his throat under his brindled beard. Then with an effort he
mastered himself and spoke on:
  "The vicar knew. He was in our confidence. He would tell you that she was
an angel upon earth. That was why he telegraphed to me and I returned.
What was my baggage or Africa to me when I learned that such a fate had
come upon my darling? There you have the missing clue to my action, Mr.
Holmes."
  "Proceed," said my friend.
  Dr. Sterndale drew from his pocket a paper packet and laid it upon the
table. On the outside was written "Radix pedis diaboli" with a red poison
label beneath it. He pushed it towards me. "I understand that you are a
doctor, sir. Have you ever heard of this preparation?"
  "Devil's-foot root! No, I have never heard of it."
  "It is no reflection upon your professional knowledge," said he, "for I
believe that, save for one sample in a laboratory at Buda, there is no other
specimen in Europe. It has not yet found its way either into the pharmacopceia
or into the literature of toxicology. The root is shaped like a foot, half
human, half goatlike; hence the fanciful name given by a botanical missionary.
It is used as an ordeal poison by the medicine-men in certain districts of
West Africa and is kept as a secret among them. This particular specimen I
obtained under very extraordinary circumstances in the Ubangi country." He
opened the paper as he spoke and disclosed a heap of reddish-brown, snuff-like
powder.
  "Well, sir?" asked Holmes sternly.
  "I am about to tell you, Mr. Holmes, all that actually occurred, for you
already know so much that it is clearly to my interest that you should know
all. I have already explained the relationship in which I stood to the
Tregennis family. For the sake of the sister I was friendly with the brothers.
There was a family quarrel about money which estranged this man Mortimer, but
it was supposed to be made up, and I afterwards met him as I did the others.
He was a sly, subtle, scheming man, and several things arose which gave me a
suspicion of him, but I had no cause for any positive quarrel.
  "One day, only a couple of weeks ago, he came down to my cottage and I
showed him some of my African curiosities. Among other things I exhibited
this powder, and I told him of its strange properties, how it stimulates those
brain centres which control the emotion of fear, and how either madness or
death is the fate of the unhappy native who is subjected to the ordeal by the
priest of his tribe. I told him also how powerless European science would be
to detect it. How hi took it I cannot say, for I never left the room, but
there is no doubt that it was then, while I was opening cabinets and stooping
to boxes, that he managed to abstract some of the devil's-foot root. I well
remember how he plied me with questions as to the amount and the time that
was needed for its effect, but I little dreamed that he could have a personal
reason for asking.
  "I thought no more of the matter until the vicar's telegram reached me at
Plymouth. This villain had thought that I would be at sea before the news
could reach me, and that I should be lost for years in Africa. But I returned
at once. Of course, I could not listen to the details without feeling assured
that my poison had been used. I came round to see you on the chance tbat some
other explanation had suggesteid itself to you. But there could be none. I was
convinced that Mortimer Tregennis was the murderer; that for the sake of
money, and with the idea, perhaps, that if the other members of his family
were all insane he would be the sole guardian of their joint property, he had
used the devil's-foot powder upon them, driven two of them out of their
senses, and killed his sister Brenda, the one human being whom I have ever
loved or who has ever loved me. There was his crime; what was to be his
punishment?
  "Should I appeal to the law? Where were my proofs? I knew that the facts
were true, but could I help to make a jury of countrymen believe so fantastic
a story? I might or I might not. But I could not afford to fail. My soul
cried out for revenge. I have said to you once before, Mr. Holmes, that I
have spent much of my life outside the law, and that I have come at last to
be a law to myself. So it was now. I determined that the fate which he had
given to others should be shared by himself. Either that or I would do
justice upon him with my own hand. In all England there can be no man who
sets less value upon his own life than I do at the present moment.
  "Now I have told you all. You have yourself supplied the rest. I did, as
you say, after a restless night, set off early from my cottage. I foresaw the
difficulty of arousing him, so I gathered some gravel from the pile which you
have mentioned, and I used it to throw up to his window. He came down and
admitted me through the window of the sitting-room. I laid his offence before
him. I told him that I had come both as judge and executioner. The wretch sank
into a chair, paralyzed at the sight of my revolver. I lit the lamp, put the
powder above it, and stood outside the window, ready to carry out my
threat to shoot him should he try to leave the room. In five minutes he died.
My God! how he died! But my heart was flint, for he endured nothing which
my innocent darling had not felt before him. There is my story, Mr. Holmes.
Perhaps, if you loved a woman, you would have done as much yourself. At
any rate, I am in your hands. You can take what steps you like. As I have
already said, there is no man living who can fear death less than I do. "
  Holmes sat for some little time in silence.
  "What were your plans?" he asked at last.
  "I had intended to bury myself in central Africa. My work there is but
half finished."
  "Go and do the other half," said Holmes. "I, at least, am not prepared to
prevent you."
  Dr. Sterndale raised his giant figure, bowed gravely, and waliked from the
arbour. Holmes lit his pipe and handed me his pouch.
  "Some fumes which are not poisonous would be a welcome change," said he.
"I think you must agree, Watson, that it is not a case in which we are called
upon to interfere. Our investigation has been independent, and our action
shall be so also. You would not denounce the man?"
  "Certainly not," I answered.
  "I have never loved, Watson, but if I did and if the woman I loved had met
such an end, I might act even as our lawless lion-hunter has done. Who
knows? Well, Watson, I will not offend your intelligence by explaining what
is obvious. The gravel upon the window-sill was, of course, the starting-
point of my research. It was unlike anything in the vicarage garden. Only
when my attention had been drawn to Dr. Sterndale and his cottage did I
find its counterpart. The lamp shining in broad daylight and the remains of
powder upon the shield were successive links in a fairly obvious chain. And
now, my dear Watson, I think we may dismiss the matter from our mind
and go back with a clear conscience to the study of those Chaldean roots
which are surely to be traced in the Cornish branch of the great Celtic
speech."

==============================
            The Advenfure of the Dying Detective

  Mrs. Hudson, the landlady of Sherlock Holmes, was a long-
suffering woman. Not only was her first-floor flat invaded at all
hours by throngs of singular and often undesirable characters but
her remarkable lodger showed an eccentricity and irregularity in
his life which must have sorely tried her patience. His incredible
untidiness, his addiction to music at strange hours, his occasional
revolver practice within doors, his weird and often malodorous
scientific experiments, and the atmosphere of violence and dan-
ger which hung around him made him the very worst tenant in
London. On the other hand, his payments were princely. I have
no doubt that the house might have been purchased at the price
which Holmes paid for his rooms during the years that I was
with him.
  The landlady stood in the deepest awe of him and never dared
to interfere with him, however outrageous his proceedings might
seem. She was fond of him, too, for he had a remarkable
gentleness and courtesy in his dealings with women. He disliked
and distrusted the sex, but he was always a chivalrous opponent.
Knowing how genuine was her regard for him, I listened earnestly
to her story when she came to my rooms in the second year of
my married life and told me of the sad condition to which my
poor friend was reduced.
  "He's dying, Dr. Watson," said she. "For three days he has
been sinking, and I doubt if he will last the day. He would not
let me get a doctor. This morning when I saw his bones sticking
out of his face and his great bright eyes looking at me I could
stand no more of it. 'With your leave or without it, Mr. Holmes,
I am going for a doctor this very hour,' said I. 'Let it be Watson,
then,' said he. I wouldn't waste an hour in coming to him, sir, or
you may not see him alive."
  I was horrified for I had heard nothing of his illness. I need
not say that I rushed for my coat and my hat. As we drove back I
asked for the details.
  "There is little I can tell you, sir. He has been working at a
case down at Rotherhithe, in an alley near the river, and he has
brought this illness back with him. He took to his bed on
Wednesday afternoon and has never moved since. For these
three days neither food nor drink has passed his lips."
  "Good God! Why did you not call in a doctor?"
  "He wouldn't have it, sir. You know how masterful he is. I
didn't dare to disobey him. But he's not long for this world, as
you'll see for yourself the moment that you set eyes on him."
  He was indeed a deplorable spectacle. In the dim light of a
foggy November day the sick room was a gloomy spot, but it
was that gaunt, wasted face staring at me from the bed which
sent a chill to my heart. His eyes had the brightness of fever,
there was a hectic flush upon either cheek, and dark crusts clung
to his lips; the thin hands upon the coverlet twitched incessantly,
his voice was croaking and spasmodic. He lay listlessly as I
entered the room, but the sight of me brought a gleam of
recognition to his eyes.
  "Well, Watson, we seem to have fallen upon evil days," said
he in a feeble voice, but with something of his old carelessness
of manner.
  "My dear fellow!" I cried, approaching him.
  "Stand back! Stand right back!" said he with the sharp impe-
riousness which I had associated only with moments of crisis.
"If you approach me, Watson, I shall order you out of the
house."
  "But why?"
  "Because it is my desire. Is that not enough?"
  Yes, Mrs. Hudson was right. He was more masterful than
ever. It was pitiful, however, to see his exhaustion.
  "I only wished to help," I explained.
  "Exactly! You will help best by doing what you are told."
  "Certainly, Holmes."
  He relaxed the austerity of his manner.
  "You are not angry?" he asked, gasping for breath.
  Poor devil, how could I be angry when I saw him lying in
such a plight before me?
  "It's for your own sake, Watson," he croaked.
  "For my sake?"
  "I know what is the matter with me. It is a coolie disease
from Sumatra -- a thing that the Dutch know more about than we,
though they have made little of it up to date. One thing only is
certain. It is infallibly deadly, and it is horribly contagious."
  He spoke now with a feverish energy, the long hands twitch-
ing and jerking as he motioned me away.
  "Contagious by touch, Watson -- that's it, by touch. Keep
your distance and all is well."
  "Good heavens, Holmes! Do you suppose that such a consid-
eration weighs with me for an instant? It would not affect me in
the case of a stranger. Do you imagine it would prevent me from
doing my duty to so old a friend?"
  Again I advanced, but he repulsed me with a look of furious
anger.
  "If you will stand there I will talk. If you do not you must
leave the room."
  I have so deep a respect for the extraordinary qualities of
Holmes that I have always deferred to his wishes, even when I
least understood them. But now all my professional instincts
were aroused. Let him be my master elsewhere, I at least was his
in a sick room.
  "Holmes," said I, "you are not yourself. A sick man is but a
child, and so I will treat you. Whether you like it or not, I will
examine your symptoms and treat you for them."
  He looked at me with venomous eyes.
  "If I am to have a doctor whether I will or not, let me at least
have someone in whom I have confidence," said he.
  "Then you have none in me?"
  "In your friendship, certainly. But facts are facts, Watson,
and, after all, you are only a general practitioner with very
limited experience and mediocre qualifications. It is painful to
have to say these things, but you leave me no choice."
  I was bitterly hurt.
  "Such a remark is unworthy of you, Holmes. It shows me
very clearly the state of your own nerves. But if you have no
confidence in me I would not intrude my services. Let me bring
Sir Jasper Meek or Penrose Fisher, or any of the best men in
London. But someone you must have, and that is final. If you
think that I am going to stand here and see you die without either
helping you myself or bringing anyone else to help you, then you
have mistaken your man."
  "You mean well, Watson," said the sick man with something
between a sob and a groan. "Shall I demonstrate your own
ignorance? What do you know, pray, of Tapanuli fever? What do
you know of the black Formosa corruption?"
  "I have never heard of either."
  "There are many problems of disease, many strange patholog-
ical possibilities, in the East, Watson." He paused after each
sentence to collect his failing strength. "I have learned so much
during some recent researches which have a medico-criminal
aspect. It was in the course of them that I contracted this
complaint. You can do nothing."
  "Possibly not. But I happen to know that Dr. Ainstree, the
greatest living authority upon tropical disease, is now in London.
All remonstrance is useless, Holmes, I am going this instant to
fetch him." I turned resolutely to the door.
  Never have I had such a shock! In an instant, with a tiger-
spring, the dying man had intercepted me. I heard the sharp snap
of a twisted key. The next moment he had staggered back to his
bed, exhausted and panting after his one tremendous outflame of
energy.
  "You won't take the key from me by force, Watson. I've got
you, my friend. Here you are, and here you will stay until I will
otherwise. But I'll humour you." (All this in little gasps, with
terrible struggles for breath between.) "You've only my own
good at heart. Of course I know that very well. You shall have
your way, but give me time to get my strength. Not now,
Watson, not now. It's four o'clock. At six you can go."
  "This is insanity, Holmes."
  "Only two hours, Watson. I promise you will go at six. Are
you content to wait?"
  "l seem to have no choice."
  "None in the world, Watson. Thank you, I need no help in
arranging the clothes. You will please keep your distance. Now,
Watson, there is one other condition that I would make. You will
seek help, not from the man you mention, but from the one that I
choose."
  "By all means."
  "The first three sensible words that you have uttered since you
entered this room, Watson. You will find some books over
there. I am somewhat exhausted; I wonder how a battery feels
when it pours electricity into a non-conductor? At six, Watson,
we resume our conversation."
  But it was destined to be resumed long before that hour, and
in circumstances which gave me a shock hardly second to that
caused by his spring to the door. I had stood for some minutes
looking at the silent figure in the bed. His face was almost
covered by the clothes and he appeared to be asleep. Then,
unable to settle down to reading, I walked slowly round the
room, examining the pictures of celebrated criminals with which
every wall was adorned. Finally, in my aimless perambulation, I
came to the mantelpiece. A litter of pipes, tobacco-pouches,
syringes, penknives, revolver-cartridges, and other debris was
scattered over it. In the midst of these was a small black and
white ivory box with a sliding lid. It was a neat little thing, and I
had stretched out my hand to examine it more closely when -- It
was a dreadful cry that he gave -- a yell which might have been
heard down the street. My skin went cold and my hair bristled at
that horrible scream. As I turned I caught a glimpse of a con-
vulsed face and frantic eyes. I stood paralyzed, with the little
box in my hand.
  "Put it down! Down, this instant, Watson -- this instant, I say!"
His head sank back upon the pillow and he gave a deep sigh of
relief as I replaced the box upon the mantelpiece. "I hate to have
my things touched, Watson. You know that I hate it. You fidget
me beyond endurance. You, a doctor -- you are enough to drive a
patient into an asylum. Sit down, man, and let me have my
rest!"
  The incident left a most unpleasant impression upon my mind.
The violent and causeless excitement, followed by this brutality
of speech, so far removed from his usual suavity, showed me
how deep was the disorganization of his mind. Of all ruins, that
of a noble mind is the most deplorable. I sat in silent dejection
until the stipulated time had passed. He seemed to have been
watching the clock as well as I, for it was hardly six before he
began to talk with the same feverish animation as before.
  "Now, Watson," said he. "Have you any change in your
pocket?"
  "Yes."
  "Any silver?"
  "A good deal."
  "How many half-crowns?"
  "I have five."
  "Ah, too few! Too few! How very unfortunate, Watson!
However, such as they are you can put them in your watchpocket.
And all the rest of your money in your left trouserpocket. Thank
you. It will balance you so much better like that."
  This was raving insanity. He shuddered, and again made a
sound between a cough and a sob.
  "You will now light the gas, Watson, but you will be very
careful that not for one instant shall it be more than half on. I
implore you to be careful, Watson. Thank you, that is excellent.
No, you need not draw the blind. Now you will have the
kindness to place some letters and papers upon this table within
my reach. Thank you. Now some of that litter from the mantel-
piece. Excellent, Watson! There is a sugar-tongs there. Kindly
raise that small ivory box with its assistance. Place it here among
the papers. Good! You can now go and fetch Mr. Culverton
Smith, of 13 Lower Burke Street."
  To tell the truth, my desire to fetch a doctor had somewhat
weakened, for poor Holmes was so obviously delirious that
it seemed dangerous to leave him. However, he was as eager
now to consult the person named as he had been obstinate in
refusing.
  "I never heard the name," said I.
  "Possibly not, my good Watson. It may surprise you to know
that the man upon earth who is best versed in this disease is not a
medical man, but a planter. Mr. Culverton Smith is a well-
known resident of Sumatra, now visiting London. An outbreak
of the disease upon his plantation, which was distant from
medical aid, caused him to study it himself, with some rather
far-reaching consequences. He is a very methodical person, and I
did not desire you to start before six, because I was well aware
that you would not find him in his study. If you could persuade
him to come here and give us the benefit of his unique experi-
ence of this disease, the investigation of which has been his
dearest hobby, I cannot doubt that he could help me."
  I give Holmes's remarks as a consecutive whole and will not
attempt to indicate how they were interrupted by gaspings for
breath and those clutchings of his hands which indicated the pain
from which he was suffering. His appearance had changed for
the worse during the few hours that I had been with him. Those
hectic spots were more pronounced, the eyes shone more brightly
out of darker hollows, and a cold sweat glimmered upon his
brow. He still retained, however, the jaunty gallantry of his
speech. To the last gasp he would always be the master.
  "You will tell him exactly how you have left me," said he.
"You will convey the very impression which is in your own
mind -- a dying man -- a dying and delirious man. Indeed, I can-
not think why the whole bed of the ocean is not one solid mass
of oysters, so prolific the creatures seem. Ah, I am wandering!
Strange how the brain controls the brain! What was I saying,
Watson?"
  "My directions for Mr. Culverton Smith."
  "Ah, yes, I remember. My life depends upon it. Plead with
him, Watson. There is no good feeling between us. His nephew,
Watson -- I had suspicions of foul play and I allowed him to see
it. The boy died horribly. He has a grudge against me. You will
soften him, Watson. Beg him, pray him, get him here by any
means. He can save me -- only he!"
  "I will bring him in a cab, if I have to carry him down to
it."
  "You will do nothing of the sort. You will persuade him to
come. And then you will return in front of him. Make any
excuse so as not to come with him. Don't forget, Watson. You
won't fail me. You never did fail me. No doubt there are natural
enemies which limit the increase of the creatures. You and I,
Watson, we have done our part. Shall the world, then, be
overrun by oysters? No, no; horrible! You'll convey all that is in
your mind."
  I left him full of the image of this magnificent intellect bab-
bling like a foolish child. He had handed me the key, and with a
happy thought I took it with me lest he should lock himself in.
Mrs. Hudson was waiting, trembling and weeping, in the pas-
sage. Behind me as I passed from the flat I heard Holmes's high,
thin voice in some delirious chant. Below, as I stood whistling
for a cab, a man came on me through the fog.
  "How is Mr. Holmes, sir?" he asked.
  It was an old acquaintance, Inspector Morton, of Scotland
Yard, dressed in unofficial tweeds.
  "He is very ill," I answered.
  He looked at me in a most singular fashion. Had it not been
too fiendish, I could have imagined that the gleam of the fanlight
showed exultation in his face.
  "I heard some rumour of it," said he.
  The cab had driven up, and I left him.
  Lower Burke Street proved to be a line of fine houses lying in
the vague borderland between Notting Hill and Kensington. The
particular one at which my cabman pulled up had an air of smug
and demure respectability in its old-fashioned iron railings, its
massive folding-door, and its shining brasswork. All was in
keeping with a solemn butler who appeared framed in the pink
radiance of a tinted electric light behind him.
  "Yes, Mr. Culverton Smith is in. Dr. Watson! Very good, sir,
I will take up your card."
  My humble name and title did not appear to impress Mr.
Culverton Smith. Through the half-open door I heard a high,
petulant, penetrating voice.
  "Who is this person? What does he want? Dear me, Staples,
how often have I said that I am not to be disturbed in my hours
of study?"
  There came a gentle flow of soothing explanation from the
butler.
  "Well, I won't see him, Staples. I can't have my work inter-
rupted like this. I am not at home. Say so. Tell him to come in
the morning if he really must see me."
  Again the gentle murmur.
  "Well, well, give him that message. He can come in the
morning, or he can stay away. My work must not be hindered."
  I thought of Holmes tossing upon his bed of sickness and
counting the minutes, perhaps, until I could bring help to him. It
was not a time to stand upon ceremony. His life depended upon
my promptness. Before the apologetic butler had delivered his
message I had pushed past him and was in the room.
  With a shrill cry of anger a man rose from a reclining chair
beside the fire. I saw a great yellow face, coarse-grained and
greasy, with heavy, double-chin, and two sullen, menacing gray
eyes which glared at me from under tufted and sandy brows. A
high bald head had a small velvet smoking-cap poised coquett-
ishly upon one side of its pink curve. The skull was of enormous
capacity, and yet as I looked down I saw to my amazement that
the figure of the man was small and frail, twisted in the shoul-
ders and back like one who has suffered from rickets in his
childhood.
  "What's this?" he cried in a high, screaming voice. "What is
the meaning of this intrusion? Didn't I send you word that I
would see you to-morrow morning?"
  "I am sorry," said I, "but the matter cannot be delayed. Mr.
Sherlock Holmes --"
  The mention of my friend's name had an extraordinary effect
upon the little man. The look of anger passed in an instant from
his face. His features became tense and alert.
  "Have you come from Holmes?" he asked.
  "I have just left him."
  "What about Holmes? How is he?"
  "He is desperately ill. That is why I have come."
  The man motioned me to a chair, and turned to resume his
own. As he did so I caught a glimpse of his face in the mirror
over the mantelpiece. I could have sworn that it was set in a
malicious and abominable smile. Yet I persuaded myself that it
must have been some nervous contraction which I had surprised,
for he turned to me an instant later with genuine concern upon
his features.
  "I am sorry to hear this," said he. "I only know Mr. Holmes
through some business dealings which we have had, but I have
every respect for his talents and his character. He is an amateur
of crime, as I am of disease. For him the villain, for me the
microbe. There are my prisons," he continued, pointing to a row
of bottles and jars which stood upon a side table. "Among those
gelatine cultivations some of the very worst offenders in the
world are now doing time."
  "It was on account of your special knowledge that Mr. Holmes
desired to see you. He has a high opinion of you and thought that
you were the one man in London who could help him."
  The little man started, and the jaunty smoking-cap slid to the
floor.
  "Why?" he asked. "Why should Mr. Holmes think that I
could help him in his trouble?"
  "Because of your knowledge of Eastern diseases."
  "But why should he think that this disease which he has
contracted is Eastern?"
  "Because, in some professional inquiry, he has been working
among Chinese sailors down in the docks."
  Mr. Culverton Smith smiled pleasantly and picked up his
smoking-cap.
  "Oh, that's it -- is it?" said he. "I trust the matter is not so
grave as you suppose. How long has he been ill?"
  "About three days."
  "Is he delirious?"
  "Occasionally."
  "Tut, tut! This sounds serious. It would be inhuman not to
answer his call. I very much resent any interruption to my work,
Dr. Watson, but this case is certainly exceptional. I will come
with you at once."
  I remembered Holmes's injunction.
  "I have another appointment," said I.
  "Very good. I will go alone. I have a note of Mr. Holmes's
address. You can rely upon my being there within half an hour at
most."
  It was with a sinking heart that I reentered Holmes's bedroom.
For all that I knew the worst might have happened in my
absence. To my enormous relief, he had improved greatly in the
interval. His appearance was as ghastly as ever, but all trace of
delirium had left him and he spoke in a feeble voice, it is true,
but with even more than his usual crispness and lucidity.
  "Well, did you see him, Watson?"
  "Yes; he is coming."
  "Admirable, Watson! Admirable! You are the best of mes-
sengers."
  "He wished to return with me."
  "That would never do, Watson. That would be obviously
impossible. Did he ask what ailed me?"
  "I told him about the Chinese in the East End."
  "Exactly! Well, Watson, you have done all that a good friend
could. You can now disappear from the scene."
  "I must wait and hear his opinion, Holmes."
  "Of course you must. But I have reasons to suppose that this
opinion would be very much more frank and valuable if he
imagines that we are alone. There is just room behind the head
of my bed, Watson."
  "My dear Holmes!"
  "I fear there is no alternative, Watson. The room does not
lend itself to concealment, which is as well, as it is the less
likely to arouse suspicion. But just there, Watson, I fancy that it
could be done." Suddenly he sat up with a rigid intentness upon
his haggard face. "There are the wheels, Watson. Quick, man,
if you love me! And don't budge, whatever happens -- whatever
happens, do you hear? Don't speak! Don't move! Just listen with
all your ears." Then in an instant his sudden access of strength
departed, and his masterful, purposeful talk droned away into the
low, vague murmurings of a semi-dellrious man.
  From the hiding-place into which I had been so swiftly hustled
I heard the footfalls upon the stair, with the opening and the
closing of the bedroom door. Then, to my surprise, there came a
long silence, broken only by the heavy breathings and gaspings
of the sick man. I could imagine that our visitor was standing by
the bedside and looking down at the sufferer. At last that strange
hush was broken.
  "Holmes!" he cried. "Holmes!" in the insistent tone of one
who awakens a sleeper. "Can't you hear me, Holmes?" There
was a rustling, as if he had shaken the sick man roughly by the
shoulder.
  "Is that you, Mr. Smith?" Holmes whispered. "I hardly
dared hope that you would come."
  The other laughed.
  "I should imagine not," he said. "And yet, you see, I am
here. Coals of fire, Holmes -- coals of fire!"
  "It is very good of you -- very noble of you. I appreciate your
special knowledge."
  Our visitor sniggered.
  "You do. You are, fortunately, the only man in London who
does. Do you know what is the matter with you?"
  "The same," said Holmes.
  "Ah! You recognize the symptoms?"
  "Only too well."
  "Well, I shouldn't be surprised, Holmes. I shouldn't be sur-
prised if it were the same. A bad lookout for you if it is. Poor
Victor was a dead man on the fourth day -- a strong, hearty
young fellow. It was certainly, as you said, very surprising that
he should have contracted an out-of-the-way Asiatic disease in
the heart of London -- a disease, too, of which I had made such a
very special study. Singular coincidence, Holmes. Very smart of
you to notice it, but rather uncharitable to suggest that it was
cause and effect."
  "I knew that you did it."
  "Oh, you did, did you? Well, you couldn't prove it, anyhow.
But what do you think of yourself spreading reports about me
like that, and then crawling to me for help the moment you are in
trouble? What sort of a game is that -- eh?"
  I heard the rasping, laboured breathing of the sick man. "Give
me the water!" he gasped.
  "You're precious near your end, my friend, but I don't want
you to go till I have had a word with you. That's why I give you
water. There, don't slop it about! That's right. Can you under-
stand what I say?"
  Holmes groaned.
  "Do what you can for me. Let bygones be bygones," he
whispered. "I'll put the words out of my head -- I swear I will.
Only cure me, and I'll forget it."
  "Forget what?"
  "Well, about Victor Savage's death. You as good as admitted
just now that you had done it. I'll forget it."
  "You can forget it or remember it, just as you like. I don't see
you in the witness-box. Quite another shaped box, my good
Holmes, I assure you. It matters nothing to me that you should
know how my nephew died. It's not him we are talking about.
It's you."
  "Yes, yes."
  "The fellow who came for me -- I've forgotten his name -- said
that you contracted it down in the East End among the sailors."
  "I could only account for it so."
  "You are proud of your brains, Holmes, are you not? Think
yourself smart, don't you? You came across someone who was
smarter this time. Now cast your mind back, Holmes. Can you
think of no other way you could have got this thing?"
  "I can't think. My mind is gone. For heaven's sake help
me! "
  "Yes, I will help you. I'll help you to understand just where
you are and how you got there. I'd like you to know before you
die."
  "Give me something to ease my pain."
  "Painful, is it? Yes, the coolies used to do some squealing
towards the end. Takes you as cramp, I fancy."
  "Yes, yes; it is cramp."
  "Well, you can hear what I say, anyhow. Listen now! Can
you remember any unusual incident in your life just about the
time your symptoms began?"
  "No, no; nothing."
  "Think again."
  "I'm too ill to think."
  "Well, then, I'll help you. Did anything come by post?"
  "By post?"
  "A box by chance?"
  "I'm fainting -- I'm gone!"
  "Listen, Holmes!" There was a sound as if he was shaking
the dying man, and it was all that I could do to hold myself quiet
in my hiding-place. "You must hear me. You shall hear me. Do
you remember a box -- an ivory box? It came on Wednesday.
You opened it -- do you remember?"
  "Yes, yes, I opened it. There was a sharp spring inside it.
Some joke --"
  "It was no joke, as you will find to your cost. You fool,
you would have it and you have got it. Who asked you to cross
my path? If you had left me alone I would not have hurt
you."
  "I remember," Holmes gasped. "The spring! It drew blood.
This box -- this on the table."
  "The very one, by George! And it may as well leave the room
in my pocket. There goes your last shred of evidence. But you
have the truth now, Holmes, and you can die with the knowledge
that I killed you. You knew too much of the fate of Victor
Savage, so I have sent you to share it. You are very near your
end, Holmes. I will sit here and I will watch you die."
  Holmes's voice had sunk to an almost inaudible whisper.
  "What is that?" said Smith. "Turn up the gas? Ah, the
shadows begin to fall, do they? Yes, I will turn it up, that I may
see you the better." He crossed the room and the light suddenly
brightened. "Is there any other little service that I can do you,
my friend?"
  "A match and a cigarette."
  I nearly called out in my joy and my amazement. He was
speaking in his natural voice -- a little weak, perhaps, but the very
voice I knew. There was a long pause, and I felt that Culverton
Smith was standing in silent amazement looking down at his
companion.
  "What's the meaning of this?" I heard him say at last in a
dry, rasping tone.
  "The best way of successfully acting a part is to be it," said
Holmes. "I give you my word that for three days I have tasted
neither food nor drink until you were good enough to pour me
out that glass of water. But it is the tobacco which I find most
irksome. Ah, here are some cigarettes." I heard the striking of a
match. "That is very much better. Halloa! halloa! Do I hear the
step of a friend?"
  There were footfalls outside, the door opened, and Inspector
Morton appeared.
  "All is in order and this is your man," said Holmes.
  The officer gave the usual cautions.
  "I arrest you on the charge of the murder of one Victor
Savage," he concluded.
  "And you might add of the attempted murder of one Sherlock
Holmes," remarked my friend with a chuckle. "To save an
invalid trouble, Inspector, Mr. Culverton Smith was good enough
to give our signal by turning up the gas. By the way, the prisoner
has a small box in the right-hand pocket of his coat which it
would be as well to remove. Thank you. I would handle it
gingerly if I were you. Put it down here. It may play its part in
the trial."
  There was a sudden rush and a scuffle, followed by the clash
of iron and a cry of pain.
  "You'll only get yourself hurt," said the inspector. "Stand
still, will you?" There was the click of the closing handcuffs.
  "A nice trap!" cried the high, snarling voice. "It will bring
you into the dock, Holmes, not me. He asked me to come here to
cure him. I was sorry for him and I came. Now he will pretend,
no doubt, that I have said anything which he may invent which
will corroborate his insane suspicions. You can lie as you like,
Holmes. My word is always as good as yours."
  "Good heavens!" cried Holmes. "I had totally forgotten him.
My dear Watson, I owe you a thousand apologies. To think that
I should have overlooked you! I need not introduce you to Mr.
Culverton Smith, since I understand that you met somewhat
earlier in the evening. Have you the cab below? I will follow you
when I am dressed, for I may be of some use at the station.
  "I never needed it more," said Holmes as he refreshed himself
with a glass of claret and some biscuits in the intervals of his
toilet. "However, as you know, my habits are irregular, and
such a feat means less to me than to most men. It was very
essential that I should impress Mrs. Hudson with the reality of
my condition, since she was to convey it to you, and you in turn
to him. You won't be offended, Watson? You will realize that
among your many talents dissimulation finds no place, and that
if you had shared my secret you would never have been able to
impress Smith with the urgent necessity of his presence, which
was the vital point of the whole scheme. Knowing his vindictive
nature, I was perfectly certain that he would come to look upon
his handiwork."
  "But your appearance, Holmes -- your ghastly face?"
  "Three days of absolute fast does not improve one's beauty,
Watson. For the rest, there is nothing which a sponge may not
cure. With vaseline upon one's forehead, belladonna in one's
eyes, rouge over the cheek-bones, and crusts of beeswax round
one's lips, a very satisfying effect can be produced. Malingering
is a subject upon which I have sometimes thought of writing a
monograph. A little occasional talk about half-crowns, oysters-,
or any other extraneous subject produces a pleasing effect of
delirium."
  "But why would you not let me near you, since there was in
truth no infection?"
  "Can you ask, my dear Watson? Do you imagine that I have
no respect for your medical talents? Could I fancy that your
astute judgment would pass a dying man who, however weak,
had no rise of pulse or temperature? At four yards, I could
deceive you. If I failed to do so, who would bring my Smith
within my grasp? No, Watson, I would not touch that box. You
can just see if you look at it sideways where the sharp spring
like a viper's tooth emerges as you open it. I dare say it was
by some such device that poor Savage, who stood between
this monster and a reversion, was done to death. My correspon-
dence, however, is, as you know, a varied one, and I am
somewhat upon my guard against any packages which reach
me. It was clear to me, however, that by pretending that he
had really succeeded in his design I might surprise a con-
fession. That pretence I have carried out with the thoroughness
of the true artist. Thank you, Watson, you must help me on
with my coat. When we have finished at the police-station I
think that something nutritious at Simpson's would not be out
of place."

=================================
             The Adventure of the Empty House

  It was in the spring of the year 1894 that all London was
interested, and the fashionable world dismayed. by the murder of
the Honourable Ronald Adair under most unusual and inexplica-
ble circumstances. The public has already learned those particu-
lars of the crime which came out in the po]ice investigation, but
a good deal was suppressed upon that occasion, since the case
for the prosecution was so overwhelmingly strong that it was not
necessary to bring forward all the facts. Only now, at the end of
nearly ten years, am I allowed to supply those missing links
which make up the whole of that remarkable chain. The crime
was of interest in itself, but that interest was as nothing to me
compared to the inconceivable sequel, which afforded me the
greatest shock and surprise of any event in my adventurous life.
Even now, after this long interval, I find myself thrilling as I
think of it, and feeling once more that sudden flood of joy,
amazement, and incredulity which utterly submerged my mind.
Let me say to that public, which has shown some interest in
those glimpses which I have occasionally given them of the
thoughts and actions of a very remarkable man, that they are not
to blame me if I have not shared my knowledge with them, for I
should have considered it my first duty to do so, had I not been
barred by a positive prohibition from his own lips, which was
only withdrawn upon the third of last month.
  It can be imagined that my close intimacy with Sherlock
Holmes had interested me deeply in crime, and that after his
disappearance I never failed to read with care the various prob-
lems which came before the public. And I even attempted, more
than once, for my own private satisfaction, to employ his meth-
ods in their solution, though with indifferent success. There was
none, however, which appealed to me like this tragedy of Ronald
Adair. As I read the evidence at the inquest, which led up to a
verdict of wilful murder against some person or persons un-
known, I realized more clearly than I had ever done the loss
which the community had sustained by the death of Sherlock
Holmes. There were points about this strange business which
would, I was sure, have specially appealed to him, and the
efforts of the police would have been supplemented, or more
probably anticipated. by the trained observation and the alert
mind of the first criminal agent in Europe. All day. as I drove
upon my round, I turned over the case in my mind and found no
explanation which appeared to me to be adequate. At the risk of
telling a twice-told tale. I will recapitulate the facts as they were
known to the public at the conclusion of the inquest.
  The Honourable Ronald Adair was the second son of the Earl
of Maynooth, at that time governor of one of the Australian
colonies. Adair's mother had returned from Australia to undergo
the operation for cataract, and she, her son Ronald, and her
daughter Hilda were living together at 427 Park Lane. The youth
moved in the best society -- had, so far as was known, no ene-
mies and no particular vices. He had been engaged to Miss Edith
Woodley, of Carstairs, but the engagement had been broken off
by mutual consent some months before, and there was no sign
that it had left any very profound feeling behind it. For the rest
of the man's life moved in a narrow and conventional circle, for
his habits were quiet and his nature unemotional. Yet it was
upon this easy-going young aristocrat that death came, in most
strange and unexpected form, between the hours of ten and
eleven-twenty on the night of March 30, 1894.
  Ronald Adair was fond of cards -- playing continually, but
never for such stakes as would hurt him. He was a member of
the Baldwin, the Cavendish, and the Bagatelle card clubs. It was
shown that, after dinner on the day of his death, he had played a
rubber of whist at the latter club. He had also played there in the
afternoon. The evidence of those who had played with him -- Mr.
Murray, Sir John Hardy, and Colonel Moran -- showed that the
game was whist, and that there was a fairly equal fall of the
cards. Adair might have lost five pounds, but not more. His
fortune was a considerable one, and such a loss could not in any
way affect him. He had played nearly every day at one club or
other, but he was a cautious player, and usually rose a winner. It
came out in evidence that, in partnership with Colonel Moran, he
had actually won as much as four hundred and twenty pounds in
a sitting, some weeks before, from Godfrey Milner and Lord
Balmoral. So much for his recent history as it came out at the
inquest.
  On the evening of the crime, he returned from the club exactly
at ten. His mother and sister were out spending the evening with
a relation. The servant deposed that she heard him enter the front
room on the second floor, generally used as his sitting-room. She
had lit a fire there, and as it smoked she had opened the window.
No sound was heard from the room until eleven-twenty, the hour
of the return of Lady Maynooth and her daughter. Desiring to
say good-night, she attempted to enter her son's room. The door
was locked on the inside, and no answer could be got to their
cries and knocking. Help was obtained, and the door forced. The
unfortunate young man was found lying near the table. His head
had been horribly mutilated by an expanding revolver bullet, but
no weapon of any sort was to be found in the room. On the table
lay two banknotes for ten pounds each and seventeen pounds ten
in silver and gold, the money arranged in little piles of varying
amount. There were some figures also upon a sheet of paper,
with the names of some club friends opposite to them, from
which it was conjectured that before his death he was endeav-
ouring to make out his losses or winnings at cards.
  A minute examination of the circumstances served only to
make the case more complex. In the first place, no reason could
be given why the young man should have fastened the door upon
the inside. There was the possibility that the murderer had done
this, and had afterwards escaped by the window. The drop was
at least twenty feet, however, and a bed of crocuses in full
bloom lay beneath. Neither the flowers nor the earth showed any
sign of having been disturbed, nor were there any marks upon
the narrow strip of grass which separated the house from the
road. Apparently, therefore, it was the young man himself who
had fastened the door. But how did he come by his death? No
one could have climbed up to the window without leaving traces.
Suppose a man had fired through the window, he would indeed
be a remarkable shot who could with a revolver inflict so deadly
a wound. Again, Park Lane is a frequented thoroughfare; there is
a cab stand within a hundred yards of the house. No one had
heard a shot. And yet there was the dead man, and there the
revolver bullet, which had mushroomed out, as soft-nosed bul-
lets will, and so inflicted a wound which must have caused
instantaneous death. Such were the circumstances of the Park
Lane Mystery, which were further complicated by entire absence
of motive, since, as I have said, young Adair was not known to
have any enemy, and no attempt had been made to remove the
money or valuables in the room.
  All day I turned these facts over in my mind, endeavouring to
hit some theory which could reconcile them all, and to find that
line of least resistance which my poor friend had declared to be
the starting-point of every investigation. I confess that I made
little progress. In the evening I strolled across the Park, and
found myself about six o'clock at the Oxford Street end of Park
Lane. A group of loafers upon the pavements, all staring up at a
particular window, directed me to the house which I had come to
see. A tall, thin man with coloured glasses, whom I strongly
suspected of being a plain-clothes detective, was pointing out
some theory of his own, while the others crowded round to listen
to what he said. I got as near him as I could, but his observations
seemed to me to be absurd, so I withdrew again in some disgust.
As I did so I struck against an elderly, deformed man, who had
been behind me, and I knocked down several books which he
was carrying. I remember that as I picked them up, I observed
the title of one of them, The Origin of Tree Worship, and it
struck me that the fellow must be some poor bibliophile, who,
either as a trade or as a hobby, was a collector of obscure
volumes. I endeavoured to apologize for the accident, but it was
evident that these books which I had so unfortunately maltreated
were very precious objects in the eyes of their owner. With a
snarl of contempt he turned upon his heel, and I saw his curved
back and white side-whiskers disappear among the throng.
  My observations of No. 427 Park Lane did little to clear up the
problem in which I was interested. The house was separated
from the street by a low wall and railing, the whole not more
than five feet high. It was perfectly easy, therefore, for anyone
to get into the garden, but the window was entirely inaccessible,
since there was no waterpipe or anything which could help the
most active man to climb it. More puzzled than ever, I retraced
my steps to Kensington. I had not been in my study five minutes
when the maid entered to say that a person desired to see me. To
my astonishment it was none other than my strange old book
collector, his sharp, wizened face peering out from a frame of
white hair, and his precious volumes, a dozen of them at least,
wedged under his right arm.
  "You're surprised to see me, sir," said he, in a strange,
croaking voice.
  I acknowledged that I was.
  "Well, I've a conscience, sir, and when I chanced to see you
go into this house, as I came hobbling after you, I thought to
myself, I'll just step in and see that kind gentleman, and tell him
that if I was a bit gruff in my manner there was not any harm
meant, and that I am much obliged to him for picking up my
books."
  "You make too much of a trifle," said I. "May I ask how
you knew who I was?"
  "Well, sir, if it isn't too great a liberty, I am a neighbour of
yours, for you'll find my little bookshop at the corner of Church
Street, and very happy to see you, I am sure. Maybe you collect
yourself, sir. Here's British Birds, and Catullus, and The Holy
War -- a bargain, every one of them. With five volumes you
could just fill that gap on that second shelf. It looks untidy, does
it not, sir?"
  I moved my head to look at the cabinet behind me. When I
turned again, Sherlock Holmes was standing smiling at me across
my study table. I rose to my feet, stared at him for some seconds
in utter amazement, and then it appears that I must have fainted
for the first and the last time in my life. Certainly a gray mist
swirled before my eyes, and when it cleared I found my collar-
ends undone and the tingling after-taste of brandy upon my lips.
Holmes was bending over my chair, his flask in his hand.
  "My dear Watson," said the well-remembered voice, "I owe
you a thousand apologies. I had no idea that you would be so
affected."
  I gripped him by the arms.
  "Holmes!" I cried. "Is it really you? Can it indeed be that
you are alive? Is it possible that you succeeded in climbing out
of that awful abyss?"
  "Wait a moment," said he. "Are you sure that you are really
fit to discuss things? I have given you a serious shock by my
unnecessarily dramatic reappearance."
  "I am all right, but indeed, Holmes, I can hardly believe my
eyes. Good heavens! to think that you -- you of all men -- should
be standing in my study." Again I gripped him by the sleeve,
and felt the thin, sinewy arm beneath it. "Well, you're not a
spirit, anyhow," said I. "My dear chap, I'm overjoyed to see
you. Sit down, and tell me how you came alive out of that
dreadful chasm."
  He sat opposite to me, and lit a cigarette in his old, nonchalant
manner. He was dressed in the seedy frockcoat of the book
merchant, but the rest of that individual lay in a pile of white
hair and old books upon the table. Holmes looked even thinner
and keener than of old, but there was a dead-white tinge in his
aquiline face which told me that his life recently had not been a
healthy one.
  "I am glad to stretch myself, Watson," said he. "It is no joke
when a tall man has to take a foot off his stature for several
hours on end. Now, my dear fellow, in the matter of these
explanations, we have, if I may ask for your cooperation, a hard
and dangerous night's work in front of us. Perhaps it would be
better if I gave you an account of the whole situation when that
work is finished."
  "I am full of curiosity. I should much prefer to hear now."
  "You'll come with me to-night?"
  "When you like and where you like."
  "This is, indeed, like the old days. We shall have time for a
mouthful of dinner before we need go. Well, then, about that
chasm. I had no serious difficulty in getting out of it, for the
very simple reason that I never was in it."
  "You never were in it?"
  "No, Watson, I never was in it. My note to you was abso-
lutely genuine. I had little doubt that I had come to the end of
my career when I perceived the somewhat sinister figure of the
late Professor Moriarty standing upon the narrow pathway which
led to safety. I read an inexorable purpose in his gray eyes. I
exchanged some remarks with him, therefore, and obtained his
courteous permission to write the short note which you after-
wards received. I left it with my cigarette-box and my stick, and
I walked along the pathway, Moriarty still at my heels. When I
reached the end I stood at bay. He drew no weapon, but he
rushed at me and threw his long arms around me. He knew that
his own game was up, and was only anxious to revenge himself
upon me. We tottered together upon the brink of the fall. I have
some knowledge, however, of baritsu, or the Japanese system of
wrestling, which has more than once been very useful to me. I
slipped through his grip, and he with a horrible scream kicked
madly for a few seconds, and clawed the air with both his hands.
But for all his efforts he could not get his balance, and over he
went. With my face over the brink, I saw him fall for a long
way. Then he struck a rock, bounded off, and splashed into the
water."
  I listened with amazement to this explanation, which Holmes
delivered between the puffs of his cigarette.
  "But the tracks!" I cried. "I saw, with my own eyes, that two
went down the path and none returned."
  "It came about in this way. The instant that the Professor had
disappeared, it struck me what a really extraordinarily lucky
chance Fate had placed in my way. I knew that Moriarty was not
the only man who had sworn my death. There were at least three
others whose desire for vengeance upon me would only be
increased by the death of their leader. They were all most
dangerous men. One or other would certainly get me. On the
other hand. if all the world was convinced that I was dead they
would take liberties, these men, they would soon lay themselves
open, and sooner or later I could destroy them. Then it would be
time for me to announce that I was still in the land of the living.
So rapidly does the brain act that I believe I had thought this all
out before Professor Moriarty had reached the bottom of the
Reichenbach Fall.
  "I stood up and examined the rocky wall behind me. In your
picturesque account of the matter, which I read with great inter-
est some months later, you assert that the wall was sheer. That
was not literally true. A few small footholds presented them-
selves, and there was some indication of a ledge. The cliff is so
high that to climb it all was an obvious impossibility, and it was
equally impossible to make my way along the wet path without
leaving some tracks. I might, it is true, have reversed my boots,
as I have done on similar occasions, but the sight of three sets of
tracks in one direction would certainly have suggested a decep-
tion. On the whole, then, it was best that I should risk the climb.
It was not a pleasant business, Watson. The fall roared beneath
me. I am not a fanciful person, but I give you my word that I
seemed to hear Moriarty's voice screaming at me out of the
abyss. A mistake would have been fatal. More than once, as
tufts of grass came out in my hand or my foot slipped in the wet
notches of the rock, I thought that I was gone. But I struggled
upward, and at last I reached a ledge several feet deep and
covered with soft green moss, where I could lie unseen, in the
most perfect comfort. There I was stretched, when you, my dear
Watson, and all your following were investigating in the most
sympathetic and inefficient manner the circumstances of my
death.
  "At last, when you had all formed your inevitable and totally
erroneous conclusions, you departed for the hotel, and I was left
alone. l had imagined that I had reached the end of my adven-
tures, but a very unexpected occurrence showed me that there
were surprises still in store for me. A huge rock, falling from
above, boomed past me, struck the path, and bounded over into
the chasm. For an instant I thought that it was an accident, but a
moment later, looking up, I saw a man's head against the
darkening sky, and another stone struck the very ledge upon
which I was stretched, within a foot of my head. Of course, the
meaning of this was obvious. Moriarty had not been alone. A
confederate -- and even that one glance had told me how danger-
ous a man that confederate was -- had kept guard while the
Profcssor had attacked me. From a distance, unseen by me, he
had been a witness of his friend's death and of my escape. He
had waited, and then making his way round to the top of the
cliff, he had endeavoured to succeed where his comrade had
failed.
  "I did not take long to think about it, Watson. Again I saw
that grim face look over the cliff, and I knew that it was the
precursor of another stone. I scrambled down on to the path. I
don't think I could have done it in cold blood. It was a hundred
times more difficult than getting up. But I had no time to think of
the danger, for another stone sang past me as I hung by my
hands from the edge of the ledge. Halfway down I slipped, but,
by the blessing of God, I landed, torn and bleeding, upon the
path. I took to my heels, did ten miles over the mountains in the
darkness, and a week later I found myself in Florence, with the
certainty that no one in the world knew what had become of me.
  "I had only one confidant -- my brother Mycroft. I owe you
many apologies, my dear Watson, but it was all-important that it
should be thought I was dead, and it is quite certain that you
would not have written so convincing an account of my unhappy
end had you not yourself thought that it was true. Several times
during the last three years I have taken up my pen to write to
you, but always I feared lest your affectionate regard for me
should tempt you to some indiscretion which would betray my
secret. For that reason I turned away from you this evening when
you upset my books, for I was in danger at the time, and any
show of surprise and emotion upon your part might have drawn
attention to my identity and led to the most deplorable and
irreparable results. As to Mycroft, I had to confide in him in
order to obtain the money which I needed. The course of events
in London did not run so well as I had hoped, for the trial of the
Moriarty gang left two of its most dangerous members, my own
most vindictive enemies, at liberty. I travelled for two years in
Tibet, therefore, and amused myself by visiting Lhassa, and
spending some days with the head lama. You may have read of
the remarkable explorations of a Norwegian named Sigerson, but
I am sure that it never occurred to you that you were receiving
news of your friend. I then passed through Persia, looked in at
Mecca, and paid a short but interesting visit to the Khalifa at
Khartoum, the results of which I have communicated to the
Foreign Office. Returning to France, I spent some months in a
research into the coal-tar derivatives, which I conducted in a
laboratory at Montpellier, in the south of France. Having con-
cluded this to my satisfaction and learning that only one of my
enemies was now left in London, I was about to return when my
movements were hastened by the news of this very remarkable
Park Lane Mystery, which not only appealed to me by its own
merits. but which seemed to offer some most peculiar personal
opportunities. I came over at once to London, called in my own
person at Baker Street. threw Mrs. Hudson into violent hysterics,
and found that Mycroft had preserved my rooms and my papers
exactly as they had always been. So it was, my dear Watson
that at two o'clock to-day I found myself in my old armchair in
my own old room, and only wishing that I could have seen my
old friend Watson in the other chair which he has so often
adorned."
  Such was the remarkable narrative to which I listened on that
April evening -- a narrative which would have been utterly in-
credible to me had it not been confirmed by the actual sight of
the tall, spare figure and the keen, eager face, which I had never
thought to see again. In some manner he had learned of my own
sad bereavement, and his sympathy was shown in his manner
rather than in his words. "Work is the best antidote to sorrow,
my dear Watson," said he; "and I have a piece of work for us
both to-night which, if we can bring it to a successful conclu-
sion, will in itself justify a man's life on this planet." In vain I
begged him to tell me more. "You will hear and see enough
before morning," he answered. "We have three years of the past
to discuss. Let that suffice until half-past nine, when we start
upon the notable adventure of the empty house."
  It was indeed like old times when, at that hour, I found myself
seated beside him in a hansom, my revolver in my pocket, and
the thrill of adventure in my heart. Holmes was cold and stern
and silent. As the gleam of the street-lamps flashed upon his
austere features, I saw that his brows were drawn down in
thought and his thin lips compressed. I knew not what wild beast
we were about to hunt down in the dark jungle of criminal
London, but I was well assured, from the bearing of this master
huntsman, that the adventure was a most grave one -- while the
sardonic smile which occasionally broke through his ascetic
gloom boded little good for the object of our quest.
  I had imagined that we were bound for Baker Street, but
Holmes stopped the cab at the corner of Cavendish Square. I
observed that as he stepped out he gave a most searching glance
to right and left, and at every subsequent street corner he took
the utmost pains to assure that he was not followed. Our route
was certainly a singular one. Holmes's knowledge of the byways
of London was extraordinary, and on this occasion he passed
rapidly and with an assured step through a network of mews and
stables, the very existence of which I had never known. We
emerged at last into a small road, lined with old, gloomy houses.
which led us into Manchester Street, and so to Blandford Street.
Here he turned swiftly down a narrow passage, passed through a
wooden gate into a deserted yard, and then opened with a key
the back door of a house. We entered together, and he closed it
behind us.
  The place was pitch dark, but it was evident to me that it was
an empty house. Our feet creaked and crackled over the bare
planking, and my outstretched hand touched a wall from which
the paper was hanging in ribbons. Holmes's cold, thin fingers
closed round my wrist and led me forward down a long hall,
until I dimly saw the murky fanlight over the door. Here Holmes
turned suddenly to the right, and we found ourselves in a large,
square, empty room, heavily shadowed in the corners, but faintly
lit in the centre from the lights of the street beyond. There was
no lamp near, and the window was thick with dust, so that we
could only just discern each other's figures within. My compan-
ion put his hand upon my shoulder and his lips close to my ear.
  "Do you know where we are?" he whispered.
  "Surely that is Baker Street," I answered, staring through the
dim window.
  "Exactly. We are in Camden House, which stands opposite to
our own old quarters."
  "But why are we here?"
  "Because it commands so excellent a view of that picturesque
pile. Might I trouble you, my dear Watson, to draw a little
nearer to the window, taking every precaution not to show
yourself, and then to look up at our old rooms -- the starting-point
of so many of your little fairy-tales? We will see if my three
years of absence have entirely taken away my power to surprise
you."
  I crept forward and looked across at the familiar window. As
my eyes fell upon it, I gave a gasp and a cry of amazement. The
blind was down, and a strong light was burning in the room. The
shadow of a man who was seated in a chair within was thrown in
hard, black outline upon the luminous screen of the window.
There was no mistaking the poise of the head, the squareness of
the shoulders, the sharpness of the features. The face was turned
half-round, and the effect was that of one of those black silhou-
ettes which our grandparents loved to frame. It was a perfect
reproduction of Holmes. So amazed was I that I threw out my
hand to make sure that the man himself was standing beside me.
He was quivering with silent laughter.
  "Well?" said he.
  "Good hcavens!" I cried. "It is marvellous."
  "I trust that age doth not wither nor custom stale my infinite
variety," said he, and I recognized in his voice the joy and pride
which the artist takes in his own creation. "It really is rather like
me, is it not?"
  "I should be prepared to swear that it was you."
  "The credit of the execution is due to Monsieur Oscar Meunier
of Grenoble, who spent some days in doing the moulding. It is a
bust in wax. The rest I arranged myself during my visit to Baker
Street this afternoon."
  "But why?"
  "Because, my dear Watson, I had the strongest possible rea-
son for wishing certain people to think that I was there when I
was really elsewhere."
  "And you thought the rooms were watched?"
  "I knew that they were watched."
  "By whom?"
  "By my old enemies, Watson. By the charming society whose
leader lies in the Reichenbach Fall. You must remember that
they knew, and only they knew, that I was still alive. Sooner or
later they believed that I should come back to my rooms. They
watched them continuously, and this morning they saw me arrive."
  "How do you know?"
  "Because I recognized their sentinel when I glanced out of my
window. He is a harmless enough fellow, Parker by name, a
garroter by trade, and a remarkable performer upon the jew's-
harp. I cared nothing for him. But I cared a great deal for the
much more formidable person who was behind him, the bosom
friend of Moriarty, the man who dropped the rocks over the cliff
the most cunning and dangerous criminal in London. That is the
man who is after me to-night, Watson, and that is the man who
is quite unaware that we are after him."
  My friend's plans were gradually revealing themselvcs. From
this convenient retreat, the watchers were being watched and the
trackers tracked. That angular shadow up yonder was the bait.
and we were the hunters. In silence we stood together in the
darkness and watched the hurrying figures who passed and re-
passed in front of us. Holmes was silent and motionless; but I
could tell that he was keenly alert, and that his eyes were fixed
intently upon the stream of passers-by. It was a bleak and
boisterous night, and the wind whistled shrilly down the long
street. Many people were moving to and fro, most of them
muffled in their coats and cravats. Once or twice it seemed to
me that I had seen the same figure before, and I especially
noticed two men who appeared to be sheltering themselves from
the wind in the doorway of a house some distance up the street. I
tried to draw my companion's attention to them; but he gave a
little ejaculation of impatience, and continued to stare into the
street. More than once he fidgeted with his feet and tapped
rapidly with his fingers upon the wall. It was evident to me that
he was becoming uneasy, and that his plans were not working
out altogether as he had hoped. At last, as midnight approached
and the street gradually cleared, he paced up and down the room
in uncontrollable agitation. I was about to make some remark to
him, when I raised my eyes to the lighted window, and again
experienced almost as great a surprise as before. I clutched Holmes's
arm, and pointed upward.
  "The shadow has moved!" I cried.
  It was indeed no longer the profile, but the back, which was
turned towards us.
  Three years had certainly not smoothed the asperities of his
temper or his impatience with a less active intelligence than his
own.
  "Of course it has moved," said he. "Am I such a farcical
bungler, Watson, that I should erect an obvious dummy, and
expect that some of the sharpest men in Europe would be de-
ceived by it? We have been in this room two hours, and Mrs.
Hudson has made some change in that figure eight times, or once
in every quarter of an hour. She works it from the front, so that
her shadow may never be seen. Ah!" He drew in his breath with
a shrill, excited intake. In the dim light I saw his head thrown
forward, his whole attitude rigid with attention. Outside the
street was absolutely deserted. Those two men might still be
crouching in the doorway, but I could no longer see them. All
was still and dark, save only that brilliant yellow screen in front
of us with the black figure outlined upon its centre. Again in the
utter silence I heard that thin, sibilant note which spoke of
intense suppressed excitement. An instant later he pulled me
back into the blackest corner of the room. and I felt his warning
hand upon my lips. The fingers which clutched me were quiver-
ing. Never had I known my friend more moved, and yet the dark
street still stretched lonely and motionless before us.
  But suddenly I was aware of that which his keener senses had
already distinguished. A low, stealthy sound came to my ears,
not from the direction of Baker Street, but from the back of the
very house in which we lay concealed. A door opened and shut.
An instant later steps crept down the passage -- steps which were
meant to be silent, but which reverberated harshly through the
empty house. Holmes crouched back against the wall, and I did
the same, my hand closing upon the handle of my revolver.
Peering through the gloom, I saw the vague outline of a man, a
shade blacker than the blackness of the open door. He stood for
an instant, and then he crept forward, crouching, menacing, into
the room. He was within three yards of us, this sinister figure,
and I had braced myself to meet his spring, before I realized that
he had no idea of our presence. He passed close beside us, stole
over to the window, and very softly and noiselessly raised it for
half a foot. As he sank to the level of this opening, the light of
the street, no longer dimmed by the dusty glass, fell full upon his
face. The man seemed to be beside himself with excitement. His
two eyes shone like stars, and his features were working convul-
sively. He was an elderly man, with a thin, projecting nose, a
high, bald forehead, and a huge grizzled moustache. An opera
hat was pushed to the back of his head, and an evening dress
shirt-front gleamed out through his open overcoat. His face was
gaunt and swarthy, scored with deep, savage lines. In his hand
he carried what appeared to be a stick, but as he laid it down
upon the floor it gave a metallic clang. Then from the pocket of
his overcoat he drew a bulky object, and he busied himself in
some task which ended with a loud, sharp click, as if a spring or
bolt had fallen into its place. Still kneeling upon the floor he bent
forward and threw all his weight and strength upon some lever
with the result that there came a long, whirling, grinding noise,
ending once more in a powerful click. He straightened himself
then, and I saw that what he held in his hand was a sort of gun,
with a curiously misshapen butt. He opened it at the breech, put
something in, and snapped the breech-lock. Then, crouching
down, he rested the end of the barrel upon the ledge of the open
window, and I saw his long moustache droop over the stock and
his eye gleam as it peered along the sights. I heard a little sigh of
satisfaction as he cuddled the butt into his shoulder, and saw that
amazing target, the black man on the yellow ground, standing
clear at the end of his foresight. For an instant he was rigid and
motionless. Then his finger tightened on the trigger. There was a
strange, loud whiz and a long, silvery tinkle of broken glass. At
that instant Holmes sprang like a tiger on to the marksman's
back, and hurled him flat upon his face. He was up again in a
moment, and with convulsive strength he seized Holmes by the
throat, but I struck him on the head with the butt of my revolver,
and he dropped again upon the floor. I fell upon him, and as I
held him my comrade blew a shrill call upon a whistle. There
was the clatter of running feet upon the pavement, and two
policemen in uniform, with one plain-clothes detective, rushed
through the front entrance and into the room.
  "That you, Lestrade?" said Holmes.
  "Yes, Mr. Holmes. I took the job myself. It's good to see you
back in London, sir."
  "I think you want a little unofficial help. Three undetected
murders in one year won't do, Lestrade. But you handled the
Molesey Mystery with less than your usual -- that's to say, you
handled it fairly well."
  We had all risen to our feet, our prisoner breathing hard, with
a stalwart constable on each side of him. Already a few loiterers
had begun to collect in the street. Holmes stepped up to the
window, closed it, and dropped the blinds. Lestrade had pro-
duced two candles, and the policemen had uncovered their lan-
terns. I was able at last to have a good look at our prisoner.
  It was a tremendously virile and yet sinister face which was
turned towards us. With the brow of a philosopher above and the
jaw of a sensualist below, the man must have started with great
capacities for good or for evil. But one could not look upon his
cruel blue eyes, with their drooping, cynical lids, or upon the
fierce, aggressive nose and the threatening, deep-lined brow,
without reading Nature's plainest danger-signals. He took no
heed of any of us, but his eyes were fixed upon Holmes's face
with an expression in which hatred and amazement were equally
blended. "You fiend!" he kept on muttering. "You clever,
clever fiend!"
  "Ah, Colonel!" said Holmes, arranging his rumpled collar.
" 'Journeys end in lovers' meetings,' as the old play says. I
don't think I have had the pleasure of seeing you since you
favoured me with those attentions as I lay on the ledge above the
Reichenbach Fall."
  The colonel still stared at my friend like a man in a trance.
"You cunning, cunning fiend!" was all that he could say.
  "I have not introduced you yet," said Holmes. "This, gentle-
men, is Colonel Sebastian Moran, once of Her Majesty's Indian
Army, and the best heavy-game shot that our Eastern Empire has
ever produced. I believe I am correct, Colonel, in saying that
your bag of tigers still remains unrivalled?"
  The fierce old man said nothing, but still glared at my com-
panion. With his savage eyes and bristling moustache he was
wonderfully like a tiger himself.
  "I wonder that my very simple stratagem could deceive so old
a shikari," said Holmes. "It must be very familiar to you. Have
you not tethered a young kid under a tree, lain above it with your
rifle, and waited for the bait to bring up your tiger? This empty
house is my tree, and you are my tiger. You have possibly had
other guns in reserve in case there should be several tigers, or in
the unlikely supposition of your own aim failing you. These,"
he pointed around, "are my other guns. The parallel is exact."
  Colonel Moran sprang forward with a snarl of rage, but the
constables dragged him back. The fury upon his face was terrible
to look at.
  "I confess that you had one small surprise for me," said
Holmes. "I did not anticipate that you would yourself make use
of this empty house and this convenient front window. I had
imagined you as operating from the street, where my friend
Lestrade and his merry men were awaiting you. With that excep-
tion, all has gone as I expected."
  Colonel Moran turned to the official detective.
  "You may or may not have just cause for arresting me," said
he, "but at least there can be no reason why I should submit to
the gibes of this person. If I am in the hands of the law, let
things be done in a legal way."
  "Well, that's reasonable enough," said Lestrade. "Nothing
further you have to say, Mr. Holmes, before we go?"
  Holmes had picked up the powerful air-gun from the floor,
and was examining its mechanism.
  "An admirable and unique weapon," said he, "noiseless and
of tremendous power: I knew Von Herder, the blind German
mechanic, who constructed it to the order of the late Professor
Moriarty. For years I have been aware of its existence, though I
have never before had the opportunity of handling it. I commend
it very specially to your attention, Lestrade, and also the bullets
which fit it."
  "You can trust us to look after that, Mr. Holmes," said
Lestrade, as the whole party moved towards the door. "Any-
thing further to say?"
  "Only to ask what charge you intend to prefer?"
  "What charge, sir? Why, of course, the attempted murder of
Mr. Sherlock Holmes."
  "Not so, Lestrade. I do not propose to appear in the matter at
all. To you, and to you only, belongs the credit of the remark-
able arrest which you have effected. Yes, Lestrade, I congratu-
late you! With your usual happy mixture of cunning and audacity,
you have got him."
  "Got him! Got whom, Mr. Holmes?"
  "The man that the whole force has been seeking in vain --
Colonel Sebastian Moran, who shot the Honourable Ronald Adair
with an expanding bullet from an air-gun through the open
window of the second-floor front of No. 427 Park Lane, upon
the thirtieth of last month. That's the charge, Lestrade. And
now, Watson, if you can endure the draught from a broken
window, I think that half an hour in my study over a cigar may
afford you some profitable amusement."

  Our old chambers had been left unchanged through the super-
vision of Mycroft Holmes and the immediate care of Mrs. Hud-
son. As I entered I saw, it is true, an unwonted tidiness, but the
old landmarks were all in their place. There were the chemical
corner and the acid-stained, deal-topped table. There upon a
shelf was the row of formidable scrap-books and books of refer-
ence which many of our fellow-citizens would have been so glad
to burn. The diagrams, the violin-case, and the pipe-rack -- even
the Persian slipper which contained the tobacco -- all met my
eyes as I glanced round me. There were two occupants of the
room -- one, Mrs. Hudson, who beamed upon us both as we
entered -- the other, the strange dummy which had played so
important a part in the evening's adventures. It was a wax-
coloured model of my friend, so admirably done that it was a
perfect facsimile. It stood on a small pedestal table with an old
dressing-gown of Holmes's so draped round it that the illusion
from the street was absolutely perfect.
  "I hope you observed all precautions, Mrs. Hudson?" said
Holmes.
  "I went to it on my knees, sir, just as you told me."
  "Excellent. You carried the thing out very well. Did you
observe where the bullet went?"
  "Yes, sir. I'm afraid it has spoilt your beautiful bust, for it
passed right through the head and flattened itself on the wall. I
picked it up from the carpet. Here it is!"
  Holmes held it out to me. "A soft revolver bullet, as you
perceive, Watson. There's genius in that, for who would expect
to find such a thing fired from an air-gun? All right, Mrs. Hudson.
I am much obliged for your assistance. And now. Watson, let me
see you in your old seat once more, for there are several points
which I should like to discuss with you."
   He had thrown off the seedy frockcoat, and now he was the
Holmes of old in the mouse-coloured dressing-gown which he
took from his effigy.
   "The old shikari's nerves have not lost their steadiness, nor
his eyes their keenness," said he, with a laugh, as he inspected
the shattered forehead of his bust.
   "Plumb in the middle of the back of the head and smack
through the brain. He was the best shot in India, and I expect
that there are few better in London. Have you heard the name?"
  "No, I have not."
  "Well, well, such is fame! But, then, if I remember right,
you had not heard the name of Professor James Moriarty, who
had one of the great brains of the century. Just give me down
my index of biographies from the shelf."
  He turned over the pages lazily, leaning back in his chair and
blowing great clouds from his cigar.
  "My collection of M's is a fine one," said he. "Moriarty
himself is enough to make any letter illustrious, and here is
Morgan the poisoner, and Merridew of abominable memory, and
Mathews, who knocked out my left canine in the waiting-room
at Charing Cross, and, finally, here is our friend of to-night."
  He handed over the book, and I read:

     Moran, Sebastian, Colonel . Unemployed . Formerly I st
   Bangalore Pioneers. Born London, 1840. Son of Sir Augus-
   tus Moran, C.B., once British Minister to Persia. Educated
   Eton and Oxford. Served in Jowaki Campaign, Afghan
   Campaign, Charasiab (despatches), Sherpur, and Cabul. Au-
   thor of Heavy Game of the Western Himalayas (1881);
   Three Months in the Jungle (1884). Address: Conduit Street.
   Clubs: The Anglo-lndian, the Tankerville, the Bagatelle
   Card Club.

  On the margin was written, in Holmes's precise hand:

   The second most dangerous man in London.

  "This is astonishing," said I, as I handed back the volume.
"The man's career is that of an honourable soldier."
  "It is true," Holmes answered. "Up to a certain point he did
well. He was always a man of iron nerve, and the story is still
told in India how he crawled down a drain after a wounded
man-eating tiger. There are some trees, Watson, which grow to a
certain height, and then suddenly develop some unsightly eccen-
tricity. You will see it often in humans. I have a theory that the
individual represents in his development the whole procession of
his ancestors, and that such a sudden turn to good or evil stands
for some strong influence which came into the line of his pedi-
gree. The person becomes, as it were, the epitome of the history
of his own family."
  "It is surely rather fanciful."
  "Well, I don't insist upon it. Whatever the cause, Colonel
Moran began to go wrong. Without any open scandal, he still
made India too hot to hold him. He retired, came to London, and
again acquired an evil name. It was at this time that he was
sought out by Professor Moriarty, to whom for a time he was
chief of the staff. Moriarty supplied him liberally with money,
and used him only in one or two very high-class jobs, which no
ordinary criminal could have undertaken. You may have some
recollection of the death of Mrs. Stewart, of Lauder, in 1887.
Not? Well, I am sure Moran was at the bottom of it, but nothing
could be proved. So cleverly was the colonel concealed that,
even when the Moriarty gang was broken up, we could not
incriminate him; You remember at that date, when I called upon
you in your rooms, how I put up the shuners for fear of air-guns?
No doubt you thought me fanciful. I knew exactly what I was
doing, for I knew of the existence of this remarkable gun, and I
knew also that one of the best shots in the world would be
behind it. When we were in Switzerland he followed us with
Moriarty, and it was undoubtedly he who gave me that evil five
minutes on the Reichenbach ledge.
  "You may think that I read the papers with some attention
during my sojourn in France, on the look-out for any chance of
laying him by the heels. So long as he was free in London, my
life would really not have been worth living. Night and day the
shadow would have been over me, and sooner or later his chance
must have come. What could I do? I could not shoot him at
sight, or I should myself be in the dock. There was no use
appealing to a magistrate. They cannot interfere on the strength
of what would appear to them to be a wild suspicion. So I could
do nothing. But I watched the criminal news, knowing that
sooner or later I should get him. Then came the death of this
Ronald Adair. My chance had come at last. Knowing what I did,
was it not certain that Colonel Moran had done it? He had played
cards with the lad, he had followed him home from the club, he
had shot him through the open window. There was not a doubt
of it. The bullets alone are enough to put his head in a noose. I
came over at once. I was seen by the sentinel, who would, I
knew, direct the colonel's attention to my presence. He could not
fail to connect my sudden return with his crime, and to be
terribly alarmed. I was sure that he would make an attempt to get
me out of the way at once, and would bring round his murderous
weapon for that purpose. I left him an excellent mark in the
window, and, having warned the police that they might be
needed -- by the way, Watson, you spotted their presence in that
doorway with unerring accuracy -- I took up what seemed to me
to be a judicious post for observation, never dreaming that he
would choose the same spot for his attack. Now, my dear
Watson, does anything remain for me to explain?"
  "Yes," said I. "You have not made it clear what was Colonel
Moran's motive in murdering the Honourable Ronald Adair?"
  "Ah! my dear Watson, there we come into those realms of
conjecture, where the most logical mind may be at fault. Each
may form his own hypothesis upon the present evidence, and
yours is as likely to be correct as mine."
  "You have formed one, then?"
  "I think that it is not difficult to explain the facts. It came out
in evidence that Colonel Moran and young Adair had, between
them, won a considerable amount of money. Now, Moran un-
doubtedly played foul -- of that I have long been aware. I believe
that on the day of the murder Adair had discovered that Moran
was cheating. Very likely he had spoken to him privately, and
had threatened to expose him unless he voluntarily resigned his
membership of the club, and promised not to play cards again. It
is unlikely that a youngster like Adair would at once make a
hideous scandal by exposing a well known man so much older
than himself. Probably he acted as I suggest. The exclusion from
his clubs would mean ruin to Moran, who lived by his ill-gotten
card-gains. He therefore murdered Adair, who at the time was
endeavouring to work out how much money he should himself
return. since he could not profit by his partner's foul play. He
locked the door lest the ladies should surprise him and insist
upon knowing what he was doing with these names and coins.
Will it pass?"
  "I have no doubt that you have hit upon the truth."
  "It will be verified or disproved at the trial. Meanwhile. come
what may, Colonel Moran will trouble us no more. The famous
air-gun of Von Herder will embellish the Scotland Yard Mu-
seum, and once again Mr. Sherlock Holmes is free to devote his
life to examining those interesting little problems which the
complex life of London so plentifully presents."

==========================
           The Adventure of the Engineer's Thumb

  Of all the problems which have been submitted to my friend,
Mr. Sherlock Holmes, for solution during the years of our
intimacy, there were only two which I was the means of intro-
ducing to his notice -- that of Mr. Hatherley's thumb, and that of
Colonel Warburton's madness. Of these the latter may have
afforded a finer field for an acute and original observer, but the
other was so strange in its inception and so dramatic in its details
that it may be the more worthy of being placed upon record,
even if it gave my friend fewer openings for those deductive
methods of reasoning by which he achieved such remarkable
results. The story has, I believe, been told more than once in the
newspapers, but, like all such narratives, its effect is much less
striking when set forth en bloc in a single half-column of print
than when the facts slowly evolve before your own eyes, and the
mystery clears gradually away as each new discovery furnishes a
step which leads on to the complete truth. At the time the
circumstances made a deep impression upon me, and the lapse of
two years has hardly served to weaken the effect.
  It was in the summer of '89, not long after my marriage, that
the events occurred which I am now about to summarize. I had
returned to civil practice and had finally abandoned Holmes in
his Baker Street rooms, although I continually visited him and
occasionally even persuaded him to forgo his Bohemian habits
so far as to come and visit us. My practice had steadily in-
creased, and as I happened to live at no very great distance from
Paddington Station, I got a few patients from among the offi-
cials. One of these, whom I had cured of a painful and lingering
disease, was never weary of advertising my virtues and of en-
deavouring to send me on every sufferer over whom he might
have any influence.
  One morning, at a little before seven o'clock, I was awakened
by the maid tapping at the door to announce that two men had
come from Paddington and were waiting in the consulting-room.
I dressed hurriedly, for I knew by experience that railway cases
were seldom trivial, and hastened downstairs. As I descended,
my old ally, the guard, came out of the room and closed the door
tightly behind him.
  "I've got him here," he whispered, jerking his thumb over his
shoulder; "he's all right."
  "What is it, then?" I asked, for his manner suggested that it
was some strange creature which he had caged up in my room.
  "It's a new patient," he whispered. "I thought I'd bring him
round myself; then he couldn't slip away. There he is, all safe
and sound. I must go now, Doctor; I have my dooties, just the
same as you." And off he went, this trusty tout, without even
giving me time to thank him.
  I entered my consulting-room and found a gentleman seated
by the table. He was quietly dressed in a suit of heather tweed
with a soft cloth cap which he had laid down upon my books.
Round one of his hands he had a handkerchief wrapped, which
was mottled all over with bloodstains. He was young, not more
than five-and-twenty, I should say, with a strong, masculine
face; but he was exceedingly pale and gave me the impression of
a man who was suffering from some strong agitation, which it
took all his strength of mind to control.
  "I am sorry to knock you up so early, Doctor," said he, "but
I have had a very serious accident during the night. I came in by
train this morning, and on inquiring at Paddington as to where I
might find a doctor, a worthy fellow very kindly escorted me
here. I gave the maid a card, but I see that she has left it upon
the side-table."

I took it up and glanced at it. "Mr. Victor Hatherley, hydrau-
iic engineer, 1 6A. Victoria Street (3d floor) . " That was the
name, style, and abode of my morning visitor. "I regret that I
have kept you waiting," said I, sitting down in my library-chair.
"You are fresh from a night journey, I understand, which is in
itself a monotonous occupation."
  "Oh, my night could not be called monotonous," said he, and
laughed. He laughed very heartily, with a high, ringing note,
leaning back in his chair and shaking his sides. All my medical
instincts rose up against that laugh.
  "Stop it!" I cried; "pull yourself together!" and I poured out
some water from a carafe.
  It was useless, however. He was off in one of those hysterical
outbursts which come upon a strong nature when some great
crisis is over and gone. Presently he came to himself once more,
very weary and pale-looking.
  "I have been making a fool of myself," he gasped.
  "Not at ail. Drink this." I dashed some brandy into the water,
and the colour began to come back to his bloodless cheeks.
  "That's better!" said he. "And now, Doctor, perhaps you
would kindly attend to my thumb, or rather to the place where
my thumb used to be."
  He unwound the handkerchief and held out his hand. It gave
even my hardened nerves a shudder to look at it. There were four
protruding fingers and a horrid red, spongy surface where the
thumb should have been. It had been hacked or torn right out
from the roots.
  "Good heavens!" I cried, "this is a terrible injury. It must
have bled considerably."
  "Yes, it did. I fainted when it was done, and I think that I
must have been senseless for a long time. When I came to I
found that it was still bleeding, sol tied one end of my handker-
chief very tightly round the wrist and braced it up with a twig."
  "Excellent! You should have been a surgeon."
  "It is a question of hydraulics, you see, and came within my
own province."
  "This has been done," said I, examining the wound, "by a
very heavy and sharp instrument."
  "A thing like a cleaver," said he.
  "An accident, I presume?"
  "By no means."
  "What! a murderous attack?''
  "Very murderous indeed."
  "You horrify me."
  I sponged the wound, cleaned it, dressed it, and finally cov-
ered it over with cotton wadding and carbolized bandages. He
lay back without wincing, though he bit his lip from time to
time.
  "How is that?" I asked when I had finished.
  "Capital! Between your brandy and your bandage, I feel a
new man. I was very weak, but I have had a good deal to go
through."
  "Perhaps you had better not speak of the matter. It is evi-
dently trying to your nerves."
  "Oh, no, not now. I shall have to tell my tale to the police;
but, between ourselves, if it were not for the convincing evi-
dence of this wound of mine, I should be surprised if they
believed my statement, for it is a very extraordinary one, and I
have not much in the way of proof with which to back it up; and,
even if they believe me, the clues which I can give them are so
vague that it is a question whether justice will be done."
  "Ha!" cried I, "if it is anything in the nature of a problem
which you desire to see solved, I should strongly recommend
you to come to my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, before you go
to the official police."
  "Oh, I have heard of that fellow," answered my visitor, "and
I should be very glad if he would take the matter up, though of
course I must use the official police as well. Would you give me
an introduction to him?"
  "I'll do better. I'll take you round to him myself."
  "I should be immensely obliged to you."
  "We'll call a cab and go together. We shall just be in time to
have a little breakfast with him. Do you feel equal to it?"
  "Yes; I shall not feel easy until I have told my story."
  "Then my servant will call a cab, and I shall be with you in
an instant." I rushed upstairs, explained the matter shortly to my
wife, and in five minutes was inside a hansom, driving with my
new acquaintance to Baker Street.
  Sherlock Holmes was, as I expected, lounging about his sitting-
room in his dressing-gown, reading the agony column of The
Times and smoking his before-breakfast pipe, which was com-
posed of all the plugs and dottles left from his smokes of the day
before, all carefully dried and collected on the corner of the
mantelpiece. He received us in his quietly genial fashion, or-
dered fresh rashers and eggs, and joined us in a hearty meal.
When it was concluded he settled our new acquaintance upon
the sofa, placed a pillow beneath his head, and laid a glass of
brandy and water within his reach.
  "It is easy to see that your experience has been no common
one, Mr. Hatherley," said he. "Pray, lie down there and make
yourself absolutely at home. Tell us what you can, but stop when
you are tired and keep up your strength with a little stimulant."
  "Thank you," said my patient. "but I have felt another man
since the doctor bandaged me, and I think that your breakfast has
completed the cure. I shall take up as little of your valuable time
as possible, so l shall start at once upon my peculiar experiences."
  Holmes sat in his big armchair with the weary, heavy-lidded
expression which veiled his keen and eager nature, while I sat
opposite to him, and we listened in silence to the strange story
which our visitor detailed to us.
  "You must know," said he, "that I am an orphan and a
bachelor, residing alone in lodgings in London. By profession I
am a hydraulic engineer, and I have had considerable experience
of my work during the seven years that I was apprenticed to
Venner & Matheson, the well-known firm, of Greenwich. Two
years ago, having served my time, and having also come into a
fair sum of money through my poor father's death, I determined
to start in business for myself and took professional chambers in
Victoria Street.
  "I suppose that everyone finds his first independent start in
business a dreary experience. To me it has been exceptionally
so. During two years I have had three consultations and one
small job, and that is absolutely all that my profession has
brought me. My gross takings amount to 27 pounds lOs. Every day,
from nine in the morning until four in the afternoon, I waited in
my little den, until at last my heart began to sink, and I came to
believe that I should never have any practice at all.
  "Yesterday, however, just as I was thinking of leaving the
office, my clerk entered to say there was a gentleman waiting
who wished to see me upon business. He brought up a card, too,
with the name of 'Colonel Lysander Stark' engraved upon it.
Close at his heels came the colonel himself, a man rather over
the middle size, but of an exceeding thinness. I do not think that
I have ever seen so thin a man. His whole face sharpened away
into nose and chin, and the skin of his cheeks was drawn quite
tense over his outstanding bones. Yet this emaciation seemed to
be his natural habit, and due to no disease, for his eye was
bright, his step brisk, and his bearing assured. He was plainly
but neatly dressed, and his age, I should judge, would be nearer
forty than thirty.
  " 'Mr. Hatherley?' said he, with something of a German
accent. 'You have been recommended to me, Mr. Hatherley, as
being a man who is not only proficient in his profession but is
also discreet and capable of preserving a secret.'
  "I bowed, feeling as flattered as any young man would at
such an address. 'May I ask who it was who gave me so good a
character?'
  " 'Well, perhaps it is better that I should not tell you that just
at this moment. I have it from the same source that you are both
an orphan and a bachelor and are residing alone in London.'
  " 'That is quite correct,' I answered; 'but you will excuse me
if I say that I cannot see how all this bears upon my professional
qualifications. I understand that it was on a professional matter
that you wished to speak to me?'
  " 'Undoubtedly so. But you will find that all I say is really to
the point. I have a professional commission for you, but absolute
secrecy is quite essential -- absolute secrecy, you understand, and
of course we may expect that more from a man who is alone than
from one who lives in the bosom of his family.'
  " 'If I promise to keep a secret,' said I, 'you may absolutely
depend upon my doing so.'
  "He looked very hard at me as I spoke, and it seemed to me
that I had never seen so suspicious and questioning an eye.
  " 'Do you promise, then?' said he at last.
  " 'Yes, I promise.'
  " 'Absolute and complete silence before, during, and after?
No reference to the matter at all, either in word or writing?'
  " 'I have already given you my word.'
  " 'Very good.' He suddenly sprang up, and darting like light-
ning across the room he flung open the door. The passage
outside was empty.
  " 'That's all right,' said he, coming back. 'I know the clerks
are sometimes curious as to their master's affairs. Now we can
talk in safety.' He drew up his chair very close to mine and
began to stare at me again with the same questioning and thought-
ful look.
  "A feeling of repulsion, and of something akin to fear had
begun to rise within me at the strange antics of this fleshless
man. Even my dread of losing a client could not restrain me
from showing my impatience.
  " 'I beg that you will state your business, sir,' said l; 'my
time is of value.' Heaven forgive me for that last sentence, but
the words came to my lips.
  " 'How would fifty guineas for a night's work suit you?' he
asked.
  " 'Most admirably.'
  " 'I say a night's work, but an hour's would be nearer the
mark. I simply want your opinion about a hydraulic stamping
machine which has got out of gear. If you show us what is
wrong we shall soon set it right ourselves. What do you think of
such a commission as that?'
  " 'The work appears to be light and the pay munificent.'
  " 'Precisely so. We shall want you to come to-night by the
last train.'
  " 'Where to?'
  " 'To Eyford, in Berkshire. It is a little place near the borders
of Oxfordshire, and within seven miles of Reading. There is a
train from Paddington which would bring you there at about
11:15.'
  " 'Very good.'
  " 'I shall come down in a carriage to meet you.'
  " 'There is a drive, then?'
  " 'Yes, our little place is quite out in the country. It is a good
seven miles from Eyford Station.'
  " 'Then we can hardly get there before midnight. I suppose
there would be no chance of a train back. I should be compelled
to stop the night.'
  " 'Yes, we could easily give you a shake-down.'
  " 'That is very awkward. Could I not come at some more
convenient hour?'
  " 'We have judged it best that you should come late. It is to
recompense you for any inconvenience that we are paying to
you, a young and unknown man, a fee which would buy an
opinion from the very heads of your profession. Still, of course,
if you would like to draw out of the business, there is plenty of
time to do so.'
  "I thought of the fifty guineas, and of how very useful they
would be to me. 'Not at all,' said I, 'I shall be very happy to
accommodate myself to your wishes. I should like, however, to
understand a little more clearly what it is that you wish me to do.'
  " 'Quite so. It is very natural that the pledge of secrecy which
we have exacted from you should have aroused your curiosity. I
have no wish to commit you to anything without your having it
all laid before you. I suppose that we are absolutely safe from
eavesdroppers?'
  " 'Entirely.'
  " 'Then the matter stands thus. You are probably aware that
fuller's-earth is a valuable product, and that it is only found in
one or two places in England?'
  " 'I have heard so.'
  " 'Some little time ago I bought a small place -- a very small
place -- within ten miles of Reading. I was fortunate enough to
discover that there was a deposit of fuller's-earth in one of my
fields. On examining it, however, I found that this deposit was a
comparatively small one, and that it formed a link between two
very much larger ones upon the right and left -- both of them,
however, in the grounds of my neighbours. These good people
were absolutely ignorant that their land contained that which was
quite as valuable as a gold-mine. Naturally, it was to my interest
to buy their land before they discovered its true value, but
unfortunately I had no capital by which I could do this. I took a
few of my friends into the secret, however, and they suggested
that we should quietly and secretly work our own little deposit
and that in this way we should earn the money which would
enable us to buy the neighbouring fields. This we have now been
doing for some time, and in order to help us in our operations we
erected a hydraulic press. This press, as I have already ex-
plained, has got out of order, and we wish your advice upon the
subject. We guard our secret very jealously, however, and if it
once became known that we had hydraulic engineers coming to
our little house, it would soon rouse inquiry, and then, if the
facts came out, it would be good-bye to any chance of getting
these fields and carrying out our plans. That is why I have made
you promise me that you will not tell a human being that you are
going to Eyford to-night. I hope that I make it all plain?'
  " 'I quite follow you,' said I. 'The only point which I could
not quite understand was what use you could make of a hydraulic
press in excavating fuller's-earth, which, as I understand, is dug
out like gravel from a pit.'
  " 'Ah!' said he carelessly, 'we have our own process. We
compress the earth into bricks, so as to remove them without
revealing what they are. But that is a mere detail. I have taken
you fully into my confidence now, Mr. Hatherley, and I have
shown you how I trust you.' He rose as he spoke. 'I shall expect
you, then, at Eyford at 11:15.'
  " 'I shall certainly be there.'
  " 'And not a word to a soul.' He looked at me with a last
long, questioning gaze, and then, pressing my hand in a cold,
dank grasp, he hurried from the room.
  "Well, when I came to think it all over in cool blood I was
very much astonished, as you may both think, at this sudden
commission which had been intrusted to me. On the one hand, of
course, I was glad, for the fee was at least tenfold what I should
have asked had I set a price upon my own services, and it was
possible that this order might lead to other ones. On the other
hand, the face and manner of my patron had made an unpleasant
impression upon me, and I could not think that his explanation of
the fuller's-earth was sufficient to explain the necessity for my
coming at midnight, and his extreme anxiety lest I should tell
anyone of my errand. However, I threw all fears to the winds,
ate a hearty supper, drove to Paddington, and started off, having
obeyed to the letter the injunction as to holding my tongue.
  "At Reading I had to change not only my carriage but my
station. However, I was in time for the last train to Eyford, and I
reached the little dim-lit station aher eleven o'clock. I was the
only passenger who got out there, and there was no one upon the
platform save a single sleepy porter with a lantern. As I passed
out through the wicket gate, however, I found my acquaintance
of the morning waiting in the shadow upon the other side.
Without a word he grasped my arm and hurried me into a
carriage, the door of which was standing open. He drew up the
windows on either side, tapped on the wood-work, and away we
went as fast as the horse could go."
  "One horse?" interjected Holmes.
  "Yes, only one."
  "Did you observe the colour?"
  "Yes, I saw it by the side-lights when I was stepping into the
carriage. It was a chestnut."
  "Tired-looking or fresh?"
  "Oh, fresh and glossy."
  "Thank you. I am sorry to have interrupted you. Pray con-
tinue your most interesting statement."
  "Away we went then, and we drove for at least an hour.
Colonel Lysander Stark had said that it was only seven miles,
but I should think, from the rate that we seemed to go, and from
the time that we took, that it must have been nearer twelve. He
sat at my side in silence all the time, and I was aware, more than
once when I glanced in his direction, that he was looking at me
with great intensity. The country roads seem to be not very good
in that part of the world, for we lurched and jolted terribly. I
tried to look out of the windows to see something of where we
were, but they were made of frosted glass, and I could make out
nothing save the occasional bright blur of a passing light. Now
and then I hazarded some remark to break the monotony of the
journey, but the colonel answered only in monosyllables, and the
conversation soon flagged. At last, however, the bumping of the
road was exchanged for the crisp smoothness of a gravel-drive,
and the carriage came to a stand. Colonel Lysander Stark sprang
out, and, as I followed after him, pulled me swiftly into a porch
which gaped in front of us. We stepped, as it were, right out of
the carriage and into the hall, so that I failed to catch the most
fleeting glance of the front of the house. The instant that I had
crossed the threshold the door slammed heavily behind us, and I
heard faintly the rattle of the wheels as the carriage drove away.
  "It was pitch dark inside the house, and the colonel fumbled
about looking for matches and muttering under his breath. Sud-
denly a door opened at the other end of the passage, and a long,
golden bar of light shot out in our direction. It grew broader, and
a woman appeared with a lamp in her hand, which she held
above her head, pushing her face forward and peering at us. I
could see that she was pretty, and from the gloss with which the
light shone upon her dark dress I knew that it was a rich
material. She spoke a few words in a foreign tongue in a tone as
though asking a question, and when my companion answered in
a gruff monosyllable she gave such a start that the lamp nearly
fell from her hand. Colonel Stark went up to her, whispered
something in her ear, and then, pushing her back into the room
from whence she had come, he walked towards me again with
the lamp in his hand.
  " 'Perhaps you will have the kindness to wait in this room for
a few minutes,' said he, throwing open another door. It was a
quiet, little, plainly furnished room, with a round table in the
centre, on which several German books were scattered. Colonel
Stark laid down the lamp on the top of a harmonium beside the
door. 'I shall not keep you waiting an instant,' said he, and
vanished into the darkness.

"I glanced at the books upon the table, and in spite of my
ignorance of German I could see that two of them were treatises
on science, the others being volumes of poetry. Then I walked
across to the window, hoping that I might catch some glimpse of
the country-side, but an oak shutter, heavily barred, was folded
across it. It was a wonderfully silent house. There was an old
clock ticking loudly somewhere in the passage, but otherwise
everything was deadly still. A vague feeling of uneasiness began
to steal over me. Who were these German people, and what were
they doing living in this strange, out-of-the-way place? And
where was the place? I was ten miles or so from Eyford, that was
all I knew, but whether north, south, east, or west I had no idea.
For that matter, Reading, and possibly other large towns, were
within that radius, so the place might not be so secluded, after
all. Yet it was quite certain, from the absolute stillness, that we
were in the country. I paced up and down the room, humming a
tune under my breath to keep up my spirits and feeling that I was
thoroughly earning my fifty-guinea fee.
  "Suddenly, without any preliminary sound in the midst of the
utter stillness, the door of my room swung slowly open. The
woman was standing in the aperture, the darkness of the hall
behind her, the yellow light from my lamp beating upon her
eager and beautiful face. I could see at a glance that she was sick
with fear, and the sight sent a chill to my own heart. She held up
one shaking finger to warn me to be silent, and she shot a few
whispered words of broken English at me, her eyes glancing
back, like those of a frightened horse, into the gloom behind her.
  " 'I would go,' said she, trying hard, as it seemed to me, to
speak calmly; 'I would go. I should not stay here. There is no
good for you to do.'
  " 'But, madam,' said I, 'I have not yet done what I came for.
I cannot possibly leave until I have seen the machine.'
  " 'It is not worth your while to wait,' she went on. 'You can
pass through the door; no one hinders.' And then, seeing that I
smiled and shook my head, she suddenly threw aside her con-
straint and made a step forward, with her hands wrung together.
'For the love of Heaven!' she whispered, 'get away from here
before it is too late!'
  "But I am somewhat headstrong by nature, and the more
ready to engage in an affair when there is some obstacle in the
way. I thought of my fifty-guinea fee, of my wearisome journey,
and of the unpleasant night which seemed to be before me. Was
it all to go for nothing? Why should I slink away without having
carried out my commission, and without the payment which was
my due? This woman might, for all I knew, be a monomaniac.
With a stout bearing, therefore, though her manner had shaken
me more than I cared to confess, I still shook my head and
declared my intention of remaining where I was. She was about
to renew her entreaties when a door slammed overhead, and the
sound of several footsteps was heard upon the stairs. She listened
for an instant, threw up her hands with a despairing gesture, and
vanished as suddenly and as noiselessly as she had come.
  "The newcomers were Colonel Lysander Stark and a short
thick man with a chinchilla beard growing out of the creases of
his double chin, who was introduced to me as Mr. Ferguson.
  " 'This is my secretary and manager,' said the colonel. 'By
the way, I was under the impression that I left this door shut just
now. I fear that you have felt the draught.'
  " 'On the contrary,' said I, 'I opened the door myself because
I felt the room to be a little close.'
  "He shot one of his suspicious looks at me. 'Perhaps we had
better proceed to business, then,' said he. 'Mr. Ferguson and I
will take you up to see the machine.'
  " 'I had better put my hat on, I suppose.'
  " 'Oh, no, it is in the house.'
  " 'What, you dig fuller's-earth in the house?'
  " 'No, no. This is only where we compress it. But never mind
that. All we wish you to do is to examine the machine and to let
us know what is wrong with it.'
  "We went upstairs together, the colonel first with the lamp,
the fat manager and I behind him. It was a labyrinth of an old
house, with corridors, passages, narrow winding staircases, and
little low doors, the thresholds of which were hollowed out by
the generations who had crossed them. There were no carpets
and no signs of any furniture above the ground floor, while the
plaster was peeling off the walls, and the damp was breaking
through in green, unhealthy blotches. I tried to put on as uncon-
cerned an air as possible, but I had not forgotten the warnings of
the lady, even though I disregarded them, and I kept a keen eye
upon my two companions. Ferguson appeared to be a morose
and silent man, but I could see from the little that he said that he
was at least a fellow-countryman.
  "Colonel Lysander Stark stopped at last before a low door,
which he unlocked. Within was a small, square room, in which
the three of us could hardly get at one time. Ferguson remained
outside, and the colonel ushered me in.
  " 'We are now,' said he, 'actually within the hydraulic press,
and it would be a particularly unpleasant thing for us if anyone
were to turn it on. The ceiling of this small chamber is really the
end of the descending piston, and it comes down with the force
of many tons upon this metal floor. There are small lateral
columns of water outside which receive the force, and which
transmit and multiply it in the manner which is familiar to you.
The machine goes readily enough, but there is some stiffness in
the working of it, and it has lost a little of its force. Perhaps you
will have the goodness to look it over and to show us how we
can set it right.'
  "I took the lamp from him, and I examined the machine very
thoroughly. It was indeed a gigantic one, and capable of exercis-
ing enormous pressure. When I passed outside, however, and
pressed down the levers which controlled it, I knew at once by
the whishing sound that there was a slight leakage, which al-
lowed a regurgitation of water through one of the side cylinders.
An examination showed that one of the india-rubber bands which
was round the head of a driving-rod had shrunk so as not quite to
fill the socket along which it worked. This was clearly the cause
of the loss of power, and I pointed it out to my companions, who
followed my remarks very carefully and asked several practical
questions as to how they should proceed to set it right. When I
had made it clear to them, I returned to the main chamber of the
machine and took a good look at it to satisfy my own curiosity.
It was obvious at a glance that the story of the fuller's-earth was
the merest fabrication, for it would be absurd to suppose that so
powerful an engine could be designed for so inadequate a pur-
pose. The walls were of wood, but the floor consisted of a large
iron trough, and when I came to examine it I could see a crust of
metallic deposit all over it. I had stooped and was scraping at
this to see exactly what it was when I heard a muttered exclama-
tion in German and saw the cadaverous face of the colonel
looking down at me.
  " 'What are you doing there?' he asked.
  "I felt angry at having been tricked by so elaborate a story as
that which he had told me. 'I was admiring your fuller's-earth,'
said I; 'I think that I should be better able to advise you as to
your machine if I knew what the exact purpose was for which it
was used.'
  "The instant that I uttered the words I regretted the rashness
of my speech. His face set hard, and a baleful light sprang up in
his gray eyes.
  " 'Very well,' said he, 'you shall know all about the ma-
chine.' He took a step backward, slammed the little door, and
turned the key in the lock. I rushed towards it and pulled at the
handle, but it was quite secure, and did not give in the least to
my kicks and shoves. 'Hello!' I yelled. 'Hello! Colonel! Let me
out!'
  "And then suddenly in the silence I heard a sound which sent
my heart into my mouth. It was the clank of the levers and the
swish of the leaking cylinder. He had set the engine at work. The
lamp still stood upon the floor where I had placed it when
examining the trough. By its light I saw that the black ceiling
was coming down upon me, slowly, jerkily, but, as none knew
better than myself, with a force which must within a minute
grind me to a shapeless pulp. I threw myself, screaming, against
the door, and dragged with my nails at the lock. I implored the
colonel to let me out, but the remorseless clanking of the levers
drowned my cries. The ceiling was only a foot or two above my
head, and with my hand upraised I could feel its hard, rough
surface. Then it flashed through my mind that the pain of my
death would depend very much upon the position in which I met
it. If I lay on my face the weight would come upon my spine,
and I shuddered to think of that dreadful snap. Easier the other
way, perhaps; and yet, had I the nerve to lie and look up at that
deadly black shadow wavering down upon me? Already I was
unable to stand erect, when my eye caught something which
brought a gush of hope back to my heart.
  "I have said that though the floor and ceiling were of iron, the
walls were of wood. As I gave a last hurried glance around, I
saw a thin line of yellow light between two of the boards, which
broadened and broadened as a small panel was pushed backward.
For an instant I could hardly believe that here was indeed a door
which led away from death. The next instant I threw myself
through, and lay half-fainting upon the other side. The panel had
closed again behind me, but the crash of the lamp, and a few
moments afterwards the clang of the two slabs of metal, told me
how narrow had been my escape.
  "I was recalled to myself by a frantic plucking at my wrist,
and I found myself lying upon the stone floor of a narrow
corridor, while a woman bent over me and tugged at me with her
left hand, while she held a candle in her right. It was the same
good friend whose warning I had so foolishly rejected.
  " 'Come! come!' she cried breathlessly. 'They will be here in
a moment. They will see that you are not there. Oh, do not waste
the so-precious time, but come!'
  "This time, at least, I did not scorn her advice. I staggered to
my feet and ran with her along the corridor and down a winding
stair. The latter led to ancther broad passage, and just as we
reached it we heard the sound of running feet and the shouting of
two voices, one answering the other from the floor on which we
were and from the one beneath. My guide stopped and looked
about her like one who is at her wit's end. Then she threw open
a door which led into a bedroom, through the window of which
the moon was shining brightly.
  " 'It is your only chance,' said she. 'It is high, but it may be
that you can jump it.'
  "As she spoke a light sprang into view at the further end of
the passage, and I saw the lean figure of Colonel Lysander Stark
rushing forward with a lantern in one hand and a weapon like a
butcher's cleaver in the other. I rushed across the bedroom, flung
open the window, and looked out. How quiet and sweet and
wholesome the garden looked in the moonlight, and it could not
be more than thirty feet down. I clambered out upon the sill, but
I hesitated to jump until I should have heard what passed be-
tween my saviour and the ruffian who pursued me. If she were
ill-used, then at any risks I was determined to go back to her
assistance. The thought had hardly flashed through my mind
before he was at the door, pushing his way past her; but she
threw her arms round him and tried to hold him back.
  " 'Fritz! Fritz!' she cried in English, 'remember your promise
after the last time. You said it should not be again. He will be
silent! Oh, he will be silent!'
  " 'You are mad, Elise!' he shouted, struggling to break away
from her. 'You will be the ruin of us. He has seen too much. Let
me pass, I say!' He dashed her to one side, and, rushing to the
window, cut at me with his heavy weapon. I had let myself go,
and was hanging by the hands to the sill, when his blow fell. I
was conscious of a dull pain, my grip loosened, and I fell into
the garden below.
  "I was shaken but not hurt by the fall; so I picked myself up
and rushed off among the bushes as hard as I could run, for I
understood that I was far from being out of danger yet. Sud-
denly, however, as I ran, a deadly dizziness and sickness came
over me. I glanced down at my hand, which was throbbing
painfully, and then, for the first time, saw that my thumb had
been cut off and that the blood was pouring from my wound. I
endeavoured to tie my handkerchief round it, but there came a
sudden buzzing in my ears, and next moment I fell in a dead
faint among the rose-bushes.
  "How long I remained unconscious I cannot tell. It must have
been a very long time, for the moon had sunk, and a bright
morning was breaking when I came to myself. My clothes were
all sodden with dew, and my coat-sleeve was drenched with
blood from my wounded thumb. The smarting of it recalled in an
instant all the particulars of my night's adventure, and I sprang
to my feet with the feeling that I might hardly yet be safe from
my pursuers. But to my astonishment, when I came to look round
me, neither house nor garden were to be seen. I had been Iying
in an angle of the hedge close by the highroad, and just a little
lower down was a long building, which proved, upon my ap-
proaching it, to be the very station at which I had arrived upon
the previous night. Were it not for the ugly wound upon my
hand, all that had passed during those dreadful hours might have
been an evil dream.
  "Half dazed, I went into the station and asked about the
morning train. There would be one to Reading in less than an
hour. The same porter was on duty, I found, as had been there
when I arrived. I inquired of him whether he had ever heard of
Colonel Lysander Stark. The name was strange to him. Had he
observed a carriage the night before waiting for me? No, he had
not. Was there a police-station anywhere near? There was one
about three miles off.
  "It was too far for me to go, weak and ill as I was. I
determined to wait until I got back to town before telling my
story to the police. It was a little past six when I arrived, so I
went first to have my wound dressed, and then the doctor was
kind enough to bring me along here. I put the case into your
hands and shall do exactly what you advise."
  We both sat in silence for some little time after listening to
this extraordinary narrative. Then Sherlock Holmes pulled down
from the shelf one of the ponderous commonplace books in
which he placed his cuttings.
  "Here is an advertisement which will interest you," said he.
"It appeared in all the papers about a year ago. Listen to this:

    "Lost, on the 9th inst., Mr. Jeremiah Hayling, aged
  twenty-six, a hydraulic engineer. Left his lodgings at ten
  o'clock at night, and has not been heard of since. Was
  dressed in --

etc., etc. Ha! That represents the last time that the colonel
needed to have his machine overhauled, I fancy."
  "Good heavens!" cried my patient. "Then that explains what
the girl said."
  "Undoubtedly. It is quite clear that the colonel was a cool and
desperate man, who was absolutely determined that nothing
should stand in the way of his little game, like those out-and-out
pirates who will leave no survivor from a captured ship. Well,
every moment now is precious, so if you feel equal to it we shall
go down to Scotland Yard at once as a preliminary to starting for
Eyford."
  Some three hours or so afterwards we were all in the train
together, bound from Reading to the little Berkshire village.
There were Sherlock Holmes, the hydraulic engineer, Inspector
Bradstreet, of Scotland Yard, a plain-clothes man, and myself.
Bradstreet had spread an ordnance map of the county out upon
the seat and was busy with his compasses drawing a circle with
Eyford for its centre.
  "There you are," said he. "That circle is drawn at a radius of
ten miles from the village. The place we want must be some-
where near that line. You said ten miles, I think, sir."
  "It was an hour's good drive."
  "And you think that they brought you back all that way when
you were unconscious?"
  "They must have done so.l have a confused memory, too, of
having been lifted and conveyed somewhere."
  "What I cannot understand," said I, "is why they should
have spared you when they found you lying fainting in the
garden. Perhaps the villain was softened by the woman's
entreaties."
  "I hardly think that likely. I never saw a more inexorable face
in my life."
  "Oh, we shall soon clear up all that," said Bradstreet. "Well,
I have drawn my circle, and I only wish I knew at what point
upon it the folk that we are in search of are to be found."
  "I think I could lay my finger on it," said Holmes quietly.
  "Really, now!" cried the inspector, "you have formed your
opinion! Come, now, we shall see who agrees with you. I say it
is south, for the country is more deserted there."
  "And I say east," said my patient.
  "I am for west," remarked the plain-clothes man. "There are
several quiet little villages up there."
  "And I am for north," said I, "because there are no hills
there, and our friend says that he did not notice the carriage go
up any."
  "Come," cried the inspector, laughing; "it's a very pretty
diversity of opinion. We have boxed the compass among us.
Who do you give your casting vote to?"
  "You are all wrong."
  "But we can't all be."
  "Oh, yes, you can. This is my point." He placed his finger in
the centre of the circle. "This is where we shall find them."
  "But the twelve-mile drive?" gasped Hatherley.
  "Six out and six back. Nothing simpler. You say yourself that
the horse was fresh and glossy when you got in. How could it be
that if it had gone twelve miles over heavy roads?"
  "Indeed, it is a likely ruse enough," observed Bradstreet
thoughtfully. "Of course there can be no doubt as to the nature
of this gang."
  "None at all," said Holmes. "They are coiners on a large
scale, and have used the machine to form the amalgam which
has taken the place of silver."
  "We have known for some time that a clever gang was at
work," said the inspector. "They have been turning out half-
crowns by the thousand. We even traced them as far as Reading,
but could get no farther, for they had covered their traces in a
way that showed that they were very old hands. But now, thanks
to this lucky chance, I think that we have got them right enough."
  But the inspector was mistaken, for those criminals were not
destined to fall into the hands of justice. As we rolled into
Eyford Station we saw a gigantic column of smoke which streamed
up from behind a small clump of trees in the neighbourhood and
hung like an immense ostrich feather over the landscape.
  "A house on fire?" asked Bradstreet as the train steamed off
again on its way.
  "Yes, sir!" said the station-master.
  "When did it break out?"
  "I hear that it was during the night, sir, but it has got worse,
and the whole place is in a blaze."
  "Whose house is it?"
  "Dr. Becher's."
  "Tell me," broke in the engineer, "is Dr. Becher a German,
very thin, with a long, sharp nose?"
  The station-master laughed heartily. "No, sir, Dr. Becher is
an Englishman, and there isn't a man in the parish who has a
bener-lined waistcoat. But he has a gentleman staying with him,
a patient, as I understand, who is a foreigner, and he looks as if
a little good Berkshire beef would do him no harm."
  The station-master had not finished his speech before we were
all hastening in the direction of the fire. The road topped a low
hill, and there was a great widespread whitewashed building in
front of us, spouting fire at every chink and window, while in
the garden in front three fire-engines were vainly striving to keep
the flames under.
  "That's it!" cried Hatherley, in intense excitement. "There is
the gravel-drive, and there are the rose-bushes where I lay. That
second window is the one that I jumped from."
  "Well, at least," said Holmes, "you have had your revenge
upon them. There can be no question that it was your oil-lamp
which, when it was crushed in the press, set fire to the wooden
walls, though no doubt they were too excited in the chase after
you to observe it at the time. Now keep your eyes open in this
crowd for your friends of last night, though I very much fear that
they are a good hundred miles off by now."
  And Holmes's fears came to be realized, for from that day to
this no word has ever been heard either of the beautiful woman,
the sinister German, or the morose Englishman. Early that morn-
ing a peasant had met a cart containing several people and some
very bulky boxes driving rapidly in the direction of Reading, but
there all traces of the fugitives disappeared, and even Holmes's
ingenuity failed ever to discover the least clue as to their
whereabouts.
  The firemen had been much perturbed at the strange arrange-
ments which they had found within, and still more so by discov-
ering a newly severed human thumb upon a window-sill of the
second floor. About sunset, however, their efforts were at last
successful, and they subdued the flames, but not before the roof
had fallen in, and the whole place been reduced to such absolute
ruin that, save some twisted cylinders and iron piping, not a
trace remained of the machinery which had cost our unfortunate
acquaintance so dearly. Large masses of nickel and of tin were
discovered stored in an out-house, but no coins were to be
found, which may have explained the presence of those bulky
boxes which have been already referred to.
  How our hydraulic engineer had been conveyed from the
garden to the spot where he recovered his senses might have
remained forever a mystery were it not for the soft mould, which
told us a very plain tale. He had evidently been carried down by
two persons, one of whom had remarkably small feet and the
other unusually large ones. On the whole, it was most probable
that the silent Englishman, being less bold or less murderous
than his companion, had assisted the woman to bear the uncon-
scious man out of the way of danger.
  "Well," said our engineer ruefully as we took our seats to
return once more to London, "it has been a pretty business for
me! I have lost my thumb and I have lost a fifty-guinea fee, and
what have I gained?"
  "Experience," said Holmes, laughing. "Indirectly it may be
of value, you know; you have only to put it into words to gain
the reputation of being excellent company for the remainder of
your exlstence."

===================================
