 In  volumes  10  and  11  of  The History  of Middle-earth
 Christopher  Tolkien  recounts  from  the  original  texts
 the evolution of  his father's  work on  The Silmarillion,
 the  legendary  history of  the Elder  Days or  First Age,
 from  the  completion  of The  Lord of  the Rings  in 1949
 until his death. In  Volume 10,  Morgoth's Ring,  the nar-
 rative  was  taken only  so far  as the  natural dividing-
 point  in  the  whole,  when  Morgoth destroyed  the Trees
 of  Light  and  fled  from  Valinor  bearing   the  stolen
 Silmarils. In The War of the Jewels  the story  returns to
 Middle-earth,  and  the  ruinous  conflict  of   the  High
 Elves  and  the  Men  who  were  their  allies   with  the
 power  of  the  Dark  Lord. With  the publication  in this
 book of all J.R.R. Tolkien's later narrative  writing con-
 cerned with the last centuries of the First Age,  the long
 history of The  Silmarillion, from  its beginnings  in The
 Book  of  Lost  Tales,  is  completed;  and  the enigmatic
 state of the work at his death can be understood.        
                                                         
 A  chief  element  in  The War  of the  Jewels is  a major
 story of Middle-earth  now published  for the  first time,
 a  continuation  of  the  great  'saga' of  Turin Turambar
 and  his  sister  Nienor,  the   children  of   Hurin  the
 Steadfast: this is the tale of the disaster  that overtook
 the  forest  people  of  Brethil  when  Hurin  came  among
 them after  his release  from long  years of  captivity in
 Angband,   the  fortress   of  Morgoth.   The  uncompleted
 text of the  Grey Annals,  the primary  record of  the War
 of  the  Jewels,  is  given  in  full;  the  geography  of
 Beleriand  is studied  in detail,  with redrawings  of the
 final state  of the  map; and  a long  essay on  the names
 and relations of all the peoples  shows more  clearly then
 any writing published hitherto the  closeness of  the con-
 nection   between  language   and  history   in  Tolkien's
 world,  and  provides  much  new   information,  including
 some  knowledge  of  the  language  of the  divine powers,
 the Valar.                                               

                                
                                
          J.R.R. TOLKIEN.        
                                
      THE WAR OF THE JEWELS.     
                                
      The Later Silmarillion.    
             Part Two.           
     The Legends of Beleriand.
                                
  Edited by Christopher Tolkien.
                                
  HarperCollinsRblishers.        

  HarperCollinsPublishers.                                     
  77 - 85 Fulham Palace Road,                                  
  Hammersmith, London W6 8JB.                                 
                                                              
  This paperback edition 1995                                  
  987654321.                                                   
                                                              
  First published in Great Britain by                          
  HarperCollinsPublishers 1994.                                
                                                              
  Copyright (C) HarperCollinsPublishers 1994.                    
                                                              
           TM  (C) 1990 Frank Richard Williamson                 
    and Christopher Reuel Tolkien,                             
                  executors of the Estate of the late          
                  John Ronald Reuel Tolkien.                   
                                                              
  ISBN 0 261 10324 5.                                          
                                                              
  Set in Sabon.                                                
                                                              
  Printed in Great Britain by                                  
  HarperCollinsManufacturing Glasgow.                          
                                                              
  All  rights  reserved.  No  part of  this publication  may be
  reproduced,  stored  in a  retrieval system,  or transmitted,
  in  any  form  or  by  any  means,   electronic,  mechanical,
  photocopying,  recording  or  otherwise,  without  the  prior
  permission of the publishers.                                
                                                              
  This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not,
  by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out or
  otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent
  in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it
  is published and without a similar condition including this
  condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.         

                        CONTENTS.                                 
                                                                 
 Foreword.                                              page  ix
                                                                 
                             PART ONE.                            
                                                                 
 THE GREY ANNALS.                                                 
                                                                 
                             PART TWO.                            
                                                                 
            THE LATER QUENTA SILMARILLION.                        
                                                                 
  9.Of Men                                                     173
 10.Of the Siege of Angband                                    175
 11.Of Beleriand and its Realms                                180
 12.Of Turgon and the Building of Gondolin                     198
 13.Concerning the Dwarves                                     201
 14.Of the Coming of Men into the West                         215
 15.Of the Ruin of Beleriand and the Fall of Fingolfin         238
      The Last Chapters                                        243
                                                                 
                               PART THREE.                        
                                                                 
                         THE WANDERINGS OF HURIN                  
                 AND OTHER WRITINGS NOT FORMING PART OF           
                         THE QUENTA SILMARILLION.                 
                                                                 
   I.The Wanderings of Hurin                                   251
  II.AElfwine and Dirhaval                                     311
 III.Maeglin                                                   316

 IV.  Of the Enis and the Eagles      340
 V.   The Tale of Years               342
                                      
                         PART FOUR.    
                                      
 QUENDI AND ELDAR                   357
                                      
 Index                              425
