                                FOREWORD.                              
                                                                      
 The  War  of  the  Jewels  is  a  companion  to  and   continuation  of
 Morgoth's  Ring,  Volume  10  in  The   History  of   Middle-earth.  As
 I  explained  in  that  book,  the two  together contain  virtually all
 of  my  father's narrative  writing on  the subject  of the  Elder Days
 in  the  years  after  The  Lord of  the Rings,  but the  division into
 two  is   made  'transversely':   between  the   first  part   of  'The
 Silmarillion'   ('the   Legends   of  Aman')   and  the   second  ('the
 Legends of Beleriand'). I use  the term  'Silmarillion', of  course, in
 a  very  wide  sense:  this  though  potentially  confusing  is imposed
 by  the  extremely  complex  relationship  of  the different  'works' -
 especially  but  not  only  that  of  the  Quenta Silmarillion  and the
 Annals;  and  my  father  himself  employed  the  name  in   this  way.
 The  division  of  the  whole  corpus  into  two  parts  is   indeed  a
 natural  one:  the Great  Sea divides  them. The  title of  this second
 part,  The  War  of  the  Jewels,  is  an  expression  that  my  father
 often used of the last six centuries of the First  Age: the  history of
 Beleriand  after  the  return  of  Morgoth  to  Middle-earth   and  the
 coming of the Noldor, until its end.                                  
   In  the  foreword  to  Morgoth's  Ring  I  emphasised   the  distinc-
 tion  between  the  first  period  of  writing  that  followed  in  the
 early  1950s  the  actual  completion  of  The Lord  of the  Rings, and
 the  later  work  that  followed  its publication;  in this  book also,
 therefore, two distinct 'phases' are documented.                      
   The  number  of   new  works   that  my   father  embarked   upon  in
 that first 'phase', highly creative but all too brief,  is astonishing.
 There  were  the  new  Lay  of  Leithian,  of which  all that  he wrote
 before  he  abandoned  it  was  published  in  The  Lays  of Beleriand;
 the  Annals  of  Aman  and  new  versions   of  the   Ainulindale;  the
 Grey  Annals,  abandoned  at  the  end of  the tale  of Turin;  the new
 Tale  of  Tuor  and  the  Fall  of  Gondolin  (published  in Unfinished
 Tales),  abandoned  before  Tuor  actually  entered  the city;  and all
 the   new   tale   of  Turin   and  Nienor   from  Turin's   return  to
 Dor-lomin  to  their  deaths  in  Brethil  (see p.  144 in  this book).
 There  were  also  an  abandoned  prose  saga  of  Beren   and  Luthien
 (see  V.295);  the  story  of  Maeglin;  and  an extensive  revision of
 the  Quenta  Silmarillion,  the  central  work   of  the   last  period

 before  The Lord  of the  Rings, interrupted  near the  beginning of
 the tale of Turin in 1937 and never concluded.                     
   I  expressed  the  view  in  the foreword  to Morgoth's  Ring that
 'despair of publication, at least in  the form  that he  regarded as
 essential' (i.e. the conjunction  of The  Silmarillion and  The Lord
 of the Rings  in a  single work)  was the  fundamental cause  of the
 collapse of this new endeavour;  and that  this break  destroyed all
 prospect  that  what may  be called  'the older  Silmarillion' would
 ever  be  completed.  In  Morgoth's  Ring  I  have   documented  the
 massive  upheaval,  in the  years that  followed, in  his conception
 of  the  old  myths:  an  upheaval  that  never  issued  in  new and
 secure  form.  But  we  come  now  to  the last  epoch of  the Elder
 Days,  when  the  scene  shifts  to  Middle-earth  and  the mythical
 element  recedes:  the  High-elves  return across  the Great  Sea to
 make   war   upon   Morgoth,   Dwarves   and   Men  come   over  the
 mountains  into Beleriand,  and bound  up with  this history  of the
 movement  of  peoples,  of  the  policies  of  kingdoms,  of moment-
 ous  battles  and  ruinous defeats,  are the  heroic tales  of Beren
 One-hand  and  Turin  Turambar.  Yet  in  The  War  of   the  Jewels
 the record  is completed  of all  my father's  further work  on that
 history  in  the  years  following  the publication  of The  Lord of
 the  Rings;  and  even  with  all  the  labour  that  went  into the
 elaboration of parts of 'the Saga of Turin' it is obvious  that this
 bears  no  comparison  with  his  aims  or  indeed  his achievements
 in the early 1950s.                                                
   In Part Two of this book it will be seen that in this  later phase
 of  his  work  the  Quenta   Silmarillion  underwent   scarcely  any
 further  significant rewriting  or addition,  other than  the intro-
 duction  of  the  new  chapter  Of  the  Coming  of  Men   into  the
 West  with the  radically altered  earlier history  of the  Edain in
 Beleriand;  and  that  (the  most  remarkable  fact  in   the  whole
 history of The Silmarillion) the  last chapters  (the tale  of Hurin
 and   the   dragon-gold   of  Nargothrond,   the  Necklace   of  the
 Dwarves,  the  ruin  of  Doriath,  the  fall  of Gondolin,  the Kin-
 slayings)  remained  in  the  form  of  the  Quenta   Noldorinwa  of
 1930  and  were  never  touched  again.   Only  some   meagre  hints
 are found in later writings.                                       
   For  this  there can  be no  simple explanation,  but it  seems to
 me  that  an  important element  was the  centrality that  my father
 accorded  to  the  story  of  Hurin and  Morwen and  their children,
 Turin  Turambar  and  Nienor   Niniel.  This   became  for   him,  I
 believe,  the  dominant  and  absorbing  story  of  the  end  of the

 Elder   Days,  in   which  complexity   of  motive   and  character,
 trapped  in  the  mysterious  workings of  Morgoth's curse,  sets it
 altogether  apart.  He  never  finally  achieved  important passages
 of Turin's  life; but  he extended  the 'great  saga' (as  he justly
 called it) into 'the Wanderings of Hurin',  following the  old story
 that  Hurin  was  released  by  Morgoth  from  his  imprisonment  in
 Angband after  the deaths  of his  children, and  went first  to the
 ruined  halls  of  Nargothrond.  The  dominance  of  the  underlying
 theme  led  to  a  new  story,  a  new  dimension  to the  ruin that
 Hurin's release would bring:  his catastrophic  entry into  the land
 of  the  People  of  Haleth, the  Forest of  Brethil. There  were no
 antecedents  whatsoever  to  this  tale;  but  antecedents   to  the
 manner of its telling are found in parts of the prose 'saga'  of the
 Children  of  Hurin  (Narn   i  Chin   Hurin,  given  in Unfinished
 Tales), of which  'Hurin in  Brethil' is  a further  extension. That
 'saga'  went  back to  the foundations  in The  Book of  Lost Tales,
 but its great elaboration belongs  largely to  the period  after the
 publication of  The Lord  of the  Rings; and  in its  later develop-
 ment there entered an  immediacy in  the telling  and a  fullness in
 the recording  of event  and dialogue  that must  be described  as a
 new  narrative impulse:  in relation  to the  mode of  the 'Quenta',
 it is as if the focus of  the glass  by which  the remote  ages were
 viewed had been sharply changed.                                   
   But   with   Hurin's   grim   and  even   it  may   seem  sardonic
 departure  from  the  ruin  of  Brethil   and  dying   Manthor  this
 impulse  ceased  -  as  it  appears.  Hurin   never  came   back  to
 Nargothrond  and  Doriath;  and  we  are   denied  an   account,  in
 this  mode  of  story-telling,  of  what  should be  the culminating
 moment of the saga after the deaths  of his  children and  his wife-
 his confrontation of Thingol and Melian in the Thousand Caves.     
   It might be, then,  that my  father had  no inclination  to return
 to the Quenta Silmarillion,  and its  characteristic mode,  until he
 had  told  on  an  ample  scale,  and  with  the  same  immediacy as
 that of his sojourn in Brethil, the full tale of Hurin's  tragic and
 destructive 'wanderings' - and their  aftermath also:  for it  is to
 be  remembered  that  his  bringing of  the treasure  of Nargothrond
 to Doriath  would lead  to the  slaying of  Thingol by  the Dwarves,
 the sack of Menegroth, and all the  train of  events that  issued in
 the  attack  of  the Feanorians  on Dior  Thingol's heir  in Doriath
 and, at the last, the  destruction of  the Havens  of Sirion.  If my
 father had done this, then  out of  it might  have come,  I suppose,
 new  chapters  of  the  Quenta  Silmarillion, and  a return  to that

 quality in  the older  writing that  I attempted  to describe  in my
 foreword  to   The  Book   of  Lost   Tales:  'The   compendious  or
 epitomising  form  and   manner  of   The  Silmarillion,   with  its
 suggestion  of  ages  of  poetry  and  "lore"  behind  it,  strongly
 evokes a sense of "untold tales", even in the telling of them       
      There is no  narrative urgency,  the pressure  and fear  of the
 immediate  and   unknown  event.   We  do   not  actually   see  the
 Silmarils as we see the Ring.'                                      
   But this is entirely speculative, because none  of it  came about:
 neither  the  'great   saga'  nor   the  Quenta   Silmarillion  were
 concluded. Freely as my  father often  wrote of  his work,  he never
 so much as hinted at his larger intentions for the structure  of the
 whole. I think that it must be said  that we  are left,  finally, in
 the dark.                                                           
                                                                    
   'The Silmarillion', again in the widest  sense, is  very evidently
 a literary entity of a singular nature. I would say that it can only
 be defined in terms of its history;  and that  history is  with this
 book  largely  completed  ('largely',  because  I  have  not entered
 further into the complexities of the  tale of  Turin in  those parts
 that  my  father  left  in confusion  and uncertainty,  as explained
 in  Unfinished Tales,  p. 6).  It is  indeed the  only  'completion'
 possible,  because  it  was  always  'in  progress';  the  published
 work is  not in  any way  a completion,  but a  construction devised
 out  of  the  existing  materials.  Those  materials  are  now  made
 available, save only in a few details and in  the matter  of 'Turin'
 just  mentioned;  and  with  them a  criticism of  the 'constructed'
 Silmarillion  becomes  possible.  I  shall   not  enter   into  that
 question; although it will be apparent in this  book that  there are
 aspects of the work that I view with regret.                        
                                                                    
   In The War of the Jewels  I have  included, as  Part Four,  a long
 essay  of a  very different  nature: Quendi  and Eldar.  While there
 was  no  possibility  of  making  The  History  of   Middle-earth  a
 history  of  the  languages  as well,  I have  not wished  to eschew
 them  altogether  even  when  not  essential  to  the  narrative (as
 Adunaic is in  The Notion  Club Papers);  I have  wished to  give at
 least some indication at different  stages of  the presence  of this
 vital  and  evolving element,  especially in  regard to  the meaning
 of  names  -  thus  the  appendices to  The Book  of Lost  Tales and
 the  Etymologies  in  The  Lost Road.  Quendi and  Eldar illustrates
 perhaps  more  than  any  other  writing  of  my  father's  the sig-
 nificance of  names, and  of linguistic  change affecting  names, in

                                               
                                                                   
 his  histories.  It  gives  also  an  account  of many  things found
 nowhere  else,  such  as  the gesture-language  of the  Dwarves, and
 all that will ever be known, I believe, of Valarin, the  language of
 the Valar.                                                         
                                                                   
   I take this opportunity to give the correct text of a passage in
 Morgoth's  Ring.  Through  an  error  that entered  at a  late stage
 and  was not  observed a  line was  dropped and  a line  repeated in
 note 16 on page 327; the text should read:                         
  There  have  been  suggestions  earlier   in  the   Athrabeth  that
 Andreth   was   looking   much   further   back   in  time   to  the
 awakening  of  Men  (thus  she  speaks  of  'legends  of  days  when
 death  came  less  swiftly  and  our  span  was  still  far longer',
 p.  313);  in  her  words  here,  'a  rumour  that  has   come  down
 through   years   uncounted',   a   profound   alteration   in   the
 conception seems plain.                                            
                                                                   
  I   have   received   a   communication   from  Mr   Patrick  Wynne
 concerning  Volume  IX,  Sauron  Defeated,  which  I  would  like to
 record  here.  He  has  pointed  out  that several  of the  names in
 Michael  Ramer's  account  of  his  experiences  to the  Notion Club
 are  'not  just  Hungarian  in  style  but  actual  Hungarian words'
 (Ramer  was  born  and  spent  his early  childhood in  Hungary, and
 he  refers to  the influence  of Magyar  on his  'linguistic taste',
 Sauron Defeated  pp. 159,  201). Thus  the world  of the  story that
 he wrote  and read  to the  Club was  first named  Gyonyoru   (ibid.
 p. 214,  note 28),  which means  'lovely'. His  name for  the planet
 Saturn was first given as  Gyuruchill (p.  221, note  60), derived
 from  Hungarian  gyuru   'ring'  and  csillag  'star'  (where  cs is
 pronounced  as  English  ch  in  church);  Gyuruchill   was  then
 changed   to   Shomoru,  probably   from  Hungarian   szomoru  'sad'
 (though  that is  pronounced 'somoru'),  and if  so, an  allusion to
 the  astrological  belief  in  the  cold  and gloomy  temperament of
 those  born  under  the  influence  of  that   planet.  Subsequently
 these  names  were  replaced  by  others  (Emberu,  and  Enekol for
 Saturn) that cannot be so explained.                               
  In  this connection,  Mr Carl  F. Hostetter  has observed  that the
 Elvish  star-name  Lumbar  ascribed  to  Saturn  (whether or  not my
 father always so intended it, see Morgoth's  Ring pp.  434 -  5) can
 be  explained  in  the  same  way  as  Ramer's  Shomoru, in  view of
 the   Quenya   word   lumbe,  'gloom,   shadow',  recorded   in  the
 Elvish   Etymologies   (The   Lost   Road   and    Other   Writings,
 p. 170).                                                           

   Mr  Hostetter  has  also pointed  out that  the name  Byrde given
 to  Finwe s  first wife  Miriel in  the Annals  of Aman  (Morgoth s
 Ring, pp. 92, 185) is not, as I said (p. 103), an Old  English word
 meaning 'broideress', for  that is  not found  in Old  English. The
 name  actually  depends  on  an  argument  advanced  (on  very good
 evidence) by my  father that  the word  byrde 'broideress'  must in
 fact have existed in the old language, and that it survived  in the
 Middle English burde  'lady, damsel',  its original  specific sense
 faded and forgotten. His discussion  is found  in his  article Some
 Contributions  to  Middle-English   Lexicography  (The   Review  of
 English Studies 1.2, April 1925).                                 
                                                                  
   I  am  very  grateful  to  Dr Judith  Priestman for  her generous
 help  in  providing  me  with  copies  of  texts  and  maps  in the
 Bodleian Library. The accuracy of the intricate  text of  this book
 has  been  much  improved  by  the  labour  of  Mr   Charles  Noad,
 unstintedly given and greatly  appreciated. He  has read  the first
 proof  with  extreme  care  and  with  critical  understanding, and
 has  made  many  improvements;  among  these  is  an interpretation
 of  the  way  in  which  the  narrow  path,  followed by  Turin and
 afterwards  by  Brandir  the  Lame,  went  down  through  the woods
 above  the  Taeglin  to   Cabed-en-Aras:  an   interpretation  that
 justifies expressions of my father's that I had taken to  be merely
 erroneous (pp. 157, 159).                                         
                                                                  
   There  remain a  number of  writings of  my father's,  other than
 those  that  are  expressly  philological, that  I think  should be
 included in this History  of Middle-earth,  and I  hope to  be able
 to publish a further volume in two years' time.                   
