   PART ONE.
           
     THE
 GREY ANNALS.

                                THE GREY ANNALS.                             
                                                                            
 The  history  of  the  Annals  of  Beleriand  began   about  1930,   when  my
 father  wrote  the  earliest  version  ('AB  1')  together  with that  of the
 Annals  of  Valinor  ('AV  1').  These  were printed  in Vol.IV,  The Shaping
 of  Middle-earth;  I  remarked  there  that  'the  Annals began,  perhaps, in
 parallel  with  the  Quenta  as  a  convenient  way  of driving  abreast, and
 keeping  track  of,  the  different  elements  in   the  ever   more  complex
 narrative  web.'  Second  versions  of  both  sets  of  Annals  were composed
 later  in  the  1930s,  as  part  of  a  group of  texts comprising  also the
 Lhammas   or  Account  of  Tongues,  a  new   version  of   the  Ainulindale,
 and  the  central  work of  that time:  a new  version of  'The Silmarillion'
 proper,   the   unfinished   Quenta   Silmarillion   ('QS').   These   second
 versions,  together  with the  other texts  of that  period, were  printed in
 Vol.V,  The  Lost  Road  and  Other  Writings,  under  the  titles  The Later
 Annals of Valinor ('AV 2') and The Later Annals of Beleriand ('AB 2').      
  When  my  father  turned  again,  in  1950-1,  to  the  Matter of  the Elder
 Days  after  the  completion  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings,  he   began  new
 work  on  the  Annals  by  taking  up  the  AV  2 and  AB 2  manuscripts from
 some  15  years  earlier  and  using them  as vehicles  for revision  and new
 writing. In the  case of  AV 2,  correction of  the old  text was  limited to
 the  opening  annals,  and the  beginnings of  a new  version written  on the
 blank  verso  pages  of this  manuscript likewise  petered out  very quickly,
 so  that  there  was  no  need  to  take  much  account  of  this preliminary
 work  (X.47).  In  AB  2,  on  the  other hand,  the preparatory  stages were
 much more extensive and substantial.                                        
  In  the  first  place, revision  of the  original AB  2 text  continues much
 further - although in practice  this can  be largely  passed over,  since the
 content  of  the revision  appears in  subsequent texts.  (In some  cases, as
 noted in V.124, it is not easy to  separate 'early'  (pre-Lord of  the Rings)
 revisions  and  additions from  'late' (those  of the  early 1950s).)  In the
 second  place,  the  beginning  of  a  new  and  much  fuller version  of the
 Annals  of  Beleriand  on  the  blank  verso  pages  of  AB  2 extends  for a
 considerable distance  (13 manuscript  pages) -  and the  first part  of this
 is written in such a careful script, before it begins to degenerate,  that it
 may be thought that my father did not  at first  intend it  as a  draft. This
 is  entitled  'The  Annals  of  Beleriand',  and  could  on  that  account be
 referred to as 'AB 3', but I shall in fact call it 'GA 1' (see below).      
  The  final  text  is  a  good  clear  manuscript  bearing  the   title  'The
 Annals  of  Beleriand  or  the  Grey  Annals'.  I  have  chosen to  call this
 work   the   Grey   Annals,   abbreviated   'GA',  in   order  to   mark  its

                                                                            
                                                                               
  distinctive  nature  in  relation  to  the  earlier  forms  of  the  Annals of
  Beleriand  and  its  close  association  with  the  Annals  of  Aman  ('AAm'),
  which  also  bears  a  title  different  from  that  of its  predecessors. The
  abandoned  first  version  just  mentioned  is   then  more   suitably  called
  'GA  1'  than  'AB  3',  since for  most of  its length  it was  followed very
  closely  in  the  final  text, and  is to  be regarded  as a  slightly earlier
  variant:  it  will be  necessary to  refer to  it, and  to cite  passages from
  it,  but  there  is  no need  to give  it in  full. Where  it is  necessary to
  distinguish  the  final  text  from  the  aborted  version  I  shall  call the
  former 'GA 2'.                                                                
    There  is  some  evidence  that  the  Grey  Annals  followed  the  Annals of
  Aman  (in  its  primary  form),  but  the  two  works  were,  I  feel certain,
  closely  associated  in  time  of  composition.  For  the  structure   of  the
  history  of  Beleriand  the  Grey  Annals  constitutes  the primary  text, and
  although  much  of  the  latter part  of the  work was  used in  the published
  Silmarillion with little change I give it in full. This is really essential on
  practical  grounds,  but  is  also  in  keeping  with  my  intention  in  this
  'History',  in  which  I  have  traced the  development of  the Matter  of the
  Elder  Days  from  its  beginning  to  its  end  within  the  compass   of  my
  father's  actual  writings:  from  this point  of view  the published  work is
  not its end, and I do not  treat his  later writing  primarily in  relation to
  what was used, or  how it  was used,  in 'The  Silmarillion'. -  It is  a most
  unhappy  fact  that  he  abandoned  the  Grey  Annals  at  the death  of Turin
  -  although,  as  will  be  seen   subsequently  (pp.   251  ff.),   he  added
  elements of a continuation at some later time.                                
    I  have  not,  as  I did  in the  case of  the Annals  of Aman,  divided the
  Grey   Annals   into  sections,   and  the   commentary,  referenced   to  the
  numbered  paragraphs,  follows  the  end  of  the  text  (p.  103). Subsequent
  changes  to  the  manuscript,  which  in  places  were  heavy,  are  indicated
  as such.                                                                      
    At the top  of the  first page  of the  old AB  2 text,  no doubt  before he
  began   work   on   the   enormously   enlarged   new   version,   my   father
  scribbled  these  notes:  'Make  these  the  Sindarin  Annals  of  Doriath and
  leave  out  most  of  the...'  (there are  here two  words that  probably read
  'Nold[orin]  stuff');  and  'Put  in  notes  about  Denethor,   Thingol,  etc.
  from AV'.                                                                     
    Two  other  elements  in  the  complex  of  papers  constituting   the  Grey
  Annals  remain  to  be  mentioned.   There  are   a  number   of  disconnected
  rough  pages  bearing  the  words  'Old  material  of  Grey  Annals'  (see  p.
  29);  and  there  is  an  amanuensis typescript  in top  copy and  carbon that
  clearly  belongs  with  that  of  the  Annals  of  Aman,  which  I tentatively
  dated to 1958 (X.47).                                                         

                        THE ANNALS OF BELERIAND                      
                                  OR                                 
                            THE GREY ANNALS.                         
                                                                    
  $1. These  are  the  Annals  of  Beleriand  as  they  were  made  by
 the  Sindar,  the  Grey  Elves  of  Doriath   and  the   Havens,  and
 enlarged  from  the  records  and  memories  of  the  remnant  of the
 Noldor  of  Nargothrond  and  Gondolin  at  the  Mouths   of  Sirion,
 whence they were brought back into the West.                        
  $2. Beleriand  is  the  name  of  the country  that lay  upon either
 side of the great river Sirion ere  the Elder  Days were  ended. This
 name it bears  in the  oldest records  that survive,  and it  is here
 retained  in  that  form,  though  now  it  is  called  Belerian. The
 name signifies in the language of  that land:  the country  of Balar.
 For  this  name  the Sindar  gave to  Osse, who  came often  to those
 coasts, and  there befriended  them. At  first, therefore,  this name
 was  given to  the land  of the  shores, on  either side  of Sirion's
 mouths, that face the Isle of Balar, but it spread until  it included
 all  the ancient  coast of  the North-west  of Middle-earth  south of
 the Firth of  Drengist and  all the  inner land  south of  Hithlum up
 to  the feet  of Eryd  Luin (the  Blue Mountains).  But south  of the
 mouths  of  Sirion  it  had  no  sure  boundaries;  for   there  were
 pathless  forests  in  those  days between  the unpeopled  shores and
 the lower waters of Gelion.                                         
                                                                    
                                VY 1050.                             
                                                                    
  $3. Hither,  it  is said,  at this  time came  Melian the  Maia from
 Valinor,  when  Varda made  the great  stars. In  this same  time the
 Quendi  awoke  by  Kuivienen,  as  is  told   in  the   Chronicle  of
 Aman.                                                               
                                                                    
                                 1080                                
                                                                    
  $4. About this time the spies of Melkor discovered the              
 Quendi and afflicted them.                                          
                                                                    
                                 1085                                
                                                                    
  $5. In this year Orome found the Quendi, and befriended             
 them.                                                               
                                                                    
                                 1090                                
                                                                    
  $6. At this time the Valar came hither from Aman for their          
 assault upon Melkor, whose stronghold was in the North              

 beyond  Eryd  Engrin  (the  Iron   Mountains).  In   these  regions,
 therefore, were fought the first battles of the  Powers of  the West
 and  the  North,  and all  this land  was much  broken, and  it took
 then that shape which it  had until  the coming  of Fionwe.  For the
 Great Sea  broke in  upon the  coasts and  made a  deep gulf  to the
 southward,  and  many  lesser  bays  were  made  between  the  Great
 Gulf  and  Helkaraxe  far  in  the  North,  where  Middle-earth  and
 Aman  came  nigh  together.  Of  these  bays  the  Bay of  Balar was
 the chief;  and into  it the  mighty river  Sirion flowed  down from
 the   new-raised   highlands   northwards:   Dorthonion    and   the
 mountains  about  Hithlum.  At  first these  lands upon  either side
 of  Sirion  were  ruinous  and desolate  because of  the War  of the
 Powers,  but  soon  growth  began  there,  while  most   of  Middle-
 earth  slept  in  the  Sleep of  Yavanna, because  the Valar  of the
 Blessed  Realm  had  set  foot  there;  and  there were  young woods
 under  the bright  stars. These  Melian the  Maia fostered;  and she
 dwelt  most  in the  glades of  Nan Elmoth  beside the  River Celon.
 There also dwelt her nightingales.                                 
                                                                   
                                1102-5.                             
                                                                   
   $7   Ingwe,   Finwe,  and   Elwe  were   brought  to   Valinor  by
 Orome  as  ambassadors  of   the  Quendi;   and  they   looked  upon
 the  Light  of  the  Trees  and  yearned  for  it.   Returning  they
 counselled  the Eldar  to go  to the  Land of  Aman, at  the summons
 of the Valar.                                                      
                                                                   
                                 1115.                              
                                                                   
   $8. Even  as  the  Valar  had  come  first  to  Beleriand  as they
 went  eastward,  so  later  Orome  leading  the  hosts of  the Eldar
 westwards   towards   Aman   brought   them   to   the   shores   of
 Beleriand.  For  there  the  Great Sea  was less  wide and  yet free
 from the perils of the ice that lay further north.  In this  year of
 the  Valar,  therefore,  the  foremost companies  of the  Vanyar and
 Noldor  passed  through  the  vale  of  Sirion   and  came   to  the
 sea-coast  between Drengist  and the  Bay of  Balar. But  because of
 their  fear  of  the  Sea, which  they had  before neither  seen nor
 imagined,  the  Eldar  drew  back  into  the  woods  and  highlands.
 And  Orome  departed  and  went  to  Valinor  and  left  them  there
 for a time.                                                        
                                                                   
                                 1128.                              
    $9.  In this year the Teleri, who had lingered on the road,     

 came  also at  last over  Eryd Luin  into northern  Beleriand. There
 they  halted  and  dwelt  a  while  between  the  River  Gelion  and
 Eryd  Luin.  At  that  time  many  of the  Noldor dwelt  westward of
 the Teleri, in those regions where afterwards  stood the  forests of
 Neldoreth  and  Region.  Finwe  was  their lord,  and with  him Elwe
 lord of the Teleri  had great  friendship; and  Elwe was  wont often
 to visit Finwe in the dwellings of the Noldor.                     
                                                                   
                                 1130.                              
                                                                   
  $10. In this  year King  Elwe Singollo  of the  Teleri was  lost in
 the  wilderness.  As  he   journeyed  home   from  a   meeting  with
 Finwe,  he  passed  by  Nan  Elmoth, and  he heard  the nightingales
 of  Melian  the  Maia,  and  followed  them  deep  into  the glades.
 There  he  saw  Melian  standing  beneath  the  stars,  and  a white
 mist was about her,  but the  Light of  Aman was  in her  face. Thus
 began  the  love  of   Elwe  Greymantle   and  Melian   of  Valinor.
 Hand in  hand they  stood silent  in the  woods, while  the wheeling
 stars  measured  many  years,  and  the  young  trees of  Nan Elmoth
 grew tall and dark. Long his people sought for Elwe in vain.       
                                                                   
                                 1132.                              
                                                                   
   $11. Now  Ulmo,  at  the  command  of  the  Valar,  came   to  the
 shores  of   Beleriand  and   summoned  the   Eldar  to   meet  him;
 and  he  spoke  to  them,  and  made  music  upon  his  conches, and
 changed the fear of all who heard him  into a  great desire  for the
 Sea.  Then Ulmo  and Osse  took an  island, which  stood far  out in
 the Sea, and they  moved it,  and brought  it, as  it were  a mighty
 ship,  into  the   Bay  of   Balar;  and   the  Vanyar   and  Noldor
 embarked  thereon,  and  were  drawn  over Sea,  until they  came at
 last  to  the Land  of Aman.  But a  part of  that island  which was
 deep-grounded  in  the  shoals   off  the   mouths  of   Sirion  was
 broken  away  and  remained;  and  this  was  the  Isle of  Balar to
 which afterward Osse often came.                                   
   $12. For  the  Teleri  had  not  embarked,  but  remained  behind.
 Many  indeed  were  dwelling  at  that  time  afar  off  in  eastern
 Beleriand  and  heard  the  summons  of  Ulmo  too  late;  and  many
 others searched still for Elwe their king, and  were not  willing to
 depart  without  him.  But  when  the  Teleri  learned   that  their
 kinsfolk,  the  Vanyar  and  the  Noldor, were  gone, the  most part
 hastened  to  the  shore  and  dwelt thereafter  nigh the  mouths of
 Sirion, in longing for their friends  that had  left them.  And they
 took  Olwe,  Elwe's  brother, for  their lord.  Then Osse  and Uinen

 came  to  them,  and  dwelt  in the  Isle of  Balar, and  became the
 friends of the Teleri  and taught  them all  manner of  sea-lore and
 sea-music.                                                          
                                                                    
                               1149-50.                              
                                                                    
   $13. In  this  year  Ulmo returned  to Beleriand.  To this  he was
 most  moved  by  the  prayers  of  the  Noldor  and  of  Finwe their
 king,  who  grieved  at  their  sundering   from  the   Teleri,  and
 besought  Ulmo  to  bring  Elwe  and  his  people  to Aman,  if they
 would   come.   And   all   those   who   followed  Olwe   were  now
 willing to depart; but Osse  was sad  at heart.  For he  went seldom
 to  the  shores  of  Aman,  and  loved  the   Teleri,  and   he  was
 ill-pleased that their fair voices should be heard no longer  by the
 strands of Middle-earth, which were his domain.                     
   $14. Osse  therefore  persuaded  many  to  remain   in  Beleriand,
 and  when  King  Olwe  and  his  host  were  embarked upon  the isle
 and passed over  the Sea  they abode  still by  the shore;  and Osse
 returned  to  them,  and  continued  in  friendship  with  them. And
 he taught  to them  the craft  of shipbuilding  and of  sailing; and
 they  became  a  folk of  mariners, the  first in  Middle-earth, and
 had fair havens  at Eglarest  and Brithombar;  but some  dwelt still
 upon  the  Isle  of  Balar. Cirdan  the Shipwright  was the  lord of
 this  people,  and  all  that shoreland  between Drengist  and Balar
 that  he  ruled  was  called the  Falas. But  among the  Teleri were
 none yet so hardy of heart,  and of  their ships  none so  swift and
 strong that they might dare  the deeps  of the  Great Sea  or behold
 even  from afar  the Blessed  Realm and  the Light  of the  Trees of
 Valinor.   Wherefore   those  that   remained  behind   were  called
 Moriquendi, Elves of the Dark.                                      
                                                                    
                                 1150.                               
                                                                    
   $15. The  friends  and  kinsfolk  of   Elwe  also   remained;  but
 they  would  fain  have  departed to  Valinor and  the Light  of the
 Trees  (which  Elwe  indeed  had seen),  if Ulmo  and Olwe  had been
 willing to tarry yet longer while  they sought  still for  Elwe. But
 when  Ulmo  had tarried  a full  Year (and  a Year  of the  Valar is
 in  length  well  nigh  as are  ten of  the years  that now  are) he
 departed,  and  the  friends  of  Elwe  were left  behind. Therefore
 they  called  themselves  the  Eglath,  the  Forsaken   People;  and
 though they dwelt in the  woods and  hills rather  than by  the Sea,
 which  filled  them with  sorrow, their  inmost hearts  yearned ever
 Westward.                                                           

                                 1152.                                
                                                                     
   $16. At  this  time,  it  is  told,  Elwe Singollo awoke  from his
 long  trance.  And  he  came  forth  from  Nan  Elmoth  with  Melian,
 and they dwelt  thereafter in  the woods  in the  midst of  the land;
 and though Elwe had greatly  desired to  see again  the light  of the
 Trees, in the face of Melian  the fair  he beheld  the Light  of Aman
 as  in  an  unclouded  mirror,  and  in  that  light he  was content.
 Then  his  folk  gathered  about him  in joy;  and they  were amazed,
 for fair and  noble as  he had  been, now  he appeared  as it  were a
 lord of the Maiar, tallest of all the Children of Iluvatar,  his hair
 as grey silver, and his eyes like unto stars. King  of the  Eglath he
 became,  and  Melian  was  his  Queen,  wiser  than  any  daughter of
 Middle-earth.                                                        
                                                                     
                                 1200.                                
                                                                     
   $17.  It   is  not   known  to   any  among   Elves  or   Men  when
 Luthien,  only  child  of  Elwe  and  Melian,  came  into  the World,
 fairest of all the Children of Iluvatar that were or shall be. But it
 is held that  it was  at the  end of  the first  age of  the Chaining
 of  Melkor,  when  all the  Earth had  great peace  and the  glory of
 Valinor  was  at  its  noon,  and  though  Middle-earth for  the most
 [part] lay  in the  Sleep of  Yavanna, in  Beleriand under  the power
 of Melian there  was life  and joy  and the  bright stars  shone like
 silver fires. In the Forest of Neldoreth it is said that she was born
 and  cradled  under the  stars of  heaven, and  the white  flowers of
 niphredil came forth to greet her, as stars from the earth.          
                                                                     
                                1200-50.                              
                                                                     
   $18. In  this  time  the  power  of  Elwe  and Melian  reached over
 all  Beleriand.  Elu  Thingol  he  was  called in  the tongue  of his
 people,  King  Greymantle,  and  all  the  Elves  of  Beleriand  from
 the  mariners  of  Cirdan  to  the  wandering  huntsmen  of  the Blue
 Mountains took  him for  lord. And they  are called,  therefore, the
 Sindar, the Grey Elves of  starlit Berleriand.  And albeit  they were
 Moriquendi,  under  the  lordship  of  Thingol  and  the  teaching of
 Melian  they  became the  fairest and  the most  wise and  skilful of
 all the Elves of Middle-earth.                                       
                                                                     
                                 1250.                                
                                                                     
  $19. In this year the Norn-folk came first over the moun-           
 tains into Beleriand. This people the Noldor after named the         
 Naugrim,  whom  some  Men call  Dwarves. Their  most ancient         

 dwellings  were  far  to  the  East,  but  they  had   delved  for
 themselves great  halls and  mansions, after  the manner  of their
 kind, on  the east-side  of Eryd  Luin, north  and south  of Mount
 Dolmed,  in  those  places  which  the  Eldar  named  Belegost and
 Nogrod   (but.they  Gabilgathol   and  Tumunzahar).   Thence  they
 now  came  forth  and  made  themselves  known  to the  Elves; and
 the  Elves  were  amazed,  for  they had  deemed themselves  to be
 the only living things in  Middle-earth that  spoke with  words or
 wrought  with hands;  and that  all others  were beasts  and birds
 only.                                                            
   $20.  Nonetheless  they   could  understand   no  word   of  the
 tongue  of  the  Naugrim,  which  to their  ears was  cumbrous and
 unlovely; and few ever of the Eldar have  achieved the  mastery of
 it. But the Dwarves  were swift  to learn  (after a  fashion), and
 indeed  were  more  willing  to  learn  the  Elven-tongue  than to
 teach  to  aliens  their  own;  and  soon  there  was  much parley
 between  the  peoples.  Ever  cool  was  their  friendship, though
 much profit they  had one  of the  other. But  at that  time those
 griefs that lay between them had not  yet come  to pass,  and they
 were welcomed by King Thingol.                                   
   $21. How  the  Dwarves  came  into  the  world  the  Eldar  know
 not for certain,  though the  loremasters have  elsewhere recorded
 the tales of the Naugrim  themselves (such  as they  would reveal)
 concerning  their  beginning.  They  say  that  Aule   the  Maker,
 whom  they  call  Mahal,  brought  them  into  being;  and however
 that  may  be,  certain  it  is  that they  were great  smiths and
 masons,  though of  old there  was little  beauty in  their works.
 Iron  and  copper they  loved to  work more  than silver  or gold,
 and stone more than wood.                                        
                                                                 
                                1300.                             
                    Of the building of Menegroth.                 
                                                                 
   $22. Now  Melian  had  after  the  manner  of  the   Maiar,  the
 people of Valinor, much  foresight. And  when two  of the  ages of
 the Chaining  of Melkor  had passed,  she counselled  Thingol that
 the  Peace  of  Arda  would not  last for  ever; and  he therefore
 bethought  him   how  he   should  make   for  himself   a  kingly
 dwelling,  and  a place  that should  be strong,  if evil  were to
 awake  again  in  Middle-earth.  He  called  therefore   upon  the
 Enfeng,  the  Longbeards  of  Belegost,  whom  he  had befriended,
 and sought their aid and counsel. And they gave it  willingly, for
 they  were  unwearied  in  those  days, and  eager for  new works.

 And though the Dwarves  ever demanded  a price  for all  that they
 did, whether with delight  or with  toil, at  this time  they held
 themselves  paid.  For  Melian  taught  them  much  wisdom,  which
 they  were  eager  to  get;  whereas  Thingol  rewarded  them with
 many fair pearls. These Cirdan gave to him, for  they were  got in
 great number in the shallow waters  about the  Isle of  Balar; but
 the Naugrim had not  before seen  their like,  and they  held them
 dear.  And one  there was  great as  a dove's  egg, and  its sheen
 was  as  the  starlight  upon the  foam of  the sea;  Nimphelos it
 was  named,  and the  chieftain of  the Enfeng  prized it  above a
 mountain of wealth.                                              
   $23. Therefore  the  Naugrim  laboured   long  and   gladly  for
 Thingol, and devised for him mansions after  the fashion  of their
 folk,  delved  deep  in  the  earth.  Where  the  River  Esgalduin
 flowed  down,  dividing Neldoreth  from Region,  there was  in the
 midst of the forest a rocky hill, and the river  ran at  its feet.
 There they made the gates of the halls of Thingol, and  they built
 a bridge of stone over the river, by which  alone the  gates could
 be  entered.  But  beyond  the  gates  wide  passages ran  down to
 high halls and chambers  far below  that were  hewn in  the living
 stone,  so  many  and  so  great  that  that  dwelling  was  named
 Menegroth, the Thousand Caves.                                   
   $24. But  the  Elves  also had  part in  that labour,  and Elves
 and Dwarves together, each  with their  own skills,  there wrought
 out the  visions of  Melian, images  of the  wonder and  beauty of
 Valinor  beyond the  Sea. The  pillars of  Menegroth were  hewn in
 the  likeness of  the beeches  of Orome,  stock, bough,  and leaf,
 and they were  lit with  lanterns of  gold. The  nightingales sang
 there as in the  gardens of  Lorien; and  there were  fountains of
 silver,  and  basins  of  marble,  and  floors   of  many-coloured
 stones.  Carven  figures  of beasts  and of  birds there  ran upon
 the  walls,  or  climbed  upon  the pillars,  or peered  among the
 branches  entwined  with  many  flowers. And  as the  years passed
 Melian and her maidens filled the  halls with  webs of  many hues,
 wherein could  be read  the deeds  of the  Valar, and  many things
 that  had befallen  in Arda  since its  beginning, and  shadows of
 things that were yet to be. That was the  fairest dwelling  of any
 king that hath ever been east of the Sea.                        
                                                                 
                              1300-50.                            
                                                                 
  $25. After the building of Menegroth was achieved, there        
 was peace in the realm of Thingol. The Naugrim would come        

 ever  and  anon  over  the  mountains  and  visit  Menegroth  and go
 in traffick about the land, though  they went  seldom to  the Falas,
 for they hated the sound of the Sea and  feared to  look on  it; but
 otherwise  there  came  to  Beleriand  no rumour  or tidings  of the
 world  without.  But  it  came  to  pass   that  the   Dwarves  were
 troubled,  and they  spoke to  King Thingol,  saying that  the Valar
 had  not rooted  out utterly  the evils  of the  North, and  now the
 remnant,  having  long multiplied  in the  dark, were  coming forth
 once  more  and  roaming  far  and  wide.  'There are  fell beasts,'
 said they, 'in the land east  of the  mountains, and  the dark-elves
 that dwell there, your ancient kindred, are  flying from  the plains
 to the hills.'                                                     
                                                                   
                                 1330.                              
                                                                   
   $26. And  ere  long  (in  the  year 1330  according to  the annals
 that  were  made  in  Doriath)  the  evil  creatures  came  even  to
 Beleriand,  over  passes  in  the  mountains, or  up from  the south
 through  the  dark  forests.  Wolves there  were, or  creatures that
 walked in wolf-shapes, and other fell beings of shadow.            
   $27.  Among   these   were   the    Orkor   indeed,    who   after
 wrought  ruin  in  Beleriand;  but they  were yet  few and  wary and
 did  but smell  out the  ways of  the land,  awaiting the  return of
 their  Lord.  Whence  they  came,  or  what  they  were,  the  Elves
 knew  not  then,  deeming  them  to  be   Avari,  maybe,   that  had
 become  evil  and  savage  in the  wild. In  which they  guessed all
 too near, it is said.                                              
   $28.  Therefore   Thingol   bethought   [him]   of   arms,   which
 before  his  folk had  not needed,  and these  at first  the Naugrim
 smithied  for  him.  For  they  were greatly  skilled in  such work,
 though  none  among   them  surpassed   the  craftsmen   of  Nogrod,
 of  whom  Telchar  the  Smith   was  the   greatest  in   renown.  A
 warlike  race  of old  were all  the Naugrim,  and they  would fight
 fiercely  with  whomsoever  aggrieved  them:  folk  of   Melkor,  or
 Eldar,  or  Avari,  or  wild beasts,  or not  seldom with  their own
 kin,  Dwarves  of  other  mansions   and  lordships.   Their  smith-
 craft  indeed  the  Sindar  soon  learned  of   them;  yet   in  the
 tempering  of  steel  alone  of  all crafts  the Dwarves  were never
 outmatched  even  by  the  Noldor,  and  in  the  making of  mail of
 linked  rings  (which  the  Enfeng first  contrived) their  work had
 no rival.                                                          
   $29. At  this  time  therefore  the  Sindar  were well  armed, and

 they drove off all  creatures of  evil, and  had peace  again; but
 Thingol's armouries were stored  with axes  (the chief  weapons of
 the  Naugrim,  and  of the  Sindar), and  with spears  and swords,
 and tall helms, and long coats  of bright  mail: for  the hauberks
 of the Enfeng were  so fashioned  that they  rusted not  and shone
 ever  as  were they  new-burnished. This  proved well  for Thingol
 in the time that was to come.                                     
                                                                  
                                1350.                              
                      The coming of Denethor.                     
                                                                  
   $30. Now  as  is  elsewhere recounted,  one Dan  of the  host of
 Olwe  forsook  the  march  of  the  Eldar  at  that time  when the
 Teleri  were  halted by  the shores  of the  Great River  upon the
 borders  of  the  westlands  of  Middle-earth. And  he led  away a
 numerous  people  and  went  south  down  the  river,  and  of the
 wanderings  of  that  people,  the  Nandor,  little is  now known.
 Some, it is said, dwelt age-long in the woods of  the Vale  of the
 Great  River,  some  came  at last  to the  mouths of  Anduin, and
 there  dwelt  by  the  Sea,  and  others  passing  by   the  White
 Mountains  came  north  again  and   entered  the   wilderness  of
 Eriador  between  Eryd  Luin  and  the  far  Mountains   of  Mist.
 Now  these  were  a  woodland folk  and had  no weapons  of metal,
 and  the  coming of  the fell  beasts of  the North  affrayed them
 sorely, as the Naugrim  reported. Therefore  Denethor, the  son of
 Dan,  hearing  rumour  of the  might of  Thingol and  his majesty,
 and of the peace of his realm, gathered such host of his scattered
 folk  as  he  could  and   led  them   over  the   mountains  into
 Beleriand.  There  they  were  welcomed  by  Thingol, as  kin long
 lost that return, and they dwelt in Ossiriand in the south  of his
 kingdom. For it was a great country, and  yet little  peopled; and
 it  was  so  named,  the  Land  of  Seven  Rivers, because  it lay
 between  the  mighty  stream  of  Gelion  and the  mountains, from
 which there flowed into  Gelion the  swift rivers:  Ascar, Thalos,
 Legolin,  Brilthor,  Duilwen,  and  Adurant.  In  that  region the
 forests  in  after days  were tall  and green,  and the  people of
 Denethor  there  dwelt warily  and seldom  seen, because  of their
 raiment of the colour of  leaves; and  they were  called therefore
 the Green-elves.                                                  
   $31  Of  the  long  years  of  peace  that  followed  after  the
 coming of Denethor there is little tale; for  though in  this time
 Dairon the minstrel, it is said, who was  the chief  loremaster of

 the  kingdom   of  Thingol,   devised  his   Runes,'  [added   later  in
 margin:  Cirth]  they were  little used  by the  Sindar for  the keeping
 of  records,  until  the  days of  the War,  and much  that was  held in
 memory  has  perished  in  the  ruin  of  Doriath.  Yet verily  of bliss
 and glad life there is little to be said, ere it  endeth; as  works fair
 and  wonderful,  while  still  they endure  for eyes  to see,  are their
 own  record,  and  only  when  they  are  in  peril  or broken  for ever
 do  they  pass  into  song.  In  Beleriand  in  those  days   the  Elves
 walked,  and  the  rivers  flowed,   and  the   stars  shone,   and  the
 night-flowers  gave  forth  their  scents;  and  the  beauty  of  Melian
 was  as  the  noon,  and  the  beauty  of  Luthien  was  as the  dawn in
 spring.  In  Beleriand  King  Thingol  upon  his   throne  was   as  the
 sons  of the  Valar, whose  power is  at rest,  whose joy  is as  an air
 that  they breathe  in all  their days,  whose thought  flows in  a tide
 untroubled  from  the  heights  to  the  deeps.  In  Beleriand  still at
 whiles   rode  Orome   the  great,   passing  like   a  wind   over  the
 mountains,  and  the  sound  of  his  horn  came  down  the  leagues  of
 the  starlight,  and  the  Elves  feared  him for  the splendour  of his
 countenance  and  the  great  noise   of  the   onrush  of   Nahar;  but
 when  the  Valaroma  echoed  in  the  hills,  they  knew  well  that all
 evil things were fled far away.                                        
                                                                       
                                   1495.                                
                                                                       
   $32  It  came  to pass  at last  that the  end of  Bliss was  at hand,
 and  the  noontide  of  Valinor  was  drawing  to  its twilight.  For as
 is  known  to  all,  being  written  elsewhere  in  lore  and   sung  in
 many  songs,  Melkor  slew  the  Trees  of  the   Valar  with   the  aid
 of   Ungoliante,   and   escaped  and   came  back   to  the   north  of
 Middle-earth.   And   hereafter  he   shall  be   known  by   that  name
 that Feanor gave him, the Dark Foe, Morgoth the Accursed.              
   $33   Far   to   the   North   befell  the   strife  of   Morgoth  and
 Ungoliante;   but   the   great   cry   of   Morgoth    echoed   through
 Beleriand,  and  all  its  folk  shrank  for fear;  for though  few knew
 what it foreboded, they heard then the herald of death.                
   $34  Soon  after,  indeed,   Ungoliante  fled   from  the   North  and
 came  into  the  realm  of  King  Thingol,  and  a  terror  of  darkness
                                                                       
    These, it is said, he contrived first ere the building  of Menegroth,
 and  after  bettered  them. The  Naugrim, indeed,  that came  to Thingol
 learned  the Runes  of Dairon,  and were  well-pleased with  the device,
 esteeming Dairon's skill higher than did the Sindar,  his own  folk; and
 by  the  Naugrim  they  [later  > the  Cirth] were  taken east  over the
 mountains and passed into the knowledge of many peoples.               

 was about her.  But by  the power  of Melian  she was  stayed, and
 entered  not  into  Neldoreth,  but  abode  long  while  under the
 shadow  of  the  precipices  in  which Dorthonion  fell southward.
 Therefore  they  became   known  as   Eryd  Orgoroth,   the  Moun-
 tains of Terror, and none dared go thither, or pass nigh  to them;
 for even after Ungoliante  herself departed  and went  whither she
 would  back  into  the  forgotten  South  of  the world,  her foul
 offspring  dwelt there  in form  as spiders  and wove  there their
 hideous webs. -There light and life were strangled, and  there all
 waters were poisoned.                                             
    $35. Morgoth,  however,  came  not  himself  to  Beleriand, but
 went  to  the  Iron  Mountains,  and  there  with  the aid  of his
 servants  that  came forth  to meet  him he  delved anew  his vast
 vaults  and  dungeons.  These  the  Noldor  after  named  Angband:
 the Iron Prison;  and above  their gates  Morgoth reared  the vast
 and  threefold peaks  of Thangorodrim,  and a  great reek  of dark
 smoke was ever wreathed about them.                               
                                                                  
                                1497.                              
                                                                  
    $36. In  this  year  Morgoth  made   his  first   assault  upon
 Beleriand, which lay south of Angband. Indeed it is said  that the
 gates of Morgoth were but  one hundred  and fifty  leagues distant
 from the bridge of Menegroth; far and yet all too near.           
    $37. Now  the Orcs  that had  multiplied in  the bowels  of the
 earth grew strong and fell, and their dark lord filled them with a
 lust  of  ruin  and death;  and they  issued from  Angband's gates
 under  the  clouds that  Morgoth sent  forth, and  passed silently
 into  the  highlands  of  the north.  Thence on  a sudden  a great
 army  came.to  Beleriand  and  assailed King  Thingol. Now  in his
 wide  realm  many  Elves  wandered free  in the  wild or  dwelt at
 peace in small  kindreds of  quiet folk  far sundered.  Only about
 Menegroth in the midst of  the land,  and along  the Falas  in the
 country  of  the  mariners  were there  numerous peoples;  but the
 Orcs  came  down  upon   either  side   of  Menegroth,   and  from
 camps  in  the  east  between Celon  and Gelion,  and west  in the
 plains  between  Sirion and  Narog, they  plundered far  and wide;
 and Thingol was cut off from Cirdan at Eglarest.                  
    $38. Therefore  he  called  upon Denethor,  and the  Elves came
 in  force from  Region over  Aros and  from Ossiriand,  and fought
 the first battle in the Wars of Beleriand. And the eastern host of
 the Orcs was taken between the armies of the  Eldar, north  of the
 Andram  and  midway  between  Aros  and  Gelion,  and  there  they

 were  utterly  defeated,  and those  that fled  north from  the great
 slaughter  were  waylaid  by  the  axes  of  the Naugrim  that issued
 from Mount Dolmed: few indeed returned to Angband.                  
   $39  But  the  victory  of  the  Elves  was  dearbought.   For  the
 Elves  of  Ossiriand  were light-armed,  and no  match for  the Orcs,
 who  were   shod  with   iron  and   iron-shielded  and   bore  great
 spears   with   broad   blades.   And  Denethor   was  cut   off  and
 surrounded upon the  hill of  Amon Ereb;  and there  he fell  and all
 his nearest kin  about him,  ere the  host of  Thingol could  come to
 his  aid.  Bitterly  though  his  fall  was  avenged,   when  Thingol
 came  upon  the  rear  of  the  Orcs  and   slew  them   aheaps,  the
 Green-elves  lamented  him  ever  after  and  took  no   king  again.
 After  the  battle  some  returned  to  Ossiriand, and  their tidings
 filled the remnant of their folk with great fear, so  that thereafter
 they  came  never  forth  in  open  war,   but  kept   themselves  by
 wariness  and  secrecy.  And   many  went   north  and   entered  the
 guarded realm of Thingol and were merged with his folk.             
   $40.   And   when    Thingol   came    again   to    Menegroth   he
 learned  that  the  Orc-host  in  the  west  was  victorious  and had
 driven  Cirdan  to  the  rim of  the Sea.  Therefore he  withdrew all
 his  folk  that  his  summons  could  reach  within  the  fastness of
 Neldoreth  and   Region,  and   Melian  put   forth  her   power  and
 fenced  all  that  dominion  round  about  with  an  unseen  wall  of
 shadow   and   bewilderment:   the  Girdle   of  Melian,   that  none
 thereafter could pass against her will  or the  will of  King Thingol
 (unless  one  should  come  with  a  power   greater  than   that  of
 Melian  the  Maia).  Therefore  this  inner   land  which   was  long
 named  Eglador  was  after  called  Doriath,  the   guarded  kingdom,
 Land  of  the  Girdle.  Within  it  there was  yet a  watchful peace;
 but  without  there was  peril and  great fear,  and the  servants of
 Morgoth roamed at will, save in the walled havens of the Falas.     
                                                                    
                      Of the Coming of the Noldor.                   
                                                                    
   $41. But  new  tidings  were  at  hand,   which  none   in  Middle-
 earth  had  foreseen,  neither  Morgoth  in  his  pits nor  Melian in
 Menegroth;   for   no   news   came   out   of   Aman,   whether   by
 messenger, or by spirit, or by vision  in dream,  after the  death of
 the  Trees  and  the  hiding  of Valinor.  In this  same year  of the
 Valar (but some seven  years after  in the  later reckoning  of time)
 Feanor  came  over  Sea  in  the  white  ships  of  the  Teleri,  and
 landed  in  the  Firth  of Drengist,  and there  burned the  ships at
 Losgar.                                                             

               
                                                                 
  $42. Now  the  flames  of  that  burning were  seen not  only by
 Fingolfin, whom Feanor  had deserted,  but also  by the  Orcs and
 the  watchers  of  Morgoth.  No  tale  hath  told   what  Morgoth
 thought in his heart at the tidings that Feanor his bitterest foe
 had brought a host out of the West. Maybe  he feared  him little,
 for he had not yet had  proof of  the swords  of the  Noldor, and
 soon it was seen that  he purposed  to drive  them back  into the
 Sea.                                                             
  $43. Drengist is  a long  firth which  pierces the  Echoing Hills
 of Eryd Lomin that  are the  west-fence of  the great  country of
 Hithlum.  Thus the  host of  Feanor passed  from the  shores into
 the inner  regions of  Hithlum, and  marching about  the northern
 end  of  the  Mountains  of  Mithrim they  encamped in  that part
 which  was  named  Mithrim  and  lay  about  the great  lake amid
 the mountains that bore the same name.                           
  $44  But  the  host  of  Melkor,   orcs  and   werewolves,  came
 through  the  passes  of  Eryd-wethrin and  assailed Feanor  on a
 sudden, ere his  camp was  fullwrought or  put in  defence. There
 now on the grey fields of  Mithrim was  fought the  second battle
 of the Wars of Beleriand, and the first meeting  of the  might of
 Morgoth with the valour of the  Noldor. Dagor-nuin-Giliath  it is
 named,  the  Battle under  the Stars,  for the  Moon had  not yet
 risen. In that battle, albeit outnumbered and taken  at unawares,
 the Noldor  were swiftly  victorious. Strong  and fair  were they
 yet, for the  light of  Aman was  not yet  dimmed in  their eyes;
 swift they were, and deadly in wrath, and long and  terrible were
 their swords. The  Orcs fled  before them,  and they  were driven
 forth from  Mithrim with  great slaughter,  and hunted  over that
 great plain that  lay north  of Dorthonion,  and was  then called
 Ardgalen. There the armies that had passed  south into  the vales
 of Sirion and  had beleagured  Cirdan came  up to  their succour,
 and  were  caught  in  their  ruin.  For  Celegorn  Feanor's son,
 having  news  of them,  waylaid them  with a  part of  the Elven-
 host, and  coming down  upon them  out of  the hills  nigh Eithel
 Sirion drove them into the Fen  of Serech.  Evil indeed  were the
 tidings  that  came  at  last  unto  Angband,  and   Morgoth  was
 dismayed.  Ten  days that  battle endured,  and from  it returned
 of all the hosts that  he had  prepared for  the conquest  of the
 kingdoms of the Eldar no more than a handful of leaves.          
  $45  Yet  cause  he  had  for  great joy,  though it  was hidden
 from  him for  a while.  For the  heart of  Feanor, in  his wrath
 against the Enemy, blazed like a fire, and he would not halt, but

 pressed  on  behind  the  remnant of  the Orcs,  thinking, it  is said,
 so  to  come  at  Morgoth  himself.   And  he   laughed  aloud   as  he
 wielded  his  sword,  and  rejoiced  that  he  had  dared the  wrath of
 the  Valar  and  the  evils of  the road  that he  might see  that hour
 of   his  vengeance.   He  knew   naught  of   Angband  or   the  great
 strength  of  defence  that  Morgoth  had  so  swiftly   prepared;  but
 had  he  known,  it  would  not  have  deterred  him,  for fey  he was,
 consumed  by  the  flame  of  his  own  wrath.  Thus  it  was  that  he
 drew  far  ahead  of  the  van  of  his  host,  and  seeing   this  the
 servants   of   Morgoth   turned   to  bay,   and  there   issued  from
 Angband  Balrogs  to  aid  them.  There  upon   the  confines   of  Dor
 Daedeloth,   the  land   of  Morgoth,   Feanor  was   surrounded,  with
 few  friends  about  him.  Soon  he  stood  alone;  but long  he fought
 on,   and   laughed  undismayed,   though  he   was  wrapped   in  fire
 and   wounded   with   many   wounds.   But   at  the   last  Gothmog,*
 Lord  of  the  Balrogs,  smote  him  to  the   ground,  and   there  he
 would  have  perished,  but  Maidros  and  three other  of his  sons in
 that  moment  came  up  with  force to  his aid,  and the  Balrogs fled
 back to Angband.                                                      
   $46. Then  his  sons  raised  up  their  father  and  bore  him  back
 towards  Mithrim.  But  as  they  drew  near   to  Eithel   Sirion  and
 were  upon  the   upward  path   to  the   pass  over   the  mountains,
 Feanor  bade  them   halt.  For   his  wounds   were  mortal,   and  he
 knew  that  his  hour  was  come.  And  looking  out  from  the  slopes
 of  Eryd-wethrin  with  his  last  sight  he beheld  afar the  peaks of
 Thangorodrim,   mightiest   of   the   towers   of   Middle-earth,  and
 knew  with  the   foreknowledge  of   death  that   no  power   of  the
 Noldor  would  ever  overthrow  them;  but  he   cursed  the   name  of
 Morgoth,  and  laid it  upon his  sons to  hold to  their oath,  and to
 avenge  their  father.  Then  he died;  but he  had neither  burial nor
 tomb, for so fiery was his spirit that, as it passed, his body  fell to
 ash  and  was  borne  away  like a  smoke, and  his likeness  has never
 again  appeared  in  Arda,  neither has  his spirit  left the  realm of
 Mandos.   Thus   ended   the   mightiest  of   the  Noldor,   of  whose
 deeds  came  both  their  greatest  renown  and  their   most  grievous
 woe.                                                                  
                                                                      
  $47. Tidings of these great deeds came to Menegroth and to           
 Eglarest, and the Grey-elves were filled with wonder and with         
 hope,  for  they looked  to have  great help  in their  defence against
                                                                      
     (* [Marginal note:] whom Ecthelion afterward slew in Gondolin.)

 Morgoth   from   their   mighty  kindred   that  thus   returned  un-
 looked-for  from  the  West  in  their very  hour of  need, believing
 indeed  at  first  that  they  came  as  emissaries  of the  Valar to
 deliver  their  brethren  from  evil.  Now  the  Grey-elves  were  of
 Telerian  race,  and  Thingol  was  the  brother  of  Olwe  at Alqua-
 londe,  but  naught  yet  was  known  of the  kinslaying, nor  of the
 manner of the exile of the  Noldor, and  of the  oath of  Feanor. Yet
 though  they  had  not  heard  of the  Curse of  Mandos, it  was soon
 at  work  in  Beleriand.  For  it  entered  into  the  heart  of King
 Thingol  to  regret  the  days  of peace  when he  was the  high lord
 of  all  the  land  and  its  peoples.  Wide  were  the  countries of
 Beleriand  and  many  empty  and  wild,  and  yet  he   welcomed  not
 with full heart the coming of  so many  princes in  might out  of the
 West, eager for new realms.                                          
   $48. Thus  there  was  from  the  first  a  coolness   between  him
 and  the  sons  of  Feanor,  whereas   the  closest   friendship  was
 needed,  if  Morgoth  were  to  be  withstood;  for  the   [House  >]
 sons  of Feanor  were ever  unwilling to  accept the  overlordship of
 Thingol,  and  would  ask  for  no  leave where  they might  dwell or
 might pass. When,  therefore, ere  long (by  treachery and  ill will,
 as  later  is  told) the  full tale  of the  deeds in  Valinor became
 known   in  Beleriand,   there  was   rather  enmity   than  alliance
 between  Doriath  and  the  House  of  Feanor;  and  this  bitterness
 Morgoth  eagerly  inflamed  by  all  means  that  he could  find. But
 that evil lay as yet in the days to  come, and  the first  meeting of
 the  Sindar  and  the  Noldor  was  eager  and  glad,  though  parley
 was  at  first not  easy between  them, for  in their  long severance
 the  tongue  of  the  Kalaquendi  in  Valinor  and the  Moriquendi in
 Beleriand had drawn far apart.                                       
                                                                     
               Excursus on the languages of Beleriand.                              
 I interrupt the  text here  since the  complex variant  material that
 follows in the  two manuscripts  cannot well  be accommodated  in the
 commentary.                                                          
   In place of GA 2 $48 just given, GA 1 (making  no reference  to the
 active hostility that developed between  Thingol and  the Feanorians)
 has only the following (after the words 'eager for new realms'):     
   Moreover in their long severance the tongues of the Sindar  and the
   Noldor had  drawn apart,  and at  first parley  was not  easy between
   them.                                                                
 This is followed by a long 'excursus' (marked on the manuscript as an
 intrusion into the  main text)  on the  development and  relations of


  Noldorin and Sindarin  in Beleriand,  the end  of which  is also  the end
  of GA 1. This discussion  reappears, rewritten,  in GA  2, and  then this
  revised form was itself substantially altered. It seems desirable to give
  all the versions of this passage, of central importance in the linguistic
  history of Middle-earth.  The numbered  notes to  this section  are found
  on p. 28.                                                                
    The original version in GA 1 reads as follows.                         
                                                                          
    It   was  indeed   at  the   landing  of   Feanor  three   hundred  and
  sixty-five  long years of the  Valar (1) since  the  Noldor  had  passed
  over  the  Sea  and  left  the  Teleri  behind  them.  Now that  time was
  in  length  well  nigh  as  three  thousand  and  five  hundred  years of
  the  Sun.  In  such  an  age  the  tongues  of mortal  Men that  were far
  sundered  would  indeed  change   out  of   knowledge,  unless   it  were
  as  written  records  of  song  and  wisdom.  But   in  Valinor   in  the
  days  of  the  Trees  change  was  little  to  be  perceived,  save  that
  which  came  of  will  and  design,  while  in  Middle-earth   under  the
  Sleep  of  Yavanna  it  was  slow  also,  though  before  the  Rising  of
  the  Moon  all  things  had  been  stirred  from  slumber  in  Beleriand,
  as  has  before  been  told. (2) Therefore, whereas   the  tongue of  the
  Noldor  had  altered  little  from  the  ancient  tongue  of   the  Eldar
  upon  the  march  -  and  its  altering  had  for the  most part  come in
  the  making  of  new  words  (for  things  old  and   new)  and   in  the
  softening   and   harmonizing  of   the  sounds   and  patterns   of  the
  Quendian   tongue   to   forms   that   seemed   to   the   Noldor   more
  beautiful  -  the  language  of  the  Sindar   had  changed   much,  even
  in   unheeded   growth   as   a   tree   may  imperceptibly   change  its
  shape:   as   much   maybe   as   an   unwritten   mortal   tongue  might
  change  in  five  hundred  years or more.(3) It  was  already   ere  the
  Rising  of  the  Sun  a  speech  greatly  different to  the ear  from the
  Noldorin,  and  after  that  Rising  all  change was  swift, for  a while
  in  the  second  Spring  of  Arda  very  swift  indeed.  To  the  ear, we
  say,   because   though   Dairon   the   minstrel   and   loremaster   of
  Menegroth   had   devised   his   Runes   already   by  V.Y.   1300  (and
  after  greatly  bettered  them),  it  was  not the  custom of  the Sindar
  to  write  down  their  songs  or  records,  and  the  Runes   of  Dairon
  (save   in   Menegroth)   were   used   chiefly   for  names   and  brief
  inscriptions   cut   upon   wood,   stone,   or   metal.(The Naugrim (4)
  learned   the   Runes   of   Dairon    from   Menegroth,    being   well-
  pleased  with  the  device  and  esteeming   Dairon  higher   than  [did]
  his  own  folk;  and  by  the  Naugrim  they   were  brought   east  over
  the Mountains.)(5)                                                       
    Soon,  however,  it  came  to  pass  that  the  Noldor  in   daily  use

 took  on  the  Sindarin  tongue,  and this  tongue enriched  by words
 and  devices  from Noldorin  became the  tongue of  all the  Eldar in
 Beleriand  (save  in  the  country  of  the  Green[-elves])  and  the
 language of all the Eldar, either in Middle-earth, or that  (as shall
 be  told) went  back from  exile into  the West  and dwelt  and dwell
 now   upon   Eressea.   In  Valinor   the  ancient   Elven-speech  is
 maintained,  and  the  Noldor  never  forsook it;  but it  became for
 them  no  longer  a  cradle-tongue,  a  mother-tongue, but  a learned
 language  of  lore,  and  of  high  song  and  noble and  solemn use.
 Few  of  the  Sindar  learned  it,  save  in so  far as  they became,
 outside   Doriath,   merged   in   one   people   with   Noldor   and
 followed  their  princes;   as  indeed   ere  long   happened  indeed
 except  for  few  scattered  companies   of  Sindar   in  mountainous
 woods,  and  except  also  for  the  lordship  of  Cirdan,   and  the
 guarded kingdom of Thingol.                                         
   Now  this  change  of  tongue  among  the  Noldor  took  place  for
 many  divers  reasons.  First,  that  though  the  Sindar   were  not
 numerous   they   far   outnumbered   the   hosts   of   Feanor   and
 Fingolfin,  such  as  in  the  end  survived their  dreadful journeys
 and  reached  Beleriand.  Secondly  and  no  less:  that  the  Noldor
 having  forsaken  Aman  themselves  began  to  be  subject  to change
 undesigned  while  they  were  yet  upon  the   march,  and   at  the
 Rising  of  the  Sun this  change became  swift -  and the  change in
 their  daily  tongue was  such that,  whether by  reason of  the like
 clime  and soil  and the  like fortunes,  whether by  intercourse and
 mingling  of  blood,  it  changed  in  the  same  ways  as   did  the
 Sindarin,  and  the  two  tongues  grew  towards  one  anotner.  Thus
 it  came  that  words taken  from Noldorin  into Telerin  entered not
 in the true forms of High Speech but  as it  were altered  and fitted
 to  the  character  of  the  tongue  of  Beleriand.  Thirdly: because
 after the death of Feanor the  overlordship of  the Exiles  (as shall
 be  recounted)  passed  to  Fingolfin,  and  he  being of  other mood
 than   Feanor   acknowledged   the   high-kingship  of   Thingol  and
 Menegroth,  being  indeed  greatly  in  awe  of that  king, mightiest
 of the Eldar  save Feanor  only, and  of Melian  no less.  But though
 Elu-  Thingol,  great  in  memory,  could  recall  the tongue  of the
 Eldar  as  it  had been  ere riding  from Finwe's  camp he  heard the
 birds  of  Nan  Elmoth,  in  Doriath  the  Sindarin tongue  alone was
 spoken,  and  all  must  learn it  who would  have dealings  with the
 king.                                                               
   It is said that it was after the Third  Battle Dagor Aglareb (6) that
 the Noldor first  began far  and wide  to take  the Sindarin  as they
                                                       
 settled and established realms in  Beleriand; though  maybe the           
 Noldorin survived  (especially in  Gondolin) until  Dagor Arne-           
 diad (7) or until the Fall of Gondolin - survived, that is, in the           
 spoken form that it had in Beleriand as different both from the           
 Quenya  (or  Ancient  Noldorin)  and  from  the  Sindarin:  for           
 the Quenya never perished and is  known and  used still  by all           
 such as crossed the Sea ere the Trees were slain.                         
                                                                          
  This  is  the  first  general  linguistic  statement  since  the Lhammas,
 written long  before, and  there have  been major  shihs from  the earlier
 theory.  The  third  version  of  the  Lhammas, 'Lammasethen',  the latest
 and  shortest  of  the  three,  gives a  clear statement  of what  is more
 diffusely expressed in the longer versions, and I cite a part of  it (from
 V.193-4):                                                                 
                                                                          
    Now  ancient  Noldorin,  as  first  used,  and  written  in the  days of
  Feanor  in  Tun,  remained  spoken  by  the  Noldor  that  did  not  leave
  Valinor  at  its  darkening,  and  it  abides  still  there,  not  greatly
  changed,  and  not  greatly   different  from   Lindarin.  It   is  called
  Kornoldorin,  or   Finrodian  because   Finrod  and   many  of   his  folk
  returned  to  Valinor  and  did  not  go  to  Beleriand.  But most  of the
  Noldor  went  to  Beleriand,  and  in  the  400 years  of their  wars with
  Morgoth  their  tongue  changed  greatly.  For  three reasons:  because it
  was  not  in  Valinor;  because  there  was  war  and confusion,  and much
  death   among  the   Noldor,  so   that  their   tongue  was   subject  to
  vicissitudes  similar  to  those  of mortal  Men; and  because in  all the
  world,  but  especially  in  Middle-earth,  change  and  growth  was  very
  great in the first  years of  the Sun.  Also in  Beleriand the  tongue and
  dialects  of the  Telerian Ilkorins  was current,  and their  king Thingol
  was   very   mighty;   and   Noldorin   in   Beleriand   took   much  from
  Beleriandic  especially  of  Doriath.  Most  of  the  names and  places in
  that  land  were  given  in  Doriathrin  form.  Noldorin  returned,  after
  the  overthrow  of  Morgoth,  into  the  West,  and  lives  still  in Tol-
  eressea,  where  it  changes  now  little;  and  this  tongue  is  derived
  mainly  from  the  tongue  of  Gondolin,  whence  came  Earendel;  but  it
  has  much  of  Beleriandic,  for  Elwing  his wife  was daughter  of Dior,
  Thingol's  heir;  and  it  has  somewhat  of Ossiriand,  for Dior  was son
  of Beren who lived long in Ossiriand.                                    
                                                                          
 There  was   also  the   book-tongue,  'Elf-Latin',   Quenya,  concerning
 which  the  Lammasethen  gives  a  different  account  from  that  in  the
 other  versions  (see  V.195). The  'Elf-Latin', it  is said  (V.172), was
 brought to  Middle-earth by  the Noldor,  it came  to be  used by  all the
 Ilkorindi, 'and all Elves know it, even such as linger still in the Hither
 Lands'.                                                                   
  Thus  in  the  Lhammas   account  we   are  concerned   essentially  with
 three tongues in Beleriand after the Return of the Noldor:                

                  
                                                                         
   Quenya, the high language and book-tongue, brought from Valinor
     by the Noldor;
   Noldorin, the language of the Noldor in Kor, greatly changed in
     Beleriand and much influenced by the Ilkorin speech especially
     that of Doriath. (It is said in the Lhammas, V.174, that the
     Noldorin tongue of Kor, Korolambe or Kornoldorin, was itself
     much changed from ancient times through the peculiar inventive-
     ness of the Noldor.)
   Beleriandic, the Ilkorin tongue of Beleriand, which had become in
     long ages very different from the tongues of Valinor.
 The Noldorin speech of Gondolin was the language that survived in
 Tol Eressea after the end of the Elder Days, though influenced by other
 speech, especially the Ilkorin of Doriath during the sojourn at Sirion's
 Mouths (see V.177 - 8).
                                                                         
  In GA 1 we have still  the conception  that the  language of  the Noldor
 in  Valinor  was  changed  by  Noldorin inventiveness,  though it  is em-
 phasized that it had altered little 'from the ancient tongue of the Eldar
 upon  the.march';  and  the  profound  difference  between  the  Noldorin
 of the new-come Exiles  out of  Valinor and  the ancient  Telerian tongue
 of Beleriand (now called Sindarin) likewise  remains -  indeed it  is the
 remark  that  at  first  communication  between  Noldor  and  Sindar  was
 not easy that leads to this excursus. But in GA 1 it is said  that, while
 the   Sindarin   tongue  was   'enriched  by   words  and   devices  from
 Noldorin', Sindarin  nevertheless became  the language  of all  the Eldar
 of Middle-earth and was  the language  of Tol  Eressea after  the Return;
 while  Noldorin  of  Valinor became  a 'learned'  tongue -  equivalent in
 status  to  the  'Elf-Latin'  or Quenya  of the  Lhammas, but  learned by
 few  among  the  Sindar;  and  indeed the  'Ancient Noldorin'  is equated
 with Quenya (p. 22,  at the  end of  the text).  Among the  reasons given
 for  this  development  is   that  spoken   Noldorin  in   Beleriand  and
 Sindarin 'grew towards'  each other,  and it  is made  clear in  the last
 paragraph of the  text that  there was  at the  end of  the Elder  Days a
 profound  difference  between  the  spoken  Noldorin of  Beleriand, where
 it survived, and 'Ancient Noldorin' or Quenya.                           
  The  statement  that  Fingolfin  as  'overlord'  of the  Exiles 'acknow-
 ledged the  high-kingship of  Thingol and  Menegroth', being  'greatly in
 awe  of  that  king', is  notable (cf.  QS $121:  'and mighty  though the
 Kings  of  the Noldor  were in  those days  ... the  name of  Thingol was
 held in awe among them'). This  is indeed  one of  the reasons  given for
 the adoption of Sindarin by the Noldor  in Beleriand  - for  in Thingol's
 domain only Sindarin might be used; but it is clear that as yet  the idea
 of an  actual ban  on the  use of  the Noldorin  speech among  the Sindar
 had not arisen.                                                          
  At  the  end  of  this linguistic  passage in  GA 1  my father  wrote in
 rapid pencil:                                                            

 Alter  this.  Let  Sindar  and  Noldor speak  much  the   same  tongue
 owing (a) to changelessness in Valinor (b) to  slow change  in Middle-
 earth (c) to  long memories  of the  Elves. But  there were  of course
 differences  -  new  words  in  Noldorin and  Sindarin. In  both cases
 more by invention  than involuntary.  But after  Rising of  Sun change
 was  sudden and  swift -  and the  Noldor brought  a special  curse of
 changefulness  with  them  (designed  to  cut  them off  from converse
 with  Valinor?).  The  two  tongues  there  changed  and  grew  alike.
 Generally in Beleriand  a Noldorized  (slightly) Sindarin  was spoken.
 In Doriath less Noldorin if any. [?Ossiriand] to be like Beleriandic.
 The difference here from the primary text lies in a denial of any very
 significant  difference  between  the  language  of Beleriand  and the
 language of the incoming Noldor,  with the  subsequent history  (as it
 appears,  from  the brief  and hasty  words) being  rather one  of the
 coalescence of the languages than of the abandonment of Noldorin.     
                                                                      
 The excursus on languages in GA 2,  written in  a much  smaller script
 than that of the main body of the text, reads as follows.             
                                                                      
 It  was  indeed   at  the   landing  of   Feanor  three   hundred  and
 sixty-five  long  years  of  the  Valar  since  the Noldor  had passed
 over  the  Sea  and  left  the  Sindar  behind. Now  that time  was in
 length  well  nigh as  three thousand  and five  hundred years  of the
 Sun.  In  such  an  age  the  tongues  of Men  that were  far sundered
 would   indeed   change   out   of  knowledge,   save  such   as  were
 written  down  in  records  of  song  and  wisdom.  But in  Valinor in
 the days of the Trees  change was  little to  be perceived,  save that
 which  came  of  will   and  design,   while  in   Middle-earth  under
 the  Sleep  of   Yavanna  the   change  of   growth  was   slow  also.
 Nonetheless  in  Beleriand  the  Sleep  before the  coming of  the Sun
 had  been  stirred  (as  elsewhere is  told) and  the language  of the
 Sindar  had  in  the  long  years  changed  much,  even   in  unheeded
 growth,  as  a  tree  may  imperceptibly  change  its shape:  as much,
 maybe,  as  an  unwritten  tongue  of  the later  days woud  change in
 five   hundred   years   or   more.   Whereas  the   Noldorin  tongue,
 albeit  still  far  nearer  in  most  ways   to  the   ancient  common
 speech  of  the  Eldar,  had  been  altered  by  will  (to  forms that
 seemed  to  those  in  Aman  more  sweet  upon  the  tongue or  in the
 ear)  and  by  the  invention  of  many  new  words  unknown   to  the
 Sindar.  But  speech  between  the  two   kindreds  became   easy  and
 free in this wise. First that after the Rising of  the Sun  the change
 of  all  things  in  Arda was  sudden and  swift, and  in the  days of
 the  Wars  both  the  tongue  of  the  Noldor and  that of  the Sindar
 changed  greatly:  moreover,  whether  by  reason  of the  like clime,

 and  soil,  and  the  like  fortunes,  whether  by  intercourse  and the
 mingling  of   the  peoples,   the  two   tongues  changed   in  similar
 ways  and  drew  together  again.  Secondly  because  in  time  it  came
 to   pass   that   most  of   the  Noldor   indeed  forsook   their  own
 tongue  in  daily  use  and  took  the  tongue  of   Beleriand  instead,
 though  they  enriched  it  with  many  words  of  their  own.  Only  in
 Gondolin,  which   was  early   peopled  (by  Noldor alone)(8)  and  cut
 off   from   intercourse   with   others,   did   the   Noldorin  tongue
 endure  unto  the  end  of  the city;  whereas in  Doriath only  was the
 Sindarin  tongue  maintained   untouched  by   the  Noldorin   and  less
 changed  than   the  language   of  those   without.  Now   this  change
 in  the  speech  of  the  Noldor  came  about   in  this   wise.  First:
 though   the   Sindar   were   not   numerous   they   much  outnumbered
 the   hosts   of   Feanor   and  Fingolfin,   such  as   survived  their
 dreadful   journey.   Secondly:   because   of   the  mingling   of  the
 peoples,   whereby   in  all   the  countries   save  only   in  Doriath
 though  the  princes  of  the  Noldor  were  the  kings  their followers
 were  largely  Sindarin  by  race.  Thirdly:  because  after  the  death
 of  Feanor  the  overlordship   of  the   Exiles  passed   to  Fingolfin
 (save  among   the  followers   of  Feanor's   sons),  and   he  acknow-
 ledged  the  high-kingship  of  Thingol,  being  indeed  in awe  of that
 king,  mightiest  of  the  Eldar  save  Feanor, and  of Melian  no less.
 But  Thingol,  because  of  the  grievance  of  the  Teleri  against the
 Noldor,  would   not  speak   the  Noldorin   tongue  and   forbade  his
 subjects  to  do  so.  Moreover  it  came  to  pass  that  the  Noldor,
 having  of   their  own   will  forsaken   Aman  in   rebellion,  became
 subject  to  change  undesigned  in  a  measure  beyond  even   that  of
 the  Sindar,  and  their  own  tongue  in   daily  use   swiftly  became
 unlike   the   high   tongue   of   Valinor.   But  the   Noldor,  being
 loremasters,  retained  that  high  tongue  in lore,  and ceased  not to
 use  it  for  noble  purposes  and  to  teach  it  to   their  children.
 Therefore  the  form  of  their  speech  in  daily use  came to  be held
 as  debased,  and  the  Noldor   would  use   either  the   High  Tongue
 as a learned  language, or  else in  daily business  and in  all matters
 that  concerned  all  the  Eldar  of  Beleriand  in  general  they would
 use rather the tongue of that land.  It is  said that  it was  after the
 Third  Battle,  Dagor  Aglareb,  that  the  Noldor  first began  far and
 wide  to  take  the  Sindarin  tongue, as  they settled  and established
 their realms in Beleriand.                                              
                                                                        
   This restructuring and partial rewriting of the text does not change
 very substantially the ideas expressed in the earlier form of it: my
 father did not take up his pencilled note of projected alterations given

                  
                                                                          
  on  p.  24.  The  passage  concerning  Dairon  and  the Runes  is omitted,
  but  that  had  been  introduced  earlier  in GA  2 ($31).  It is  now em-
  phasized that  the Sindarin  of Doriath  was to  some degree  archaic, and
  'untouched' by Noldorin: this is not  stated in  GA 1,  though it  is said
  there  that  'in  Doriath  the  Sindarin  tongue  alone  was  spoken'. The
  acknowledgement  by  Fingolfin  of  Thingol's 'high-kingship'  is retained
  (with  the  reservation  'save  among  the  followers of  Feanor's sons'),
  but   there now  appears   the   ban  on   the  Noldorin   tongue  imposed
  by  Thingol  on  his  subjects  when  he  learned  of  the  Kinslaying  at
  Alqualonde  as  one  of  the  reasons  for  the  abandonment of  their own
  tongue  by  the  Noldor.  Noldorin  is  now  said  to  have  changed  even
  more rapidly in Middle-earth after the  Rising of  the Sun  than Sindarin,
  and this is associated with their rebellion in Aman (cf. the words  in the
  pencilled  comments  at  the  end of  the GA  1 text,  p. 24:  'the Noldor
  brought  a  special  curse  of  changefulness   with  them');   while  the
  opinion  coming  to  be  held  among  the  Noldor  themselves  that  their
  spoken  tongue  was  debased  provides  a   further  explanation   of  its
  abandonment.                                                             
     My father then  (probably after  no long  interval) rejected  the whole
  of this second text  after the  words 'and  by the  invention of  many new
  words unknown to the Sindar' (p. 24) and replaced it as follows:         
                                                                          
     But  it  came  to  pass ere  long that  the Exiles  took up  the tongue
  of  Beleriand,  as  the  language   of  daily   use,  and   their  ancient
  tongue  was  retained  only   as  a   high  speech   and  a   language  of
  lore,  especially  in  the  houses  of  the   Noldorin  lords   and  among
  the   wise.   Now   this   change   of   speech   was   made    for   many
  reasons.   First,   the   Noldor   were   fewer   in   number   than   the
  Sindar,  and,  save  in   Doriath  [struck   our  later: and Gondolin],(9)
  the   peoples   soon   became   much   mingled.   Secondly,   the   Noldor
  learned   the   Sindarin  tongue   far  more   readily  than   the  Sindar
  could   learn  the   ancient  speech;   moreover,  after   the  kinslaying
  became   known,   Thingol   would   hold   no   parley   with   any   that
  spake  in  the  tongue  of  the  slayers  at  Alqualonde,  and  he forbade
  his   folk  to   do  so.   Thus  it   was  that   the  common   speech  of
  Beleriand  after  the  Third  Battle,  Dagor   Aglareb,  was   the  speech
  of   the   Grey-elves,   albeit   somewhat    enriched   by    words   and
  devices    drawn   from    Noldorin   (save    in   Doriath    where   the
  language  remained  purer  and   less  changed   by  time).   [Struck  out
  later:  Only  in  Gondolin  did  the  tongue  of  the  Noldor   remain  in
  daily  use  until  the  end  of  that city;  for it  was early  peopled by
  Turgon  with  Noldor  only,  from   the  North-west   of  the   land,  and
  was long hidden and cut off from all converse with others.(10)           
  The  following  replacement   passage  was   written  in   the  margin:]

                 
                                                                        
 but  the  Noldor  preserved  ever  the  High-speech  of  the  West  as a
 language  of  lore,  and  in  that  language   they  would   still  give
 names  to  mighty  men  or  to  places  of  renown. /  But all  the days
 of  the  Wars  of  Beleriand,  [wellnigh  >]   more  than   six  hundred
 years,  were  times   of  great   change,  not   only  because   of  the
 labours  and  troubles  of  those  years,  but  because  in   the  first
 years  of  the  Sun  and  the  second  Spring  of  Arda  the  growth and
 change  of all  living things  was sudden  and swift.  Far other  at the
 end  of  the  Wars  were  [both  the   Sindarin  and   Noldorin  tongues
 later >] the tongues of Beleriand (11) than they  were at  the landing
 of  Feanor,  and  only  the   High  Speech   being  learned   anew  from
 letters  remained  unaltered.  But  these  histories  were   made  after
 the  Last  Battle  and the  end of  the Elder  Days, and  therefore they
 were  made  in  the  tongue  of  the  remnant  of the  Elves as  it then
 was,  ere  it  passed  again  into  the  West,  and  the names  of those
 that  they  record  and  of  the  places  that  are remembered  have for
 the  most  part  that  form  which  they  had  in  the spoken  speech at
 the last.                                                               
                                                                        
  Here  ends   that  part   which  was   drawn  mainly   from  the       
  Grey  Annals,  and  there  follows  matter  drawn in  brief from       
  the  Quenta  Noldorinwa,  and   mingled  with   the  traditions       
  of Doriath.(12)                                                        
                                                                        
 In this revised  version, nothing  is said  about Sindarin  and Noldorin
 'drawing  together' again,  and there  is no  suggestion that  the later
 tongue  of  the  Noldor  came  to  be  regarded  as   'debased';  spoken
 Noldorin endured (as the passage was originally  written) in  the wholly
 Noldorin  city  of  Gondolin  until  its  fall.  The   whole  conception
 becomes in fact far simpler: the Noldor retained their  own tongue  as a
 High Speech, but Sindarin became their language of  daily use  (and this
 was  because  of  the  numerical  inferiority  of  the  Noldor  and  the
 mingling of the peoples outside Doriath, the difficulty that  the Sindar
 found in acquiring the  High Speech,  and the  ban imposed  by Thingol).
 Sindarin  received  .'loanwords'  from  Noldorin,  but  not  in Doriath,
 where  the  language  remained  somewhat  archaic.  By later  changes to
 the text (see notes 8-11) the idea that Noldorin  remained in  daily use
 in Gondolin was abandoned.                                              
  It is interesting to read, at the end of this last version, that 'these
 histories' were made 'after the  Last Battle  and the  end of  the Elder
 Days,  and therefore  they were  made in  the tongue  of the  remnant of
 the Elves as it then was, ere it passed again into the West.'           

                             NOTES.                                      
                                                                        
 1.    365 years of the Valar: 1132-1497 (see GA $11).
 2.    On the awakening of Beleriand from the Sleep of Yavanna see
       $$6, 17, and the commentary on $ $6, 10.
 3.    A rough draft of this passage is extant, and this has here:
         Therefore whereas the tongue of the Noldor had changed for
         the most part only in the making of new words (for things new
         and old), and in the wilful altering of the ancient tongue of the
         Quendi to forms and patterns that seemed to the Eldar more
         beautiful - in which Vanyar, Noldor, and Teleri differed and
         drew apart - the tongue of the Sindar had changed as living
         things change by growth - yet only so as in the later world
         might pass in 400 years.
 4.    Earlier in GA 1 the form is Nauglath: see the commentary on
       519.
 5.    On this passage concerning the Runes of Dairon see $31 and
       commentary.
 6.    Dagor Aglareb, the Glorious Battle, was formerly the Second
       Battle (see commentary on $$36 ff.).
 7.    Dagor Arnediad: the Battle of Unnumbered Tears (Nirnaith
                                                                        
       Arnediad).                                                         
 8.    This represents my father's original view that there were no Grey-
       elves among the people of Gondolin; see note 9.                   
 9.    The  removal  of  the  words  'and  Gondolin'  shows the  entry of
       the later conception  (see note  8) that  many Sindar  dwelling in
       Nivrost at the coming of the Noldor took Turgon to be  their lord,
       and that there were in fact more Elves of Sindarin origin  than of
       Noldorin  in  the  people   of  Gondolin;   see  $$107,   113  and
       commentary.                                                       
 10.   This  passage  was  removed  at  the  same time  and for  the same
       reason as the words 'and  Gondolin' earlier  in this  revised text
       (note 9).                                                         
 11.   The change of  'both the  Sindarin and  Noldorin tongues'  to 'the
       tongues of Beleriand' was made later than the changes  referred to
       in notes 9 and 10, but presumably for the  same reason,  since the
       reference  was  to  the  spoken Noldorin  of Gondolin.  The plural
       'tongues' in the revised  wording is  rather puzzling;  perhaps my
       father was thinking of the speech of the Green-elves of Ossiriand,
       or possibly he meant the varieties (dialects) of Sindarin.        
 12.   The  term  Quenta  Noldorinwa appears in the  title of  Q (IV.77).
       I  cannot  say  what  conception  my  father  had  formed  of  the
       historical tradition when he wrote these concluding words.        

  As I have said, the manuscript GA 1 does  not continue  after the  end of
  the discussion of the languages, but for the next section  of GA  2 there
  is a  text on  loose pages  which may  be regarded  as a  continuation of
  GA 1. It constitutes part of the material labelled 'Old material  of Grey
  Annals' referred to on p. 4. This text runs  from the  (second) beginning
  of  the  annal  1497 ('Now  Morgoth being  dismayed ...')  to the  end of
  annal  YS  20  (and  for  the  annals  6  and  7  there  is a  very rough
  preliminary draft as  well). To  this text  the GA  2 manuscript  is very
  close indeed, and is scarcely more than a fine copy of it with changes of
  wording  here  and  there;  a  few interesting  points of  difference are
  noticed in the commentary.                                               
    I  return  now  to  the  text  of  GA   2,  which   need  not   now  be
  distinguished by a number.                                               
                                                                          
                                    1497.                                   
                                                                          
    $49.   Now    Morgoth   being    dismayed   by    the   rout    of   his
  armies  and  the  unlooked-for  valour  of   the  Noldor,   and  desiring
  time  for  new  designs,   sent  emissaries   to  Maidros,   and  feigned
  that  he  was  willing  to  treat  with  him.  And  Maidros  feigned that
  he  for  his  part  was  also willing,  and either  purposed evil  to the
  other.  Therefore  against  covenant  each  came  with  great   force  to
  the   parley,   but   Morgoth   with   the   more,   and    Maidros   was
  defeated and taken captive.                                              
    $50.   Then   Morgoth   held   Maidros   as   a   hostage,   and   swore
  only  to  release  him,  if  the  Noldor  would  march  away,  either  to
  Valinor,  or  else  far  from  Beleriand  into  the  South of  the world;
  and  if  they  would  not  do  this,  then  he   would  put   Maidros  to
  torment.   But   the   other   sons   of   Feanor   knew   that   Morgoth
  would   betray   them,   and  would   not  release   Maidros,  whatsoever
  they  might  do;  and  they   were  constrained   also  by   their  oath,
  and   might   not   for  any   cause  forsake   the  war   against  their
  Enemy.                                                                   
                                                                          
                                    1498.                                   
                                                                          
    $51.  Therefore  Morgoth  took  Maidros,  and setting  a band           
  of hellwrought steel about  his right  wrist hung  him thereby           
  above a precipice upon the  west-tower of  Thangorodrim, where           
  none could reach him. But his brethren drew back and fortified           
  a great camp in Hithlum.                                                 
                                                                          
                                    1500.                                  
                                                                          
    $52. In this time Fingolfin and those that followed him                 
  crossed the grinding ice of Helkaraxe, and so came at last with          

 great  woe  and  loss  into the  North of  Endar; and  their hearts
 were filled with  bitterness.  And  even  as  they  set  foot  upon
 Middle-earth, the ages of  the Stars  were ended,  and the  time of
 the  Sun  and  Moon  was  begun,  as  is told  in the  Chronicle of
 Aman.                                                              
                                                                   
                                 YS1.                               
                                                                   
 $53  Here  the  Moon  and  the  Sun,  wrought  by  the  Valar after
 the death of  the Trees,  rose new  in the  heaven. First  the Moon
 came forth, and  even as  it rose  above the  darkness in  the West
 Fingolfin let blow his silver  trumpets, and  began his  march into
 Middle-earth;  and  the  shadows of  his host  went long  and black
 before                                                        them.
  $54. The   Elves  of   Middle-earth  looked   up  with   hope  and
 delight  at  this  new  thing;  but  the  servants of  Morgoth were
 amazed;  and  Morgoth sent  spirits of  darkness to  assail Tilion,
 the  guardian  of the  moon, and  there was  strife in  heaven. But
 soon after there came the first Dawn of  the Sun,  and it  was like
 a  great fire  upon the  towers of  the Pelori,  and the  clouds of
 Middle-earth  were  kindled,  and  all  the  mists  of   the  world
 smoked  and  glowed  like  gold. Then  Fingolfin unfurled  his blue
 and  silver  banners,  and   flowers  awoke   from  the   Sleep  of
 Yavanna and sprang up beneath the feet of his host.                
   $55  Then  indeed   Morgoth  was   dismayed,  and   he  descended
 into   the   uttermost   depths  of   Angband,  and   withdrew  his
 servants,  sending  forth  great reek  and dark  cloud to  hide his
 land from  the light  of the  Daystar. Therefore  Fingolfin marched
 from  the  North  unopposed through  the fastness  of the  realm of
 Morgoth,  and  he  passed  over  Dor-Daedeloth,  and  his  foes hid
 beneath  the  earth;  but  the  Elves  smote  upon  the   gates  of
 Angband,  and  the  challenge  of their  trumpets shook  the towers
 of  Thangorodrim.  And   Maidros  heard   them  amid   his  torment
 and cried aloud, but his voice was lost in the echoes of the stone.
                                                                   
   $56. From  this  time  are  reckoned  the   Years  of   the  Sun.
 Swifter and briefer are they than the  long Years  of the  Trees in
 Valinor.  Lo!  in  that  time  the  growth  and  the  changing  and
 ageing  of  all  things  was hastened  exceedingly; and  all living
 things  spread and  multiplied in  the Second  Spring of  Arda, and
 the Eldar increased, and Beleriand grew green and fair.            
   $57 At the first Sunrise, it is said,  Men, the  younger children
 of  Iluvatar,  awoke  in Hildorien  in the  midmost regions  of the

                             
                                                                 
 world.  The  Atani  they were  named; but  the Eldar  called them
 also the Hildi, the Followers.  Into the  tale of  Beleriand they
 came ere the end.                                                
                                                                 
                                2.                                
                                                                 
  $58. Now  Fingolfin,  being  of  other  temper than  Feanor, and
 wary  of  the  wiles  of  Morgoth,  after sounding  his challenge
 withdrew   from   Dor-Daedeloth   and  turned   towards  Mithrim,
 for he had heard tidings that there  he should  find the  sons of
 Feanor, and he desired also to have the shield of  the mountains,
 while  his  folk  rested  and grew  strong; for  he had  seen the
 strength of  Angband and  deemed not  that it  would fall  to the
 sound of  trumpets only.  Therefore coming  at length  to Hithlum
 he made his first camp and  dwelling by  the north-shore  of Lake
 Mithrim.                                                         
  $59. But no love was there in  the hearts  of Fingolfin  and his
 folk for the people of Feanor; and though Fingolfin  learned that
 Feanor  was  dead,  he  held  his sons  the accomplices  of their
 father,  and  there  was  peril  of  war  between the  two hosts.
 Grievous  as  were  their  losses  upon the  road, the  people of
 Fingolfin  and  Inglor  son  of Finrod  were still  more numerous
 than  the  followers  of Feanor;  wherefore they  withdrew before
 Fingolfin  and  removed  their dwelling  to the  south-shore, and
 the Lake lay between the peoples.                                
  $60. Many  indeed  of  Feanor's  folk  repented  them  sorely of
 the deed at Losgar, and were  astounded at  the valour  which had
 brought  the  friends  that they  abandoned over  the Ice  of the
 North,  and  they  would  have  welcomed  them  humbly  had  they
 dared for shame. Thus because of the curse that  lay on  them the
 Noldor  achieved  nothing,  while  Morgoth  was dismayed  and his
 servants still cowed  by the  sudden light. And Morgoth  let make
 vast smokes and vapours  in the  pits of  Angband, and  they came
 forth from the reeking tops of the Iron  Mountains, and  the east
 wind  bore  them  over  Hithlum  and  darkened  the new  sun, and
 they fell, coiling  about field  and hollow,  and lying  upon the
 waters of Mithrim, drear and poisonous.                          
                                                                 
                                5.                                
                                                                 
  $61. Here  Fingon  the Valiant  resolved to  heal the  feud that
 divided  the Noldor,  ere their  Enemy should  be ready  for war;
 for the earth trembled in the north-lands with the thunder of the
 forges  of  Morgoth.   Moreover  the   thought  of   his  ancient

            
                                                                  
 friendship  with  Maidros  stung  his heart  with grief  (though he
 knew not yet that  Maidros had  not  forgotten  him at  the burning
 of  the  ships). Therefore  he dared  a deed  which is  justly re-
 nowned  among  the  feats  of  the  princes  of the  Noldor: alone,
 and  without  the  counsel  of  any,  he  set  forth  in  search of
 Maidros;  and  aided  by  the  very   darkness  that   Morgoth  had
 made he came unseen into the fastness  of his  foes. In  the Quenta
 it is told how at the last he found Maidros, by  singing a  song of
 Valinor   alone   in  the   dark  mountains,   and  was   aided  by
 Thorondor  the  Eagle,  who  bore  him  aloft  unto   Maidros;  but
 the  bond  of  steel he  could in  no wise  release and  must sever
 the  hand that  it held.  Thus he  rescued his  friend of  old from
 torment,  and  their  love  was  renewed;  and  the  hatred between
 the  houses  of  Fingolfin  and  Feanor  was  assuaged.  Thereafter
 Maidros wielded his sword in his left hand.                       
                                                                  
                                  6.                               
                                                                  
   $62. Now  the  Noldor,  being  again  united,  set  a  watch upon
 the  borders of  Dor-Daedeloth, and  held their  main force  in the
 north of the land, but they sent forth messengers  far and  wide to
 explore the countries of Beleriand and to treat with the  folk that
 dwelt there.                                                      
   $63. Beyond  the  Girdle  of  Melian  those  of   Finrod's  house
 were  suffered to  pass, for  they could  claim close  kinship with
 King  Thingol  himself  (their  mother  Earwen being  his brother's
 daughter).  Now  Angrod  was  the first  of the  Exiles to  come to
 Menegroth,  as  messenger  of Inglor,  and he  spoke long  with the
 King, telling him  of the  deeds of  the Noldor  in the  north, and
 their  numbers, and  the ordering  of their  force; but  being true
 and  wisehearted  and  deeming  all griefs  now forgiven,  he spoke
 naught of the deeds of Feanor save his valiant death.             
   $64. And  King  Thingol   hearkened,  and   he  said   to  Angrod
 ere  he went:  'Thus thou  shalt speak  for me  to those  that sent
 thee.  In  Hithlum  indeed  the  Noldor  have leave  to do  as they
 will,  and  in Dor  Thonion they  may dwell,  and in  the countries
 east of Doriath  even to  the feet  of the  mountains of  Eryd Luin
 there is room  and to  spare. But  elsewhere there  are many  of my
 folk,  and  I  would not  have them  restrained of  their freedoms,
 still  less  ousted  from  their  homes.  Beware  therefore  how ye
 princes  of  the  West  bear  yourselves,  for  I  am  the  Lord of
 Beleriand  and  all who  seek to  dwell there  shall hear  my word.

                             
                                                                  
 Into Doriath none shall come to abide there, but only such as I
 call as guests, or who seek me in great need.'                    
                                                                  
                                 7.                                
                                                                  
  $65. Now  the  Noldor  held  council  in  Mithrim  to  ponder all
 such matters, and to resolve  how they  should deal  in friendship
 with  the Grey-elves,  and yet  best gather  force and  dispose it
 for  the  war  upon  Morgoth.  For  that  cause  they had  come to
 Middle-earth;  yet  to many  the northlands  seemed chill  and the
 south  countries  fairer,  and  they  desired  greatly  new  homes
 where their folk might  increase in  peace far  from the  camps of
 war in the highlands.                                             
  $66. To  this  council  came  Angrod out  of Doriath  bearing the
 words  of  King  Thingol,  and  their welcome  seemed cold  to the
 Noldor.  The  sons  of  Feanor  indeed  were  wroth  thereat;  and
 Maidros laughed, saying: 'He is a king that can  hold his  own, or
 else his title is vain. Thingol does but grant us lands  where his
 power  does  not  run.  Indeed  Doriath  only  would be  his realm
 this day, but for the coming of the  Noldor. Therefore  in Doriath
 let him reign, and  be glad  that he  hath the  sons of  Finwe for
 neighbours,  not  the  Orcs  of Morgoth  that we  found. Elsewhere
 it shall go as seems good to us.'                                 
  $67. But  Cranthir,  who  loved  not  the  sons  of  Finrod,  and
 was the  harshest of  the brethren  and the  most quick  to anger,
 cried  aloud,  Yea more!  Let not  the sons  of Finrod  run hither
 and thither with their tales to  this Dark-elf  in his  caves! Who
 made  them  our  spokesmen  to  deal  with  him?  And  though they
 be come indeed to Beleriand, let them not  so swiftly  forget that
 their father was a  lord of  the Noldor,  though their  mother was
 of other kin.'                                                    
  $68.  Then   Angrod   was  exceedingly   wroth  and   went  forth
 from  the  council.  Maidros  indeed  rebuked  Cranthir;  but  the
 greater  part  of  the  Noldor,  of  both followings,  hearing his
 words were troubled in heart, fearing the fell spirit of  the sons
 of Feanor that, it seemed, would ever  be like  to burst  forth in
 rash word or violence.                                            
  $69. Therefore  when  the  council  came   to  the   choosing  of
 one to be the overlord of  the Exiles  and the  head of  all their
 princes, the choice of all save few fell on Fingolfin. And even as
 the choice was made known, all  those that  heard it  recalled the
 words of  Mandos that  the House  of Feanor  should be  called the
 Dispossessed for ever. None the less ill for that did the  sons of

 Feanor  take  this  choice,  save  Maidros  only, though  it touched
 him  the  nearest.  But  he  restrained   his  brethen,   saying  to
 Fingolfin: 'If there lay no  grievance between  us, lord,  still the
 choice would  come rightly  to thee,  the eldest  here of  the house
 of Finwe, and not the least wise.'                                 
   570  But  the  sons  of  Feanor  departed  then from  the council,
 and  soon  after  they  left  Mithrim  and  went  eastward   to  the
 countries  wide  and   wild  between   Himring  and   Lake  Helevorn
 under   Mount   Rerir.   That  region   was  named   thereafter  the
 March of  Maidros; for  there was  little defence  there of  hill or
 river  against  assault  from the  North; and there Maidros  and his
 brethren  kept  watch,  gathering  all  such folk  as would  come to
 them, and  they had  little dealings  with their  kinsfolk westward,
 save at need.                                                      
   $71  It  is  said,  indeed,  that  Maidros  himself  devised  this
 plan,  to  lessen the  chances of  strife, and  because he  was very
 willing that the chief peril of assault (as  it seemed)  should fall
 upon  himself;  and  he  remained  for his  part in  friendship with
 the  houses  of  Fingolfin   and  Finrod,   and  would   come  among
 them  at  whiles  for  common  counsel.  Yet  he  also was  bound by
 the Oath, though it slept now for a time.                          
                                                                   
                                  20.                               
                                                                   
   $72. In this year Fingolfin, King  of the  Noldor, called  a great
 council  and  made  a  high  feast, that  was long  after remembered
 as  Mereth  Aderthad,  the  Feast  of  Reuniting.  And  it  was held
 nigh the fair pools  of Ivrin  (whence the  swift Narog  arose), for
 there the lands were green  and fair  at the  feet of  the mountains
 that  shielded  them  from  the  'North.  Thither  came many  of the
 chieftains and people of Fingolfin and  Inglor; and  of the  sons of
 Feanor  Maidros  and  Maglor  with  warriors   of  the   March;  and
 there  they  were  joined  by Cirdan  and many  folk of  the Havens,
 and  great concourse  of the  Grey-elves from  woods and  fields far
 and  near,  and  even  from  Ossiriand  there   came  some   of  the
 Nandor  on  behalf  of  their  folk.  But  Thingol came  not himself
 from   Doriath,   and   sent   but   two   messengers,   Dairon  and
 Mablung,   bringing   his   greetings.   At  Mereth   Aderthad  many
 counsels  were  taken  in  good  will,  and  oaths  were   sworn  of
 league  and  friendship,  and   there  was   much  mirth   and  good
 hope;  and  indeed there  followed after  a fair  time of  peace, of
 growth  and  blossoming,  and all  the land  was glad,  though still
 the Shadow brooded in the North.                                   

   $73. (At  this  feast  it  is  recorded that  the tongue  of the
 Grey-elves  was  most  spoken  even  by  the  Noldor,  for whereas
 the  Noldor readily  learned the  speech of  the land,  the Sindar
 were slow to master the tongue of Aman.)                          
                                                                  
                                50.                                
                                                                  
   $74. Here  after  long  peace,  as  Inglor and  Turgon journeyed
 together, and lay by night near  the Twilight  Meres, Ulmo  laid a
 deep  sleep   upon  them   and  troubled   them  in   dreams.  And
 thereafter  each  sought  separately  for  places of  strength and
 refuge  in the  land, lest  Morgoth should  burst from  Angband as
 their  dreams  foreboded.  [Added  later:  But  Turgon  found  not
 what he sought, and returned to Nivrost.]                         
                                                                  
                                52.                                
                                                                  
   $75. In this year Inglor and his sister Galadriel were  long the
 guests  of  Thingol  their  kinsman.  And Inglor was  filled  with
 wonder  at  the  beauty   and  strength   of  Menegroth,   and  he
 desired  greatly  to  make  for  himself  a  strong place  in like
 manner. Therefore he opened his heart to  Thingol, telling  him of
 his  dreams;  and  Thingol  spoke to  him of  the caves  under the
 High  Faroth  on  the  west-bank  of Narog,  and when  he departed
 gave him guides to lead him to that place of  which few  yet knew.
 Thus  Inglor  came  to  the Caverns  of Narog  and began  there to
 establish  deep  halls and  armouries, after  the manner  of Mene-
 groth;  and  that  stronghold  was  called  Nargothrond. Wherefore
 the  Noldor  named  him  Felagund,  Lord of  Caves, and  that name
 he bore until his end. But Galadriel did not depart  [added later:
 from  Doriath],  and  remained  long  with  Melian, for  there was
 much love between them.                                           
                                                                  
                                53.                                
                                                                  
   $76. [Turgon  journeying  alone,  by  the  favour of  Ulmo later
 >]  In  this  year  Ulmo  appeared  to Turgon  upon the  shores of
 Nivrost, and at his bidding went  forth alone,  and by  the favour
 of  Ulmo  he  / discovered  that hidden  vale amid  the encircling
 mountains  where  afterwards  Gondolin  was  built.  Of   this  he
 spoke to none yet, but began secretly to devise the plan of a city
 after the  manner of  Tirion upon  Tuna, for  which his  heart now
 yearned in exile.                                                 

                                   60.                                 
                            The Third Battle.                          
                                                                      
  $77. Here  Morgoth,  believing  the  report  of  his  spies  that the
 lords  of  the  Eldar  were  wandering abroad  with little  thought of
 war,  made  trial  of the  strength and  watchfulness of  his enemies.
 Once  more,  with  little   warning,  his   might  was   stirred,  and
 suddenly  there  were  earthquakes  in  the  North,  and   fires  came
 from  fissures  in  the   earth,  and   the  Iron   Mountains  vomited
 flame;  and  an  army  of  Orcs  thrust  down the  Vale of  Sirion and
 attempted  to  pierce  to the  heart of  Beleriand. But  Fingolfin and
 Maidros  were  not  sleeping,  and  gathering  swiftly great  force of
 both  Noldor  and  Sindar  they  destroyed  all  the  scattered  bands
 of the Orcs that  had stolen  into the  land; but  the main  host they
 repelled,  and  drove  out  onto  the  fields  of Ardgalen,  and there
 surrounded it and destroyed it, to  the least  and last,  within sight
 of  Angband.  This  was  the  Third  Battle  of  the  Wars,   and  was
 called Dagor Aglareb, the Glorious Battle.                            
  $78. A  victory  it  was,  and  yet  a  warning;  and  the chieftains
 took  heed  of  it,  and  thereafter  drew  closer their  leaguer, and
 strengthened   and  ordered   their  watch,   setting  the   Siege  of
 Angband,   which   lasted   wellnigh    four   hundred    years.   And
 Fingolfin   boasted   that   (save   by   treason   among  themselves)
 Morgoth  could  never  again  burst  from  the  leaguer of  the Eldar.
 Yet   neither   could  the   Noldor  take   Angband  nor   regain  the
 Silmarils.  And  war  never  wholly  ceased  in all  that time  of the
 Siege;  for  Morgoth  was  secretly  forging  new  weapons,  and  ever
 and  anon  he  would  make  trial  of  his  enemies. Moreover,  he was
 not  encircled  upon  the  uttermost  north;  and  though the  ice and
 snow  restrained  his  enemies  from  keeping  watch  in   the  frozen
 wilderness,  it  hindered  not  his spies  and messengers  from secret
 going and coming.                                                     
                                                                      
  The following passage as the text was originally written  began thus:
  'At this time also Morgoth began a new evil. He bade his  servants to
  take alive any of the Eldar ...' This was replaced by the  long rider
  (written on a separate page) that follows here ($$79 - 81), returning
  to the original text at 'He now bade the Orkor to  take alive  any of
  the Eldar', the second sentence of $81.                              
                                                                      
  $79. Nor  himself,  an  he  would   go.  Indeed   we  learn   now  in
 Eressea from  the Valar,  through our  kin that  dwell still  in Aman,
 that  after  Dagor-nuin-Giliath  Melkor  was  so  long   in  assailing
 the   Eldar   with  strength   for  he   himself  had   departed  from

 Angband, for  the last  time. Even  as before  at the  awakening of
 the  Quendi,  his  spies were  watchful, and  tidings soon  came to
 him of the arising of Men.  This seemed  to him  so great  a matter
 that  secretly  under  shadow  he  went  forth  into  Middle-earth,
 leaving the command of  the War  to Sauron  his lieutenant.  Of his
 dealings  with  Men  the  Eldar  knew  naught  at  that  time,  and
 know  little  now, for  neither the  Valar nor  Men have  spoken to
 them clearly of these things.                                     
   $80. But  that  some  darkness  lay  upon the  hearts of  Men (as
 the  shadow  of  the  kinslaying and  the doom  of Mandos  lay upon
 the Noldor) the Eldar perceived clearly  even in  the fair  folk of
 the  Elf-friends  that  they  first  knew.  To  corrupt  or destroy
 whatsoever  arose  new  and  fair  was  ever  the  chief  desire of
 Morgoth;  but  as  regards  the  Eldar,   doubtless  he   had  this
 purpose also in  his errand:  by fear  and lies  to make  Men their
 foes, and  bring them  up out  of the  East against  Beleriand. But
 this  design  was  slow to  ripen, and  was never  wholly achieved,
 for Men (it  is said)  were at  first very  few in  number, whereas
 Morgoth  grew  afraid  of  the  tidings  of  the growing  power and
 union  of  the  Eldar  and  came  back  to Angband,  leaving behind
 at  that  time  but  few  servants,  and  those  of less  might and
 cunning.                                                          
   $81. Certain it is that at this time (which was  the time  of his
 return,  if  the  aforesaid account  be true,  as we  must believe)
 Morgoth  began  a  new  evil, desiring  above all  to sow  fear and
 disunion  among  the  Eldar  in  Beleriand. He  now bade  the Orkor
 to  take alive  any of  the Eldar  that they  could and  bring them
 bound  to Angband.  For it  was his  intent to  use their  lore and
 skill  under duress  for his  own ends;  moreover he  took pleasure
 in  tormenting  them,  and  would  besides   by  pain   wring  from
 them at times tidings  of the  deeds and  counsels of  his enemies.
 Some  indeed he  so daunted  by the  terror of  his eyes  that they
 needed  no  chains  more,  but walked  ever in  fear of  him, doing
 his will  wherever they  might be.  These he  would unbind  and let
 return  to  work  treason  among their  own kin.  In this  way also
 was the  curse of  Mandos fulfilled,  for after  a while  the Elves
 grew   afraid   of  those   who  claimed   to  have   escaped  from
 thraldom,  and  often  those  hapless   whom  the   Orcs  ensnared,
 even  if  they  broke  from  the  toils  would but  wander homeless
 and friendless thereafter, becoming outlaws in the woods.         
   $82  And  though  it  was  long  ere  all  these  evils  began to
 appear, it is said that even after the victory of the  Third Battle

 some of the Eldar  (either caught  by robber  bands in  the woods,
 or over rash in pursuit of the foe) were thus seized and  taken to
 Morgoth.  And  thus  he  learned  much  of  all that  had befallen
 since the  rebellion of  Feanor, and  rejoiced seeing  therein the
 seed  of  many  dissensions  among  his  foes.  But  thus  also it
 became known to the Eldar that the Silmarils  yet lived,  and were
 set in  the Iron  Crown that  Morgoth wore  upon his  dark throne.
 For  the Noldor  were a  mighty race  yet, and  few of  them could
 he  so  daunt  that  they  would  do his  will, but  escaping they
 became oft his deadliest foes.                                    
                                                                  
   $83. In  the  Quenta   Noldorinwa  it   is  recounted   in  what
 manner  after Dagor  Aglareb the  lords of  the Noldor  and Sindar
 ordered the land, during the  Siege of  Angband. Here  it suffices
 to say that [added: westernmost at first  Turgon abode  in Nivrost
 south  of  Drengist  between   Eryd  Lomin   and  the   Sea;  but]
 Fingolfin  and  Fingon  held  Hithlum  and  had  their  abode  and
 chief fortress at Eithel Sirion; and they  had horsemen  also that
 rode upon the fields of Ardgalen,  for from  few their  horses had
 increased  swiftly, and  the grass  of Ardgalen  was yet  rich and
 green. Of those horses many of  the sires  came from  Valinor, and
 were given to  Fingolfin by  Maidros in  atonement of  his losses,
 for they had been carried by ship to Losgar.                      
   $84. The  sons  of  Finrod  held  the  land  from  Hithlum  unto
 the  eastern  end  of  Dorthonion.  Inglor  and Orodreth  held the
 pass of  Sirion, but  Angrod and  Egnor held  the north  slopes of
 Dorthonion  as  far  as  Aglon  where began  the March  of Maidros
 aforesaid.                                                        
   $85. Behind  this leaguer  from the  Sea to  Eryd Luin  the wide
 countries of Beleriand, west and east of Sirion, were held in this
 wise.  Though  Fingolfin  of  Hithlum  was  overlord  of  all  the
 Noldor,  Inglor,  well-beloved  of  all  Elves, became  indeed the
 greatest  prince  in  the  land.  For  King  Felagund  he  was  in
 Nargothrond,   whereas   his  brothers   Angrod  and   Egnor  were
 lords of Dorthonion and his vassals; and  he had  also a  fort and
 place of battle in the north, in the  wide pass  between Eredweth-
 rin  and  Dorthonion  through  which  Sirion  flowed  south. There
 stood ah isle amid the river, and  upon it  Inglor built  a mighty
 watchtower:  Minnas-tirith:  and   there,  when   Nargothrond  was
 made, he set Orodreth  as warden.  But upon  either side  of Narog
 all the folk of either race that dwelt in the  lands took  him for
 their  lord,  as  far  south  as  the Mouths  of Sirion,  and from

                     
                                                                 
 Nenning in the West  to the  borders of  Doriath eastward.  But in
 Eglarest, and west of Nenning  to the  Sea, Cirdan  the Shipwright
 was lord, yet ever he was close in friendship with Nargothrond.
  $86  Doriath  in  the midst  of the  land was  the realm  of King
 Thingol;  and  east  the  wide  countries  south  of the  March of
 Maidros, even  to the  borders of  Ossiriand were  held to  be the
 domain of the sons  of Feanor.  But few  dwelt there  save hunters
 and  Grey-elves  wandering,  and  there  Damrod  and  Diriel abode
 and  came  seldom  northward  while  the  Siege   lasted.  Thither
 other of the Elven-lords would ride at whiles, even from  afar, to
 hunt  in  the  green-woods; but  none ever  passed east  over Eryd
 Luin  or  looked  upon  Eriador,  save  the Green-elves  only, who
 had kindred that dwelt yet in the further lands. Thus  little news
 and late came to Beleriand of what  passed in  the regions  of the
 East.                                                            
                                                                 
                               60-445.                            
                                                                 
  $87. For  the  most part  the time  of the  Siege of  Angband was
 a time of gladness, and the earth had peace  under the  new light,
 while  the  swords  of  the  Noldor   restrained  the   malice  of
 Morgoth, and  his thought  being bent  on their  ruin he  gave the
 less heed to aught else  in Middle-earth.  In this  time therefore
 Men  waxed  and  multiplied,  [and  they  had  converse  with  the
 Dark-elves  of  the  Eastlands >]  and among  them were  some that
 had  converse  with  the  Elves  of  Middle-earth,  /  and learned
 much  of them.  [From them  it is  said that  they took  the first
 beginnings  of  the  many   tongues  of   Men.  Thus   they  heard
 rumour  of  the  Blessed  Realms  [sic]  of  the  West and  of the
 Powers  that  dwelt there,  and many  of the  Fathers of  Men, the
 Atanatari,  in   their  wanderings   moved  ever   westward.  This
 passage was rewritten to  read:] From  them it  is said  that they
 took  the  first  beginnings of  the western  tongues of  Men; and
 from them  also they  heard rumour  of the  Blessed Realms  of the
 West  and  of  the  Powers  of Light  that dwelt  there. Therefore
 many of the  Fathers of  Men, the  Atanatari, in  their wanderings
 moved  ever  westward,   fleeing  from   the  darkness   that  had
 ensnared   them.  For   these  Elf-friends   were  Men   that  had
 repented and  rebelled against  the Dark  Power, and  were cruelly
 hunted  and  oppressed  by  those  that  worshipped  it,  and  its
 servants.                                                        

                                                  
                                                                   
                                  64.                               
                                                                   
    $88. Now  the  unquiet  that Ulmo  set in  his heart  returned to
 Turgon  in  Nivrost, and  he gathered  therefore his  folk together,
 even  to  a third part of  the  Noldor  of  Fingolfin's  people (nor
 were  any  of  the  Sindar  among  them),   and  with   their  wives
 and  their  goods  they  departed  secretly   along  the   south  of
 Ered-wethrin,   and   few   knew   whither   they  were   gone.  But
 Turgon  came  to  Gondolin,  and  there  his  folk  pressed  on with
 the building of the city that he had devised in his heart;  and they
 set  a guard  upon it  that none  might come  upon it  from without.
 [This annal was later changed to read:]                            
    $89. Now  the  unquiet  that Ulmo  set in  his heart  returned to
 Turgon  in  Nivrost,  and  he  gathered therefore  many of  his most
 skilled  folk  together  and  led  them  secretly  to  Gondolin, and
 there they began the  building of  the strong  city that  Turgon had
 devised  in  his  heart;  and  they set  a guard  upon it  that none
 might come upon their work from without.                           
                                                                   
                                  65.                               
                                                                   
    $90. Here  with  the  aid   of  the   Noldor  (whose   skill  far
 surpassed  that  of  the  Sindar)   Brithombar  and   Eglarest  were
 walled  about  with  great  walls,  and   fair  towns   were  raised
 within,  and  harbours  with  quays  and  piers  of  stone.  And the
 Tower  of Ingildon  was set  up upon  the cape  west of  Eglarest to
 watch  the  Sea; though  needlessly, as  it proved.  For at  no time
 ever  did  Morgoth  essay  to  build ships  or to  make war  by sea.
 Water  all  his  servants  shunned,  and  to  the  Sea   none  would
 willing go nigh, save in dire need.                                
                                                                   
                                  66.                               
                                                                   
    $91. Now  Galadriel  Finrod's  daughter,   as  hath   been  told,
 dwelt  with  Melian,  and  was  dear  to  her.  And  at  times  they
 would speak together of  Valinor and  the bliss  of old;  but beyond
 the dark hour  of the  death of  the Trees  Galadriel would  not go,
 but fell ever silent.                                              
    $92. And on  a time  Melian said:  'There is  some woe  that lies
 upon thee and  thy kin.  That I  can see  in thee,  but all  else is
 'hidden  from  me;  for  by  no  vision  or  thought can  I perceive
 aught that passed  or passes  in the  West: a  shadow lies  over all
 the  Land of  Aman, and  reaches far  out over  the Sea.  [Wilt thou
 not >] Why wilt thou not tell me more?'                            

 'For  that  woe  is  past,'  answered  Galadriel;  'and I  would take
 what joy  is here  left untroubled  by memory.  And maybe  there is
 woe enough yet to come, though still hope may seem bright.'         
    $93. Then  Melian looked  in her  eyes, and  said: 'I  believe not
 that  the  Noldor  came  forth  as  messengers of  the Valar,  as was
 said at first: not though they  came in  the very  hour of  our need.
 For lo! they  speak never  of the  Valar, nor  have their  high lords
 brought   any   message   to   Thingol,   whether   from   Manwe,  or
 Ulmo,  or  even  from  Olwe  the  king's  brother  and  his  own folk
 that went  over the  Sea. For  what cause,  Galadriel, were  the high
 people  of  the  Noldor  driven  forth  as   exiles  from   Aman?  Or
 what evil lies  on the sons of Feanor  that they  are so  haughty and
 fell? Do I not strike near the truth?'                             
    $94. 'Near,  lady,'  answered  Galadriel, 'save  that we  were not
 driven  forth, but  came of  our own  will, and  against that  of the
 Valar.  And  through  great  peril and  in despite  of the  Valar for
 this  purpose  we  came:  to  take  vengeance  upon  Morgoth,  [or >]
 and  regain  what  he  stole.'  Then  Galadriel  spoke  to  Melian of
 the Silmarils, and of the slaying of King Finwe.  But still  she said
 no  word  of  the Oath,  nor of  the Kinslaying,  nor of  the burning
 of the ships.                                                       
    $95. But  Melian,  who  looked  still  in her  eyes as  she spoke,
 said:  'Now  much  thou  tellest  me,  and  yet  more  I  perceive. A
 darkness  thou wouldst  cast still  over the  long road  from Tirion,
 but  I  see  evil  there,   which  Thingol   should  learn   for  his
 guidance.'                                                          
    'Maybe,' said Galadriel, 'but not of me.'                        
    $96. And  Melian  spoke  then  no  more  of  these   matters  with
 Galadriel; but she told to  King Thingol  all that  she had  heard of
 the Silmarils. 'This is a great matter,' said she, 'a  greater indeed
 than  the  Noldor  themselves  understand.  For  lo!  the   Light  of
 Aman  and  the  fate  of  Arda lie  now locked  in these  things, the
 work  of  Feanor,  who  is  gone.  They  shall  not  be  recovered, I
 foretell,  by  any  power  of  the  Eldar;  and  the  world  shall be
 broken  in  battles  that  are  to  come, ere  they are  wrested from
 Morgoth.  See  now!  Feanor  they  have  slain  (and  many  another I
 guess); but first of all the deaths they have  brought and  yet shall
 bring  was  Finwe  thy  friend. Morgoth  slew him,  ere he  fled from
 Aman.'                                                              
    $97   Then   Thingol   was   silent   a   while  with   grief  and
 foreboding; but  at length  he said:  'Now at  last I  understand the
 coming  of  the  Noldor  out  of  the  West,  at  which   I  wondered

 much  before.  Not  to  our  aid  came  they  (save by  chance); for
 those  that  remain  upon  Middle-earth  the  Valar  will  leave  to
 their  own  devices,  until  the uttermost  need. For  vengeance and
 redress of their loss the Noldor came. Yet all  the more  sure shall
 they be as allies against Morgoth,  with whom  it is  not now  to be
 thought that they shall ever make treaty.'                          
   $98. But  Melian  said:  'Truly  for these  causes they  came; but
 for  others  also.  Beware  of  the  sons of  Feanor! The  shadow of
 the wrath of the Gods lies  upon them;  and they  have done  evil, I
 perceive, both in  Aman and  to their  own kin.  A grief  but lulled
 to sleep lies between the princes of the Noldor.'                   
   $99. And  Thingol  said:  What  is  that  to   me?  Of   Feanor  I
 have  heard  but  report,  which  maketh  him  great indeed.  Of his
 sons I hear little to my pleasure; yet they are likely to  prove the
 deadliest foes of our foe.'                                         
   'Their  words  and  their  counsels  shall  have two  edges,' said
 Melian; and afterward they spake no more of this matter.            
                                                                    
                                  67                                 
                                                                    
   $100. It  was  not  long  ere  whispered   tales  began   to  pass
 among  the  Sindar  concerning  the  deeds  of  the Noldor  ere they
 came  to  Beleriand.  Whence  they  came  is  now  clear  (though it
 was not so then), and as  may well  be thought,  the evil  truth was
 enhanced  and  poisoned  with  lies.  Morgoth  chose the  Sindar for
 this first assault of  his malice,  because they  knew him  not, and
 were   yet  unwary   and  trustful   of  words.   Therefore  Cirdan,
 hearing  these  dark  tales,   was  troubled.   Wise  he   was,  and
 perceived swiftly that, true or false, these tales were put about at
 this time with  malice; but  the malice  he deemed  was that  of the
 princes  of  the  Noldor because  of the  jealousy of  their houses.
 Therefore he  sent messengers  to Thingol  to tell  all that  he had
 heard.                                                              
   $101. And  it  chanced  that  at  that  time  the  sons  of Finrod
 were  again  the guests  of Thingol,  for they  wished to  see their
 sister Galadriel. Then Thingol,  being greatly  moved, spake  in ire
 to Inglor, saying: 'Ill hast thou  done to  me, kinsman,  to conceal
 so great matters  from me.  For behold!  I have  learned of  all the
 evil deeds of the Noldor.'                                          
   $102  But  Inglor  answered:  'What  ill have  I done  thee, lord?
 Or  what  evil  deed  have  the  Noldor  done  in  all thy  realm to
 grieve thee? Neither  against thy  kingship nor  against any  of thy
 folk have they thought evil or done evil.'                          

                
                                                                  
  $103. 'I  marvel  at thee,  son of  Earwen,' said  Thingol, 'that
 thou  wouldst  come  to  the  board  of  thy  kinsman   thus  red-
 handed from the slaying of thy  mother's kin,  and yet  say nought
 in defence, nor yet seek any pardon!'                            
  $104. And  Inglor  was sorely  troubled, but  he was  silent, for
 he  could  not defend  himself, save  by bringing  charges against
 the  other princes  of the  Noldor; and  this he  was loath  to do
 before  Thingol. But  in Angrod's  heart the  memory of  the words
 of Cranthir welled up again with bitterness, and he  cried: 'Lord,
 I know not  what lies  thou hast  heard, nor  whence. But  we come
 not redhanded. Guiltless we came  forth, save  maybe of  folly, to
 listen to the words of fell  Feanor, and  become as  folk besotted
 with wine, and as  briefly. No  evil did  we do  on our  road, but
 suffered  ourselves  great  wrong.  And forgave  it. For  which we
 are  named  tale-bearers to  thee and  treasonable to  the Noldor.
 Untruly as thou knowest, for we  have of  our loyalty  been silent
 before  thee, and  thus earned  thy anger.  But now  these charges
 are not longer to be borne, and the truth  thou shalt  know.' Then
 he spake bitterly against the sons of Feanor, telling of the blood
 at  Alqualonde,  and  the  doom  of  Mandos,  and  the  burning of
 the  ships  at  Losgar.  'Wherefore  should  we  that  endured the
 Grinding  Ice  bear  the  names  of  kinslayers and  traitors?' he
 cried.                                                            
  $105. 'Yet  the  shadow  of  Mandos  lies  on  you   also,'  said
 Melian. But Thingol was  long silent  ere he  spoke. 'Go  now!' he
 said. 'For my heart is hot within me. Later ye may return,  if you
 will. For I will not shut my doors for ever  against you   my kin,
 that were ensnared in an evil that ye did not aid.  With Fingolfin
 and his folk also I will keep friendship,  for they  have bitterly
 atoned for such ill as they did. And  in our  hatred of  the Power
 that wrought all this woe our griefs shall be lost.               
  $106. 'But  hear  this!  Never again  in my  ears shall  be heard
 the tongue of those who  slew my  folk in  Alqualonde! Nor  in all
 my  realm  shall  that  tongue  be openly  spoken, while  my power
 endureth. All the  Sindar shall  hear my  command that  they shall
 neither speak  with the  tongue of  the Noldor  nor answer  to it.
 And all such as use it shall be held slayers of kin  and betrayers
 of kin unrepentant.'                                              
  $107.  Then   the   sons  of   Finrod  departed   from  Menegroth
 with  heavy  hearts,  perceiving  how  the  words of  Mandos would
 ever  be  made true,  and that  none of  the Noldor  that followed
 after  Feanor  could  escape  from  the shadow  that lay  upon his

 house.  And  it  came  to  pass  even  as Thingol  had spoken;  for the
 Sindar  heard  his  word  and  thereafter  throughout   Beleriand  they
 refused  the  tongue  of  the  Noldor,  and  shunned  those  that spoke
 it aloud; but the Exiles took the  Sindarin tongue  in all  their daily
 uses,   [save   only   in  Gondolin   where  Noldor   dwelt  unmingled,
 but  that  was  yet  hidden.  >]  and  the  High  Speech  of  the  West
 was  spoken  only  by  the  lords  of  the  Noldor   among  themselves,
 yet it  lived ever  as a  language of  lore wherever  any of  that folk
 dwelt.                                                                
                                                                      
                                   102.                                
                                                                      
   $108. About   this  time   it  is   recorded  that   Nargothrond  was
 full-wrought,  and  Finrod's  sons  were  gathered  there  to  a  feast
 and  Galadriel  came  from  Doriath  and  dwelt  there  a   while.  Now
 King  Inglor  Felagund  had  no  wife,  and  Galadriel  asked  him  why
 this  was;  but  foresight  came  upon  Felagund as  she spoke,  and he
 said: 'An oath I too shall swear, and must  be free  to fulfill  it and
 go  into  darkness.  Nor  shall anything  of all  my realm  endure that
 a son should inherit.'                                                
   $109. But  it  is  said  that  not  until  that  hour  had  such cold
 thoughts   ruled  him;   for  indeed   she  whom   he  had   loved  was
 Amarie  of  the  Vanyar,  and  she  was  not permitted  to go  with him
 into exile.                                                           
                                                                      
                                   116.                                
                                                                      
   $110. In  this   year  according   to  the   records  of   that  city
 Gondolin  was  full-wrought,  in  fifty  years  after  the   coming  of
 Turgon   from Nivrost.   But  no   tidings  of   this  came   over  the
 mountains,  nor  were  any  of Turgon's  kin bidden  to a  feast. [This
 annal  was  later  struck  out  and  replaced  by the  following rider,
 $$111-13:]                                                            
   $111.  In   this   year  Gondolin   was  full-wrought,   after  fifty
 [added:   and   2]  years   of  secret   toil.  Now   therefore  Turgon
 prepared  to  depart  from  Nivrost,  and  leave  his  fair   halls  in
 Vinyamar   beneath   Mount  Taras;   and  then   [for  the   last  time
 Ulmo  himself  came  to  him  >]  Ulmo  came  to  him  a second  time /
 and  said:  'Now  thou  shalt  go at  last to  Gondolin, Turgon;  and I
 will  set  my power  in the  Vale of  Sirion, so  that none  shall mark
 thy  going,  nor  shall  any  find  there  the  hidden entrance  to thy
 land  against  thy  will.  Longest  of  all the  realms of  the Eldalie
 shall  Gondolin  stand  against  Melkor.  But  love  it  not  too well,
 and  remember  that  the  true  hope of  the Noldor  lieth in  the West
 and cometh from the Sea.'                                             

                   
                                                                     
  $112. And  Ulmo   warned  Turgon   that  he   also  lay   under  the
 Doom  of  Mandos,  which  Ulmo   had  no   power  to   remove.  'Thus
 it may come to pass,' he said, 'that  the curse  of the  Noldor shall
 find  thee  too  ere  the  end,  and treason  shall awake  within thy
 walls. Then shall they be in peril of fire. But if this peril draweth
 nigh,  then  even  from  Nivrost  one  shall come  to warn  thee, and
 from  him  beyond  ruin and  fire hope  shall be  born for  Elves and
 Men.  Leave,  therefore,  in  this house  arms and  a sword,  that in
 years  to  come  he  may  find  them,  and thus  shalt thou  know him
 and  be  not  deceived.'  And  Ulmo  showed  to  Turgon of  what kind
 and  stature  should  be the  mail and  helm and  sword that  he left
 behind.                                                              
  $113. Then  Ulmo  returned  to  the  Sea;  and  Turgon   sent  forth
 all  his folk  (even to  a third  part of  the Noldor  of Fingolfin's
 House,  and  a  yet  greater  host  of the  Sindar), and  they passed
 away,   company   by   company,  secretly,   under  the   shadows  of
 Eryd  Wethion,  and  came  unseen  with  their  wives  and  goods  to
 Gondolin,  and  none  knew  whither  they  were  gone.  And  last  of
 all  Turgon  arose  and went  with his  lords and  household silently
 through  the  hills  and  passed  the  gates  in  the  mountains, and
 they  were  shut.  But  Nivrost  was  empty of  folk and  so remained
 until the ruin of Beleriand.                                         
                                                                     
                                  150.                                
                                                                     
  $114. The  people  of  Cranthir  Feanor's   son  dwelt   beyond  the
 upper  waters  of  Gelion,  about  Lake  Helevorn  under  the  shadow
 of  the  Blue  Mountains. At  this time  it is  said that  they first
 climbed  into  the  mountains  and  looked  eastward,  and  wide  and
 wild  it  seemed  to  them  was  Middle-earth.   Thus  it   was  that
 Cranthir's  folk  first  came  upon  the   Naugrim,  who   after  the
 onslaught  of  Morgoth  and  the  coming  of  the  Noldor  had ceased
 their  traffick  into  Beleriand.  Now,  though  either  people loved
 skill  and  was eager  to learn,  there was  little love  between the
 Noldor   and   the  Dwarves.   For  the   Dwarves  were   secret  and
 quick  to  resentment,  whereas  Cranthir  was  haughty   and  scarce
 concealed  his scorn  for the  unloveliness of  the Naugrim,  and his
 folk  followed  their  lord. Nonetheless,  since both  peoples feared
 and  hated  Morgoth  they  made  alliance,  and   had  of   it  great
 profit.  For  the  Naugrim  learned  many secrets  of craft  in those
 days,  so  that  the  smiths  and  masons  of  Nogrod   and  Belegost
 became  renowned  among  their   kin;  but   the  Noldor   got  great
 wealth  of  iron,  and their  armouries became  filled with  store of

 
                                                                 
 weapons  and  harness  of  war.  Moreover  thereafter,  until the
 power  of  Maidros  was  overthrown,  all  the  traffick  of  the
 dwarf-mines  passed  first  through  the  hands of  Cranthir, and
 thus he won great riches.                                        
                                                                 
                                155.                              
                                                                 
   $115. Here  after  long  quiet  Morgoth  endeavoured   to  take
 Fingolfin at unawares (for he knew of the vigilance  of Maidros);
 and he sent forth an  army into  the white  north, and  it turned
 then west and again south  and came  by the  coasts to  the firth
 of Drengist, and so would enter into  the heart  of the  realm of
 Hithlum. But it  was espied  in time  and taken  in a  trap among
 the hills at the head of the firth, and the most of the Orcs were
 driven  into  the  sea.  This  was not  reckoned among  the great
 battles, and was but the most  dangerous of  the many  trials and
 thrusts  that  Angband  would  make  ever  and  anon  against the
 leaguer. Thereafter there was peace for many  years, and  no open
 assault; for  Morgoth perceived  now that  the Orcs  unaided were
 no match for the Noldor,  save in  such numbers  as he  could not
 yet muster. Therefore  he sought  in his  heart for  new counsel,
 and he bethought him of dragons.                                 
                                                                 
                                260.                              
                                                                 
   $116. Here  Glaurung,  the  first  of  the  Uruloki,  the fire-
 drakes of the  North, came  forth from  Angband's gate  by night.
 He was  yet young  and scarce  half-grown (for  long and  slow is
 the  life  of  those  worms), but  the Elves  fled before  him to
 Erydwethrin  and  to  Dorthonion  in dismay;  and he  defiled the
 fields  of  Ardgalen.  Then  Fingon,  prince  of   Hithlum,  rode
 against  him  with  archers  upon   horseback,  and   hemmed  him
 round  with  a ring  of swift  riders. And  Glaurung in  turn was
 dismayed,  for he  could not  endure their  darts, being  not yet
 come to his full armoury; and he fled back to hell, and  came not
 forth  again for  many years.  But Morgoth  was ill  pleased that
 Glaurung had disclosed himself  over soon;  and after  his defeat
 there was the long peace of wellnigh two  hundred years.  In that
 time there was naught but affrays on  the north-marches,  and all
 Beleriand  prospered  and grew  rich, and  the Noldor  built many
 towers and fair  dwellings and  made many  things of  beauty, and
 many  poesies  and  histories  and  books  of  lore. And  in many
 parts of the land the Noldor  and Sindar  became welded  into one
 folk  and  spoke  the  same tongue;  though ever  this difference

 remained  between  them,  that  the  Noldor  of   purer  race   had  the
 greater   power   of   mind   and   body,   being   both   the  mightier
 warriors  and  sages,  and  they  built  with  stone,  and  loved rather
 the   hill-slopes   and  open   lands.  Whereas   the  Sindar   had  the
 fairer  voices  and  were  more  skilled  in  music  (save  only  Maglor
 son  of  Feanor),  and  loved  the  woods   and  riversides,   and  some
 still  would  wander  far  and  wide  without  settled  abode,  and they
 sang as they went.                                                      
                                                                        
                             [Isfin and Eol]                             
                                                                        
   At this point in the manuscript my father inserted an annal  entry for
   the year 316 concerning Isfin and Eol, replacing the annal  that stood
   in  the  manuscript  under  471, which  was struck  out. He  wrote the
   new  annal  on  the back  of a  page from  an engagement  calendar for
   November  1951;  and  on  the same  page he  added two  further annals
   on the same subject, for the  years 320  and 400.  It is  clearest and
   most convenient to give all four annals (i.e. the original one for 471
   and the three later ones) together here.                              
                                                                        
   $117. [Rejected  annal  for  the  year  471]  In  this year  Isfin the
 White,  sister  of  Turgon,,  wearying  of  the  city,  and  desiring to
 look   again   upon   Fingon   her    brother,   went    from   Gondolin
 against  the  will  and  counsel  of  Turgon;   and  she   strayed  into
 Brethil  and  was  lost  in the  dark forest.  There Eol,  the Dark-elf,
 who  abode  in  the  forest,  found  her and  took her  to wife.  In the
 depths  of  the  wood  he  lived  and  shunned  the  sun,  desiring only
 the starlight of old; for so  he had  dwelt since  the first  finding of
 Beleriand, and took no part in all the deeds of his kin.                
                                                                        
                                   316                                   
                                                                        
   $118. Here  Isfin  the  White,  sister  of  Turgon,  wearying  of  the
 city,  went  from  Gondolin  against  the  [will  >]  wish   of  Turgon.
 And  she  went  not  to  Fingon,  as  he  bade, but  sought the  ways to
 the  East,  to  the  land  of  Celegorm  and  his brethren,  her friends
 of  old  in  Valinor. But  she strayed  from her  escort in  the shadows
 of  Nan  Dungorthin,  and  went  on  alone;  and  she  came  at  last to
 Nan  Elmoth.  There  she  came   into  the   enchantments  of   Eol  the
 Dark-elf,  who  abode  in  the  wood  and  shunned  the   sun,  desiring
 only  the  starlight  of  old.  And  Eol  took  her  to  wife,  and  she
 abode  with  him,  and  no  tidings  of  her  came  to  any of  her kin;
 for  Eol  suffered her  not to  stray far,  nor to  fare abroad  save in
 the dark or the twilight.                                               

                               320.   
                                                                
  $119. Here Isfin  the White  bore a  son in  Nan Elmoth  to Eol
 the Dark-elf; and she would  name him  (?) Fingol  [added: dur),
 but Eol named him Glindur [later  > Maeglin];  for that  was the
 name of the metal of Eol, which he himself  devised, and  it was
 dark, supple, and yet strong; and even so was his son.          
                                                                
                               400.                              
                                                                
  $120. Here Isfin  and her  son Glindur  [later >  Maeglin] fled
 from  Eol  the  Dark-elf in  Nan Elmoth,  and came  to Gondolin,
 and they were received with joy  by Turgon,  who had  deemed his
 sister dead or lost beyond finding. But Eol, following them with
 stealth,  found the  Hidden Way,  and was  brought by  the Guard
 to  Turgon.  Turgon  received  him  well, but  he was  wroth and
 filled with hatred of the Noldor, and spoke evilly, and demanded
 to  depart with  his son.  And when  that was  denied to  him he
 sought to slay Glindur [not emended] with  a poisoned  dart, but
 Isfin sprang before her son, and was wounded,  and died  in that
 day. Therefore Eol was doomed to death, and  cast from  the high
 walls of Gondolin; and he cursed his son as he  died, foreboding
 that he should die a like death. But  Glindur [later  > Maeglin]
 abode in Gondolin and became great among its lords.             
                                                                
                               370.                              
                                                                
  $121. Here Beor, eldest of the Fathers of Men of the West,      
 was born east of the mountains.                                 
                                                                
                               388.                              
  $122. Here Haleth the Hunter was born in Eriador.             
                                                                
                               390.                              
                                                                
  $123. Here  also  in  Eriador  was   born  Hador   the  Golden-
 haired,  whose  house  was after  the most  renowned of  all the
 kindreds of the Elf-friends.                                    
                                                                
                               400                               
                                                                
  $124  Here  King   Inglor  Felagund   went  a-hunting   in  the
 eastern woods,  as is  told in  the Quenta,  and he  passed into
 Ossiriand,  and  there  came upon  Beor and  his men,  that were
 new-come   over  the   mountains.  Beor   became  a   vassal  of

             
                                                                 
 Felagund,  and  went  back  with him  into the  west-country, and
 dwelt  with him  until his  death. There  was great  love between
 them. In eastern Beleriand was born Bregolas son of Beor.        
                                                                 
                               402.                               
                                                                 
  $125. Here  there  was  fighting  on  the   north-marches,  more
 bitter than there had been since the routing of Glaurung; for the
 Orcs attempted to  pierce the  pass of  Aglon. There  Maidros and
 Maglor  were  aided  by  the sons  of Finrod,  and Beor  was with
 them, the first  of Men  to draw  sword in  behalf of  the Eldar.
 In this year Barahir son  of Beor  was born,  who after  dwelt in
 Dorthonion.                                                      
                                                                 
                               413.                               
  $126. Hundor son of Haleth was born.                             
                                                                 
                               417.                               
                                                                 
  $127. Galion the Tall, son of Hador, was born [beneath the       
 shadows of Eryd Lindon >] in Eriador.                            
                                                                 
                               419.                               
                                                                 
  $128. Gundor son of Hador was born beneath the shadows           
 of Eryd Lindon.                                                  
                                                                 
                               420.                               
                                                                 
  $129. In  this  year  Haleth  the  Hunter  came  into  Beleriand
 out  of  Eriador.  Soon  after came  also Hador  the Goldenhaired
 with great companies of  Men. Haleth  remained in  Sirion's vale,
 and  his  folk  wandered  much in  hunting, owning  allegiance to
 no prince; but their dwellings were deep in the forest of Brethil
 between  Taiglin  and  Sirion,  where   none  before   had  dwelt
 because of the greatness and darkness of  the trees.  Hador hear-
 ing that there was room and need  of folk  in Hithlum,  and being
 come of a  northland people,  became a  vassal of  Fingolfin; and
 he strengthened greatly the armies of the king, and he  was given
 wide  lands in  Hithlum in  the country  of Dor-Lomin.  There was
 ever great love between  the Eldar  and the  house of  Hador, and
 the folk of  Hador were  the first  of Men  to forsake  their own
 tongue and speak the elven-tongue of Beleriand.                  
  $130. It is said  that in  these matters  none save  Inglor took
 counsel  with  King  Thingol. And  he was  ill pleased,  for that
 reason and  because he  was troubled  with dreams  concerning the

   
                                                                   
 coming  of  Men, ere  ever the  first tidings  of them  were heard.
 Therefore  he  commanded  that   Men  should   take  no   lands  to
 dwell in save in  the north,  in Hithlum  and Dorthonion,  and that
 the  princes whom  they served  should be  answerable for  all that
 they  did.  And  he  said,  Into  Doriath shall  no Man  come while
 my  realm lasts,  not even  those of  the house  of Beor  who serve
 Inglor the beloved.'                                               
                                                                   
   $131. Melian  said  naught  to  him  at that  time, but  she said
 after  to  Galadriel:  'Now  the  world  runs  on swiftly  to great
 tidings. And lo! one  of Men,  even of  Beor's house,  shall indeed
 come, and the Girdle  of Melian  shall not  restrain him,  for doom
 greater than  my power  shall send  him; and  the songs  that shall
 spring  from  that  coming  shall endure  when all  Middle-earth is
 changed.'                                                          
                                                                   
                                 422.                               
                                                                   
   $132. Here   at  the   prayer  of   Inglor  Thingol   granted  to
 Haleth's  people  to  live  in  Brethil;  for  they  were  in  good
 friendship with the woodland Elves.                                
   $133. In  this  time,  the  strength  of Men  being added  to the
 Noldor,  their  hope  rose  high,  and  Morgoth  was  more straitly
 enclosed; for the folk  of Hador,  being hardy  to endure  cold and
 long wandering, feared not at times to  go far  into the  North and
 keep  watch  on  any   movements  of   the  Enemy.   Now  Fingolfin
 began  to  ponder  an  assault  upon  Angband;  for  he  knew  that
 they  lived  in  danger  while Morgoth  was free  to labour  in his
 deep  mines,  devising  what  evils  none  could  foretell  ere  he
 should  reveal  them.  But  because  the  land  was  grown  so fair
 most  of  the  Eldar  were content  with matters  as they  were and
 slow to begin an  assault in  which many  must surely  perish, were
 it in victory  or defeat.  Therefore his  designs were  delayed and
 came in the end to naught.                                         
   $134. The  Men  of  the   Three  Houses   now  grew   and  multi-
 plied; and they learned  wisdom and  craft and  fair speech  of the
 Eldar,  and  became  more  like to  them than  any other  race have
 been, yet they were gladly subject to the Elf-lords and  loyal; and
 there was as yet no grief between the two kindreds.                
   $135. The  men  of  Beor  were dark  or brown  of hair,  but fair
 of  face,  with  grey  eyes;  of shapely  form, having  courage and
 endurance, yet they were no greater  in stature  than the  Eldar of
 that day. For the Noldor indeed were tall as are in the latter days
 men  of  great  might  and majesty.  But the  people of  Hador were

                
                                                                     
 of  yet  greater  strength  and  stature,  mighty among  the Children
 of  Eru,  ready  in  mind,  bold  and  steadfast.  Yellowhaired  they
 were  for  the  most  part  and  blue-eyed * and  their   women  were
 tall  and  fair.  Like  unto  them  were the  woodmen of  Haleth, yet
 somewhat broader and less high.                                      
                                                                     
                                  423.                                
                                                                     
  $136. Hador's folk entered Dorlomin. [This annal u as a late         
 pencilled addition.]                                                 
                                                                     
                              [425 >] 424.                            
                                                                     
  $137. Baragund son of Bregolas son of Beor was born in               
 Dorthonion.                                                          
                                                                     
                                  428.                                
  $138. Belegund his brother was born.                                 
                                                                     
                                  432.                                
                                                                     
  $139. Beren  son  of  Barahir  son  of   Beor  was   born  in       
 Dorthonion,  who  was  after  named  Erchamion  the One-handed       
 and  Camlost  the  Emptyhanded.  His  mother  was  Emeldir the       
 Manhearted.                                                          
                                                                     
                                  436.                                
                                                                     
  $140. Hundor son of Haleth wedded Glorwendil daughter                
 of Hador.                                                            
                                                                     
                                  441.                                
                                                                     
  $141. Hurin  the  Steadfast son  of Galion  son of  Hador was       
 born  in  Hithlum. In  the same  year was  born Handir  son of       
 Hundor.                                                              
                                                                     
                              [445 >] 443.                            
                                                                     
  $142.  Morwen   Eledwen,  the   Elf-sheen,   was    born,   daughter
 of  Baragund.  She  was  the  fairest  of all  mortal maidens  of the
 Elder Days.                                                          
                                                                     
                                  444.                                
  $143. Huor brother of Hurin was born.                                
                                                                     
  (* Not so was Turin, but his mother was of Beor's house.)           

                                 450.                 
                                                                 
   $144.  Rian   daughter   of   Belegund,   mother  of   Tuor  the
 Blessed, was born. In this year Beor the Old, father of  Men, died
 of [old age >] age. The  Eldar saw  then for  the first  time [the
 death of weariness, without wound or  sickness; by  late pencilled
 change  >] the  swift waning  of the  life of  Men and  the coming
 of death without wound  or grief;  and they  wondered at  the fate
 of Men, grieving greatly at the  short span  that was  allotted to
 them. Bregolas then ruled the people of Beor.                    
                                                                 
                                455.                              
                                                                 
   $145. The  Fell  Year.  Here  came  an end  of peace  and mirth.
 In the winter, at the year's beginning,  Morgoth unloosed  at last
 his  long-gathered  strength,  and  he  sought  now to  break with
 one  great  blow  the  leaguer  of Angband,  and to  overthrow the
 Noldor  and  destroy  Beleriand  utterly.  The  Battle  began sud-
 denly on the night of mid-winter, and fell first and  most heavily
 upon  the  sons  of Finrod.  This is  named the  Dagor Bragollach,
 the  Battle  of  Sudden  Flame.  Rivers  of  fire  ran  down  from
 Thangorodrim,  and  Glaurung,  Father  of  Dragons, came  forth in
 his full might. The green plains  of Ardgalen  were burned  up and
 became  a  drear  desert  without  growing  thing;  and thereafter
 they were called Anfauglith, the Gasping Dust.                   
   $146.  In   the   assault  upon   the  defences   of  Dorthonion
 Angrod and Egnor,  sons of  Finrod, fell,  and with  them Bregolas
 was slain and a great  part of  the warriors  of Beor's  folk. But
 Barahir  his  brother was  in the  fighting further  westward nigh
 the  passes  of  Sirion.  There  King  Inglor  Felagund, hastening
 from  the  south,  was  defeated  and  was  surrounded  with small
 company in the Fen of Serech.  But Barahir  came thither  with the
 doughtiest  of  his men,  and broke  the leaguer  of the  Orcs and
 saved the Elven-king.  Then Inglor  gave to  Barahir his  ring, an
 heirloom of his house, in  token of  the oath  that he  swore unto
 Barahir to render  whatsoever service  was asked  in hour  of need
 to him or to any of his kin.  Then Inglor  went south  to Nargoth-
 rond, but Barahir  returned to  Dorthonion to  save what  he could
 of the people of Beor.                                           
   $147.  Fingolfin   and   Fingon   had   marched    indeed   from
 Hithlum to the aid of  the sons  of Finrod,  but they  were driven
 back  to  the  mountains  with  grievous  loss.  Hador,  now  aged
 [later > old and '65' added],  fell defending  his lord  at Eithel

 Sirion, and with him fell Gundor his [added later:  younger] son,
 pierced  with  many  arrows.  Then  Galion  the  Tall   took  the
 lordship of the House of Hador.                                 
   $148. Against  the  March of  Maidros there  came also  a great
 army   and  the   sons  of   Feanor  were   overwhelmed.  Maidros
 and  Maglor  held  out valiantly  upon the  Hill of  Himring, and
 Morgoth  could  not  yet take  the great  fortress that  they had
 there  built;  but  the  Orcs  broke  through  upon  either side,
 through   Aglon   and   between  Gelion   and  Celon,   and  they
 ravaged far into East  Beleriand driving  the Eldar  before them,
 and  Cranthir  and  Damrod  and  Diriel  fled  into   the  south.
 Celegorn  and  Curufin  held  strong  forces  behind  Aglon,  and
 many  horsed  archers,  but  they  were overthrown,  and Celegorn
 and  Curufin  hardly  escaped,  and  passed  westward  along  the
 north  borders  of Doriath  with such  mounted following  as they
 could save, and came thus at length to the vale of Sirion.      
   $149. Turgon was not  in that  battle, nor Haleth, nor  any but
 few  of  Haleth's  men.  [The  following passage,  to the  end of
 $150, was struck out later: It is said that in the  autumn before
 the  Sudden  Flame,  Hurin   son  of   Galion  was   dwelling  as
 fosterson  (as  the  custom  was  among  the  northern  men) with
 Haleth,  and  Handir  and  Hurin,  being of  like age,  went much
 together; and hunting in Sirion's vale they  found [by  chance or
 fate later >] by fate or the will of Ulmo  I the  hidden entrance
 into  the  valley of  Tumladin where  stood Gondolin  the guarded
 city.  There  they  were taken  by the  watch and  brought before
 Turgon,  and  looked  upon  the  city  of  which none  that dwelt
 outside  yet  knew  aught,  save  Thorondor  King of  Eagles. But
 Turgon  welcomed  them,   for  [messages   and  dreams   sent  by
 Ulmo, Lord of Waters,  up the  streams of  Sirion had  warned him
 that a time of grief approached in  which he  would have  need of
 the  help of  Men. >]  Ulmo, Lord  of Waters,  had warned  him to
 look  kindly  upon  the  folk  of the  House.of Hador,  from whom
 great help should come to him at need.                          
   $150. It  is  said  that Turgon  had great  liking for  the boy
 Hurin,  and  wished  to  keep  him  in  Gondolin;  but  Thorondor
 brought dread tidings of the great battle,  and Handir  and Hurin
 wished to depart to share the troubles  of their  folk. Therefore
 Turgon let them go, but they swore  to him  oaths of  secrecy and
 never  revealed  Gondolin;  yet  at   this  time   Hurin  learned
 something  of  the  counsels  of  Turgon,  though  he  kept  them
 hidden in his heart.]                                           

   $151.  When   [later  >   But  when]   Turgon  learned   of  the
 breaking of the leaguer of Angband, he  sent secret  messengers to
 the mouths of Sirion and to the Isle of Balar and there  they [the
 following passage  was struck  out and  replaced at  the time  o f
 writing:  built  many  swift  ships.  Thence  many  set  sail upon
 Turgon's errand, seeking for Valinor,  to ask  for pardon  and for
 aid  of  the  Valar,  but  none  came  ever  to  the West  and few
 returned.                                                        
   $152. Now  it  seemed  to  Fingolfin, King  of the  Noldor, that
 he beheld  the utter  ruin of  his people,  and the  defeat beyond
 redress of  all their  houses, and  he was  filled with  wrath and
 despair.  Then  he  rode  forth  alone  to  the gates  of Angband]
 endeavoured  to  build ships  that might  sail into  the uttermost
 West on Turgon's  errand, seeking  for Valinor,  there to  ask for
 pardon and the aid of the Valar. But  the Noldor  had not  the art
 of shipbuilding, and all the  craft that  they built  foundered or
 were  driven  back  by  the  winds. But  Turgon ever  maintained a
 secret refuge upon the Isle of  Balar, and  the building  of ships
 was never wholly abandoned.                                      
   $153. [Original  date  here  456  struck  out  at  the  time  of
 writing]  Morgoth  learning  now  of  the defeat  of the  sons of
 Finrod,  and  the  scattering  of  the  people  of  Feanor, hemmed
 Fingolfin  in  Hithlum  and  sent  a  great  force  to  attack the
 westward pass into the vales  of Sirion;  and Sauron  his lieuten-
 ant  (who  in  Beleriand  was  named  Gorsodh)  led  that assault,
 and his hosts broke through and besieged  the fortress  of Inglor,
 Minnas-tirith  upon  Tolsirion.  And this  they took  after bitter
 fighting,  and  Orodreth  the brother  of Inglor  who held  it was
 driven  out.  There  he would  have been  slain, but  Celegorn and
 Curufin came up with their riders,  and such  other force  as they
 could gather, and they fought fiercely, and  stemmed the  tide for
 a  while;  and  thus  Orodreth  escaped  and came  to Nargothrond.
 Thither  also at  last before  the might  of Sauron  fled Celegorn
 and  Curufin  with  small  following; and  they were  harboured in
 Nargothrond  gratefully,  and  the  griefs  that  lay  between the
 houses of Finrod and Feanor were for that time forgotten.        
   $154. But  Sauron  took  Minnas-tirith  and   made  it   into  a
 watch-tower for Morgoth, and  filled it  with evil;  for he  was a
 sorcerer and a master of phantoms  and terror.  And the  fair isle
 of  Tolsirion  became  accursed  and  was  called Tol-in-Gaurhoth,
 Isle of Werewolves; for Sauron fed many of these evil things.

                                 456.                              
                                                                  
   $155. Now  Fingolfin,  King  of  the   Noldor,  beheld   (as  him
 seemed)  the  utter  ruin  of  his  people,  and the  defeat beyond
 redress  of  all their  houses, and  he was  filled with  wrath and
 despair. Therefore he did on his  silver arms,  and took  his white
 helm, and his sword Ringil, and his blue shield set with a  star of
 crystal,  and  mounting  upon  Rochallor  his  great steed  he rode
 forth  alone  and  none  might  restrain  him.  And he  passed over
 the Anfauglith like a wind amid the dust, and  all that  beheld his
 onset  fled  in  amaze, deeming  that Orome  himself was  come, for
 a great madness of ire was upon him,  so that  his eyes  shone like
 the eyes of the Valar.  Thus he  came alone  to Angband's  gate and
 smote  upon  it  once  again,  and  sounding  a challenge  upon his
 silver  horn he  called Morgoth  himself to  come forth  to combat,
 crying:  'Come forth,  thou coward  king, to  fight with  thine own
 hand!  Den-dweller,  wielder of  thralls, liar  and lurker,  foe of
 Gods and Elves, come! For I would see thy craven face.'           
   $156. Then  Morgoth  came.  For  he  could  not  refuse   such  a
 challenge  before  the face  of his  captains. But  Fingolfin with-
 stood  him, though  he towered  above the  Elven-king like  a storm
 above  a  lonely  tree,  and  his  vast  black   shield  unblazoned
 overshadowed  the  star  of  Fingolfin  like  a  thundercloud. Mor-
 goth  fought  with  a  great hammer,  Grond, that  he wielded  as a
 mace, and Fingolfin fought  with Ringil.  Swift was  Fingolfin, and
 avoiding  the  strokes  of Grond,  so that  Morgoth smote  only the
 ground  (and  at  each  blow  a  great  pit  was made),  he wounded
 Morgoth  seven  times  with  his  sword; and  the cries  of Morgoth
 echoed  in  the north-lands.  But wearied  at last  Fingolfin fell,
 beaten  to  the  earth  by  the  hammer  of  Angband,  and  Morgoth
 set his foot upon his neck and crushed him.                       
   $157. In  his  last  throe  Fingolfin  pinned  the  foot  of  his
 Enemy  to  the  earth  with  Ringil,  and  the  black  blood gushed
 forth  and  filled  the  pits  of  Grond.  Morgoth  went  ever halt
 thereafter.  Now  lifting  the  body  of the  fallen king  he would
 break  it  and  cast  it  to  his  wolves,  but   Thorondor  coming
 suddenly  assailed  him  and  marred his  face, and  snatching away
 the corse  of Fingolfin  bore it  aloft to  the mountains  far away
 and laid it in a high place north of the valley of  Gondolin; there
 the eagles piled a great cairn of stones. There was  lamentation in
 Gondolin  when  Thorondor  brought  the  tidings,  for  [the people
 of the hidden city  were all  later >]  many of  the people  of the

      
                                                                  
 hidden  city  were  /  Noldor of  Fingolfin's house.  Now Rochallor
 had  stayed  beside  the  king  until  the end,  but the  wolves of
 Angband  assailed  him,  and he  escaped from  them because  of his
 great swiftness, and ran at last  to Hithlum,  and broke  his heart
 and died.  Then in  great sorrow  Fingon took  the lordship  of the
 house  of  Fingolfin  and   the  kingdom   of  the   Noldor.  [Late
 pencilled addition: But his young son (?Findor)  [sic]  Gilgalad he
 sent to the Havens.]                                              
                                                                  
   $ 158.   Now  Morgoth's   power  overshadowed   the  north-lands,
 but  [struck  out: still]  Barahir would  not retreat  and defended
 still  the  remant  of  his  land  and  folk  in   Dorthonion.  But
 Morgoth  hunted  down  all  that  there remained  of Elves  or Men,
 and  he  sent  Sauron  against  them;  and  all  the forest  of the
 northward slopes of that  land was  turned into  a region  of dread
 and dark  enchantment, so  that it  was after  called Taur-nu-Fuin,
 the Forest under Nightshade.                                      
   $159. At  last  so  desperate  was  the  case  of   Barahir  that
 Emeldir  the  Manhearted  his  wife  (whose  mind  was   rather  to
 fight beside her son and  husband than  to flee)  gathered together
 all the women and children that were still left,  and gave  arms to
 those  that  would  bear  them,  and  led  them into  the mountains
 that lay behind, and  so by  perilous paths,  until they  came with
 loss and misery at last to  Brethil. And  some were  there received
 into  Haleth's  folk,  and  some  passed  on  to  Dorlomin  and the
 people   of   Galion   Hador's  son.   (Among  these   were  Morwen
 Eledhwen   daughter   of   Baragund,    and   Rian    daughter   of
 Belegund.)  But  none  ever  again  saw the  menfolk that  they had
 left. For these were slain one by one, or fled, until at  last only
 Barahir  and  Beren  his  son,  and Baragund  and Belegund  sons of
 Bregolas, were left,  and with  them [eight  >] nine  desperate men
 whose   names   were   long   remembered   in   song:   Dagnir  and
 Ragnor,  Radhruin  and  Dairuin  and  Gildor,  Urthel   and  Arthad
 and   Hathaldir,   and   Gorlim   Unhappy.  Outlaws   without  hope
 they became, for their  dwellings were  destroyed, and  their wives
 and children  slain or  taken or  fled with  Emeldir. No  help came
 to them and they were hunted as wild beasts.                      
                                                                  
                                 458.                              
                                                                  
   $160. Here Haleth and his men fought with the Orcs that          
 came down Sirion. In this battle they had help out of Doriath     
 (for  they  dwelt  upon  its  west-march),  and  Beleg  the  Bowman

 chief  of  the  march-wards  of  Thingol  brought  great  strength of
 the  Eglath  armed  with  axes  into  Brethil;  and issuing  from the
 deeps  of  the  forest  they  took  an  Orc-legion  at  unawares  and
 destroyed  it.  Thus  for a  while the  black tide  out of  the North
 was  stemmed  in  that  region  and the  Orcs did  not dare  to cross
 the Taiglin for many years after.                                    
                                                                     
   At this point my father inserted into  the manuscript  an extensive
   rider, replacing the rejected passage in annal 455 ($$149-50). This
   rider was written on the backs  of two  sheets from  the engagement
   calendar for 1951 (see p. 47), covering weeks in August - September
   and December of that year.                                         
                                                                     
   $161. It is said  that at  this time  Hurin and  Huor, the  sons of
 Galion,  were  dwelling  with  Haleth  [added  later:  their kinsman]
 as  fostersons  (as  the  custom  then   was  among   northern  Men);
 and  they  went  both  to  battle with  the Orcs,  even Huor,  for he
 would  not  be  restrained,  though  he  was  but  thirteen  years in
 age.  And  being  with  a  company that  was cut  off from  the rest,
 they  were  pursued  to  the  ford  of  Brithiach;  and   there  they
 would  have  been  taken  or  slain,  but  for  the  power  of  Ulmo,
 which was still strong  in Sirion.  Therefore a  mist arose  from the
 river  and  hid  them  from  their  enemies,  and  they  escaped into
 Dimbar, and  wandered in  the hills  beneath the  sheer walls  of the
 Crisaegrim.  There  Thorondor  espied  them,  and  sent   two  Eagles
 that  took  them  and  bore  them  up  and  brought  them  beyond the
 mountains  to  the secret  vale of  Tumladen and  the hidden  city of
 Gondolin, which no man else had yet seen.                            
   $162.  Then   they   were   led   before   King   Turgon,   and  he
 welcomed  them,  for  Ulmo   had  counselled   him  to   deal  kindly
 with  the  House  of  Hador,  whence  great   help  should   come  to
 him  at  need.  And  Hurin  and  Huor  dwelt as  his guests  for well
 nigh  a  year;  and  it  is  said  that  at  this time  Hurin learned
 something  of  the  counsels  and  purposes  of  Turgon.  For  Turgon
 had  great  liking for  Hurin, and  for Huor  his brother,  and spoke
 much  with  them;  and  he  wished  to  keep  them  in  Gondolin, out
 of love and not for his  law only.  Now it  was the  law of  the king
 that  no  stranger  who  found  the   way  in,   or  looked   on  the
 guarded  realm,  should  ever  depart  again until  such time  as the
 king  should  [come  forth  from  hiding  >]  open  the  leaguer  and
 the hidden people should come forth.                                 
   $163. But  Hurin  and  Huor   desired  to   return  to   their  own
 kin,  and  share  in the  wars and  griefs that  now beset  them. And

     
                                                                         
 Hurin  said  to  Turgon:  Lord,  we  are  but   mortal  men,   and  unlike
 the   Eldar.   They   may   endure  long   years,  awaiting   battle  with
 their  enemies  in  some  far  distant  day.  But  for  us time  is short,
 and   our   hope   and   strength  soon   withereth.  Moreover   we  found
 not  the  road  hither,  and  indeed  we  know   not  surely   where  this
 city  standeth;  for  we  were  brought   in  fear   and  wonder   by  the
 high ways of the air, and in mercy our eyes were veiled.'                
   $164.  Then   Turgon   yielded   to   their   prayer,   and   said:  'By
 the  way  that  ye  came  ye  have  leave  to  depart,  if   Thorondor  is
 willing. I grieve at this parting,  yet in  a little  while, as  the Eldar
 account it, we may meet again.'                                          
   $165. But  it  is  said  that  [Glindur  later  >]  Maeglin,  the king's
 sister-son,  grieved  not  at  all  at  their going,  [save only  later >]
 though   he   begrudged   it/   that   in  this   the  king   showed  them
 favour,  for  he  loved  not  the  kindred  of  Men;  and  he  said: 'Your
 grace  is  greater  than  ye  know,  and  the  law  is  become  less stern
 than  aforetime,  or  else   no  choice   would  be   given  you   but  to
 abide here to your life's end.'                                          
   $166.  'The   king's   grace   is   great   indeed,'   answered   Hurin;
 'but  if  we  have  not  thy  trust  then  oaths  we  will take.'  And the
 brethren  swore  never   to  reveal   the  counsels   of  Turgon   and  to
 keep  secret  all  that  they  had  seen  in  his  realm.  Then  they took
 their  leave,  and  the  Eagles  coming  bore  them  away  and   set  them
 down  in  Dor  Lomin;  and  their  kinsfolk  rejoiced  to  see  them,  for
 messages   from   Brethil   had   reported   that   they  were   slain  or
 taken  by  the  Orcs.  But  though  they  told  that  they  had   dwelt  a
 while  in  honour  in  the  halls  of  King  Turgon,   to  none,   kin  or
 stranger,  would  they  ever  speak  of  the  manner of  his land,  or its
 ordering,   or   where  upon   earth  it   might  be   found.  Nonetheless
 the  strange  fortune  of  the  sons  of  Galion,  and   their  friendship
 with  Turgon,  became   known  far   and  wide,   and  reached   the  ears
 of the servants of Morgoth.                                              
                                                                         
   The rider ends here, and I return to the original text of the Annals.
                                                                         
                                    460.                                  
                                                                         
   $167.  The   forest   of   Dorthonion   rose   southward    into   moun-
 tainous  moors.  There  lay  a  lake,  Tarn-aeluin, in  the east  of those
 highlands,  and  wild  heaths  were  about  it,  and  all  that  land  was
 pathless  and  untamed;  for  even  in   the  days   of  the   Long  Peace
 none  had  dwelt  there.  But  the  waters  of  Tarn-aeluin  were  held in
 reverence;  for  they  were  clear  and  blue  by  day  and by  night were

 a mirror for the stars. Melian herself, it was said,  had hallowed
 that  water  in  days  of  old.  Thither  Barahir and  his outlaws
 withdrew,  and  there  made  their  lair,  and  Morgoth  could not
 discover  it.  But  the  rumour of  the deeds  of Barahir  and his
 twelve  men went  far and  wide, and  enheartened those  that were
 under  the  thraldom  of  Morgoth;  and  he   therefore  commanded
 Sauron to find and destroy the rebels  speedily. Elsewhere  in the
 Quenta  and the  Lay of  Leithian is  much told  of this,  and how
 Sauron  ensnared  Gorlim  by a  phantom of  his wife  Eilinel, and
 tormented him and  cozened him,  so that  he betrayed  the hidings
 of  Barahir.  Thus  at last  the outlaws  were surrounded  and all
 slain, save Beren son of Barahir. For Barahir his father  had sent
 him  on  a  perilous errand  to spy  upon the  ways of  the Enemy,
 and he was far afield when the lair was  taken, and  returned only
 to find the bodies of the slain.                                 
   $168. Then Beren  pursued the  Orcs that  had slain  his father,
 and  coming  upon  their camp,  at Rivil's  Well above  Serech, he
 entered it and slew the  captain even  as he  boasted that  he was
 the  slayer  of  Barahir;  and he  snatched from  him the  hand of
 Barahir  that had  been cut  off as  a token  for Sauron.  Thus he
 regained the Ring of Felagund that his father had worn.          
   $169. Thereafter  escaping from  the Orcs  Beren dwelt  still in
 those lands  as a  solitary outlaw  for four  years, and  did such
 deeds  of single-handed  daring that  Morgoth put  a price  on his
 head no less than upon the head of Fingon King of the Noldor.
                                                                 
                                462.                              
                                                                 
   $170. Here  Morgoth  renewed  his   assaults,  seeking   to  ad-
 vance  further  into  Beleriand  and  secure his  hold southwards.
 For great though his victory had  been in  the Bragollach,  and he
 had  done  grievous  damage  then  and  in the  year after  to his
 enemies, yet his  own loss  had been  no less.  And now  the Eldar
 had recovered from their  first dismay  and were  slowly regaining
 what  they  had  lost.  Dorthonion  he  now  held  and  had estab-
 lished Sauron in the pass of Sirion; but in the  east he  had been
 foiled. Himring stood  firm. The  army that  had driven  into East
 Beleriand  had  been  broken   by  Thingol   on  the   borders  of
 Doriath, and  part had  fled away  south never  to return  to him,
 part retreating north had been  stricken by  a sortie  of Maidros,
 while  those  that  ventured  near  the  mountains were  hunted by
 the Dwarves. And still upon his flank Hithlum stood firm.        
   $171. He  resolved,  therefore,  now   to  send   force  against

                                                                 
                                                                  
 Hithlum; for in  the eastward  war he  hoped ere  long to  have new
 help  unforeseen  by  the  Eldar.  The  assault  upon  Hithlum  was
 bitter, but it was repelled from the passes of  Erydwethrin. There,
 however, in the siege of the fortress of  Eithel Sirion  Galion was
 slain, for he held it on behalf of King Fingon.  Hurin his  son was
 but  then  new  come to  manhood, but  he was  mighty in  heart and
 strength,  and  he  defeated  the  Orcs  and  drove them  with loss
 from the walls into the  sands of  Anfauglith. Thereafter  he ruled
 the  House  of  Hador.  [Added subsequently:]  Of less  stature was
 he  than  his  father  (or  his  son after  him), but  tireless and
 enduring in body; lithe and swift he was, after  the manner  of his
 mother's kin, the daughter of Haleth.                             
   $172. But  King  Fingon  with  most  of   the  Noldor   was  hard
 put  to  it  to  hold  back  the  army  of  Angband that  came down
 from  the  north.  Battle  was  joined  upon  the  very  plains  of
 Hithlum,  and  Fingon  was  outnumbered;   but  timely   help  came
 from Cirdan. His ships in great strength  sailed into  Drengist and
 there landed a force  that came  up in  the hour  of need  upon the
 west  flank  of  the  enemy.  Then  the Eldar  had the  victory and
 the Orcs  broke and  fled, pursued  by the  horsed archers  even to
 the Iron Mountains.                                               
                                                                  
                                 463.                              
                                                                  
   $173. In   this  year   new  tidings   came  to   Beleriand:  the
 Swarthy  Men  came  out  of  Eriador, and  passing north  about the
 Eryd  Luin  entered  into  Lothlann.  Their  coming was  not wholly
 unlooked-for,   since   the   Dwarves   had  warned   Maidros  that
 hosts  of  Men  out  of  the further  East were  journeying towards
 Beleriand.  They  were  short  and  broad, long  and strong  in the
 arm,  and  grew  much  hair on  face and  breast; their  locks were
 dark as  were their  eyes, and  their skins  were sallow  or swart.
 But they were not all of one  kind, in  looks or  in temper,  or in
 tongue.  Some  were  not  uncomely  and  were  fair  to  deal with;
 some were grim and ill-favoured and of  little trust.  Their houses
 were  many,  and  there  was  little  love  among  them.  They  had
 small liking for the Elves, and for the most part loved  rather the
 Naugrim  of  the  mountains;  but  they were  abashed by  the lords
 of the Noldor, whose like they had not before encountered.        
   $174.  But   Maidros,   knowing  the   weakness  of   the  Noldor
 and the Elf-friends,  whereas the  pits of  Angband seemed  to hold
 store  inexhaustible  and  ever renewed,  made alliance  with these
 new-come   Men,   and   gave  them   dwellings  both   in  Lothlann

 north of the March, and in the lands south of it. Now the two            
 chieftains                                                               
                                                                         
   From  this  point  there  are  two  parallel versions  of the  text (the
   remainder  of  the  annal  concerning  the  Swarthy  Men  and  the story
   of  Beren and  Luthien); on  the manuscript  a secretary  wrote 'Version
   I'  (the  first  and  much  shorter  version)  and  'Version  II'  (much
   longer),  and  similarly  on the  typescript of  the Grey  Annals, where
   both forms  are given.  There can  be no  doubt at  all that  Version II
   was  written  second  (even though  it has  the earlier  form Borthandos
   while Version I has the later Borthand), for Version I is  integral with
   the  whole  text  of  the  Annals,  whereas Version  II ends  before the
   bottom of a page. I give first the whole text  of Version  I, continuing
   from  the  point  in  the annal  for 463  on the  Swarthy Men  where the
   text was broken off above.                                             
                                                                         
 that  had  the  greatest followings  and authority  were named           
 Bor and Ulfang. The sons of  Bor were  Borlas and  Boromir and           
 Borthand,  and they  followed Maidros  and were  faithful. The           
 sons of Ulfang the swart were Ulfast and Ulwarth and Uldor the           
 Accursed; and they followed Cranthir  and swore  allegiance to           
 him and were faithless.*                                                 
                                                                         
                                    464.                                  
                                                                         
   $175.  In   the   beginning  of   this  year   Beren  was   pressed  so
 hard  that  at  last  he  was  forced  to flee  from Dorthonion.  In time
 of  winter  and  snow,  therefore,  he  forsook  the  land  and  grave of
 his   father   and   climbed   into   the   Eryd  Orgorath,   and  thence
 found  a  way  down   into  Nan   Dungorthin,  and   so  came   by  paths
 that  no  Man  nor  Elf  else  dared to  tread to  the Girdle  of Melian.
 And  he  passed  through,  even  as  Melian  had  foretold,  for  a great
 doom  lay  on  him.  In  this  year,  in the  spring, Hurin  Galion's son
 of   the   House   of   Hador   wedded   Morwen   Elfsheen   daughter  of
 Baragund  of  the  House  of  Beor  [this   sentence  was   later  marked
 for  transposition  to  the  beginning  of  the  annal].   [Later  inser-
 tion:] In this year Turin son of Hurin was born in Dorlomin.             
   $176.  In  this   year  at   the  mid-summer   Beren  son   of  Barahir
 met  Luthien  Thingol's  daughter  in  the   forest  of   Neldoreth,  and
                                                                         
  (* It was after thought that the people of Ulfang were  already secretly
 in  the  service  of  Morgoth  ere  they  came to  Beleriand. Not  so the
 people of Bor, who were worthy folk and  tillers of  the earth.  Of them,
 it is said, came the most ancient of the Men that dwelt  in the  north of
 Eriador in the Second Age and [? read in] after-days.)                   

 because of her great beauty and his love a spell of dumbness was
 laid on him, and he wandered long in the woods of Doriath.       
                                                                 
                                465.                              
                                                                 
    $177. In this year at the first spring Beren was released from
 his  spell,  and  spoke  to  Luthien,  calling her  Tinuviel, the
 Nightingale.  Thus  began  the  love of  Beren the  most renowned
 and  Luthien  the  most  fair of  which the  Lay of  Leithian was
 made.                                                            
    $178. Beren  was  brought  before  King  Thingol,  who scorned
 him, and desiring to send him to  death, said  to him  in mockery
 that he must bring a Silmaril from  the crown  of Morgoth  as the
 bride-price of  Luthien. But  Beren took  the quest  upon himself
 and  departed,  and  came to  Nargothrond and  sought the  aid of
 King  Felagund.  Then  Felagund  perceived  that  his   oath  had
 returned to bring him to  death, but  he was  willing to  lend to
 Beren all the aid of his kingdom, vain though it must prove.     
    $179.  [Celegorm   >]  Celegorn   and  Curufin   however  hin-
 dered  the quest,  for their  Oath was  roused from  slumber, and
 they  swore that  even should  the quest  be achieved  they would
 slay any that kept the Silmaril or gave it to any hands but their
 own. And because of their fell words great fear fell on  the folk
 of Nargothrond, and they withheld their aid from the king.       
    $180. King  Inglor  Felagund  and  Beren  set forth,  with ten
 companions  only,  and  went  northward;  but  they  were waylaid
 by  Sauron and  cast into  a pit  in Tol-in-Gaurhoth.  There they
 were  devoured  one  by one  by wolves;  but Felagund  fought the
 wolf that was sent to devour Beren, and slew  it, and  was slain.
 Thus perished from Middle-earth  the fairest  of the  children of
 Finwe,  and  returned  never  again;  but  dwells now  in Valinor
 with Amarie.                                                     
    $181. Luthien desired to  follow Beren,  but was  held captive
 by her father, until she escaped and passed into the  wild. There
 she  was  found  by  Celegorn  and  Curufin,  and  taken  to Nar-
 gothrond. And evil entered into the hearts  of the  brethren, and
 they  designed  to  seize  the kingship  of Nargothrond,  and wed
 Luthien  to  Celegorn  and  compel  Thingol  to alliance,  and so
 make  the  sons  of  Feanor  the  greatest  House  of  the Noldor
 again.                                                           
    $182. But  Luthien  escaped  them  and  came to  Sauron's isle
 and  with  the aid  of Huan  the Hound  of Valinor  overthrew the
 werewolves  and  Sauron  himself,  and  rescued.Beren.  And  when

 these  tidings  were  heard  in  Nargothrond  Orodreth  took  the
 crown  of  Felagund  and  drove forth  Celegorn and  Curufin. And
 they  riding  east  in  haste  found Beren  and Luthien  near the
 borders  of  Doriath,  and  would  seize  Luthien. But  they were
 foiled, and rode away; yet Beren was sorely wounded.            
   $183. When  Beren  was  healed  he  led  Luthien  to   her  own
 land and  there left  her sleeping  and went  forth alone  on his
 quest, but  Luthien following  overtook him  upon the  borders of
 the Anfauglith.                                                 
   [Added:] In the winter  of this  year, Turin  son of  Hurin was
 born with omens of sorrow. [Written against this later:  Place in
 464]                                                            
                                                                
                                466.                             
                                                                
   $184. In  disguise  Beren  and  Luthien  came  to  Angband, and
 Luthien  cast  Carcharoth  the  Wolf-warden  of  the gate  into a
 slumber;   and   they  descended   to  Morgoth's   throne.  There
 Luthien laid her spell even upon Morgoth, so that he  fell asleep
 against his will, and the Iron Crown rolled from his head.      
   $185. Luthien  and  Beren  bearing a  Silmaril were  waylaid at
 the  gate  by  Carcharoth,  and  Carcharoth bit  off the  hand of
 Beren that held  the jewel,  and being  filled with  madness fled
 away.  Then  Thorondor  and  his  eagles  lifted  up   Beren  and
 Luthien,  and  bore  them away  and set  them within  the borders
 of  Doriath.  Long  Luthien  fought with  death, until  Beren was
 again healed. And in the spring of the year she  led him  back to
 Menegroth.  And  when  Thingol  heard   all  that   had  befallen
 them, his mood was  softened, for  he was  filled with  wonder at
 the  love of  Luthien and  Beren, and  perceived that  their doom
 might  not  be  withstood  by any  power of  the world.  For thus
 was  it  appointed  that  the  two  kindreds,  the elder  and the
 younger children of Eru, should  be joined.  Then Beren  took the
 hand of Luthien before the throne of her father.                
   $186. But   soon  after   Carcharoth  by   the  power   of  the
 Silmaril  burst  into  Doriath, and  the Wolf-hunt  of Carcharoth
 was  made.  In  that  hunt were  King Thingol,  and Beren  of the
 One  Hand,  and  Beleg  and  Mablung  and   Huan  the   Hound  of
 Valinor.  And  Carcharoth  hurt  Beren  to  the  death,  but Huan
 slew him and then died. From the  belly of  the Wolf  Mablung cut
 the Jewel and  Beren took  it and  gave it  to Thingol,  and said
 'Now  the  Quest  is  achieved',  and  afterwards spoke  no more.
 But ere he died  Luthien bade  him farewell  before the  gates of

 Menegroth, and said to him: 'Await me beyond the Western                 
 Sea.'                                                                    
   Thus ended the Quest of the Silmaril.                                  
                                                                         
   As has been seen (p. 61), 'Version II' takes up at a point in annal 463
   concerning  the  Swarthy  Men,  following  the   words  'Now   the  two
   chieftains',  my  father  copied  out  the  end  of  that  annal simply
   because it stood at the head of the page  on which  the story  of Beren
   and  Luthien  began,  as originally  written. He  inevitably introduced
   some differences, however, and I give the second text in full.         
                                                                         
 (Conclusion of annal 463 in Version II)                                  
 [Now  the  two  chieftains]   that  had   the  greatest   followings  and
 authority   were   named   Bor  and   Ulfang.  The   sons  of   Bor  were
 Borlas   and   Boromir   and   Borthandos,    and   they    were   goodly
 men,  and   they  followed   Maidros  and   Maglor  and   were  faithful.
 The   sons   of   Ulfang   the   Swart  were   Ulfast  and   Ulwarth  and
 Uldor   the   Accursed;   and   they   followed   Cranthir    and   swore
 allegiance  to  him,  and  were  faithless.  (It  was after  thought that
 the  people  of  Ulfang  were   already  secretly   in  the   service  of
 Morgoth ere they came to Beleriand.)*                                    
                                                                         
                                    464.                                  
                                                                         
   $187.  In   the   beginning  of   this  year   Beren  was   pressed  so
 hard  that  at  last, [in  the winter  >] soon  after the  mid-winter, he
 was   forced   to  choose   between  flight   and  capture.   He  forsook
 then   Dorthonion   and  passed   into  the   Eryd  Orgorath   and  found
 a  way   down  into   Nan  Dungorthin,   and  so   came  by   paths  that
 neither  Man  nor  Elf  else  ever  dared  to  tread  to  the  Girdle  of
 Doriath.  And  he  passed  through,  even  as  Melian  had   foretold  to
 Galadriel; for a great doom lay on him.                                  
   In   this   year  in   the  spring   Hurin  of   the  House   of  Hador
 wedded   Morwen   Elfsheen  of   the  people   of  Beor   [this  sentence
 was  later   marked  for   transposition  to   the  beginning   of  the
 annal, as in $175].                                                      
   $188.  In   this   year  at   the  midsummer   Beren  son   of  Barahir
 met  Luthien  Thingol's  daughter  in  the   forest  of   Neldoreth,  and
 becoming   enamoured   of   her   wandered   long   in   the   woods   of
 Doriath,   for   a   spell   of   dumbness    was   upon    him.   [Later
 insertion,  as  in  $175:]   Turin  son   of  Hurin   was  born   in  Dor
 Lomin.                                                                   
                                                                         
 (* Of the people of Bor, it is  said, came  the most  ancient of  the Men
 that dwelt in the north of Eriador afterwards in the Second Age.)        

                                465.                              
                                                                 
   $189. In this year at the  first spring  Beren was released from
 his  spell  and  spoke  to  Luthien,  calling  her  Tinuviel,  the
 Nightingale  (for  he knew  not her  name yet,  nor who  she was).
 Thus began  the love  of Beren  the blessed  and Luthien  the most
 fair,  of  which  the  Lay  of Leithian  was made.  Their meetings
 were  espied  by  Dairon  the  minstrel  (who also  loved Luthien)
 and  were  bewrayed  to  King  Thingol.  Then  Thingol  was  wroth
 indeed,  but  Luthien  brought  Beren  to  Menegroth,   and  Beren
 showed  to  him  the  ring  of  Inglor  his  kinsman.  But Thingol
 spoke in anger  scorning mortal  Men, saying  that the  service of
 Beren's father to another prince gave the son no claim to  walk in
 Doriath, still less to lift his eyes to Luthien. Then  Beren being
 stung  by  his  scorn swore  that by  no power  of spell,  wall or
 weapon  should  he  be  withheld  from   his  love;   and  Thingol
 would have cast him into prison  or put  him to  death, if  he had
 not  sworn  to Luthien  that no  harm should  come to  Beren. But,
 as doom  would, a  thought came  into his  heart, and  he answered
 in mockery: 'If thou fearest neither spell,  wall nor  weapons, as
 thou  saist,  then  go  fetch  me  a  Silmaril  from the  crown of
 Morgoth. Then we will  give jewel  for jewel,  but thou  shalt win
 the fairer: Luthien of the First-born and of the Gods.'  And those
 who  heard  knew  that  he  would  save  his  oath,  and  yet send
 Beren to his death.                                              
   $190. But  Beren  looked  in  the  eyes  of  Melian,  who  spake
 not,  and  he took  upon himself  the Quest  of the  Silmaril, and
 went forth from Menegroth alone.                                 
                                                                 
   $191   Now   Beren   went  west   to  Nargothrond,   and  sought
 out  King  Felagund.  And  when  Felagund  heard  of the  quest he
 knew  that  the  oath  he  had  sworn  was come  upon him  for his
 death  (as  long before  he had  said to  Galadriel). But  he kept
 his oath, and would have mustered all his host for the  service of
 Beren, vain though all his strength must be in such a venture.
   $192. But  Celegorn   and  Curufin   were  in   Nargothrond  (as
 was before  told), and  the quest  roused from  sleep the  Oath of
 Feanor.  And  the  brethren  spoke  against  Felagund,   and  with
 their  words  set  such  a  fear in  the hearts  of the  people of
 Nargothrond  that  they  would  not obey  their king,  neither for
 many years after would they go to any open war.                  
   $193. Then  [Finrod  >]  Inglor  cast  off  his  crown  and made
 ready to go forth alone with Beren, but ten  of his  most faithful

 knights  stood  beside  him,  and Edrahil,  their chief,  lifted the
 crown  and  bade  the  king  give  it  in  keeping  to  Orodreth his
 brother.  But  Celegorn  said: 'Know  this: thy  going is  vain; for
 could ye achieve  this quest  it would  avail nothing.  Neither thee
 nor this  Man should  we suffer  to keep  or to  give a  Silmaril of
 Feanor.  Against  thee  would  come  all the  brethren to  slay thee
 rather.  And  should  Thingol gain  it, then  we would  burn Doriath
 or die in the attempt. For we have sworn our Oath.'                
   $194. 'I also  have  sworn  an  oath,' said  Felagund, 'and I seek
 no  release  from  it.  Save  thine  own,  until thou  knowest more.
 But this I will say to you, [son of Feanor >) Celegorn the  fell, by
 the sight that is given me in this hour, that  neither thou  nor any
 son  of Feanor  shall regain  the Silmarils  ever unto  world's end.
 And  this that  we now  seek shall  come indeed,  but never  to your
 hands.  Nay,  your  oath  shall  devour  you,  and deliver  to other
 keeping the bride-price of Luthien.'                               
   $195.  Thus  King   Felagund  and   Beren  and   their  companions
 went   forth,   and  waylaying   a  company   of  Orcs   beyond  the
 Taiglin   they   passed   towards  [Tolsirion   >]  Tol-in-Gaurhoth,
 disguised  as  soldiers  of  Morgoth.  There  they  were  questioned
 and laid bare by Sauron, and cast into a pit.                      
   $196. Now  Luthien  resolved  in  heart   to  follow   Beren,  but
 seeking  the  counsel  of  Dairon (who  was of  old her  friend) she
 was  again  bewrayed  to  Thingol,  and he  in dismay  set her  in a
 prison high in the  trees. But  she escaped  by arts  of enchantment
 upon a rope of  her own  hair and  passed into  the wild.  There she
 was  found  by  Celegorn  and  Curufin,  as  they   were  a-hunting,
 and  taken  to  Nargothrond,  and there  closely kept.  For Celegorn
 being  enamoured  of  her  beauty  resolved to  wed her,  and compel
 King Thingol's assent.                                             
   $197. But  Luthien with  the aid  of Huan,  the hound  of Valinor,
 who  followed  Celegorn  but  was  won  to  the  love   of  Luthien,
 escaped from Nargothrond and came to Tol-in-Gaurhoth.              
   $198. There  in  the  pits  of  Sauron  one  by  one   the  twelve
 companions  were  slain  and  devoured   by  werewolves,   until  at
 last  only  Beren  and  Felagund  remained.  But  none  had betrayed
 them,  and  Sauron  could  not  learn  the  errand  upon  which they
 went.  He  left  the  Elven-king  to the  last, for  he knew  who he
 was,  and  deemed  that  he  was  the  mover  in   whatever  venture
 was  devised.  But  when  the  wolf  came  to  Beren,  Felagund with
 his  last  strength  broke  his  bonds,  and  wrestled  naked-handed
 with the wolf and slew it, and was slain.                          

   $199. Thus  perished  Inglor  Felagund  son of  Finrod, fairest
 and most beloved  of the  children of  Finwe, and  returned never
 again to Middle-earth.  But it  is said  that released  soon from
 Mandos, he went to Valinor and there dwells with Amarie.         
   $200. Beren  sank  down  now  into  a  darkness  of  sorrow and
 despair. In that hour Luthien and  Huan came  to the  bridge that
 led to Sauron's isle, and Luthien  sang a  song of  Doriath. Then
 Beren  awoke  from  his  darkness;  and  the  towers   of  Sauron
 trembled,  and  he  sent  forth  Draugluin  the  greatest  of his
 werewolves.   But   Huan   slew   Draugluin,   and   when  Sauron
 himself  came  forth   in  wolf-hame   he  overthrew   him.  Thus
 Sauron was constrained to yield up Tol-sirion, ere bereft  of his
 bodily  form  he  passed  away  as a  black shadow  into Taur-nu-
 Fuin.                                                            
   $201.  Thus   Luthien   rescued  Beren,   and  set   free  many
 hapless  prisoners  of  Sauron.  These  prisoners  Huan  led back
 to  Nargothrond,  for his  loyalty constrained  him to  return to
 Celegorn,  his  master.  But  when the  tidings came  to Nargoth-
 rond  of  the  death  of  Felagund,  and the  great deeds  of the
 Elf-maid,  then  Celegorn  and Curufin  were hated,  and Orodreth
 took  the  crown  of  Nargothrond,  and  drove  them  forth;  and
 they fled eastward to Himring.                                   
   $202. Luthien  and  Beren  wandered  in  the  wild  together in
 brief joy; and Beren led  Luthien back  towards Doriath.  Thus by
 ill chance Celegorn and Curufin came  upon them  as they  rode to
 the  north-borders  with  Huan. There  Celegorn would  ride Beren
 down,   and   Curufin   seized   Luthien;  but   Beren  overthrew
 Curufin, and took his  horse and  his knife,  and was  saved from
 death  at  the  hands  .of  Celegorn  by Huan;  who in  that hour
 forsook  his  master and  served   Luthien.  Then   Celegorn  and
 Curufin  rode  away  upon  one horse,  and Curufin  shooting back
 smote Beren with an arrow and he fell.                           
                                                                 
                                466.                              
                                                                 
   $203. Luthien  and  Huan  guarded  Beren  in  the   woods,  and
 Luthien brought  him back  at last  from the  edge of  death. But
 when  he  was  healed, and  they had  passed into  Doriath, Beren
 remembering   his   oath   and  proud   words  to   Thingol,  was
 unwilling  to  return  to  Menegroth,   neither  would   he  lead
 Luthien upon his hopeless quest. Therefore in great grief he left
 her as she slept in a  glade, and  committing her to the  care of
 Huan,  rode  away  north  upon  his  horse  that  he   took  from

  
                                                                  
 Curufin.   And   since   Tol-in-Gaurhoth   was  now   destroyed  he
 came  at  last  to  the  north-slopes  of  Taur-nu-Fuin  and looked
 across the Anfauglith to Thangorodrim and despaired.              
   $204. There he sent  away his  horse, and  bade farewell  to life
 and  to the  love of  Luthien, and  prepared to  go forth  alone to
 death.  But  Luthien  was  borne  swiftly  after  him by  Huan, and
 she  came  upon  him in  that hour,  and would  not be  parted from
 him. Then  with the  aid of  Huan and  her arts,  Luthien disguised
 Beren  as  a  wolf in  the hame  of Draugluin,  and herself  as the
 vampire  Thuringwethil,  and  they   passed  over   Anfauglith  and
 came to Angband, but Huan abode in the woods.                     
   $205.  At   Angband's   gate   Luthien   cast  down   the  warden
 of  the  gate,  Carcharoth  mightiest  of all  wolves, into  a deep
 slumber,  and Beren  and Luthien  came into  the dreadful  realm of
 Morgoth,  and  descended  even  into  his  uttermost hall  and came
 before  his  throne.  There  Beren slunk  in wolf-form  beneath the
 very  chair  of  Morgoth,  but  the  disguise  of  Luthien  did not
 deceive  Morgoth  and  she  was  revealed  to  him. Yet  she eluded
 his foul grasp, and even as he watched  her dancing,  held as  in a
 spell by her beauty, she set a deep slumber upon all the  hall, and
 at last Morgoth himself was overcome  and fell  from his  seat into
 a blind sleep, but the Iron Crown rolled from his head.           
   $206.  Then   Luthien   roused  Beren   and  stripping   off  the
 wolf-hame  he  took  the  dwarf-knife  of  Curufin  and   cut  from
 Morgoth's  crown  a Silmaril.  But desiring  suddenly to  go beyond
 doom  and  rescue  all  the  jewels  he was  betrayed by  the knife
 which  snapped,  and  a  splinter smote  Morgoth and  disturbed his
 sleep.                                                            
   $207. Then  Beren  and  Luthien  fled,  but  at  the  gates  they
 found   Carcharoth   once   more   awake,   and   he   leaped  upon
 Luthien;  and  before  she could  use any  art Beren  sprang before
 and would  daunt the  wolf with  the hand  that held  the Silmaril.
 But  Carcharoth seized  the hand  and bit  it off,  and straightway
 the  Silmaril  burned  him,  and  madness  seized  him and  he fled
 away;  but  his  howls  roused  all the  sleepers in  Angband. Then
 Luthien knelt by Beren, as he lay in a swoon as  it were  of death,
 and all their  quest seemed  in ruin.  But even  as she  drew forth
 the  venom  from  Beren's  wound  with  her  lips,  Thorondor  came
 with  Lhandroval  and  Gwaihir,  his  mightiest  vassals,  and they
 lifted  up  Luthien  and  Beren  and  bore  them  south,  high over
 Gondolin, and set them down on the borders of Doriath.            
   $208. There  Huan  found  them  and   again  they   tended  Beren

 and  won  him  from  death,  and   as  spring   grew  fair   they  passed
 into   Doriath   and   came   to  Menegroth.   Glad  was   their  welcome
 in  Doriath,  for  a  spell  of  shadow  and  silence  had lain  upon all
 the  land  since  Luthien  fled;  and  Dairon   seeking  her   in  sorrow
 had wandered far away and was lost.                                      
   $209. Thus  once  more  Luthien  led  Beren  to   the  throne   of  her
 father,  and  he  marvelled  at  him,  but  was  not  appeased;   and  he
 said  to  Beren:  'Didst  thou  not  say  that  thou  wouldst  not return
 to  me  save  with  a  jewel  from  the  crown  of  Morgoth?'  And  Beren
 answered:   'Even  now   a  Silmaril   is  in   my  hand.'   And  Thingol
 said:  Show  it  to  me!  But  Beren  said,  That  I  cannot do,-  for my
 hand  is  not  here.'  And  he  held  up  his  right  arm; and  from that
 hour he named himself Camlost.                                           
   $210.  Then   Thingol's   mood   was   softened,   for  it   seemed  to
 him  that  this  Man  was  unlike  all  others,  and  among the  great in
 Arda,  whereas  the  love  of  Luthien  was  of  a strength  greater than
 all   the  kingdoms   of  West   or  East.   And  Beren   took  Luthien's
 hand  and  laid  it  upon  his breast  before the  throne of  her father,
 and thus they were betrothed.                                            
   But  now  Carcharoth  by  the   power  of   the  Silmaril   burst  into
 Doriath.                                                                 
                                                                         
     Here Version II breaks off abruptly, and not at the foot of a page.
   The  page  on  which Version  I ends,  with the  words 'Thus  ended the
   Quest of the Silmaril' (p. 64), continues with the annal for 467.      
                                                                         
                                  467.                                    
                                                                         
   $211. In  this   year  at   the  first   breaking  of   Spring  Luthien
 Tinuviel  laid  her  body  as  a  white  flower  on  the  grass  and  her
 spirit  fled  from  Middle-earth,  and  she  went  unto  Mandos,   as  it
 saith  in  the  Lay.  But  a winter  as it  were the  hoar age  of mortal
 Men came upon Thingol.                                                   
                                                                         
                                    468.                                  
                                                                         
   $212.  In   this   time   Maidros   began   those   counsels   for  the
 raising  of  the  fortunes  of  the Eldar  that are  called the  Union of
 Maidros.   For  new   hope  ran   through  the   land,  because   of  the
 deeds   of   Beren   and   Luthien,   and   it   seemed   to   many  that
 Morgoth   was   not   unconquerable,   and  that   fear  only   gave  him
 his  power.  Yet  still  the  Oath  of  Feanor  lived  and  hindered  all
 good,  and  not  least  the  evil  that  Celegorn  and  Curufin  had done
 because  of  it.  Thus  Thingol  would  lend  no  aid   to  any   son  of

                         
                                                                   
   Feanor;  and  small  help  came   from  Nargothrond:   there  the
   Noldor  trusted  rather  to  defend  their  hidden  stronghold by
   secrecy and stealth.  But Maidros  had the  help of  the Naugrim,
   both  in  armed  force  and  in  great store  of weapons;  and he
   gathered together again all his  brethren and  all the  folk that
   would  follow  them;  and  the  men  of  Bor  and of  Ulfang were
   marshalled and trained  for war,  and given  fair arms,  and they
   summoned  yet  more of  their kinsfolk  out of  the East.  And in
   Hithlum Fingon,  ever the  friend of  Maidros, prepared  for war,
   taking counsel with Himring.  To Gondolin  also the  tidings came
   to the hidden king, Turgon, and  in secret  also he  prepared for
   great battle. And Haleth gathered his folk  in Brethil,  and they
   whetted their axes;  but he  died of  age ere  the war  came, and
   Hundor his son ruled his people.                                 
                                                                   
                                  469.                              
                                                                   
       $213. In the spring of this year Maidros made the first trial
   of his strength though his  plans were  not yet  full-wrought. In
   which he erred, not concealing his stroke until it could  be made
   suddenly with all  strength, as  Morgoth had  done. For  the Orcs
   indeed  were  driven  out  of  Beleriand  once  more,   and  even
   Dorthonion was freed for a while,  so that  the frontiers  of the
   Noldor were again as they were before  the Bragollach,  save that
   the Anfauglith was now a  desert possessed  by neither  side. But
   Morgoth  being  warned  of  the  uprising  of  the Eldar  and the
   Elf-friends took  counsel against  them, and  he sent  forth many
   spies and workers of  treason among  them, as  he was  the better
   able now to do, for the  faithless men  of his  secret allegiance
   were yet deep in the secrets of Feanor's sons.                   
                                                                   
       $214. In this year, it hath been [thought >] said,  Beren and
   Luthien returned to the world, for a while.  For Luthien  had won
   this  doom  from  Manwe that  Beren might  return to  live again,
   and she with him; but only so that she  too thereafter  should be
   mortal as he, and should soon die indeed and  lose the  world and
   depart from the numbers of the  Eldalie for  ever. This  doom she
   chose.  And  they  appeared  again unlooked  for in  Doriath, and
   those  that  saw  them were  both glad  and fearful.  But Luthien
   went  to  Menegroth  and healed  the winter  of Thingol  with the
   touch of her hand; yet  Melian looked  in her  eyes and  read the
   doom  that  was  written  there,  and turned  away: for  she knew
   that  a  parting beyond  the end  of the  World had  come between

 them,  and  no grief  of loss  hath been  heavier than  the grief  of the
 heart  of  Melian  Maia  in  that  hour  (unless only  it were  the grief
 of  Elrond  and   Arwen).  But   Luthien  and   Beren  passed   then  out
 of  the  knowledge  of  Elves  and  Men,  and  dwelt  a  while  alone  by
 the   green  waters   of  Ossiriand   in  that   land  which   the  Eldar
 named   therefore   Gwerth-i-guinar,   the   land   of   the   Dead  that
 Live.  Thereafter  Beren  son  of  Barahir  spoke  not  again   with  any
 mortal Man.                                                              
                                                                         
                                    470.                                  
                                                                         
   $215. In this year was the birth of Dior Aranel the Beautiful           
 in  Gwerth-i-Guinar,  who  was after  known as  Dior Thingol's           
 heir, father of the Halfelven.                                           
                                                                         
   The  annal  that  follows  now  in  GA, for  471, concerning  Isfin and
   Eol, was struck  out; the  revised version  of the  story appears  on a
   rider inserted at an earlier point, under the year 316 (see $$117 - 18,
   where  the rejected  annal for  471 has  been given).  A new  annal for
   471 was added later in pencil:                                         
                                                                         
                                    471.                                  
   $216. In this year Huor wedded Rian daughter of Belegund.         
                                                                         
                                    472.                                  
                                                                         
   $217. This  is  the  Year  of  Lamentation.  At  last Maidros          
 resolved to assault Angband from east and  from west.  With the          
 main host that he gathered, of  Elves and  Men and  Dwarves, he          
 purposed to  march with  banners displayed  in open  force from          
 the east over Anfauglith. But when  he had  drawn forth,  as he          
 hoped, the armies of Morgoth in answer, then at a signal Fingon          
 should issue from the passes of Hithlum with all  his strength.          
 Thus  they  thought  to take  the might  of Morgoth  as between          
 anvil and hammer, and so break it to pieces.                             
   $218.  [Huor   son   of  Galion   wedded  Rian   daughter  of          
 Belegund upon the  eve of  battle, and  marched with  Hurin his          
 brother in the army of Fingon. Changed in pencil to read:] Huor          
 son of Galion  wedded Rian  daughter of  Belegund in  the first          
 days  of  spring.  But  when he  had been  but two  months wed,          
 the  summons came  for the  mustering of  the hosts,  and Hurin          
 marched away with his brother in the army of Fingon.                     
   $219. Here  at   midsummer  was   fought  the   Fifth  Battle          
 Nirnaeth  Arnediad,  Unnumbered  Tears, upon  the sands  of the          
 Anfauglith before the passes of Sirion. [Struck out  later: The          

             
                                                                        
 place  of the  chief slaughter  was long  marked by  a great  hill in
 which  the  slain  were   heaped,  both   Elves  and   Men:  Haud-na-
 Dengin,  upon  which  alone   in  all   Anfauglith  the   grass  grew
 green.]                                                                 
   $220. In  this  battle  Elves  and  Men  were utterly  defeated and
 the  ruin  of  the  Noldor  was  achieved.  For Maidros  was hindered
 at his setting out by the guile of Uldor the Accursed: first  he gave
 false  warning  of an  attack from  Angband; then  he must  tarry for
 not all  his men  were willing  to march.  And the  army in  the West
 awaited  the  signal,  and  it  came  not,  and they  grew impatient,
 and there were whispers of treason among them.                          
   $221.  Now   the   army  of   the  West   contained  the   host  of
 Hithlum,  both  Elves  and  Men,  and to  it was  added both  folk of
 the  Falas,  and  a   great  company   from  Nargothrond   [and  many
 of  the  woodmen  out  of  Brethil.  This  was  struck  out  and  the
 following   substituted:]  And   many  of   the  woodmen   came  also
 with   Hundor   of  Brethil;   and  with   him  marched   Mablung  of
 Doriath  with  a  small  force  of Grey-elves,  some with  axes, some
 with  bows;  for  Mablung  was  unwilling  to have  no part  in these
 great deeds,  and Thingol  gave leave  to him  to go,  so long  as he
 served  not  the  sons  of  Feanor. Therefore  Mablung joined  him to
 the host of  Fingolfin [read:  Fingon] and  Hurin. /  And lo!  to the
 joy  and  wonder  of  all  there  was a  sounding of  great trumpets,
 and  there  marched  up  to  war a  host unlooked  for. This  was the
 army   of   Turgon   that   issued   from   Gondolin,   ten  thousand
 strong,   with   bright  mail   and  long   swords;  and   they  were
 stationed southwards guarding the passes of Sirion.                     
   $222.  Then   Morgoth,   who   knew   much   of   what   was  done,
 chose  his  hour,  and  trusting  in  his   servants  to   hold  back
 Maidros and prevent  the union  of his  foes, he  sent forth  a force  1
 seeming  great  (and  yet but  part of  all that  he had  made ready)
 and   marched   them   on   Hithlum.   Then   hot  of   heart  Fingon
 wished  to  assail  them  upon  the  plain,   thinking  he   had  the
 greater  strength;  but  Hurin  spoke   against  this,   bidding  him
 await  the  signal  of  Maidros,  and  let  rather  the   Orcs  break
 themselves against his strength arrayed in the hills.                   
   $223.  But  the   Captain  of   Morgoth  in   the  West   had  been
 commanded  to  draw  forth  Fingon  into  open  battle   swiftly,  by
 whatsoever  means  he  could.  Therefore  when   his  van   had  come
 even  to  the  inflowing  of Rivil  into Sirion  and still  none came
 forth  to  withstand  him,  he  halted,  and  sent forth  riders with
 tokens  of  parley;  and they  rode up  close to  the lines  of their

 enemies  upon  the   west-shore  of   Sirion  at   the  feet   of  the
 mountains.                                                           
    $224. Now  they  led  with  them  Gelmir  son  of  Guilin,  a  lord
 of  Nargothrond,   whom  they   had  taken   in  the   Bragollach  and
 had  blinded;  and  they  showed  him  forth,  crying:  'We  have many
 more  such  at  home,  but  ye  must  make  haste,  if  ye  would find
 them.  For  we  shall slay  them when  we return,  even so.'  And they
 hewed  off  Gelmir's  hands  and  feet,  and  his  head  last,  within
 sight of the Elves.                                                  
    $225.  But   by  ill   chance  across   the  water   stood  Gwindor
 Guilin's  son,  and  he  indeed  against  the  will  of  Orodreth  had
 marched  to  the  war  with  all  the  strength  that he  could muster
 because  of his  grief for  his brother.  Therefore his  wrath [struck
 out:  could  no longer  be restrained,  but] was  kindled to  a flame,
 and  the  men  of  Nargothrond  sprang  over   the  stream   and  slew
 the  riders,  and  drove  then on  against the  main host.  And seeing
 this all the host  of the  West was  set on  fire, and  Fingon sounded
 his  trumpets  and  leaped  forth  from  the   hills  in   sudden  on-
 slaught;  and  many  also  of  the  army  of  Gondolin  joined  in the
 battle ere Turgon could restrain them.                               
    $226. And  behold!  the  light  of  the  drawing  of the  swords of
 the Noldor was like a fire in a field of reeds; and so fell  was their
 onset  that  almost  the  designs  of  Morgoth  went  astray.  Ere the
 army  that  he  had  sent  westward  could  be  strengthened,  it  was
 swept  away;  [and  assailed  from   west  and   south  it   was  hewn
 down  as  it  stood,  and  the  greatest  slaughter  of  the  Orcs was
 then  made  that  yet  had  been  achieved.  >]  and  the  banners  of
 Fingolfin   [?   read   Fingon]  passed   over  Anfauglith   and  were
 raised  before  the  walls  of  Angband.  I  Gwindor  son   of  Guilin
 and the  folk of  Nargothrond were  in the  forefront of  that battle,
 and they  burst through  the outer  gates and  slew the  Orcs [even
 in  the  very  tunnels  of  Morgoth  >]  within  the very  fortress of
 Morgoth,  and  he  trembled  upon  his   deep  throne,   hearing  them
 beat upon his doors.                                                 
    $227. But  at  the  last  Gwindor  was  taken and his men slain;
 for  none  had  followed  them,  and  no  help  came. By  other secret
 doors  in  the  mountains  of  Thangorodrim  Morgoth  had   let  forth
 his  main  host  that  was  held  in  waiting,  and Fingon  was beaten
 back with great loss from the walls.                                 
    $228. Then  in  the  plain   of  Anfauglith,   on  the   [third  >]
 fourth  day  of  the  war, began  the Nirnaeth  Arnediad, for  no song
 can  contain  all its  grief. The  host of  Fingon retreated  over the

      
                                                                    
 sands of  the desert,  and there  fell Hundor  son of  Haleth [struck
 out:  in  the  rearguard]  and  most  of  the  men  of  Brethil.  But
 as  night  fell,  and  they  were  still  far  from  [Ered-wethion >]
 Eryd-wethrin,   the  Orcs   surrounded  the   army  of   Fingon,  and
 they fought  until day,  pressed ever  closer. Even  so, all  was not
 yet  lost.  In  the  morning  were  heard  the  horns  of  Turgon who
 brought  up  now   his  main   host  to   the  rescue   [struck  out:
 unlooked-for  by  the  Orcs];  and  the   Noldor  of   Gondolin  were
 strong  and  clad  in  mail, and  they broke  [the leaguer,  and once
 again  the  might  of  Angband  was  defeated.  >] through  the ranks
 of the Orcs, and  Turgon hewed  his way  to the  side of  Fingon, his
 brother.  And  it  is  said  that  the meeting  of Turgon  with Hurin
 who stood by his king was glad in the midst of the battle.l         
   $229. And  in  that very  day, at  the third  hour of  morning, lo!
 at  last  the  trumpets  of  Maidros  were heard  coming up  from the
 east; and the banners of  the sons  of Feanor  assailed the  enemy in
 the  rear.  It  has been  said that  even then  the Eldar  might have
 won  the  day,  had  all their  hosts proved  faithful; for  the Orcs
 wavered,   and  their   onslaught  was   stayed,  and   already  some
 were turning to flight.                                             
   $230. But  even  as  the   vanguard  of   Maidros  came   upon  the
 Orcs,   Morgoth   loosed   his   last   strength,  and   Angband  was
 emptied.  There  came   wolves,  and   wolfriders,  and   there  came
 Balrogs  a   thousand,  and   there  came   worms  and   drakes,  and
 Glaurung,  Father  of  Dragons. And  the strength  and terror  of the
 Great  Worm  were  now  grown  great  indeed,   and  Elves   and  Men
 withered  before  him;  and  he  came  between  the hosts  of Maidros
 and Fingon and swept them apart.                                    
   $231.  Yet   neither   by   wolf,   balrog,   nor    dragon   would
 Morgoth  have  achieved his  end, but  for the  treachery of  Men. In
 this  hour  the  plots  of  Ulfang  were  revealed;  for many  of the
 Easterlings turned and fled, their hearts being filled with  lies and
 fear;  but  the  sons of  Ulfang went  over suddenly  to the  side of
 Morgoth  and  drove  in  upon  the rear  of the  sons of  Feanor. And
 in  the  confusion  that  they   wrought  they   came  near   to  the
 standard  of  Maidros.  They  reaped  not  the  reward  that  Morgoth
 promised  them,  for  Maglor  slew  Uldor  the  Accursed,  the leader
 in  treason,  and  Bor  and  his  sons  slew  Ulfast and  Ulwarth ere
 they  themselves  were  slain.  But  new  strength  of evil  men came
 up  that  Uldor  had  summoned  and  kept   hidden  in   the  eastern
 hills, and the host  of Maidros  being assailed  now on  three sides,
 by  the  Orcs,  and  the  beasts,  and  by   the  Swarthy   Men,  was

 dispersed and fled this way and that.  Yet fate  saved the  sons of
 Feanor,  and though  all were  wounded, none  were slain,  for they
 drew  together  and  gathering  a  remnant  of  Noldor  and  of the
 Naugrim  about  them  they  hewed  a  way  out  of  the  battle and
 escaped towards Mount Dolmed.                                     
   $232. Last  of  all  the  eastern  force to  stand firm  were the
 Enfeng  of  [Nogrod  >]  Belegost,  and  thus  won renown.  Now the
 Naugrim  withstood  fire  more  hardily than  either Elves  or Men,
 and  it  was  the  custom  moreover  of  the  Enfeng to  wear great
 masks  [struck  out:  or vizors)  in battle  hideous to  look upon,
 which stood  them in  good stead  against the  drakes. And  but for
 them  Glaurung  and  his  brood  would have  withered all  that was
 left  of  the  Noldor.  But  the  Naugrim made  a circle  about him
 when he  assailed them,  and even  his mighty  armour was  not full
 proof against the blows of their great axes; and  when in  his rage
 he  turned  and  struck  down  Azaghal  of  Belegost   and  crawled
 over  him,  with his  last stroke  Azaghal drove  a knife  into his
 belly and so wounded him that he fled the field  and the  beasts of
 Angband  in  dismay  followed  after  him.  Had  Azaghal  but borne
 a  sword  great  woe  would  have  been spared  to the  Noldor that
 after befell [added:] but  his knife  went not  deep enough.  l But
 then the Enfeng raised up  the body  of Azaghal  and bore  it away;
 and with slow steps they walked  behind, singing  a dirge  in their
 deep voices, as it were a funeral  pomp in  their own  country, and
 gave no heed  more to  their foes;  and indeed  none dared  to stay
 them.                                                             
   $233. But  now  in  the  western  battle  Fingon  was  surrounded
 by a tide of  foes thrice  greater than  all that  was left  to him
 [struck out: and the Balrogs came against him]. There at  last fell
 the King of  the Noldor,  and flame  sprang from  his helm  when it
 was  cloven.  He was  overborne by  the Balrogs  and beaten  to the
 earth and his banners blue and silver were trodden into dust.     
   $234. The  day  was  lost,  but  still  Hurin  and Huor  with the
 men  of  Hador  stood  firm,  and the  Orcs could  not yet  win the
 passes  of  Sirion.  Thus  was  the  treachery of  Uldor redressed;
 and  the  last stand  of Hurin  and Huor  is the  deed of  war most
 renowned  among  the  Eldar  that  the  Fathers  of Men  wrought in
 their  behalf. For  Hurin spoke  to Turgon  saying: 'Go  now, lord,
 while time is! For last  art thou  of the  House of  Fingolfin, and
 in  thee  lives  the  last  hope  of  the  Noldor.  While  Gondolin
 stands,  strong  and  guarded,  Morgoth  shall  still know  fear in
 his heart.'                                                       

                                                                 
                                                                  
   'Yet  not  long  now  can  Gondolin  be  hidden,  and  being dis-
 covered it must fall,' said Turgon.                               
   $235. 'Yet  [a  while  it must  stand,' said  Hurin; 'for  out of
 Gondolin >] if it stands but a little while,' said [Hurin  >] Huor,
 'then out of [Gondolin later  >] thy  house I  shall come  the hope
 of  Elves  and Men.  This I  say to  thee, lord,  with the  eyes of
 death; though here  we part  for ever,  and I  shall never  look on
 thy  white  walls,  from  thee  and  me  shall  a  new  star arise.
 Farewell! '                                                       
   $236.  [Struck   out:   Then   Turgon   withdrew   and   all  the
 Noldor  of  Gondolin  went  back  down  Sirion  and  vanished  into
 the hills. But all the  remnant of  the host  of the  west gathered
 about the brethren and held the pass behind them.]                
   $237.  [Added   subsequently:]  And   [Glindur  later   >]  Maeg-
 lin,  Turgon's  sister-son,  who  stood  by  heard these  words and
 marked  them  well,  [struck  out  later:  and  looked  closely  at
 Huor,] but said naught.                                           
   $238.  Then   Turgon   accepted   the   valiant   words   of  the
 brethren,  and  summoning  all  that  remained   of  the   folk  of
 Gondolin,  and  such  of  Fingon's  host as  could be  gathered, he
 [withdrew  >]  fought   his  way   southward,l  and   escaped  down
 Sirion,  and  vanished  into  the  mountains  and  was  hidden from
 the  eyes  of  Morgoth.  For Hurin  and Huor  held the  pass behind
 him,  so that  no foe  could follow  him, and  drew the  remnant of
 the mighty men of Hithlum about them.                             
   $239. Slowly  they  withdrew,  until  they  came  behind  the Fen
 of  Serech,  and  had  the  young  stream  of  Sirion  before them,
 and  then  they  stood  and  gave  way  no more,  for they  were in
 the  narrow  gorge  of  the  pass.  Then  all  the host  of Morgoth
 swarmed  against  them,  and  they  bridged  the  stream  with  the
 dead,  and encircled  the remnant  of Hithlum  as a  gathering tide
 about a rock.                                                     
   $240. Huor  fell  pierced  with  a  venomed  arrow  in  the  eye,
 and  all  the  valiant  men  of  Hador  were  slain  about  him  in
 a  heap,  and  the  Orcs  hewed  their  heads and  piled them  as a
 mound of gold;  for the  sun was  shining on  the [fourth  >] sixth
 and last I day of the battle and their yellow locks shone  amid the
 blood.  Last  of  all  Hurin stood  alone. Then  he cast  aside his
 shield  and  wielded his  axe two-handed;  and it  is sung  that in
 that last stand he himself slew an  hundred of  the Orcs.  But they
 took  him  alive  at  last,   by  the   command  of   Morgoth,  who
 thought  thus  to do  him more  evil than  by death.  Therefore his

                                      
                                                                  
 servants grappled him with their  hands, which  clung still  to him
 though  he  hewed  off  their  arms;  and  ever their  numbers were
 renewed  until  at  the  last  he  fell  buried beneath  them. Then
 binding   him   they   dragged   him   to  Angband   with  mockery.
 Thus  ended  the  Nirnaeth  Arnediad,  and  the  sun sank  red over
 Hithlum,  and  there  came  a  great  storm  on  the  winds  of the
 West.                                                             
  $241. Great   indeed  now   was  the   triumph  of   Morgoth;  and
 his  design  was  accomplished  in  a manner  after his  own heart;
 for Men took the lives  of Men,  and betrayed  the Eldar,  and fear
 and  hatred  were  aroused  among  those  that  should   have  been
 united  against  him.  From  that  day  indeed began  the estrange-
 ment  of  Elves  from  Men,  save  only  from  those  of  the Three
 Houses of Beor, Hador, and Haleth, and their children.            
  $242. The  March  of  Maidros  was  no  more.  The  fell  sons  of
 Feanor  were  broken  and  wandered  far  away  in  the   woods  as
 leaves  before  the  wind.  The  Gorge  of  Aglon  was  filled with
 Orcs,  and  the  Hill  of  Himring  was  garrisoned by  soldiers of
 Angband;  the  pass of  Sirion was  pierced and  Tol-sirion retaken
 and its dread towers rebuilt. All  the gates  of Beleriand  were in
 the  power  of   Morgoth.  The   realm  of   Fingon  was   no  more
 [struck out: for few ever  of the  host of  Hithlum, Elves  or Men,
 came  ever  back  over  the  mountains to  their land].  To Hithlum
 came  back  never  one  of  Fingon's host,  nor any  of the  Men of
 Hador, nor any tidings of the battle and the fate of their lords.
  $243.   Doriath    indeed    remained,    and    Nargothrond   was
 hidden,  and  Cirdan  held  the  Havens;  but  Morgoth  gave  small
 heed to them as yet, either for he knew little of them,  or because
 their hour was not yet  come in  the deep  purposes of  his malice.
 But  one  thought  troubled  him  deeply,  and marred  his triumph;
 Turgon  had  escaped the  net, whom  he most  desired to  take. For
 Turgon  came  of  the  great  house  of Fingolfin,  and was  now by
 right  King of  all the  Noldor, [struck  out: and  from of  old he
 hated  him,  scarce  less  than  Feanor, and  feared him  more. For
 never  in  Valinor  would  Turgon  greet  him,  being  a  friend of
 Ulmo  and  of  Tulkas;  and  moreover,   ere  yet   darkness  over-
 whelmed  him  and  the   blindness  of   malice,  he   looked  upon
 Turgon  and  knew  that  from him  should come,  in some  time that
 doom  held,  the end  of all  hope.] and  Morgoth feared  and hated
 most  the  house  of  Fingolfin,  because they  had scorned  him in
 Valinor,  and  had  the  friendship  of  Ulmo,  and because  of the
 wounds  that  Fingolfin  gave him  in battle.  Moreover of  old his

       
                                                                  
 eye had lighted on Turgon,  and a  dark shadow  fell on  his heart,
 foreboding that, in some  time that  lay yet  hidden in  doom, from
 Turgon ruin should come to him.                                   
   $244.  Therefore   Hurin   was   brought   before   Morgoth,  and
 defied  him;  and  he  was   chained  and   set  in   torment.  But
 Morgoth  who  would  ever work  first with  lies and  treachery, if
 they might avail, came to  him where  he lay  in pain,  and offered
 him  freedom,  and   power  and   wealth  as   one  of   his  great
 captains, if he would take service in  his armies  and lead  a host
 against Turgon,  or even  if he  would but  reveal where  that king
 had  his  stronghold.  For  he  had  learned  that  Hurin  knew the
 secret  counsels  of   Turgon.  But   again  Hurin   the  Steadfast
 mocked him.                                                       
   $245.  Then   Morgoth   restrained   his   wrath  and   spoke  of
 Hurin's  wife  and  son  now  helpless  in  Hithlum  [written above
 later:  Dorlomin],  and  at  his  mercy  to do  what he  would with
 them.                                                             
   $246. 'They  know  not  the  secrets  of  Turgon,'   said  Hurin.
 'But an they did, thou  shouldst not  come at  Turgon so;  for they
 are of the houses  of Hador  and Beor,  and we  sell not  our troth
 for any price of profit or pain.'                                 
   $247.  Then   Morgoth   cursed   Hurin   and  Morwen   and  their
 offspring  and  set  a  doom  upon  them  of  sorrow  and darkness;
 and  taking  Hurin  from  prison  he set  him in  a chair  of stone
 upon a  high place  of Thangorodrim.  There he  could see  afar the
 land  of  Hithlum  westward  and  the  lands  of  Beleriand  south-
 ward.  There  Morgoth  standing  beside   him  cursed   him  again,
 and set his power upon him  so that  he could  not stray  from that
 place, nor die, unless Morgoth released him.                      
   $248. 'Sit  now  there!'  said  Morgoth.  'Look  upon  the  lands
 where  the  uttermost  woe   shall  come   upon  those   whom  thou
 hast  delivered  unto  me.  Yea,  verily!  Doubt  not the  power of
 Melkor,  Master  of  the  fates  of  Arda! And  with my  eyes shalt
 thou see it, [struck  out: and  nought shall  be hidden  from thee,
 and all that befalls those thou holdest dear shall swiftly  be told
 to thee] and with my ears shalt thou hear  all tidings,  and nought
 shall be hidden from thee!'                                       
   $249. And  even  so  it came  to pass;  but it  is not  said that
 Hurin  asked ever  of Morgoth  either mercy  ar death,  for himself
 or for any of his kin.                                            
                                                                  
   $250. Now the Orcs in token of the great triumph of

 Angband  gathered  with  great  labour  all   the  bodies   of  their
 enemies  that  were  slain, and  all their  harness and  weapons, and
 they piled  them, Elves  and Men,  in a  great hill  in the  midst of
 the   Anfauglith.   [Haud-na-D(engin)   >   Haud-i-Nengin   later  >]
 Haud-ina-Nengin  was  the  name  of  that  mound,  and  it  was  like
 unto a hill. But thither alone in all the desert the grass  came, and
 grew  again  long  and  green,  and  thereafter  no  Orc  dared tread
 upon   the   earth   beneath   which   the   swords  of   the  Noldor
 crumbled into rust.                                                 
                                                                    
   $251. Rian  wife  of  Huor  hearing  no  tidings  of her  lord went
 forth into the wild, and there  gave birth  to Tuor  her son;  and he
 was  taken  to  foster  by  [the  Dark-elves later  >] Annael  of the
 Grey-elves   of   Mithrim.   But   Rian   went    to   [Haud-i-Nengin
 later   >   Haud-na-nDengin   >]   Haud-in-nDengin   and   laid   her
 there  and  died.  And  in  Brethil  Glorwendil,   Hador's  daughter,
 died  of  grief.  But  Morwen  wife  of Hurin  abode in  Hithlum, for
 she was with child.                                                 
                                                                    
   $252.  Morgoth   now   broke   his   pledges  to   the  Easterlings
 that  had  served  him,  and  denied  to  them  the  rich   lands  of
 Beleriand  which  they  coveted,  and  he sent  away these  evil folk
 into  Hithlum,  and  there  commanded  them  to  dwell.   And  little
 though  they  now  loved  their  new  king,  yet  they  despised  the
 remnant  of  the  folk  of  Hador  (the  aged and  the women  and the
 children  for  the  most  part),  and they  oppressed them,  and took
 their  lands  and  goods,  and  wedded  their  women  by  force,  and
 enslaved  their  children.  And  those  of  the  Grey-elves  that had
 dwelt  there  fled into  the mountains,  or were  taken to  the mines
 of the North and laboured there as thralls.                         
   $253.  Therefore   Morwen   unwilling    that   Turin    her   son,
 being  then  seven  years  old,  should  become  a  slave,  sent  him
 forth with two  aged servants,  and bade  them find  if they  could a
 way  to  Doriath,  and  there  beg  fostering for  the son  of Hurin,
 and kinsman of Beren (for her father was his cousin).               
                                                                    
                                  473.                               
                                                                    
   $254. In  the  [added:] first/beginning  of this  year was  born to
 Morwen  Elfsheen  a  maid-child,  daughter  of  Hurin;  and  she  was
 named   Nienor,   which  is   Mourning.  And   at  about   this  time
 Turin  came   through  great   perils  to   Doriath  and   was  there
 received  by  Thingol,  who  took  him  to his  own fostering,  as he

                                                  
                                                                   
  were  king's  son,  in  memory  of Hurin.  For Thingol's  mood was
  now changed towards the houses of the Elf-friends.                
          $255. In  this  year Morgoth  having rested  his strength,
  and  given  heed  to  his  own  hurts  and  great  losses, renewed
  the  assault  upon  Beleriand,  which  now  lay  open to  him; and
  the orcs and wolves passed far into the lands, even as far  as the
  borders  of  Ossiriand  upon one  side, and  Nan Tathren  upon the
  other, and none were safe in field or wild.                       
         $256. Many now fled to  the Havens  and took  refuge behind
  Cirdan's  walls,  and  the  mariner  folk passed  up and  down the
  coast and  harried the  enemy with  swift landings.  Therefore the
  first assault of Morgoth was  against Cirdan;  and ere  the winter
  was  come he  sent great  strength over  Hithlum and  Nivrost, and
  they  came  down  the  Rivers  Brithon  and  Nenning,  and ravaged
  all the Falas, and besieged the walls of Brithombar  and Eglarest.
  Smiths  and miners  and masters  of fire  they brought  with them,
  and set up great engines,  and though  they were  stoutly resisted
  they broke the walls at last. Then the Havens  were laid  in ruin,
  and the Tower of Ingildon cast down, and  all Cirdan's  folk slain
  or  enthralled, save  those that  went aboard  and escaped  by sea
  [added:] and some few that fled north to Mithrim.                 
         $257. Then Cirdan took his remnant by ship, and they sailed
  to  the  Isle  of Balar,  [struck out:  and mingled  with Turgon's
  outpost  there,]  and  made  a  refuge  for  all  that  could come
  thither. For they kept also a  foothold at  the mouths  of Sirion,
  and there many light swift ships lay hid in the creeks  and waters
  where  the  reeds  were  dense as  a forest.  [And seven  ships at
  Turgon's  asking Cirdan  sent out  into the  West, but  they never
  returned.  >]  And when  Turgon heard  of this  he sent  again his
  messengers  to  Sirion's Mouths,  and besought  the aid  of Cirdan
  the Shipwright. And at his  bidding Cirdan  let build  seven swift
  ships, and they sailed out into the West, and were never  heard of
  again - save one and the last. Now  the captain  of this  ship was
  Voronwe,  and  he  toiled  in  the  sea  for  many   years,  until
  returning at last in despair his ship foundered  in a  great storm
  within sight of land, and he  alone survived,  for Ulmo  saved him
  from  the  wrath  of  Osse,  and the  waves bore  him up  and cast
  him ashore in Nivrost./                                           
                                                                   
                                 481.                               
                                                                   
         $258. Turin waxed fair and strong and wise in Doriath, but
  was marked with sorrow. In this his sixteenth year he went forth

 to  battle  on  the  marches  of  Doriath,  and became  the companion
 in  arms  of  Beleg  the  Bowman.  [Later pencilled  addition:] Turin
 donned the Dragon-helm of Galion.                                       
                                                                        
                                   484.                                  
                                                                        
   $259. Here Turin  was a  guest at  Menegroth in  honour for           
 his deeds of valour. But he came from the  wild, and  was un-           
 kempt  and  his  gear  and garments  were wayworn.  And Orgof           
 taunted him, and the people of Hithlum, and  in his  wrath he           
 smote Orgof with a cup and slew him at the king's board. Then           
 fearing the anger of Thingol he fled, and became an outlaw in           
 the woods, and gathered a desperate band, of Elves and of Men           
 [struck out: beyond the Girdle of Melian].                              
                                                                        
                                   487.                                  
                                                                        
   $260. Here   Turin's  band   captured  Beleg   and  bound   him;  but
 Turin  returning  released   him,  and   they  renewed   their  friend-
 ship.  And  Turin  learned  of  the  king's  pardon,  but would  not go
 back  to  Menegroth,  and   remained  upon   the  marches.   And  since
 no  foe  yet  could  pass  the Girdle  of Melian,  and he  desired only
 to  take  vengeance  on  the  Orcs,  he  made  a  lair  in   the  woods
 between Sirion and Mindeb in the country of Dimbar.                     
                                                                        
   The  following  passage  was rewritten  several times  and it  is not
   possible to be perfectly certain of the detail of development at each
   stage. As first written it seems to have read:                        
                                                                        
   $261. Here Tuor son of Huor, being now fifteen years of age,           
 came to Hithlum seeking his kin, but they were no more, for             
 Morwen  and  Nienor had  been carried  away to  Mithrim and             
 none remembered them.                                                   
                                                                        
   This seems to have been cancelled as  soon as  written, and  a second
   form probably reads thus:                                             
                                                                        
    $262. Here  Tuor  son  of Huor,  being now  fifteen years  of age,
 came  to  Hithlum  seeking  his  kin,  but  he  found  them  not. For
 though  the  Elves  that  fostered  him  knew  indeed   their  names,
 they  knew  not  where  they  dwelt  of  old,  or  dwelt  now  in the
 change  of  the  land.   But  Morwen   and  Nienor   alone  remained,
 and  they  dwelt  still  in  Dor  Lomin;  therefore Tuor  searched in
 Hithlum  in  vain,  and  the  Easterlings  seized  him  and  enslaved
 him.  But  he  escaped  and  became  an  outlaw  in  the  wild  lands
 about Lake Mithrim.                                                     
                                                                        
   In the final form of the passage the date 488 was added:              

                                488.                              
                                                                 
    $263. Here  Tuor  son  of  Huor,  being  now sixteen  years of
 age,  seeking  to  escape  from  Dorlomin,  was made  captive and
 enslaved  by  Lorgan  chief  of the  Easterlings; and  he endured
 thraldom  for  [seven years  immediately >]  three years,  ere he
 escaped and became an outlaw in the hills of Mithrim.            
                                                                 
                         [Struck out: 488]                        
                                                                 
    $264.  Here   Haldir   Orodreth's   son  of   Nargothrond  was
 trapped  and  hung on  a tree  by Orcs.  Thereafter the  Elves of
 Nargothrond  were  yet  more  wary  and  secret,  and  would  not
 suffer even Elves to stray in their lands.                       
                                                                 
                                489.                              
                                                                 
    $265. In  this   year  Gwindor   Guilin's  son   escaped  from
 Angband. Blodren  Ban's son  was an  Easterling, and  being taken
 by  Morgoth, and  tormented because  he was  one of  the faithful
 that  withstood  Uldor, entered  the service  of Morgoth  and was
 released, and sent in search of Turin. And he entered  the hidden
 company  in  Dimbar,  and  served Turin  manfully for  two years.
 But seeing now his  chance he  betrayed the  refuge of  Beleg and
 Turin to  the Orcs,  as his  errand was.  Thus it  was surrounded
 and  taken,  and  Turin  was captured  alive and  carried towards
 Angband; but Beleg  was left  for dead  among the  slain. Blodren
 was slain by a chance arrow in the dark. [Pencilled  against this
 annal: What happened to the Dragon-helm?]                        
    $266. Beleg  was  found  by  Thingol's  messengers,  and taken
 to  Menegroth  and  healed  by Melian.  At once  he set  forth in
 search  of Turin  [pencilled in  margin: bearing  the Dragon-helm
 that  Turin  had  left  in  Menegroth].  He  came   upon  Gwindor
 bewildered  in   Taur-na-Fuin  (where   Sauron  now   dwelt)  and
 together  they  pursued the  captors of  Turin. From  an orc-camp
 on the edge of the desert they rescued him as he slept in drugged
 sleep, and carried him to a hidden dell. But Beleg as he laboured
 to unloose Turin's fetters pricked his foot,  and he  was roused,
 and  dreaming  that  he  was  surrounded   by  Orcs   that  would
 torment  him,  seized  Beleg's  sword  and slew  him ere  he knew
 him.  Gwindor  buried  Beleg,  and  led  Turin  away, for  a dumb
 madness of grief was on him.                                     

                                 490.                               
                                                                   
  $267.  Through   great   perils   Gwindor   led    Turin   towards
 Nargothrond,  and  they  came  to  the  pools  of Ivrin,  and there
 Turin  wept  and  was  healed  of  his  madness. Gwindor  and Turin
 came  at  last  to  Nargothrond, and  were admitted;  for Finduilas
 daughter  of  Orodreth,  to  whom   Gwindor  had   been  betrothed,
 alone  of  his  people  knew  him  again  after  the   torments  of
 Angband.                                                           
                                                                   
                                490-5.                              
                                                                   
  $268.  During   this   time  Turin   dwelt  in   Nargothrond,  and
 became  great  in  counsel  and  renown.  The  Noldor  took Beleg's
 sword  which  Turin had  kept, and  re-forged it,  and it  was made
 into  a  black  sword  with edges  as of  fire. Now  Turin [added:]
 had  begged  Gwindor  to  conceal  his right  name, for  the horror
 he had of his slaying of Beleg and  dread lest  it were  learned in
 Doriath;  and  he  /  had given  out his  name as  Iarwaeth [struck
 out:  the  blood-stained],  but  now  it  was  changed  to Mormegil
 the  Blacksword,  because  of  the  rumour of  his deeds  with that
 weapon  in  vengeance  for  Beleg;  but the  sword itself  he named
 Gurthang  Iron of  Death. Then  the heart  of Finduilas  was turned
 from  Gwindor  (who  because  of  his  pains  in  Angband  was half
 crippled) and her love  was given  to Turin;  and Turin  loved her,
 but  spoke  not, being  loyal to  Gwindor. [Added:]  Then Finduilas
 being  torn in  heart  became  sorrowful;  and  she  grew  wan  and
 silent.  /  But  Gwindor  seeing  what had  befallen was  bitter at
 heart,  and  cursed  Morgoth,  who  could  thus pursue  his enemies
 with  woe,  whithersoever  they might  run. 'And  now at  last,' he
 said,  'I  believe  the tale  of Angband  that Morgoth  hath cursed
 Hurin and all his kin.'                                            
  $269. And  he  spoke  on  a  time  to  Finduilas,  saying: 'Daugh-
 ter  of the  House of  Finrod, let  no grief  lie between  us, for,
 though Morgoth hath laid my life in ruin, thee still I love. But go
 thou whither love leads thee! Yet beware! Not meet  is it  that the
 Elder  Children  should  stoop  to the  Younger. Neither  will fate
 suffer it, save once or  twice only  for some  high cause  of doom.
 But this Man is not Beren.  A doom  indeed lies  on him,  as seeing
 eyes may well read  in him,  but a  dark doom.  Enter not  into it!
 And if thou wilt, then thy love shall betray thee to bitterness and
 death. For behold!  this is  not Iarwaeth  nor Mormegil,  but Turin
 son of Hurin.'                                                     

                                                               
                                                                  
   $270.  And   Gwindor   told   how   Hurin's  torment   and  curse
 was  known  to  all  in  Angband;  and said:  'Doubt not  the power
 of Morgoth Bauglir! Is  it not  written in  me?' But  Finduilas was
 silent.                                                           
   $271. And  later  in  like  manner  Gwindor  spoke to  Turin; but
 Turin answered: 'In love I hold thee  for rescue  and safe-keeping.
 And even were it not so, still I would do  thee no  hurt willingly,
 who  hast  suffered  such  great wrongs.  Finduilas indeed  I love,
 but fear not! Shall the accursed  wed, and  give as  morrowgift his
 curse  to  one  that  he loves?  Nay, not  even to  one of  his own
 people. But now  thou hast  done ill  to me,  friend, to  bewray my
 right  name,  and  call  my  doom  upon  me,   from  which   I  had
 thought to lie hidden.'                                           
   $272. But  when  it  became  known  to  Orodreth  [and  the  folk
 of  Nargothrond  that  Iarwaeth  was  indeed  the  son   of  Hurin,
 then  greater  became  his  honour  among  them,  and   they  would
 do  >]  that  Iarwaeth was  indeed the  son of  Hurin, he  gave him
 great  honour,  and  did  I all  that he  counselled. And  he being
 troubled by this new grief (for ever the love of Finduilas  that he
 would  not  take grew  greater) found  solace only  in war.  And in
 that  time  the folk  of Nargothrond  forsook their  secrecy, their
 war  of  ambush  and  hunting,  and  went  openly  to  battle;  and
 they [struck out: allied  themselves with  Handir of  Brethil, and]
 built a  bridge over  the Narog  from the  great doors  of Felagund
 for the  swifter passage  of their  arms. And  they drove  the Orcs
 and  beasts  of  Angband  out  of  all the  land between  Narog and
 Sirion  eastward,  and  westward  to  the  Nenning and  the borders
 of  the  desolate  Falas.  Thus  Nargothrond  was  revealed  to the
 wrath and malice of Morgoth, but still at  Turin's prayer  his true
 name  was  not  spoken,  and  rumour  spoke  only  of  Mormegil  of
 Nargothrond.                                                      
                                                                  
   The following entry, for the year 492, was  struck out  later. Its
   replacement, an inserted annal for  the year  400, has  been given
   earlier ($120).                                                 
                                                                  
   $273. [Rejected  annal  for  the  year   492]  Here   Meglin  son
 of  Eol  was  sent  by  his  mother Isfin  to Gondolin,  and Turgon
 rejoiced to hear tidings  of his  sister whom  he had  deemed lost,
 and he received Meglin  with honour  as his  sister-son. But  it is
 said  that  Meglin,  having  been  nurtured   in  the   shadows  of
 Brethil, was never wholly at ease in the light of Gondolin.       

                                                                    
                                     494.                               
                                                                       
         $274. In  this  time,  when  because of  the deeds  of Mormegil
      of  Nargothrond  the  power  of  Morgoth   was  stemmed   west  of
      Sirion,  Morwen  and  Nienor  fled  at  last  from  Dor  Lomin and
      came  to Doriath,  seeking tidings  of Turin.  But they  found him
      gone,  and  in  Doriath  no tidings  had been  heard of  his name,
      since  the  Orcs  took  him,  five  years before.  [Added:] Morwen
      and  Nienor  remained  as  guests  of  Thingol,  and  were treated
      with honour, but they were  filled with  sorrow, and  yearned ever
      for tidings of Turin. /                                           
                                                                       
                                     495.                               
                                                                       
         $275. Here  [added:]  Handir  of  Brethil  was  slain   in  the
      spring  in  fighting  with Orcs  that invaded  his land.  The Orcs
      gathered in the passes  of Sirion.  Late in  the year  having thus
      mustered   great   strength   /   Morgoth   assailed  Nargothrond.
      Glaurung  the  Uruloke passed  [into Hithlum  and there  did great
      evil,  and he  came thence  out of  Dorlomin over  the Erydwethrin
      >]  over  Anfauglith,  and  came  thence into  the north  vales of
      Sirion and  there did  great evil,  and he  came thence  under the
      shadows of the  Erydwethrin /  with a  great army  of Orcs  in his
      train, and he defiled the Eithil  Ivrin. Then  he passed  into the
      realm  of  Nargothrond,  burning  the  Talath Dirnen,  the Guarded
      Plain,  between  Narog  and  Sirion.   Then  Orodreth   and  Turin
      [struck out: and Handir of  Brethil; added  later:] and  Gwindor /
      went up  against him,  but they  were defeated  upon the  field of
      Tum-halad;  and  Orodreth  was  slain  [struck  out:  and  Handir.
      Added  later:]  and Gwindor.  [Pencilled in  margin: Turin  in the
      battle  wore  the  Dragon-helm.]  Turin  bore  Gwindor out  of the
      rout, and escaping to a wood there laid him on the grass.         
         $276. And  Gwindor  said,  'Let  bearing  pay for  bearing! But
      hapless  was  mine,  and  vain  is  thine.  For  now  my  body  is
      marred, and I  must leave  Middle-earth; and  though I  love thee,
      son of Hurin, yet I rue the day I took thee from the Orcs. But for
      thy prowess, still I should  have love  and life,  and Nargothrond
      should  stand.  Now  if  you  love  me,  leave  me! Haste  thee to
      Nargothrond and save Finduilas. And this last I  say to  thee: she
      alone stands between thee and thy doom. If thou fail her, it shall
      not fail to find thee. Farewell!'                                
         $277.  Therefore   Turin   sped   now   back   to  Nargothrond,
      mustering such of  the rout  as he  met on  the way.  [Added:] And

 the leaves fell from the trees in a great wind as they went,  for the
 autumn  was  passing  to  a  dire  winter.  And  one,   Ornil,  said:
 'Even  so  fall  the  people  of  Nargothrond,  but  for  them  there
 shall  come  no  Spring.'  And  Turin  hastened,  I but  Glaurung and
 his  army  were  there  before  him  (because  of  his  succouring of
 Gwindor),  and  they  came  suddenly,  ere  those  that were  left on
 guard  were  aware  of  the  defeat.  In  that  day  the  bridge that
 Turin  let build  over Narog  proved an  evil; for  it was  great and
 mightily  made  and  could  not  swiftly be  destroyed, and  thus the
 enemy  came  readily  over  the  deep  river,  and  Glaurung  came in
 full  fire  against  the  Doors  of  Felagund,  and  overthrew  them,
 and passed within.                                                  
   $278.  And   even   as   Turin   came  up   the  ghastly   sack  of
 Nargothrond   was   wellnigh   achieved.  The   Orcs  had   slain  or
 driven  off  all  that  remained  in  arms, and  they were  even then
 ransacking  all  the  great  halls   and  chambers,   plundering  and
 destroying;  but  those  of  the  women  and  maidens  that  were not
 burned or  slain they  had herded  on the  terrace before  the doors,
 as  slaves  to  be taken  to Angband.  Upon this  ruin and  woe Turin
 came,  and  none  could  withstand  him;  or  would  not,  though  he
 struck  down  all  before  him,  and  passed  over  the  bridge,  and
 hewed his way towards the captives.                                 
   $279.  And   now   he   stood   alone,   for   the  few   that  had
 followed  him  had  fled  into  hiding.  But  behold! in  that moment
 Glaurung  the  fell  issued  from  the  gaping  Doors   of  Felagund,
 and  lay  behind,  between  Turin  and  the  bridge.   Then  suddenly
 he spoke by the evil spirit  that was  in him,  saying: Hail,  son of
 Hurin. Well met!'                                                   
   $280. Then  Turin  sprang  about,  and  strode  against   him,  and
 fire  was  in  his  eyes,  and the  edges of  Gurthang shone  as with
 flame.  But  Glaurung  withheld  his  blast,  and  opened   wide  his
 serpent-eyes   and  gazed   upon  Turin.   And  without   fear  Turin
 looked  in  those  eyes  as  he   raised  up   his  sword,   and  lo!
 straightway  he  fell  under the  dreadful spell  of the  dragon, and
 was  as  one  turned  to  stone.  Thus  long  they   stood  unmoving,
 silent  before  the  great  Doors  of  Felagund. Then  Glaurung spoke
 again,  taunting  Turin.  [Pencilled  against  this   paragraph:  For
 while  he  wore  the  Dragon-helm  of  Galion  he  was  proof against
 the glance of Glaurung. Then the Worm perceiving this (sic)]        
   $281. 'Evil  have  been  all  thy  ways,  son  of Hurin,'  said he.
 'Thankless fosterling, outlaw, slayer of thy  friend, thief  of love,
 usurper  of  Nargothrond,  captain  foolhardy,  and  deserter  of thy

 kin.  [Struck  out:  How  long wilt  thou live  to bring  ruin upon
 all  that  love thee?]  As thralls  thy mother  and sister  live in
 Dorlomin,  in  misery  and  want.  Thou  art  arrayed as  a prince,
 but they go in rags. For thee they yearn, but  thou reckest  not of
 that. Glad may thy father be to learn that he hath  such a  son, as
 learn  he  shall.'  And Turin  being under  the spell  of Glaurung,
 harkened  to  his  words,  and  saw  himself  as  in a  mirror mis-
 shapen  by  malice, and  loathed that  which he  saw. And  while he
 was  yet  held  by the  eyes of  Glaurung in  torment of  mind, and
 could  not stir,  at a  sign from  the dragon  the Orcs  drove away
 the  herded  captives,  and  they  passed  nigh  to Turin  and went
 over  the  bridge.  And  behold!  among  them  was  Finduilas,  and
 she held out her arms to  Turin, and  called him  by name.  But not
 until her cries and the wailing of the captives  was lost  upon the
 northward  road  did  Glaurung  release  Turin,  and  he  might not
 even stop his ears against that voice that haunted him after.     
   $282.  Then   suddenly   Glaurung   withdrew   his   glance,  and
 waited;  and  Turin  stirred slowly  as one  waking from  a hideous
 dream.  Then  coming  to  himself with  a loud  cry he  sprang upon
 the dragon. But Glaurung laughed, saying: 'If  thou wilt  be slain,
 I will slay thee gladly. But small help will that be to  Morwen and
 Nienor. No  heed didst  thou give  to the  cries of  the Elf-woman.
 Wilt thou deny also the bond of thy blood?'                       
   $283. But  Turin  drawing  back  his sword  stabbed at  his eyes;
 and  Glaurung  coiling back  swiftly towered  above him,  and said:
 'Nay!  At  least  thou  art valiant.  Beyond all  whom I  have met.
 And  they  lie  who  say  that  we of  our part  do not  honour the
 valour of foes. Behold! I  offer thee  freedom. Go  to thy  kin, if
 thou canst. Get thee gone! And if Elf or Man be  left to  make tale
 of these days, then surely in scorn  they will  name thee,  if thou
 spurnest this gift.'                                              
   $284. Then  Turin,  being  yet  bemused  by   the  eyes   of  the
 dragon,  as  were  he  treating with  a foe  that could  know pity,
 believed  the  words  of  Glaurung,  and  turning  away  sped  over
 the  bridge.  But  as  he  went Glaurung  spake behind  him, saying
 in a fell voice: 'Haste  thee now,  son of  Hurin, to  Dorlomin! Or
 maybe the  Orcs shall  come before  thee, once  again. And  if thou
 tarry for Finduilas,  then never  shalt thou  see Morwen  or Nienor
 again; and they will  curse thee.'  [Pencilled in  margin: Glaurung
 taunts him with the Dragon-helm.]                                 
   $285. But  Turin  passed   away  on   the  northward   road,  and
 Glaurung   laughed  once   more,  for   he  had   accomplished  the

 errand  of  his  Master.  Then  he  turned  to  his own  pleasure, and
 sent  forth his  blast, and  burned all  about him.  But all  the Orcs
 that  were  busy  in  the  sack  he  routed  forth,  and   drove  them
 away,  and  denied  them  their  plunder  even to  the least  thing of
 worth.  The  bridge  then  he  broke down  and cast  into the  foam of
 Narog,  and  being  thus  secure,  he  gathered  all  the   hoard  and
 riches  of  Felagund  and  heaped  them,  and  lay  then upon  them in
 the innermost hall, and rested a while.                                
                                                                       
   $286.  Now   Turin   hastened   along   the   ways  to   the  North,
 through   the  lands   now  desolate,   between  Narog   and  Taiglin,
 [added:]  and  the  Fell  Winter  came  down  to  meet  him;  for that
 year  snow  fell  ere  autumn  was  passed, and  spring came  late and
 cold. / Ever it seemed to him as he went  that he  heard the  cries of
 Finduilas,  calling  his  name  by  wood  and by  hill, and  great was
 his  anguish;  but  his  heart being  hot with  the lies  of Glaurung,
 and  seeing  ever  in his  mind the  Orcs burning  the house  of Hurin
 or  putting  Morwen  and  Nienor  to  torment,  he  held  on  his way,
 turning never aside.                                                   
                                                                       
   There follows here a section of the text  where the  original writing
   was heavily emended, after which the greater part of the  section was
   struck out and replaced. I give first the form as originally written.
   For  the  antecedents  of  the  Grey Annals  (other than  the entries
   concerning Tuor) from  this point  to the  end of  the tale  of Turin
   ($349) see the commentary on $$287 ff.                               
                                                                       
   $287. At  last  worn  and  hungry  by  long  days  of   journey,  as
 the  sad  autumn  drew  on  he  came  to  the  pools  of  Ivrin, where
 before  he  had  been  healed.  But  they  were  broken  and  defiled,
 and  he  could  not  drink  there  again.  An ill  token it  seemed to
 him.                                                                   
   $288. Thus   he  came   through  the   passes  into   Dorlomin,  and
 even  as  winter  fell  with  snow  from  the  North,  he  found again
 the  land  of  his  childhood.  Bare  was  it  and  bleak.  And Morwen
 was  gone.  Empty  stood  her  house,  broken  and  cold. It  was more
 than  a  year  since she  departed to  Doriath. Brodda  the Easterling
 (who   had   wedded   Morwen's   kinswoman   Airin)    had   plundered
 her house, and taken all  that was  left of  her goods.  Then Turin's.
 eyes  were  opened,  and  the  spell  of  Glaurung  was   broken,  and
 he  knew  the  lies  wherewith  he  had  been  cheated.  And   in  his
 anguish  and  his wrath  for the  evils that  his mother  had suffered
 he  slew  Brodda  in  his  own  hall,  and  fled  then  out  into  the
 winter, a hunted man.                                                  

                 
                                                                         
  $289. Tidings came soon to Thingol in Doriath  of the  fall of           
 Nargothrond;  and  [it  was  revealed  now  that  Mormegil was           
 indeed Turin son of Hurin >] fear walked on the borders of the           
 Hidden Kingdom.                                                          
                                                                         
  $290. In  this   same  year   Tuor  son   of  Huor   was  led   by  the
 sendings  of  Ulmo  to  a  secret  way  that  led  from  Mithrim,  by  a
 channel  of  water  running  under  earth,  and  so  came  to  the  deep
 cleft  at  the  head of  Drengist, and  passed out  of the  knowledge of
 the  spies   of  Morgoth.   Then  journeying   alone  warily   down  the
 coasts  he  came  through  the  Falas  and  the  ruined  Havens  and  so
 reached  at  the  year's  end  the  Mouths  of  Sirion. [Added  and then
 struck  out:  In  the spring  of this  year also  Handir of  Brethil was
 slain in fighting with the Orcs that ventured into Brethil.]             
                                                                         
                                   496.                                   
                                                                         
  $291.  Too   late  now   Turin  sought   for  Finduilas,   roaming  the
 woods  under  the  shadow  of  Eryd   Wethion,  wild   and  wary   as  a
 beast;  and  he  waylaid  all  the  roads  that went  north to  the pass
 of  Sirion. Too  late. For  all trails  had grown  old, or  had perished
 in  the  winter.  But  thus  it  was   that  Turin   passing  southwards
 down  Taiglin  came  upon  some  of  the  folk  of  Haleth   that  dwelt
 still  in  the  forest  of  Brethil. They  were dwindled  now by  war to
 a  small  people,  and  dwelt  for  the  most  part  secretly  within  a
 stockade  upon  the  Amon  Obel  deep  in  the  forest.   Ephel  Brandir
 was  that  place  named;  for  Brandir  son  of  Handir  was  now  their
 lord  since  [Handir  had  not  returned  from  the  stricken  field  of
 Tum-halad.   >]   since   Handir   his  father   had  been   slain.  And
 Brandir  was  no  man  of  war,   being  lame   by  a   misadventure  in
 childhood;   and   he  was   gentle  moreover   in  mood,   loving  wood
 rather  than  metal,  and  the  knowledge  of  all  things that  grow in
 the earth rather than other lore.                                        
                                                                         
  At this point the rejected section of the narrative, beginning at $287,
  ends. The text that replaced it belongs to  the time  of the  writing of
  the manuscript.                                                         
                                                                         
  $292. At  last  worn  by  haste  and  the  long  road  (for  [eighty >]
 forty  leagues  had  he  journeyed  without  rest)  he  came   with  the
 first ice of winter  to the  pools of  Ivrin, where  before he  had been
 healed.  But  they  were  now  but  a  frozen  mire,  and  he  could not
 drink there again.                                                       
  $293.  Thus   he   came   hardly   by    the   passes    of   Dorlomin,

                                            
                                                                 
 through  bitter snows  from the  North, and  found again  the land
 of his  childhood. Bare  was it  and bleak.  And Morwen  was gone.
 Empty  stood  her  house,  broken  and cold,  and no  living thing
 now dwelt nigh.                                                  
  $294. It so  befell that  Turin came  then to  the hall of Brodda
 the Incomer, and learned of an  old servant  of Hurin  that Brodda
 had  taken  to  wife  by  force   Airin  Hurin's   kinswoman,  and
 had  oppressed  Morwen;  and  therefore  in  the  year  before she
 had fled with Nienor, none but Airin knew whither.               
  $295. Then  Turin  strode  to  Brodda's  table, and  with threats
 learned  from  Airin  that  Morwen  went  to  Doriath to  seek her
 son. For said Airin: 'The lands were freed then  from evil  by the
 Blacksword of the South, who now hath fallen, they say.'         
  $296. Then  Turin's  eyes  were  opened, and  the last  shreds of
 Glaurung's spell left him, and for anguish, and wrath at  the lies
 that  had deluded  him, and  hatred of  the oppressors  of Morwen,
 a  black rage  seized him,  and he  slew Brodda  in his  hall, and
 other Easterlings that were his guests, and then he fled  out into
 the winter, a hunted man.                                        
  $297. But  he  was  aided  by  some  that  remained   of  Hador's
 people  and  knew  the  ways  of  the  wild,  and  with   them  he
 escaped  through  the  falling  snow  and  came  to   an  outlaws'
 refuge  in  the  southern  mountains  of  Dorlomin.  Thence  Turin
 passed  again  from  the land  of his  childhood, and  returned to
 Sirion's  vale.  His  heart  was  bitter, for  to Dorlomin  he had
 brought  only  greater  woe upon  the remnant  of his  people, and
 they were glad of his going; and this comfort  alone he  had: that
 by the  prowess of  the Blacksword  the ways  to Doriath  had been
 laid  open  to  Morwen.  And  he  said in  his heart:  'Then those
 deeds wrought not evil to all! And where else might I  have better
 bestowed  my  dear  kin, even  if I  had come  sooner? For  if the
 Girdle of Melian is broken, then last  hope is  ended. Nay,  it is
 better  as  it  hath  turned  out.  For  behold!  a shadow  I cast
 wheresoever  I  come.  Let  Melian  keep  them!  But I  will leave
 them in peace unshadowed for a while.'                           
                                                                 
                                496.                              
                                                                 
  $298. Here  Tuor  son  of  Huor  met  Bronwe  of  the  Noldor  at
 the  mouths  of  Sirion;  and  they  began  a   journey  northward
 along  the  great river.  But as  they dwelt  in Nan  Tathrin, and
 delayed because of the  peace and  beauty of  that country  in the
 spring,  Ulmo himself  came up  Sirion and  appeared to  Tuor, and

    the  yearning for  the Great  Sea was  ever after  in his  heart. But
    now  at  Ulmo's  command  he  went  up  Sirion,  and  by   the  power
    that  Ulmo  set  upon  them  Tuor  and   Bronwe  found   the  guarded
    entrance   to   Gondolin.   There  Tuor   was  brought   before  King
    Turgon,  and  spake  the  words  that  Ulmo  had  set  in  his mouth,
    bidding  him  depart  and  abandon  the  fair  and  mighty  city that
    he  had  built,  and  go  down  to  the  Sea.  But  Turgon  would not
    listen to this counsel; and [Meglin later  >] Glindur  his sister-son
    spoke  against  Tuor.  But  Tuor  was  held  in  honour  in Gondolin,
    for his kindred's sake.                                              
                                                                        
      This annal  was much  emended and  added to  (and the  date changed
      to 495), and then (since the text was now in a very confused state)
      struck out  as far  as 'bidding  him depart'  and  replaced  by the
      following version on a detached slip:                              
                                                                        
                                     495.                                
                                                                        
       $299. Now  Tuor  Huor's  son  had  lived  as  an  outlaw   in  the
    caves  of  Androth  above  Mithrim  for  four   years,  and   he  had
    done  great  hurt to  the Easterlings,  and Lorgan  set a  price upon
    his  head.  But  Ulmo,  who   had  chosen   him  as   the  instrument
    of his designs, caused him to go by secret  ways out  of the  land of
    Dorlomin,  so  that  his  going  was  hidden  from  all  the servants
    of   Morgoth;   and  he   came  to   Nivrost.  But   there,  becoming
    enamoured  of the  Sea, he  tarried long;  and in  the autumn  of the
    year  Ulmo  himself  appeared  to  Tuor,  and  bade  him  to  depart,
    and  go  to  the  hidden  city  of  Turgon.  And   he  sent   to  him
    Voronwe,  last  of  the  mariners  of  Turgon,  to  guide   him;  and
    Voronwe  led  Tuor  eastward  along  the  eaves  of  Eryd  Wethion to
    Ivrin.  (And  there they  saw Turin  pass, but  spoke not  with him.)
    And  at  the last  by the  power that  Ulmo set  upon them  they came
    to   the   guarded  gate   of  Gondolin.   There  Tuor   was  brought
    before  the  king,  and  spoke  the counsel  of Ulmo,  bidding Turgon
    [the  following  is  the  text  already  given  in  $298]  depart and
    abandon  the fair  and mighty  city that  he had  built, and  go down
    to  the  Sea.  But  Turgon  would  not  listen  to this  counsel; and
    [Meglin  later  >]  Glindur  his sister-son  spoke against  Tuor. But
    Tuor was held in honour in Gondolin, for his kindred's sake.         
                                                                        
                                    [496]                                
                                                                        
       $300. Now Turin coming down from Eryd Wethion sought               
    for Finduilas in vain, roaming the woods under the shadow of         
    the  mountains,  wild  and  wary  as a  beast; and  he waylaid  all the

     
                                                                   
 roads that went north to  the passes  of Sirion.  Too late.  For all
 the  trails  had  grown  old,  or  were washed  away by  the winter.
 But  thus  it  was  that,  passing  southwards  down  Taiglin, Turin
 came  upon  some  of  the  Men  of   Brethil,  and   delivered  them
 from  Orcs  that  had  entrapped  them.  For  the  Orcs   fled  from
 Gurthang.                                                          
   $301.  He   named  himself   Wildman  of   the  Woods,   and  they
 besought  him  to  come and  dwell with  them; but  he said  that he
 had  an  errand  yet  unachieved:   to  seek   Finduilas  Orodreth's
 daughter.   Then   Dorlas,   leader   of   the  woodmen,   told  the
 grievous  tidings of  her death.  For the  woodmen at  the Crossings
 of  Taiglin  had  waylaid  the  orc-host  that  led the  captives of
 Nargothrond,  hoping  to  rescue  them;  but  the  Orcs had  at once
 cruelly slain their prisoners, and Finduilas they  pinned to  a tree
 with a spear. So she died, saying  at the  last: 'Tell  the Mormegil
 that Finduilas  is here.'  Therefore they  had laid  her in  a mound
 near that place, and named it Haud-en-Ellas.                       
   $302. Turin  bade  them  lead  him  thither,  and  there  he  fell
 down  into  a  darkness  of  grief,  and  was  near  to  death. Then
 Dorlas  by  his  black  sword,  the  fame  whereof  had   come  even
 into the deeps of Brethil, and by his quest of the  king's daughter,
 knew  that  this  Wildman  was  indeed  the  Mormegil   of  Nargoth-
 rond  [added:]  (whom  rumour  said   was  the   son  of   Hurin  of
 Dorlomin).  The  woodmen  therefore  lifted  him  up,  and  bore him
 away  to  their  homes. These  were set  in a  stockade upon  a high
 place in  the forest,  Ephel Brandir  upon Amon  Obel; for  the folk
 of  Haleth  were  now  dwindled  by  war  to  a  small  people,  and
 Brandir  son  of  Handir  who  ruled  them  was  a  man   of  gentle
 mood,  and  lame  also  from  childhood,  and  he trusted  rather in
 secrecy than in deeds  of war  to save  them from  the power  of the
 North.                                                             
   $303. Therefore  he  feared  the  tidings  that   Dorlas  brought,
 and  when  he  beheld the  face of  Turin as  he lay  on the  bier a
 cloud  of  foreboding  lay  on  his  heart. Nonetheless  being moved
 by his  woe, he  took him  into his  own house  and tended  him; for
 he had  skill in  healing. And  with the  beginning of  spring Turin
 cast off his darkness, and  grew hale  again; and  he arose,  and he
 thought  that  he  would  remain  in  Brethil,  hidden, and  put his
 shadow  behind  him,  forsaking  the  past.  He  took   therefore  a
 new  name,  Turambar,  and  besought  the  woodmen  to  forget  that
 he  was  a  stranger  among  them  or  ever  bore  any  other  name.
 Nonetheless  he  would  not  wholly  leave  deeds  of  war,  for  he

 could not  endure that  the Orcs  should come  to the  Crossings of
 Taiglin or draw nigh  Haud-en-Ellas, and  he made  that a  place of
 dread  for them  so that  they shunned  it. But  he laid  his black
 sword by, and used rather the bow.                                 
                                                                   
   $304.  Now   new   tidings  came   to  Doriath   concerning  Nar-
 gothrond,  for  some  that  had  escaped  from  the defeat  and the
 sack, and had survived the fell winter in the wild, came at last to
 Thingol, seeking  refuge. But  their tales  were at  variance, some
 saying   that   Nargothrond   was   empty,  others   that  Glaurung
 abode  there;  some  saying that  all the  lords and  captains were
 slain,  others  that, nay,  the Mormegil  had returned  to Nargoth-
 rond and there was made a prisoner under the  spell of  the dragon.
 But  all  declared that  it was  known to  many in  Nargothrond ere
 the  end  that  the  Mormegil  was  none  other than  Turin Hurin's
 son.  [Pencilled  addition:  And  when  she  heard  of  the Dragon-
 helm Morwen knew this was true.]                                   
   $305.  Then   Morwen   was    distraught,   and    refusing   the
 counsel  of  Melian, she  rode forth  alone into  the wild  to seek
 her  son,  or  some true  tidings of  him. Thingol, therefore, sent
 Mablung  after  her,   with  many   hardy  march-wards,   and  some
 riders,  to  guard  her,  and to  learn what  news they  might; but
 Nienor  joined  this company  secretly in  disguise, for  she hoped
 that  when  Morwen  saw  that  her  daughter  would  go   with  her
 into peril, if she went on, then she would be willing to  return to
 Doriath  and  leave  the  seeking  of   tidings  to   Mablung.  But
 Morwen,   being   fey,   would  not   be  persuaded,   and  Mablung
 perforce led  the ladies  with him;  and they  passed out  over the
 wide  plain  and came  to Amon  Ethir, a  league before  the bridge
 of  Nargothrond.  There  Mablung  set  a  guard  of   riders  about
 Morwen  and  her  daughter, and  forbade them  go further.  But he,
 seeing  from the  hill no  sign of  any enemy,  went down  with his
 scouts to the Narog, as stealthily as they could go.               
   $306. But  Glaurung  was  aware  of  all  that  they did,  and he
 came forth in heat of wrath,  and lay  into the  river; and  a vast
 vapour  and  foul  reek  went   up,  in   which  Mablung   and  his
 company  were  blinded   and  lost.   Then  Glaurung   passed  east
 over Narog.                                                        
   $307. Seeing  the  onset  of  Glaurung   the  guards   upon  Amon
 Ethir sought to lead the ladies away,  and fly  with them  with all
 speed  back  eastwards;  but  the  wind bore  the blank  mists upon
 them,  and  their  horses  were  maddened  by   the  dragon-stench,

                                                                
                                                                   
 and  were  ungovernable, and  ran this  way and  that, so  that some
 were  dashed  against  trees and  slain, and  others were  borne far
 away.  Thus  the  ladies  were lost,  and of  Morwen indeed  no sure
 tidings  came ever  to Doriath  after. But  Nienor, being  thrown by
 her  steed  yet unhurt,  groped her  way back  to Amon  Ethir, there
 to  await  Mablung,  and  came  thus  above the  reek into  the sun-
 light.  [Thus she  came alone  face to  face with  Glaurung himself,
 who  had  climbed  up  from  the  other  side.  >] And  looking west
 she  looked  straight  into  the  eyes of  Glaurung, whose  head lay
 upon the hill-top.                                                 
   $308. Her  will  strove with  him for  a while,  but he  put forth
 his  power,  and  having  learned   who  she   was  (as   indeed  he
 guessed full well) he  constrained her  to gaze  into his  eyes, and
 laid a spell of utter darkness and forgetfulness, so that  she could
 remember  nothing  that  had   ever  befallen   her,  nor   her  own
 name,  nor  the  name  of  any  other  thing;  and  for   many  days
 indeed she could neither hear, nor see,  nor stir  by her  own will.
 Then  Glaurung  left  her  standing  alone upon  Amon Ethir,  and he
 went back to Nargothrond.                                          
   $309.  Now   Mablung,   who  greatly   daring  had   explored  the
 halls  of  Felagund  when  Glaurung  left  them,  fled from  them at
 the  approach  of  the  dragon,  and  returned  to  Amon  Ethir. The
 sun sank and night fell as he climbed  the hill,  and to  his dismay
 he  found none  there, save  Nienor standing  alone under  the stars
 as  an  image  of  stone.  No  word  she spoke  or heard,  but would
 follow, if he took up her hand. Therefore in great grief he  led her
 away,  though it  seemed to  him vain;  for they  were both  like to
 perish, succourless, in the wild.                                  
   $310.  But   they   were   found  by   three  of   Mablung's  com-
 panions,  and  slowly  they  journeyed  northward  and  eastward  to
 the fences of  Doriath where,  nigh to  the inflowing  of Esgalduin,
 there was the secret gate by which those of  its folk  that returned
 from  without  were  wont to  enter. Slowly  the strength  of Nienor
 returned  as  they  drew   nearer  to   Doriath  and   further  from
 Glaurung,  but  as  yet  she  could  not speak  or hear,  and walked
 blindly as she was led.                                            
   $311. But even as they  drew near  the fences  at last  she closed
 her  wild  staring eyes,  and would  sleep; and  they laid  her down
 and  she  slept;  and  they  rested  also,  for  they  were  utterly
 outworn.  Being thus  less heedful  than was  wise, they  were there
 assailed  by  an  Orc-band,  such as  now roamed  often as  nigh the
 fences  of  Doriath  as  they  dared.  But   Nienor  in   that  hour

 recovered hearing and  sight, and  being awakened  by the  cries of
 the Orcs, sprang up in terror as a  wild thing,  and fled  ere they
 could come to her.                                                
   $312. Then  the  Orcs  gave  chase,  and  the  Elves  after;  but
 though  they  overtook  the  Orcs  indeed  and  slew them  ere they
 could  harm  her,  Nienor  escaped  them.  For  she  fled  as  in a
 madness of fear, swifter than a deer, and tore off all  her raiment
 as she ran, until she was naked [bracketed later:] but for  a short
 kirtle.  And  she  passed  out of  their sight,  running northward,
 and  though  they  sought  her  long  they found  her not,  nor any
 trace  of  her.  And  at  last  Mablung  in  despair   returned  to
 Menegroth  and  told  all  his  tidings.  [Added:  Greatly  grieved
 were  Thingol  and  Melian;   but  Mablung   went  forth   and  for
 three years sought in vain for tidings of Morwen and Nienor.]     
   $313. But  Nienor  ran  on   into  the   woods,  until   she  was
 spent, and then  fell and  slept, and  awoke; and  behold it  was a
 bright morning, and she rejoiced in light as it  were a  new thing,
 and all things else that she saw  seemed new  and strange,  for she
 had  no  names  for  them.   Nothing  did   she  remember   save  a
 darkness  that  lay  behind her,  and a  shadow of  fear; therefore
 warily she went as  a hunted  beast, and  became famished,  for she
 had no food and knew  not how  to seek  it. But  coming at  last to
 the Crossings of Taiglin she went over, seeking the shelter  of the
 great trees of Brethil, for she was  afraid, and  it seemed  to her
 that  the  darkness  was overtaking  her again  from which  she had
 fled.                                                             
   $314. But  it  was a  great storm  of thunder  that came  up from
 the  South,  and  in  terror she  cast herself  down by  the mound,
 Haud-en-Ellas  [pencilled  in  margin:  Elleth], stopping  her ears
 from the  thunder, but  the rain  smote her  and drenched  her, and
 she lay like a wild beast that is dying.                          
   $315. There  Turambar  found  her,  as  he  came  to  the  Cross-
 ings  of  Taiglin,  having  heard  a  rumour  of  Orcs  that roamed
 near.  And  seeing  in a  flare of  lightning the  body of  a slain
 maiden  (as  it  seemed)  lying  upon  the  mound of  Finduilas, he
 was  stricken  [suddenly  with  fear  o]  to  the  heart.  But  the
 woodmen  lifted  her  up, and  Turambar cast  his cloak  about her,
 and  they  took  her  to  a  lodge  nearby,  and  bathed   her  and
 warmed  her  and  gave her  food. And  as soon  as she  looked upon
 Turambar  she  was comforted;  for it  seemed to  her that  she had
 found  something  at  last that  she long  sought in  her darkness;
 and she laid her hand in his and would not be parted from him.

                                                                  
                                                                     
   $316. But  when   he  asked   her  concerning   her  name   and  her
 kin  and  her  misadventure,  then  she  became  troubled  as  a child
 that  perceives  that   something  is   demanded  but   cannot  under-
 stand  what  it  be.  And  she  burst  into tears.  Therefore Turambar
 said: 'Be not troubled! Doubtless thy tale is too sad yet to  tell. It
 shall wait. But a name thou  must have,  and I  will call  thee Niniel
 (tear-maiden).'  And  at  that  name  she  shook  her  head,  but said
 Niniel.  That  was  the  first  word  she  spoke  after  her darkness,
 and it remained her name among the woodmen ever after.               
   $317.  The   next  day   they  bore   her  towards   Ephel  Brandir,
 but  at  the  falls  of  Celebros  a  great  shuddering came  upon her
 (wherefore  afterwards  that  place  was   called  Nen   Girith),  and
 ere  she  came  to  the  home  of  the  woodmen  she  was  sick  of  a
 fever. She lay long in her sickness, but  was healed  by the  skill of
 Brandir  and  the  care  of  the  leech-women  of  Brethil;   and  the
 women  taught  her  language  as  to  an   infant.  Ere   autumn  came
 she  was  hale  again,  and  could   speak,  but   remembered  nothing
 before  she  was  found  by  Turambar.   Brandir  loved   her  dearly,
 but  all her  heart was  given to  Turambar. All  that year  since the
 coming  of  Niniel  there  was  peace  in  Brethil,  and the  Orcs did
 not trouble the woodmen.                                             
                                                                     
                                  497.                                
                                                                     
   $318. Turambar  still  remained  at  peace  and  went  not  to  war.
 His heart turned  to Niniel,  and he  asked her  in marriage;  but for
 that time  she delayed  in spite  of her  love. For  Brandir foreboded
 he  knew  not  what,  and  sought  to  restrain  her,  rather  for her
 sake  than  his  own  or  rivalry  with Turambar;  and he  revealed to
 her  that  Turambar   was  Turin   son  of   Hurin,  and   though  she
 knew  not  the  name  a  shadow  fell  on  her  heart.  This  Turambar
 learned and was ill pleased with Brandir.                            
                                                                     
                                  498.                                
                                                                     
   $319.  In   the   spring   of  this   year  Turambar   asked  Niniel
 again,  and  vowed  that  he  would  now wed  her, or  go back  to war
 in  the  wild.  And  Niniel  took   him  with   joy,  and   they  were
 wedded  at   the  mid-summer,   and  the   Woodmen  of   Brethil  made
 a  great  feast.  But  ere  the  end  of the  year Glaurung  sent Orcs
 of  his   dominion  against   Brethil;  and   Turambar  sat   at  home
 deedless,  for  he  had  promised Niniel  that he  would go  to battle
 only  if  their  home  was  assailed.  But  the woodmen  were worsted,
 and  Dorlas  upbraided  him that  he would  not aid  the folk  that he

                                     
                                                                 
 had  taken for  his own.  Then Turambar  arose and  brought forth
 again his black sword, and he gathered a great  force of  the Men
 of  Brethil,  and they  defeated the  Orcs utterly.  But Glaurung
 heard  tidings  that  the  Black  Sword  was  in Brethil,  and he
 pondered what he had heard, devising new evil.                   
                                                                 
                                499.                              
                                                                 
   $320. Niniel conceived in the spring of this year, and became
 wan and sad. At the same time there came to Ephel Brandir the
 first  rumours  that  Glaurung had  issued from  Nargothrond. And
 Turambar sent out scouts far afield, for he now ordered things
 as he would, and few gave heed to Brandir.                       
   $321. And  as  it  drew  near  to summer  Glaurung came  to the
 borders of Brethil, and lay near the  west-shore of  Taiglin, and
 then there was great  fear among  the wood-folk,  for it  was now
 plain  that the  Great Worm  would assail  them and  ravage their
 land, and not pass by, returning to Angband,  as they  had hoped.
 They  sought  therefore  the  counsel of  Turambar. And  he coun-
 selled them that  it was  vain to  go against  the Worm  with all
 their force. Only by cunning and good  fortune could  they defeat
 him.  He  offered  therefore  himself  to  seek  Glaurung  on the
 borders of the land, and bade the rest of the people to remain at
 Ephel Brandir, but to prepare for flight. For if Glaurung had the
 victory, he would come first  to the  woodmen's homes  to destroy
 them,  and  they could  not hope  to withstand  him; but  if they
 then  scattered  far  and  wide,  then  many  might  escape,  for
 Glaurung  would not  take up  his dwelling  in Brethil  and would
 return soon to Nargothrond.                                      
   $322. Then  Turambar  asked  for  companions  willing   to  aid
 him in his peril,  and Dorlas  stood forth,  but no  others. Then
 Dorlas  upbraided  the  people,  and spoke  scorn of  Brandir who
 could not play the part of the  heir of  Haleth; and  Brandir was
 shamed before his people, and was bitter  at heart.  But Torbarth
 [pencilled above: Gwerin] kinsman of Brandir  asked his  leave to
 go in his stead. Then Turambar  said farewell  to Niniel  and she
 was  filled  with  fear  and  foreboding,  and their  parting was
 sorrowful;  but  Turambar  set  out with  his two  companions and
 went to Nen Girith.                                              
   $323. Then  Niniel  being  unable  to  endure  her   fear,  and
 unwilling to wait in the Ephel tidings of Turambar's fortune, set
 forth  after  him, and  a great  company went  with her.  At this
 Brandir  was  filled more  than ever  before with  dread, [struck

                                  
                                                                   
 out: but she heeded  not his  counsels] and  he sought  to dissuade
 her and the folk that  would go  with her  from this  rashness, but
 they  heeded  him  not.  Therefore he  renounced his  lordship, and
 all love for the  people that  had scorned  him, and  having naught
 left but his love for  Niniel, he  girt himself  with a  sword, and
 went after her; but being lame he fell far behind.                 
                                                                   
  $324.  Now   Turambar   came   to  Nen   Girith  at   sundown  and
 there learned that Glaurung  lay on  the brink  of the  high shores
 of  the  Taiglin,  and  was  like  to  move  when night  fell. Then
 he  called  those  tidings  good;  for the  Worm lay  at [Cabad-en-
 Aras  >]  Cabed-en-Aras,  where  the  river  ran  in  a   deep  and
 narrow  gorge  that  a  hunted  deer  might o'erleap,  and Turambar
 deemed  that  he  would  seek  no  further,  but  would  attempt to
 pass  over  the  gorge.  Therefore  he  purposed  to creep  down at
 dusk,  and  descend  into the  ravine under  night, and  cross over
 the wild  water, and  then climb  up the  further cliff  (which was
 less sheer) and so come at the Worm beneath his guard.             
  $325  This  counsel  he  then  took,  but  the  heart   of  Dorlas
 failed when they  came to  the races  of Taiglin  in the  dark, and
 he  dared  not  attempt  the  perilous  crossing,  but   drew  back
 and  lurked  in  the  woods  burdened  with  shame.   Turambar  and
 Torbarth,  nonetheless,  crossed over     in  safety, for  the loud
 roaring  of  the  water  drowned  all  other  sounds,  and Glaurung
 slept.  But  ere  the  middle-night  the  Worm  roused, and  with a
 great noise and blast cast his  forward part  across the  chasm and
 began  to  draw  his  bulk  after.   Turambar  and   Torbarth  were
 well-night  overcome by  the heat  and the  stench, as  they sought
 in  haste  for  a  way  up to  come at  Glaurung; and  Torbarth was
 slain  by  a  great  stone  that,  dislodged  from  on high  by the
 passage  of  the  dragon,  smote  him  upon the  head and  cast him
 into the River. So ended the last of the right  kin of  Haleth, and
 not the least valiant.                                             
  $326   Then   Turambar   summoned   all   his  will   and  courage
 and climbed the cliff alone, and he thrust  Gurthang into  the soft
 belly of the Worm, even  up to  the hilts.  But when  Glaurung felt
 his death-pang he  screamed, and  in his  dreadful throe  he heaved
 up his  bulk and  hurled himself  across the  chasm, and  there lay
 lashing and. coiling in his agony. And he set all in a  blaze about
 him, and beat all to ruin, until at last his fires died, and he lay
 still.                                                             
  $327.  Now   Gurthang   had    been   wrested    from   Turambar's

                                          
                                                                
 hand in the  throe of  Glaurung, and  clave to  the belly  of the
 Worm.  Turambar,   therefore,  crossed   the  water   once  more,
 desiring to recover his sword, and look on his foe. And  he found
 him stretched at his length, and  rolled upon  one side;  and the
 hilts  of  Gurthang  stood  in  his  belly. Then  Turambar seized
 the hilts and set his foot upon the belly,  and cried  in mockery
 of  the  Worm  and  his  words  at  Nargothrond:  'Hail,  Worm of
 Morgoth!  Well met  again! Die  now and  the darkness  have thee!
 Thus is Turin son of Hurin avenged.'                            
  $328. Then  he  wrenched  out the  sword, but  a spout  of black
 blood followed it, and  fell on  his hand,  and the  venom burned
 it.  And  thereupon  Glaurung  opened  his  eyes and  looked upon
 Turambar with such malice, that it smote  him as  a blow;  and by
 that stroke and  the anguish  of the  venom he  fell into  a dark
 swoon, and lay as one dead, and his sword was beneath him.      
                                                                
  $329. The  yells  of  Glaurung  rang  in the  woods and  came to
 the folk that waited at Nen  Girith; and  when those  that looked
 forth heard the scream of  the Worm  and saw  from afar  the ruin
 and  burning  that  he made,  they deemed  that he  had triumphed
 and was destroying those that  assailed him.  And Niniel  sat and
 shuddered beside the falling water, and at the voice  of Glaurung
 her darkness crept upon  her again,  so that  she could  not stir
 from that place of her own will.                                
  $330. Even so  Brandir  found  her,  for he  came to  Nen Girith
 at last, limping wearily.  And when  he heard  that the  Worm had
 crossed the river and had beaten down his foes his  heart yearned
 towards Niniel in pity. Yet he thought  also: 'Turambar  is dead,
 but Niniel lives.  Now maybe  she will  come with  me and  I will
 lead her away and so we shall escape the Worm together.'        
  $331. After  a  while  therefore  he stood  by Niniel  and said:
 'Come! It is time to go. If thou wilt, I will lead thee.'  And he
 took her hand, and she arose silently, and  followed him;  and in
 the darkness none saw them go.                                  
  $332. But  as  they  went  down  the  path toward  the Crossings
 the moon arose, and cast  a grey  light on  the land,  and Niniel
 said: 'Is this the  way?' And  Brandir answered  that he  knew no
 way, save to flee as they might  from the  Worm, and  escape into
 the wild. But Niniel said: 'The  Black Sword  was my  beloved and
 my husband. To  seek him  only do  I go.  What else  couldst thou
 think?' And she sped  on before  him. Then  she came  towards the
 Crossings  of  Taiglin  and  beheld  Haud-en-Ellas  in  the white

                          
                                                                    
 moonlight,  and  great  dread  came  on  her.  Then  with  a  cry she
 turned  away, casting  off her  cloak, and  fled southward  along the
 river, and her white raiment shone in the moon.                     
   $333. Thus  Brandir  saw  her  from  the  hill-side  and  turned to
 cross  her  path,  but was  still behind  her, when  she came  to the
 ruin  of  Glaurung  nigh  the  brink  of  [Cabad-en-Aras   >]  Cabed-
 en-Aras.  There  she  saw  the Worm  lying, but  heeded him  not, for
 a  man  lay  beside  him;  and  she  ran to  Turambar and  called his
 name  in  vain. Then,  finding his  hand that  was burned,  she laved
 it with tears and bound it  about with  a strip  of her  raiment, and
 kissed  him  and  cried  on  him  again  to  awake.  Thereat Glaurung
 stirred for the last time ere  he died,  and he  spoke with  his last
 breath  saying:  Hail,  Nienor  daughter  of   Hurin.  This   is  thy
 brother!  Have  joy  of  your  meeting,  and know  him: Turin  son of
 Hurin,  treacherous  to  foes,  faithless to  friends, and  [a] curse
 unto his kin. And to thee worst of all, as now thou shalt feel!'
   $334. Then  Glaurung  died,  and  the  veil   of  his   malice  was
 taken  from her,  and she  remembered all  her life;  and she  sat as
 one  stunned  with  horror   and  anguish.   Then  Brandir   who  had
 heard  all, standing  stricken upon  the edge  of the  ruin, hastened
 towards  her;  but  she  leapt  up  and  ran  like  a   hunted  deer,
 and  came  to  [Cabad-en-Aras  >]   Cabed-en-Aras,  and   there  cast
 herself over the brink, and was lost in the wild water.             
   $335.  Then   Brandir   came   and   looked   down    into   Cabad-
 en-Aras,  and  turned  away  in  horror,  and  though  he  no  longer
 desired life,  he could  not seek  death in  that roaring  water. And
 thereafter  no  man  looked  ever   again  upon   Cabad-en-Aras,  nor
 would  any  beast  or  bird  come there,  nor any  tree grow;  and it
 was named Cabad Naeramarth, the Leap of Dreadful Doom.              
   $336. But  Brandir  now  made  his  way  back  to  Nen  Girith,  to
 bring tidings to  the people;  and he  met Dorlas  in the  woods, and
 slew him (the first blood  that ever  he had  spilled and  the last).
 And  he  came  to  Nen  Girith,  and  men  cried  to him:  'Hast thou
 seen her? Lo! Niniel is gone.'                                      
   $337. And  he  answered  saying:  'Yea,  Niniel  is gone  for ever.
 The  Worm  is  dead,  and  Turambar  is dead:  and those  tidings are
 good.'  And  folk  murmured  at  these  words,  saying  that  he  was
 crazed.  But  Brandir  said:  'Hear  me  to   the  end!   Niniel  the
 beloved is also dead. She cast herself into the Taiglin desiring life
 no  more.  For  she  learned  that  she  was  none other  than Nienor
 daughter  of  Hurin,  ere  her  forgetfulness  came  upon   her,  and
 that Turambar was her brother, Turin son of Hurin.'                 

   $338. But  even  as  he  had  ceased and  the people  wept, Turin
 himself  came  before  them.  For  when  the  Worm died,  his swoon
 left him, and he fell into a deep sleep of weariness. But  the cold
 of the night troubled  him, and  the hilts  of Gurthang  drove into
 his  side,  and  he  awoke.  Then he  saw that  one had  tended his
 hand, and  he wondered  much that  he was  left nonetheless  to lie
 upon  the  cold ground;  and he  called and  hearing no  answer, he
 went in search of aid, for he was weary and sick.                 
   $339. But  when  the  people  saw  him  they  drew  back  in fear
 thinking that  it was  his unquiet  spirit; and  he said:  'Nay, be
 glad;  for the  Worm is  dead, and  I live.  But wherefore  have ye
 scorned  my  counsel,  and come  into peril?  And where  is Niniel?
 For her  I would  see. And  surely ye  did not  bring her  from her
 home?'                                                           
   $340. Then  Brandir  told  him  that  it  was  so and  Niniel was
 dead. But the wife of Dorlas cried  out: Nay,  lord, he  is crazed.
 For he came here saying  that thou  wert dead,  and called  it good
 tidings. But thou livest.'                                        
   $341. Then  Turambar  was  wroth,  and  believed  that  all  that
 Brandir  said  or  did  was  done  in  malice  towards  himself and
 Niniel,  begrudging  their love;  and he  spoke evilly  to Brandir,
 naming  him  Club-foot. Then  Brandir reported  all that  he heard,
 and  named  Niniel  Nienor  daughter  of   Hurin,  and   cried  out
 upon  Turambar  with  the  last words  of Glaurung,  that he  was a
 curse unto his kin and to all that harboured him.                 
   $342. Then  Turambar  fell  into  a  fury,  and  charged  Brandir
 with leading Niniel to her death, and  publishing with  delight the
 lies of Glaurung (if he devised  them not  himself indeed),  and he
 cursed Brandir  and slew  him, and  fled from  the people  into the
 woods.  But after  a while  his madness  left him,  and he  came to
 Haud-en-Ellas  and there  sat and  pondered all  his deeds.  And he
 cried  upon  Finduilas  to  bring  him  counsel;  for  he  knew not
 whether he  would do  now more  ill to  go to  Doriath to  seek his
 kin, or to forsake them for ever and seek death in battle.        
   $343. And  even  as  he  sat  there  Mablung  with  a  company of
 Grey-elves  came  over  the  Crossings  of  Taiglin,  and  he  knew
 Turin and hailed him, and was glad to find him  living. For  he had
 learned of the coming forth of Glaurung  and that  his path  led to
 Brethil, and at the same time he  had heard  report that  the Black
 Sword  of  Nargothrond  now  abode  there.  Therefore  he  came  to
 give warning to Turin and  help if  need be.  But Turin  said: 'Too
 late thou comest. The Worm is dead.'                              

                                       
                                                                  
  $344. Then  they  marvelled,  and  gave  him  great   praise,  but
 he cared nothing for it, and said: 'This only I  ask: give  me news
 of my kin, for  in Dorlomin  I learned  that they  had gone  to the
 Hidden Kingdom.'                                                  
  $345.  Then   Mablung   was   dismayed,   but   needs   must  tell
 to  Turin  how  Morwen  was  lost,  and  Nienor  cast into  a spell
 of  dumb  forgetfulness,  and  how  she   escaped  them   upon  the
 borders  of Doriath  and fled  northward. Then  at last  Turin knew
 that  doom  had  overtaken  him,  and  that  he  had  slain Brandir
 unjustly,  so that  the words  of Glaurung  were fulfilled  in him.
 And he laughed as one fey, crying: 'This is a bitter  jest indeed!'
 But  he  bade  Mablung  go,  and  return  to  Doriath,  with curses
 upon it. 'And a curse too on thy errand!' he said. 'This  only was
 wanting. Now comes the night! '                                   
  $346. Then  he  fled  from  them  like  the  wind,  and  they were
 amazed,   wondering  what   madness  had   seized  him;   and  they
 followed  after  him.  But  Turin  far  out-ran  them, and  came to
 Cabad-en-Aras,  and  heard  the  roaring  of  the  water,  and  saw
 that all the leaves fell sere from the trees, as though  winter had
 come.  Then  he  cursed  the  place  and  named  it   Cabad  Naera-
 marth,  and  he  drew  forth  his  sword,  that now  alone remained
 to him  of all  his possessions,  and he  said: 'Hail  Gurthang! No
 lord  or  loyalty  dost  thou  know,  save  the hand  that wieldeth
 thee.  From no  blood wilt  thou shrink.  Wilt thou  therefore take
 Turin Turambar, wilt thou slay me swiftly?'                       
  $347. And  from  the  blade  rang  a  cold  voice in  answer: Yea,
 I will drink thy blood gladly, that so  I may  forget the  blood of
 Beleg my master, and the blood  of Brandir  slain unjustly.  I will
 slay thee swiftly.'                                               
  $348. Then  Turin  set  the  hilts  upon  the  ground,   and  cast
 himself  upon  the  point  of  Gurthang, and  the black  blade took
 his  life.  But  Mablung  and  the  Elves  came  and looked  on the
 shape  of  the  Worm  lying  dead,  and  upon  the  body  of Turin,
 and  they  were  grieved;  and  when men  of Brethil  came thither,
 and they learned  the reasons  of Turin's  madness and  death, they
 were  aghast;  and  Mablung said  bitterly: 'Lo!  I also  have been
 meshed  in the  doom of  the Children  of Hurin,  and thus  with my
 tidings have slain one that I loved.'                             
  $349. Then  they  lifted   up  Turin   and  found   that  Gurthang
 had  broken  asunder.  But  Elves  and  Men  gathered   then  great
 store  of  wood  and  made  a  mighty  burning,  and  the  Worm was
 consumed  to  ashes.  But  Turin they  laid in  a high  mound where

 he had fallen, and the shards of Gurthang were  laid beside              
 him. And when all was done, the Elves sang a lament for the              
 Children of Hurin, and a great grey stone was set  upon the              
 mound, and thereon was carven in the Runes of Doriath:                   
                                                                         
 Here  the  manuscript  comes  to  an  end,  at  the foot  of a  page, and
 the  typescript  also.  Later,  and  probably a  good while  later, since
 the writing is in ball-point pen, my father  added in  the margin  of the
 manuscript:                                                              
                                                                         
                          TURIN TURAMBAR DAGNIR                           
                                GLAURUNGA                                 
 and beneath they wrote also:                                             
                              NIENOR NINIEL.                              
 But  she  was  not  there,  nor  was  it  ever  known  whither  the  cold
 waters  of  Taiglin  had  taken  her.  [Thus  endeth  the  Narn   i  Chin
 Hurin:  which  is  the  longest  of all  the lays  of Beleriand,  and was
 made by Men.]                                                            
                                                                         
 It  always  seemed to  me strange  that my  father should  have abandoned
 the Grey Annals where he did,  without at  least writing  the inscription
 that  was  carved  on  the  stone;  yet  the  facts  that  the amanuensis
 typescript ended at this point also, and that he added in the inscription
 in  rough  script  on  the manuscript  at some  later time,  seemed proof
 positive that this was the case. Ultimately I discovered the explanation,
 which for reasons that will be seen I postpone to  the beginning  of Part
 Three (p. 251).                                                          
                                                                         
                              C0MMENTARY.                             
                                                                         
 In this commentary the following abbreviations are used:                 
 AV. Annals of Valinor (see p. 3)                                          
 AAm. Annals of Aman (text with numbered paragraphs in Vol.X)              
 AB. Annals of Beleriand (see p. 3). I use the revised dating of the       
     annals in AB 2 (see V.124).                                              
 GA. Grey Annals (GA 1 abandoned opening, GA 2 the final text              
     when distinguished from GA 1: see pp. 3 - 4)                             
 Q.  The Quenta (text in Vol.IV)                                            
 QS. Quenta Silmarillion (text with numbered paragraphs in                 
     Vol. V)                                                                  
 NE. The last part of the Narn i Chin Hurin, given in Unfinished           
     Tales (pp. 104 - 46), and referenced to the pages in that                
     book; see pp. 144-5.                                                     
                                                                         
 $1. This opening paragraph is absent from the abandoned version           
   GA 1. Cf. the direction scribbled on the old AB 2 manuscript (p. 4)

                                                                       
                                                                       
 to 'make these the Sindarin Annals of Doriath'. For the beginning of '
 the Annals in GA 1 see under $2 below.                                 
$2.  This is a much  more definite  statement of  the development  of the
 geographical  concept of  'Beleriand' than  that found  in GA  1, where
 the Annals begin thus:                                                 
   The  name  Beleriand  is  drawn from  the tongue  of the  Sindar, the
 Grey-elves that long dwelt in that country; and  it signifies  the land
 of  Balar.  For  this  name  the  Sindar  gave to  Osse, who  came much
 to  those  coasts,  and  there  befriended them.  In ancient  days, ere
 the  War  of  Utumno, it  was but  the northern  shoreland of  the long
 west-coast  of  Middle-earth,  lying  south  of  Eryd Engrin  (the Iron
 Mountains)  and  between  the  Great  Sea  and  Eryd  Luin   (the  Blue
 Mountains).                                                            
 This is in any case  not easy  to understand,  since Beleriand  'in the
 ancient days' is defined as 'but' the northern  shoreland of  the west-
 coast  of  Middle-earth,  yet  extending  south  of the  Iron Mountains
 and from the Great  Sea to  the Blue  Mountains, an  area in  fact much
 greater than that described in  GA 2  as its  later extension  of mean-
 ing. The latter agrees with the statement  on the  subject in  QS $108,
 where  'Beleriand   was  bounded   upon  the   North  by   Nivrost  and
 Hithlum and Dorthonion'.                                               
   A  possible  explanation  of  the  opening  passage  of  GA 1  may be
 found,  however,  by  reference  to  the  Ambarkanta  map  IV (IV.249),
 where it will be seen that 'Beleriand' could well be described  as 'but
 the northern shoreland of  the long  west-coast of  Middle-earth, lying
 south  of  the  Iron  Mountains  and  between  the  Great  Sea  and the
 Blue  Mountains'.  The  meaning  of  the  opening  of  GA  1   may  be,
 therefore,  not  that  this geographical  description was  the original
 reference  of  the  name  'Beleriand',  but  that  before  the  War  of
 Utumno   (when   Melkor   was   chained)   Beleriand   was   'but   the
 northern  shoreland of  the long  west-coast of  Middle-earth', whereas
 in  the  ruin  of  that  war  there was  formed the  Great Gulf  to the
 southward  (referred  to  in   GA  $6,   both  texts;   see  Ambarkanta
 map V, IV.251), after which Beleriand could not be so described.       
   In the List of Names  of the  1930s (V.404)  'Beleriand' was  said as
 in GA 2 to have been originally the 'land  about southern  Sirion'; but
 is there  said to  have been  'named by  the Elves  of the  Havens from
 Cape  Balar,  and  Bay  of  Balar  into  which  Sirion flowed'.  In the
 Etymologies  (V.350,  stem  BAL) Beleriand  was likewise  derived from
 (the isle of) Balar, and Balar in turn 'probably from * balare,  and so
 called  because here  Osse visited  the waiting  Teleri.' At  that time
 Osse was a Bala (Vala).                                                
   On  the  later  form  Belerian  see  my  father's  note  on  Sindarin
 Rochand  >  Rochan  (Rohan)  in  Unfinished  Tales p.  318 (note  49 to
 Cirion and Eorl ).                                                     
$3.  Cf.  the  entry  added to  the annal  for Valian  Year 1050  in AAm

 $40 (X.72,  77),  concerning  Melian's  departure  from Valinor.  In the
 preceding annal 1000 -  1050 in  AAm it  is told  that Varda  'made stars
 newer and brighter'.                                                     
$$3-5.  The  second sentence  of the  annal 1050  and the  annals 1080
 and  1085  were  added  to  the  manuscript  subsequently. It  is curious
 that  there  was  no  mention  of  the  Awakening  of the  Elves in  GA 1
 nor in  GA 2  as written;  but among  the rough  draft pages  referred to
 on p. 4 there is in fact a substantial passage  beginning: 'In  this same
 time  the  Quendi  awoke  by  the  waters  of  Kuivienen:  of  which more
 is said in the Chronicles of Aman.' The text that  follows in  this draft
 is very  close -  much of  it indeed  virtually identical  - to  the long
 passage   interpolated   into  AAm   ($$43-5)  on   the  fear   of  Orome
 among  the  Quendi,  the  ensnaring of  them by  the servants  of Melkor,
 and  the  breeding  of  the  Orcs  from  those  captured.  There  are  no
 differences  of  substance  between  this  text and  the passage  in AAm;
 and  it  is  obvious  that  the latter  followed, and  was based  on, the
 former, originally intended for inclusion in the Grey Annals.            
   In  AAm  the  same  dates  are  given  for the  Awakening of  the Elves
 (1050)  and for  their discovery  by Orome  (1085); no  date is  given in
 AAm  for  their  discovery  by  Melkor,  but  it is  said (AAm  $43) that
 this was 'some years ere the coming of Orome'.                           
$6.  In GA  1 the  sentence 'it  took then  that shape  which it  had until
 the  coming  of  Fionwe'  reads  '... which  it had  until the  Change of
 the  World',  using  that  expression  not  to  refer  to the  World Made
 Round   at  the   Drowning  of   Numenor  but   to  the   destruction  of
 Beleriand in the  final overthrow  of Morgoth,  at the  end of  the Elder
 Days.                                                                    
   The  Great  Gulf  (shown  and   thus  named   on  the   Ambarkanta  map
 V,  IV.251) was  referred to  in QS  $108: 'Beyond  the river  Gelion the
 land  narrowed  suddenly,  for  the  Great  Sea  ran  into a  mighty gulf
 reaching almost to the feet of Eredlindon...' See under 52 above.        
   Unique  to  the Grey  Annals is  the statement  that because  the Valar
 had  set  foot  in  the  lands  about  Sirion, when  they came  from Aman
 for  the  assault  on  Utumno,  growth  soon  began  there  again  'while
 most  of  Middle-earth  slept  in  the  Sleep   of  Yavanna',   and  that
 Melian  fostered  the  'young   woods  under   the  bright   stars'.  See
 further under $10 below.                                                 
$7.  This  annal  was a  later addition  to the  manuscript; the  date was
 first   written   1102,   then   changed  to   1102-5.  AAm  ($$54-5) has
 entries  concerning  the  three  ambassadors,  their  going  in  1102 and
 their return to Kuivienen in 1104.                                       
$8.  In  AAm  the  dates  were  so  often changed  and became  so confused
 that in rendering the text I gave only the final ones (see X.47 - 8); but
 in this part of  AAm all  the dates  were in  fact originally  100 Valian
 Years  later  -  thus  1115,  the  year  in which  the Eldar  reached the
 Anduin  (X.82)  was  an  emendation  of  1215.  Already   in  GA   1  the

  dates  are  in  the  1100s  as  first  written,  showing that  it followed
  AAm, if at no long interval. But  it is  curious that  in GA  (both texts)
  the  coming  of  the  Vanyar  and  Noldor to  the Great  Sea is  placed in
  1115;  in  AAm  the  march  began   in  1105,   the  Anduin   was  reached
  in 1115, and the Sea in 1125.                                            
$10.  This annal has  close relations  not only  with that  in AAm  for the
  same  year  ($65)  but  also  with  the  passage  in  the  'Silmarillion'
  tradition (X.172, $32).                                                 
    With  'the  young  trees  of  Nan Elmoth'  cf. the  change made  on one
  of the typescripts of AAm (X.91)  of 'the  trees of  Nan Elmoth'  to 'the
  sapling  trees  of Nan  Elmoth', though  this was  made years  later. The
  'young trees'  are no  doubt to  be connected  with the  phrase in  GA $9
  'where  afterwards stood  the forests  of Neldoreth  and Region';  and it
  seems clear  that the  trees were  all young  because, as  is said  in GA
  $6,  'the  lands upon  either side  of Sirion  were ruinous  and desolate
  because  of  the  War  of  the  Powers,  but  soon  growth  began  there,
  while  most  of  Middle-earth  slept  in  the  Sleep of  Yavanna, because
  the  Valar  of  the  Blessed  Realm had  set foot  there; and  there were
  young woods under the bright stars.'                                     
    The  conception  that there  were trees  in a  world illumined  only by
  starlight  was  a  datum  of  the  mythology  (though  years   after  the
  writing  of  the  Grey  Annals  my  father  rejected  it:  'Neither could
  there be  woods and  flowers &c.  on earth,  if there  had been  no light
  since  the  overthrow  of  the  Lamps!',  X.375);  on  the   other  hand,
  there  appears  in AAm  ($30) the  story, not  present in  the 'Silmaril-
  lion' tradition, that Yavanna  'set a  sleep upon  many fair  things that
  had arisen in the Spring [i.e. before the fall of  the Lamps],  both tree
  and herb  and beast  and bird,  so that  they should  not age  but should
  wait  for  a  time  of  awakening  that  yet  should  be.'  In  the other
  tradition  (X.158,  $18)  'While  the  Lamps  had  shone,   growth  began
  there  which  now  was  checked,   because  all   was  again   dark.  But
  already  the  oldest  living  things  had  arisen: in  the sea  the great
  weeds,  and on  the earth  the shadow  of great  trees... In  those lands
  and forests Orome would often hunt...'                                   
    How  these  conceptions  relate  to  each  other  is  far   from  clear
  on  the  basis of  these texts;  but now,  in the  Grey Annals  ($6), the
  peculiar  nature of  Beleriand is  asserted, in  that there  alone growth
  began  again  under  the stars  on account  of the  passage of  the Valar
  from  Aman,  and  ($17)  'though Middle-earth  for the  most part  lay in
  the  Sleep  of  Yavanna,  in Beleriand  under the  power of  Melian there
  was life and joy and the bright stars shone like silver fires.'          
$$11-12.  This annal  1132 is  very close  to that  in AAm  ($66), largely
  identical  in  structure  and  near  in  phraseology; the  only important
  feature in which it differs is the reference to the legend that a part of
  the  island  that  became  Tol  Eressea  was  broken  off and  became the

 Isle of Balar. This story appears in a footnote to the next of  QS $35
 (V.221, X.174).                                                      
$$13-15.  The annals 1149  - 50  and 1150  are again  close to those in
 AAm  ($$70-1),  and  were  I  think  based  on them  (it may  be noted
 that in GA 1, of which GA 2 is here  for the  most part  scarcely more
 than  a  fair  copy, my  father first  wrote in  $15 'The  friends and
 kinsfolk  of  Elwe  also  were unwilling  to depart',  as in  AAm, but
 changed the last words in the act of writing to 'also remained').
$14.  The  whole  extent  of  the  coastal  region  from  the  Firth of
 Drengist south to Cape Balar  is here  named the  Falas (cf.  QS $109:
 'the country of the  Falas (or  Coast), south  of Nivrost'),  and thus
 Cirdan  is  made  the  ruler  of  the  shorelands  of  Nivrost  (later
 Nevrast).                                                            
   The last part of the annal 1149 - 50, concerning  the fact  that the
 Elves of the  Havens did  not cross  the Great  Sea (though  there was
 no ban on their attempting to do so), is not in GA 1. It is  indeed an
 answer to a question that has not  emerged in  any previous  writing -
 though it becomes implicit from  the first  emergence of  the sailing-
 elves  of  the  Havens  (Elves  persuaded  by  Osse  to remain  on the
 shores of Middle-earth are first mentioned in Q, IV.87).             
$16.  The  annal  1152 is  closely related  to that  in AAm  ($74). The
 question arises why, if these Annals were the work of the  Sindar (see
 $1),  should  they  have  such  obvious  affinity  to  those  of Aman?
 Perhaps it should be supposed that both sets  of Annals,  as received,
 derive from the editorial work of Pengolod in Tol Eressea.           
$17.  There is nothing corresponding  to the  interesting annal  1200 in
 AAm. On the reference to the  Sleep of  Yavanna and  the life  and joy
 in  Beleriand  see  under $10  above. Melian's  power and  presence in
 Beleriand  is  now  given  a  greater  significance. -  Here niphredil
 appears from The Lord of the Rings.                                  
$18.  The idea of the 'higher  culture' of  the Dark-elves  of Beleriand
 (the Sindar) goes back  to the  very early  'Sketch of  the Mythology'
 (IV.21): 'Only  in the  realm of  Doriath, whose  queen was  of divine
 race, did the Ilkorins equal the Koreldar'; this phrase with  a slight
 modification survived through Q (IV.100) into QS ($85).              
$19.  Cf.  the  passage  inserted  into  annal  1250  in  AAm  ($84), a
 Beleriandic interpolation by Pengolod, against  which my  father later
 noted: 'Transfer  to A[nnals  of] B[eleriand]'  (X.102, note  7). That
 passage (very greatly expanded here in GA) begins:                   
   In  this  time  also,  it  is  said among  the Sindar,  the Nauglath
 [written   above:   Naugrim]   whom   we   also  name   the  Nornwaith
 (the   Dwarves)   came   over   the   mountains  into   Beleriand  and
 became known to the Elves.                                           
 The present annal in GA 1 begins: 'In this year, it is  recorded among
 the  Sindar,  the  Nauglath  came  first   over  the   mountains  into

 Beleriand.  This  people the  Noldor after  named the  Norn-folk...' In
 GA  2  the  words 'it  is recorded  among the  Sindar' are  absent, and
 Naugrim replaces Nauglath.                                            
    In  QS  $124  the Dwarvish  names of  the cities  in Eryd  Luin were
 Gabilgathol    (Belegost,   the    Great   Fortress)    and   Khazaddum
 (Nogrod,  the  Dwarfmine);  Tumunzahar  now  first  appears   (also  in
 QS revised, p. 206, $7).                                              
$20.  For  statements  in  the  Lhammas and  in QS  on the  languages of
 the  Dwarves  see  V.178-9,  273.  - The  concluding sentences  of this
 paragraph  ('Ever cool  was their  friendship ...')  are very  close to
 what is said in AAm ($84).                                            
$21.  This cautious and sceptical view of the story of the origin  of the
 Dwarves  -  ascribing  it entirely  to the  Dwarves themselves  - seems
 to contrast with earlier texts,  where it  is said  to be  derived from
 'the  wise  in  Valinor' (V.129,  273). -  The name  Mahal of  Aule has
 not appeared before.                                                  
$22.  Enfeng,  the  Longbeards  of  Belegost.  In  the  old Tale  of the
 Nauglafring  the  Indrafangs   or  Longbeards   were  the   Dwarves  of
 Belegost,  while  Dwarves  of  Nogrod were  the Nauglath  (see II.247).
 In  Q  the Indrafangs  had become  those of  Nogrod (IV.104),  and this
 reappears  in  QS  ($124):  those  who  dwelt   in  Nogrod   they  [the
 Gnomes]  called  Enfeng,  the  Longbeards,  because their  beards swept
 the floor before their feet.'  In the  passage in  AAm ($84)  the Long-
 beards, as here, are again the  Dwarves of  Belegost. -  The conclusion
 of this paragraph is wholly different in GA 1:                        
    For  Melian  taught  them  much  wisdom   (which  also   they  were
 eager  to  get),  and  she  gave  to  them also  the great  jewel which
 alone  she  had brought  out of  Valinor, work  of Feanor,  [struck out
 but then ticked as if to stand: for he gave  many such  to the  folk of
 Lorien.] A white gem it  was that  gathered the  starlight and  sent it
 forth  in blue  fires; and  the Enfeng  prized it  above a  mountain of
 wealth.                                                               
   This was an idea that  did not  fit the  chronology, for  Melian left
 Valinor in 1050,  the year  of the  Awakening of  the Elves,  as stated
 both  in  AAm  (see  X.77)  and  GA  (Feanor  was  born  more   than  a
 hundred Valian years later,  AAm $78);  and in  GA 2  the story  of the
 great pearl Nimphelos was substituted.                                
$$23-4.  Thingol's  early  association  with  the  Dwarves  is mentioned
 in  QS  $122  (from  their  cities  in the  Blue Mountains  the Dwarves
 'journeyed  often  into  Beleriand,  and  were  admitted at  times even
 into  Doriath'),  but  the  aid of  the Longbeards  of Belegost  in the
 building  of  Menegroth  did  not  appear  until  the  interpolation in
 AAm  ($84).  That  brief  mention  is  here  greatly  expanded  into  a
 description  of   the  Thousand   Caves;  cf.   the  Lay   of  Leithian
 (III.188-9, lines 980-1008), and for the  earliest conception  - before

  the rise of Thingol to his later wealth and majesty - see II.63, 128-9,
  245-6.                                                                 
$$25-9.  In GA  1 the  whole passage  given here  in the  annals 1300-50
  and  1330  is  placed under  1320: the  actual event  in 1320  was the
  speaking of the Dwarves to  Thingol concerning  their fears  ('In this
  year,  however, the  Dwarves were  troubled...', where  GA 2  has 'But
  it came to pass that the Dwarves were troubled...'),  and it  was 'not
  long thereafter' that 'evil creatures  came even  to Beleriand'.  In a
  note  to  the  year  1320  on the  typescript of  AAm (X.106,  $85) my
  father added: 'The Orcs first appear in Beleriand'; in GA 2  ($26) the
  event is dated ten Valian Years later, in 1330.                        
$25.  The Dwarves'  hatred and  fear of  the Sea  has not  been mentioned
  before.                                                                
$26.  GA  1 has  'over passes  in the  mountains, or  up from  the south
  where their heights fell away':  probably referring  to the  region of
  the Great Gulf (Ambarkanta map V, IV.251).                             
$27.  This paragraph  was an  addition to  GA 1,  though not  long after
  the primary text was made.  This is  the later  conception, introduced
  into  AAm  (see  X.123,  $127),  according to  which the  Orcs existed
  before  ever  Orome  came  upon  the  Elves,  being  indeed   bred  by
  Morgoth  from  captured  Elves;  the  older  tradition,  that  Morgoth
  brought  the Orcs  into being  when he  returned to  Middle-earth from
  Valinor,  survived  unchanged  in  the  final   form  of   the  Quenta
  Silmarillion (see X.194, $62). See further under $29 below.            
$28.  Telchar  of  Nogrod is  not named  here in  GA 1.  He goes  back a
  long way in the history, appearing first in the second version  of the
  Lay of the Children of Hurin (III.115), and in Q  (IV.118) -  where he
  is of Belegost, not Nogrod.                                            
$29.  Axes  were  'the  chief  weapons  of  the  Naugrim,  and   of  the
  Sindar':  cf.  the name  'Axe-elves' of  the Sindar,  X.171. -  Of the
  appearance  of  Orcs  and  other evil  beings in  Eriador and  even in
  Beleriand long before  (some 165  Valian Years)  the return  of Melkor
  to  Middle-earth,  and of  the arming  of the  Sindar by  the Dwarves,
  there has been no previous suggestion (see under $27 above).           
$30. The coming of  Denethor to  Beleriand is  more briefly  recorded in
  an  annal  interpolated into  AAm ($86)  under the  same date,  1350 -
  an interpolation by Pengolod which  (like that  referred to  under $19
  above)  was  marked  later for  transfer to  the Annals  of Beleriand.
  With the mention of the halting  of the  Teleri on  the shores  of the
  Great  River  cf.  the  fuller  account in  AAm, annal  1115 ($$60-1).
  In  GA   1  the   name  Nandor   is  interpreted,   the  Turners-back:
  this expression is found also in a  note to  one of  the texts  of the
  Lhammas, V.188.                                                        
    It  has  not  (of  course)  been  said  before  that  the  coming of
  Denethor  over   the  Blue   Mountains  was   brought  about   by  the

                                                                      
                                                                         
 emergence  of  'the  fell  beasts of  the North'.  The later  history and
 divisions  of  the  Nandor  are  now  much  more  fully  described: those
 who  'dwelt  age-long'  in the  woods of  the Vale  of Anduin  (the Elves
 of  Lothlorien  and  Mirkwood,   see  Unfinished   Tales  p.   256),  and
 those  who  went  down   Anduin,  of   whom  some   dwelt  by   the  Sea,
 while others passed by the White Mountains (the first mention of         
   Ered  Nimrais  in  the  writings  concerned  with  the Elder  Days) and
 entered Eriador. These last were  the people  of Denethor  (of whom  it ?
 is said in AAm that 'after long wanderings they came up into             
   Beleriand from the South', see $86 and commentary, X.93, 104).         
    The words 'in after days' in 'In that region the forests in after days
 were tall and green' are  perhaps significant:  the association  of green
 with the Elves  of Ossiriand  emerged after  the rising  of the  Sun. See
 further under $44 below.                                                 
$31.  The passage corresponding to this in GA 1 is very much briefer:      
      Of the long years of peace that followed after the coming of       
 Denethor  there  is  no  tale,  save  only  that  Orome would  come at
 whiles  to  the  land,  or  pass  over  the mountains,  and the  sound of
 his    horn    came    over    the    leagues    of    the   starlight...
 (concluding  as  in  GA 2).  But the  passage in  GA 2  concerning Dairon
 and his runes is largely derived  from a  later passage  in GA  1 (absent
 in GA 2), for which see p. 20.                                           
    The  word  Cirth first  appears here,  though as  a later  addition to
 the manuscript (perhaps at the time when my father was preparing         
   Appendix E to The Lord of the  Rings). It  is said  in the  footnote to
 the paragraph that Dairon contrived his runes 'ere the building of       
   Menegroth' (begun in 1300, according to GA); so also in GA 1           
   'Dairon  ...  had  devised  his  Runes already  by V.Y.1300'.  An annal
 added  to  the  typescript  of  AAm  (X.106,   $85)  has   '1300  Daeron,
 loremaster  of  Thingol,  contrives the  Runes.' For  an earlier  view of
 the origin of  the Runes  of Dairon  (an invention  of 'the  Danian Elves
 of  Ossiriand',  elaborated  in  Doriath)  see  The  Treason  of Isengard
 pp.  453-5;  there  the  name  'Alphabet  of  Dairon' is  ascribed simply
 to the fact of 'the preservation in this script of some fragments  of the
 songs of Dairon, the ill-fated minstrel  of King  Thingol of  Doriath, in
 the works on the ancient Beleriandic languages by Pengolod the           
   Wise  of  Gondolin'. See  also my  father's later  statement concerning
 the Alphabet of Daeron at the beginning of Appendix E (II) to The        
   Lord of the Rings.                                                     
$33.  On the great cry of Morgoth see X.109, 296. Where GA 2 has           
   'few knew what it foreboded' GA 1 has 'few (save Melian and            
   Thingol) knew what it foreboded'.                                      
$34.  So also in AAm ($126) and in the late Quenta Silmarillion text       
   'Of the Thieves' Quarrel' (X.297) Ungoliante after her rout by the     
   Balrogs went down into Beleriand and dwelt in Nan Dungorthin           
   (Nan Dungortheb); but it is not said in those texts that the power of

  Melian prevented her entry into  the Forest  of Neldoreth.  In both  it is
  said  that  that  valley  was  so  named  because of  the horror  that she
  bred  there,  but  the  statement  here  that  the  Mountains   of  Terror
  came  to  be  so  called  after  that  time is  not found  elsewhere. That
  Ungoliante  departed into  the South  of the  world is  said also  in AAm,
  but  in  'Of  the  Thieves' Quarrel'  (X.297) 'whither  she went  after no
  tale tells'.                                                             
$35.  The stage of development in the tradition of Morgoth's fortress
  is that of QS and AAm, in which Angband was built on the ruins of
  Utumno (see X.156, $12). - In GA 1 the name Thangorodrim is
  translated 'the Tyrannous Towers'; cf. the later translation 'the
  Mountains of Oppression' (X.298).
$$36 ff. This is the first full account of 'the First Battle of Beleriand'
  (a term previously applied to the Battle-under-Stars, which now
  becomes the Second Battle). In the pre-Lord of the Rings texts the
  first assault of the Orcs on Beleriand had been briefly described; thus
  in the second version (AV 2) of the Annals of Valinor it was said
  (V.114):
    Thingol with his ally Denithor of Ossiriand for a long while held
    back the Orcs from the South. But at length Denithor son of Dan
    was slain, and Thingol made his deep mansions in Menegroth, the
    Thousand Caves, and Melian wove magic of the Valar about the
    land of Doriath; and most of the Elves of Beleriand withdrew
    within its protection, save some that lingered about the western
    havens, Brithombar and Eglorest beside the Great Sea, and the
    Green-elves of Ossiriand who dwelt still behind the rivers of
    the East...
  In QS $115 the account ran thus:
    Of old the lord of Ossiriand was Denethor, friend of Thingol; but
    he was slain in battle when he marched to the aid of Thingol
    against Melko, in the days when the Orcs were first made and
    broke the starlit peace of Beleriand. Thereafter Doriath was
    fenced with enchantment, and many of the folk of Denethor
    removed to Doriath and mingled with the Elves of Thingol; but
    those that remained in Ossiriand had no king, and lived in the
    protection of their rivers.
$36.  Between Menegroth and Thangorodrim on the second Silmaril-
  lion map (as drawn: not in my reproduction, V.409) the length is
  14 cm, and the scale is stated to be 50 miles to 3-2 cm. (the length of
  the sides of the squares); the distance was therefore 218 75 miles, or
  just under 73 leagues (for my father's later interpretation of the scale
  in inches, not centimetres, see p. 332, but the difference has no
  significance here). The distance given here of 150 leagues (450
  miles) from Menegroth to Angband's gate, more than doubling that
  shown on the second map, seems to imply a great extension of the
  northern plain. The geography of the far North is discussed in

             
                                                                         
 V.270-2;  but  since  it  is  impossible  to  say how  my father  came to
 conceive it I discreetly omitted all indication of  the Iron  Mountains '
 and  Thangorodrim  from  the  map  drawn  for  the   published  Silmaril-
 lion.                                                                    
$38.  GA 1 has here:                                                       
  Therefore  he  called  on  Denethor  [struck  out:  and on  the Enfengs]
 and  the  First  Battle  was  fought in  the Wars  of Beleriand.  And the
 Orcs  in  the  east  were  routed  and  slain  aheaps,  and as  they fled
 before  the  Elves  they were  waylaid by  the axes  of the  Enfengs that
 issued from Mount Dolmed: few returned to the North.                     
 In  GA  2  'Region  over  Aros'  refers  to  that part  of the  Forest of
 Region  between the  rivers Aros  and Celon  (see p.  183, square  F 10).
 The implication  of the  sentence seems  clearly to  be that  these Elves
 owed   allegiance   to   Denethor;  and   this  does   not  seem   to  be
 consistent with what is said  in $39,  that after  the First  Battle many
 of  the  Green-elves  of Ossiriand  'went north  and entered  the guarded
 realm  of  Thingol  and  were  merged  with   his  folk'.   Against  this
 sentence  in  the  typescript  of  GA  my  father  wrote  in  the  margin
 'Orgol'  and  'of  the  Guest-elves  in  Arthorien',  marking  these with
 carets  to  indicate  that  something   should  be   said  of   them.  In
 Unfinished Tales, p. 77, occurs the following passage:                   
  Saeros...  was  of  the  Nandor,  being  one  of  those who  took refuge
 in  Doriath  after  the  fall  of  their  lord  Denethor upon  Amon Ereb,
 in the first battle of  Beleriand. These  Elves dwelt  for the  most part
 in  Arthorien,  between  Aros  and   Celon  in   the  east   of  Doriath,
 wandering  at  times  over  Celon  into  the   wild  lands   beyond;  and
 they  were  no  friends  to  the  Edain   since  their   passage  through
 Ossiriand and settlement in Estolad.                                     
 This  was largely  derived from  an isolated  note, very  rapidly written
 and  not  at  all  points  intelligible,  among   the  Narn  papers,  but
 somewhat  reduced.  It  is  remarked in  this note  that 'the  Nandor had
 turned  away,  never  seen  the  Sea  or  even   Osse,  and   had  become
 virtually  Avari.  They  had  also  picked up  various Avari  before they
 came  back  west  to  Ossiriand.'  Of  those  Nandor  who took  refuge in
 Doriath after the fall of Denethor it is said: 'In the event they did not
 mingle  happily  with  the  Teleri  of  Doriath, and  so dwelt  mostly in
 the  small  land  Eglamar,  Arthorien  under  their  own  chief.  Some of
 them  were  "darkhearted",  though  this  did  not   necessarily  appear,
 except under  strain or  provocation.' 'The  chief of  the "Guest-elves",
 as  they  were  called,  was  given  a   permanent  place   in  Thingol's
 council';  and  Saeros  (in  this note  called in  fact Orgoph  or Orgol)
 was 'the son of the chief of  the Guest-elves,  and had  been for  a long
 time resident in Menegroth'.                                             
  I  think it  very probable  that my  father wrote  'Orgol' and  'of the
 Guest-elves  in  Arthorien'  on  the typescript  of GA  as the  same time
 as he wrote this note.                                                   

                   
                                                                        
   Arthorien  was  entered  on  the  second  map (p.  183, square  F 10).
  The  application  of  the  name Eglamar  to Arthorien  in this  note is
  puzzling (see p. 189, $57).                                            
   The   intervention   of  the   Dwarves  has   not  been   referred  to
  previously.                                                            
$40.  The  words  'unless  one  should  come with  a power  greater than
  that  of  Melian  the  Maia' replaced  at the  time of  writing 'unless
  haply  some  power  greater   than  theirs   should  assail   them'.  -
  Eglador:  my father  pencilled this  name under  Doriath on  the second
  map (see p. 186, $14).                                                 
$41.  At the end  of this  paragraph the  Annals of  Aman cease  to record
  the  events  in  the  Grey  Annals,  and comparison  is with  QS (V.248
  ff.), together with the conclusion of AV 2  (V.117 ff.)  and with  AB 2
  (V.125  ff.).  In this  commentary I  do not  generally refer  to later
  developments in the Quenta Silmarillion tradition.                     
$44.  For  Eryd-wethrin,  the  valour  of  the  Noldor,  and  Dagor-nuin-
  Giliath  GA  1  has  Erydwethion,  the  valour   of  the   Gnomes,  and
  Dagor-nui-Ngiliath (as in QS $88, marginal note).                      
   This  is  the  first  occurrence  of  Ardgalen  in  the texts  as here
  presented,  replacing  Bladorion  as  the  original  name of  the great
  northern plain before its devastation. It is notable that Ardgalen 'the
  green region' is expressly stated to have  been the  name at  this time
  before the rising of the Sun; cf. the  change made  long before  to the
  passage in  Q describing  the Battle-under-Stars  (when the  battle was
  fought on the plain itself, not in Mithrim): 'yet  young and  green (it
  stretched to the feet of the tall mountains)' >  'yet dark  beneath the
  stars' (IV.101, 103).                                                  
   The  Orc-hosts  that  passed  southwards  down  the  Vale   of  Sirion
  are  not  of  course  mentioned  in  previous  accounts of  the Battle-
  under-Stars.  The  attack  on  the Noldor  in Mithrim  is now  taken up
  into a larger assault out  of Angband,  and the  victory of  the Noldor
  brought  into  relation  with  the  newly-developed  conception  of the
  beleaguered Sindar.                                                    
   In  the  account  of  the  destruction  of  the  western  Orc-host  by
  Celegorn is the first appearance of the Fen of  Serech: this  was first
  named  in  an  addition   to  the   second  map   the  Fen   of  Rivil,
  subsequently  changed  to the  Fen of  Serech (p.  181, $3).  Rivil was
  the stream that rising at Rivil's Well  on Dorthonion  made the  fen at
  its inflowing into Sirion.                                             
$45.  In  AV 2  (V.117) and  QS ($88)  the Balrogs  were in  the rearguard
  of  Morgoth's  host,  and  it  was  they who  turned to  bay. -  Of the
  rescue  of  Feanor  GA  1  (following  QS)  has  only:  'But  his  sons
  coming  up  with  force  rescued  their  father, and  bore him  back to
  Mithrim' (see under $46).                                              
$46.  The  story  of  Feanor's  dying  sight  of  Thangorodrim   and  his
  cursing of  the name  of Morgoth  first appeared  in Q  (IV.101), where

                                               
                                                                          
 the   Battle-under-Stars   was   fought   on   the   plain   of  Bladorion
 (Ardgalen).  In  AV  1  and  AV 2  (IV.268, V.117)  the battle  was fought
 in   Mithrim,   and  Feanor   was  mortally   wounded  when   he  advanced
 too  far  upon  the  plain,  but  he  was  brought  back  to  Mithrim  and
 died  there;  his  sight  of  Thangorodrim  and  curse  upon   Morgoth  do
 not  appear.  In  QS  ($88)  my  father  combined  the   accounts:  Feanor
 died  in Mithrim,  but it  is also  told that  he 'saw  afar the  peaks of
 Thangorodrim'  as  he  died,  and  'cursed  the  name of  Morgoth thrice';
 GA 1  follows this  story (see  under $45  above). It  must have  been the
 consideration  that  from   Mithrim  Thangorodrim   was  not   visible  on
 account of  the heights  of Eryd-wethrin  that led  to the  story in  GA 2
 that  Feanor  caused  his  sons  to  halt  as they  began the  climb above
 Eithel Sirion, and that he died in that place.                            
$47.  The   initial  misapprehension   among  the   Grey-elves  concerning
 the return of the  Noldor is  a wholly  new element  in the  narrative, as
 is also the  cold view  taken by  Thingol, seeing  in it  a threat  to his
 own  dominion.  In  the  old  versions  his   coolness  does   not  appear
 until  his  refusal  to attend  the Feast  of Reuniting  (Mereth Aderthad)
 in  the  year  20  of the  Sun, and  arises rather  from his  insight into
 what  the  future  might  bring,   Thingol  came   not  himself,   and  he
 would  not  open  his  kingdom,  nor  remove  its  girdle  of enchantment;
 for  wise with  the wisdom  of Melian  he trusted  not that  the restraint
 of Morgoth  would last  for ever'  (QS $99,  and very  similarly in  AB 2,
 V.126).                                                                   
$49.  The   date  1497   is  repeated   from  $36.   -  The   Balrogs  that
 constituted  the force  that Morgoth  sent to  the parley  in QS  ($89 and
 commentary) have disappeared.                                             
$52.  As  in  AAm  $$157-8,   163  the   form  Endar   ('Middle-earth')  is
 clear, but here as there the typist put Endor (see X.126, $157).          
$53.  The  paragraph  opens  in  the  manuscript  with  a   large  pointing
 hand.                                                                     
$$54-5.  In this passage, while there are echoes of the earlier texts, the
 writing  is  largely  new,  and there  are new  elements, notably  the cry
 of Maidros on Thangorodrim.                                               
$54.  The  story  of  Morgoth's  assault  on  Tilion is  told in  AAm $179,
 where   however   it   took   place   after   both   Sun  and   Moon  were
 launched  into  the  heavens.  It  is  told  in AAm  that 'Tilion  was the
 victor:  as  he ever  yet hath  been, though  still the  pursuing darkness
 overtakes him at whiles',  evidently a  reference to  the eclipses  of the
 Moon.                                                                     
$57.  On  the  placing  of  Hildorien  see  AV  2 (V.120,  note 13)  and QS
$82.  and  commentary;  also  pp.  173-4.  On  the  name  Atani   see  X.7,
 39.                                                                       
$$58-60.  While this  annal for  the second  year of  the Sun  is obviously
 closely  related  to  and  in  large  part derived  from QS  $$92 -  3, it
 contains  new  elements,  as  the more  explicit portrayal  of Fingolfin's

    anger against the Feanorians, and also the repentance of many of        
    the latter for the burning of the ships at Losgar.                      
                                                                           
 $61.  The reference to the Quenta  is to  the much  fuller account  of the
    rescue  of  Maidros  in  QS  $$94-7.  In  AAm  ($160)  it  is  told that
    Maidros  was  'on  a time  a friend  of Fingon  ere Morgoth's  lies came
    between', and ($162) that he  alone stood  aside at  the burning  of the
    ships. - The spelling  Maidros: at  earlier occurrences  in GA  the name
    is  spelt  Maidros,  and Maidros  appears again  in the  following line;
    while  in  the  draft  text  referred  to on  p. 29  the form  is mostly
    Maidros  (cf.   the  later   form  Maedhros,   X.177,  adopted   in  the
    published Silmarillion, beside Maedros X.293, 295).                    
 $$63-4.  The content  of this  passage is  largely new;  there has  been no
    previous  mention  of  the  coming   of  Angrod   to  Thingol   and  his
    silence  about  many matters  in respect  of the  Return of  the Noldor.
    The  actual  nature  of  Thingol's  claim  to  overlordship,  whereby he
    'gave leave' to the princes of the Noldor to  dwell in  certain regions,
    is  now specified  (the acceptance  by Fingolfin  of Thingol's  claim is
    referred to in the earlier forms of the linguistic  excursus in  GA, pp.
    21, 25; cf.  also the  anticipatory words  in $48,  'the sons  of Feanor
    were  ever  unwilling  to  accept  the  overlordship  of   Thingol,  and
    would  ask  for  no  leave  where they  might dwell  or might  pass'). -
    The  Telerin  connection  of  the  Third  House  of  the  Noldor through
    the  marriage  of  Finrod  (>  Finarfin)   to  Earwen   Olwe's  daughter
    appears in AAm $$85, 156, and see X.177.                                
 $$65-71.  The content of the annal for the year 7  is largely  new, save
    that in QS ($98) there is told of  the waiving  of the  high-kingship of
    the  Noldor  by  Maidros,  and  the  secret  disavowal  of   this  among
    some at least of his brothers ('to this his brethen did not all in their
    hearts agree'). In GA there is no mention of what is  told in  QS, that
    'Maidros  begged  forgiveness  for  the  desertion  in Eruman,  and gave
    back  the goods  of Fingolfin  that had  been borne  away in  the ships'
    (but  see  $83  and  commentary);  on the  other hand  we learn  here of
    the scornful rejection  of Thingol's  claim by  the Feanorians  (with no
    mention of Fingolfin's acceptance of it, see under $$63  - 4  above), of
    Cranthir's harsh disposition and  his insulting  speech at  the council,
    of the choosing of Fingolfin as overlord of the  Noldor, of  the opinion
    that  Maidros  was  behind the  swift departure  of the  Feanorians into
    the eastern lands (in order to lessen the chances of strife and  to bear
    the brunt of the likeliest assault), and of his remaining  in friendship
    with  the  other  houses  of the  Noldor, despite  the isolation  of the
    Feanorians.                                                             
       Curiously, the draft text has here  and in  $68 Caranthir  (the later
    form),  while  the final  text reverts  to Cranthir.  In the  very rough
    initial draft for the annals 6 and 7 (see p. 29) the  son of  Feanor who
    was  'the  harshest  and  the   most  quick   to  anger'   was  Curufin,
    changed  to  Caranthir.  On  Caranthir's  scornful reference  to Thingol

 
                                                                           
   as 'this Dark-elf'  see my  note in  the Index  to the  published Silmaril-
   lion,  entry  Dark  Elves. -  In the  draft text  Caranthir says  'let them
   not so quickly forget that they were Noldor!'                           
 $72.  In  AB  2  (V.126)  and  QS  ($99)  Mereth  Aderthad  was   held  in
   Nan  Tathren,  the  Land  of  Willows.  GA  is  more  specific concerning
   those  who  were  present  than  are  the  earlier  texts:   Maidros  and
   Maglor;   Cirdan;   and   Dairon   and   Mablung   as   the    only   two
   representatives  from  Doriath  (on  Thingol's  aloofness  see   $47  and
   commentary).                                                             
 $73.  That  the  Noldor  learned  Sindarin  far  more  readily   than  the
   Sindar learned  Noldorin has  been stated  already in  the final  form of
   the linguistic excursus, p. 26. It is stated in all three versions of the
   excursus  that  it  was  after  Dagor  Aglareb  (in  the  year  60)  that
   Sindarin became the common speech of Beleriand.                          
 $74.  In  AB  2  (V.126)  Turgon  discovered  the  hidden  vale  of Gondolin
   in  the  same  year  (50)  as  Inglor  Felagund discovered  Nargothrond -
   the year of their dreams.                                                
 $75.  This is the first  mention (as  the texts  are presented)  of Galadriel
   in  Middle-earth  in  the  Elder  Days. The  spelling Galadriel  is note-
   worthy,  implying  the  association  of  her  name  with   galadh  'tree'
   (galad): see X.182 and Unfinished Tales p. 267.                          
      In  AB 2  (V.126) and  QS ($101)  there is  no suggestion  that Inglor
   Felagund  was  aided  by  Thingol  to  his discovery  of the  caves where
   he  established  Nargothrond.  In  QS  'the  High  Faroth' are  named, at
   a  later  point  in  the  narrative,  Taur-na-Faroth  (see  QS  $112  and
   commentary).  The  great   highlands  west   of  Narog   were  originally
   called  the  Hills  of  the  Hunters  or the  Hunters' Wold;  see III.88,
   IV.225, and the Etymologies in V.387, stem SPAR.                         
      The  passage   beginning  'Thus   Inglor  came   to  the   Caverns  of
   Narog' as far as 'that name he  bore until  his end'  was an  addition to
   the manuscript, but  seems certainly  to have  been made  at the  time of
   the original writing. In  view of  the close  relationship of  this annal
   to  the  later  development of  the story  in the  QS tradition,  where a
   very similar passage is found, I think that my father merely left  it out
   inadvertently and at  once noticed  the omission  (see pp.  177-8, $101).
 $76.  It is said in  QS ($116)  only that  Gondolin was  'like unto  Tun of
   Valinor'. This idea perhaps goes far back: see II.208.                   
 $77.  Dagor  Aglareb,  the  Glorious  Battle,  was  originally   the  Second
   Battle in the Wars of Beleriand (see p. 21 and note 6).                  
 $78.  The  Siege  of  Angband  'lasted   wellnigh  four   hundred  years':
   from 60 to 455 (see V.257-8).                                            
 $$79-81.  This  inserted  passage,  which  returns  to  the   original  text
   near   the   beginning   of  $81,   concerns  Morgoth's   departure  from
   Angband and his attempt  to corrupt  the first  Men in  the East,  and is
   of great interest. While  in QS  ($63) it  was said  of Morgoth  that 'it
   was never his wont  to leave  the deep  places of  his fortress',  in AAm

    ($128,  X.110)  'never  but  once  only,  while his  realm lasted,  did he
    depart for  a while  secretly from  his domain  in the  North'; but  it is
    not said or hinted  for what  purpose he  went. (It  is worth  noting that
    a  rough draft  for the  present rider  in GA  is found  on the  same page
    as  a  draft  for  the  expansion  of  the  passage in  AAm, on  which see
    X.121 note 10.)                                                           
      The  insertion  is  carefully  written  in  the same  style as  the main
    text, and seems likely  to belong  to much  the same  time. It  is notable
    that the reverse of the page used for  it carries  drafting for  the final
    form  of  the  insertion in  AAm ($$43  - 5)  concerning the  ensnaring of
    the  Quendi  by  the  servants  of  Melkor  in  the lands  about Kuivienen
    (cf.  the  words  in  $79,  'Even  as  before  at  the  awakening  of  the
    Quendi, his spies were watchful'). See further under $87 below.           
 $79.  'Nor  himself,  an  he  would  go': i.e.,  nor did  the ice  and snow
    hinder  Morgoth  himself,  if  he  wished to  go. -  'Indeed we  learn now
    in Eressea': cf. the end of the final version of the 'linguistic excursus'
    (p. 27): 'these  histories were  made after  the Last  Battle and  the end
    of  the  Elder  Days',  and  also  the  opening  paragraph  of  the  Grey
    Annals (p. 5).                                                            
 $83.  The  reference  to  the  Quenta Noldorinwa  (see p.  27 and  note 12)
    is to Chapter 9 'Of Beleriand and its Realms' in QS (V.258).              
      In QS $116 it is mentioned that  'many of  the sires'  of the  horses of
    Fingolfin  and  Fingon  came  from Valinor.  The horses  are here  said to
    have  been  'given to  Fingolfin by  Maidros in  atonement of  his losses,
    for they had been carried by  ship to  Losgar'. In  an earlier  passage in
    GA  (see  the  commentary  on  $$65-71)  the  reference   in  QS   $98  to
    the  return  of  Fingolfin's  goods  that  had  been  carried away  in the
    ships is absent.                                                          
  $85.  Eredwethrin:  earlier  in  GA  the  form  is  Erydwethrin   (also Eryd
    Lomin,  Eryd  Luin);  cf.  under  $113   below.  -   This  is   the  first
    occurrence  of  the  river-name  Nenning  for  earlier  Eglor   (at  whose
    mouth  was  the  haven  of  Eglorest),  named  in  AB  2 (V.128,  139) and
    on  the  second  map  (V.408).  On  the  map  my  father later  struck out
    Eglor  and  wrote  in  two  names,  Eglahir  and  Nenning,   leaving  both
    to stand (p. 187, $22).                                                   
      In  QS  ($109)  it  is  said  that  the  Dark-elves  of  Brithombar  and
    Eglorest  'took  Felagund,  lord of  Nargothrond, to  be their  king'; see
    the  commentary  on  this  passage,  V.267.  My   father  seems   to  have
    been uncertain of the status of Cirdan: in a  late change  to the  text of
    AB  2  (the  passage  given  in  V.146,  note  13) he  wrote that  'in the
    Havens  the folk  of the  Falas were  ruled by  Cirdan of  the Grey-elves;
    but  he  was  ever  close  in  friendship  with  Felagund  and  his  folk'
    (agreeing  with what  is said  here in  GA), but  he at  once substituted:
    'And  in  the  west  Cirdan  the  Shipwright  who  ruled  the  mariners of
    the  Falas took  Inglor also  for overlord,  and they  were ever  close in
    friendship.'                                                              

  
                                                                          
 $87.  The  words  '[Morgoth's]  thought  being  bent  on  their   ruin  he
    gave  the  less  heed  to  aught  else  in  Middle-earth' seem  hardly to
    agree   with   the  inserted   passage  concerning   Morgoth's  departure
    from  Angband  ($$79-80).  It  may  be  suggested,  however,   that  that
    passage  is  precisely  concerned with  the period  before the  attack on
    Beleriand  in  the  year  60  (Dagor  Aglareb)  -  which   was  postponed
    so  long  because  of  Morgoth's  operations  in  the  East,   whence  he
    returned  in  alarm  at  'the  growing  power  and  union  of  the Eldar'
     
    ($80)                                                                  
  By  alteration  to  the  original  passage in  this annal  concerning the
  beginning  of  the  languages  of  Men a  Dark-elvish origin  is ascribed
  only  to  the  'western  tongues'.  I  think   that  this   represents  a
  clarification rather  than the  entry of  a new  conception. It  was said
  already in Lhammas B (V.179, $10):                                       
        The  languages  of  Men  were  from  their  beginning  diverse  and
  various;  yet  they  were  for the  most part  derived remotely  from the
  language  of  the  Valar.  For  the  Dark-elves,  various  folk   of  the
  Lembi,  befriended  wandering  Men   in  sundry   times  and   places  in
  the  most  ancient  days,  and  taught  them  such  things as  they knew.
  But  other  Men  learned  also  wholly  or  in  part of  the Orcs  and of
  the Dwarves; while  in the  West ere  they came  into Beleriand  the fair
  houses of the eldest Men learned of the Danas, or Green-elves.           
        The very interesting addition at the end of the annal  belongs with
  the  insertion  about  Morgoth's  departure  into the  East. There  it is
  said  ($80):  'But  that some  darkness lay  upon the  hearts of  Men ...
  the Eldar perceived clearly even in the fair folk of the Elf-friends that
  they first knew'; but the present passage is the first definite statement
  that Men in  their beginning  fell to  the worship  of Morgoth,  and that
  the  Elf-friends,  repentant,  fled  west to  escape persecution.  In the
  long  account  of  his  works  written  for Milton  Waldman in  1951, and
  so  very  probably  belonging  to the  same period,  my father  had said:
  'The  first  fall  of  Man  ...  nowhere  appears  - Men  do not  come on
  the stage until all that is long past, and  there is  only a  rumour that
  for  a  while  they  fell  under  the  domination of  the Enemy  and that
  some repented' (Letters no.131, pp. 147-8; see X.354 - 5).               
$89.  The  new  story  in  the  revised  form  of the  annal for  64, that
  Turgon at this time led  only a  part of  his people  - those  skilled in
  such  work  -  to  Tumladen  in   order  that   they  should   begin  the
  building  of  Gondolin,  is  extended  further  in  a   greatly  expanded
  version of the annal for 116: see $$111-13.                              
$90.  The  Tower  of  Ingildon:  this  replaces  the  old  name  Tower  of
  Tindobel   (Tindabel),   which   survived   in   QS   ($120)  and   AB  2
  (V.129); see p. 197, $120. It is  not said  in GA  as it  was in  QS that
  Inglor was the  builder of  the tower;  this is  perhaps to  be connected
  with what is said in  $85, that  Cirdan was  lord of  the lands  'west of
  Nenning to the Sea'.                                                     

$$91-107.  The  entire  content  of  the  annals  for 66  and 67  is new.
 Highly   'un-annalistic'  in   manner,  with   its  long   and  superbly
 sustained  discourse,  this  narrative  is  developed from  the earlier
 passage in GA  ($48) -  or perhaps  rather, reveals  what my  father had
 in mind when he wrote it:                                              
    When, therefore, ere long  (by treachery  and ill  will, as  later is
 told)  the  full  tale  of  the  deeds  in   Valinor  became   known  in
 Beleriand,  there  was  rather  enmity  than  alliance  between  Doriath
 and  the  House  of   Feanor;  and   this  bitterness   Morgoth  eagerly
 inflamed by all means that he could find.                              
   A complete text of these annals is extant in a preliminary  draft, but
 the  form  in GA  followed this  draft closely  and the  development was
 almost entirely stylistic. A few of the differences are worth noting:
    $93. After  'not  though  they  came in  the very  hour of  our need'
 my father added to the draft  text: 'The  new lights  of heaven  are the
 sending  of  the  Valar,  not the  Noldor, mighty  though they  be', and
 this was not taken up in GA.                                           
    $95. Draft  text: '...  over the  long road  from the  Kalakiryan'. -
 After  '"Maybe,"  said  Galadriel,  "but  not  of  me"' the  draft con-
 tinues:                                                                 
 and  being  perplexed  and  recalling  suddenly  with  anger  the  words
 of Caranthir she said  ere she  could set  a guard  on her  tongue: 'For
 already  the  children  of  Finrod  are  charged  with  talebearing  and
 treason  to  their  kindred.  Yet  we  at  least  were   guiltless,  and
 suffered  evil   ourselves.'  And   Melian  spoke   no  more   of  these
 things with Galadriel.                                                 
   This passage was bracketed, and later in the  draft the  bitterness of
 the  memory  of  Cranthir's  words  of  sixty  years  before  appears in
 Angrod's  mouth,  as  in  GA  ($104).  The  draft  has Caranthir  in the
 first passage, Cranthir in the second; see under $67 above.            
    $105. In the draft Thingol says: 'for my heart is hot  as the fire of
 Losgar'.                                                               
    $107. After  'the  words  of  Mandos  would  ever  be made  true' the
 draft  has:  'and  the  curse  that  Feanor drew  upon him  would darken
 all that was done after.'                                              
    On  the  spelling  Galadriel  see  under  $75  above. In  $94 appears
 Galadriel;  the draft  text begins  with Galadriel  but then  changes to
 Galadriel. This distinction is however probably artificial, since  it is
 merely a  question of  the insertion  or omission  of the  cross-line on
 the d, written in both cases in a single movement (a reversed 6).      
$107.  The revision at the end of the annal  for 67  depends on  the later
 story  that  the  population  of  Gondolin was  by no  means exclusively
 Noldorin,  and is  similar to  those made  to the  final version  of the
 'linguistic excursus' (see p. 26 and notes 9 and  10), a  consequence of
 the  rejection  of  the  old  conception  that   in  Gondolin,   and  in
 Gondolin  only,  which  was  peopled   by  Noldor   and  cut   off  from

 intercourse  with  all  others,  the Noldorin  tongue survived  in daily
 use; see $113 and commentary.                                           
$$108-9.  The  content  of   this  annal,   extended  from   the  opening
 sentence  recording  the  completion  of Nargothrond  (AB 2,  V.129), is
 also entirely new. For the earlier story that Felagund did have  a wife,
 and that their son was Gilgalad, see pp. 242-3.                         
$110.  According  to  the  chronology  of  the  Grey  Annals  Turgon left
 Nivrost in the year 64 ($88), and thus the figure here of fifty years is
 an error for fifty-two. The error  was repeated,  but corrected,  at the
 beginning  of  the  revised  annal  for  116.  Possibly  my  father  had
 reverted  in  a  momentary  forgetfulness to  the original  dating, when
 the  years  were  52  and  102  (V.127,  129).  See  the  commentary  on
 $111.                                                                   
$111.  The  change  in  the  opening sentence  of the  new annal  for 116
 depends  on  the  revised  annal for  64 ($89),  whereby Turgon  did not
 definitively  leave  Vinyamar  in that  year but  began the  building of
 Gondolin. The erroneous fifty years, corrected  to fifty-two,  since the
 start  of  the   work  was   presumably  merely   picked  up   from  the
 rejected annal (see under $110).                                        
$$111-12.  Entirely  new  is  the  appearance  of   Ulmo  to   Turgon  at
 Vinyamar  on  the  eve  of  his  departure,  his warning,  his prophecy,
 and his instruction to  Turgon to  leave arms  in his  house for  one to
 find in later days (cf. II.208, where I suggested that the germ  of this
 was  already present  in the  original tale  of The  Fall of  Gondolin -
 'Thy   coming   was   set  in   our  books   of  wisdom').   But  Ulmo's
 foretelling  that   Gondolin  should   stand  longest   against  Morgoth
 goes  back  through  Q  (IV.136-7)  to  the  Sketch  of   the  Mythology
 (IV.34).                                                                
$113.  The  later  story  that  there  were  many  Sindar  among Turgon's
 people has led to various changes  already met  in the  text of  GA: see
 the  commentary  on  $107.  -  The reversion  to the  old form  wethion
 in Eryd Wethion is curious (see commentary on $44).                     
   At the foot of  the page  carrying the  revised annal  for 116  is the
 following rapidly pencilled note:                                       
   Set this rather in the Silmarillion and substitute a short notice:
   'In this year as is  said in  the Quenta  Gondolin was  fully wrought,
 and  Turgon  arose   and  went   thither  with   all  his   people,  and
 Nivrost  was  emptied  of  folk  and  so  remained.  But  the  march  of
 Turgon  was  hidden  by  the  power  of  Ulmo,  and  none  even  of  his
 kin in Hithlum knew whither he had gone.                                
 Against this my father  wrote 'Neglect  this'; but  since a  new chapter
 was  inserted  into  the  Quenta  Silmarillion  which was  largely based
 on  the  present  rider  (see  pp.  198  -  9)  this  was  presumably an
 instruction that was itself neglected.                                  
$114.  The  date  of  this  annal was  first written  154, which  was the
 revised date of the  meeting of  Cranthir's people  with the  Dwarves in

                                                      
                                                                              
  the  Blue  Mountains  in  AB  2  (V.129,  and  cf.  QS  $125).   The  passage
  describing  the  relations  of  Cranthir's  folk  with  the  Dwarves  is new.
  It  was  stated  in  AB  2  (V.129  -  30)  thar  the  old   Dwarf-road  into
  Beleriand  had  become  disused  since  the  return  of  the  Noldor,  and in
  a  late rewriting  of that  passage (precursor  of the  present annal)  it is
  said:                                                                        
           But  after  the coming  of the  Noldor the  Dwarves came  seldom any
  more   by   their   old   roads   into   Beleriand   (until   the   power  of
  Maidros  fell  in   the  Fourth   Battle  [i.e.   the  Dagor   Bragollach  in
  455]),  and  all  their  traffic  passed  through  the  hands   of  Cranthir,
  and thus he won great riches.                                                
      The  meaning is  therefore that  after the  meeting of  Cranthir's people
  with  the  Dwarves  their  renewed  commerce  with   the  Elves   passed  for
  three   hundred   years  over   the  mountains   much  further   north,  into
  the northern parts of Thargelion about Lake Helevorn.                        
$115.  The  route   of  the   Orc-army  that   departed  from   Angband  'into
  the   white   north'   remains  unchanged   from  AB   2  (V.130);   cf.  the
  account   in   QS   $103,   and   my   discussion   of   the   geography   in
  V.270-1.                                                                     
$116.  Glaurung   here   appears   for   earlier   Glomund,   together   with
  Uruloki  'fire-serpents':  cf.  the  original  tale   of  Turambar   and  the
  Foaloke  in  The  Book  of  Lost  Tales  (and  'this  loke  (for  so  do  the
  Eldar name the worms of Melko)', II.85).                                     
           In QS $104 it was not said that Morgoth was  'ill pleased'  that the
  dragon  'had  disclosed  himself  over  soon',  but  on  the   contrary  that
  Glomund   issued   from   Angband   'by   the   command   of   Morgoth;   for
  he was unwilling, being yet young and but half-grown.'                       
           The content of the latter part of the annal has no antecedent in the
  old  versions.  I  take  the  words  'the  Noldor  of  purer  race'  to  mean
  those   Noldor   who   had   no   or   little  intermingling   of  Dark-elven
  character,  with  perhaps  the  implication  that  they  were  more  faithful
  to their ancient nature as it had evolved in Aman.                           
$$117-20.  The  story, or  rather the  existence of  a story,  about Isfin
  and  Eol  goes  back  to  the beginning,  and I  shall briefly  rehearse here
  what can be learnt of it before this time.                                   
           In the original tale  of The  Fall of  Gondolin (II.165,  168) Isfin
  appears as Turgon's sister, and there is a  reference to  the 'tale  of Isfin
  and Eol', which 'may not here be told'. Meglin was their son.                
           In  the  fragmentary  poem  The   Lay  of   the  Fall   of  Gondolin
  Fingolfin's  wife  and  daughter  (Isfin)  were  seeking  for him  when Isfin
  was  captured  by  Eol  'in  Doriath's  forest';  and  Isfin sent  Meglin her
  son to Gondolin (III.146).                                                   
           In the Sketch of  the Mythology  (IV.34-5) Isfin  was lost  in Taur-
  na-Fuin  after  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered  Tears  and  entrapped   by  Eol;
  Isfin  sent  Meglin  to  Gondolin  (which  at  that  stage  was  not  founded
  until after the Battle of Unnumbered Tears).                                 

         
                                                                         
  In  Q  (IV.136),  similarly,  Isfin  was lost  in Taur-na-Fuin  after the
 Battle  of  Unnumbered  Tears,  and captured  by Eol;  in addition,  it is
 said  that  'he  was  of  gloomy  mood,  and  had  deserted the  hosts ere
 the  battle'.  It  is  subsequently  said (IV.140)  that Isfin  and Meglin
 came  together  to  Gondolin  at  a  time  when  Eol  was  lost  in  Taur-
 na-Fuin.                                                                 
  In  AB  1  (IV.301),  in  the  year 171  (the year  before the  Battle of
 Unnumbered  Tears),  it is  told that  Isfin strayed  out of  Gondolin and
 was taken to wife  by Eol.  [An error  in the  printed text  of AB  1 here
 may  be  mentioned:  'Isfin  daughter  of  Turgon'  for  'Isfin  sister of
 Turgon'.]  In  192  'Meglin  comes   to  Gondolin   and  is   received  by
 Turgon  as  his  sister's  child',  without  mention  of  Isfin.  This was
 repeated  in  AB  2  (V.136,  139),  with changed  dates (271,  292, later
 >  471,  492), but  now it  is expressly  stated that  Meglin was  sent to
 Gondolin  by  Isfin,  and  that  he  went  alone  (thus  reverting  to the
 story in the Sketch of the Mythology).                                   
  QS has no mention of the story.                                         
$117.  In GA as originally written the loss of Isfin is still placed  in the
 'year  (471)  before the  Battle of  Unnumbered Tears,  but the  motive is
 introduced  that  she  left  Gondolin  in  weariness   of  the   city  and
 wishing  to  see  her  brother  Fingon; and  she was  lost in  Brethil and
 entrapped  by  Eol,  who  had  lived  there  'since  the first  finding of
 Beleriand'  -  which  must  mean  that  he   withdrew  into   secrecy  and
 solitude  when  the  Elves  of  the Great  March first  entered Beleriand.
 The implication  of the  last words,  'took no  part in  all the  deeds of
 his kin', is not explained.                                              
$118.  In  the  replacement  annal  316  something  more  is  suggested  of
 Eol's  nature,  and   the  element   enters  that   disregarding  Turgon's
 bidding   Isfin   went   eastwards  from   Gondolin,  seeking   'the  land
 of  Celegorm  and  his  brethren,  her  friends  of  old  in  Valinor'.  A
 description  of  Isfin  on  a  page  from  an  engagement  calendar  dated
 October  1951  (and  so  belonging  to  the  same time  as the  new annals
 in  GA  discussed  here) was  attached to  the account  of the  princes of
 the Noldor in QS (see X.177, 182),  and in  this account  it is  said that
 in  Valinor  Isfin  'loved  much  to  ride  on  horse and  to hunt  in the
 forests,  and there  was often  in the  company of  her kinsmen,  the sons
 of  Feanor'.  It  is  further  told  in  the  new annal  for 316  that she
 became  separated  from  her  escort  in  Nan   Dungorthin  and   came  to
 Nan  Elmoth,  where  Eol's  dwelling  is  now   placed.  She   now  leaves
 Gondolin long before the Battle of Unnumbered Tears.                     
$119.  The name Fingol is not in fact written  with a  capital, but  is pre-
 ceded by  an altered  letter that  I cannot  interpret (it  might possibly
 be intended as  an 0).  As the  annal was  written Glindur  (replacing the
 primitive  and  long-enduring   name  Meglin)   was  primarily   the  name
 of the  metal devised  by Eol,  and with  the later  change of  Glindur to
 Maeglin this remained true of the name Maeglin.                          

 $120.  The  story  now  reverts  to that  told in  Q (IV.140):  Isfin and
   Glindur  (Maeglin)  came  together  to   Gondolin;  and   the  essential
   features  of  the final  drama now  appear. The  original text  (see pp.
   316 ff.) of the fully told story of Isfin and Eol and their son (Chapter
   16 in the published Silmarillion,  Of Maeglin)  belongs to  this period,
   and  indeed  it  was  already in  existence when  these new  annals were
   written: they are a very condensed  resume. (For  the rejected  annal of
   which this is a replacement see $273 and commentary.)                   
 $121.  The  date  of Beor's  birth remains  unchanged from  that in  AB 2
   (as  revised:  170  >  370,  V.130), as  do the  dates of  the following
   annals.                                                                 
 $122-3.  The  statements  in  the annals  for 388  and 390  that Haleth
   and Hador were born in Eriador were not made in AB 2.                   
 $124.  The  reference  to  the  Quenta  is to  QS $$126  ff. -  Against the
   first sentence of this annal my father afterwards  pencilled an  X, with
   a  scribbled  note: 'This  is too  late. It  should be  the date  of the
   invitation  of  the  [?Sires]  of  Men  to come  west'. This  was struck
   through,  apart  from  the  first  four  words:  these  are   the  first
   indication of  major changes  in the  chronology that  would enter  at a
   later time.                                                             
 $125.  This  annal  is  substantially  extended  from that  in AB  2, where
   no  more  was  said  than  'there  was  war  on  the  East  Marches, and
   Beor was there with Felagund'.                                          
 $127.  Galion  replaces  Gumlin  of  QS $127  (and AB  2 as  early revised,
   V.146 note 20: originally in this text the  names of  the sons  of Hador
   were  in  the  reverse positions,  Gundor being  the elder).  Later, the
   name  Galion  was  replaced  by  Galdor.  The  change  to  'in  Eriador'
   was  probably  made  for this  reason: Hador  entered Beleriand  in 420;
   thus Gallion  was born  while his  father was  somewhere in  Eriador, in
   417, but  by the  time of  Gundor's birth  in 419  Hador was  already in
   the eastern foothills of the Blue Mountains ($128).                     
 $129.  The first paragraph of the annal for  420 is  close to that in AB 2
   (V.130-1),  with  some  additions:  that Brethil  had never  before been
   inhabited on account of the density of  the forest,  that Hador  was the
   more ready  to settle  in Hithlum  'being come  of a  northland people',
   and  that  his  lands  in Hithlum  were 'in  the country  of Dor-Lomin'.
   In the  margin against  this last  my father  later scribbled:  '[427 >]
   423  Hador's  folk  come  to  Dor-lomin',  but  struck  this   out;  see
 $136.  and  commentary.   The  old   view  that   the  people   of  Hador
   abandoned  their  own  language  in  Hithlum  is  retained  (see  V.149,
   annal 220).                                                             
 $$130-2.  The content of  the latter  part of  the annal  for 420  and the
   opening  of  that  for 422  is wholly  new: Thingol's  dreams concerning
   Men  before  they  appeared,  his ban  on their  settlement save  in the
   North  and  on  the  entry  of  any  Man  (even  of  Beor's  house) into
   Doriath,  Melian's  prophecy  to  Galadriel,  and  Thingol's  permission

 to the people of Haleth to dwell  in Brethil,  despite his  hostility to
 Men in general and his edict against their taking land so far south.
$133.  This  passage  follows  closely  the  annal in  AB 2  (V.131), but
 with the  interesting addition  that the  people of  Hador would  go far
 into the cold North to keep watch.                                      
$135.  With the  notable sentence  (not in  AB 2)  'For the  Noldor indeed
 were tall as are in the latter days men of great might and  majesty' cf.
 the collected references to  the relative  stature of  Men and  Elves in
 the oldest writings, II.326. In the early  texts it  was said  more than
 once  that  the  first Men  were smaller  than their  descendants, while
 the Elves were taller, and thus  the two  races were  almost of  a size;
 but the present passage is not clear in this respect.                   
   As  the  last  sentence  but  one  of  the  paragraph  was  originally
 written  it  read:  'Yellowhaired they  were and  blue-eyed (not  so was
 Turin  but  his  mother  was  of  Beor's  house)  and  their  women were
 tall  and fair.'  The words  'for the  most part'  were added;  they had
 appeared  in  a  closely  similar  passage  in  QS  chapter  10  (V.276,
 $130).                                                                  
$136.  That  Hador's  folk  were  given  lands  in Dor-lomin   was  men-
 tioned  in  the  annal  for 420,  to which  my father  added afterwards,
 but  then  struck  out,  '[427  >]  423  Hador's   folk  come   to  Dor-
 lomin'  (commentary  on  $129).  The  implication  is   presumably  that
 for a few years they dwelt in some other part of Beleriand.             
$139.  Beren's  mother Emeldir   'Manhearted'  is   not  named   in  the
 earlier texts.                                                          
$142.  In  AB  2  the  birth  of  Morwen was  in 445.  When the  date was
 changed in GA to 443 the entry was moved.                               
$144.  Tuor has not previously been given the title of 'the Blessed'.     
$$145-7.  In AB 2  (V.131 -  2) the  Battle of  Sudden Fire,  recorded in
 the  annal  for  455,  'began suddenly  on a  night of  mid-winter'; but
 the  passage  beginning  'Fingolfin  and  Fingon marched  to the  aid of
 Felagund'  has  a  new  date,  456.  I suggested  (V.150) that  this was
 because  the  Battle  of  Sudden  Fire  began at  midwinter of  the year
 455, i.e.  at the  end of  the year.  In GA,  on the  other hand,  it is
 expressly stated ($145) that  the assault  out of  Angband came  'at the
 year's  beginning',  'on  the night  of mid-winter';  thus the  new year
 began at the  mark of  mid-winter, and  the battle  was dated  the first
 day of the year 455. See commentary on $147.                            
$145.  There  are  here  the  first  appearances   of  the   names  Dagor
 Bragollach  (for  Dagor  Vreged-ur  in  QS,  earlier   Dagor  Hur-Breged
 in AB 2) and Anfauglith (for Dor-na-Fauglith).                          
$147.  In  QS  (V.282,  $140)  Hador,  who was  born in  390, is  said to
 have been 'sixty and six years of age' at his death, not as here 65 (see
 commentary on $$145-7).                                                 
$$149-50.  This  passage,  later  struck from  the manuscript  apart from

 the  opening  sentence  of  $149,  remained very  close to  that in  AB 2
 (V.132) with some influence in its structure  from the  story as  told in
 QS  (V.288),  except  in  one  important  particular:  Hurin's  companion
 was not,  as in  AB 2  and QS,  Haleth the  Hunter himself,  but Haleth's
 grandson  Handir,  born  in  the  same  year  as  Hurin.  - The  story of
 Hurin  in  Gondolin reappears  in GA  in a  long rider  to the  annal 458
 ($$ 161-6).                                                             
$$151-2.  As  this  passage concerning  Turgon's messengers  was first
 written it followed closely that in AB  2 (V.132-3,  and cf.  the version
 in QS, V.288); as revised it introduces the ideas of the inability of the
 Noldor  to  build  seaworthy  ships,  and  of Turgon's  nonetheless keep-
 ing  a secret  outpost and  place of  shipbuilding on  the Isle  of Balar
 thereafter.                                                              
$153.  In the earlier  accounts (AB  2 in  V.132-3 with  notes 25  and 29,
 and   QS   $141   and  commentary)   the  story   of  how   Celegorn  and
 Curufin  came  to  Nargothrond  after  their  defeat  in  the   east  was
 shifting  and  obscure,  but  there was  at any  rate no  suggestion that
 they  played  any  part  in  the defence  of Minnas-tirith  on Tolsirion.
 My  father  made  a  note  at  this   time  on   the  AB   2  manuscript,
 suggesting  a  possible  turn  in  the story:  Celegorn and  Curufin were
 driven  west  and  helped  manfully  in   the  siege   of  Minnas-tirith,
 saving   Orodreth's   life:   and   so   when  Minnas-tirith   was  taken
 Orodreth   could   not  help   but  harbour   them  in   Nargothrond.  He
 struck  this  out;  but  the  story  was  now reintroduced  and developed
 in the Grey Annals.                                                      
   The  date  of  the  capture of  Minnas-tirith was  changed in  the Grey
 Annals. In AB 2  the date  was 457  (following the  fall of  Fingolfin in
 456);  so  also  in  QS  $143  'For  nearly  two  years the  Gnomes still
 defended  the  west  pass  ...  and  Minnastirith  withstood  the  Orcs',
 and  it  was  'after  the  fall  of Fingolfin'  that Sauron  came against
 Tolsirion.  In  GA  the present  passage, describing  the assault  on the
 Pass of Sirion, was  first dated  456, but  the date  was struck  out, so
 that  these  events  fall  within  the Fell  Year, 455;  and the  fall of
 Fingolfin follows (still dated 456).                                     
$154.  The  later  form  Tol-in-Gaurhoth  (for   earlier  Tol-na-Gaurhoth)
 now appears.                                                             
$$155-7.  The  story  of  Fingolfin's  death  in  AB  2  (V.133)  had been
 compressed  into  a  few  lines.  Introducing  a  much  extended  account
 into the new Annals,  my father  drew largely  upon the  story as  it had
 been  told  in  QS  ($$144-7  and  commentary),  with  some  regard  also
 to  Canto  XII  of  the  Lay  of Leithian  (on which  the QS  version was
 largely based). In content the  differences are  mostly small,  but there
 enters here the great ride of  Fingolfin across  Anfauglith on  his horse
 Rochallor,   and   the  horse's   flight  from   Angband  and   death  in
 Hithlum.  In  AB  2  (as  in  AB  1  and  Q) it  was Thorondor  who built

        
                                                                     
 Fingolfin's cairn, whereas in QS  it was  Turgon (see  the commentary
 on QS $147); now  in the  Grey Annals  the building  of the  cairn is
 ascribed to 'the eagles'.                                            
$157.  The change of 'the people of  the hidden  city were  all Noldor'
 to 'many of  the people...  were Noldor'  depends on  the development
 whereby there were  many Elves  of Sindarin  origin in  Gondolin: see
 commentary on $107 and references given there.                       
  In the late addition at the end of this paragraph (present in the GA
 typescript)  appears  the  parentage  of Gilgalad  as adopted  in the
 published Silmarillion; see further pp. 242-3.                       
$158.  The   form   Taur-nu-Fuin   (for  earlier   Taur-na-Fuin)  now
 appears.                                                             
$159.  In AB 2 (V.133), and in a closely similar passage in  QS ($139),
 it  was  said  that  the  wives  of Baragund  and Belegund  were from
 Hithlum,  and  that  when  the  Battle  of  Sudden  Fire  began their
 daughters  Morwen  and  Rian  were   sojourning  there   among  their
 kinsfolk -  hence they  were the  only survivors.  This story  is now
 superseded  and rejected:  Emeldir Beren's  mother led  the surviving
 women  and  children  of  Beor's  people away  over the  mountains in
 the aftermath of the battle,  and it  was thus  that Morwen  and Rian
 came to Dor-lomin (by way of Brethil). It is  not made  clear whether
 their mothers were still women of Hithlum.                           
  In  AB  2 the  full list  of Barahir's  band was  not given,  with a
 suggestion that only certain  names were  remembered, but  it appears
 in  QS  ($139).  The  only  name  that  differs in  GA is  Arthad for
 Arthod.  Radhruin  of  QS  is  here  written  Radhruin   (Radruin  by
 emendation of Radros in AB 2,  V.147 note  31), but  this may  not be
 significant.                                                         
$160.  This paragraph derives from the annal for 458  in AB  2 (V.133).
 In the story as told in QS  ($152) Beleg  came to  the aid  of Haleth
 'with many  archers'; cf.  GA $29,  'Thingol's armouries  were stored
 with axes (the chief  weapons of  the Naugrim,  and of  the Sindar)',
 and  the  name  'Axe-elves'  of  the  Sindar  (transferred  from  the
 Nandor),  X.171.  On  the  name  Eglath  ('The  Forsaken')  see X.85,
 164, 170.                                                            
$161.  Huor  now  at last  appears as  Hurin's companion  in Gondolin,
 replacing Handir grandson of Haleth in the earlier,  rejected passage
 in GA ($ 149).                                                       
  Haleth  was the  kinsman of  Hurin and  Huor (as  noticed in  a late
 addition to the  manuscript) through  the marriage  in 436  ($140) of
 Haleth's  son  Hundor  to  Glorwendil, daughter  of Hador  and sister
 of their father Galion. But  the genealogy  was further  developed in
 the  annal  for  462  (see $171  and commentary)  by the  marriage of
 Galion to Haleth's daughter, so  that Haleth  was the  grandfather of
 Hurin and Huor; and it seems very probable that  this was  the reason
 for the addition of the words 'their kinsman' here.                  

    The  story  now  becomes  decisively  different  from the  old version
   in AB 2 and QS, and still present in GA  as originally  written ($149);
   for  Hurin  and  his  companion  (now  his   brother  Huor)   were  not
   hunting in the Vale of Sirion before  the Battle  of Sudden  Flame, but
   the  fact  of  the fostering  of Hurin  (and now  of his  brother also)
   among  the  people  of  Haleth  is  brought  into association  with the
   defeat of the Orcs in 458 by the men of Brethil, aided by Elves  out of
   Doriath, three years after the battle. There enters now also  the story
   that  Hurin  and  Huor  were  taken  to  Gondolin by  the Eagles.  - On
   the ford of Brithiach see p. 228, $28.                                 
 $$162-6.  The  story  now  reaches  virtually its  final form,  with the
   major innovation of Maeglin's hostility to  the young  men but  also of
   their being permitted to leave  Gondolin despite  the king's  ban, here
   first stated in  its full  rigour, on  departure from  the city  of any
   stranger  who  came  there;  and  this  permission was  granted because
   of their ignorance of how it might be found. (The  riders on  the story
   of  Isfin  and  Eol, $$118-20,  were written  at the  same time  as the
   present one.)                                                          
 $165.  On  the  change  of Glindur  to  Maeglin  see  $119   and  commen-
   tary.                                                                  
 $166.  On the  carbon  copy  of  the  typescript  of  GA my  father wrote
   against the words 'But though  they told  that they  had dwelt  a while
   in  honour  in  the  halls  of  King  Turgon':  'They  did  not  reveal
   Turgon's name.' See p. 169.                                            
 $170.  'The army  that  had  driven  into East  Beleriand' must  refer to
   the  invasions  of the  year 455:  cf. AB  2, annal  456; QS  $142; and
   again in GA $148, in all of which the phrase 'far into  East Beleriand'
   occurs. In AB 2, in the renewed assaults of the year 462  (V.134), 'the
   invasion  of  the  Orcs  encompassed  Doriath,  both west  down Sirion,
   and  east  through  the  passes beyond  Himling.' Of  this there  is no
   mention  here  in  GA  (nor  in  QS,  $156);  but  there has  also been
   no mention before the present  passage of  Thingol's victory  after the
   Dagor Bragollach or indeed of the subsequent  total destruction  (as it
   appears) of the eastern invading force.                                
 $171.  The statement  that  'in  the eastward  war [Morgoth]  hoped ere
   long  to  have  new  help  unforeseen  by the  Eldar' is  a premonitory
   reference  to  the  coming  of  the  Swarthy Men;  cf. QS  $150, where,
   immediately  before  their  entry  into  Beleriand,  it  is  said  that
   Morgoth  'sent  his  messengers  east  over  the  mountains',  and that
   'some  were  already  secretly  under  the  dominion  of  Morgoth,  and
   came at his call'. In GA ($174, footnote) it is said that 'it was after
   thought that the people of Ulfang were already secretly in  the service
   of  Morgoth ere  they came  to Beleriand.'  See further  $$79 -  81 and
   commentary.                                                            
    Of  the  assault on  Hithlum no  more was  said in  AB 2  (V.134) than
   that 'Morgoth went against  Hithlum, but  was driven  back as  yet'; in

  
                                                                            
     QS  ($156)  it  was  Fingon,  not Hurin,  who 'drove  [the Orcs]  in the
     end  with  heavy  slaughter  from  the  land,   and  pursued   them  far
     across the sands of Fauglith.'                                          
       At the end of the paragraph, by later addition, is the first reference
     to the short  stature of  Hurin, and  also to  the 'double  marriage' of
     Hador's  son  Galion  and  daughter  Glorwendil  to   Haleth's  daughter
     (unnamed) and son Hundor.  It seems  likely that  this extension  of the
     genealogy  arose  here,  and  was the  basis of  the addition  of 'their
     kinsman'  to  the  annal  for  458  discussed   in  the   commentary  on
     $ 161.                                                                  
  $172.  In  QS  ($156)  there  seems  only  to  have  been  an  assault on
     Hithlum from the  east, from  Fauglith, for  it is  said that  'the Orcs
     won  many  of  the  passes,  and some  came even  into Mithrim'.  In the
     present  annal  it  seems  that Galion  and his  son Hurin  defeated the
     attack  from  the  east,  while  Fingon  attempted  to   defend  Hithlum
     from the north (the intervention of Cirdan is  of course  entirely new).
     On  the  puzzling   question  of   the  geographical   configuration  of
     the north of Hithlum see  V.270-1 (and  cf. what  is said  in GA  of the
     route  of  the  attack  out  of  Angband  in  the  year  155,  $115  and
     commentary).  The  present   passage  does   not  clarify   the  matter,
     though  the  statement  that  the  horsed archers  of the  Eldar pursued
     the  Orcs  'even  to   the  Iron   Mountains'  possibly   suggests  that
     Hithlum  was  to  some  degree  open  to  the  north. This  would indeed
     be  very  surprising,  since  it  would  make  Hithlum  by far  the most
     vulnerable  of  the  territories of  the Eldar,  and Morgoth  would have
     had little need to  attempt to  break through  the vast  natural defence
     of the  Shadowy Mountains.  But this  is the  merest speculation,  and I
     know of no other evidence bearing on the matter.                        
  $$173-4.  New  elements in  this account  of the  Easterlings (cf.  AB 2,
     V.134,  and  QS  $151)  are  the  explicit statement  that they  did not
     enter  Beleriand  over the  Blue Mountains  but passed  to the  north of
     them;  the  warning  of   the  Dwarves   to  Maidros   concerning  their
     westward  movement;  the  diversity  of their  tongues and  their mutual
     hostility;  their  dwellings  in  Lothlann  and  south  of the  March of
     Maidros  (in  QS  it  is  said  only  that  they  'abode  long  in  East
     Beleriand',  $152).  The  form  Lothlann  appears for  earlier Lothland;
     Lothlann  (Lhothlann)  is  found  in  the  Etymologies  (stems LAD, LUS,
     V.367, 370).                                                            
  $174.  On the  first sentence  of the  footnote to  this paragraph  see the
     commentary  on  $171.  With  the  following  remarks  in   the  footnote
     concerning  the  descendants of  the people  of Bor  in  Eriador  in the
     Second  Age  cf.  QS  chapter  16,  $15   (V.310-11):  'From   that  day
     [Nirnaith  Arnediad]  the  hearts  of  the  Elves  were  estranged  from
     Men,  save  only  from  those  of  the  Three  Houses,  the  peoples  of
     Hador,  and  Beor, and  Haleth; for  the sons  of Bor,  Boromir, Borlas,
     and  Borthandos,  who  alone  among  the  Easterlings  proved   true  at

  need, all perished in that battle, and they left no heirs.' This suggests
  that the people of Bor ceased to be of any account after  472; but  it is
  perhaps  to  be  presumed  in  any case  that these  Men of  Eriador were
  a branch of that people who never entered Beleriand.                     
$$175-210.  I  have  described  in  V.295  how,  after  The  Lord  of the
  Rings was finished, my father  began (on  the blank  verso pages  of the
  manuscript  of  AB 2)  a prose  'saga' of  Beren and  Luthien, conceived
  on a  large scale  and closely  following the  revised Lay  of Leithian;
  but this went no further than  Dairon's betrayal  to Thingol  of Beren's
  presence  in  Doriath.  Unless  this work  belongs to  a time  after the
  abandonment  of  the   Grey  Annals,   which  seems   to  me   very  im-
  probable, the two versions of the tale  that appear  here in  the Annals
  are the last of the many that  my father  wrote (for  a full  account of
  the complex history of the QS versions and drafts see V.292 ff.).        
    It will be seen that Version I is a  precis of  the narrative  with no
  new elements, or  elements inconsistent  with the  'received tradition',
  apart  from  the  reference   to  Amarie   (see  commentary   on  $180).
  Version II, if at the outset conceived  on a  fairly ample  scale, again
  soon  becomes  another  precis,  though  much  fuller  than  Version  I,
  and a great deal that is told  in the  completed QS  text ('QS  II', see
  V.292-3)  is  either  not  present  or is  treated much  more cursorily:
  thus  for  example, nothing  is said  in GA  of Huan's  understanding of
  speech  or  speaking  three  times  before  his death,  nor of  his doom
  (The Silmarillion pp. 172-3), and  much else  that there  is no  need to
  detail  here.  But  the  structure  of the  two narratives  remains very
  close.                                                                   
    It is curious to observe that the relation of the  two versions  in GA
  is the reverse  of that  between the  two versions  that my  father made
  for the Quenta Silmarillion. The fuller form of the latter ('QS  I') was
  very  clearly  an  integral  element  in  the QS  manuscript as  it pro-
  ceeded,  but he  abandoned it  and replaced  it by  the shorter  form QS
  II because (as I have said, V.292) 'he saw that it was  going to  be too
  long,  overbalancing  the  whole  work.  He  had  taken  more  than 4000
  words  to  reach  the  departure  of  Beren  and Felagund  from Nargoth-
  rond'. In the case of the Grey  Annals, on  the other  hand, it  was the
  shorter  form  (Version I)  that was  integral to  the text  as written,
  while  the  fuller  form  (Version  II)  was  intended  to  supplant  it
  (though it was not finished).                                            
    For  passages  in  the  published Silmarillion  derived from  the Grey
  Annals see V.298-301.                                                    
$175.  Eryd  Orgorath:  on  the  typescript  of  AAm  Ered  Orgoroth  was
  changed to Ered Gorgorath (X.127, $126).                                 
    'And  he  passed  through,  even  as  Melian  had  foretold':  see the
  words of Melian to Galadriel, $131.                                      
    In  AB  2  (V.135)  Hurin  wedded  Morwen  in  464,  as  in   GA,  but
  Turin was born in the  winter of  465 'with  sad omens'.  This insertion

 in GA makes Turin's birth in the  year of  his parents'  marriage. See
 further the commentary on $183.                                       
$178.  The  word  'bride-price'  of the  Silmaril demanded  by Thingol
 had been used by Aragorn when he told the story on Weathertop.        
$179.  Celegorm  was  the original  form, appearing  in the  Lost Tales
 (II.241). The name became  Celegorn in  the course  of the  writing of
 QS  (V.226, 289),  and this  remained the  form in  AAm and  GA; later
 it reverted to Celegorm (X.177, 179). The change  of m  to n  here was
 made at the time of or very soon  after the  writing of  this passage,
 and Celegorm was probably no more than a slip.                        
$180.  With '[Felagund] dwells  now in  Valinor with  Amarie' cf.  QS I
 (V.300): 'But Inglor walks with Finrod his  father among  his kinsfolk
 in the light of the Blessed Realm, and it is not  written that  he has
 ever returned to Middle-earth.' In Version II ($199)  it is  said that
 'released  soon  from  Mandos,  he  went to  Valinor and  there dwells
 with Amarie.' It has been told in the annal for  102 ($109)  that 'she
 whom  [Felagund]  had  loved  was Amarie  of the  Vanyar, and  she was
 not permitted to go with him into exile.'                             
$183.  Turin's birth ('with sad omens') was likewise  given in  the year
 465  in AB  2. The  present entry  was only  inserted later,  I think,
 because  my father  had inadvertently  omitted it  while concentrating
 on  the  story  of  Beren  and Luthien.  Following the  direction here
 'Place in 464' a pencilled  addition was  made to  the annal  for that
 year in both versions (see $175 and commentary, $188).                
$185.  It appears from the penultimate sentence  of this  paragraph that
 the joining of the Two  Kindreds is  ascribed to  the purpose  of Eru.
 This is not in QS (I) (see The Silmarillion p. 184), nor in Version II
 of the story in the Grey Annals ($210).                               
$187.  With the  revised reading  'soon after  the mid-winter'  cf. the
 commentary on $$145-7.                                               
$189.  '[Thingol] answered in mockery': his tone  is indeed  less sombre
 and  more  briefly  contemptuous  than  in  QS  (I)  (The Silmarillion
 p. 167). In the Lay of Leithian  (III.192, lines  1132 -  3) Thingol's
 warriors  'laughed  loud  and long'  at his  demand that  Beren should
 fetch him a Silmaril; see my remarks on this, III.196.                
$190.  The  detail of  the glance  passing between  Melian and  Beren at
 this juncture is not found in the other versions.                     
$191.  The words  'as long  before he  had said  to Galadriel'  refer to
 Felagund's  prophetic  words  in  Nargothrond  recorded  in  the annal
 for 102 ($108).                                                       
$193.  The naming of Inglor  'Finrod' was  perhaps no  more than  a slip
 without significance; but in view of the occurrence of  'Finrod Inglor
 the Fair' in a text associated  with drafting  for Aragorn's  story on
 Weathertop  (VI.187-8)  it  seems  possible  that  my father  had con-
 sidered  the  shifting  of  the  names  (whereby Inglor  became Finrod
 and Finrod his father  became Finarfin)  long before  their appearance

                             
                                                                         
     in print in the Second Edition of The Lord of the Rings.             
  $$193-4.  In the long version QS (I),  which ends  at this  point, when
     Felagund  gave  the  crown  of  Nargothrond  to his  brother Orodreth
     'Celegorm and Curufin  said nothing,  but they  smiled and  went from
     the  halls'  (The  Silmarillion p.  170). The  words of  Celegorn and
     Felagund that follow here are a new element in the story.            
        The foresight of  Felagund is  undoubtedly intended  to be  a true
     foresight (like all such foresight, though it  may be  ambiguous). If
     full weight is given to the precise words used  by Felagund,  then it
     may be said that the conclusion of QS (V.331), where it is  told that
     Maidros and Maglor did each regain a  Silmaril for  a brief  time, is
     not contradicted.                                                    
  $198.  In QS (The Silmarillion p. 174) it is not said that Sauron 'left
     the Elven-king to the last, for he knew who he was', but only that he
     'purposed to keep Felagund to the last, for he perceived that  he was
     a Gnome of great might and wisdom.'  See the  Lay of  Leithian, lines
     2216 - 17 and 2581-2609 (III.231, 249).                              
  $201.  It is not told in other versions that Huan led the  prisoners of
     Tolsirion back to Nargothrond; in QS  it is  said only  that 'thither
     now  returned  many  Elves  that had  been prisoners  in the  isle of
     Sauron' (The Silmarillion p. 176).                                   
  $203.  The new year is placed at a slightly later point in  the narrative
     in Version I, $184. In AB 2 all the latter part of the story of Beren
     and  Luthien, from  their entry  into Angband,  was placed  under the
     annal for the year 465 (V.135).                                      
  $204.  The  absence  of  any  mention   of  the   story  that   Huan  and
     Luthien  turned  aside  to  Tol-in-Gaurhoth on  their way  north, and
     clad in the wolfcoat of  Draugluin and  the batskin  of Thuringwethil
     came  upon  Beren  at the  edge of  Anfauglith (The  Silmarillion pp.
     178-9), is clearly due simply to compression. It was  not said  in QS
     (ibid.  p.  179)  that  'Huan  abode  in  the  woods' when  Beren and
     Luthien left him on their journey to Angband.                        
  $207.  It is not made clear in QS (The Silmarillion pp. 181  - 2)  that it
     was the howls of Carcharoth that aroused the  sleepers in  Angband. -
     On  the  names  Gwaihir  and  Lhandroval,  which  appear  here  in QS
     but not in the published Silmarillion (p. 182), see V.301 and IX.45.
  $211.  This annal  is very  close to  a passage  in QS  (The Silmarillion
     p. 186).                                                             
  $$212 ff.  The text  of QS  is no  longer the  fine manuscript  that was
     interrupted  when it  was sent  to the  publishers in  November 1937,
     but the intermediate texts that my  father wrote  while it  was away.
     These  have  been  described in  V.293-4: a  rough but  legible manu-
     script 'QS(C)' that  completed the  story of  Beren and  Luthien, and
     extending  through  the  whole  of  QS  Chapter  16  Of   the  Fourth
     Battle:  Nirnaith  Arnediad  was  abandoned  near  the  beginning  of
     Chapter  17 (the  story of  Turin); and  a second  manuscript 'QS(D)'

        
                                                                       
 which  took  up  in  the  middle  of Chapter  16 and  extended somewhat
 further  into  Chapter  17,  at  which  point  the  Quenta Silmarillion
 in  that  phase  came to  an end  as a  continuous narrative.  From the
 beginning  of  Chapter  16 I  began a  new series  of paragraph-numbers
 from $1 (V.306).                                                       
$212.  In this annal (468) my father  followed that  in AB  2 (465  - 70,
 V.135) closely, and thus  an important  element in  the 'Silmarillion'
 tradition  is  absent:  the  arrogant  demand  of  the  Feanorians upon
 Thingol  for the  surrender of  the Silmaril,  followed by  the violent
 menaces of  Celegorn and  Curufin against  him, as  the prime  cause of
 his  refusal  to aid  Maidros (see  QS $6,  and the  passage in  Q from
 which that derives, IV.116 - 17). In AB 2 Thingol's refusal is ascribed
 to 'the deeds of Celegorm  and Curufin',  and this  is followed  in GA.
 Again,  the  story  in  QS  $7, absent  in AB  2, that  only a  half of
 Haleth's  people   came  forth   from  Brethil   on  account   of  'the
 treacherous  shaft  of  Curufin that  wounded Beren',  is not  found in
 GA.                                                                    
  Notably,  it  is  said  in  GA  that  Maidros  had  the  help  of  the
 Dwarves 'in armed force' as well  as in  weapons of  war; this  was not
 said  in  AB  2  and  was  expressly  denied in  QS, where  the Dwarves
 were represented as cynically engaged in  the profitable  enterprise of
 'making  mail  and  sword and  spear for  many armies'  (see QS  $3 and
 commentary).                                                           
$213.  The annal  in AB  2 from  which this  paragraph derives  is dated
 468.  The  present  annal  is  much  more  explicit about  the unwisdom
 of  Maidros  in  revealing  his  power untimely  than were  the earlier
 accounts. - In QS ($3)  it is  said that  at this  time 'the  Orcs were
 driven out of the northward regions of Beleriand', to  which it  is now
 added in GA that 'even Dorthonion was freed for a while'.              
$214.  The span of  the second  lives of  Beren and  Luthien was  said in
 the QS drafts to have been long, but  the final  text has  'whether the
 second span of his life  was brief  or long  is not  known to  Elves or
 Men'  (see  V.305-6  on  the  development  of  the  passage  concerning
 the  return  of  Beren  and  Luthien  and  its  form  in  the published
 Silmarillion).  It  seems  possible  that  '[Luthien]  should  soon die
 indeed' in the present text does not imply a short  mortal span,  but a
 mortal span in contrast to that of the Eldar.                          
  The  final  text  of QS  says that  Beren and  Luthien 'took  up again
 their mortal form in Doriath', but the account here of their  return to
 Thingol and Melian in Menegroth is  entirely new  (as also,  of course,
 is the reference to Elrond and Arwen).                                 
  The  land  of  the  Dead that  Live is  named in  QS(B) Gwerth-i-Cuina
 and in the final text of QS Gyrth-i-Guinar (V.305).                    
$215.  In AB 2 the latter part of the legend of  Beren and  Luthien, from
 their entry  into Angband  to their  return from  the dead,  was placed
 under  the  year  465,  whereas  in GA  it appears  under 466,  and the

 death of Luthien in 467 ($211). The birth of Dior  (whose name          
 Aranel now appears) is here moved forward three years from the          
 date in AB 2, 467.                                                      
$216.  The  wedding  of Huor  and Rian  was given  in AB  2 in  the annal
 for 472, and was  said to  have taken  place 'upon  the eve  of battle'.
 See $218 and commentary.                                                
$$217 ff.  In  the  very  long  account of  the Nirnaeth  Arnediad that
 follows  my  father  made  use  both  of the  'Silmarillion' and  of the
 'Annals' tradition, i.e.  QS Chapter  16 and  the account  in AB  2. The
 QS chapter  was itself  largely derived  from an  interweaving of  Q and
 AB 2 (see V.313). - A later version of the story of the  battle, closely
 based on that in GA but  with radical  alterations, is  given in  Note 2
 at the end of this commentary (pp. 165 ff.)                             
$218.  This  passage  was  not   removed  when   the  record   of  Huor's
 marriage  to  Rian  was  entered  under  471  ($216); the  typescript of
 GA, however, has only the later 471 entry.                              
$219.  The  Nirnaeth  Arnediad, formerly  the fourth  battle in  the wars
 of  Beleriand,  now  becomes  the  fifth   battle:  see   commentary  on
 $$36 ff. The time of the year was not stated in the earlier accounts.
   The  placing  of  the  passage  on the  subject of  the Hill  of Slain
 follows  AB  2 (V.136);  rejected here,  it was  replaced by  another at
 the  end  of  the  story  of  the  Nirnaeth Arnediad  in GA  ($250): cf.
 QS  $19.  On   the  name   Haud-na-Dengin  see   V.314,  $19;   also  GA
 $$250-1.                                                                
$220.  The  actual  nature  of  Uldor's  machinations  was not  stated in
 the earlier accounts.                                                   
$221.  'a  great company  from Nargothrond':  earlier in  GA ($212)  it is
 said  that  'small  help  came  from  Nargothrond' (cf.  QS $5:  'only a
 small  company').   -  The   addition  concerning   Mablung's  presence,
 not  in  AB  2,  comes  from  QS  ($6),  deriving  from Q  (IV.117); but
 in  those  texts  Beleg  ('who  obeyed  no  man',  'who  could   not  be
 restrained')  came also  to the  battle. Thingol's  qualified permission
 to  Mablung  is  new  in  GA;  in the  Quenta tradition  such permission
 was  given  by  Orodreth  to  the  company   from  Nargothrond.   -  The
 succession of  Hundor on  the death  of his  father, Haleth  the Hunter,
 is  recorded  in  the  annal  for  468  ($212).  (Much  later,  when the
 genealogy  of  the  People  of  Haleth   was  transformed,   Hundor  was
 replaced by 'Haldir and Hundar'; on this see p. 236.)                   
   On   the   unsatisfactory   account   of   Turgon's   emergence   from
 Gondolin  in  QS,  amalgamating  the  inconsistent  stories  in   Q  and
 AB  2,  see  V.313-15.  In the  Grey Annals  the confusion  is resolved.
 Turgon  came  up  from  Gondolin  before  battle was  joined (in  the AB
 story   he  and   his  host   only  came   down  from   Taur-na-Fuin  as
 Fingon's  host  withdrew   southwards  towards   the  Pass   of  Sirion,
 V.136 - '7), but only  shortly before,  and was  stationed in  the south
 guarding the Pass of Sirion.                                            

                                                  
                                                                         
$222.  The story of the opening of the  battle as  told here  differs from
  that  in  QS  $10  (following  Q),  where  Fingon  and  Turgon  becoming
  impatient at the delay of Maidros sent their heralds  into the  plain of
  Fauglith to sound their trumpets in challenge to Morgoth.               
$$224-5.  There now  appears the  final link  in this  element of  the nar-
  rative:  the  captured herald  (see commentary  on $222)  slaughtered in
  provocation  on  the  plain  of  Fauglith  (QS  $11)  disappears  and is
  replaced  by  Gelmir   of  Nargothrond,   Gwindor's  brother,   who  had
  been taken  prisoner in  the Battle  of Sudden  Flame. It  was Gwindor's
  grief  for   his  brother   that  had   brought  him   from  Nargothrond
  against the will of  Orodreth the  king, and  his rage  at the  sight of
  Gelmir's  murder  was  the  cause  of the  fatal charge  of the  host of
  Hithlum. I have described the evolution of the story in IV.180.         
$226.  In $221 'the host of Fingolfin' is obviously a slip of the pen, for
  'the host of Fingon', and so  probably 'the  banners of  Fingolfin' here
  also: QS ($12) has 'the banners of Fingon'.                             
$228.  'in the rearguard', struck  out in  GA, is  found both  in AB  2 and
  in QS ($13). - It is not said either in AB 2 or in QS  that the  host of
  Hithlum  was  surrounded,  only  that  the   enemy  came   between  them
  and  Erydwethion,  so  that  Fingon  was forced  to retreat  towards the
  Pass of Sirion.                                                         
    It seems clear that Turgon  emerged from  the Pass  only a  brief time
  before  the  coming  of  the decoy  force out  of Angband;  therefore he
  had not yet actually encountered Hurin.                                 
$230.  The Balrogs were still  at this  time conceived  to exist  in large
  numbers;  cf.  AAm  $50  (X.75):  '[Melkor]  sent  forth  on a  sudden a
  host of Balrogs'  - at  which point  my father  noted on  the typescript
  of  AAm:  'There  should  not be  supposed more  than say  3 or  at most
  7 ever existed' (X.80).                                                 
$231.  In AB  2 and  in QS  ($15) it  was Cranthir,  not Maglor,  who slew
  Uldor the Accursed. It is not said in those texts that 'new  strength of
  evil  men  came  up  that  Uldor  had  summoned and  kept hidden  in the
  eastern hills',  nor, of  course, that  the Feanorians,  fleeing towards
  Mount  Dolmed,  took  with  them  a  remnant  of  the  Naugrim,  for  it
  was  only  with  the  Grey  Annals  that  the Dwarves  took part  in the
  battle (commentary on $212).                                            
$232.  Earlier  in  GA  ($22)  the  Enfeng are  the Dwarves  of Belegost,
  but there  was a  period (Q,  QS) when  they were  those of  Nogrod (see
  commentary  on  $22);  this  no  doubt   explains  Nogrod   here,  which
  was  struck  out  and replaced  by Belegost  as soon  as written.  - The
  entire paragraph, and all its detail, is original in GA.                
$233.  In  QS  ($17)  the  banners of  Fingon were  white. In  the account
  in GA of the fall of Fingolfin  ($155) his  shield was  blue set  with a
  star of  crystal, and  his arms  silver; this  is found  also in  the QS
  version ($144).                                                         
$$234-5.  The   speeches   between   Turgon,   Hurin,  and   Huor  are

 entirely new. In  $235 one  might expect  Huor to  have said:  'I shall
 never  look on  thy white  walls again'  (as he  does in  the published
 Silmarillion, p. 194), since he  had been  to Gondolin,  fourteen years
 before; but see p. 169.                                                
$$235-6.  Virtually all  the changes  in these  paragraphs were  made at
 the time of the writing of the manuscript.                             
$237.  The  name  Glindur  has  appeared  in other  passages introduced
 into the primary text: $$119 - 20, 165.                                
$240.  Original details  in GA  are the  striking of  Huor's eye  by the
 venomed arrow, and  the piling  of the  dead men  of Hador's  house 'as
 a mound of gold'.                                                      
$241.  This  paragraph  is derived  from passages  in QS  ($$15-16) that
 occur at an earlier point in the narrative; but there is no  mention in
 GA of the sons of Bor (see commentary on $174).                        
$242.  The statement here that  'Tol-sirion [was]  retaken and  its dread
 towers rebuilt', not previously made, is clearly in plain contradiction
 of  what was  said in  QS (V.300):  'They buried  the body  of Felagund
 upon the hill-top of his own  isle, and  it was  clean again,  and ever
 after remained inviolate; for Sauron came never  back thither.'  In the
 published Silmarillion this passage in QS was changed.                 
$243.  'Cirdan  held  the  Havens'  is  of  course  an  addition  to the
 passage  in  QS  ($20)  which  is  here being  closely followed.  - The
 references  to  Morgoth's  peculiar  fear  of  Turgon,  and  to  Ulmo's
 friendship  towards  the  house  of Fingolfin,  who scorned  Morgoth in
 Valinor, have no antecedents in earlier texts. It can be seen  from the
 rejected lines (rough  and with  many changes  in the  manuscript) that
 my  father was  to some  extent working  out the  thought as  he wrote.
 The words 'from  Turgon ruin  should come  to him'  are a  reference to
 Earendil and his embassage to Valinor.                                 
$$244-9.  The  encounter  of  Hurin with  Morgoth as  told in  GA is
 based  on  and  for  the  most  part  follows closely  the story  in QS
 ($$21-3),  but  with  some   expansions:  Morgoth's   words  concerning
 Hurin's  wife  and  son  now  helpless  in  Hithlum,  Hurin's  sight of
 Hithlum  and Beleriand  far off  from his  stone seat  on Thangorodrim.
 See further p. 169.                                                    
$251.  It is at this point in  the narrative  that the  draft manuscripts
 QS(C)  and  QS(D),  having  concluded the  'Nirnaith' chapter  with the
 setting  of  Hurin  on  Thangorodrim,  give  a  new  heading,  in QS(C)
 'Of  Turin  the  Hapless'  and in  QS(D) 'Of  Turin Turamarth  or Turin
 the  Hapless'.  This,  which was  to be  the next  chapter (17)  in QS,
 begins with the birth of  Tuor and  the death  of Rian  on the  Hill of
 Slain (to  which the  Grey Annals  likewise now  turn); but  QS(C) goes
 only so far  as Turin's  departure from  Menegroth to  go out  to fight
 on  the  marches  of  Doriath  wearing   the  Dragon-helm,   and  QS(D)
 continues  beyond  this  point  only  to Turin's  self-imposed outlawry
 after the slaying of Orgof (GA $259).                                  

    The  fostering  of  Tuor  by  Dark-elves  was recorded  both in  AB 2
   (V.137) and in QS  ($24); rejected  in GA,  there appears  instead the
   first  mention  of  Annael  and  the Grey-elves  of Mithrim  (see com-
   mentary  on  $252).  Glorwendil's  death  of  grief  for  her  husband
   Hundor son of Haleth is referred to in the course of the  narrative of
   the Nirnaith Arnediad in QS ($13).                                    
 $252.  In both AB 2 (V.138) and in QS  ($19) it  was recorded  that 'the
   Elves  of  Hithlum'  were  enslaved in  the mines  of Morgoth  at this
   time, such of them  as did  not escape  into the  wild, and  one would
   naturally assume that this referred to  Noldorin Elves  of Fingolfin's
   people - although  the very  reference to  Tuor's fostering  by 'Dark-
   elves'  shows  that  there  were  other Elves  in Hithlum,  and 'Grey-
   elves' may  be simply  a later  term for  the Dark-elves  of Beleriand
   owning  allegiance  to  Thingol.  In  his  message  to   the  new-come
   Noldor  by  the  mouth  of  Angrod  (GA  $64)  Thingol did  not indeed
   suggest that there  were any  of his  people (Grey-elves)  in Hithlum:
   among   the   regions   where   the  Noldor   might  dwell   he  named
   Hithlum,  adding  that 'elsewhere  there are  many of  my folk,  and I
   would not have them restrained  of their  freedoms, still  less ousted
   from their homes.'                                                    
 $253.  At  the  end of  this paragraph  my father  pencilled: '(Septem-
   ber-Dec.)';  this  clearly  refers  to the  months of  Turin's journey
   from  Hithlum to  Doriath in  the latter  part of  472 (the  Battle of
   Unnumbered  Tears  was  fought  at  midsummer  of  that  year,  $219).
   According to the earlier dating ($183) he  was born  in the  winter of
   465;  this was  changed ($$175,  188) to  464, but  without indication
   of the time of the year.  If he  were born  in the  winter of  464, he
   would still have been seven years old in the autumn of 472.           
 $256.  The whole  content of  this paragraph  is new  to the  history. In
   the sentence 'Smiths  and miners  and masters  of fire'  the published
   Silmarillion (p. 196), which  derives from  this passage,  has 'makers
   of fire': this was a misreading of the manuscript.                    
 $257.  It  was said  earlier in  GA ($$151 - 2)  that after  the Dagor
   Bragollach  Turgon  sent  Elves of  Gondolin to  the mouths  of Sirion
   and to the  Isle of  Balar to  attempt shipbuilding  (it is  perhaps a
   question, why  did he  not approach  Cirdan at  that time?),  and that
   he 'ever maintained a secret refuge upon the Isle  of Balar'.  But the
   phrase  in  the  present  passage 'and  mingled with  Turgon's outpost
   there'  was  struck  out,  and  the subsequent  'when Turgon  heard of
   this  he sent  again his  messengers to  Sirion's Mouths'  suggests of
   itself that the idea  of a  permanent outpost  from Gondolin  on Balar
   had been abandoned.                                                   
    Here,  in  an  alteration to  the text,  Voronwe's story  is extended
   back, and he appears in a new role as captain of the last of the seven
   ships sent out into the Western Ocean by Cirdan (it  is not  said that
   he was an Elf of Gondolin). In earlier texts he  has of  course played

 no  such  part.  In  Q  (IV.141)  Tuor  at  the  mouths of  Sirion met
 Bronweg  (>  Bronwe)  who  had  been of  old of  the people  of Turgon
 and had escaped  from Angband.  With $$256-7 cf.  the story  of Tuor
 in Unfinished Tales, pp. 34-5 and note 13.                            
$258.  If  Turin  were born  in the  winter of  464 (see  commentary on
 $253) he would  have been  in his  seventeenth year  in 481;  it seems
 therefore that the older  date (465)  for his  birth is  retained. The
 Annals, very cursory,  do not  mention the  occasion of  Turin's going
 to war (the ceasing of all tidings out of Hithlum).                   
   The  scribbled  note  'Turin  donned the  Dragon-helm of  Galion' is
 not in the  typescript of  GA. The  Dragon-helm goes  back to  the old
 Lay  of  the  Children  of  Hurin,  and was  described in  Q (IV.118),
 in  the  context  of  Hurin's  not  having  worn it  at the  Battle of
 Unnumbered Tears; in the Lay (not in Q)  Turin's taking  it to  war at
 this time is mentioned (III.16, line 377: 'then  Hurin's son  took the
 helm of his sire').                                                   
$259.  It is here that QS came to an end as a continuous  narrative (see
 V.321, 323).                                                          
 $260  The  first  two  sentences  of  this  annal  are derived  from Q
 (IV.123) and AB 2 (V.138); but those texts  do not  give the  place of
 Turin's lair, here said to be in Dimbar.                              
$261.  The  first  part  of  this follows  AB 2  (on Tuor's  'coming to
 Hithlum'  see  V.151),  but  the  statement  that  Morwen  and  Nienor
 'had been carried away to Mithrim' seems altogether aberrant.         
$263.  The  final  form  of the  annal concerning  Tuor, with  the date
 changed to  488 and  his age  changed to  sixteen, and  the appearance
 of Lorgan chief of the Easterlings, is probably derived from the story
 in  Of  Tuor  and  his  Coming  to  Gondolin  (Unfinished   Tales  pp.
 18-19):  in  the manuscript  of that  work the  date 488  was inserted
 against  the  paragraph  beginning  'Therefore  Annael  led  his small
 people  ...'  (p.  18),  and Tuor's  age was  changed from  fifteen to
 sixteen in the same sentence. On the other hand  that text  has 'after
 three years of  thraldom' (p.  19) as  it was  written, whereas  in GA
 'three' is a change from 'seven'.                                     
$264.  This is the original annal  for 488.  When the  preceding passage
 on  Tuor  was  given  the  date  488  the  entry concerning  Haldir of
 Nargothrond  became  a  continuation  of  that  year.  The  event  was
 referred  to  in  the  Lay  of  the Children  of Hurin  (III.75, lines
 2137-8),  where  Orodreth's  son  was  named  Halmir;  Halmir in  AB 2
 was changed to Haldir (V.138 and note 38),  which is  the form  in the
 Etymologies  (explained   as  meaning   'hidden  hero', stem SKAL {1},
 V.386).                                                               
$265.  In Q Blodrin was a  Gnome, with  the later  addition that  he was
 a Feanorian (IV.123 and note 5); the story told here  that he  was one
 of the faithful Easterlings who became a traitor after his  capture by
 Morgoth is a new development.  In Q  his evil  nature was  ascribed to

                                                                         
                                                                            
 his having 'lived long  with the  Dwarves', and  this was  derived from     
 the  Lay  (III.32).  - On  the pencilled  query concerning  the Dragon-     
 helm see $266.                                                              
$266.  In  Q  Thingol's  messengers  arrived on  the scene  because they     
 had been sent to  summon Turin  and Beleg  to a  feast (IV.123).  - The     
 attempt  to  develop  the  subsequent  history  of the  Dragon-helm and     
 weave it into the existing  story was  inherently very difficult. Here,     
 the  questions  arise  at  once:  (1)  Why   was  the   Dragon-helm  in     
 Menegroth?  This  may  be  answered  by   supposing  that   when  Turin     
 came  to  Menegroth  for the  feast at  which he  slew Orgof  ($259) he     
 brought  the  Helm  with  him  from  Dimbar, and  after the  slaying he     
 fled  from  the  Thousand  Caves  without it;  on this  assumption, the     
 Helm remained  in Doriath  during the  following years  (484 -  9). But     
 (2) if this is granted, why should Beleg now carry it off into the wilds
 on  what  must  have  seemed  an  almost  certainly  vain   search  for     
 Turin,  who  had  been  captured  by  Orcs  and  haled off  to Angband?     
 In my  father's later  work on  the Turin  legend he  concluded finally     
 that  Turin  left   the  Dragon-helm   in  Dimbar   when  he   went  to     
 Menegroth  for  the  fatal  feast,  and  that (in  the later  much more     
 complex  story)  Beleg  brought  it  from  there when  he came  to Amon     
 Rudh in the winter snow:  hence in  the (extremely  artificial) passage     
 in the published Silmarillion, p. 204,  'he brought  out of  Dimbar the     
 Dragon-helm of Dor-lomin'.                                                  
$267.  In the Lay, likewise, it was Finduilas  who asserted  against the     
 disbelief  and  suspicion in  Nargothrond that  it was  indeed Flinding     
 (Gwindor) who had returned (III.69 - 71).                                  
$268.  In  this  passage  a  new  element  enters  the   story:  Turin's     
 assumption  of  a  riddling  name,  Iarwaeth  (cf.  the  later Agarwaen     
 'Bloodstained', The  Silmarillion p.  210), and  his asking  Gwindor to     
 conceal his true name 'for the horror he  had of  his slaying  of Beleg     
 and dread lest it were learned in Doriath'; and  here also  appears the     
 final  form  of  the  name of  the re-forged  sword, Gurthang  'Iron of     
 Death'  for  earlier  Gurtholfin  >  Gurtholf   (V.139  and   note  39)     
 'Wand  of  Death'  (Gurthang  is  a  change  on  the manuscript  from a     
 rejected name that cannot  be read:  the second  syllable is  tholf but    ]
 the  first  is  not Gur,  and the  meaning given  is probably  'Wand of     
 Death').  The  form  Mormegil appears  in the  earliest Annals  (AB 1),     
 emended  to  Mormael  (IV.304  and  note  52);  Q  had   Mormaglir  and     
 AB 2 Mormael.                                                               
$$269-72.  The greater part of this narrative appears for the  first time     
 in  the  Grey  Annals:  Gwindor's  revelation  to Finduilas  of Turin's     
 identity, his warning to  her, and  his assertion  that all  in Angband     
 knew  of   the  curse   upon  Hurin;   Turin's  assurance   to  Gwindor     
 concerning  Finduilas  and  his displeasure  with him  for what  he had     
 done;  the  honour  done  to  Turin  by  Orodreth  when he  learned who     
 he  was  and  the king's  acceptance of  his counsels;  Turin's unhappy     

 love  for  Finduilas  leading  him  to  seek escape  from his  trouble in
 warfare.                                                                 
$271.  morrowgift: the  gift of  the husband  to the  wife on  the morning
 ('morrow') after the wedding.                                            
$272.  The  alliance  of  the   Elves  of   Nargothrond  with   Handir  of
 Brethil goes back  to the  earliest Annals  (IV.305); I  do not  know why
 this  element  in  the  story  was  removed.  See further  the commentary
 on $300. - The bridge  over Narog  is not  said here  to have  been built
 on Turin's counsel, but this appears subsequently ($277).                
$273.  This  rejected  annal  for  492  adheres  to  the  old  story  that
 Meglin  was  sent by  Isfin to  Gondolin (although  the later  story that
 Isfin  and  Meglin  came  together  to Gondolin  appeared long  before in
 Q:  see  $120 and  commentary), and  there is  no trace  of the  story of
 Eol's  pursuit,  the death  of Isfin  from Eol's  dart aimed  at Maeglin,
 and Eol's execution and dying curse on his son.                          
$275.  The  somewhat  later  insertion  at  the  beginning  of  the  annal
 replaces  the  subsequent  statement  in   this  paragraph   that  Handir
 was  slain  in  the  battle  of  Tum-halad,  which  derives  from   AB  2
 (V.139).                                                                 
   The  removal  of  Glaurung's  passage  through   Hithlum  on   his  way
 to  Nargothrond  (recorded  in  AB  2)  is  a  great  improvement  to the
 probabilities  of  the  narrative. -  Eithil Ivrin:  formerly Ivrineithel
 (V.139), 'Ivrin's Well', source of the Narog. This is the first reference
 to the defiling of Ivrin by Glaurung.                                    
   The  site  of  the battle  is not  made clear.  In Q  it was  'upon the
 Guarded   Plain,   north   of   Nargothrond'  (IV.126),   and  in   AB  2
 (V.139)  'between  Narog  and  Taiglin'.  In  later  work  on the Narn my
 father wrote in one of a series of narrative-outlines:                   
   They  contact  the  Orc-host  which  is  greater  than  they  knew  (in
 spite   of   Turin's  boasted   scouts).  Also   none  but   Turin  could
 withstand  the  approach  of   Glaurung.  They   were  driven   back  and
 pressed  by  the  Orcs  into  the  Field  of  Tumhalad  between  Ginglith
 and  Narog  and  there  penned.  There   all  the   pride  and   host  of
 Nargothrond  withered  away.   Orodreth  was   slain  in   the  forefront
 of  battle,  and   Gwindor  wounded   to  death.   Then  Turin   came  to
 him  and  all  fled  him,  and  he  lifted  Gwindor and  bore him  out of
 battle  and  [several  words  illegible]  he  swam  the  Narog  and  bore
 Gwindor   to  [?a   wood]  of   trees.  But   Glaurung  went   down  east
 of  Narog  and   hastened  [?on   ?in]  to   Nargothrond  with   a  great
 number of Orcs.                                                          
 This is, I believe, the only statement that  the site  of the  battle was
 between  Ginglith  and  Narog;  but  my  father  pencilled  in  the  name
 Tumhalad  between  those  rivers,  towards   their  confluence,   on  the
 map  (p.  182,  square  E s).  In GA  Turin's escape  with Gwindor  'to a
 wood'  is  mentioned,  but  not  his  swimming  of the  Narog. This  is a
 curious  detail:  presumably  he  swam  the  Narog  to  escape  from  the

                                                                       
                                                                        
 battle, and  then went  down the  east bank  of the  river to  the Bridge
 of Nargothrond.                                                         
    But it is hard to know what  to make  of this  late conception  of the
 site  of  Tumhalad.  It  would   seem  that   my  father   now  conceived
 Glaurung  and  the  Orc-host  to  have  come  south  from  Ivrin  on  the
 west side of Narog;  but the  text states  that they  'went down  east of
 Narog'  to  Nargothrond,  and  therefore  they  also  must  have  crossed
 the  river  -  by  swimming,  as  Turin  had   done?  In   the  published
 Silmarillion  (pp.  212-13)  I  was  probably  mistaken  to  follow  this
 very  hastily  written  and  puzzling  text,  and  on the  map accompany-
 ing  the  book  to  mark  the  site  of Tumhalad  in accordance  with it.
 But in.any case I feel sure that the original site, in the plain  east of
 Narog, was still present in GA.                                         
    With  regard  to  the  pencilled note  'Turin in  the battle  wore the
 Dragon-helm',  the  Helm  was  last  mentioned  in  these  marginal notes
 on  the  subject  when  Beleg  carried  it  with  him  from  Menegroth on
 the journey  in search  of Turin  which led  to his  death (see  $266 and
 commentary).  My  father   must  have   supposed  therefore   that  Gwin-
 dor  and  Turin  carried  it with  them to  Nargothrond. This  raises the
 obvious  difficulty  that  the  Helm  would  at  once  have  revealed the
 identity of Turin; but in Unfinished  Tales (pp.  154-5) I  have referred
 to an  isolated piece  of writing  among the  Narn material  which 'tells
 that  in  Nargothrond  Turin  would  not  wear  the  Helm again  "lest it
 reveal  him",  but  that  he  wore  it  when  he  went  to the  Battle of
 Tumhalad.' The passage in question reads:                               
    Beleg  searching  the  orc-camp  [in  Taur-nu-Fuin] finds  the dragon-
 helm  -  or  was  it  set on  Turin's head  in mockery  by the  Orcs that
 tormented   him?   Thus   it   was   borne   away  to   Nargothrond;  but
 Turin  would not  wear it  again, lest  it reveal  him, until  the Battle
 of Dalath Dirnen.                                                       
   (Dalath  Dirnen,  the  Guarded Plain,  was the  earlier form;  the name
 was  so  spelt  when  entered  on  the map,  but changed  subsequently as
 in the texts to Talath Dirnen (p. 186, $17).)                           
$276.  Against the first line  of this  paragraph my  father wrote  a date:
 'Oct.13'; against the first line of $278 he  wrote 'Oct.25';  and against
 the  first line  of $288  he wrote  'Nov.1'. These  very uncharacteristic
 additions  must  refer  to  the  actual  days  of his  writing, in  (as I
 presume) 1951.                                                          
    In AB 2 all that is said here is that 'Gwindor  died, and  refused the
 succour of Turin.' The  same was  said in  Q (IV.126),  and also  that he
 died reproaching Turin:  as I  noted (IV.184),  'the impression  is given
 that  the  reproaches  of  Flinding   (Gwindor)  as   he  died   were  on
 account of Finduilas.  There is  indeed no  suggestion here  that Turin's
 policy   of  open   war  was   opposed  in   Nargothrond'.  Here   in  GA
 appears  the  motive  that  Gwindor  held  his  death  and  the  ruin  of
 Nargothrond  against  Turin  -  or more  accurately, reappears,  since it

 is clearly present  in the  old Tale  of Turambar  (II.83-4). Gwindor's
 words   in   GA   concerning   Turin   and  Finduilas   are  altogether
 different  from those  given to  him in  Q, and  there now  appears the
 idea  of  the  supreme  importance  to Turin  of his  choice concerning
 Finduilas: but this is again a reappearance, from  the Tale,  where his
 choice is explicitly condemned (II.87).                                
$277.  It is a new element in the narrative that it was Turin's rescue of
 Gwindor  that  allowed  Glaurung  and  his  host  to  reach Nargothrond
 before he did.                                                         
   This is a convenient place to describe a text  whose relation  to the
 Grey  Annals  is  very  curious.  The  text  itself  has been  given in
 Unfinished  Tales,  pp.  159-62:  the  story  of  the  coming   of  the
 Noldorin   Elves   Gelmir   and   Arminas   to   Nargothrond   to  warn
 Orodreth of its peril,  and their  harsh reception  by Turin.  There is
 both a manuscript (based on  a very  rough draft  outline written  on a
 slip) and a  typescript, with  carbon copy,  made by  my father  on the
 typewriter  that he  seems to  have used  first about  the end  of 1958
 (see X.300). The manuscript  has no  title or  heading, but  begins (as
 also does  the rough  draft and  the typescript)  with the  date '495'.
 The  top  copy of  the typescript  has a  heading added  in manuscript:
 'Insertion for  the longer  form of  the Narn',  while the  carbon copy
 has  the  heading,  also  added  in  manuscript,  'Insertion   to  Grey
 Annals', but this was changed to the reading of the top copy.          
   The curious thing is that  while the  manuscript has  no 'annalistic'
 quality  apart  from  the  date  495,  the  typescript begins  with the
 annalistic  word  'Here'   (a  usage   derived  from   the  Anglo-Saxon
 Chronicle):                                                            
   Here   Morgoth   assailed  Nargothrond.   Turin  now   commanded  all
 the  forces  of  Nargothrond,  and  ruled  all matters  of war.  In the
 spring  there  came  two  Elves,  and  they  named   themselves  Gelmir
 and Arminas...                                                         
 Moreover,  while  the  manuscript  extends  no  further  than  the text
 printed in  Unfinished Tales,  ending with  the words  'For so  much at
 least of the words of Ulmo were read aright',  the typescript  does not
 end there but continues:                                               
   Here  Handir  of  Brethil  was slain  in the  spring, soon  after the
 departure  of  the  messengers.   For  the   Orcs  invaded   his  land,
 seeking  to  secure  the  crossings  of   Taiglin  for   their  further
 advance;  and  Handir  gave  them  battle,  but  the  Men  of  Brethil
 were  worsted  and  were  driven  back  into  their  woods.   The  Orcs
 did  not  pursue them,  for they  had achieved  their purpose  for that
 time; and  they continued  to muster  their strength  in the  passes of
 Sirion.                                                                
       Late in the year, having [struck out: gathered his  strength and]
 completed  his  design,  Morgoth  at  last  loosed  his   assault  upon
 Nargothrond.  Glaurung   the  Uruloke   passed  over   the  Anfauglith,

[$277]                                                                     l
   and  came thence  into the  north vales  of Sirion,  and there  did great
   evil;  and  he  came  at  length  under  the   shadow  of   Eryd  Wethian
   [sic], leading the great army of the Orcs in his train...                   
 The  text  then  continues,  almost  exactly  as  in  the  Grey  Annals
 $$275-6,  concluding  with  Gwindor's  words  at  the  end  of  $276: 'If
 thou fail  her, it  shall not  fail to  find thee.  Farewell! '  The only
 significant  difference  from  the text  in the  Annals is  the statement
 that  at  the  battle  of  Tum-halad  'Turin  put  on the  Dragon-helm of
 Hador'; this however had been said in a marginal note to GA $275.           
       This  is  very  puzzling.  So far  as the  content of  the original
 manuscript   of   'Gelmir   and  Arminas'   is  concerned,   there  seems
 nothing  against  the  supposition  that  my  father   wrote  it   as  an
 insertion  to  the Grey  Annals, and  indeed in  appearance and  style of
 script  it  could  derive  from  the time  when he  was working  on them,
 before  the publication  of The  Lord of  the Rings.  The puzzle  lies in
 my father's  motive for  making, years  later, a  typescript of  the text
 and  adding  to  it  material  taken  directly  from  the   Grey  Annals,
 specifically  reinforcing  the  place  of  'Gelmir  and  Arminas'  in the
 annalistic  context  -  together  with  his  uncertainty,  shown  in  the
 headings to the carbon copy, as  to what  its place  actually was  to be.
 Subsequently,  indeed,  he  bracketed  on  the  typescript  the  date and
 opening   words   '495   Here   Morgoth   assailed    Nargothrond',   and
 struck  out the  words 'Here'  and 'in  the spring'  at the  beginning of
 the  passage  cited  above,  thus   removing  the   obviously  annalistic
 features;  but  the  conclusion  seems  inescapable  that  when  he  made
 the typescript he could  still conceive  of the  Annals as  an ingredient
 in  the  recorded tradition  of the  Elder Days.  (A curious  relation is
 seen  between  a  continuation  of  the  Annals   made  after   the  main
 manuscript  had  been  interrupted  and  the  opening  of  the  late work
 The Wanderings of Hurin: see pp. 251-4, 258-60.)                            
       It should be mentioned that certain  names in  the text  of 'Gelmir
 and  Arminas'  as  printed  in Unfinished  Tales were  editorial altera-
 tions  made  for  the  sake  of  consistency:  in  both   manuscript  and
 typescript  Gelmir  refers  to  Orodreth  as  'Finrod's son',  changed to
 'Finarfin's  son';  Iarwaeth  was  changed  to  Agarwaen (the  later name
 found  in  the  Narn papers);   and  Eledhwen   was  retained   from  the
 manuscript  (Eledwen)  for  the  typescript  Edelwen  (the  form  used in
 The Wanderings of Hurin).                                                   
$$278-85.  This  passage  describing  the   fateful  encounter   of  Turin
 and   Glaurung   very   greatly   develops  the   bare  narrative   in  Q
 (IV.126 - 7), but for the most part it is not at odds in  essentials with
 the old version, and  in places  echoes it.  On the  other hand  there is
 an  important  difference  in  the  central  motive.  In  Q  (IV.126) the
 dragon  offered  him  his  freedom  either 'to  rescue his  "stolen love"
 Finduilas, or to  do his  duty and  go to  the rescue  of his  mother and

  sister... But he must swear  to abandon  one or  the other.  Then Turin
  in anguish and in  doubt forsook  Finduilas against  his heart  ...' In
  the  story  in  the  Grey  Annals,  on  the  other  hand, Turin  had no
  choice:  his  will  was  under  Glaurung's  when  Finduilas  was  taken
  away,  and  he  was  physically  incapable  of  movement.   The  Dragon
  does indeed say  at the  end: 'And  if thou  tarry for  Finduilas, then
  never  shalt  thou  see  Morwen or  Nienor again;  and they  will curse
  thee'; but this is a warning, not the offering of a choice. In all this
  Glaurung appears as  a torturer,  with complete  power over  his victim
  so long as he chooses  to exert  it, morally  superior and  superior in
  knowledge,  his pitiless  corruption able  to assume  an air  almost of
  benevolence,  of  knowing  what  is best:  'Then Turin  ... as  were he
  treating  with  a  foe  that  could  know pity,  believed the  words of
  Glaurung'.                                                             
$280.  The  further pencilled  note here  on the  subject of  the Dragon-
 helm,  observing  that  while  Turin  wore  it  he  was   proof  against
 Glaurung's eyes,  can be  somewhat amplified.  I have  given at  the end
 of  the  commentary  on  $275  a  note  on the  recovery of  the Dragon-
 helm   when   Turin  was   rescued  from   the  Orcs   in  Taur-nu-Fuin,
 whence   it   came  to   Nargothrond.  That   note  continues   with  an
 account  of  the  meeting  of Turin  with Glaurung  before the  Doors of
 Felagund (see Unfinished Tales  p. 155).  Here it  is said  that Glaurung
 desired  to  rid Turin  of the  aid and  protection of  the Dragon-helm,
 and taunted  him, saying  that he  had not  the courage  to look  him in
 the face.                                                               
    And  indeed  so  great  was  the  terror  of  the  Dragon  that Turin
 dared not look straight  upon his  eye, but  had kept  the visor  of his
 helmet  down,  shielding  his  face,  and  in his  parley had  looked no
 higher  than  Glaurung's  feet.  But  being thus  taunted, in  pride and
 rashness he thrust up the visor and looked Glaurung in the eye.         
  At  the  head  of the  page my  father noted  that something  should be
 said about the visor, 'how  it protected  the eyes  from all  darts (and
 from dragon-eyes)'.                                                     
    This text, or rather the idea that it  contains, is  obviously behind
 the  note  in  GA,  and  the  last  words  of that  note 'Then  the Worm
 perceiving  this'  would  no doubt  have introduced  some phrase  to the
 effect  that  Glaurung  taunted  Turin  with cowardice  in order  to get
 him to remove it (cf. the note in the margin at $284- which  is scarcely
 in the right place). A  further statement  on the  subject of  the visor
 of the  Helm is  found in  the Narn (Unfinished Tales  p. 75,  an expan-
 sion of the passage in QS  Chapter 17,  V.319): 'It  had a  visor (after
 the  manner  of  those that  the Dwarves  used in  their forges  for the
 shielding of their eyes), and the face of one that  wore it  struck fear
 into the hearts of all beholders, but was itself  guarded from  dart and
 fire.' It is said here  that the  Helm was  originally made  for Azaghal
 Lord of Belegost, and the history of how it came to Hurin is told.      

                          
                                                                        
   In  the  published  Silmarillion  (p.  210)  I  adopted a  passage from
  another text  in the  vast assemblage  of the  Narn papers,  telling how
  Turin  found  in  the  armouries  of   Nargothrond  'a   dwarf-mask  all
  gilded', and  wore it  into battle.  It seems  probable that  this story
  arose  at  a  stage  when  my  father  was  treating the  Dragon-helm as
  lost and out of the story  (from the  end of  Dor-Cuarthol, the  Land of
  Bow  and  Helm,  when  Turin  was  taken  by the  Orcs), and  I extended
  Turin's wearing of it to the battle of Tumhalad (p. 212).              
$$287 ff.  From the Battle of Tumhalad to the end of  the tale  of Turin
  the text of the Grey Annals was virtually the sole source of  the latter
  part  of  Chapter  21  'Of  Turin Turambar'  in the  published Silmaril-
  lion  (pp.  213  -  26).  There now  enters an  element in  the history,
  however,  of  which  I  was  unaware,   or  more   accurately  misinter-
  preted,  when  I  prepared  the  text  of  the  Narn for  publication in
  Unfinished  Tales, and  which must  be made  clear. At  that time  I was
  under  the  impression  that  the  last  part  of  the  Narn  (from  the
  beginning  of  the  section entitled  The Return  of Turin  to Dor-lomin
  to the end, Unfinished  Tales pp.  104-46) was  a relatively  late text,
  belonging  with  all  the  other  Narn  material that  (in terms  of the
  narrative)  precedes  it;  and  I  assumed  that the  story in  the Grey
  Annals  (to  which  the  last  part  of  the  Narn is  obviously closely
  related, despite its much greater length)  preceded it  by some  years -
  that it was in fact an elaboration of the story in the Annals.         
   This  view is  wholly erroneous,  and was  due to  my failure  to study
  sufficiently closely the material (preserved in a different  place) that
  preceded the  final text  of the  story in  the Narn.  In fact,  it soon
  becomes plain  (as will  be seen  in the  commentary that  follows) that
  the long narrative in the Grey Annals  was based  directly on  the final
  text of that in the Narn, and was  a reduction  of that  text, congruent
  with it at virtually all points. The manuscript of  this latter  is very
  similar  in appearance  and style  of script  to that  of the  Annals of
  Aman  and  the  Grey  Annals,  and  undoubtedly  belongs  to  the  same
  period   (presumptively   1951).  Thus   the  massive   development  and
  enhancement  of  the  final  tragedy  in  Brethil  is yet  another major
  work  of  the prolific  time that  followed the  completion of  The Lord
  of the Rings (see Morgoth's Ring, pp. vii and 3).                      
   The  manuscript  was  headed  (later)  'The  Children  of  Hurin:  last
  part', and at the top of the  first page  my father  wrote 'Part  of the
  "Children of Hurin" told in full scale'. I shall devote  a good  deal of
  the   following   commentary   to   showing   how,  in   more  important
  instances, my father developed the  narrative in  the Narn. It is  to be
  remembered  that  the  last  version  he  had   written  was   the  very
  compressed  story  in  the  Quenta  (Q)  of  1930   (IV.127-30),  behind
  which  lay  'the  earliest  Silmarillion' or  'Sketch of  the Mythology'
  (IV.30  -  1),  and  behind  that  the  old  Tale  of  Turambar  and the
  Foaloke (II.88-112).                                                   

    I  shall  not  make  a detailed  comparison of  the new  narrative with
   the  older  forms,  nor  of  the  last part  of the  Narn with  the Grey
   Annals. Since it is obviously out of  the question  to reprint  the last
   part of the Narn in this book, I must  refer to  the text  in Unfinished
   Tales,  which  is  very  close  to  the final  form of  the text  in the
   manuscript,  but  introduces  some   unimportant  changes   in  wording;
   the use of 'you' for 'thou' and 'thee' of the  original; and  some later
   forms of names. In order to avoid  ambiguity I  shall identify  the last
   part of the Narn by the letters 'NE' (i.e. 'End of the Narn');  thus 'NE
   p.  132'  is  to  be  understood  as  meaning  the text  of the  Narn in
   Unfinished Tales on  p. 132.  Where necessary  I distinguish  the actual
   manuscript,  or  manuscripts,  from the  printed text.  There is  also a
   later amanuensis typescript of NE.                                      
 $290.  The  addition  concerning   the  death   of  Handir   of  Brethil,
   rejected  here,  reappears  at  the  beginning  of  the  annal  for  495
   ($275).                                                                 
 $291.  The  names  Amon  Obel  and  Ephel   Brandir  now   first  appear;
   they  were  marked  in  on  the  second  map   (see  the   redrawing  on
   p. 182,  square E  7). On  the emendation  concerning Handir  of Brethil
   see $275 and commentary.                                                
 $292.  The  opening  of  NE  (p. 104)  is almost  the same  as that  of the
   rewritten section in GA, rather than its original  form ($287).  This is
   to  be  explained,  I  think,  on  the  supposition  that my  father was
   working (here at any rate) on the two versions  at the  same time.  - In
   both  texts  'eighty  leagues'  was  changed  to  'forty  leagues';  the
   distance  on  the  second  map  from  Nargothrond  to Ivrin  measured in
   a straight line is 8 cm. or 41 6 leagues (see V.412).                   
 $293.  Against  Dorlomin  my  father  wrote  in   the  margin   the  Quenya
   form Lominore, but he did not strike out Dorlomin.                      
 $294.  It  is  made  clear in  the later  text from  which the  section The
   Departure  of  Turin  in  the  Narn  is  derived  that  Brodda  forcibly
   wedded   Hurin's  kinswoman   Aerin  (later   form  for   Airin)  before
   Turin left  Dor-lomin (see  Unfinished Tales  p. 69);  in GA  Turin only
   learns of it now, on his return, and this was certainly the case also in
   NE.  Airin  now  becomes  Hurin's  kinswoman,   not  Morwen's,   as  she
   was in Q and QS, and still in the  rejected form  ($288) of  the present
   passage.                                                                
    It  is  seen  from  NE  (p. 106)  that the  story of  Turin's childhood
   friendship  with  the  lame   Sador  Labadal   was  already   in  being,
   although it had not yet been written  (the parts  of the  Narn narrative
   preceding  NE   being  unquestionably   later);  in   GA  there   is  no
   suggestion of this story, but I think it certain that this is due merely
   to  the   extreme  condensation   of  the   narrative  here:   the  long
   conversation  in  NE  between  Turin  and  Sador, and  Sador's 'recogni-
   tion', before  ever Turin  entered Brodda's  hall, is  reduced to  a few
   lines in the Annals. In that conversation and  subsequently the  text of

          
                                                                        
 NE  uses  'thou'  and  'thee'  throughout,  but  afterwards   my  father
 sometimes  changed   them  to   'you'  and   sometimes  not.   It  seems
 possible  that  where  the  changes  were  made   it  was   because  the
 speakers  were  using the  'polite plural'  (as Sador  to Turin  when he
 found  out  who  he  was);  but in  the published  text I  adopted 'you'
 throughout.  -  Where in  NE (p.  105) Sador  speaks of  'Hurin Galdor's
 son'  the manuscript  has 'Hurin  Galion's son',  Galion being  still at
 that time the name of Hurin's father.                                   
$$295-7.  The  whole  episode  in NE  (pp. 106  - 9)  following Turin's
 entry  into  Brodda's  hall,  a  massive development  of the  bare words
 of  Q  (IV.127  and  note  9),  is  again   greatly  reduced   in  these
 paragraphs,  and  much  is  omitted:  thus  there is  no mention  of the
 general fighting, of Airin's firing of the hall, or of Asgon, the man of
 Dor-lomin (who will reappear).                                          
$298.  This  annal  concerning  Tuor,  dated  496,  follows  on  from the
 entry  about his  departure from  Mithrim at  the end  of the  annal for
 495 in the rejected section  of the  manuscript ($290).  It is  based on
 that in AB 2 (V.140), and adheres still to the old  story that  Tuor met
 Bronwe  (Voronwe)  at  the  mouths  of  Sirion;  thus  it   was  written
 before  the   addition  was   made  to   $257  whereby   Voronwe  became
 the sole survivor of the seven  ships sent  into the  West and  was cast
 ashore in Nivrost (see the commentary on that paragraph).               
$299.  Tuor  was  born  in  472  ($251),  was enslaved  by Lorgan  in 488
 when  he  was  sixteen  years  old  and   endured  thraldom   for  three
 years, thus  until 491  ($263), and  in 495  had lived  as an  outlaw in
 the hills of Mithrim for four years.                                    
  This  annal  replaces  both  the  preceding  entries   concerning  Tuor
 ($$290,  298).  Here  the very  old story  of Tuor's  going down  to the
 mouths  of  Sirion  is  at  last  abandoned,  and  Ulmo appears  to Tuor
 in  Nivrost;   Voronwe,  cast   ashore  in   Nivrost,  now   leads  Tuor
 eastwards  to  Gondolin  along  the  southern   faces  of   the  Shadowy
 Mountains. Here  also appears  the story  that they  saw Turin  at Ivrin
 on  his  journey  northward  from  Nargothrond,  and  it  may   well  be
 that this  accounts for  the change  of date  from 496  to 495;  but the
 coming  of   Tuor  to   Turgon's  ancient   dwelling  of   Vinyamar  and
 finding  the  arms  left  there  long  before at  Ulmo's counsel  is not
 referred to.                                                            
  For  the  bidding  of  Ulmo to  Turgon in  Q, where  it appears  in two
 versions,  see  IV.142,  146-7,  and  my remarks  IV.193-4. In  GA there
 is no  suggestion of  Ulmo's counsel  that Turgon  should prepare  for a
 great  war against  Morgoth and  that Tuor  should be  his agent  in the
 bringing of new nations of Men out of the East to his banners.          
  Elsewhere  in  GA  the  change  is  always  Glindur >  Maeglin; Meglin
 > Glindur here  depends on  the time  of writing,  for while  my father
 was  working  on  the  Annals  the  series  went  Meglin  >   Glindur  >
 Maeglin.                                                                

                                                         
                                                                            
 $300.  The  manuscript  has  no  date  here,  but it  is clear  that there
     should  be  (it  is obviously  496 later  in the  annal, where  'with the
     beginning  of  spring  Turin  cast  off  his  darkness',  $303);  in  the
     rejected version of the text the date 496 is given at this  point ($291),
     and  in  the  manuscript  of  NE  also.  The  omission  is  due   to  the
     (second)  rejected  entry  concerning  Tuor  ($298)  having   been  dated
     496.                                                                    
         The  spelling  Taiglin  is  found  in  NE also;  Teiglin in  both the
     published texts is an editorial alteration to a later form (see  pp. 228,
     309-10).                                                                
  The  story  of  Turin's  rescue  of  the  men  of  Brethil  from  an  attack
  by  Orcs,  derived  from  the  lively   account  of   the  incident   in  NE
  (p.  110),  is  a new  element in  the narrative.  It is  to be  noted, how-
  ever,  that  as  NE  was  first  written  there  was no  mention of  it; the
  original  text  tells  simply  that  when  Turin  fell in  with some  of the
  folk              of              Haleth              in             Brethil
  ...  the  men   that  saw   Turin  welcomed   him,  and   even  thus   as  a
  wild  wanderer  they  knew  him   for  the   Mormegil,  the   great  captain
  of   Nargothrond,   and   the   friend   of   Handir;  and   they  marvelled
  that  he  had  escaped,  since  they  had  heard  that  none  had  come  out
  alive   from   the   fortress   of   Felagund.   Therefore  they   bade  him
  come and rest among them for a while.                                      
     Following this is  a brief  preliminary passage  in which  Turin's rescue
  of  the  men  of  Brethil  from  the Orc-attack  is introduced,  and finally
  the full account of the  incident as  it stands  in NE.  It is  thus clearly
  seen that this  story arose  in the  course of  the writing  of NE,  as also
  did  the  motive  that  the  woodmen  deduced  that  the  stranger  was  the
  Mormegil  after  Turin  had  fallen  into  his  swoon  of grief.  Both these
  elements  are  present  in  the  GA  version.  This  is  one  of   many  un-
  questionable  evidences  that  the  last  part  of  the  Narn  preceded  the
  Grey Annals.                                                               
         It is also said in the rejected passage  of NE  that when  Turin told
  the       woodmen       of        his       quest        for       Finduilas
  ...  they  looked  on  him  with  grief  and  pity.  'Seek  no  more!'  said
  one.   'For   behold!   the   few   of   our    men   that    escaped   from
  Tum-halad   brought   us   warning   of   an   Orc-host   that   came   from
  Nargothrond   towards   the   crossings   of   Taiglin,    marching   slowly
  because of the number of their captives....'                               
     In   the  final   text  the   statement  that   the  woodmen   fought  at
  Tumhalad   disappears   (and   Dorlas   says   of   their   ambush   of  the
  Orc-host  from  Nargothrond  'we  thought  to  deal  our  small   stroke  in
  the  war',  NE  p. 111).  This is  to be  related to  the information  in GA
  which   was   struck   out,   that   the   Elves   of   Nargothrond  'allied
  themselves   with   Handir'   ($272   and   commentary),  and   that  Handir
  was slain at Tumhalad ($275 and commentary).                               
 $$301-3.  The  narrative  (condensed  from  that  of  NE,   pp.  109   -  12)

                                                                        
                                                                        
 greatly  expands  that  of  Q  (IV.127):  new  elements are  'Wildman of
 the  Woods',  Dorlas,  and  the Haud-en-Ellas  where Finduilas  was laid
 near  the  Crossings  of  Taiglin,  which  have  not been  named before;
 Dorlas'  realisation  that  the  stranger  must  be  the  Mormegil,  ru-
 moured  to  be Turin  son of  Hurin (in  Q there  is no  indication that
 the  woodmen  knew  who  he  was  until  the end);  Brandir's foreboding
 when  he  saw  Turin  on  the bier,  and his  healing of  Turin; Turin's
 setting  aside of  the black  sword. The  old story  in Q  (IV.129) that
 Turin  became  lord  of  the  woodmen  is  now  abandoned:  Brandir,  as
 will be seen  later in  the narrative  ($323, NE  p. 132),  remained the
 titular ruler (and in NE,  p. 129,  at the  council held  before Turin's
 setting  out  for the  encounter with  Glaurung, he  'sat indeed  in the
 high-seat of the lord of the assembly, but unheeded').                  
$301.  Haud-en-Ellas: the  later form  -Elleth was  pencilled in  on both
 the  NE  and  GA  manuscripts,  and  Haudh-en-Elleth   is  found   in  a
 plot-sequence  among  the  later   Narn  papers   (p.  256);   this  was
 adopted  in  both  NE  and  The  Silmarillion.  The  translation  'Mound
 of  the  Elf-maid',  not  in  GA, was  introduced into  The Silmarillion
 from  NE  (p.  112),  and  comparison of  the texts  will show  a number
 of other instances, not recorded here, of this conflation.              
$302.  Against  the  name  Ephel  Brandir  in  NE  (p.  110)   my  father
 wrote  faintly  on  the  amanuensis  typescript that  was made  from the
 manuscript:  Obel  Halad  and  '....  of  the chieftain';  the illegible
 word  might  be  'Tower',  but  looks  more  like  'Town'. 'Town  of the
 Chieftain' is quite possibly the correct interpretation, if town is used
 in the ancient sense of  'enclosed dwelling-place'  (see II.292,  and my
 remarks  on  the  name  Tavrobel  in  V.412).  On  Obel  Halad  see  pp.
 258, 263.                                                               
$303.  In  GA   Brandir's  foreboding   concerning  Turambar   came  upon
 him  after  he  had  heard  'the  tidings  that  Dorlas   brought',  and
 therefore  knew  who  it  was  that  lay  on  the  bier;  whereas  in NE
 (p.  111)  his  foreboding is  more prophetic  and less  'rational' (see
 Unfinished Tales  p.  111  and  note  21).  In  NE  Turambar   'laid  his
 black sword by' in response to Brandir's warning (p.  112), but  this is
 lost in GA.                                                             
$305.  The  new  narrative  is  here further  developed from  Q (IV.128),
 where 'Thingol  yielded so  far to  the tears  and entreaties  of Morwen
 that  he  sent  forth  a   company  of   Elves  toward   Nargothrond  to
 explore  the  truth.  With  them  rode Morwen...';  now she  rides forth
 alone and the Elves are sent after her. Nienor's  motive in  joining the
 Elvish  riders   in  disguise   is  now   more  complex;   and  Mablung,
 entirely absent from the story in Q (and AB 2), enters the narrative.
   There is a very great reduction in GA of the  elaborate story  told in
 NE (pp. 112 - 16), but the narrative structure is  the same  (the flight
 of   Morwen   followed   by  the   company  led   by  Mablung).   In  NE

  Thingol  already  had  the  idea  of  sending  out  a party  to Nargoth-
  rond, independently of Morwen's wish to go.                             
    In Q it seems  certain that  Nienor's presence  was never  revealed to
  the   company,   including   Morwen  (see   my  remarks,   IV.185).  The
  discovery of her at the  passage of  the Twilit  Meres is  not mentioned
  in  GA,  but  that  she was  at some  point revealed  is implied  by the
  words  'But  Morwen...  would not  be persuaded'  (i.e. by  the presence
  of  Nienor);  and  Nienor  was  set with  Morwen on  the Hill  of Spies.
  The  condensation  in  the  Annals  of  the  story  in NE  here produces
  some  obscurity,  and  in  the  passage  in  The  Silmarillion  (p. 217)
  corresponding  to  this  paragraph  I  made  use  of both  versions (and
  also  Q), although  at the  time I  misunderstood the  relations between
  them.                                                                   
    The  reference in  NE (p.  114) to  the hidden  ferries at  the Twilit
  Meres, not mentioned  before, is  lost in  GA. In  NE the  sentence 'for
  by  that  way  messengers  would  pass  to and  fro between  Thingol and
  his kin in  Nargothrond' continues  in the  manuscript 'ere  the victory
  of  Morgoth'  (i.e.  at  Tumhalad),  and these  last words  were changed
  to  'ere  the  death  of Felagund'.  This was  omitted in  the published
  text,  in  view  of  the later  reference (Unfinished  Tales p.  153) to
  the  close  relations  of  Orodreth  with  Menegroth:  'In   all  things
  [Orodreth]   followed   Thingol,   with   whom   he   exchanged  messen-
  gers by secret ways'.                                                   
    There  appears  here  (in   both  versions)   the  Elvish   name  Amon
  Ethir of the Hill of Spies (the Spyhill, NE), and also (in NE  only) its
  origin,  which  has  never been  given before:  'a mound  as great  as a
  hill  that  long  ago  Felagund  had  caused  to  be  raised  with great
  labour in the plain before his Doors'. In both versions  it is  a league
  from  Nargothrond; in  Q (IV.128)  it was  'to the  east of  the Guarded
  Plain',  but  Morwen could  see from  its top  the issuing  of Glaurung.
  On the first map (following  p. 220  in Vol.IV)  it seems  to be  a long
  way  east,  or  north-east, of  Nargothrond (though  'Hill of  Spies' is
  named on the map it is not perfectly clear where it is, IV.225);  on the
  second  map  it  is  not  named,  but if  it is  the eminence  marked on
  square  F 6   (p.  182)  it  was  likewise a  long way  from Nargothrond
  (about 15 leagues).                                                     
$306.  'But  Glaurung  was  aware  of  all  that  they  did':   where  NE
  (p. 117) says of Glaurung  that his  eyes 'outreached  the far  sight of
  the Elves' a rejected  form of  the passage  has the  notable statement:
  'Indeed further reached the sight of his fell eyes than even the eyes of
  the Elves (which thrice surpass those of Men).' Also,  where it  is said
  in  NE  that  Glaurung  'went  swiftly, for  he was  a mighty  Worm, and
  yet lithe', there  followed in  the manuscript,  but placed  in brackets
  later, 'and he could go as speedily as a man could run, and tire  not in
  a hundred leagues.'                                                     

$307.  'Thus  the  ladies  were  lost,  and  of  Morwen  indeed  no  sure
 tidings came ever to  Doriath after':  so also  in NE  at a  later point
 (p.  121): 'Neither  then nor  after did  any certain  news of  her fate
 come  to  Doriath or  to Dor-lomin',  but against  this my  father wrote
 an  X  in  the  margin of  the typescript.  In NE  the passage  (p. 118)
 describing how one of  the Elf-riders  saw her  as she  disappeared into
 the mists crying Nienor replaced the following:                        
    After  a  while Morwen  passed suddenly  out of  the mists,  and near
 at  hand  there  were  two  of  the  elf-riders;  and whether  she would
 or  no  her  horse  bore  her  with them  swiftly away  towards Doriath.
 And   the  riders   comforted  her,   saying:  'You   must  go   in  our
 keeping.  But  others will  guard your  daughter. It  is vain  to tarry.
 Fear  not!  For  she  was  mounted,  and  there  is  no  horse  but will
 make  best  speed  away  from  the  dragon-stench.  We  shall  meet  her
 in Doriath.'                                                           
   This is another example of the precedence of NE as first  written over
 GA; for this rejected  text was  apparently following  the old  story of
 Q  (IV.128),  that  Morwen  returned to  Doriath. -  In Q  Nienor, whose
 presence  was  never  revealed  (see  commentary  on  $305), did  not go
 to  the  Hill  of  Spies with  Morwen, but  met with  the Dragon  on the
 banks of the Narog.                                                    
    In  the  passage  in  NE  (p.  118) describing  the eyes  of Glaurung
 when  Nienor  came  face to  face with  him on  the hill-top,  the words
 'they were terrible, being filled with the fell  spirit of  Morgoth, his
 master' contain an editorial alteration: the manuscript reads  'the fell
 spirit  of  Morgoth,  who  made  him'  (cf.  IV.128).  My  father under-
 lined the last three words in pencil, and faintly and barely  legibly at
 the  foot  of  the page  he noted:  'Glaurung must  be a  demon [??con-
 tained in worm form].' On the emergence at  this time  of the  view that
 Melkor could make nothing that had life of its own see X.74, 78.       
$$309-12.  There  is  a  further  great  development in  this passage
 (condensed   from  NE,   pp.  119-21),   following  the   enspelling  of
 Nienor.  There  enters  now  Mablung's   exploration  of   the  deserted
 halls  of  Nargothrond; his  discovery of  Nienor on  Amon Ethir  in the
 early  night;  the  meeting  with  the  three  other Elves  of Mablung's
 company;  the  secret  entrance  into  Doriath  near  the  inflowing  of
 Esgalduin; the attack  by Orcs  as they  slept, and  the slaying  of the
 Orcs  by  Mablung  and  his  companions;  the  flight  of  Nienor naked;
 and  Mablung's   return  to   Doriath  and   subsequent  three-year-long
 search for Morwen and Nienor. In Q  there is  none of  this; and  it was
 Turambar  with  a  party  of  the  woodmen  who   slew  the   Orcs  that
 pursued Nienor (IV.128 - 9).                                           
$310.  Where  GA has  'the secret  gate' into  Doriath near  the inflowing
 of  Esgalduin  into  Sirion,  NE (p.  120) has  'the guarded  bridge'. A
 bridge  is  indeed  more  to  be  expected  than a  gate, for  the West-

 march of Doriath, Nivrim, was within the Girdle of Melian              
 (V.261 - 2).                                                           
$312.  Similarly in the manuscript of  NE, after  'until she  went naked'
 (p. 121),  the words  'but for  the short  elven-kirtle above  the knee
 that she had worn in her disguise' were bracketed for exclusion.       
$317.  The  falls  of  Celebros.  In  NE the  passage beginning  'In the
 morning  they  bore  Niniel  towards  Ephel  Brandir'  (pp.  122  -  3)
 replaced an earlier text, as follows:                                  
       In  the  morning  they  bore  Niniel  towards Ephel  Brandir. Now
 there  was  a  fair  place  on  the  way,  a  green  sward  amid  white
 birches.  There  a  stream  leaping  down  from Amon  Obel to  find its
 way to the  Taiglin went  over a  lip of  worn stone,  and fell  into a
 rocky bowl far below, and all  the air  was filled  with a  soft spray,
 in  which  the  sun  would  gleam  with  many  colours.  Therefore  the
 woodmen  called  those  falls  Celebros,  and  loved  to  rest  there a
 while.                                                                 
 The name Celebros first  appeared in  Q, 'the  Falls of  Silver-bowl' >
 'the Falls of Celebros, Foam-silver', and the falls were in the Taiglin
 (see IV.129 and note 14). In GA the falls are still called Celebros, as
 in the passage just  cited from  NE from  which it  derives, but  as in
 that  passage  my  father   would  obviously   have  now   placed  them
 in  the  tributary  stream  falling  down  from  Amon Obel  towards the
 Taiglin.                                                               
   In  the NE  manuscript, however,  the passage  was rewritten,  and it
 is the rewritten text that stands in Unfinished Tales pp. 122 -  3: 'In
 the  morning  they  bore  Niniel  towards Ephel  Brandir, and  the road
 went  steeply  upward  towards  Amon  Obel  until  it  came to  a place
 where  it  must  cross  the  tumbling  stream  of Celebros',  &c. Thus
 Celebros  becomes  the  name  of  the  tributary  stream,  and  in  the
 continuation  of  this  rewritten passage  the falls  themselves become
 Dimrost, the Rainy Stair. This change was  not entered  on the  text of
 GA, but was incorporated in The Silmarillion (p. 220).                 
   On the curious matter of the  use in  both versions  of the  name Nen
 Girith 'Shuddering Water' as if it were due to the fact of Niniel's fit
 of  shuddering  when  she  first  came  there,   rather  than   to  the
 prophetic  nature  of  that  shuddering  whose  meaning  was  not  seen
 until  she  and  Turambar were  dead, see  IV.186-7, where  I discussed
 it fully.                                                              
$318.  In Q (IV.129) it was said here  that Brandir  yielded the  rule of
 the  woodmen  to  Turambar  (see  commentary  on $$301  - 3),  and that
 'he was ever true to Turambar; yet bitter  was his  soul when  he might
 not win the love of Niniel.' This is  not said  in GA  (or NE);  but on
 the other hand there was nothing in  Q about  Niniel's delaying  of the
 marriage, nor of Brandir's seeking to  restrain her  on account  of his
 forebodings,  nor  yet  of  Brandir's  revealing  to  her  who Turambar

 was  -  indeed  in  Q, as  I have  mentioned (commentary  on $$301-3),
 there is no indication that the woodmen knew his identity.           
    In NE, following the story  in Q,  the first  draft of  the passage
 begins:  'Turambar  asked  her  in  marriage,  and  she  went  to  him
 gladly,  and  at  the  midsummer  they  were  wed,  and   the  woodmen
 made a great feast for them' (see NE pp. 124 - 5).  In a  second stage
 Brandir  counselled  Niniel  to  wait,  but  did  not  tell  her  that
 Turambar  was  Turin  son  of  Hurin:  that  entered  with  a  further
 revision to the manuscript. GA has this  final form.  In NE  (p. 125),
 however, Turambar's  displeasure with  Brandir was  at his  counsel of
 delay: in GA it was (apparently) at Brandir's revelation to  Niniel of
 his identity. - The motive of Niniel's delaying  of the  marriage goes
 back to the Tale (II.102):  she delayed  him, saying  nor yea  nor no,
 yet herself she knew not why'.                                       
$$322-5.  Following the words in  NE (p.  129) 'the  tale of  the scouts
 that had  seen [Glaurung]  had gone  about and  grown in  the telling'
 the text as originally written continued:                            
    Then  Brandir  who stood  [before his  house in  the open  place of
 Ephel  Brandir  >]  nigh  spoke before  them and  said: 'I  would fain
 come  with  thee,  Captain  Black  Sword,   but  thou   wouldst  scorn
 me. Rightly. But                                                     
   This  was  changed  immediately  to the  text printed,  with Dorlas'
 crying scorn on Brandir, who sat 'unheeded', 'in the high-seat  of the
 lord of the assembly'.                                               
    Up to this point,  drafting for  the manuscript  of NE  consists of
 little more than scribbled slips. From here on, however, there  are in
 effect two  manuscripts: one  (which I  shall refer  to as  'the draft
 manuscript')  being  the  continuation of  the original,  which became
 so chaotic with rewriting that  my father  subsequently copied  it out
 fair. The  draft manuscript  in this  part of  the narrative  has much
 interest  as showing  my father's  development of  the story  from the
 form it had reached in Q (IV.129 - 30).                              
    The  words  given  in  NE  to  Brandir's kinsman  Hunthor (Torbarth
 in GA) were given first to Brandir, speaking in self-defence:        
        'Thou speakest unjustly,  Dorlas. How  can it  be said  that my
 counsels  were  vain,  when  they  were  never  taken?  And  I  say to
 thee  that  Glaurung  comes  now  to  us,  as  to  Nargothrond before,
 because  our  deeds  have bewrayed  us to  him, as  I feared.  But the
 son of Handir asketh none to take  his place  at need.  I am  here and
 will  gladly go.  The less  loss of  a cripple  unwedded than  of many
 others.  Will  not  some  stand  by  me,  who have  also less  care to
 leave behind?'                                                       
        Then  five  men  came  and  stood  by  him. And  Turambar said:
 'That is enough. These five I  will take.  But, lord,  I do  not scorn
 thee,  and any  who do  so are  fools. But  see! We  must go  in great
 haste...'                                                            

 [$$322-5]
    

                                                            
    This follows, in structure, the  story in  Q, where  'six of  his boldest
    men  begged  to  come  with  him'.  In  the  draft  manuscript  'Turambar
    with  Dorlas  and  their  five  companions  took horse  and rode  away in
    haste  to  Celebros';  and  when  later  Turambar  crossed   the  Taiglin
    (NE  p.  133),  'in the  deep dark  he counted  his following.  They were
    four.  "Albarth fell,"  said Dorlas,  "and Taiglin  took him  beyond aid.
    The  other  two,  I  deem,   were  daunted,   and  skulk   now  yonder."'
    Albarth,  who  here  first  appears,  seems  to  have been  first written
    Albard.                                                                  
    The draft manuscript continues:                                          
        Then after a rest they that remained  climbed, foot  by foot,  up the
    steep  slope  before  them,  till  they  came  nigh  the brink.  There so
    foul  grew  the  reek  that  their heads  reeled, and  they clung  to the
    trees  as  best  they could.  The night  was now  passing, but  there was
    a  flicker  above  them  as  of smouldering  fires, and  a noise  of some
    great beast sleeping; but if he stirred the earth quivered.              
              Dawn  came  slowly;  and  its  glimmer came  to Turambar  as he
    strove  with  dark  dreams  of  dread  in  which  all  his will  had been
    given  only  to clinging  and holding,  while a  great tide  of blackness
    had  sucked  and  gnawed   at  his   limbs.  And   he  woke   and  looked
    about  in  the  wan  light,  and  saw  that   only  Dorlas   remained  by
    him.                                                                     
              'Seven wounds I hoped to give him,' he thought. 'Well, if it be
    two only, then they must go deep.'                                       
              But  when day  came indeed  all passed  as Turambar  had hoped.
    For   suddenly   Glaurung   bestirred    himself,   and    drew   himself
    slowly  to  the  chasm's   edge;  and   he  did   not  turn   aside,  but
    prepared  to  spring  over  with  his  clawed  forelegs  and   then  draw
    his  bulk  after.  Great  was  the  horror  of his  coming, for  he began
    the  passage  not   right  above   Turambar,  but   many  paces   to  the
    northward,  and  from  under  they  could  see   his  hideous   head  and
    gaping  jaws  as  he  peered over  the brink.  Then he  let fly  a blast,
    and  the  trees  before  him  withered,  and rocks  fell into  the river,
    and  with  that  he  cast  himself  forward  and  grappled   the  further
    bank and began to heave himself over the narrow chasm.                   
              Now  there was  need of  great haste,  for though  Turambar and
    Dorlas  had  escaped  from  the  blast  since  they  lay  not   right  in
    Glaurung's  path,  they  could  not  now  come  at  him,  and   soon  all
    the  device  of  Turambar  was  in  point to  fail utterly.  Heedless now
    of  all  else  he  clambered   down,  and   Dorlas  followed   him.  Then
    swiftly  he  came  beneath  the  Worm;  but  there  so  deadly   was  the
    heat  and  the  stench  that  he  tottered  and  was almost  blinded. And
    Dorlas  because  of  the  reek,  or  being  daunted at  last, clung  to a
    tree  by  the  water,  and  would not  move fell  and lay  as in  a swoon
    [sic;  the  sentence  changed  to:]  But  Dorlas  was  overcome,  and his

[$$322-5]
 will  daunted at  last, and  he stumbled  and fell  and was  engulfed in
 the water.                                                              
        Then Turambar said aloud: 'Now thou art alone at the end,        
      Master  of  Doom.  Fail  now  or  conquer!'  And  he   summoned  to
 him  all  his  will,  and all  his hatred  of the  Worm and  his Master,
 and  climbed  up,  as  one  finding  strength   and  skill   beyond  his
 measure;   and  lo!   now  the   midmost  parts   of  the   dragon  came
 above him...                                                            
   I repeat here my remarks in IV.186:                                   
      In the Tale (II.106) the band of seven clambered up the far side of
 the ravine in the evening and  stayed there  all night;  at dawn  of the
 second  day,  when  the  dragon  moved  to  cross,  Turambar   saw  that
 he  had  now  only  three  companions,  and  when  they  had   to  climb
 back  down  to  the  stream-bed  to  come   up  under   Glorund's  belly
 these  three  had  not the  courage to  go up  again. Turambar  slew the
 dragon  by  daylight...  In  Q  the  six  all  deserted  Turambar during
 the  first  night  ...  but  he  spent  the whole  of the  following day
 clinging  to  the  cliff;  Glomund  moved  to  pass  over the  ravine on
 the  second  night  (my  father  clearly  wished  to  make  the  dragon-
 slaying  take  place  in  darkness,  but  achieved  this  at   first  by
 extending the time Turambar spent in the gorge).                        
   Curiously enough, in the text just given my father reverted, so far as
 the time-scale is concerned, to the  story in  the Tale,  where Turambar
 spent the whole night in the  ravine and  the dragon  moved to  cross at
 the beginning of the next day (see further the commentary on            
 $$329-32).                                                        
      In the condensed account in Q nothing is said of  the need  to move
 along  the  river  and  then  to  climb  up  again  to  come  under  the
 dragon's  belly  ('The  next  evening...  Glomund  began the  passage of
 the  ravine,  and  his  huge  form  passed  over Turambar's  head'); and
 here  also  it  seems  certain  that my  father went  back to  the Tale,
 where this  is described  in a  way very  similar to  that in  the draft
 manuscript of NE. In the Tale as in this draft there is no  suggestion -
 that the  men had  taken into  account the  possibility that  the dragon
 might not cross  at the  point they  had chosen  (and therefore,  in the
 final version, after attempting to climb they returned -  as it  must be
 assumed: it is not expressly stated - to  the bottom  of the  ravine and
 waited); in both, they climbed up the far  side of  the gorge  and clung
 beneath  its  brink,  whence  they  had  to  climb  down  again  to  the
 water  when  the  dragon moved.  Dorlas' failure  'because of  the reek'
 when  he  and  Turambar  came,  in  the  riverbed,  beneath  the  dragon
 corresponds to the  failure of  the three  men in  the Tale,  who 'durst
 not climb the bank again' because  'the heat  was so  great and  so vile
 the stench' (II.107).                                                   

 [$$322-5]                                                                        
     The behaviour of Turambar's companions in the different ver-                 
   sions can be set out thus:                                                     
                                        The Tale.                                 
     Three deserted during the night.                                             
     The three others climbed down with Turambar to get beneath the               
                dragon, but dared not climb up again.                             
                                                                                 
                                          The Quenta.                             
            All six deserted during the (first) night (nothing is said of the need
            to change position).                                                  
                                                                                 
                                    Draft manuscript of NE.                       
            Two feared to cross the river and one  (Albarth) was  drowned in      
            the crossing.                                                         
     Two more fled away during the night.                                         
     The  last  (Dorlas)  climbed  down  with  Turambar  to get  beneath the      
            dragon, but dared not climb up again.                                 

  The revised and final story (NE pp.  133 -  4) is  far better  (and of
  course the version in GA, though very brief, is in agreement with it).
  By  this time  the passage  in which  Brandir defends  himself against
  Dorlas  (p.  152)  had been  emended to  the final  form (NE  p. 129),
  except that Albarth (at first simply one of  the five  volunteers, but
  named  because  he  fell  and  was  drowned in  the river)  had become
  the  kinsman  of  Brandir  who  rebukes  Dorlas.  There  are  now only
  two  companions  of  Turambar,  and  the  hard  and  boastful  warrior
  Dorlas  becomes  the  coward,  while  Albarth  is  the  brave  man who
  stays  beside  Turambar until  he is  struck by  a falling  stone. The
  development is a characteristic complex:                              
             

                                                      
 Brandir defends himself       Albarth defends Brandir
 against Dorlas' scorn          against Dorlas' scorn
                                                        
 Turambar takes six          Turambar takes Dorlas and
 companions                   Albarth only as companions
                                                        
 One of these, Albarth, is                               
 drowned in the crossing;    Dorlas flees                
 four flee; only Dorlas      Albarth remains by Turambar
 remains by Turambar                                     

 Dorlas is drowned in the river.    Albarth is drowned in the river.

 A curious detail in the final form of the story is worth remarking.
 In the new account,  it occurs  to Turambar  that they  are wasting
 their strength in climbing up the far side of the gorge  before the
 dragon  moves. It  is not  said that  they descended  from whatever
 point they had reached when he  came to  this realisation,  and the
 passage concerning his dream 'in which  all his  will was  given to

[$$322-5]                                                                    
   clinging'  reappears  from the  earlier version  (p. 153).  But in  the new
   story  there  was  no  need  for  them  to  cling:  they  could  have,  and
   surely  would  have,  descended  to  the  bottom   and  waited   there.  In
   fact, it is clear that this is what they did: it is said  (NE p.  134) that
   when  Glaurung  moved  to  cross   the  ravine   they  were   not  standing
   right   in  his   path,  and   Turambar  at   once  'clambered   along  the
   water-edge'.  Thus  the  revised  story  still  carries  an  unneeded trait
   from the earlier.                                                         
          A draft slip, not  fully legible,  shows my  father working  out the
   new story:                                                                
          Let Turin slay dragon at nightfall. He reaches Nen Girith as  sun is
   going  down.  He  warns  them  that   Glaurung  will   move  in   dark.  He
   outlines  his  plan.  They go  down to  Taiglin but  there the  heart fails
   his  men,  and  they  say:  'Lord,  forgive  us,  but  our  hearts  are not
   great  enough  for  the  venture.  For  [illegible  words]  the  thought of
   those we have left.'                                                      
             'What of me?' said Turambar. He dismissed them with scorn.      
             He goes on with Dorlas and Albarth.                             
   This  is  an  intermediate  stage:  there  are  other  'volunteers'  beside
   Dorlas and Albarth,  but they  beg off  before the  crossing of  the river.
   These others were abandoned.                                              
          This  may seem  much ado  about a  single episode,  but it  seems to
   me  to  illustrate  in  miniature  the  complex  and  subtle  movement that
   is found in the history of the legends at large. It  was, also,  an episode
   of  great  importance:  there  are  few 'monsters'  to rival  Glaurung, and
   my father  strove to  perfect the  tale of  how Turin  earned the  title of
   Dagnir Glaurunga.                                                         
          It remains to mention  that in  the final  manuscript of  NE Albarth
   was  changed  to  Torbarth,  the  name  in  GA; but  at all  occurrences in
   NE  of  Torbarth  it  was  changed  later  to Hunthor.  In GA  this further
   alteration  was  not  made  (it  was  of  course  adopted in  The Silmaril-
   lion),  but  at  the  first  occurrence only  ($322) of  Torbarth in  GA my
   father  pencilled  above it  Gwerin: on  this name  see further  pp. 163-5.
 $323.  In the Narn (p. 132) it is told  that Niniel  and the  people with
     her came to Nen Girith 'just at nightfall', but in the draft manuscript
     they reached the falls 'at the  first breath  of morning'  (see commen-
     tary  on  $$329-32).  In the  draft manuscript,  also, Brandir  did not
     limp  slowly  after  the  others  on  his crutch,  but 'took  the small
     ambling  horse  that  was  trained to  bear him,  and he  rode westward
     after  Niniel  and  her  companions.  And  many  that  saw  him  go had
     pity, for in truth he was well beloved by many.'                        
 $324.  As   in   GA,   Cabad-en-Aras   was  corrected   throughout,  except
     where  omitted  by  oversight, to  Cabed-en-Aras on  the final  text of
     NE.  The  draft  manuscript  had  Mengas  Dur,  changed   to  Cabad-en-

 Aras  at  the  time  of writing.  In NE  (p. 130)  Turambar says  of the
 ravine  that  over  it,  'as  you  tell,  a  deer  once leaped  from the
 huntsmen  of  Haleth',  and  later  (p.  140)  Brandir says  that Niniel
 'leaped from the brink of the Deer's Leap'.                            
    In  NE  (p.  130), when  Turambar came  to Nen  Girith at  sunset, he
 looked out over the falls, and seeing the spires of smoke rising  by the
 banks  of  the  Taiglin he  said to  his companions  that this  was good
 news,  because  he  had  feared  that Glaurung  would change  his course
 and come to the Crossings, 'and so to the  old road  in the  lowland'. I
 take  this  to  be  the  old  south  road  to  Nargothrond,  coming down
 from  the  Pass  of  Sirion  and  running through  the western  eaves of
 Brethil  on  its  way  to the  Crossings; but  the draft  manuscript has
 here  'and  so  along  the  old road  to Bar  Haleth', against  which my
 father  wrote  later:  'into deep  Brethil'. Bar  Haleth was  written in
 above  Tavrobel  (struck  out)  on  the  map (see  p. 186,  $19). Beyond
 the fact that 'Tavrobel' was in the extreme  east of  Brethil it  is not
 possible to be sure of its site. Bar Haleth was in turn crossed  out. It
 seems  certain  therefore  that  this  was  a  transient name  for Ephel
 Brandir,  which was  marked in  subsequently in  the centre  of Brethil;
 and 'the old road' in the draft manuscript  distinct from  that referred
 to in the final text.                                                  
$325.  In  NE  it  is told  (p. 131)  that from  Nen Girith  Turambar and
 his  companions  took  the  path  to  the  Crossings,  but  'before they
 came  so  far,  they  turned  southward  by a  narrow track',  and moved
 through  the  woods   above  the   Taiglin  towards   Cabed-en-Aras.  Mr
 Charles   Noad   has   suggested  that   my  sketch-map   in  Unfinished
 Tales, p. 149, should be  modified, and  the track  shown to  turn again
 westward to reach the Taiglin: thus  'The first  stars glimmered  in the
 East behind them'. See further p. 159, $333.                           
    'So ended the  last of  the right  kin of  Haleth': 'right  kin' must
 mean 'direct line'. But Torbarth was not the last,  for Brandir,  son of
 Handir son of Hundor son of Haleth, still lived.                       
$$329-32.  The  narrative  of  these  paragraphs  as  first   written  in
 NE  had  many  differences  from  the final  text (pp.  135 -  7, begin-
 ning  'Now  the  screams  of  Glaurung  came  to   the  people   at  Nen
 Girith ...'), and I give the earlier text (which exists in  two drafts);
 for the time-scale see commentary on $$322 - 5.                        
    Now  when  the  screams  of  Glaurung  came  to   the  folk   at  Nen
 Girith  they  were  filled  with  terror; and  the watchers  beheld from
 afar  the  great  breaking  and  burning  that  the  Worm  made  in  his
 throes,  and   deemed  that   he  was   trampling  and   destroying  all
 those  that  had  assailed  him.  Then  those that  had been  most eager
 to  come   and  see   strange  deeds   were  most   eager  to   go,  ere
 Glaurung  should  discover  them.  All   therefore  fled,   either  wild
 into the woods, or back towards Ephel Brandir.                         

 [$$329-32]                                                                 
                                                                           
           But  when  Niniel heard  the voice  of the  Worm, her  heart died
    within  her,  and a  shadow of  her darkness  fell on  her, and  she sat
    still, shuddering by Nen Girith.                                        
           The morning passed, and still she did not stir from the  spot. So
    it  was  that Brandir  found her.  For he  came at  last to  the bridge,
    spent  and  weary,  having  limped  all  the  long  way  alone   on  his
    crutch;  and  it  was  seven  leagues  from  Ephel  Brandir.   Fear  had
    urged  him  on.  For  he  met  with some  of those  that fled  back, and
    heard  all  that  they had  to tell.  'The Black  Sword is  surely dead,
    and  all  with  him,'  they  said.  But  when he  found that  Niniel was
    not with them, and that they  had left  her behind  in their  terror, he
    cursed  them  and  pressed  on  to  Nen Girith,  thinking to  defend her
    or comfort her.                                                         
           But now that he saw her still living, he found naught to say, and
    had  neither  counsel  nor  comfort,  and  stood  silent looking  on her
    misery with pity.                                                       
           Time  wore  on,  and  the  sun  began to  wester, and  there came
    neither  sound   nor  tidings.   Brandir  looking   out  could   see  no
    longer  any  smoke  by  the  Taiglin.  And  suddenly  he thought  in his
    heart:  'Beyond  doubt he  is slain.  But Niniel  lives.' And  he looked
    at  her  and  his  heart  yearned  towards  her, and  then he  was aware
    that it was cold in  that high  place; and  he went  and cast  his cloak
    about  her,  but  she  said naught  to him.  And he  stood yet  a while,
    and  he  could  hear  no  sound  but  the  voices of  the trees  and the
    birds  and  the  water,  and  he  thought:  'Surely  the  Worm  is gone,
    and  has  passed  into  Brethil. He  will overtake  the hapless  folk on
    the  way.'  But  he  pitied  them no  more: fools  that had  flouted his
    counsel.  Nor  his  people  waiting  in Ephel  Brandir: he  had forsaken
    them.  Thither  Glaurung  surely  would  go  fast,  and  he  would  have
    time  to  lead  Niniel  away  and  escape. Whither  he scarce  knew, for
    he  had  never  strayed  beyond  Brethil [first  draft only:  and though
    he  knew  of  the  Hidden  Kingdom  he  knew little  more than  that its
    king  loved  not  Men,  and  few  were  ever  admitted].  But  time  was
    fleeting, and soon evening would come.                                  
           Then he went again to Niniel's side, and said: 'It  groweth late,
    Niniel. What wouldst thou do?'                                          
           'I know not,' said she. 'For I  am adread.  But could  I overcome
    my  shuddering,  I  would  arise  and  go,  and seek  my lord;  though I
    fear that he is dead.'                                                  
           Then  Brandir  knew  not  what to  answer; and  he said:  'All is
    strange. Who shall read  the signs?  But if  he lives,  would he  not go
    to  Ephel Brandir,  where he  left thee?  And the  bridge of  Nen Girith
    doth not lie  on the  only road,  or the  straightest, thither  from the
    place of battle.'                                                       

                      
                                                                            
[$$329-32]                                                                
                                                                            
  Then   Niniel   was   roused   at   last,   and   she  stood   up,  crying:
  'Towards  tidings  I  came  hither,  and  yet  all  tidings  I  miss!  Hath
  some  spell  been  laid  on  me  that  I  linger  here?'  And she  began to
  hasten  down  the  path  from  the  bridge.  But  Brandir  called  to  her:
  'Niniel!  Go  not  alone.  I  will  go  with  thee.  Thou knowest  not what
  thou  may  find.  A  healer  thou  mayest  need.  But  if  the  dragon lies
  there,  then  beware!  For  the   creatures  of   Morgoth  die   hard,  and
  are dangerous in death.'                                                   
              But  she  heeded  him  not  and  went now  as though  her blood
  burned  her,  which  before  had   been  cold.   And  though   he  followed
  as  he  could,  because  of  his  lameness  she   passed  away   until  she
  was  out  of  his  sight.  Then  Brandir  cursed  his  fate  and  his weak-
  ness, but still he held on.                                                
              Night fell and all the woods were still; and the moon rose away
  beyond   Amon  Obel,   and  the   glades  became   pale.  And   Niniel  ran
  on;  but  as  she  came  down  from  the  upland   towards  the   river  it
  seemed to her that she remembered the place, and feared it.                
     Thus Niniel passed the whole of the day at Nen  Girith (in  this earlier
  version  she  and  the  people  with  her  had  come  there  'at  the first
  breath  of   morning',  commentary   on  $323,   and  Glaurung   was  slain
  in  the  morning);  when  Brandir  perceived  that  it  was  cold  and cast
  his  cloak  about  her  it  was the  second evening,  whereas in  the final
  story  it  was  the  night  of  Glaurung's  death  (and  no  long  time can
  elapse   between   his  death,   Brandir's  coming   to  Nen   Girith,  and
  Niniel's   running   down   to   Cabed-en-Aras).   A    further   important
  divergence,  among  many  other  differences  of  detail,  is  that  in the
  earlier all  the people  fled from  Nen Girith,  leaving Niniel  alone. But
  from   this   point  the   draft  manuscript   and  the   final  manuscript
  become closely similar.                                                    
$332.  In NE (p. 136), as also at  the end  of the  earlier version  given in
  the  commentary  on  $$329  -  32,  'the  moon  rose  beyond   Amon  Obel'.
  The  sketch-map  in  Unfinished  Tales (p.  149) is  not well  oriented: as
  is  seen  from  revisions  made  to  the  second  map  (and  so  reproduced
  on  my  map  to  the   published  Silmarillion),   Amon  Obel   was  almost
  due east of the Crossings of Taiglin.                                      
$333.  There  are,  two  points of  detail to  be mentioned  in the  text of
  NE   corresponding   to   this   paragraph.   The   words   concerning  the
  track  that  Brandir  took  to   head  off   Niniel,  'went   steeply  down
  southward  to  the  river'  (p.  137),  were an  editorial change  from the
  reading   of   the  manuscript,   which  has   'went  steeply   down  west-
  ward'.  The  change  was made  because it  is expressly  said here  that it
  was  the  path  that  Turambar  and  his  companions  had   taken  earlier:
  cf.  p.  131  'they   turned  southward   by  a   narrow  track';   but  Mr
  Noad's  clearly  correct  suggestion   (see  p.   157,  $325)   makes  this

          
                                                                        
 emendation  unnecessary.  Secondly,   in  the   words  of   Glaurung  to
 Niniel at his death (p. 138) 'We meet again ere the end', 'ere  the end'
 is a simple error for 'ere we end'.                                     
$334.  '[She]  ran like  a hunted  deer, and  came to  Cabed-en-Aras': the
 name Cabed-en-Aras referred  to the  actual ravine  in the  Taiglin, and
 (as  I  suggested  in  Unfinished  Tales  p.  150,  note  27) it  may be
 supposed  that  the  death-leap  of  Glaurung  had  carried  him  a good
 distance beyond the further cliff, so that  Niniel had  some way  to run
 to the ravine. The wording of NE is  clearer: 'Swiftly  she came  to the
 brink of Cabed-en-Aras'.                                                
$335.  Cabad  Naeramarth:  in  an  earlier  form  of  this passage  in NE
 (p.  138)  the  name  was  Cabad  Amarth  'Leap  of  Doom'.  In  $$335,
 346 Cabad was not corrected.                                            
$$336-7.  In Q there  was no  mention of  Brandir's bringing  the tidings
 to  the  waiting  people.  This  was  due  to  Q's  compression,  for it
 appears  in  the  Tale  (II.110);  and  his words  in GA  (deriving from
 NE) 'and those tidings are good' echo those  in the  Tale: 'and  that is
 well;  aye very  well': in  both, those  who heard  him thought  that he
 was mad.                                                                
$$339-42.  Q  was   here  exceedingly   compressed,  saying   only:  'he
 asked for Niniel, but  none dared  tell him,  save Brandir.  And Brandir
 distraught  with  grief  reproached  him;  wherefore Turin  slew him...'
 The  complex scene  in NE  and GA  goes back  in a  very general  way to
 the  Tale  (II.111); there  also Turambar  calls Tamar  (Brandir) 'Club-
 foot', and it is this (as it appears) that leads him to tell all that he
 knows,  which  in  turn  incites  Turambar  to  murder   him,  believing
 him to be lying out of malice.                                          
$$346-7.  In the Tale  and Q  the voice  from the  sword does  not speak
 of  Beleg  or  of  Brandir.  In  NE  as  first written  Turambar himself
 named  them  in  his  address  to the  sword: 'From  no blood  wilt thou
 shrink.  Not  from  Beleg  slain  in  madness,  not  from  Brandir slain
 unjustly.  That  was  a  wicked  deed,  thou  black  sword.  Do   now  a
 better  and  take  Turin  Turambar!  Wilt  thou  slay  me  swiftly?' And
 the voice from the blade replied:  'Thy blood  will I  gladly drink.,For
 it is of the best,  and sweeter  will it  seem than  any that  thou hast
 given me. Swift will I  slay thee!'  - echoing  the words  of Gurtholfin
 in the Tale, II.112; cf. also Q, IV.130.                                
$349.  The sword was not  broken in  the Tale  or in  Q. -  At the  top of
 the manuscript page  my father  wrote hastily  in pencil:  'Turin should
 slay  himself on  Finduilas' tomb'  (cf. Unfinished  Tales p.  150, note
 28).                                                                    
  The  conclusion  of  NE  (p.  146)  in  the manuscript  actually reads:
 'Thus  endeth  the  tale of  the Children  of Hurin  [added:] as  it was
 told in the Glaer nia [later > Narn i]  Chin Hurin,  the longest  of all
 the  lays  of  Beleriand.'  The  conclusion  added  afterwards to  GA is

  
                                                                         
    thus almost exactly the same as that in NE, which does not however
    have the words 'and was made by Men'; with this cf. X.373.            
                                                                         
                                   NOTE 1.                                
                                                                         
                   Variant forms at the end of the tale of                
                            the Children of Hurin.                        
                                                                         
  There are, first, some rough draft texts that sketch  out ideas  for the
  denouement of the  tragedy; there  can be  no doubt  that they  were all
  abandon d in favour of  the actual  ending in  NE and  GA. One  of them,
  beginning as  in NE  p. 143  immediately after  the slaying  of Brandir,
  reads                             as                            follows:
  now  cursing  Middle-earth and  all the  life of  Men, now  calling upon
  Niniel. But when at last the madness left  him, he  walked still  in the
  wild bent and haggard, and  pondered all  his life  in his  thought, and
  ever  Niniel's  image  was  before  him.  And  now  with  opened  eye he
  saw  her,  remembering  his  father:  there  in  woman's  form  was  his
  voice and his  face and  the bend  of his  brows, and  his hair  like to
  gold, even as Turin had the  dark hair  and the  grey eyes,  the [?pale
  cheek]  and  [illegible  words]  of Morwen  his mother  of the  House of
  Beor.  Doubt  could  not  be.  But how  had it  chanced? Where  then was
  Morwen?   Had   they   never   reached   the  H[idden]   K[ingdom]?  How
  had they met Glaurung? But no, he dared never seek Morwen.              
  I believe that this was  a soon  abandoned idea  that Turin  could come,
  through  his own  reflections, to  a recognition  that what  Brandir had
  said was true. It was displaced by the  story of  the coming  of Mablung
  to the Crossings of Taiglin and meeting Turin there.                    
    In  two related  passages my  father entertained  the idea  that Turin
  met Morwen before his end. The first is very brief:                     
    And as he sat like a beggar-man near the Crossings of Taiglin,  an old
  woman  came  by  bowed  on  a  stick;  ragged  she  was and  forlorn and
  her  grey  hair  blew  wild  in  the  wind. But  she gave  him good-day,
  saying: 'And  good day  it is,  master, for  the sun  is warm,  and then
  hunger gnaws less. These are evil days for our likes: for I see  by your
  bearing that,  as I  and so  many, you  have seen  prouder days.  In the
  summer  we  can  drag   on  our   lives,  but   who  dare   look  beyond
  winter?'                                                                
       'Whither go you, lady?'  he said,  'for so  methinks you  were once
  wont to be called.'                                                     
       'Nowhither,' she answered. 'I have long since  ceased to  seek what
  I missed. Now I took  for naught  but what  will keep  me over  night to
  the  next  grey  dawn. Tell  me, whither  goes this  green road?  Do any
  still dwell in the deep forest? And are they as fell as wanderers' tales
  tell?'                                                                  

    'What say they?' he asked.                                             
 This  is  followed  on the  manuscript page  by 'now  cursing Middle-earth
 and all the life of Men'  &c., leading into a draft of the  final version,
 where Mablung appears at the Crossings.                                   
  The second of these passages is longer,  but only  barely legible  and in
 places altogether illegible. It begins in the same way as that just given,
 but  Morwen's  second  speech  ends  at  'I  look  for naught  beyond what
 will keep me through the cold night to next dawn.' Then Turin speaks:     
    'I seek not either,' said he. 'For what I had is  now lost  utterly and
 is gone from Middle-earth for ever. But what would you seek?'             
    'What  would  an  old  woman  seek,' said  she, 'out  in the  wild, but
 her children, even if all say they be dead. I sought for  a son  once, but
 he went  long ago.  Then I  sought for  my daughter,  but 'tis  five years
 since she was lost in the wild. Five years is  a long  time for  one young
 and fair - if the  Worm did  not get  her, the  Orcs have  [illegible], or
 the [? cold heedless] wild.'                                              
    Then  suddenly  T[urin]'s  heart  stood  still.  'What  like  was  your
 daughter, lady? Or what maybe was her name?'                              
 The  old  woman  told him  that her  daughter was  tall, with  golden hair
 and blue eyes, fleet-footed, a lover of all things that grow;             
  '... Yet a little she leaped in her words, as her  sire did  also. Nienor
 daughter of Hurin she would have named herself, an you asked her.         
  But  maybe  it  would  mean  naught.  For  the  name  of Hurin  was great
 [illegible  words]  All-  the  realms [illegible  words] are  beaten down
 and mean folk or evil are lords. Yet you are of the older folk, I deem.
  I see by thy face that the old name meant somewhat to thee still.'       
    Turin stared at her as a man that sees a ghost. 'Yea,' said he  at last
 slowly.   'The   name   of   Hurin  of   Hithlum  and   Morwen  Baragund's
 daughter was known to me.                                                 
 Of      the      remainder     I      can     only      read     snatches:
 and   Morwen   and   her   daughter   went    to   the    Hidden   Kingdom
 [illegible] they say in Hithlum.' The old woman laughed bitterly.         
  'And  what  else  did  they  say?  That  first Turin  went there  and was
 used by the king in his border wars and lost, but came to                 
  Nargothrond  and  that  Morwen  went  to  seek   him  there   with  tardy
 aid  of  Thingol,  but  [illegible  words]  by  the great  drake Glaurung.
 [illegible  words] Then she wept [illegible  words]                       
 This is clearly  the beginning  of another  narrative route  whereby Turin
 might learn the truth,  likewise abandoned  before it  was developed.  - A
 pencilled note shows the entry of the 'Mablung-intervention':             
  Mablung  searches and  brings tidings  to Thingol  of Glaurung  setting '
 forth.   This   coincides   with   rumour   (among  orcs   and  wanderers)
 that the Black Sword has reappeared in Brethil. Mablung comes to          
  Brethil  (without  orders  from  Thingol?)  to   warn  Turin   and  bring
 news of Nienor and Morwen.                                                

   Morwen should go back to Thingol and then depart as a beggar          
 in the wild.                                                            
                                                                        
 Lastly,  and very  remarkable, there  is the  following synopsis  of the
 end of the story, written carefully on a slip, apparently over  the same
 or similar text set down very roughly in pencil:                        
                                                                        
    Turambar  sets  out.  Asks  for  two  companions.  Dorlas volunteers,
 and speaks scorn of Brandir. Gwerin kinsman of Brandir volunteers.      
 Brandir is embittered. Turambar bids Niniel stay at home.               
    When  T[urambar]  has  gone  Niniel  insists  on  following.  Brandir
 forbids but she takes no heed. Brandir appears to the Men of            
 Brethil, but they will not obey  him -  they beg  Niniel to  remain, but
 as she will not, they will not restrain her by force. The wives of      
 Dorlas and Gwerin go with her. Brandir follows after them.              
    The  slaying  of  the  Dragon  may be  told more  or less  as already
 done.  But  when  Niniel  reaches  Nen  Girith  shuddering  again  takes
 her, and she can go no further.  The wives  also are  not willing  to go
 on - for they meet the scouts at Nen Girith and learn how near the      
 Worm is..... [sic]                                                      
    When  Turin  draws  his  sword  out  of Glaurung's  belly, Glaurung's
 blood  burns  his  sword  hand; also  Glaurung speaks  to him,  and says
 that Niniel is his sister. Turin falls into a swoon of pain and horror.
    The  Dragon  dies.  Suddenly  Niniel  recovers  her  memory  and  all
 her past life  is revealed  to her.  She sits  aghast. Brandir  sees her
 anguish, but believes that it is due to belief that Turin has been slain
 - the dreadful cries of Glaurung have been heard at Nen Girith.         
 Niniel gets up to flee, and Brandir thinking that she will really  go in
 search of Turin (while Glaurung is abroad) restrains her, saying        
 Wait!                                                                   
    She turns to him, crying that this was ever his  counsel, and  to her
 sorrow  she  did not  take it.  But he  may give  that counsel  once too
 often!                                                                  
    As indeed it proved. For at that moment Turin appears. When the      
 Dragon  died  his  swoon  also departed,  but the  anguish of  the venom
 on  his  hand  remained.  He came,  therefore, to  Nen Girith  for help,
 believing the scouts there. (It is Turin that slays Dorlas on the way?)
    As  Turambar  appears,  Niniel gives  a wail,  crying: 'Turin  son of
 Hurin!  Too  late  have  we  met.  The  dark  days  are gone.  But night
 comes  after!'  'How  know  you  that  name?'  'Brandir  told   me,  and
 behold!  I  am  Nienor.  Therefore  we  must part.'  And with  that, ere
 any  could  hold her,  she leapt  over the  fall of  Nen Girith,  and so
 ended, crying 'Water, water, wash me clean! Wash me of my life!'        
    Then  the  anguish  of  Turin  was terrible  to see;  and a  mad fury
 took  him,  and  he cursed  Middle-earth and  all the  life of  Men. And
 stooping over the falls, he cried in vain Niniel, Niniel. And  he turned

 in  wrath  upon  all  those  that  were  there,  against his  command; and
 all fled  away  from  him,  save  only  Brandir, who  for ruth  and horror
 could  not  move.  But  Turin  turned  to  him   and  said:   'Behold  thy
 work,  limping  evil!  Had  Niniel  remained,  as  I  left her,  and hadst
 thou  not  told  my  name,  she  might  have  been restrained  from death.
 I  could  have  gone  away  and  left  her,  and  she  might  have mourned
 for Turambar only.'                                                       
    But  Brandir  cursed  him,  saying  that their  wedding could  not have
                                                                          
 thou  hast  shorn  of  all  that  I  had, and  would have  - for  thou art
 reckless and greedy!'                                                     
    Then  Turin  slew  Brandir  in  his  wrath.  And  repenting,   he  slew
 himself (using same words to the sword).                                  
    Mablung  comes  with  news,  and  is  heart-stricken.  The  Elves  help
                                                                          
 Hurin  -  but  N[iniel]  was  not  there,  and  her  body  could   not  be
 found: mayhap Celebros bore it to Taiglin and Taiglin to the Sea.         
                                                                          
          A further simplification would be to make Brandir willing to go
 with Niniel, to guard her - for he thought Turin would die.               j
                                                                          
 This last sentence presumably refers to Brandir's attempt to stop         
 Niniel from following Turambar from Ephel Brandir.                        
 It seems impossible actually to demonstrate at what point in the          
 evolution of the legend this was written, but that it is anyway as late as
 the rewritten, final form of the last part of the Narn is clear from such
 a detail as that Celebros is the name of the stream (see commentary on
 $317). I think that it belongs with the other passages given in this      
 Note, in that it represents another, though far more drastic, attempt     
 to reach the denouement of Turin's 'recognition' - this time from         
 Nienor herself, who has learned the truth through no inter-               
 mediary, but simply from the removal of the spell on her memory by        
 the Dragon's death. But Mablung appears, though now after Turin's         
 death, and so I suspect that it is the latest of these attempts, and may
 very probably have succeeded the final form of the text. Gwerin as        
 the name of Brandir's kinsman (Albarth, Torbarth, Hunthor)                
 has appeared once before, pencilled over the first occurrence of          
 Torbarth in GA ($322).                                                    
 That my father should even have contemplated, to the extent of            
 roughing out a synopsis, breaking so violently the superb interlocking
 narrative structure represented by the final text of the last part of the
 Narn is extraordinary and hard to fathom. Did he feel that it had        
 become too evidently a 'structure', too complex in those interlocking     
 movements, reports, forebodings, chances? The concluding note ('A      
 further simplification would be ...') may  support this.  But it  seems to
 me  most  probable  that  he was  primarily concerned  with the  coming of
 Mablung  (or  indeed  Morwen)  as  a   deus  ex   machina  at   that  very

    moment, bearer of the irrefutable  proof, which  he felt  to be  a serious
    weakness.                                                                 
        However this may be, the result is, I think, and  granting that  it is
    only  represented  by  a  rapid  synopsis  written in  a certain  way, far
    weaker;  and  since,  apart  perhaps  from  the  pencilled name  Gwerin in
    the Grey Annals, there is no other trace of it, it may be that  he thought
    likewise.                                                                 
                                                                             
                                       NOTE 2.                                
                A further account of the Battle of Unnumbered Tears.          
                                                                             
      The  text  of  Chapter 20  in the  published Silmarillion  was primarily
      derived  from  the  story  in  the  Grey   Annals,  but   elements  were
      introduced  from  the old  Chapter 16  in QS  (V.307-13), and  also from
      a  third  text.  This  is a  typescript made  by my  father, and  to all
      appearance made ab initio on his typewriter; it was  explicitly intended
      as a component in  the long  prose Tale  of the  Children of  Hurin (the
      Narn), but he had the manuscript  of the  Grey Annals  in front  of him,
      and for much of  its length  the new  version remained  so close  to the
      Annals text that it can  be regarded  as scarcely  more than  a variant,
      although unquestionably much later.  For this  reason, and  also because
      some  of  its  divergent  (additional)  features  had  in any  case been
      incorporated in the Silmarillion chapter, I excluded it from the Narn in
      Unfinished Tales (see pp. 65-6 and note 2 in that book), except  for its
      end.  There  is however  a major  divergence in  the Narn  account which
      altogether contradicts the previous versions, and  this is  a convenient
      place to record it, together with some other details.                   
                                                                             
        The text opens as follows (the  typescript was  a good  deal corrected
      in ink, I think almost certainly very soon after it had been made, and I
      adopt these corrections silently except in certain cases).              
                                                                             
        Many  songs  are  yet  sung,  and  many  tales  are  yet  told  by the
      Elves   of   the   Nirnaeth   Arnoediad,   the   Battle   of  Unnumbered
      Tears,  in  which  Fingon  fell and  the flower  of the  Eldar withered.
      If  all  were  now  retold  a  man's  life  would  not  suffice  for the
      hearing.  Here  then  shall   be  recounted   only  those   deeds  which
      bear  upon  the  fate  of  the  House  of  Hador  and  the  children  of
      Hurin the Steadfast.                                                    
        Having   gathered   at  length   all  the   strength  that   he  could
      Maedros   appointed   a  day,   the  morning   of  Midsummer.   On  that
      day  the  trumpets  of  the  Eldar greeted  the rising  of the  Sun, and
      in  the  east was  raised the  standard of  the Sons  of Feanor;  and in
      the west the standard of Fingon, King of the Noldor.                    
        Then  Fingon  looked  out  from  the  walls  of  Eithel   Sirion,  and

 his  host  was  arrayed  in  the  valleys  and  woods upon  the east
 borders  of  Eryd-wethion,  well  hid  from the  eyes of  the Enemy;
 but he knew that it was very great. For there all the Noldor of
 Hithlum were assembled, and to them were gathered many             
 Elves of the Falas and [struck out at once: a great company] of
 Nargothrond;  and  he  had  great  strength of  Men. Upon  the right
 were  stationed  the  host  of  Dor-lomin  and all  the valour  of 
 Hurin and Huor his brother, and to them had come Hundar of         
 Brethil, their kinsman, with many men of the woods.                
   Then Fingon looked east  and his  elven-sight saw  far off  a dust
 and the glint of steel like stars in a mist, and he knew that      
 Maedros had set forth; and he rejoiced. Then he looked towards     
 Thangorodrim,  and  behold!  there  was  a dark  cloud about  it and
 a  black  smoke  went  up;  and he  knew that  the wrath  of Morgoth
 was  kindled  and  that  their  challenge would  be accepted,  and a
 shadow  fell  upon  his heart.  But at  that moment  a cry  went up,
 passing on the  wind from  the south  from vale  to vale,  and Elves
 and   Men  lifted   up  their   voices  in   wonder  and   joy.  For
 unsummoned   and   unlooked-for  Turgon   had  opened   the  leaguer
 of  Gondolin,  and  was  come  with  an  army, ten  thousand strong,
 with bright  mail and  long swords  and spears  like a  forest. Then
 when  Fingon   heard  afar   the  great   trumpet  of   Turgon,  the
 shadow  passed  and  his   heart  was   uplifted,  and   he  shouted
 aloud: Utulie'n aure! Aiya Eldalie ar Atanatarni, sctulie'n aure!
 (The day has come! Lo, people of the Eldar and  Fathers of  Men, the
 day  has  come!)  And  all  those  who  heard  his great  voice echo
 in the hills answered crying: Auta i lome! (The night is passing!)
   It was not long before the great battle was joined. For          
 Morgoth  knew  much  of  what  was  done  and  designed by  his foes
 and had laid his plans against  the hour  of their  assault. Already
 a  great  force  out  of  Angband  was  drawing  near   to  Hithlum,
 while  another  and  greater  went  to meet  Maedros to  prevent the
 union of the powers of the kings. And those that came against      
 Fingon  were  clad all  in dun  raiment and  showed no  naked steel,
 and  thus  were  already far  over the  sands before  their approach
 became known.                                                      
   Then  the  heart  of  Fingon  [>  the hearts  of the  Noldor] grew
 hot, and he [> their captains] wished  to assail  their foes  on the
 plain; but Hurin [> Fingon] spoke against this.                    
   'Beware  of  the  guile  of  Morgoth, lords!'  he said.  'Ever his
 strength  is  more  than  it seems,  and his  purpose other  than he
 reveals. Do not reveal your own strength, but let the enemy        

                       
                                                                         
  spend his first in assault on the hills.  At least  until the  signal of
  Maedros  is  seen.'  For   it  was   the  design   of  the   kings  that
  Maedros  should  march  openly   over  the   Anfauglith  with   all  his
  strength,  of  Elves  and  of  Men  and  of  Dwarves;  and  when  he had
  drawn   forth,   as   he   hoped,   the  main   armies  of   Morgoth  in
  answer,  then  Fingon  should  come  on  from  the  west,  and   so  the
  might   of   Morgoth   should   be   taken   as   between   hammer   and
  anvil  and  be  broken  to pieces;  and the  signal for  this was  to be
  the firing of a great beacon in Dorthonion.                             
     But  the  Captain  of  Morgoth  in  the   west  had   been  commanded
  to draw out Fingon from his hills by whatever means he could.           
                                                                         
     It is most remarkable that in this Narn version there is no reference
  whatever  to  the  hindering  of  Maedros  by  the  guile  of  Uldor the
  Accursed;  while  on  the  other  hand  there is  here the  entirely new
  statement  that a  second and  greater force  left Angband  to intercept
  Maedros and 'prevent the  union of  the powers  of the  kings' (contrast
  GA $222, where it is said that Morgoth 'trusted in his servants  to hold
  back Maidros and prevent the union of  his foes'  - referring  of course
  to  the machinations  of Uldor).  Later in  this narrative,  the passage
  corresponding to the opening of GA $228 reads:                          
                                                                         
     Then  in  the  plain of  Anfauglith, on  the fourth  day of  the war,
  there  began  the  Nirnaeth  Arnoediad,  all  the  sorrow  of  which  no
  tale can contain.  Of all  that befell  in the  eastward battle:  of the
  routing   of   Glaurung   the   Drake  by   the  Naugrim   of  Belegost;
  of  the  treachery  of  the Easterlings  and the  overthrow of  the host
  of  Maedros  and  the  flight of  the Sons  of Feanor,  no more  is here
  said. In the west the host of Fingon retreated over the sands ...       
                                                                         
     Here 'the  eastward battle'  is spoken  of as  if it  were altogether
  separate from the fighting in the west: there is no suggestion here that
  the  host  of Maedros  finally came  up and  fell upon  the rear  of the
  enemy  (GA  $229).  Finally,  where  in  GA  the  meeting of  Turgon and
  Hurin in the midst of the  battle is  followed ($229)  by the  coming of
  the host of Maidros, the Narn version reads:                            
                                                                         
  And  it  is  said  that  the  meeting  of  Turgon  with Hurin  who stood
  beside  Fingon  was  glad  in  the  midst  of battle.  For a  while then
  the  hosts  of  Angband  were  driven  back,  and  Fingon   again  began
  his  retreat.  But  having  routed  Maedros  in  the  east  Morgoth  had
  now  great  forces  to  spare,  and  before  Fingon  and   Turgon  could
  come  to  the  shelter  of the  hills they  were assailed  by a  tide of
  foes thrice greater than all the force that was left to them.          

    With  these  last  words  the  Narn version  returns to  the GA  text at
  $233.  Thus  my  father,  for  whatever  reason,  had expunged  the entire
  element  of  'the  machinations  of  Uldor'   in  delaying   Maedros,  and
  radically  altered  the  course  of  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered  Tears by
  introducing the defeat and rout of  the eastern  host before  any junction
  of the forces was achieved.                                               
    In The Silmarillion I preserved (inevitably)  the story  as told  in the
  Grey  Annals,  but  incorporated  certain  elements  from  the   Narn,  as
  may  be  seen  from  a  comparison  of  the  opening  of  the  latter (pp.
  165  -  6)  with  The  Silmarillion pp.  190-1: the  cloud and  smoke over
  Thangorodrim, the  great cry  of Fingon,  the 'dun  raiment' of  the force
  from  Angband  that  came  towards  Hithlum.   Some  other   minor  points
  in  this  passage  may  be  mentioned.  The   'great  company   from  Nar-
  gothrond'  (see  $221  and  commentary)  is  corrected  (p. 166);  and the
  name of the  leader of  the men  of Brethil,  in GA  Hundor son  of Haleth
  the Hunter, is changed to Hundar: later in the text his father is  said to
  be  Halmir  -  an  aspect  of  the extremely  complex refashioning  of the
  genealogies of the  Edain which  need not  be entered  into here  (see pp.
  236-8).                                                                   
    In  GA  ($222),  following  QS  ($11),  it  was Fingon  who was  all for
  attacking  at  once  the  force  from  Angband  on  the  plain,  and Hurin
  who  opposed it;  this was  followed in  the Narn,  but then  corrected to
  make  it  Fingon  who  opposed the  rashness of  his captains.  The change
  was  perhaps  made  for  probability's  sake:  such  prudence  and experi-
  ence  of  Morgoth  should  lie  rather  with  Fingon  King  of  the Noldor
  than  with  Hurin,  a  Man  of  no  more  than  thirty-one years.  - Hurin
  (> Fingon) urged that the western host  should wait  in its  positions 'at
  least until the  signal of  Maedros is  seen'. In  GA ($217)  the occasion
  of  the  signal  of  Maidros  to  Fingon (not  particularised as  a beacon
  in  Dorthonion)  was  to  be  the  moment  when  the  march of  Maidros in
  open  force  over  Anfauglith  had  incited  the host  of Morgoth  to come
  forth  from  Angband;  and  owing  to  Uldor the  Accursed the  signal did
  not come. In the Narn Fingon  with his  far sight  had actually  seen that
  Maedros had set out, and it is also told that great force  was on  its way
  from Angband to meet him; but it is not said that the beacon was fired.
    Other features of the story  as told  in The  Silmarillion that  are not
  found in GA  are derived  from the  Narn. In  the latter  there is  a more
  detailed  account  of  the confrontation  between the  two hosts,  and the
  riders  of Morgoth  come to  the walls  of the  fortress at  Eithel Sirion
  (here  called  Barad  Eithel  ):  thus  whereas  in  GA  Gwindor  saw  the
  slaughter of his brother Gelmir  'across the  water', in  the Narn  he was
  'at that point in the outposts'. The account of the western battle is very
  close indeed to that in GA,  but the  death of  Fingon is  differently and
  more  fully  told  (see  The  Silmarillion  p.  193):  with the  coming of
  Gothmog  'high-captain  of  Angband'  Fingon  was   cut  off   from  Hurin
  and  Turgon,  who  were  driven towards  the Fen  of Serech.  The speeches

  of  Turgon,  Hurin, and  Huor were  scarcely changed  from their  form in
  GA ($$234 - 5), but the needed change in Huor's words  to 'I  shall never
  look  on  thy  white  walls  again'  was  made  (see  the  commentary  on
  $$234-5). Lastly, in the Narn it is said that Hurin 'seized the axe of an
  Orc-captain  and  wielded  it  two-handed',  and  again  Gothmog  appears
  (see The Silmarillion p. 195).                                           
    In the account of  the Mound  of the  Slain the  Narn version  names it
  Haudh-en-Ndengin, subsequently changed to Haudh-en-Nirnaeth.             
    The  Narn  text  concludes  with  a   remarkable  elaboration   of  the
  confrontation  of  Hurin  and  Morgoth  on  the  basis  of  GA $$244  - 8
  (itself an elaboration of QS $$21-3); this was the only part of  the text
  included in Unfinished Tales (pp.  66 -  8). As  the speeches  were typed
  they  were  set  entirely  in  the second  person singular,  'thou wert',
  'knowest  thou',  etc.;  but  my  father went  through it  changing every
  'thou'  and  'thee'  to  'you',  and  the  equivalent  verb-forms  -  and
  changing  'Knowest  thou'  to  'Do  you  know'  rather  than  'Know  you'
  (also 'puissant'  to 'mighty').  In this  form, of  course, the  text was
  printed in Unfinished Tales.                                             
                                                                          
                                   NOTE 3.                                 
                                                                          
                      A further  account of  the coming                    
                      of  Hurin  and  Huor  to Gondolin.                   
                                                                          
  As in the case of the story of the Battle  of Unnumbered  Tears described
  in Note 2 above, there is also a  version of  that of  Hurin and  Huor in
 , Gondolin found as a component  of the  Narn. This  is even  more closely
 based on the story in  the Grey  Annals $$161  - 6:  while there  are many
 small  variations  in  the  precise  wording,  virtually  none are  of any
 moment in respect  of the  narrative, until  the end  is reached,  where a
 significant  difference  appears. This  story was  excluded from  the Narn
 in Unfinished Tales, but its existence noted: p. 146;  note 1.  Before the
 end  the  only  point  worth  mentioning  is  that  Maeglin's   words  (GA
 $165) are here much fiercer: 'The king's grace to you  is greater  than ye
 know;  and  some  might  wonder  wherefore  the strict  law is  abated for
 two knave-children of Men. It would  be safer  if they  had no  choice but
 to abide here as our servants to their life's end.'                       
    According  to  the  story  in  GA,  Hurin  and  Huor  told   when  they
 returned  to  Dor-lomin  that 'they  had dwelt  a while  in honour  in the
 halls  of  King  Turgon',  even  though  they  would  say   nothing  else.
 Against  this  my  father  noted  on  the  GA  typescript (p.  127, $166):
 'They  did  not  reveal  Turgon's  name';  and  in  the Narn  version they
 refused altogether to declare even to  their father  where they  had been.
 This  version was  adopted in  the published  Silmarillion (p.  159), with
 only a change at the end. Here the Narn text has:                         

 
                                                                     
  Then  Galion  [>  Galdor]  questioned  them  no  more;  but   he  and
  many others guessed at the truth. For  both the  oath of  silence and
  the Eagles pointed to Turgon, men thought.                          
                                                                     
 The conclusion of the passage in The Silmarillion  ('and in  time the
 strange fortune of Hurin and Huor reached the ears of the servants of
 Morgoth') was taken from the GA version.                             
  On these two (otherwise so closely similar) texts  of the  story see
 further p. 314.                                                      
