   PART TWO.        
                   
   THE LATER        
 QUENTA SILMARILLION.

                      THE LATER QUENTA SILMARILLION.                     
                                                                        
 In Part Two I shall trace  the development  of the  Quenta Silmarillion,
 in the years following the  completion of  The Lord  of the  Rings, from
 the point reached in Vol.X,  p. 199;  but the  history now  becomes (for
 the  most  part)  decidedly  simpler:  much  of  the development  can be
 conveyed by recording individually all the  significant changes  made to
 QS, and there is no need to divide it into two 'phases', as was  done in
 Vol.X. The basic textual  series is  QS (so  far as  it went  before its
 abandonment);  the  early  amanuensis  typescript  'LQ  1' of  1951, for
 which  see  X.141-3;  and  the  late  amanuensis  typescript  'LQ  2' of
 about 1958, for which see X.141-2, 300.                                 
   In this latter part of the history  the chapter-numbers  become rather
 confusing, but I think that  it would  be more  confusing to  have none,
 and therefore I continue  the numbering  used in  Vol.X, where  the last
 chapter treated, Of  the Sun  and Moon  and the  Hiding of  Valinor, was
 given the number 8.                                                     
                                                                        
                                9. OF MEN.                                
                                                                        
 This chapter was numbered 7 in the QS manuscript (for the text see
 V.245-7, $$81-7). The difference is simply due to the fact that the
 three 'sub-chapters' in QS numbered in Vol.V 3(a), 3(b), and 3(c) were
 in Vol.X called 3, 4, and 5 (see X.299). Few changes were made to the
 QS manuscript in later revision, and those that were made were
 incorporated in LQ 1. That typescript received no alterations, and is of
 textual value in only a few respects; the typist of LQ 2 did not use it,
 but worked directly from the old manuscript.
 $81. 'The Valar sat now behind the mountains and feasted' > 'Thus
   the Valar sat now behind their mountains in peace'.
 $82. The placing of Hildorien 'in the uttermost East of Middle-earth
   that lies beside the eastern sea' was changed to: 'in the midmost
   parts of Middle-earth beyond the Great River and the Inner Sea, in
   regions which neither the Eldar nor the Avari have known'.
     Many phrases have been used of the site of Hildorien. In the
   'Annals' tradition it was 'in the East of the world' (IV.269, V.118,
   125), but this was changed on the manuscript of AV 2 to 'in the
   midmost regions of the world' (V.120, note 13). In the Quenta it
   was 'in the East of East' (IV.99), and in QS, as cited above, 'in the
   uttermost East of Middle-earth': in my commentary on QS (V.248) I
   suggested that this last was not in contradiction with the changed

                             
                                                                          
    reading of AV 2: 'Hildorien was  in the  furthest east  of Middle-earth,
    but  it  was  in the  middle regions  of the  world; see  Ambarkanta map
    IV, on which Hildorien is marked (IV.249).'                            
       In  the  texts  of the  post-Lord of  the Rings  period there  is the
    statement  in  the  Grey Annals  (GA) $57  that it  was 'in  the midmost
    regions of the world',  as in  the emended  reading of  AV 2;  and there
    is  the  new phrase  in the  revision of  QS, 'in  the midmost  parts of
    Middle-earth  beyond  the  Great  River  and the  Inner Sea'  (with loss
    of the mention in the  original text  of 'the  eastern sea').  This last
    shows  unambiguously  that  a  change had  taken place,  but it  is very
    hard  to  say  what it  was. It  cannot be  made to  agree with  the old
    Ambarkanta  maps:  one  might  indeed  doubt  that  those  maps  carried
    much  validity  for  the  eastern  regions  by  this  time,  and  wonder
    whether by 'the Inner Sea' my father  was referring  to 'the  Inland Sea
    of  Rhun'  (see  The  Treason of  Isengard pp.  307, 333)  - but  on the
    other  hand, in  the Annals  of Aman  (X.72, 82)  from this  same period
    the Great Journey  of the  Elves from  Kuivienen ('a  bay in  the Inland
    Sea  of  Helkar')  is  described  in  terms  that  suggest that  the old
    conception was still fully present. Can  the Sea  of Rhun  be identified
    with  the  Sea  of  Helkar,  vastly  shrunken?  -  Nor  is  it  easy  to
    understand  how  Hildorien  'in  the  midmost  parts   of  Middle-earth'
    could  be  'in  regions  which  neither  the  Eldar  nor the  Avari have
    known'.                                                                
       In LQ 2 most of the  revised passage  is absent,  and the  text reads
    simply:  'in  the  land  of Hildorien  in the  midmost parts  of Middle-
    earth;  for  measured  time  had  come  upon  Earth  ...'  If   this  is
    significant, it must depend  on a  verbal direction  from my  father. On
    the  other  hand,  the  revision was  written on  the manuscript  in two
    parts:  'in  the  midmost  parts'  in  the margin  and the  remainder on
    another part of the page, where it would be possible to  miss it;  and I
    think this much the likeliest explanation.                             
  $83.  The  opening  of  the  footnote  (V.245)  was  changed   from  'The
    Eldar  called  them  Hildi  to Atani  they were  called in  Valinor, but
    the Eldar called  them also  Hildi'; and  'the birth  of the  Hildi' was
    changed  to  the  arising  of  the  Hildi  .  For Atani  see GA  $57 and
    commentary.  As  frequently  before,  the  typist  of  LQ  1  placed the
    footnote in the body of the text, where my father left it to  stand; but
    it  reappears  as  a  footnote to  LQ 2  - a  first indication  that the
    typescript was taken from the QS manuscript.                           
       After 'those fathers of Men'  (in which  the f  should not  have been
    capitalised)  was  added  'the  Atanatardi'. Here  LQ 1  has Atanatarni,
    which  was  not  corrected;  while  LQ  2  - based  not on  LQ 1  but on
    the  manuscript  -  has Atanatardi.  But the  form Atanatarni  occurs in
    the Narn  text given  in Note  2 to  Part One:  there Fingon  before the
    beginning  of  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered Tears  cries Aiya  Eldalie ar
    Atanatarni (p. 166).  In GA  $87, in  a different  passage, the  form is

 Atanatari  (which  was  adopted  in  The  Silmarillion); cf.  also Atana-
 tarion, X.373.                                                           
$85.  The  sentence   'Only  in   the  realm   of  Doriath,   whose  queen
 Melian  was  of  divine race,  did the  Ilkorins come  near to  match the
 Elves  of  Kor'  was  changed  to:  'whose  queen   Melian  was   of  the
 kindred of the [gods >] Valar,  did the  [Ekelli >]  Sindar come  near to
 match  the  [Elves  of  Tuna  >]  Kalaquendi  of  the Blessed  Realm.' On
 the  term  Ekelli  'the  Forsaken'  and  its  replacement  by  Sindar see
 X.169-70.                                                               
    Eruman > Araman (cf. X.123, 194).                                     
    'the ancient wisdom of their race' > '... of their folk'.             
$86. 'What befell their spirits after death' > 'What may befall...'       
    'beside  the  Western  Sea'  >  'beside  the  Outer  Sea'  (see V.248,
 $86).                                                                    
$87. 'vanished from the earth' > 'vanished from the Middle-earth'.        
                                                                         
 To  one or  other copies  of the  LQ 2  typescript my  father made  a few
 changes.  The  chapter,  typed  without  a   number,  was   now  numbered
 'XI'. 'Gnomes' was changed  to 'Noldor'  at each  occurrence, and  in the
 first sentence of  $85 'Dark-elves'  to 'Sindar'.  Against $82  he wrote:
 'This  depends  upon  an  old  version in  which the  Sun was  first made
 after the death of the Trees (described  in a  chapter omitted).'  I have
 already  noticed  this  in  X.299-300,  and  explained  why  he  numbered
 the present chapter 'XI'. He also bracketed in  pencil three  passages in
 the account of the mortality of the Elves in $85: 'Yet their  bodies were
 of the stuff of earth...  consumeth them  from within  in the  courses of
 time'; 'days or years, even a thousand'; 'and their deserts'.            
                                                                         
                       10. OF THE SIEGE OF ANGBAND.                        
                                                                         
 This  chapter  was  numbered  8  in  the  QS  manuscript,  and  the  text
 is  given  in  V.248-55,  $$88-104.  As  in  the  preceding  chapter, all
 post-Lord of the Rings  revision was  carried out  on the  QS manuscript:
 that is to say, no further revisions were  made to  the typescript  LQ 1;
 and  here  again  the  late  typescript  LQ  2   was  derived   from  the
 manuscript, not from LQ  1. In  this chapter,  on the  other hand,  by no
 means all the revisions made to  the manuscript  are found  in LQ  1; and
 in the account that follows I notice all such cases. I do not  notice the
 changes   Eruman   >   Araman;   Tun   >    Tuna;   Gnomes    >   Noldor;
 Thorndor > Thorondor; Bladorion > Ard-galen (see p. 113, $44).           
                                                                         
$88.  The  opening  passage  of  the  chapter  in  QS  was rewritten  on a
 slip attached to the manuscript - this slip being the reverse of a letter
 to  my  father  dated  14  November  1951:  but  it was  not incorporated
 into LQ 1.  The introduction  of this  rider led  the typist  of LQ  2 to

 ignore the  fact that  a new  chapter begins  at this  point, and  to type
 Of  the  Siege of  Angband as  all of  a piece  with Of  Men; subsequently
 my  father  inserted  a  new  heading  Of  the Siege  of Angband  with the
 number 'XII' (on which see p. 175). The new opening reads:                
                                                                          
   As was  before told  Feanor and  his sons  came first  of the  Exiles to
   Middle-earth,  and  they  landed  in  the  waste  of  Lammoth  upon  the
   outer  shores  of  the  Firth  of  Drengist.  Now  that  region  was  so
   named,  for  it  lay  between  the  Sea  and  the  walls of  the echoing
   mountains  of  the  Eryd  Lomin.  And  even  as  the  Noldor   set  foot
   upon  the  strand  their  cries  were  taken  up  into  the   hills  and
   multiplied,  so  that  a  great  clamour as  of countless  mighty voices
   filled all the coasts of the North; and it is said that the noise of the
   burning  of  the  ships  at Losgar  went down  the winds  of the  Sea as
   a  tumult  of  great  wrath,  and  far  away all  that heard  that sound
   were filled with wonder.                                                
    Under  the  cold  stars  before  the  rising  of  the  Moon  Feanor and
   his  folk  marched  eastward,  and  they  passed  the  Eryd  Lomin,  and
   came  into  the  great  land  of  Hithlum, and  crossing the  country of
   Dor-lomin  they  came  at  length  to  the  long  lake  of  Mithrim, and
   upon  its  north-shore  they  made  their  first  camp  in  that  region
   which was called by the like name.                                      
    There  a  host  of  the  Orcs,  aroused  by  the  tumult   of  Lammoth,
   and  the  light  of  the  burning  at  Losgar,  came  down   upon  them;
   and  beside  the  waters  of Mithrim  was fought  the first  battle upon
   Middle-earth...                                                         
                                                                          
 This  is  the  story  of Lammoth  told (at  about this  same time)  in the
 later Tale of Tuor (Unfinished Tales p. 23):                             
   Tuor   was   now   come   to   the   Echoing   Mountains    of   Lammoth
 about   the  Firth   of  Drengist.   There  once   long  ago   Feanor  had
 landed  from  the  sea,  and  the  voices of  his host  were swelled  to a
 mighty  clamour  upon  the  coasts  of  the  North ere  the rising  of the
 Moon.                                                                     
 On  the  much  later  and  apparently  distinct  story  that  Lammoth  was
 so  called  because  the  echoes  of  Morgoth's   cry  were   awakened  by
 'any  who  cried  aloud  in  that  land'  see  X.296, $17  and commentary,
 and  Unfinished  Tales  p.  52.  Both  'traditions'  were  incorporated in
 the published Silmarillion, pp. 80-1, 106.                                
   At  the  end  of  this  paragraph  my  father  pencilled  on  the  manu-
 script:  'He  [Feanor]  gives  the  green  stone  to  Maidros',  but  then
 noted that this was not in fact to be inserted; see under $97 below.      
$90.  'and  they  were  unwilling  to  depart,  whatever  he  might  do'  >
 '... whatever he might do,  being held  by their  oath.' This  addition is
 not present in LQ 1; while the typist of LQ  2, unable  to read  the first
 word,  put  'They  held by  their oath',  and this  was allowed  to stand.
 Cf. GA $50.                                                               

  $91.  'the Sun rose flaming in the West'  > 'the  Sun rose  flaming above
    the shadows' (not in LQ 1).                                            
      'and good was made of evil, as happens still' removed.               
  $93.  'the bright airs of those earliest of mornings' > 'the bright airs in
    the first mornings of the world.'                                      
  $94.  A  subheading  was  pencilled in  the margin  at the  beginning of
    this  paragraph:  Of  Fingon  and  Maedros  (apparently  first  written
    Maidros:  see  p.  115, $61).  Not found  in LQ  1, this  was incorpor-
    ated in LQ 2.                                                          
      In  the  second  sentence  'most  renowned'  >  'most  honoured' (not
    in LQ 1).                                                              
      To the  words 'for  the thought  of his  torment troubled  his heart'
    was added (not in LQ 1): 'and long before, in the bliss of Valinor, ere
    Melkor  was  unchained,  or  lies  came  between  them,  he   had  been
    close  in  friendship  with  Maedros.'  Cf.   GA  $61   and  commentary
    (p. 115).                                                              
  $95.  'for the banished Gnomes!' > 'for the Noldor in their need!'       
  $97.  A  new  page  in  the  QS  manuscript  begins  with  the  opening of
    this paragraph, and at the top of  the page  my father  pencilled: 'The
    Green Stone  of Feanor  given by  Maidros to  Fingon.' This  can hardly
    be  other  than a  reference to  the Elessar  that came  in the  end to
    Aragorn;  cf.  the  note given  under $88  above referring  to Feanor's
    gift at his death of the Green Stone to Maidros. It is clear,  I think,
    that my father was at this time pondering the  previous history  of the
    Elessar, which had  emerged in  The Lord  of the  Rings; for  his later
    ideas on its origin see Unfinished Tales pp. 248-52.                   
  $98.  '(Therefore  the  house  of  Feanor  were called  the Dispossessed,)
    because  of  the  doom  of  the  Gods  which  gave  the kingdom  of Tun
    [later > Tuna) to Fingolfin, and because of the loss of  the Silmarils'
    was  changed  (but the  change is  not present  in LQ  1) to:  '... (as
    Mandos foretold) because the  overlordship passed  from it,  the elder,
    to  the  house  of  Fingolfin,  both  in Elende  and in  Beleriand, and
    because also of the loss of the Silmarils.'                            
      With  the  words  'as  Mandos  foretold'  cf.  AAm $153  (X.117); and
    on  the  content  of  the  paragraph  see  p.  115,  commentary  on  GA
    $$65-71.                                                               
  $99.  At the end of the paragraph, after 'he  [Thingol] trusted  not that
    the  restraint of  Morgoth would  last for  ever', was  added: 'neither
    would he ever wholly  forget the  deeds at  Alqualonde, because  of his
    ancient  kinship  with  [Elwe  >]  Olwe  lord  of  the Teleri.'  On the
    change of Elwe to Olwe see X.169-70.                                   
  $100.  'in unexplored country' > 'in untrodden lands'.                     
  $101.  This  passage  on  the  finding  of  Nargothrond  and  Gondolin was
    expanded  in  three  stages. The  first alteration  to QS  replaced the
    sentence 'But Turgon went alone into hidden places' thus:              

                               
                                                                    
 Yet  Galadriel  his  sister  went  never  to  Nargothrond,   for  she
 remained  long  in  Doriath  and  received  the  love of  Melian, and
 abode  with  her and  there learned  great lore  and wisdom.  But the
 heart  of  Turgon  remembered rather  the white  city of  Tirion upon
 its hill, and its tower and tree, and he journeyed alone  into hidden
 places...                                                           
                                                                    
 Subsequently  the   whole  of   QS  $101   was  struck   through  and
 replaced by the following rider on a separate  sheet. This  was taken
 up into the first typescript LQ 1, but in  a somewhat  different form
 from the rider to the manuscript, which was followed in  LQ 2  and is
 given here.                                                         
 And it came to  pass that  Inglor and  Galadriel were  on a  time the
 guests  of  Thingol  and  Melian;  for  there was  friendship between
 the  lord  of  Doriath and  the House  of Finrod  that were  his kin,
 and  the  princes  of  that  house  alone were  suffered to  pass the
 girdle  of  Melian.  Then  Inglor  was  filled  with  wonder  at  the
 strength  and  majesty   of  Menegroth,   with  its   treasuries  and
 armouries  and its  many-pillared halls  of stone;  and it  came into
 his heart that  he would  build wide  halls behind  everguarded gates
 in some deep and secret place beneath  the hills.  And he  opened his
 heart  to  Thingol,  and when  he departed  Thingol gave  him guides,
 and  they  led  him  westward over  Sirion. Thus  it was  that Inglor
 found the deep gorge of the River Narog, and the  caves in  its steep
 further  shore;  and  he  delved  there  a  stronghold  and armouries
 after  the  fashion  of  the  mansions  of  Menegroth. And  he called
 that  place  Nargothrond,  and  made  there  his  home  with  many of
 his folk; and the Gnomes of the North, at first  in jest,  called him
 on this  account Felagund,  or 'lord  of caverns',  and that  name he
 bore thereafter until his end. Yet Galadriel  his sister  dwelt never
 in  Nargothrond, but  remained in  Doriath and  received the  love of
 Melian,  and  abode  with  her,  and  there  learned  great  lore and
 wisdom concerning Middle-earth.                                     
                                                                    
 The  statement  that  'Galadriel  dwelt never  in Nargothrond'  is at
 variance with what is said in GA $108 (p. 44), that in the  year 102,
 when  Nargothrond  was  completed,   'Galadriel  came   from  Doriath
 and dwelt there a while'. - To this point the two forms of  the rider
 differ only in a few details of wording, but  here they  diverge. The
 second form, in LQ 2, continues:                                    
                                                                    
  Now   Turgon   remembered  rather   the  City   set  upon   a  Hill,
  Tirion  the fair  with its  Tower and  Tree, and  he found  not what
  he  sought,  and  returned  to   Nivrost,  and   sat  at   peace  in
  Vinyamar  by  the  shore.  There  after  three  years  Ulmo  himself
  appeared  to him,  and bade  him go  forth again  alone to  the Vale
  of  Sirion;  and  Turgon  went  forth  and by  the guidance  of Ulmo

  he   discovered   the   hidden   vale   of   Tumladen  in   the  encircling
  mountains,  in  the  midst  of  which  there  was  a  hill  of   stone.  Of
  this  he  spoke  to  none  as  yet,  but  returned  to  Nivrost,  and there
  began  in  his  secret  counsels  to  devise  the  plan  of  a   fair  city
  [struck   out:   a   memorial   of   Tirion   upon   Tuna  for   which  his
  heart   still  yearned   in  exile,   and  though   he  pondered   much  in
  thought he]                                                               
   For this  concluding passage  LQ 1  returns to  the first  rewriting given
  at  the  beginning  of  this  discussion  of  QS  $101,  'But the  heart of
  Turgon  remembered  rather  the  white city  of Tirion  upon its  hill ...'
  The  explanation of  the differences  in the  two versions  must be  that a
  first  form  of  the  rider  (which  has  not survived)  was taken  up into
  LQ  1,  and  that  subsequently  a  second  version  was inserted  into the
  QS manuscript in its place, and so used in LQ 2.                          
      This  replacement  text  for  QS   $101  is   closely  related   to  GA
  $$75-6 (p. 35); and since on its reverse side is a rejected draft  for the
  replacement  annal  for  the  year  116  in  GA  ($$111-13,  pp.  44  - 5),
  also   concerned  with   Gondolin,  it   is  clear   that  my   father  was
  working  on  the  story  of  the  origins   of  Nargothrond   and  Gondolin
  in  both the  Silmarillion and  the Annals  at the  same time.  See further
  pp. 198 ff.                                                               
$102.  At  the  beginning  of   this  paragraph   a  sub-heading   Of  Dagor
  Aglareb  was  pencilled  on  the  manuscript,  but  this  was not  taken up
  in either typescript.                                                     
      'the    Blue    Mountains'   >    'Eredluin,   the    blue   mountains'
  the  second  great  battle  >  the  third  great battle:  see p.  116, $77.
                                                                           
                                       *                                    

 A few corrections were made to one or the other, or to both, of the
 copies of LQ 2. In addition to those listed below, Inglor was changed
 to Finrod, and Finrod to Finarphin or Finarfin, throughout.
 $92.  Tuna > Tirion
 $98.  '(the feud) was healed' > 'was assuaged'
 $99.  'Dark-elves of Telerian race' > 'Dark-elves, the Sindar of
   Telerian race'.
 $100.  At the beginning of this paragraph my father inserted a new
   chapter number and title: XIII The Founding of Nargothrond and
   Gondolin; and the next chapter, Of Beleriand and its Realms, was
   given in LQ 2 the number XIV.
    Nivrost > Nevrast (and subsequently); the first appearance of the
   later form of the name (its appearance in the later Tale of Tuor was
   by editorial change).
 $101 Against the name Felagund my father wrote this note: 'This
   was in fact a Dwarfish name; for Nargothrond was first made by
   Dwarves as is later recounted.' An important constituent text

 among  the  Narn  papers  is  a 'plot-outline'  that begins  with Turin's
 flight  from  Doriath  and  moves  towards  pure  narrative  in   a  long
 account   of   Turin's   relations   with   Finduilas   and   Gwindor  in
 Nargothrond  (which  with  some  editorial   development  was   given  in
 Unfinished  Tales,  pp. 155-9).  In this  text the  following is  said of
 Mim the Petty-dwarf:                                                     
    Mim  gets  a  certain  curious  liking  for  Turin, increased  when he
 learns  that  Turin  has  had  trouble  with Elves,  whom he  detests. He
 says  Elves  have  caused  the  end  of  his  race,  and taken  all their
 mansions, especially Nargothrond (Nulukhizidun).                        
   Above   this  Dwarvish   name  my   father  wrote   Nulukkhizdin  (this
 name was used, misspelt, in The Silmarillion, p. 230).                   
$104.  Glomund  >  Glaurung.  At   the  head   of  the   page  in   QS  my
 father  wrote  'Glaurung  for  Glomund',  but   the  LQ   typescript,  as
 typed,  has   Glomund  -   whereas  Glaurung   appears  already   in  the
 Grey Annals as written.                                                  
                                                                         
                      11. OF BELERIAND AND ITS REALMS.                     
                                                                         
 In Volume V (p. 407)  I wrote  as follows  about the  second Silmarillion
 map:                                                                     
   The  second  map  of  Middle-earth west  of the  Blue Mountains  in the
 Elder  Days  was  also  the  last.  My  father  never  made  another; and
 over  many  years  this  one  became  covered  all over  with alterations
 and additions of names  and features,  not a  few of  them so  hastily or
 faintly pencilled as to be more or less obscure....                      
    The  original  element  in the  map can  however be  readily perceived
 from  the  fine  and  careful  pen  (all  subsequent  change  was roughly
 done); and I give here  on four  successive pages  a reproduction  of the
 map as it was originally drawn and lettered....                          
    The  map  is  on  four  sheets,  originally  pasted  together  but now
 separate,  in which  the map-squares  do not  entirely coincide  with the
 sheets.  In  my  reproductions I  have followed  the squares  rather than
 the  original  sheets.  I  have numbered  the squares  horizontally right
 across the map from 1 to 15, and lettered them vertically from A to M, so
 that each square has  a different  combination of  letter and  figure for
 subsequent reference.  I hope  later to  give an  account of  all changes
 made to the map afterwards, using these redrawings as a basis.           
                                                                         
 This I will now do, before  turning to  the changes  made to  the chapter
 Of  Beleriand  and  its  Realms.  On the  following pages  are reproduced
 the  same  four  redrawings  as  were  given  in  V.408-11, but  with the
 subsequent  alterations  and  additions introduced  (those cases  where I
 cannot interpret at all  faint pencillings  are simply  ignored). Correc-
 tions  to  names  (as  Nan  Tathrin  >  Nan  Tathren,  Nan  Dungorthin  >
 Nan  Dungortheb,  Rathlorion  >  Rathloriel)  are  replaced,   not  shown
         
                                                                       
 as corrections. It is to be remembered that, as I have said,  all later
 changes were  roughly done,  some of  them mere  scribbled indications,
 and  also  that  they  were made  at many  different times,  in pencil,
 coloured  pencil,  blue, black  and red  ink, and  red, green  and blue
 ball-point  pen;  so  that  the appearance  of the  actual map  is very
 different from these redrawings.  I have  however retained  the placing
 of the new lettering in almost all cases as accurately as possible.
                                                                       
   There follows here a list, square  by square,  of features  and names
 where some explanation or reference seems desirable; but this is  by no
 means an exhaustive inventory of all  later alterations  and additions,
 many of which require no comment.                                      
                                                                       
                    1. North-western section (p. 182).                    
                                                                       
  (1) A 4 - 5. The mountain-chain is a mere zigzag line pencilled in a
        single movement, as also are the mountains on A 7 (extending
        east to the peaks encircling Thangorodrim on section 2, A 8).
  (2) B 4 to C 4. The name Dor-Lomen was almost illegibly scribbled      
        in; it seems to imply an extension of Dor-Lomen northwards.     
  (3) B 7 to C 7. The name beginning Fen is continued on Section 2,      
        B 8 of Rivil, changed to of Serech (see p. 113, commentary on
        GA $44). An arrow, not inserted on the redrawing, points to     
        three dots above the inflowing of Rivil as marking the Fen.     
  (4) c 1. I can cast no light on the name Ened of the island in the     
        ocean.                                                          
  (5) C 3. It seems probable that the name Falasquil referred to the     
        small round bay, blacked in, on the southern shore of the       
        great bay leading into the Firth of Drengist. On the remark-
        able reappearance of this ancient name see p. 344.              
  (6) C 4. The clearly-marked gap in the stream flowing into the         
        Firth of Drengist represents its passage underground; with      
        the name Annon Gelyd cf. Annon-in-Gelydh (the Gate of the       
        Noldor) in the later Tale of Tuor, Unfinished Tales p. 18. The
        ravine of Cirith Ninniach is described in the same work (ibid.
        p. 23). The upper course of the stream is very faintly pencilled
        and uncertain, but it seems clear that it rises in the Mountains
        of Mithrim (ibid. p. 20).                                       
  (7) C 6. For the peak shaded in and marked Amon Darthir, with         
        Morwen beside it, see Unfinished Tales, where it is told (p. 68)
        that the stream Nen Lalaith 'came down from a spring under      
        the shadow of Amon Darthir', and (p; 58) that it 'came          
        singing out of the hills past the walls of [Hurin's] house'.
  (8) C 6 to D 7. For the river Lithir see p. 261.                       
  (9) c 7. For the stream (Rivil) that flows into Sirion see Section 2,
        C 8.                                                            
 (10) D 2-4. Both Nevrast and the Marshes of Nevrast were first        

        written Nivrost (see p. 179, $100). On Lake Linaewen and          
        the marshes see p. 192 and Unfinished Tales p. 25.               
                                                                         
  (11) D 6. For  the river  Glithui see  Unfinished Tales  p. 38  and note
        16, and p. 68. In the first of these passages  (the later  Tale of
        Tuor)  the  name  is  Glithui  as on  the map,  but in  the second
        (the  Narn)  it  is  equally  clearly  Gilthui.  For  Malduin  see
        Unfinished Tales p. 38 and The Silmarillion p. 205.               
  (12) D 7.  The  line  of  dots  extending east  from the  Brithiach was
        struck  out  as  shown;  see  Section  2,  $38.  For  the  ford of
        Brithiach see p. 228, $28.                                        
  (13) D 7.  Dim is  the first  part of  the name  Dimbard: see  Section 2,
        D 8.                                                              
  (14) E 4 to F 4.  anciently Eglador:  Eglador was  the original  name of
        Doriath, 'land  of the  Elves' (see  the Etymologies,  V.356, stem
        ELED), and is so  entered on  the map  (Section 2,  F 9).  For its
        later  sense,  'land  of  the  Eglain,  the  Forsaken  People, the
        Sindar' see p.  189, $57;  and here  Eglador is  used with  a much
        wider  reference:  the  western  parts   of  Beleriand   (see  pp.
        379-80). This is perhaps  to be  related to  the statement  in The
        Tale  of  Years  (pp.  343-4),  'The foremost  of the  Eldar reach
        the  coastlands  of  Middle-earth  and  that  country   which  was
        after   named   Eglador'  -   to  which   however  is   added  the
        puzzling phrase 'Thereof Beleriand was the larger part'.          
  (15) E 4 to D 5.  Woods  of Nuath:  see  the later  Tale of  Tuor in
        Unfinished Tales, p. 36 and note 14.                              
  (16) E 5.  The  name  Tumhalad  appears  to  be  written  twice,  above
        and  below  the  two short  parallel lines  shown. See  pp. 139-40,
        commentary on GA $275.                                            
  (17) E 5-6.  Talath  Dirnen  was first  written Dalath  Dirnen; see
        p. 228, $28.                                                      
  (18) E 6 to F 6. South of the Crossings of Taiglin it is difficult to be
        sure,  among  various  incomplete  dotted  lines,  what   was  the
        course  of  the  road   to  Nargothrond,   but  my   father  seems
        subsequently  to  have  entered  it  as a  straight line  of short
        dashes as shown.                                                  
  (19) E 6-7.  From  Ephel   Brandir  various   lines,  which   I  cannot
        certainly  interpret  and  have not  marked on  the map,  run west
        towards  the  Crossings of  Taiglin. Possibly  one line  marks the
        road  to  the  Crossings  and  another the  course of  Celebros. -
        Tavrobel  on the  map as  originally lettered  was struck  out and
        replaced by Bar Haleth (also struck out), but  no precise  site is
        indicated.  For  Bar  Haleth   see  p.   157,  commentary   on  GA
        $324.                                                             
  (20) E 7. Folk  of Haleth  clearly belongs  to the  first making  of the
        map and should have been entered on the redrawing (V.408).        
  (21) F 2. The name Forfalas ('North Falas') seems not to occur

        elsewhere; similarly with Harfalas ('South Falas'), Section 3,
        H 4.                                                            
                                                                       
  (22) F 4. The original name R.Eglor  was struck  out and  replaced by
        Eglahir. Later  the name  Nenning was  written in,  but Eglahir
        was not struck out. See p. 117, commentary on GA $85.           
  (23) F 5. For the dotted line on this square see $59 below.           
  (24) F 6. The word 'or' refers to the name Methiriad, Section 3, G 6.
  (25) F 6. For the change of date from 195 to 495 see V.139, 407.      
  (26) F 6-7. Moors of  the Neweglu:  among the  Narn papers  there are
        many texts concerned with the story  of Mim,  and in  these are
        found an extraordinary  array of  names for  the Petty-dwarves:
        Neweg,    Neweglin;   Niwennog;    Naug-neben,   Neben-naug;
        Nebinnog,    Nibennog,   Nibinnogrim,    Nibin-noeg;   Nognith.
        The  name  on  the  map, Neweglu,  does not  occur in  the Narn
        papers.                                                         
  (27) F 7. The name of an isolated  hill Carabel  stands at  the point
        where  Amon  Rudh  (the  abode  of  Mim)  is  shown  on  my map
        accompanying  The  Silmarillion.  The  name  of  the  hill  was
        changed  many  times:  Amon  Garabel  >  Carabel;   Amon  Carab
        (translated 'Hill  of the  Hat'); Amon  Nardol and  Nardol (cf.
        the  beacon-hill  Nardol  in  Anorien);  Amon  Rhug  'the  Bald
        Hill'; and Amon Rudh of the same meaning.                       
  (28) F 7. For Nivrim see QS $110 (V.261).                             
                                                                       
                     2. North-eastern section (p. 183).                                
  (29) B 8. (Fen) of Serech: see Section 1, $3.                         
  (30) B 12 to A 13. read  (71)  Dor-na-Daerachas:  the  number 71
        oddly but certainly refers to  the year  1971; the  addition is
        very late, since it  does not  appear on  the photocopy  of the
        map  used by  my father  c.1970 (see  p. 330  and note  1, also
        p. 191, after $74).                                             
  (31) B 12-13. Lothland: see  p. 128,  commentary on  GA $$173  - 4.
  (32) C 9. The  mountain named  Foen: in  a philological  fragment of
        uncertain date it is  stated that  Dorthonion 'was  called also
        Taur-na-Foen, the Forest  of the  Foen, for  that was  the name
        (which  signifies  "Long Sight")  of the  high mountain  in the
        midst of that region.'                                          
  (33) C 9-10. Drun: cf. the later form of the Lay of Leithian, III.344,
        line 520:  'ambush in  Ladros, fire  in Drun'  (see commentary,
        III. 350).                                                      
  (34) C 10-11. For mentions of Ladros see p. 224 and $33  above; also
        Unfinished  Tales  p.  70,  where  Turin  is  named   'heir  of
        Dor-lomin and Ladros'.
  (35) C 11. On the left side of the square  my father  wrote Orodreth,
        subsequently  striking  it  out.  This  placing  of  Orodreth's

        territory goes back to the old story that of  the sons  of Finrod
        (Finarfin)  on  Dorthonion  'easternmost  dwelt  Orodreth,  nigh-
        est to his friends the sons of Feanor' (AB 1, IV.330).          
                                                                       
  (36) C 12. Maedros  was corrected  from Maidros,  so also  on D  12; in
        the  original  Marches  of  Maidros  the  name  was  corrected to
        Maedros.                                                        
  (37) D 8. bard is the second element of Dimbard (see  Section 1,  D 7).
        The  name is  certainly written  thus, with  final -d,  but else-
        where the form is always Dimbar.                                
  (38) D 8-9, E 9-10. The line of  dots marked  List Melian  was struck
        out  for  some  distance  east  of the  Brithiach, as  shown (see
        Section  1,  D  7),  and  its  discontinuous   extension  between
        Esgalduin and  Aros was  put in  later and  more roughly.  On the
        significance of these dotted lines see p. 333,  and for  the name
        List Melian (the Girdle of Melian) see pp. 223, 228.            
  (39) D 9. Eryd  Orgorath  seems  to  be  written  so,  and  above  it
        apparently  Gorgorath,  but  the  forms  are  very  hard  to make
                                                                       
        OUT.                                                            
                                                                       
  (40) D 9. Goroth[ ]ess: the illegible letter in this  otherwise totally
        unknown name (which was struck through) might be r.             
  (41) D 9. For the  bridge of  Esgalduin marked  on the  published map
        (and  named Iant  Iaur) in  the position  equivalent to  the S.E.
        corner of D 9 see pp. 332 - 3.                                  
  (42) D 10. For Dor Dinen see pp. 194, 333.                            
  (43) D 10. The  Ford  over  Aros  can  be  shown  to  be a  very late
        addition to the map: see p. 338, note 6.                        
  (44) D 11. Pass  of  Aglon(d:  for  the  forms  Aglon and  Aglond see
        p. 338, note 3.                                                 
  (45) D 14. Mt.  Rerir: in  QS $114  (V.263) it  is said  that Greater
        Gelion  came  from  Mount  Rerir  (the  first  occurrence  of the
        name); about it  were 'many  lesser heights'  ($118), and  on its
        western  slopes  was built  a Noldorin  fortress ($142).  The map
        was  made   before  the   emergence  of   Mount  Rerir,   and  my
        father  contented  himself  with  writing  the  name  against the
        not  specially  conspicuous  mountain  near the  end of  the line
        marking Greater Gelion.                                         
  (46) E 8 to D 8. The  name R.  Mindeb was  written on  the map  at its
        making   but   was  inadvertently   omitted  from   my  redrawing
        (V.409).                                                        
  (47) E 11. Himlad:  on the  meaning of  the name,  and the  reason for
        it, see p. 332 and note 4.                                      
  (48) E 11. Gladuial: I have not found this name anywhere else.        
  (49) E 11. Radrim: the  line directing  the name  to the  wooded land
        between  Aros  and  Celon  is  faintly  pencilled  on   the  map.
        Radrim does  not occur  in any  narrative text,  but is  found in

          the Etymologies (V.382-3, stems am and RI): Radhrim East-        
          march (part of Doriath)'.                                        
                                                                          
  (50) E 12-13, F 13. The words 'north road of Dwarves' are  very faint
          and blurred, but this seems to be  the only  possible interpreta-
          tion.  On  the  extremely  puzzling  question of  the Dwarf-roads
          in East Beleriand see pp. 334-6.                                 
  (51) E 12. A word  faintly pencilled  across the  upper part  of this
          square could be interpreted as 'Marshes'.                        
  (52) F 9. Eglador pencilled under Doriath: see $14 above.              
  (53) F 10.  Arthorien:  see  pp.  112-13,  commentary  on GA  $38; and
          the next entry.                                                  
  (54) F 10. Garthurian  (which could  also be  read as  Garthurien): in
          the text cited at $32  above it  is said  that 'the  Noldor often
          used  the  name  Arthurien  for  Doriath, though  this is  but an
          alteration of the Sindarin Garthurian "hidden realm".'           
  (55) F 11. Estoland: the form is clear, but at all other occurrences of
          the name it is Estolad.                                          
                                                                          
                   3. South-western section (p. 184).                        
                                                                          
  (56) G 2. Cape  Andras is  referred to  in Quendi  and Eldar,  p. 379.
          Cf.  Andrast  'Long  Cape'   in  the   extreme  west   of  Gondor
          (Index to Unfinished Tales).                                     
  (57) G 3 to H 3. The  names  Eglamar  (as  applied here)  and Emyn
          Eglain  (or  Hills  of Eglamar)  are not  found in  any narrative
          text.  Eglamar  is  one  of  the  oldest  names  in  my  father's
          legendarium:  together   with  Eldamar   of  the   same  meaning,
          'Elf-home', it referred to the land of the Elves in Valinor, Egla
          being  'the  Gnome  name  of  the  Eldar who  dwelt in  Kor' (see
          1.251,  II.338;  also  the  Etymologies,  V.356, stem  ELED). The
          old   names   Eglamar,  Eglador,   Eglorest  (>   Eglarest),  not
          abandoned,  were  afterwards  related  to the  name by  which the
          Sindar  called  themselves,  Eglath  'the  Forsaken  People' (see
          X.85,  164).  In  Quendi  and  Eldar  (p.  365) the  etymology of
          Eglain, Egladhrim is given - though it is not  the only  one that
          my father advanced; and later in  that essay  (pp. 379-80)  it is
          explained  why  these  names were  found in  the Falas  among the
          people  of  Cirdan.  (I  cannot  account  for the  application of
          the name  Eglamar to  Arthorien, the  small land  in the  S.E. of
          Doriath between  Aros and  Celon, in  the note  cited on  p. 112,
          commentary on GA $38.)                                           
  (58) G 4. The  name Eglorest  of the  map as  originally made  was not
          emended to the later form Eglarest.                              
  (59) G 5-6, H 5-6. The extent  of the  Taur-na-Faroth (or  High Faroth)
          is  marked  out  by  the  dotted  line (extending  somewhat north
          of  Nargothrond  on  Section  1,  F  5) as  a very  large region,

        somewhat in the shape of  a footprint:  cf. the  representation of
        the Hills of the Hunters  on the  first Silmarillion  map (Vol.IV,
        between  pp.   220  and   221).  The   dots  outlining   the  more
        southerly  part  were  cancelled,  and  rough  lines  (not  repre-
        sented  in  the  redrawing)  across  G  5  (from   left-centre  to
        bottom-right)   suggest  a   reduction  in   the  extent   of  the
        highlands. See further $65 below.                                 
                                                                         
  (60) G 5. The  name  Ingwil  was  not  corrected  to  the  later  form
        Ringwil (see p. 197, $112).                                       
  (61) G 6. I  have  not  found  the  name Methiriad  of 'Mid-Beleriand'
        elsewhere.                                                        
  (62) H 2. Barad  Nimras  replaced  Tower  of  Tindabel   (jumping  the
        intervening name Ingildon): see p. 197, $120.                     
  (63) H 3. The  coastline south-west  of Eglarest  was extended  into a
        small  cape  named  Ras  Mewrim,  a  name  not   found  elsewhere;
        in  Quendi  and  Eldar  (pp.  379  -  80)  it is  named Bar-in-Myl
        'Home of the Gulls'.                                              
  (64) H4. Harfalas: see $21 above.                                       
  (65) J 5-7, K 5-6. I have mentioned under $59 above that  the dotted
        line  marking  the   extent  of   the  Taur-na-Faroth   was  later
        cancelled  in  its  southern  part;  but   the  high   country  of
        Arvernien  (clearly added  to the  map after  the dotted  line) is
        shown  extending   by  a   narrow  neck   to  join   the  southern
        extremity  of  the Taur-na-Faroth  as originally  indicated: i.e.,
        there is a great range of hills extending  from near  the southern
        coast, through this 'neck', to a little north of Nargothrond.     
  (66) K 5-6.  The  name  Earendil  on  K  6, though  separated, very
        probably  belongs  with  Ship-havens  on  K  5. Cf.  the beginning
        of Bilbo's song at Rivendell:                                     
                                                                         
                       Earendil was a mariner                             
                       that tarried in Arvernien;                         
                       he built a boat of timber felled                   
                       in Nimbrethil to journey in ...                    
                                                                         
                      4. South-eastern section (p. 185).                  
                                                                         
  (67) G 8-9, H 8-11. The  Andram is  marked only  as a  faint pencilled
        line  of  small  curves,  more  vague  and  unclear  than   in  my
        redrawing.                                                        
  (68) G 11-13. A  vaguely marked  line of  dashes (not  represented on
        the  redrawing)  runs  westward  from   just  above   Sarn  Athrad
        on  G  13:  this perhaps  indicates the  course of  the Dwarf-road
        after the  passage of  Gelion. This  line bends  gently north-west
        across  G 12  and leaves  G 11  at the  top left  corner, possibly
        reappearing on  Section 2,  F 10,  where (if  this is  correct) it
        reached Aros just below the inflow of Celon. See p. 334.          
  (69) G 14. The correction of Rathlorion to Rathloriel was an early 

        change  (V.407).  A  name  beneath,  hastily pencilled,  is very
        probably Rathmalad  (cf. the  name Rathmallen  of this  river in
        The Tale of Years, p. 353).                                     
                                                                       
  (70) H 11-12.  Rhamdal:  this spelling  is found  in QS  $142 (beside
        Ramdal  in  $113,  adopted  in  The  Silmarillion)  and  in  the
        Etymologies,  V.390,  stem  TAL;  cf.  ibid. V.382,  stem RAMBA,
        'Noldorin rhamb, rham'.                                         
  (71) K 10-11. The scribbled named South Beleriand was struck out.
  (72) K 9-11, L 9-11.  For  the  name  Taur-im-Duinath of  the great
        forested  region  between  Gelion  and  Sirion in  the published
        Silmarillion and map see p. 193, $108.                          
  (73) L 14-15.  Tol  Galen: the  divided course  of the  river Adurant
        (whence  its  name,  according to  the Etymologies,  V.349, stem
        AT(AT)) enclosing the isle of Tol Galen is  shown in  two forms.
        The  less extensive  division was  drawn in  ink (it  seems that
        the oblong shape itself represents the island, in which case the
        area between it and the two streams  is perhaps  to be  taken as
        very  low-lying  land or  marsh); the  much larger  division, in
        which  the  northern  stream  leaves the  other much  further to
        the east and rejoins it much further to the west, was entered in
        pencil,  together  with  the  name.  The  name  Tol   Galen  was
        written a third time (again in pencil) across the upper  part of
        square M 14.                                                    
  (74) L 14-15.  The  mountains on  these squares,  extending northward
        onto K  15, were  pencilled in  very rapidly,  and those  to the
        north of Tol Galen were possibly cancelled.   

                                   *

 I turn now  to the  development of  the chapter  Of Beleriand  and its
 Realms.  The  great  majority  of  the changes  made to  the text  of QS
 (Chapter 9, V258-66, $$105-21) are found in the early  typescript
 LQ  1,  but  some are  not, and  appear only  in LQ  2: these  cases are
 noticed  in  the  account  that  follows.  I do  not record  the changes
 Melko  >  Melkor,  Helkarakse  >   Helkaraxe,  Bladorion   >  Ard-galen,
 Eglorest > Eglarest.                                                    
                                                                        
 $105.  After the words 'in the  ancient days'  at the  end of  the first
   sentence  the  following  footnote  was  added  to  QS. As  usual, the
   typist of LQ 1 took up the footnote into the text, but it appears as a
   footnote in LQ 2,  whose typist  was again  working directly  from the
   manuscript.                                                           

                             
                                                                         
     These  matters,  which  are  not in  the Pennas  of Pengolod,  I have
     added  and  taken  from  the  Dorgannas  laur  (the  account  of  the
     shapes of the lands of old that Torhir Ifant made and is kept in     
         Eressea),  that  those  who  will  may  understand  more clearly,
     maybe, what  is later  said of  their princes  and their  wars: quoth
     AElfwine.                                                            
     On the Pennas of Pengolod see V.201-4.                            
         'These Melko built in the elder days' >  'These Melkor  had built
     in ages past'                                                        
$106.  Hisilome was written in the margin of  the manuscript  against -
     Hithlum in the text (the latter not struck out). This is not in LQ 1,
     but LQ 2 has 'Hithlum (Hisilome)' in the text.                       
         Eredlomin > the  Eryd Lammad.  This form  (not in  LQ 1)  has not
     occurred before, and is not (I believe) found elsewhere: in $105     
        Eredlomin was left unchanged.                                     
         'And Nivrost was a pleasant land  watered by  the wet  winds from
     the sea, and sheltered from the  North, whereas  the rest  of Hithlum
     was  open  to  the cold  winds' was  struck out  and replaced  by the
     following (which does not appear in LQ 1):                           
                                                                         
     And  Nivrost  was by  some held  to belong  rather to  Beleriand than
     to  Hithlum,  for  it was  a milder  land, watered  by the  wet winds
     from  the  Sea  and  sheltered  from  the  North  and  East,  whereas
     Hithlum  was  open to  cold north-winds.  But it  was a  hollow land,
     surrounded  by  mountains  and  great  coast-cliffs  higher  than the
     plains  behind, and  no river  flowed thence.  Wherefore there  was a
     great  mere   amidmost,  and   it  had   no  certain   shores,  being
     encircled  by  wide  marshes.  Linaewen  was the  name of  that mere,
     because of the multitude of birds that dwelt there,  of such  as love
     tall  reeds  and  shallow  pools.  Now  at the  coming of  the Noldor
     many of the Grey-elves (akin to those  of the  Falas) lived  still in
     Nivrost,  nigh to  the coasts,  and especially  about Mount  Taras in
     the south-west; for  to that  place Ulmo  and Osse  had been  wont to
     come in days of old. All that folk  took Turgon  for their  lord, and
     so  it  came  to  pass  that in  Nivrost the  mingling of  Noldor and
     Sindar  began  sooner  than  elsewhere;  and  Turgon  dwelt  long  in
     those  halls  that  he  named  Vinyamar,  under  Mount  Taras  beside
     the Sea. There it was that Ulmo afterwards appeared to him.          
                                                                         
   This  passage  introduced  a  number  of  new elements:  the topography
   of Nivrost (the  high coast-cliffs  are represented  on the  second map
   as  originally  drawn,  p.  182),  and  Lake  Linaewen  (which  appears
   also in the later Tale of Tuor, Unfinished Tales p.  25, with  the same
   description of  Nivrost as  a 'hollow  land'); the  coming of  Ulmo and
   Osse  to  Mount  Taras  in the  ancient days;  and the  conception that
   Sindarin Elves dwelt  in Nivrost  near the  coast and  especially about
   Mount  Taras,  and  that  they  took  Turgon  to be  their lord  at the

 coming of the  Noldor to  Middle-earth. The  later story  that there
 were  many  Grey-elves   among  Turgon's   people  appears   in  the
 rewritten  annal for  the year  116 in  GA (see  $$107, 113  and the
 commentary on those passages).                                     
    The footnote in the QS manuscript 'Ilkorin name' to  the sentence
 'the  great  highland that  the Gnomes  first named  Dorthonion' was
 struck out, and in the text 'Gnomes' was changed to 'Dark-elves'.
    The extent of Dorthonion from west  to east  was changed  from 'a
 hundred leagues' to 'sixty leagues'; on this  change, made  to bring
 the  distance  into  harmony  with  the   second  map,   see  V.272.
$107.  The length of Sirion from the  pass to  the Delta  was changed
 from  'one  hundred  and  twenty-one  leagues'  to 'one  hundred and
 thirty-one  leagues'.  The  former measurement  (see V.272)  was the
 length of Sirion in  a straight  line from  the northern  opening of
 the Pass to the Delta; the new measurement is from Eithel  Sirion to
 the Delta.                                                         
$108.  A footnote was added to the first occurrence of Eredlindon:
    Which  signifieth  the  Mountains  of  Ossiriand; for  the Gnomes
 [LQ 2  Noldor] called  that land  Lindon, the  region of  music, and
 they  first  saw  these  mountains from  Ossiriand. But  their right
 name  was  Eredluin  the  Blue  Mountains,  or  Luindirien  the Blue
 Towers.                                                            
   This note, which may go back to a time near to the writing  of QS,
 has been given and  discussed in  V.267, $108.  The last  five words
 were struck out on the manuscript  and do  not appear  in LQ  1, the
 typist  of which  put the  footnote into  the body  of the  text and
 garbled  the  whole  passage,  which  however  remained uncorrected.
 The words 'quoth AElfwine' were added to the  manuscript at  the end
 of the footnote, but appear only in LQ 2.                          
    'a tangled forest' > 'Taur-im-Duinath, a tangled forest'  (of the
 land  between  Sirion  and  Gelion  south of  the Andram;  see under
 $113  below).  On  the  second  map  this  region  is  named  Taur i
 Melegyrn or Taur na Chardhin (see p. 185).                         
    'while that land lasted' > 'while their realm lasted'           
$109.  The extent of  West Beleriand  between Sirion  and the  Sea was
 changed  from  'seventy leagues'  to 'ninety-nine  leagues', another
 change harmonising the distance with the second map (see V.272).
    In 'the realm of Nargothrond, between Sirion and  Narog' 'Sirion'
 was changed to 'Taiglin'.                                          
$110.  From the words 'first the empty lands' at the beginning  of the
 paragraph all that followed in QS as far as 'Next southward  lay the
 kingdom of Doriath'  was struck  out and  replaced by  the following
 on an attached rider:                                              
                                                                   
    first  between Sirion  and Mindeb  the empty  land of  Dimbar under
    the peaks of the Crissaegrim,  abode of  eagles, south  of Gondolin

 (though  that  was  for  long  unknown);   then  between   Mindeb  and
 the  upper  waters  of  Esgalduin  the  no-land  of   Nan  Dungorthin.
 And  that  region  was filled  with fear,  for upon  its one  side the
 power  of  Melian  fenced  the  north-march of  Doriath, but  upon the
 other  side  the  sheer  precipices  of  Ered  Orgoroth  [> Orgorath],
 mountains  of  terror,  fell  down   from  high   Dorthonion.  Thither
 Ungoliante  had  fled from  the whips  of the  Balrogs, and  had dwelt
 there  a while,  filling the  hideous ravines  with her  deadly gloom,
 and there  still, when  she had  passed away,  her foul  broods lurked
 and  wove  their  evil  nets; and  the thin  waters that  spilled from
 Ered  Orgoroth  [>  Orgorath]  were  all  defiled,  and   perilous  to
 drink,  for  the hearts  of those  that tasted  them were  filled with
 shadows  of  madness  and  despair.  All  living  things  shunned that
 land,  and  the  Noldor  would  pass   through  Nan   Dungorthin  only
 at  great  need,  by  paths  nigh  to  the  borders  of  Doriath,  and
 furthest from the haunted hills.                                      
   But  if  one  fared  that  way  he  came  eastward  across Esgalduin
 and  Aros  (and  Dor  Dinen  the  silent  land  between) to  the North
 Marches  of   Beleriand,  where   the  sons   of  Feanor   dwelt.  But
 southward lay the kingdom of Doriath...                               
                                                                      
 On the  name Crissaegrim  (which occurs,  in the  spelling Crisaegrim,
 in GA $161) see V.290, $147. In this passage  is the  first appearance
 of  Dor  Dinen  'the Silent  Land' (added  to the  map p.  183, square
 D 10).  The story  that Ungoliante  dwelt in  Nan Dungorthin  when she
 fled  from  the Balrogs  appears in  the Annals  of Aman  (X.109, 123;
 cf. also X.297, $20).                                                 
 'where  he  turned  westward'  (with  reference  to  the  river Esgal-
 duin) ) 'where it turned westward'.                                   
$111.  The  marginal  note  to  the name  Thargelion 'or  Radhrost' was
 changed to 'Radhrost in the tongue of Doriath.'                       
 'This  region  the  Elves   of  Doriath   named  Umboth   Muilin,  the
 Twilight  Meres,  for  there  were  many  mists'  >  'This  region the
 Noldor   named   Aelinuial   and   the   Dark-elves   Umboth   Muilin,
 the  Twilight  Meres,  for  they  were  wrapped  in  mists',  and  the
 footnote  giving  the  Gnomish  names  Hithliniath and  Aelin-uial was
 struck  out  (thus  LQ 1).  Later emendation  removed the  words 'and
 the Dark-elves Umboth Muilin' (thus LQ 2).                            
$112.  The  opening  word  'For'  was  changed  to  'Now';  and  in the
 following sentence 'Umboth Muilin' was changed to 'Aelin-uial'.       
 The  passage  beginning  'Yet  all  the  lower  plain  of  Sirion' was
 changed to read thus: 'Yet all the lower fields of Sirion were divided
 from the upper fields by this sudden fall, which  to one  looking from
 the south northward appeared  as an  endless chain  of hills'.  In the
 following  sentence  'Narog  came  south  through  a  deep   gorge'  >
 'Narog came through these hills in a deep gorge'.  (There is  an error

                                        
                                                                        
 in the text of this sentence as printed (V.262): 'on its west  bank rose'
 should read 'on its west bank the land rose'.)                          
$113.  The  last sentence  of the  paragraph (and  the beginning  of $114)
 was rewritten to read:                                                  
  But  until  that  time  all  the  wide  woods  south  of the  Andram and
 between   Sirion   and   Gelion   were  little   known.  Taur-im-Duinath,
 the  forest  between   the  two   rivers,  the   Gnomes  [LQ   2  Noldor]
 called  that  region,  but  few  ever  ventured  in  that wild  land; and
 east of it lay the far green country of Ossiriand...                    
 On Taur-im-Duinath see under $108 above.                                
$114.  At  the  name  Adurant  there  is  a  footnote to  the text  in QS,
 which like that in $108 may belong to  a relatively  early time  (see my
 remarks in the commentary, V.268):                                      
  And  at  a  point  nearly  midway in  its course  the stream  of Adurant
 divided  and  joined  again,  enclosing  a  fair  island;  and  this  was
 called  Tolgalen,  the  Green  Isle.  There   Beren  and   Luthien  dwelt
 after their return.                                                     
$115.  The  opening  sentence  of  the   paragraph  was   rewritten  thus:
 'There  dwelt  the  Nandor,  the Elves  of the  Host of  Dan, who  in the
 beginning  were  of  Telerian  race,  but  forsook  their   lord  Thingol
 upon  the  march  from  Cuivienen  ...'  On the  first appearance  of the
 name  Nandor,  a  people  originally  from  the host  of the  Noldor, see
 X.169, $28.                                                             
  'Of  old  the  lord  of  Ossiriand  was  Denethor':  'son of  Dan' added
 after 'Denethor'. In the same sentence 'Melko' > 'Morgoth'.             
  It is notable that  the phrase  'in the  days when  the Orcs  were first
 made' was never altered.                                                
  At  the  end  of  the  paragraph  was  added:  'For  which   reason  the
 Noldor  named  that  land  Lindon',  with  a  footnote  '[The  Country of
 Music  >]  The  Land  of  Song'  (see  under  $108  above);   and  '(Here
 endeth  the  matter  taken  from  the  Dorgannas)',  on  which  see under
 $105 above.                                                             
$116.  The whole  of the  latter part  of this  paragraph, from  after the
 words  'But  Turgon  the wise,  second son  of Fingolfin,  held Nivrost',
 was  struck   out  and   the  following   substituted  (which   does  not
 appear in LQ 1):                                                        
  (But  Turgon  the  wise  ...  held  Nivrost),  and  there  he   ruled  a
 numerous  folk,  both  Noldor  and  Sindar,  for  one  hundred  years and
 sixteen,  until  he  departed  in   secret  to   a  hidden   kingdom,  as
 afterwards is told.'                                                    
  This  passage  belongs  with   the  long   replacement  in   $106  given
 above, which likewise does not appear in LQ 1.                          
$117.  'But   Angrod  and   Egnor  watched   Bladorion'  >   'His  younger
 brethren Angrod and Egnor watched the fields of Ard-galen'              

$120.  Tindobel (see V.270, commentary on QS $$119-20)                    
   Ingildon (cf. GA $90 and commentary, p. 118).                         
                                                                         
                                    *                                     
                                                                         

 These are all the changes (save for a very few of no  significance) made
 to  the  QS  manuscript.  A  number  of  further  changes  were  made to
 the  top  copy of  the late  typescript LQ  2 (the  carbon copy  was not
 touched).                                                              
   The  chapter-number  'XIV'  was inserted  (see p.  179, $100);  and at
 the head of the first page my father wrote: 'This is a  geographical and
 political insertion and may be omitted. It  requires a  map, of  which I
 have not had time to make a copy.' This sounds as  if he  were preparing
 the LQ 2 typescript for someone to see it (cf. his words against  $82 in
 the chapter  'Of Men'  in LQ  2: 'This  depends upon  an old  version in
 which the Sun was first made after the death of the Trees  (described in
 a chapter omitted)', p. 175); in which case the words  here 'and  may be
 omitted'  were  much  more  probably  advice  to  the   presumed  reader
 than a statement of intention about the inclusion of the chapter  in The
 Silmarillion.                                                          
 $105.  Ered-engrin > Eryd Engrin                                         

                                   
     '(Utumno)... at the western end' > 'at the midmost'. This shift of
   Utumno eastwards is implied in the hasty note pencilled on the LQ 2
   text of Chapter 2, Of Valinor and the Two Trees, in which the story
   entered that Angband also was built in the ancient days, 'not far
   from the northwestern shores of the Sea' (see X.156, $12, and the
   addition made to this paragraph, given below).
     Eredwethion > Erydwethrin (and subsequently).
     Eredlomin > Erydlomin. In LQ 2 $106 the name of the Echoing
   Mountains is Eryd Lammad, following the change made to the QS
   manuscript there (p. 192) but not here; and Eryd Lammad was
   allowed to stand.
     The passage 'Behind their walls Melkor coming back into Middle-
   earth made the endless dungeons of Angband, the hells of iron,
   where of old Utumno had been. But he made a great tunnel under
   them...' was emended on LQ 2 to read:
     Behind their walls Melkor had made also a fortress (after called
     Angband) as a defence against the West, if any assault should
     come from Valinor. This was in the command of Sauron. It was
     captured by the Valar, and Sauron fled into hiding; but being in
     haste to overthrow Melkor in his great citadel of Utumno, the
     Valar did not wholly destroy Angband nor search out all its deep
     places; and thither Sauron returned and many other creatures of
     Melkor, and there they waited in hope for the return of their
     Master. Therefore when he came back into Middle-earth Melkor
     took up his abode in the endless dungeons of Angband, the hells
     of iron; and he made a great tunnel under them...

                                               
                                                                      
 $106. Nivrost > Nevrast (and subsequently; see p. 179, $100). The
   footnote to the first occurrence of Nivrost 'Which is West Vale in the
   tongue of Doriath' was struck out and replaced by the following:
     Which is 'Hither Shore' in the Sindarin tongue, and was given at
     first to all the coast-lands south of Drengist, but was later limited
     to the land whose shores lay between Drengist and Mount Taras.
 $108. To the name Taur-im-Duinath (a later addition to QS, p. 193)
   a footnote was added: 'Forest between the Rivers (sc. Sirion and
   Gelion)'. This interpretation occurs in fact in a rewriting of the QS
   text at a later point: p. 195, $113.
 $110. At the two occurrences of Nan Dungorthin in the long
   replacement passage in this paragraph given on p. 193-4 the later
   form Nan Dungortheb was substituted.
 $111.  Damrod and Diriel > Amrod and Amras, and in $118; cf.
   X.177.
     The revised footnote against the name Thargelion, 'Radhrost in
   the tongue of Doriath' (p. 194), was struck out and not replaced (see
   under $118 below).
     Cranthir > Caranthir, and in $118; cf. X.177, 181.
 $112. Taur-na-Faroth > Taur-en-Faroth at both occurrences.
   Ingwil (the torrent joining Narog at Nargothrond) > Ringwil.
   Inglor > Finrod (and subsequently).
 $117. Finrod > Finarfin
 $118. At the end of the paragraph Dor Granthir > Dor Caranthir; in
   the footnote the same change was made, and Radhrost was replaced
   by Talath Rhunen, the translation 'the East Vale' remaining. See
   under $111 above.
 $119. 'But Inglor was king of Nargothrond and overlord of the
   Dark-elves of the western havens; and with his aid Brithombar and
   Eglorest were rebuilt' was rewritten thus:
      But Finrod was king of Nargothrond and over-lord of all the
      Dark-elves of Beleriand between Sirion and the Sea, save only in
      the Falas. There dwelt still those of the Sindar who still loved
      ships and the Sea, and they had great havens at Brithombar and
      Eglarest. Their lord was Cirdan the Shipbuilder. There was
      friendship and alliance between Finrod and Cirdan, and with the
      aid of the Noldor Brithombar and Eglarest were rebuilt...
   Finrod (Inglor) now loses the overlordship of the Elves of the Falas,
   with the emergence of Cirdan, but my father failed to correct the
   earlier passage in QS ($109) telling that 'the Dark-elves of the
   havens ... took Felagund, lord of Nargothrond, to be their king.'
   The statement here in $119 agrees with what is said in GA $85 (see
   also the commentary, p. 117).
 $120. In the opening sentence of this paragraph the old name
   Tindobel had been changed to Ingildon (p. 196); it was now

 changed  to  Nimras  (cf.  Barad  Nimras,  the  replacement of  Tower of
 Tindabel on the second map, p. 190, $62.                                 
                                                                         
 Some of the  changes made  to LQ  2 were  made also  to the  much earlier
 typescript  LQ  1:   Ringwil  ($112),   Talath  Rhunen   ($118),  Nimras
 ($120).  In  addition,  Dor  Granthir  was  corrected  to   Dor  Cranthir
 ($118),  and  the  passage concerning  the lordship  of the  Falas ($119)
 was inserted, but still  with the  name Inglor:  thus these  changes were
 not made at  the same  time as  those in  LQ 2,  which has  Dor Caranthir
 and Finrod.                                                              
                                                                         
                12. OF TURGON AND THE BUILDING OF GONDOLIN.                
                                                                         
 This short chapter on three manuscript pages, with  this title  but with-
 out  chapter-number,  was  inserted  into  the  QS  manuscript  following
 Of Beleriand and its Realms.                                             
 At  an  earlier  point  in  the manuscript  ($101 in  the chapter  Of the
 Siege  of Angband)  a long  rider was  introduced on  the subject  of the
 foundation  of  Nargothrond  by  Inglor  and  the  discovery  of Gondolin
 by Turgon: see pp. 177  - 9.  As I  have explained  there, this  rider is
 extant  in two  partially distinct  forms, the  first in  the early  LQ 1
 typescript  series,  and  the  second  on  a sheet  inserted into  the QS
 manuscript  (whence  it  appears in  the late  typescript LQ  2). Without
 question the new  chapter (which  does not  appear in  the LQ  1 series)
 was written at the same time as the revised form of  this rider  to $101,
 and it is to this that the  opening words  of the  new chapter  ('It hath
 been told how by the guidance of Ulmo...') refer.  (I have  also noticed,
 p. 179, that on the reverse of  this rider  is a  rejected draft  for the
 replacement text  of the  year 116  in the  Grey Annals,  $$111 -  13; on
 this see below, at the end of the third paragraph of the text.)          
 There  is  no need  to give  Of Turgon  and the  Building of  Gondolin in
 full, because, as will be seen shortly, a substantial part of it has been
 given already.                                                           
                                                                         
                  Of Turgon and the Building of Gondolin.                 
                                                                         
 It   hath   been   told   how  by   the  guidance   of  Ulmo   Turgon  of
 Nivrost  discovered  the  hidden   vale  of   Tum-laden;  and   that  (as
 was  after  known) lay  east of  the upper  waters of  Sirion, in  a ring
 of  mountains  tall  and  sheer,  and  no  living  thing came  there save
 the  eagles  of  Thorondor.  But  there   was  a   deep  way   under  the
 mountains  delved  in  the  darkness   of  the   world  by   waters  that
 flowed  out  to  join  the  stream  of  Sirion;  and  this  Turgon  found
 and  so  came  to  the  green  plain  amid  the  mountains,  and  saw the
 island-hill  that  stood  there  of  hard  smooth  stone;  for  the  vale
 had  been  a  great  lake  in  ancient  days.   Then  Turgon   knew  that

                                                                         
                                                                          
 he  had  found  the place  of his  desire, and  resolved there  to build
 a  fair  city,  a  memorial  of Tirion  upon Tuna,  for which  his heart
 still  yearned  in  exile.  But  he  returned  to Nivrost,  and remained
 there  in  peace,  though  he  pondered  ever  in  his  thought  how  he
 should accomplish his design.                                             
                                                                          
   The  conclusion  of  this  paragraph  had   already  been   used,  but
   abandoned  before it  was completed,  at the  end of  the rider  to QS
   $101, p. 179.                                                           
                                                                          
   Therefore,  after  the  Dagor  Aglareb,  the  unquiet  that  Ulmo  set
 in  his  heart  returned   to  him,   and  he   summoned  many   of  the
 hardiest  and  most  skilled  of  his  people and  led them  secretly to
 the  hidden  vale,  and  there  they  began  the  building  of  the city
 that  Turgon  had  devised  in  his  heart;  and  they  set a  watch all
 about  it  that  none  might   come  upon   their  work   from  without,
 and the power of Ulmo that ran in Sirion protected them.                  
                                                                          
   In  this  second  paragraph  my father  was following  and all  but simply
   copying  the  revised  annal  for  the year  64 in  GA ($89);  'the hidden
   vale'  was  substituted  for  'Gondolin'  of  GA  because  Turgon  was now
   not to name his city until it was completed.                            
                                                                          
   Now  Turgon  dwelt  still  for  the  most  part  in  Nivrost,  but  it
 came  to  pass  that  at  last  the  City  was  full-wrought,  after two
 and  fifty  years  of  labour;  and  Turgon appointed  its name,  and it
 was   called   Gondolin   [in   margin:    the   Hidden    Rock].   Then
 Turgon  prepared  to  depart  from  Nivrost  and  leave  his  fair halls
 beside  the  Sea;  and   there  Ulmo   came  to   him  once   again  and
 spake with him.                                                           
                                                                          
   From  this  point  the  new  Silmarillion  chapter  follows  almost word
 for word the replacement text of the  annal for  116 in  GA ($$111  - 13):
 the  words  of  Ulmo  to  Turgon,  and  the  departure  from  Vinyamar  to
 Gondolin.  The  reason  for  this  is  simple:  as I  have noticed  in the
 commentary  on  GA  $113  (p. 120),  my father  wrote against  the revised
 annal for 116: 'Set this rather in the Silmarillion and substitute a short
 notice' (the proposed 'short notice' is given ibid.).                     
   The  text  of the  new chapter  leaves that  in the  Grey Annals  at the
 words  'passed  the  gates  in  the  mountains and  they were  shut behind
 him';  the  concluding  words  of  GA  $113  ('But  Nivrost  was  empty of
 folk  and  so remained  until the  ruin of  Beleriand') were  not repeated
 here, but were brought in subsequently.                                   
                                                                          
   And through many long years none passed inward thereafter               
 (save Hurin and Handir only sent by Ulmo); and the  host of               

 Turgon   came   never   forth   again  until   the  Year   of  Lamentation
 [struck  out,  probably  at  the  time of   writing: and  the ruin  of the
 Noldor],   after   three   hundred   and   fifty   years  and   more.  But
 behind  the  circle  of  the  mountains  the  folk  of  Turgon   grew  and
 throve,  and  they  put  forth their  skill in  labour unceasing,  so that
 Gondolin   upon   Amon   Gwareth   became   fair   indeed   and   meet  to
 compare   even   with   Elven   Tirion   beyond   the   Sea.    High   and
 white  were  its  walls,  and  smooth  were  its  stairs,  and   tall  and
 strong   was   the   Tower   of   the   King.   There   shining  fountains
 played,  and  in  the  courts  of  Turgon  stood  images  of the  Trees of
 old,   which   Turgon   himself   wrought   with   elven-craft;   and  the
 Tree  which   he  made   of  gold   was  named   Glingal,  and   the  Tree
 whose   flowers   he   made  of   silver  was   named  Belthil,   and  the
 light  which  sprang  from  them  filled  all  the ways  of the  city. But
 fairer   than   all   the   wonders   of   Gondolin  was   Idril  Turgon's
 daughter,  she  that  was  called  Celebrindal  the  Silver-foot  for  the
 whiteness  of  her  unshod  feet,  but  her  hair  was  as  the   gold  of
 Laurelin  ere  the   coming  of   Melkor.  Thus   Turgon  lived   long  in
 bliss  greater  than  any  that  hath been  east of  the Sea;  but Nivrost
 was  desolate,  and  remained  empty  of  living  folk  until the  ruin of
 Beleriand;   and   elsewhere   the   shadow   of  Morgoth   stretched  out
 its fingers from the North.                                               
                                                                          
   The opening sentence of this concluding section, with the reference     
 to the entry of Hurin and Handir of Brethil into Gondolin, shows that     
 it belongs with the original form of that story in the Grey Annals        
 ($$149-50, and see the commentary, pp. 124 - 5); the later story that it
 was Hurin and his brother Huor appears in the long rider GA               
 $$161-6.                                                                  
   This is the only account, brief as it is, of the actual city of Gondolin
 that my father wrote after that in Q (IV.139 - 40) - although there are
 also the notes that follow the abandoned text of the later Tale of Tuor
 (Unfinished Tales p. 56, note 31). That the Trees of Gondolin were        
 images made by Turgon was stated in a footnote to Chapter 2 Of - '        
 Valinor and the Two Trees in QS (see V.210 - 11; X.155), and this is      
 repeated here - but with the addition that 'the light which sprang from
 them filled all the ways of the city'.                                    
   There is only one other text of the new chapter, the LQ 2 typescript,
 in which it is numbered 'XV' (see p. 196). To this my father made         
 some corrections: Nivrost > Nevrast as in the preceding chapters;         
 Eryd Wethion > Eryd Wethrin; Handir > Huor (see above); and               
 Amon Gwareth > Amon Gwared. The marginal note rendering                  
 Gondolin as 'the Hidden Rock' was placed in a footnote in LQ 2,           
 which my father then extended as follows:                                 

                                    
                                                                         
 Or  so  its  name  was   afterwards  known   and  interpreted;   but  its
 ancient form  and meaning  are in  doubt. It  is said  that the  name was
 given  first  in  Quenya  (for  that  language  was  spoken  in  Turgon's
 house),  and  was  Ondolinde,  the  Rock  of  the  Music  of  Water,  for
 there  were  fountains  upon  the hill.  But the  people (who  spoke only
 the  Sindarin  tongue)  altered  this  name  to Gondolin  and interpreted
 [it] to mean Hidden Rock: Gond dolen in their own speech.                
                                                                         
 With  the  interpretation  of  Quenya  Ondolinde  as  'Rock of  the Music
 of Water' cf. the early translation of Gondolin as 'Stone of Song' in the
 name-list to the  tale of  The Fall  of Gondolin  (II.216); and  with the
 interpretation  'Hidden  Rock'  cf.  the  Etymologies  in Vol.V,  p. 355,
 stem DUL, where  Gondolin(n) is  said to  contain three  elements: 'heart
 of hidden rock'.                                                         
                                                                         
                         13. CONCERNING THE DWARVES.                        
                                                                         
 The reason for this title will be  seen at  the end  of the  chapter (pp.
 213-14).  To  the  original  Chapter  10  Of  Men  and  Dwarfs in  the QS
 manuscript   (V272-6, $$122-31) only a few changes were made
 before a radical revision overtook it.                                   
                                                                         
$122.  'whom   the  Dark-elves   named  Naug-rim'   >  'whom   they  named
 the  Naug-rim',  i.e.  this  became  a  Noldorin  name  for  the  Dwarves
 given to them by Cranthir's people.                                      
$123.  The  marginal   note  'quoth   Pengolod'  against   the  bracketed
 passage  concerning  the  origin  and  nature of  the Dwarves  was struck
 out (see V.277-8, $123).                                                 
$124.  'Nogrod,   the   Dwarfmine':   above   'Dwarfmine'   is  pencilled
 'Dwarrowdelf',   and   in   the   margin   again    'Dwarrowdelf   Nogrod
 was afar  off in  the East  in the  Mountains of  Mist; and  Belegost was
 in  Eredlindon  south  of Beleriand.'  At the  head of  the page,  with a
 direction for insertion in the text after 'Belegost, the  Great Fortress'
 the following is written very rapidly:                                   
  Greatest  of  these  was  Khazaddum that  was after  called in  the days
 of  its  darkness  Moria,  and  it  was  far  off  in  the  east  in  the
 Mountains  of  Mist;  but  Gabilgathol   was  on   [the]  east   side  of
 Eredlindon and within reach of the Elves.                                
 In the text of QS  as written  Nogrod (which  goes back  to the  old Tale
 of  the  Nauglafring)  is  a  translation of  Khazaddum, and  the meaning
 is   'Dwarfmine';   both   Nogrod   and   Belegost    (Gabilgathol)   are
 specifically stated  (QS $122)  to have  been 'in  the mountains  east of
 Thargelion',  and  were  so  placed in  additions to  the second  map. In
 The   Lord   of   the  Rings   Khazad-dum  is   Moria,  and   Nogrod  and
 Belegost are 'ancient cities in  the Blue  Mountains' (Appendix  A, III).
 The notes in the  margin of  QS just  given must  represent an  idea that

 was   not  adopted,   whereby  Belegost   remained  in   Eredlindon,  but
 Nogrod   /   Khazad-dum  was   removed  to   the  Misty   Mountains,  and
 Nogrod became the ancient Elvish name of Moria.                          
    The  statement  in  the  first of  these notes  that 'Belegost  was in
 Eredlindon south of  Beleriand' is  surprising: it  seems to  represent a
 reversion  to  the  older conception  of the  place of  the Dwarf-cities:
 see  the  Eastward  Extension  of  the  first  Silmarillion  map, IV.231,
 where   the   dwarf-road   after  crossing   the  Blue   Mountains  below
 Mount  Dolmed  turns  south  and  goes  off  the  map  in  the south-east
 corner,  with the  direction 'Southward  in East  feet of  Blue Mountains
 are Belegost and Nogrod.'                                                
$126.  Against  the words  in the  first sentence  of the  paragraph 'when
 some   four  hundred   years  were   gone  since   the  Gnomes   came  to
 Beleriand'  my  father  noted:  'This  must be  removed to  300', changed
 to '310'. See p. 226, $1.                                                
$127.  'They  were  the first  of Men  that wandering  west' >  'They were
 the first of Men that after many lives of wandering westward'            
    Gumlin > Galion (see p. 123, $127).                                   
$128.  The footnote was changed to read:                                   
    It  is recorded  that this  name was  Vidri in  the ancient  speech of
 these  Men,  which  is  now  forgotten;   for  afterwards   in  Beleriand
 they  forsook  their   own  speech   for  the   tongue  of   the  Gnomes.
 Quoth Pengolod.                                                          
   In  the  sentence following  the place  of the  footnote 'whom  we call
 the Gnomes' was changed to '(whom we here call the Gnomes)'.             
$129.  'the  lordship  of  Gumlin  was  in  Hithlum'  >  'the  lordship of
 Galion was in Dorlomen'                                                  
 Throughout  the  text  the  form  Duarfs  (see  V.277, $122)  was changed
 to Dwarves.                                                              
                                    *                                    
 The next  step was  the striking  out of  the entire  text of  Chapter 10
 from  the beginning  as far  as 'Hador  the Goldenhaired'  at the  end of
 $125, and the substitution  of a  new and  much enlarged  form, carefully
 written  and  inserted  into  the QS  manuscript. This  has a  few subse-
 quent emendations (almost  all made  at the  same time  in red  ink), and
 these  are  shown  in the  text that  now follows.  One of  these emenda-
 tions concerns the title itself. As the revised version was first written
 the  title  was  Of  Dwarves  and  Men,  with  a subtitle  Concerning the
 Dwarves (but no subtitle  where the  section on  Men begins).  The title
 was  struck  out,  and  replaced  by Of  the Naugrim  and the  Edain; the
 subtitle  Concerning  the  Dwarves was  retained; and  a new  subtitle Of
 the Edain was inserted at the appropriate place.                         
   In order not to interrupt the numbering of  the QS  text in  Vol.V, for
 reference in  the commentary  that follows  the text  I number  the para-

  graphs of the revised version from $1. - It  will be  seen that  the opening
  paragraph  repeats  almost  exactly  that  of  QS  ($122),  but   loses  the
  original  concluding  sentence:  'For  though  the  Dwarfs  did   not  serve
  Morgoth,  yet  they were  in some  things more  like to  his people  than to
  the Elves.'                                                                 
                                                                             
                          Of the Naugrim and the Edain.                       
                                                                             
                             Concerning the Dwarves.                          
                                                                             
    $1. Now  in  time  the  building  of  Nargothrond   was  com-             
  pleted, and Gondolin had been raised in secret; but in the days             
  of  the  Siege  of  Angband the  Gnomes had  yet small  need of             
  hiding-places,  and  they  ranged  far  and  wide  between  the             
  Western Sea and the Blue Mountains.  And it  is said  that they             
  climbed  Eredlindon  and  looked  eastward  in wonder,  for the             
  lands  of  Middle-earth  seemed  wild  and  wide; but  few ever             
  passed over the mountains while Angband  lasted. In  those days             
  the folk of  Cranthir first  came upon  the Dwarves,  whom they             
  [> the Dark-elves] named the Naugrim;  for the  chief dwellings             
  of that race were then in the mountains east of Thargelion, the             
  land of Cranthir, and were digged deep in the eastern slopes of             
  Eredlindon.  Thence  they journeyed  often into  Beleriand, and             
  were  admitted even  into Doriath.  There was  at that  time no             
  enmity  between  Elves  and Dwarves,  but nonetheless  no great             
  love.                                                                       
                                                                             
    Here are the words of Pengolod concerning the Naugrim.*                    
    $2. The Naugrim are not of Elf-kind, nor of Man-kind, nor                  
  yet of Melkor's breeding;  and the  Noldor in  Middle-earth knew            
  not  whence  they  came,  holding  that they  were alien  to the            
  Children, albeit in  many ways  like unto  them. But  in Valinor            
  the wise have learned that the  Dwarves were  made in  secret by            
  Aule, while Earth was  yet dark;  for he  desired the  coming of            
  the Children of Iluvatar, that he might have learners to whom he            
  could teach his crafts and lore, and he  was unwilling  to await            
  the  fulfilment of  the designs  of Iluvatar.  Wherefore, though            
  the Dwarves are like the  Orcs in  this: that  they came  of the            
  wilfulness of one of the Valar, they are not evil; for they were            
  not made out of malice in mockery of the  Children, but  came of            
  the desire of Aule's heart to make things of  his own  after the            
                                                                             
   (* All that follows in the section 'Concerning the Dwarves' is written in a
  much smaller script than that of the opening paragraph.)                    

 pattern of the designs of Iluvatar. And since they came in the      
 days of the power of Melkor, Aule made them strong to endure.       
 Therefore they are stone-hard, stubborn, fast in friendship and     
 in enmity, and they suffer toil and hunger and hurt of body         
 more hardily than all other speaking-folk. And they live long,      
 far beyond the span of Men, and yet not for ever. Aforetime the     
 Noldor held that dying they returned unto the earth and the         
 stone of which they were made; yet that is not their own belief.
 For they say that Aule cares for them and gathers them in           
 Mandos in halls set apart for them, and there they wait, not in     
 idleness but in the practice of crafts and the learning of yet      
 deeper lore. And Aule, they say, declared to their Fathers of old
 that Iluvatar had accepted from him the work of his desire, and     
 that Iluvatar will hallow them and give them a place among the      
 Children in the End. Then their part shall be to serve Aule and     
 to aid him in the re-making of Arda after the Last Battle.          
   $3. Now these Fathers, they say, were seven in number, and         
 they alone return (in the manner of the Quendi) to live again in
 their own kin and to bear once more their ancient names. Of         
 these Durin was the most renowned in after ages, father of that     
 Dwarf-kin most friendly to the Elves whose mansions were at         
 Khazad-dum.                                                         
   $4. In the darkness of Arda already the Naugrim wrought            
 great works, for they had, even from the first days of their        
 Fathers, marvellous skill with metals and with stone, though        
 their works had little beauty until they had met the Noldor and     
 learned somewhat of their arts. And they gave their friendship      
 more readily to the Noldor than to any others of Elves or Men,      
 because of their love and reverence for Aule; and the gems of the
 Gnomes they praised above all other wealth. But in that ancient . ':
 time the Dwarves still wrought iron and copper rather than          
 silver and gold; and the making of weapons and gear of war was      
 their chief smith-craft. They it was that first devised mail of     
 linked rings, and in the making of byrnies and of hauberks none     
 among Elves or Men have proved their equals. Thus they aided        
 the Eldar greatly in their war with the Orcs of Morgoth; though     
 the Noldor believed that some of that folk would not have been      
 loath to smithy also for Morgoth, had he been in need of their      
 work or open to their trade. For buying and selling and ex-         
 change were their delight, and the winning of wealth thereby;       
 and this they gathered rather to hoard than to use, save in         
 further trading.                                                    

                                                                   
                                                                    
    $5. The  Naugrim  were  ever,  as  they  still  remain,  short and
 squat  in  stature;  they  were  deep-breasted,  strong  in  the arm,
 and  stout  in  the  leg,  and  their beards  were long.  Indeed this
 strangeness  they  have  that  no  Man  nor  Elf  has  ever   seen  a
 beardless  Dwarf  -  unless  he  were  shaven  in mockery,  and would
 then be  more like  to die  of shame  than of  many other  hurts that
 to  us  would  seem  more  deadly.  For   the  Naugrim   have  beards
 from  the  beginning  of  their  lives,  male  and female  alike; nor
 indeed  can  their  womenkind   be  discerned   by  those   of  other
 race, be it in feature or in gait or in voice, nor  in any  wise save
 this:  that  they  go  not  to war,  and seldom  save at  direst need
 issue from their deep bowers and halls. It is said, also,  that their
 womenkind  are  few,  and that  save their  kings and  chieftains few
 Dwarves  ever  wed;  wherefore  their  race  multiplied  slowly,  and
 now is dwindling.                                                   
    $6. The  father-tongue  of  the   Dwarves  Aule   himself  devised
 for them,  and their  languages have  thus no  kinship with  those of
 the  Quendi.  The  Dwarves  do  not  gladly  teach  their  tongue  to
 those  of  alien  race;  and  in  use  they  have  made it  harsh and
 intricate,  so  that of  those few  whom they  have received  in full
 friendship  fewer  still have  learned it  well. But  they themselves
 learn  swiftly  other  tongues,  and  in  converse  they use  as they
 ?may  the  speech  of  Elves  and  Men  with  whom  they deal.  Yet in
 secret they use their own speech only, and that (it is said)  is slow
 to  change;  so  that  even their  realms and  houses that  have been
 long  and  far  sundered  may  to  this   day  well   understand  one
 another.  In  ancient  days  the  Naugrim  dwelt  in  many  mountains
 of  Middle-earth,  and  there  they  met mortal  Men (they  say) long
 ere  the Eldar  knew them;  whence it  comes that  of the  tongues of
 the   Easterlings   many  show   kinship  with   Dwarf-speech  rather
 than with the speeches of the Elves.*                               
    $7.  In   their   own   tongue   the   Dwarves   name   themselves
 Khuzud   [>   Khazad];  and   the  Dark-elves   called  them   /  the
 Naugrim  [>  Naug],  the  stunted.  Which  name  the   exiled  Noldor
 also  used  [>  likewise  took for  them], but  called them  also the
 Nyrn  [struck  out:  of  like  meaning],  and the  Gonnhirrim masters
 of  stone;  and  those  who  dwelt  in   Belegost  they   called  the
 Ennfeng  or  Longbeards,  for  their  beards  swept the  floor before
 their feet. The chief cities  of the  Khuzud [>  Khazad] in  the west
 of   Middle-earth   in  those   days  were   at  Khazaddum,   and  at
                                                                    
   (* [Marginal note] Thus the Lammas.)                              

                                              
                                                                           
 Gabilgathol  and  Tumunzahar,  which   are  interpreted   in  the          
 Gnomish   tongue   Nornhabar   the   Dwarrowdelf,   and  Belegost          
 Mickleburg,  and  Nogrod  the  Hollowbold.  Greatest  of  all the          
 mansions  of  the Naugrim  was Khazaddum,  that was  after called          
 in the days of  its darkness  Moria, but  it was  far off  in the          
 Mountains of  Mist beyond  the wide  leagues of  Eriador; whereas          
 Belegost and Nogrod  were upon  the east  side of  Eredlindon and          
 nigh to the lands of the Eldar. Yet few of the Elves, save Meglin          
 of Gondolin, went ever thither; and  the Dwarves  trafficked into          
 Beleriand,  and  made  a  great  road   that  passed   under  the          
 shoulders  of  Mount  Dolmed  and followed  thence the  course of          
 Ascar, crossing Gelion at Sarn-athrad. There battle later befell;          
 but as yet the Dwarves troubled the Elves little, while the power          
 of the Gnomes lasted.                                                      
  $8. Here  end  the  words  that  Pengolod  spoke to  me concern-          
 ing the Dwarves,  which are  not part  of the  Pennas as  it was.          
 written,  but come  from other  books of  lore, from  the Lammas,          
 the  Dorgannas,  and  the  Quentale  Ardanomion:  quoth AElfwine.          
                                                                           
                                Of the Edain.                               
                                                                           
  $9. It is reckoned that the first meeting of the Noldor  and the           
 Naugrim befell in the land of Cranthir  Feanor's son  about that           
 time when  Fingolfin destroyed  the Orcs  at Drengist,  one hun-           
 dred and fifty-five years after the crossing of the Ice, and one           
 hundred  and  five  before  the  first  coming  of  Glomund  the           
 dragon. After his defeat there was long peace, and it lasted for           
 wellnigh  two  hundred  years  of  the  sun.  During  this  time           
 the fathers of  the Houses  of the  Men of  the West,  the Atani           
 [> Edain],  the Elf-friends  of old,  were born  in the  land of           
 Eriador  east  of  the  mountains: Beor  the Vassal,  Haleth the           
 Hunter, and Hador the Goldenhaired.                                        
                                                                           
  Here  the  revised  part  of  QS  Chapter 10  ends. It  will be  seen that
 while  it  was  composed  with  the original  QS text  before him  and with
 the  actual retention  of some  of it,  my father  now introduced  many new
 conceptions  concerning  the  Dwarves.  The  long-enduring  'hostile'  view
 has at last virtually vanished, with the loss of the sentence at the end of
 the first paragraph (see p. 203)  - although  in the  original QS  text the
 likeness  of  Orcs  and  Dwarves  was  subsequently  ($123) spoken  of only
 in  terms of  the analogous  origin of  the two  races, each  deriving from
 one of the Valar acting independently,  and this  remains in  the revision.
 We learn now that:                                                         
   the Dwarves live far longer than Men ($2);                               


                                                                       
 - they themselves believe that Aule gathers them after their death
   into halls in Mandos set apart, and that after the Last Battle they
   will aid Aule in the remaking of Arda ($2);
 - there were Seven Fathers of the Dwarves, who are reincarnated in
   their own kin (after the manner of the Elves), bearing their ancient
   names ($3);
 - Durin was the father of the Dwarf-kindred of Khazad-dum, most
   friendly to the Elves ($3);
 - the Dwarves were better disposed to the Noldor than to any others
   among Elves or Men on account of their reverence of Aule ($4);
 - the Dwarves are bearded from birth, both male and female ($5);
 - Dwarf-women cannot be distinguished from the men by those of
   other race ($5);
 - Dwarf-women are very few, and never go to war, nor leave their
   deep homes save at the greatest need ($5);
 - few Dwarves ever wed ($5);
 - the Dwarf-speech changes only very slowly, so that sundering of
   houses and realms does not greatly impair understanding between
   them ($6);
 - Dwarves met Men in Middle-earth long before the Eldar met them,
   and hence there is kinship between Dwarf-speech and the lan-
   guages of the Easterling Men ($6).
  This revised version was of course a part of the 1951 revision. There
 are notable likenesses to what is said in the Appendices to The Lord of
 the Rings concerning the Dwarves: thus in Appendix A, III (Durin's
 Folk) there are references to the fewness of Dwarf-women, who
 remain hidden in their dwellings, to the indistinguishability of Dwarf-
 women from Dwarf-men to people of other races, and to the rarity of
 marriage (III.360); and in Appendix F (III.410) the slow changing of
 their tongue is described.
   There follows now a commentary on particular points.
 $1.  The change made to the original QS text (p. 201, $122) of 'whom
   the Dark-elves named Naug-rim' to 'whom they [the Noldor]
   named the Naug-rim' was now reversed, by a subsequent emenda-
   tion (later, in $7, the attribution of the name to the Dark-elves
   appears in the text as written).
 $2.  'And since they came in the days of the power of Melkor': i.e.,
   before the awakening of the Elves, the Battle of the Gods, and the
   captivity of Melkor in Mandos.
 $3.  It is here that Durin of Khazad-dum, 'most renowned' of the
   Seven Fathers of the Dwarves, enters The Silmarillion. It is not said
   here that Durin's people were the Longbeards; but his association
   with the Longbeards goes back in fact to The Hobbit, where at the
   end of the chapter A Short Rest Thorin says (in the text as originally
   published): 'He was the father of the fathers of one of the two races
   of dwarves, the Longbeards, and my grandfather's ancestor.' In the

                                                                        
                                                                        
 Tale  of  the  Nauglafring  there were  the two  peoples, the  Dwarves of
 Nogrod  and  the   Dwarves  of   Belegost,  and   the  latter   were  the
 Indrafangs  or  Longbeards;  in  the  Quenta  the  same  was true  (or at
 least,  no  other  peoples  were  mentioned),  although   the  Longbeards
 had  become  the  Dwarves  of  Nogrod  (IV.104),  and  this  remained the
 case in QS ($124).                                                      
   In  the present  text two  things are  said on  the subject.  Durin was
 'the  father  of  that  Dwarf-kin  ...  whose  mansions  were  at Khazad-
 dum'  ($3);  but  (reverting  to  the  Tale   of  the   Nauglafring)  the
 Longbeards were the  Dwarves of  Belegost ($7)  - and  this is  said also
 both in the Annals of  Aman and  in the  Grey Annals  (see p.  108, $22).
 I  am  not altogether  certain how  to interpret  this; but  the simplest
 solution  is to  suppose that  when my  father wrote  these texts  he had
 forgotten  Thorin's  mention  of  Durin  as  the  ancestor  of  the Long-
 beards  in  The  Hobbit  (or,  less  probably,  that he  consciously dis-
 regarded it), and the following considerations support it.              
   At the beginning of the  section Durin's  Folk in  Appendix A  (III) to
 The Lord of the Rings the  reading of  the First  Edition was:  'Durin is
 the name that the  Dwarves use  for the  eldest of  the Seven  Fathers of
 all  their  race',  without mention  of the  Longbeards. Years  later, on
 his  copy of  the second  edition of  The Hobbit,  my father  noted: 'Not
 so in Silmarillion nor see [sic] LR III p. 352' - this being  a reference
 to the passage  just cited  from Appendix  A in  the First  Edition: what
 was  'not  so'  was  Thorin's  reference  to  'one  of  the two  races of
 dwarves',  become  obsolete  since  the  emergence  of the  conception of
 the  Seven  Fathers.  At  the  same  time  he  wrote  on  this  copy many
 tentative  phrases  to  replace  Thorin's  original  words, such  as 'the
 eldest of the Seven Fathers of the Dwarves', 'the  father of  the fathers
 of  the  eldest  line  of  the   Dwarf-kings,  the   Longbeards',  before
 arriving  at  the  final  form  as  subsequently  published, 'He  was the
 father of  the fathers  of the  eldest race  of Dwarves,  the Longbeards,
 and  my  first  ancestor:  I am  his heir.'  It was  obviously considera-
 tion  of  Thorin's  words  in  The   Hobbit  and   the  need   for  their
 correction that led him to alter  the text  of Appendix  A, which  in the
 Second  Edition  (1966)  reads:  'Durin  is  the  name  that  the Dwarves
 used  for  the  eldest  of  the  Seven  Fathers  of  their race,  and the
 ancestor of all  the kings  of the  Longbeards', with  the addition  of a
 footnote  reference  to  the  passage  in  The  Hobbit, now  published in
 its corrected form.                                                     
   Thus,  circuitously,  the Longbeards  finally entered  The Lord  of the
 Rings,   as   the   Dwarves  of   Khazad-dum;  but   the  texts   of  The
 Silmarillion  and  the  Annals   were  never   changed,  and   the  Long-
 beards remained the Dwarves of Belegost.                                
$6.  The  marginal  note  'Thus  the  Lammas'  apparently   refers  speci-
 fically  to  the  statement  in  the  text  concerning  the   kinship  of
 languages  of  the  Easterlings  with  Dwarf-speech.  Cf.   V.179  (Lham-

 mas $9): 'the  languages of  Men are  derived in  part from  them' (the
 tongues  of  the  Dwarves);  this was  repeated in  the footnote  to QS
 $123,  from  which  the  present  paragraph  was  developed,  and which
 also has a marginal note 'So, the Lhammas'.                           
$7.  The names and places of the Dwarf-cities now achieve almost
   their final form, and I recapitulate here the complex development:
                                                                      
 QS original form, $124 (V.274)                                        
    Khazad-dum = Nogrod = Dwarfmine (in the Blue Mountains)           
    Gabilgathol = Belegost = Great Fortress                            
 QS original form emended, p. 201                                      
    Khazad-dum = Nogrod = Dwarrowdelf, later Moria                  
    Gabilgathol = Belegost = Great Fortress                            
 QS revised version, $7                                                
    Tumunzahar = Nogrod = Hollowbold (in the Blue Mountains)           
    Gabilgathol = Belegost = Mickleburg                                
    Khazad-dum = Nornhabar = Dwarrowdelf, later Moria                  
                                                                      
 The   Dwarvish   name  Tumunzahar   of  Nogrod   appears  in   GA  $19,
 but this is the first occurrence of the Elvish name Nornhabar.        
    Of  the  names  of the  Dwarves themselves,  there first  occur here
 Gonnhirrim  masters  of  stone,  and  Nyrn   (cf.  Nornwaith   in  AAm,
 X.93,  Norn-folk  in  GA  $19,  and  the  name  Nornhabar   of  Khazad-
 dum).  Naugrim is  now said  to mean  'stunted', and  Nyrn is  'of like
 meaning', though this statement was  struck out;  in the  original text
 ($124)  Neweg  =  'stunted'.  In  addition,  Khuzud   was  subsequently
 changed  to  Khazad,  and Naugrim  to Naug.  I give  here a  summary of
 the development of these confusing names and forms:                   
                                                                      
 Tale of the Nauglafring.      Nauglath.                                      
 Q.                            Nauglir.                                             
                                                                    
 AB 1 (IV.311).                Nauglar (also in the List of Names, V.405:          
                               Dark-elvish name, adopted by the        
                               Gnomes).                                 
                                                                      
 QS (original form).           Naugrim (Dark-elvish name > (p. 201)       
                                                                      
                               Gnomish name).                           
                               Neweg 'stunted' (Gnomish name).            
 QS (revised version).         Naugrim (> Naug) 'stunted' (Gnomish             
                               name  >  Dark-elvish  name,  adopted by
                               the Gnomes).                             
                               Nyrn (Gnomish name, 'stunted' -  but this
                               meaning rejected).                       
                                                                      
 AAm.                          Nauglath > Naugrim                         
                                                                      
                               Nornwaith (later rejected, X.106, $84)     
                                                                      
 GA.                           Naugrim                                    
                                                                      
                               Norn-folk ($19).                            

  An  important  element  in this  revised section  remains to  be mentioned:
  at  this  stage  the  myth  of  the  creation  of  the  Dwarves  lacked the
  element of the Fathers being  laid to  sleep, by  the command  of Iluvatar,
  after their first arising. This is apparent from the text as it stands; and
  the entry of this element will be seen in a moment.                        
                                                                            
    The  next text  was the  typescript of  the LQ  1 series,  which followed
  the  manuscript  text  exactly  (but  the  changes of  Khuzud >  Khazad and
  Naugrim > Naug in  $7 do  not appear,  nor in  LQ 2),  and after  the first
  paragraph  of  the section  Of the  Edain ($9),  where the  revised version
  ends,  followed  the original  text of  QS, with  the very  few alterations
  that were made to it and which have been given on pp. 201-2.               
                                                                            
  The  opening  of  'the  words  of  Pengolod  [>  Pengolod]  concerning  the
  Naugrim'  ($2)  were  struck  out,  long  afterwards,  on LQ  1, as  far as
  'the desire of Aule's heart to  make things  of his  own after  the pattern
  of the  designs of  Iluvatar.' Associated  with the  QS manuscript  at this
  point  are  two  pages  headed  'Of Aule  and the  Dwarves', enclosed  in a
  paper   wrapper   bearing   the   words  'Amended   Legend  of   Origin  of
  Dwarves';  this  begins   as  a   good  manuscript   but  breaks   up  into
  confusion and variant forms.  A new  text was  written out  fair in  a late
  script  of  my  father's,  without  title,  and  attached  to  LQ  1  as  a
  replacement for the passage struck  out; it  begins thus,  differing little
  from the rejected form:                                                    
    The  Naugrim  are  not  of  the  Elf-kind,  nor of  Man-kind, nor  yet of
  Melkor's   breeding;   and   the   Noldor,   when   they   met    them   in
  Middle-earth,  knew  not  whence   they  came,   holding  that   they  were
  alien  to  the  Children,  although  in  many  ways  they  resembled  them.
  But  here  in  Valinor  we  have  learned  that  in  their   beginning  the
  Dwarves  were  made  by  Aule,  while  Earth  was  still  dark;   for  Aule
  desired  the  coming  of  the  Children  so  greatly,  to have  learners to
  whom  he  could  teach  his  lore  and  his crafts,  that he  was unwilling
  to await the fulfilment of the designs of Iluvatar.                        
  The remainder  of the  text will  be found  in the  published Silmarillion,
  Chapter  2  Of Aule  and Yavanna,  pp. 43  - 4,  to its  end at  'Then Aule
  took  the  Seven  Fathers  of  the  Dwarves,  and  laid  them  to  rest  in
  far-sundered  places;  and  he returned  to Valinor,  and waited  while the
  long  years  lengthened.'  There  are a  number of  insignificant editorial
  alterations  in  the published  text, and  among them  one point  should be
  mentioned:  my  father  was  uncertain whether  to use  'thou' or  'you' in
  the  converse  of  Aule with  Iluvatar (in  one case  he changed  'you may'
  to 'thou mayst' and  then reverted  to 'you  may'). In  the end  he decided
  on 'you', whereas the published text has 'thou' throughout.                
    At  the  end  of  the insertion  the chapter  continues with  'Since they
  came  in  the  days  of  the  power  of  Melkor  ...'  (p.  204),  but con-
  comitantly  with  the  introduction  of  the  new  form  of the  legend, in

  which  the  Fathers  of the  Dwarves were  laid to  sleep until  after the
  awakening  of  the  Elves  and  the  imprisonment  of  Melkor,   this  was
  changed  on  LQ  1  to  'Since  they  were  to  come  ...' The  only other
  significant alteration made to LQ  1 was  in the  opening sentence  of $3,
  which was  changed to  read: 'Now  these Seven  Fathers, they  say, return
  to live again and  to bear  once more  their ancient  names.' It  might be
  expected  that  my  father  would  have  made some  change to  the opening
  sentence of $4 after the entry of the new form of the  legend, but  he was
  evidently content with an internal shift of meaning: 'even from  the first
  days of their Fathers' is to be understood as 'even from the first days of
  their Fathers when they awoke from their sleep'.                          

   The earlier of the two texts of  the inserted  passage shows  my father
 much exercised  about the  details of  the making  of the  first Dwarves.
 Thus there are the following tentative and roughly-written passages:     
                                                                         
   (a).   But  it is  said that  to each  Dwarf Iluvatar  added a  mate of
          female  kind,  yet  because   he  would   not  amend   the  work
          of  Aule,  and  Aule  had  yet  made only  things of  male form,
          therefore  the  women  of  the Dwarves  resemble their  men more
          than all other [? speaking] races.                              
                                                                         
   (b).   He wrought in secret in a  hall under  the mountains  in Middle-
          earth. There he made  first one  Dwarf, the  eldest of  all, and
          after he made six others, the fathers of their race; and then he
          began to make others again, like to them but  of female  kind to
          be  their  mates. But  he wearied,  and when  he [had]  made six
          more he  rested, and  he returned  to the  seven fathers  and he
          looked  at them,  and they  looked at  him, and  whatever motion
          was  in his  thought that  motion they  performed. And  Aule was
          not pleased, but he  began to  teach them  the language  that he
          had designed for them, hoping thus to instruct them.            
             But Iluvatar knew all  that was  done, and  in the  very hour
          that the Eldest Dwarf first spoke with tongue, Iluvatar spoke to
          Aule; and Aule                                                  
                                                                         
   (c).   Aule made one,  and then  six, and  he began  to make  mates for
          them  of  female form,  and he  made six,  and then  he wearied.
          Thus he buried six  pairs, but  one (Durin)  the eldest  he laid
          alone.                                                          
                                                                         
   (d).   And Aule  took the  Seven Dwarves  and laid  them to  rest under
          stone in far-sundered places, and beside each [of] them  he laid
          a mate as the Voice bade him, and then he returned to Valinor.
                                                                         
   (e).   Then Aule took the  Seven Dwarves  and laid  them to  rest under
          stone in far-sundered places, and beside each he laid  his mate,
          save only  beside the  Eldest, and  he lay  alone. And  Aule re-
          turned to Valinor and waited long as  best he  might. But  it is

  not  known  when  Durin  or  his  brethren  first  awoke, though                  
  some think that it was at the time of the departure of the Eldar                  
  over sea.                                                                         
 With passage (b) cf. the essay on Orcs in Vol.X, p. 417:                           
 But  if  [Melkor]  had  indeed  attempted  to  make  creatures of  his own         
 in  imitation  or mockery  of the  Incarnates, he  would, like  Aule, only         
 have   succeeded   in   producing  puppets:   his  creatures   would  have         
 acted  only  while  the  attention  of his  will was  upon them,  and they         
 would  have  shown  no  reluctance   to  execute   any  command   of  his,         
 even if it were to destroy themselves.                                             
 In the final text,  as printed  in The  Silmarillion, my  father evidently         
 abandoned the question of  the origin  of the  female Dwarves,  finding it         
 intractable  and the  solutions unsatisfactory.  Moreover in  the finished         
 form the element of  the Eldest  (Durin) being  distinct from  the others,         
 and without mate, finds no place.                                                  
 There is  another version  of the  legend in  the draft  continuation (not         
 sent)   of  a   letter  to   Miss  Rhona   Beare  dated   14  October   1958  (The
 Letters  of  J.  R.  R.  Tolkien  no.212);  arid  here  appears  the  idea  of the
 one  and  the  six,  and  the  six mates  of the  six, making  thirteen in  all. I
 reprint the passage here, since it may not be readily available.                   
 Aule,  for  instance,  one of  the Great,  in a  sense 'fell';  for he  so desired
 to  see  the  Children,  that  he  became  impatient   and  tried   to  anticipate
 the  will  of  the  Creator.  Being  the  greatest  of all  craftsmen he  tried to
 make   children   according   to   his   imperfect   knowledge   of   their  kind.
 When   he   had   made   thirteen,*   God  spoke   to  him   in  anger,   but  not
 without  pity:  for  Aule  had  done  this  thing  not  out  of  evil   desire  to
 have   slaves   and   subjects   of   his   own,  but   out  of   impatient  love,
 desiring  children  to  talk  to  and   teach,  sharing   with  them   the  praise
 of  Iluvatar  and  his  great  love  of  the  materials  of  which  the  world  is
 made.                                                                              
 The   One   rebuked   Aule,   saying   that   he   had   tried   to    usurp   the
 Creator's   power;   but   he   could   not   give   independent   life   to   his
 makings.   He  had   only  one   life,  his   own  derived   from  the   One,  and
 could   at   most   only   distribute   it.   'Behold'   said   the   One:  'these
 creatures   of   thine   have   only   thy   will,   and   thy   movement.  Though
 you  have  devised  a  language   for  them,   they  can   only  report   to  thee
 thine own thought. This is a mockery of me.'                                       
 Then   Aule   in   grief   and   repentance   humbled   himself   and   asked  for
 pardon.   And   he   said:   'I  will   destroy  these   images  of   my  presump-
 tion,  and  wait  upon  thy  will.'  And  he  took  a  great  hammer,  raising  it
 to  smite  the  eldest  of  his  images;   but  it   flinched  and   cowered  from
 him.   And   as   he   withheld   his   stroke,    astonished,   he    heard   the
 laughter of Iluvatar.                                                              
                                                                                   
 (* One, the eldest, alone, and six more with six mates.)                            

    'Do you  wonder at  this?' he  said. 'Behold!  thy creatures  now live,
 free  from  thy will!  For I  have seen  thy humility,  and taken  pity on
 your impatience. Thy making I have taken up into my design.'             
    This  is  the  Elvish  legend  of the  making of  the Dwarves;  but the
 Elves  report  that  Iluvatar  said  thus  also:  'Nonetheless I  will not
 suffer  my  design  to  be  forestalled:  thy  children  shall  not  awake
 before  mine  own.'  And  he  commanded  Aule  to lay  the fathers  of the
 Dwarves  severally  in deep  places, each  with his  mate, save  Durin the
 eldest  who  had  none.  There  they  should  sleep  long,  until Iluvatar
 bade  them  awake. Nonetheless  there has  been for  the most  part little
 love  between  the  Dwarves  and  the  children  of  Iluvatar. And  of the
 fate  that  Iluvatar  has  set  upon  the  children  of  Aule  beyond  the
 Circles  of  the  world  Elves  and  men  know  nothing,  and  if  Dwarves
 know they do not speak of it.                                             
                                                                          
 It seems to me virtually certain that all this work on the later legend of
 Aule  and  the  Dwarves  derives  from the  same time,  and it  is obvious
 that this letter belongs with the first or draft text from  which extracts
 are given on pp. 211-12, preceding  the final  text attached  to LQ  1 and
 printed  in  The  Silmarillion.  That  text  was incorporated  in LQ  2 as
 typed,  and  for  that  typescript  I  have  proposed (on  wholly distinct
 grounds)  1958  as  the  approximate  date  (see  X.141-2,  300).  This, I
 think, fits well enough with  the date  of the  letter (October  1958). It
 seems likely that my  father revised  the existing  Silmarillion materials
 pari  passu with  the making  of the  typescript LQ  2, carried  out under
 his guidance.                                                             
                                                                          
 As  already  noticed  (see  p.  210),  the   original  QS   text  (lightly
 emended)  in  the  second  part of  the chapter,  that concerned  with the
 Edain, was followed in  the early  typescript LQ  1. At  a later  time the
 whole  of  the section  on the  Edain was  struck through  both on  the QS
 manuscript  (with  the  direction  'Substitute  new  form')  and  on  LQ 1
 (with the direction 'Cancel').  This new  form was  a typescript,  made by
 my father  himself, with  the title  Of the  Coming of  Men into  the West
 and  the  Meeting  of the  Edain and  the Eldar.  In the  LQ 2  series the
 section  on  the  Dwarves,  now  much  altered   and  expanded   from  its
 original  form,  was  made  into a  separate chapter,  on which  my father
 inserted   the   number   'XVI'   (following  'XV'   Of  Turgon   and  the
 Building of Gondolin, p. 200),  retaining as  title the  original subtitle
 Concerning  the Dwarves  (p. 202).  The new  text of  the second  part, Of
 the  Coming of  Men into  the West,  then followed  in LQ  2 as  a further
 chapter  and  was  given  the   number  'XVII'.   I  have   followed  this
 arrangement.                                                              
 The  complex  textual  evolution  of  the  original  chapter  in   QS  can
 be  displayed  thus  (the  dates  have  been made  definite except  in one
 case).                                                                    

 QS ch.10 Of Men and Dwarfs                                    
   (1937)                                                      
                                                              
   QS ch.10 New title  Of the                                  
   Naugrim  and   the  Edain:                                  
   section  on   the  Dwarves                                  
   rewritten; section  on the                                  
   Edain retained (1951)                                       
                                                              
 Typescript LQ 1 (1951)                                        
                                                              
 Insertion of new legend of          Typescript LQ 2 (1958):
   Aule and the Dwarves              ch.XVI Concerning the     
   (1958)                            Dwarves (no section on the
                                                              
                                     Edain)                    
                                                              
   Wholly new text on  the Edain:    Typescript LQ 2 (1958):
   Of  the  Coming  of  Men  into    ch. XVII                  
   the West (date uncertain:                                   
   1958?)                                                      
                                                              
                                  *                            

 It  remains  only  to  notice  the  changes  made  to  LQ   2  Concerning
 the  Dwarves.  The  chief of  these is  a further  revision of  the names
 of  the  Dwarves  (see  the  table  on  p.  209).  In  $1 (p.  203) 'whom
 the  Dark-elves  named  the  Naugrim'  was  struck  out,  and   at  every
 occurrence  the  name  Naugrim  was  replaced by  Dwarves (except  in the
 heading to $2, where it was no doubt retained inadvertently). In  $7 the
 opening passage now read, both in LQ 1 and in LQ 2:                     
    In  their  own  tongue  the  Dwarves   name  themselves   Khuzud;  but
 the   Dark-elves   called   them   Naugrim,   the  stunted.   Which  name
 the  exiled  Noldor  likewise  took for  them, but  called them  also the
 Nyrn...                                                                 
 (The  changes  of  Khuzud  to  Khazad  and  Naugrim   to  Naug   made  on
 the manuscript did not appear in the typescripts as  typed, see  pp. 205,
 210.) The passage was rewritten on LQ 2 thus:                           
    In  their  own  tongue  the  Dwarves   name  themselves   Khazad;  but
 the  Grey-elves  called them  the Nyrn,  the hard.  This name  the exiled
 Noldor  likewise  took  for  them,  but  called  them  also  the Naugrim,
 the stunted folk...                                                     
 Other  changes  were:  in  $1,  in  the  sentence  'few ever  passed over

 the  mountains',  'few'  >  'none'; also  Cranthir >  Caranthir. In  $7, in
 the   sentence   concerning   Nornhabar,   Belegost,   and   Nogrod,  which
 were  said  to  be  interpretations   'in  the   Gnomish  tongue'   of  the
 Dwarvish names, 'Gnomish' > 'Elvish'.                                      
                                                                           
                    14. OF THE COMING OF MEN INTO THE WEST.                  
                                                                           
 The  introduction  of  what  very  soon  became an  entirely new  chapter -
 a  massive extension  of and  departure from  the 'traditional'  history of
 the  Edain  -  has  been  briefly  described  on  p. 213.  It emerges  in a
 typescript  (with  carbon  copy)  made  by my  father: of  antecedent draft
 material there is now no trace,  but it  seems to  me very  improbable that
 the text reached this form ab initio. It has in fact two titles: that typed
 as heading  to the  text is  Of the  Coming of  Men into  the West  and the
 Meeting  of  the  Edain  and  the Eldar,  but on  a separate  title-page in
 manuscript it is called  Of the  Coming of  the Edain  6' their  Houses and
 Lordships in Beleriand.                                                    
   The  text  was  emended  in  ink  on  both  copies   almost  identically;
 these  changes  were  made,  I  feel  sure, at  much the  same time  as the
 original typing,  and in  the text  that follows  I adopt  the emendations,
 but  notice  some  of  the  original  readings   in  the   commentary.  The
 separate title-page with the different title may belong  with these,  but I
 use here the  other, in  a shortened  form Of  the Coming  of Men  into the
 West,  as  was  done  in  the  published  Silmarillion.  The   chapter  (as
 emended)  was  incorporated  in  the  typescript  series  LQ 2,  as already
 mentioned,  and  subsequently   given  the   number  'XVII';   perhaps  (as
 with the new legend of  Aule and  the Dwarves,  see p.  213) it  belongs to
 the  period  when  the  LQ  typescript  was  being made  (see p.  227, $13,
 and p. 229).                                                               
   The  text  is  found  in the  published Silmarillion,  Chapter 17,  but I
 have thought it best in this case to give the original in full. To show the
 editorial  alterations  and  insertions  in the  published text  takes much
 space, and it is  difficult to  make them  clear, while  the chapter  is an
 essential companion to The Wanderings of Hurin in Part Three.              
                                                                           
                     Of the Coming of Men into the West                     
                        and the Meeting of the Edain                        
                                and the Eldar.                              
                                                                           
   $1. Now  it came  to pass,  when three  hundred years  and ten           
 were gone since the Noldor came to Beleriand, in the days of the           
 Long  Peace,  that Felagund  journeyed east  of Sirion  and went           
 hunting  with  Maglor  and  Maedros,  sons  of  Feanor.  But  he           
 wearied  of  the  chase and  passed on  alone towards  the Moun-           
 tains of Ered-lindon that he  saw shining  afar; and  taking the           

 Dwarf-road  he  crossed  Gelion  at  the  ford  of  Sarn-athrad, and
 turning south  over the  upper streams  of Ascar,  he came  into the
 north of Ossiriand.                                                
   $2. In  a  valley  among  the  foothills  of the  Mountains, below
 the springs of Thalos, he saw lights in the evening, and far  off he
 heard  the  sound  of  song.  At  this  he  wondered  much,  for the
 Green-elves of that  land lit  no fires,  and they  did not  sing by
 night.  At  first  he  feared  that a  raid of  Orcs had  passed the
 leaguer of the North, but  as he  drew near  he perceived  that this
 was not so. For  the singers  used a  tongue that  he had  not heard
 before,  neither  that  of  Dwarves  nor of  Orcs, and  their voices
 were fair, though untutored in music.                              
   $3. Then  Felagund,  standing  silent   in  the   night-shadow  of
 the  trees,  looked  down  into  the  camp,  and  there he  beheld a
 strange  folk.  They  were  tall,  and  strong,  and  comely, though
 rude  and  scantily  clad;  but  their  camp  was  well-ordered, and
 they had tents  and lodges  of boughs  about the  great fire  in the
 midst; and there were fair women and children among them.          
   $4. Now  these  were  a  part  of  the  kindred  and  following of
 Beor  the  Old,  as  he  was  afterwards  called, a  chieftain among
 Men.  After  many  lives of  wandering out  of the  East he  had led
 them at last over the Mountains,  the first  of the  race of  Men to
 enter  Beleriand;  and  they  sang  because  they  were   glad,  and
 believed that they had escaped  from all  perils and  had come  to a
 land without fear.                                                 
   $5. Long  Felagund  watched  them,  and  love  for   them  stirred
 in his heart; but he  remained hidden  in the  trees until  they had
 all  fallen  asleep.  Then he  went among  the sleeping  people, and
 sat  beside  their dying  fire where  none kept  watch; and  he took
 up  a  rude  harp which  Beor had  laid aside,  and he  played music
 upon it such  as the  ears of  Men had  not heard;  for they  had as
 yet no teachers in the  art, save  only the  Dark-elves in  the wild
 lands.                                                             
   $6. Now  men  awoke  and  listened  to   Felagund  as   he  harped
 and  sang,  and  each  thought  that  he  was  in  some  fair dream,
 until  he  saw  that  his fellows  were awake  also beside  him; but
 they did not speak or stir while Felegund  still played,  because of
 the  beauty  of  the  music  and  the  wonder  of  the  song. Wisdom
 was  in  the  words  of the  Elven-king, and  the hearts  grew wiser
 that  hearkened to  him; for  the things  of which  he sang,  of the
 making  of  Arda,  and  the  bliss  of  Aman  beyond the  shadows of
 the Sea, came as  clear visions  before their  eyes, and  his Elvish

 speech was interpreted in each mind according to its measure.             
   $7.  Thus   it   was  that   Men  called   King  Felagund,   whom  they
 first  met  of  all  the  Eldar,  Wisdom,  and after  him they  named his
 people  The  Wise.*  Indeed   they  believed   at  first   that  Felagund
 was  one  of  the  gods,  of  whom  they  had  heard  rumour   that  they
 dwelt  far  in  the  West; and  this was  (some say)  the chief  cause of
 their  journey.   But  Felagund   dwelt  among   them  and   taught  them
 true  lore;  and  they  loved  him  and  took  him  for  their  lord, and
 were ever after loyal to the House of Finrod.**                           
   $8. Now  the   Eldar  were   beyond  all   other  peoples   skilled  in
 tongues;  and  Felagund  discovered  also  that  he  could  read  in  the
 minds  of  Men  such  thoughts  as  they  wished  to  reveal  in  speech,
 so  that  their  words  were  easily  interpreted.+   It  was   not  long
 therefore   before   he   could   converse  with   Beor;  and   while  he
 dwelt   with   him   they   spoke  much   together.  But   when  Felagund
 questioned   Beor   concerning   the   arising    of   Men    and   their
 journeys,  Beor  would  say  little;  and  indeed  he  knew  little,  for
 the  fathers  of  his  people  had  told few  tales of  their past  and a
 silence had fallen upon their memory.                                     
   $9.  'A   darkness   lies  behind   us,'  Beor   said;  'and   we  have
 turned  our  backs  on  it,  and  we  do  not  desire  to  return thither
 even   in   thought.  Westwards   our  hearts   have  been   turned,  and
 we believe that there we shall find Light.'                               
   $10.  But   Felagund   learned   from   Beor   that  there   were  many
 other   Men   of   like   mind   who   were  also   journeying  westward.
 'Others  of  my   own  kin   have  crossed   the  Mountains,'   he  said,
 'and   they   are   wandering   not   far  away;   and  the   Haladin,  a
 people  that  speak  the  same  tongue as  we, are  still in  the valleys
 on   the   eastern   slopes,   awaiting   tidings  before   they  venture
                                                                          
  (*  Nom  and  [Nomil  >]  Nomin in  the ancient  language of  this people
 (which  afterwards was  forgotten); for  Beor and  his folk  later learned
 the language  of the  Eldar and  forsook their  own, though  they retained
 many  names  that  came  down  to  them [out  of the  past > ]  from their
 fathers.)                                                                 
                                                                          
 (** Thus  Beor  got his  name; for  it signified  Vassal in  their tongue,
 and each of their chieftains after him bore this name as a title until the
 time of Bregolas and Barahir.)                                            
                                                                          
 (+ It  is  said  also  that  these  Men  had  long  had dealings  with the
 Dark-elves  of  Middle-earth,  and  from  them had  learned much  of their
 speech; and since  all the  languages of  the Quendi  were of  one origin,
 the language  of Beor  and his  folk resembled  the Elven-tongues  in many
 words and devices.)                                                       

                                                   
                                                                   
 further. There  are also  Men of  a different  speech, with  whom we
 have had  dealings at  times. They  were before  us in  the westward
 march,  but  we  passed  them;  for  they  are  a  numerous  people,
 and  yet  keep  together  and move  slowly, being  all ruled  by one
 chieftain whom they call Marach.'                                  
  $11   Now   the   Nandor,  the   Green-elves  of   Ossiriand,  were
 troubled  by  the  coming  of  Men,  and  when  they  heard  that  a
 lord  of  the  Eldar  from  over the  Sea was  among them  they sent
 messengers  to  Felagund.  'Lord,'  they  said,  'if you  have power
 over these  new-comers, bid  them to  return by  the ways  that they
 came, or else  to go  forward. For  we desire  no strangers  in this
 land  to  break  the  peace  in which  we live.  And these  folk are
 hewers  of  trees  and  hunters  of beasts;  therefore we  are their
 unfriends, and if they will not depart we shall afflict them  in all
 ways that we can.'                                                 
  $12  Then  by  the  advice  of  Felagund  Beor  gathered   all  the
 wandering  families  and  kindreds  of  his  folk, and  they removed
 over Gelion and took up  their abode  in the  lands of  Diriol, upon
 the east-banks  of the  Celon near  to the  borders of  Doriath. But
 when  after  a  year  had passed  Felagund wished  to return  to his
 own  country,  Beor  begged  leave   to  come   with  him;   and  he
 remained in the service of the king while his  life lasted.  In this
 way  he  got  his  name  Beor,  whereas  his  name  before  had been
 Balan;  for  Beor  signified Servant  in the  ancient tongue  of his
 people. The rule of his folk he  committed to  his elder  son Baran,
 and he did not return again to Estolad.*                           
                                                                   
               Of the Kindreds and Houses of the Edain.             
  $13. Soon  after  the  departure  of  Felagund  the  other  Men  of
 whom  Beor  had  spoken  came  also into  Beleriand. First  came the
 Haladin;   but  meeting   the  unfriendship   of  the   Nandor  they
 turned  north and  dwelt in  Radhrost, in  the country  of Caranthir
 son  of Feanor;  and there  for a  time they  had peace,  though the
 people  of  Caranthir  paid  little  heed  to  them. The  next year,
 however,  Marach  led  his  people  over  the  Mountains;  and  they
 were  a  tall  and  warlike  folk,  and  they  marched   in  ordered
 companies;  and  the   Green-elves  hid   themselves  and   did  not
 waylay  them.  And  Marach  hearing  that  the  people of  Beor were
 dwelling  in  a  green and  fertile land,  came down  the Dwarf-road
                                                                   
 (* 'The Encampment. This was the name ever after of the land east of
 Celon and south of Nan Elmoth.)                                    

 and settled his people in the  country to  the south  and east  of the
 dwellings  of  Baran  son   of  Beor.   There  was   great  friendship
 between  the  peoples,  though  they  were  sundered in  speech, until
 they both learned the Sindarin tongue.                                
   $14.  Felagund   himself   often   returned   to   visit   Men;  and
 many  other  Elves  out  of  the  westlands,  both Noldor  and Sindar,
 journeyed  to   Estolad,  being   eager  to   see  the   Edain,  whose
 coming  had  long  been  foretold.*  And  Fingolfin,  King of  all the
 Noldor,  sent  messengers  of  welcome  to   them.  Then   many  young
 and  eager  men  of  the  Edain  went  away  and  took   service  with
 the  kings  and  lords  of  the  Eldar.  Among  these  was  Malach son
 of  Marach,  and  he  dwelt  in  Hithlum  for  fourteen years;  and he
 learned the Elven-tongue and was given the name of Aradan.            
   $15. The  Edain  did  not  long  dwell  content  in   Estolad,   for
 many  still  desired  to  go  westwards;  but  they  did not  know the
 way:  before  them  lay  the  fences  of  Doriath,  and  southward lay
 Sirion  and  its  impassable fens.  Therefore the  kings of  the three
 houses  of  the  Noldor,  seeing  hope  of  strength  in  the  sons of
 Men,  sent  word  that  any  of  the  Edain  that wished  might remove
 and   come   to   dwell   among   their  people.   In  this   way  the
 migration of the Edain began: at first little by little, but  later in
 families  and  kindreds,  they  arose  and  left Estolad,  until after
 some  fifty  years  many  thousands  had  entered  the  lands  of  the
 kings.                                                                
   $16.  Most   of  these   took  the   long  road   northwards,  under
 the  guidance  of  the  Elves,  until  the ways  became well  known to
 them.  The  people   of  Beor   came  to   Dorthonion  and   dwelt  in
 lands  ruled  by  the  House  of  Finrod.  The  people of  Aradan (for
 Marach  remained  in  Estolad  until  his  death)  for  the  most part
 went  on  westwards;  and  some  came  to   Hithlum,  but   Magor  son
 of  Aradan  and   the  greater   number  of   his  folk   passed  down
 Sirion  into  Beleriand  and  dwelt  in  the  vales  on  the  southern
 slopes  of  the  Ered-wethion.  A few  only of  either people  went to
 Maedros and the lands about the Hill of Himring.                      
                                                                      
  (* Atani was the name given to Men in Valinor, in the lore  that told
 of their coming; according to the Eldar it signified 'Second', for the
 kindred of Men was the second of the Children  of Iluvatar.  Edain was
 the form of the name in Beleriand, and there it was  used only  of the
 three kindreds of the first Elf-friends. Men of other kind were called
 Hravani (or Rhevain), the 'Wild'. But all Men  the Elves  called Hildi
 [> Hildor], the Followers, or Firyar, the  Mortals (in  Sindarin Echil
 and Firiath).)                                                        

                      
                                                                    
   $17.  Many,   however,   remained   in   Estolad;  and   there  was
 still a mingled people of Men  living there  long years  after, until
 in  the  ruin  of  Beleriand  they  were  overwhelmed  or  fled  back
 into  the  East.   For  beside   the  old   who  deemed   that  their
 wandering  days  were  over  there  were  not  a  few who  desired to
 go  their  own  ways  and  feared the  Eldar and  the light  of their
 eyes;  and  dissensions  awoke   among  the   Edain,  in   which  the
 shadow  of  Morgoth  may  be  discerned,  for  it  cannot  be doubted
 that  he  knew  of   the  coming   of  Men   and  of   their  growing
 friendship with the Elves.                                          
   $18. The  leaders  of  discontent  were  Bereg  of  the   House  of
 Beor  and  Amlach  one  of   the  grandsons   of  Marach;   and  they
 said openly: 'We took long roads,  desiring to  escape the  perils of
 Middle-earth  and  the  dark things  that dwell  there; for  we heard
 that  there  was  Light  in  the  West.  But  now  we learn  that the
 Light  is  beyond  the  Sea. Thither  we cannot  come where  the gods
 dwell in bliss. Save one. For  the Lord  of the  Dark is  here before
 us,  and  the  Eldar,  wise  but  fell,  who  make  endless  war upon
 him. In the North  he dwells,  they say;  and there  is the  pain and
 death from which we fled. We will not go that way.'                 
   $19. Then  a  council  and   assembly  of   Men  was   called,  and
 great   numbers   came   together.   And  the   Elf-friends  answered
 Bereg, saying:  'Truly from  the Dark  King come  all the  evils from
 which  we  fled;  but he  seeks dominion  over all  Middle-earth, and
 whither now shall we turn and  he will  not pursue  us? Unless  he be
 vanquished here, or at least held in leaguer. Only  by the  valour of
 the Eldar is he restrained,  and maybe  it was  for this  purpose, to
 aid them at need, that we were brought into this land.'             
   $20. To  this  Bereg  answered:  'Let  the  Eldar  look to  it! Our
 lives are short enough.' But  there arose  one who  seemed to  all to
 be  Amlach  son  of  Imlach,  speaking  fell  words  that  shook  the
 hearts of all that heard him: 'All this is but Elvish lore,  tales to
 beguile  new-comers  that  are   unwary.  The   Sea  has   no  shore.
 There  is no  Light in  the West.  You have  followed a  fool-fire of
 the  Elves  to  the  end  of  the world!  Which of  you has  seen the
 least  of  the  gods?  Who  has beheld  the Dark  King in  the North?
 Those  who  seek  the  dominion  of   Middle-earth  are   the  Eldar.
 Greedy  for  wealth they  have delved  in the  Earth for  its secrets
 and  have  stirred  to  wrath the  things that  dwell beneath  it, as
 they  ever have  done and  ever shall.  Let the  Orcs have  the realm
 that is theirs, and we will have ours.  There is  room in  the world,
 if the Eldar will let us be!'                                       

   $21. Then  those  that listened  sat for  a while  astounded, and
 a shadow of fear fell on their hearts; and they resolved  to depart
 far  from  the  lands  of  the  Eldar.  But  later  Amlach returned
 among them  and denied  that he  had been  present at  their debate
 or  had  spoken  such  words  as  they  reported;  and   there  was
 doubt  and  bewilderment  among  Men.  Then  the  Elf-friends said:
 'You will now believe this at least:  there is  indeed a  dark Lord
 and his spies  and emissaries  are among  us; for  he fears  us and
 the strength that we may give to his foes.'                       
   $22. But  some  still  answered:  He hates  us, rather,  and ever
 the more the longer  we dwell  here, meddling  in his  quarrel with
 the kings of  the Eldar,  to no  gain of  ours.' Many  therefore of
 those  that  yet  remained  in  Estolad made  ready to  depart; and
 Bereg  led  a  thousand  of  the  people  of  Beor  away southwards
 and  they  passed  out  of  the  songs  of  those days.  But Amlach
 repented,  saying:  'I  now  have  a  quarrel of  my own  with this
 Master  of Lies  which will  last to  my life's  end'; and  he went
 away north and entered  the service  of Maedros.  But those  of his
 people  who  were  of  like  mind  with  Bereg  chose a  new leader
 and  went  back  over  the  Mountains  into  Eriador  and  are for-
 gotten.                                                           
                                                                  
   $23. During  this  time  the  Haladin  remained  in  Radhrost and
 were  content.  But  Morgoth, seeing  that by  lies and  deceits he
 could  not  yet  wholly  estrange  Elves and  Men, was  filled with
 wrath   and   endeavoured   to   do   Men   what  hurt   he  could.
 Therefore  he  sent  out an  orc-raid and  passing east  it escaped
 the  leaguer  and  came  in  stealth  back  over  the  Mountains by
 the  passes  of the  Dwarf-road and  fell upon  the Haladin  in the
 southern woods of the land of Caranthir.                          
   $24. Now the  Haladin did  not live  under the  rule of  lords or
 many  together,  but  each  homestead  was  set apart  and governed
 its  own  affairs,  and  they  were  slow to  unite. But  there was
 among   them   a   man   named   Haldad   who  was   masterful  and
 fearless; and he gathered  all the  brave men  that he  could find,
 and  retreated  to  the  angle  of land  between Ascar  and Gelion,
 and in  the utmost  corner he  built a  stockade across  from water
 to water; and behind it they led  all the  women and  children that
 they could save. There they  were besieged,  until they  were short
 of food.                                                          
   $25.  Now  Haldad   had  twin   children:  Haleth   his  daughter
 and  Haldar  his son;  and both  were valiant  in the  defence, for

 Haleth  was  a  woman  of  great  heart and  strength. But  at last
 Haldad was  slain in  a sortie  against the  Orcs; and  Haldar, who
 rushed  out  to  save his  father's body  from their  butchery, was
 hewn  down  beside  him.  Then  Haleth  held  the   folk  together,
 though  they were  without hope;  and some  cast themselves  in the
 rivers   and  were  drowned.  Seven  days later,  as the  Orcs made
 their last  assault and  had already  broken through  the stockade,
 there  came  suddenly  a  music  of  trumpets,  and  Caranthir with
 his  host came  down from  the north  and drove  the Orcs  into the
 rivers.                                                           
   $26.  Then   Caranthir   looked   kindly   upon   Men   and   did
 Haleth  great  honour,  and  he  offered  her  recompense  for  her
 father and brother. And seeing,  over late,  what valour  there was
 in  the  Edain,  he  said  to her:  'If you  will remove  and dwell
 further north, there you shall have  the friendship  and protection
 of the Eldar and free lands of your own.'                         
   $27. But  Haleth  was  proud,  and  unwilling  to  be  guided  or
 ruled,  and  most  of  the  Haladin  were  of like  mood. Therefore
 she  thanked  Caranthir,  but  answered:  'My  mind  is   now  set,
 lord, to  leave the  shadow of  the Mountains  and go  west whither
 others  of  our  kin  have  gone.' When  therefore the  Haladin had
 gathered all that they could find alive of their folk who  had fled
 wild  into  the  woods  before  the  Orcs,  and  had  gleaned  what
 remained  of  their  goods  in their  burned homesteads,  they took
 Haleth for their chief; and she led  them at  last to  Estolad, and
 there they dwelt for a time.                                      
   $28. But  they  remained  a  people  apart,  and were  ever after
 known  to  Elves  and  Men   as  the   People  of   Haleth.  Haleth
 remained their chief while her days  lasted, but  she did  not wed,
 and  the  headship  afterwards  passed  to  Hardan  son  of  Haldar
 her  brother.  Soon,  however,  Haleth  desired  to  move  westward
 again; and though  most of  her people  were against  this counsel,
 she  led  them  forth  once  more;  and they  went without  help or
 guidance  of  the  Eldar,  and  passing  over  Celon and  Aros they
 journeyed  in  the perilous  land between  the Mountains  of Terror
 and the  Girdle of  Melian. That  land was  not yet  so evil  as it
 after became, but it was  no road  for mortal  Men to  take without
 aid,  and Haleth  only brought  her folk  through it  with hardship
 and  loss,  constraining  them  to  go forward  by the  strength of
 her  will.  At  last  they  crossed  over  the Brithiach,  and many
 bitterly repented their journey;  but there  was now  no returning.
 Therefore in new lands they  went back  to their  old life  as best

 they could;  and they  dwelt in  free homesteads  in the  woods of
 the  Dalath  Dirnen  beyond  Teiglin, and  some wandered  far into
 the  realm  of  Nargothrond.  But  there were  many who  loved the
 Lady  Haleth  and  wished  to  go  whither  she  would  and  dwell
 [ under her rule; and these she  led into  the Forest  of Brethil.
 Thither in the evil days that followed many of her  scattered folk
 returned.                                                         
    $29. Now  Brethil  was  claimed as  part of  his realm  by King
 Thingol,  though  it  was  not  within  the  List  Melian,  and he
 would  have  denied  it  to  Haleth;  but  Felagund,  who  had the
 friendship of Thingol, when he heard of all that had  befallen the
 people of Haleth,  obtained this  grace for  her: that  she should
 dwell free in  Brethil upon  condition only  that her  folk should
 guard the Crossings of Teiglin against all  enemies of  the Eldar,
 and  allow  no  Orcs  to  enter  their  woods.  To   which  Haleth
 answered:   'Where   are   Haldad   my   father,  and   Haldar  my
 brother? If the king fears a friendship  between Haleth  and those
 who  devoured  her  kin,  then  the  thoughts  of  the  Eldar  are
 strange to Men.' And Haleth dwelt in Brethil  until she  died; and
 her people raised a green  mound over  her in  the heights  of the
 Forest:  Tur  Daretha,  the  Ladybarrow,  Haudh-en-Arwen   in  the
 Sindarin tongue.                                                  
    $30. In this way it came to pass  that the  Edain dwelt  in the
 lands  of  the  Eldar,  some  here,  some  there,  some wandering,
 some  settled  in kindreds  or small  peoples. Nearly  all learned
 soon  the  Grey-elven  tongue,  both  as  a  common  speech  among
 themselves and because many were eager  to learn  the lore  of the
 Elves. But after a time the Elf-kings, seeing that it was not good
 for Elves and  Men to  dwell mingled  together without  order, and
 that  Men  needed  lords  of  their  own  kind, set  regions apart
 where Men  could lead  their own  lives, and  appointed chieftains
 to hold these  lands freely.  No conditions  were laid  upon them,
 save to hold Morgoth as  their foe  and to  have no  dealings with
 him or his. They were the allies of the Eldar in war,  but marched
 under their  own leaders.  Yet many  of the  Edain had  delight in
 the friendship of the Elves and dwelt  among them  for so  long as
 they  had  leave; and  their young  men often  took service  for a
 time in the hosts of the Kings.                                   
    $31. Now  Hador  Glorindol,  son  of  Hathol,  son   of  Magor,
 son  of  Malach  Aradan  entered  the  household  of  Fingolfin in
 youth,  and was  loved by  the king.  Fingolfin therefore  gave to
 him  the lordship  of Dor-lomin,  and into  that land  he gathered

 most  of  the  people of  his kin  and became  the mightiest  of the
 chieftains  of the  Edain. In  his house  only the  elven-tongue was
 spoken,  though  their  own   speech  was   not  forgotten   by  his
 people.*  But  in  Dorthonion  the  lordship of  the people  of Beor
 and  the  country  of  Ladros  was  given to  Boromir, son  of Boron
 who was the grandson of Beor the Old.                                   
   $32. The  sons  of  Hador   were  Galdor   and  Gundor;   and  the
 sons  of  Galdor  were  Hurin  and Huor;  and the  son of  Hurin was
 Turin  the  bane  of  Glaurung;  and  the  son  of  Huor  was  Tuor,
 father  of  Earendil  the  Blessed.  And  the  son  of  Boromir  was
 Bregor,  whose  sons  were  Bregolas  and  Barahir;  and  the daugh-  1
 ters  of  the  sons  of Bregolas  were Morwen  the mother  of Turin,
 and  Rian  the  mother of  Tuor; but  the son  of Barahir  was Beren
 One-hand  who  won  the  love  of  Luthien  Thingol's  daughter  and  ]
 returned  from  the  Dead;  from  them  came  Elwing  the   wife  of
 Earendil and all the Kings of Numenor after.                            
   $33. All  these  were  caught  in  the  net  of  the  Doom  of the
 Noldor;  and they  did great  deeds which  the Eldar  remember still  !
 among  the histories  of the  Kings of  old. And  in those  days the  j
 strength  of  Men  was  added  to  the  power  of  the  Noldor,  and
 hope  was  renewed;  and  the  people  of  the  three houses  of Men
 throve   and   multiplied.   Greatest   was   the  House   of  Hador
 Golden-head,  peer  of  Elven-lords.  Many of  his people  were like
 him,  golden-haired  and  blue-eyed;  they  were  tall  and  strong,  j
 quick to wrath and laughter,  fierce in  battle, generous  to friend
 and to foe, swift in resolve, fast in loyalty, joyous in  heart, the
 children of  Iluvatar in  the youth  of Mankind.  But the  people of
 the  House  of  Beor were  dark or  brown of  hair; their  eyes were
 grey and keen and their faces fair  and shapely.  Lithe and  lean in
 body  they  were  long-enduring  in  hardship.   Of  all   Men  they
 were  most  like  the  Noldor  and  most  loved  by  them;  for they
 were  eager  of  mind,   cunning-handed,  swift   in  understanding,
 long  in  memory;  and  they  were  moved  sooner  to  pity  than to
 mirth,  for the  sorrow of  Middle-earth was  in their  hearts. Like
 to  them  were  the  woodland   folk  of   Haleth;  but   they  were
 shorter and broader, sterner and  less swift.  They were  less eager
 for  lore,  and  used  few  words;  for  they  did  not  love  great
 concourse  of  men,  and  many  among  them  delighted  in solitude,
 wandering  free  in  the   greenwoods  while   the  wonder   of  the
                                                                        
  (* From this speech came the common tongue of Numenor.)                
                                                                        
                                                                       

 world was new upon them. But in the lands of the West their               
 time was brief and their days unhappy.                                    
                                                                          
    $34.  The   years  of   the  Edain   were  lengthened,   according  to
 the  reckoning  of  Men,  after  their  coming   to  Beleriand;   but  at
 last  Beor  the  Old  died,  when he  had lived  three and  ninety years,
 for  four  and  forty  of  which  he  had   served  King   Felagund.  And
 when  he  lay  dead,  of  no  wound  or  sickness,  but stricken  by age,
 the  Eldar  saw  for  the  first  time  the  death  of   weariness  which
 they  knew  not  in  themselves,  and  they  grieved  for the  swift loss
 of  their  friends.  But  Beor  at  the  last  had relinquished  his life
 willingly  and  passed  in  peace;  and  the   Eldar  wondered   much  at
 the strange  fate of  Men, for  in all  their lore  there was  no account
 of  it  and  its  end  was  hidden  from  them.  Nonetheless   the  Edain
 of  old,  being  of  races  eager  and  young,  learned  swiftly  of  the
 Eldar  all  such  art  and  knowledge  as they  could receive,  and their
 sons  increased  in  wisdom  and  skill,  until  they  far  surpassed all
 others  of  Mankind,  who  dwelt   still  east   of  the   Mountains  and
 had not seen the Eldar and the faces that had beheld the Light.           
                                    *                                     
    I record here the few changes that were  made to  the LQ  2 typescript
 of the new chapter.                                                       
                                                                          
 $1. Felagund > Finrod Felagund                                            
 $4. 'had come to a land' > 'had come at last to a land'                   
 $7. The second footnote was struck out (as  it was  also on  the original
   typescript).                                                             
 $12. Diriol > Diriel > Amras                                               
 $13. Radhrost > Thargelion, and again in $23.                              
 $28. Dalath Dirnen > Talath Dirnen                                         
 $29. List  Melian: 'Girdle  of' written  over the  word List  (which was
   not struck out).                                                         
 $31. Glorindol > Glorindol                                                 
 $33. 'the  wonder  of  the world'  > 'the  wonder of  the lands  of the
    Eldar'                                                                   
      'But in the lands of the West' > 'But in the realms of the West'.     
                                                                          
 In  addition,  certain changes  were made  in pencil  to the  carbon copy
 only of the original typescript, and these were not taken  up into  LQ 2,
 nor were they added to it. They are as follows:                           
                                                                          
 $16. 'Magor son of Aradan' > 'Hador son of Aradan'                         
 $29. List Melian > Lest Melian                                             
      Tur Daretha > Tur Haretha                                                 
 $31. 'Now Hador Glorindol, son of Hathol, son of Magor, son of             

                                                                        
                                                                        
 Malach  Aradan'   was  emended   to  read   thus  (the   emendation  was
 incorrectly  made,  but  my  father's  intention  is plain):  'Now Magor
 Dagorlind,  son  of  Hathol,  son  of  Hador  Glorindal,  son  of Malach
 Aradan'                                                                 
$32.  'The sons of Hador' > 'The sons of Magor'                           
                                                                        
 On the reversal of the places of Magor and Hador in the genealogy see
 p. 235.                                                                 
                                                                        
                               Commentary.                               
                                                                        
$1.  'three  hundred  years  and  ten':  the  words  'and  ten'  were  an
 addition.  The  original  chapter  in  QS  had  'four  hundred', against
 which  my  father  noted  (p.  202,  $126):  'This  must  be  removed to
 300', altering the date to '310'.  This radical  shift, putting  back by
 ninety  years  the  date  of  Felagund's  meeting  with  Beor   (and  so
 extending the lines of the rulers of the Edain  in Beleriand  by several
 generations),  has  been  encountered  in the  opening of  the Athrabeth
 Finrod ah Andreth (X.307 and third footnote).                           
$4.  'Beor the Old':  the words  'the Old'  were an  addition, and 'as he
 was  afterwards called'  refer to  'Beor' simply  (see the  second foot-
 note to $7). -  With 'After  many lives  of wandering  out of  the East'
 cf. the change made to the original QS chapter, p. 202, $127.           
$7.  The opening sentence of this paragraph as typed read:                
   Thus  it  was  that  Men  called  King Felagund,  whom they  first met
 of  all  the  Eldar,  Somar  that is  Wisdom, and  after him  they named
 his people Samuri (that is the Wise).                                   
 As typed, the footnote was added to the word 'Wisdom', and read:        
   In  the  ancient  language of  the Edain  (from which  afterwards came
 the  Numenorean  tongue);  but   Beor  and   his  House   later  learned
 the language of the Eldar and forsook their own.                        
 See  V.275  (footnote)  and p.  202, $128.  - In  'the House  of Finrod'
 Finrod = Finarfin. The footnote at this point in the text as typed read:
 Thus Beor got his name; for  it signifies  Vassal in  the tongue  of the
 Edain.  But  after  Beor  all  the  children  of  his House  bore Elvish
 names.                                                                  
 The revised footnote as given in the text printed  was later  struck out
 in pencil. See $12 in the text.                                         
$9.  The  paragraph beginning  'But it  was said  afterwards ...'  in the
 published  Silmarillion  between  $9 and  $10 of  the original  text was
 derived from the Grey Annals, $$79-80 (pp. 36 - 7).                     
$10.  The reversal in the published Silmarillion  of what  is said  in the
 original  text  (and  cf.  X.305)  concerning  the  affinities   of  the
 languages  of  the  Edain  (so  that  the  Haladin  become  'sundered in
 speech'  from  the  People  of  Beor, and  the tongue  of the  People of
 Marach  becomes  'more  like  to  ours')  is  based  on  late  and  very
 express statements  of my  father's. -  In the  present passage  are the
 first occurrences of the names Haladin and Marach.                      

  $12.  The form  Diriol seems  not to  occur elsewhere  (see p.  225, $12).
    -  Above  the  word  'Servant'  my  father  pencilled 'Vassal',  but then
    struck it through.  - The  region of  Estolad was  entered on  the second
    map, but in the form Estoland (p. 189, $55).                             
    $13  The  heading  Of  the  Kindreds  and  Houses  of  the  Edain  was an
    addition  to  the  manuscript.  Against  the  opening  words  'Soon after
    the  departure  of  Felagund'  the date  311 was  typed; 312  against the
    coming  of  the  Haladin;  and  313  against  the  coming  of  Marach and
    his people.                                                              
      Radhrost: Dark-elvish name of Thargelion. See p. 225, $13.             
      Caranthir:  the  name  as  typed  (twice)  was  Cranthir,   emended  to
    Caranthir,  but  later  in  the  text  ($23  and  subsequently) Caranthir
    was  the form  as typed.  This is  an indication  that the  emendation of
    the  text  followed  soon  after  its  typing  (p.  215),  and  may  give
    support to the  suggestion (ibid.)  that Of  the Coming  of Men  into the
    West  belongs  to  the  period  when  the  LQ  2  typescript  series  was
    being  made,  since  the  change  of  Cranthir >  Caranthir occurs  as an
    emendation  in  Of  Beleriand  and  its  Realms  in   the  LQ   2  series
    (p. 197, $111).                                                          
      On  the  statement   that  the   peoples  of   Beor  and   Marach  were
    'sundered  in  speech',  omitted  in  the published  text, see  under $10
    above.                                                                   
  $14.  After  the  words  'dwelt in  Hithlum' there  followed in  the type-
    script 'in the household of Fingolfin', which was struck out.            
  $15.  Against the  words 'some  fifty years'  the date  330-380 is  typed in
    the margin.                                                              
  $16.  'the  House  of  Finrod':  see  under  $7   above.  -   The  paragraph
    beginning 'It is said that  in all  these matters  ...' in  the published
    Silmarillion was derived from the Grey Annals, $$ 130 - 1 (pp. 49 - 50).
  $18.  With the speech of Bereg and Amlach compare the words of
    Andreth to Felagund in the Athrabeth, X.309-10.
  $19.  Against the first sentence of the paragraph the date 369 was
    added.
  $20.  After 'new-comers that are unwary' the text as typed read
    before emendation:
      Which of you has seen the Light or the least of the gods? Who has
      beheld the Dark King in the North? The Sea has no shore. There
      is no Light in the West, for we stand now in the West of the world.
  $23.  The form Caranthir appears here in the typescript as typed: see
    under $13 above. In the carbon copy a stroke was drawn through
    the n of Caranthir, sc. Carathir, and the same was done at the first
    occurrence of the name ($13) in the top copy.
  $24.  The siege of the Haladin behind their stockade is dated 375,
    typed in the margin.
  $25.  It is here that the Lady Haleth enters the history; Haleth the
    Hunter, Father of Men, who first appeared long before in the

 Quenta  as  the  son  of  Hador (when  the 'Hadorian'  and 'Halethian'
 houses  were  one  and  the  same,  see  IV.104,  175),  has  now dis-
 appeared.                                                             
$27.  Against the last sentence, referring to the sojourn of the Haladin
 in Estolad, the date 376 - 390 is typed in the margin.                
$28.  Hardan son of  Haldar: the  substitution of  Haldan for  Hardan in
 the published text was derived from  a late  change to  a genealogical
 table of the Haladin (see p. 238).                                    
   Brithiach: the Ford of Brithiach over Sirion north of the  Forest of
 Brethil had first appeared in the later Tale of Tuor (Unfinished Tales
 p. 41), and again in GA $161; see the  map on  p. 182,  square D  7. -
 Against the sentence 'At last they crossed over the Brithiach'  is the
 date 391.                                                             
   Dalath  Dirnen:  the  Guarded Plain  east of  Narog. The  name first
 appears  in  the  tale of  Beren and  Luthien in  QS (V.299),  and was
 marked in  on the  second map,  where it  was subsequently  changed to
 Talath Dirnen (p. 186, $17), as  also on  the LQ  2 typescript  of the
 present text (p. 225, $28).                                           
   Teiglin: this  was the  form of  the name  adopted in  the published
 Silmarillion; see pp. 309-10, at end of note 55.                      
$29.  In the Grey Annals $132 (p. 50) the story  had entered  (under the
 year 422) that 'at the prayer of Inglor [Felagund] Thingol  granted to
 Haleth's people to live in Brethil; for they  were in  good friendship
 with  the  woodland  Elves'  (Haleth  here  is  of  course  Haleth the
 Hunter, who had entered Beleriand two years before).                  
   List Melian,  the Girdle  of Melian:  this name  was entered  on the
 second  map  (p.  183,  D  8-9),  and  changed to  Lest Melian  on the
 carbon copy of the original typescript of the chapter (p. 225, $29).
   Tur Daretha:  for the  form Tur  Haretha in  the published  text see
 p. 225, $29. - The date of the death of  the Lady  Haleth is  given in
 the margin: 420.                                                      
$31.  In  the  newly  devised  history,  Marach having  displaced Hador
 Goldenhead as the leader of the people in the journey out  of Eriador,
 Hador  now  appears  as  the  descendant  of  Marach  in   the  fourth
 generation; but the  House of  Hador retained  its name  (see IV.175).
 This is the first occurrence of the name Glorindol; but the later form
 Lorindol (adopted  in the  published Silmarillion)  has been  met with
 in the Athrabeth (X.305), and see pp. 233 - 5.                        
   Marginal  dates  give  Hador's  years  in  Fingolfin's  household as
 405-415,  and  the  granting  to  him  of  the  lordship  of Dor-lomin
 as 416.                                                               
   The concluding sentence of the paragraph as typed read:             
   But in Dorthonion the lordship of the people of Beor was given to
   Bregor son of Boromir...                                            
 The date of this gift, as typed in the margin, was 410. - 'The country

                                                    
                                                                        
 of  Ladros',  in  the  emended  version,  was marked  on the  second map
 in the north-east of Dorthonion: p. 187, $34.                           
$32.  For  the remainder  of its  length Of  the Coming  of Men  into the
 West  returns  to  follow,  with  much  rewriting  and   expansion,  the
 form  of  the  original  chapter  in  QS.  -  Galdor  first  occurs here
 (otherwise  than in  later corrections),  replacing Galion  which itself
 replaced Gumlin (p. 123, $127).                                         
                                                                        
                    The new genealogies of the Edain.                    
 My  father's  decision  that  the  coming  of  the  Edain over  the Blue
 Mountains into Beleriand  took place  nearly a  century earlier  than he
 had supposed  led to  a massive  overhauling of  the chronology  and the
 genealogies.                                                            
                                                                        
                          (i) The House of Beor.                         
                                                                        
 From the new chapter it is seen  that in  the case  of the  Beorians the
 original  'Father',  Beor the  Old, remained,  but four  new generations
 were  introduced  between  him  and  Bregolas  and  Barahir,  who  until
 now  had  been  his sons.  These generations  are represented  by Baran,
 Boron,  Boromir,  and  Bregor (who  becomes the  father of  Bregolas and
 Barahir), descendants in the direct line of Beor the Old - though  it is
 not actually stated that Boron was Baran's son, only that he  was Beor's
 grandson ($31). In  the Grey  Annals ($121)  Beor was  born in  the year
 370, his encounter with Felagund took place  in 400,  the year  in which
 his elder son Bregolas was born ($124), and he died in  450. In  the new
 history  he  met  Felagund  in 310,  departed with  him in  311 (commen-
 tary on $13), and remained in his service for forty-four years until his
 death at the age of 93 ($34); from  which his  dates can  be seen  to be
 262-355. His true name was Balan ($12); and it is  stated in  the second
 footnote to $7 that each of the chieftains of this people bore  the name
 Beor ('Vassal') as  a title  until the  time of  Bregolas and  Barahir -
 though  this  note  was  afterwards  struck  out  (commentary   on  $7).
 Boromir  his  great-grandson  received  the  lordship of  Dorthonion and
 Ladros in 410 ($31 and commentary).                                     
 There  are  two genealogical  tables of  the House  of Beor  that relate
 closely  to  the new  chapter and  almost certainly  belong to  the same
 period (this is strongly suggested by the  fact that  a group  of Elvish
 genealogies,  closely  resembling  in  form  those  of  the   Edain,  is
 accompanied  by  notes  dated  December  1959).  The  two   tables  were
 obviously made at the same time. The first ('Beor table I')  was written
 neatly and clearly; it differs from the second in many of the  dates and
 in its presentation of the descendants  of Boron  (grandson of  Beor the
 Old), thus:                                                             

                                                                             
                                                                               
                                Boron                                        
                                                                               
      Beleth                     Boromir                Belegor                 
                                                                               
                    Bregor                    Bregil                            
                                                                               
            Bregolas              Beldis             Barahir                    
                                                                               
                                                                               
    Bar agund Belegund                                                          
                                                                               
 Names  in  italics  show  members  of  the  House  of  Beor who  have not      
 appeared before; of these Beleth, Bregil,  and Beldis  are marked  on the      
 table  as  daughters.  Subsequent  alterations,  carried  out  in complex      
 stages, brought the genealogy to  the fuller  form that  it has  in 'Beor      
 table  II';  of  these  changes the  most notable  is the  replacement of      
 Boromir's  daughter  Bregil  (who   is  moved   down  a   generation)  by      
 Andreth,  the  first  appearance  of the  name. The  only other  point to      
 notice  in  table  I  is that  Morwen was  named Eledhwen  (with Edelwen,      
 as in table II, added above).                                                  
  Beor table II took up all the changes made to I, and  I have  redrawn it      
 on p. 231 in the  form in  which it  was first  made. The  numerals added      
 to certain of the names indicate the rulers of the House in their order.       
  It  is  seen  from  this  genealogy  that  Boron was  indeed the  son of      
 Baran ('Beor  the Young');  and that  Bereg the  dissident ($18),  in the      
 text said only to be 'of the House of Beor', was the  son of  Baranor son      
 of Baran, and thus  a great-grandson  of Beor  the Old.  It is  seen also      
 that  the further  extension of  the House  of Beor  that appears  in the      
 Athrabeth   Finrod   ah   Andreth   (X.305-6)   was  now   present,  with      
 Andreth the sister of Bregor, and Belen the second son  of Beor  the Old,      
 father of Beldir (not previously  named), father  of Belemir  the husband      
 of Adanel. (Adanel  is here  said to  be the  daughter of  Malach Aradan,      
 son  of  Marach,  whereas in  the Athrabeth  she is  the sister  of Hador      
 Lorindol: on this see p. 235.)                                                 
  A  few  changes  were  made  subsequently, at  different times,  to Beor      
 table II, as follows:                                                          
 -  (Bar Beora) added after 'The House of Beor';                                  
 -  Boron's  dates  changed  to  315-408,  and   Boromir's  birth   to  338;      
 -  the  name  Saelin  pencilled  beside  Andreth,  and  also  'A[ndreth) the      
    Wise',                                                                         
 -  a  remote  descent  from  Beleth,  sister   of  Baragund   and  Belegund,      
    indicated, leading to Erendis of Numenor;                                      

 -  a daughter Hiril, sister  of  Beren  One-hand,  given  to  Barahir and
    Emeldir.                                                                 
 On  the  name  Saelin  beside  Andreth see  p. 233.  With the  descent of
 Erendis  of  Numenor  from  Beleth  daughter  of  Bregolas  cf.  Aldarion
 and Erendis in Unfinished Tales, p. 177, where  it is  said of Beregar the
 father of Erendis that he  'came of  the House  of Beor':  in my  note on
 this (p. 214, note 10) I referred to her descent as given in  the present
 genealogical table, but gave her ancestor's name wrongly as 'Bereth'.
 Some  of  the  later  dates  in  the  table  differ  from those  in other
 sources. The first death of Beren is placed under 466 in the texts of The
 Tale of Years: 465 is a reversion to the date in AB 2 (see p. 131, $203).
 The second death of Beren, in the  table dated  501, was  placed in  AB 2
 in 503, while in The Tale of Years it is given as 505, then  reverting to
 503 (pp.  346, 348).  In GA  Bregolas was  born in  400, Barahir  in 402,
 Baragund  in  424, and  Belegund in  428 (these  were the  original dates
 going  back  to  the  earliest  Annals  of  Beleriand,  allowing  for the
 extension by one and then by  two centuries  in subsequent  versions; see
 the genealogical table in IV.315).                                       
 On  the  much  changed  date  of  the   Second  Kinslaying   (here  given
 as 511), in  which Dior  Thingol's heir  was slain  in fighting  with the
 Feanorians  and  his  young  sons   Eldun  and   Elrun  were   taken  and
 abandoned to starve in the forest, see The Tale of Years, pp. 345 ff.; it
 is plainly a mere inadvertence that in the same table  the date  of their
 death is given as 506, five years before that of Dior. In (later) sources
 Eldun and  Elrun are  twin brothers,  born in  the year  500 (see  p. 257
 and note 16 on p. 300; p. 349)-                                          
                                                                         
                          (ii) The House of Hador.                        
                                                                         
 In the old history of the  Edain, now  rejected, Hador  the Goldenhaired,
 third of 'the Fathers of the Men  of the  West', was  born in  Eriador in
 390,  and  came over  the Blue  Mountains into  Beleriand in  420. Unlike
 the  development  in  the  House  of  Beor,  however,  Hador  (Glorindol,
 $31) retained his chronological  place in  the history  (as will  be seen
 shortly,  his  original  birth-date  remained  the  same),  and  his sons
 Galdor  (<  Galion  <  Gumlin)  and  Gundor;  but  with the  much earlier
 date  of  'the  Coming  of  Men  into  the West'  he was  moved downwards
 in  the  genealogy,  to  become  the ruler  of the  people in  the fourth
 generation  from  Marach,  under  whose   leadership  they   had  entered
 Beleriand  in  313 (commentary  on $13).  His father  was Hathol,  son of
 Magor, son of Malach, son of Marach ($31).                               
 As  with  the  House  of  Beor,  there  are  here  also  two genealogical
 tables  closely  related  to  the  new conception.  The earlier  of these
 ('Hador  table  I')  was  made on  my father's  old typewriter  using his
 'midget  type'  (VIII.233). It  was a  good deal  altered by  revision of
 dates, and by additions, but these latter  chiefly concern  the extension
 of  the  genealogy to  include the  descendants of  Hurin and  Huor, with

                                                   
                                                                           
 whom the table ended  in the  form as  typed: the  structure of  the descent
 from the ancestor was far less changed  than in  the case  of Beor  table I,
 and  indeed  the  only  addition  here  was  the  incorporation  of  Amlach,
 one of the leaders of  discontent in  Estolad, who  is said  in the  text of
 the  chapter  ($18)  to  have  been  'one  of  the  grandsons   of  Marach'.
 Changes  were  also  made  to  the  names  of  the  Haladin  who  appear  in
 the genealogy.                                                             
  A  fair  copy  in manuscript  ('Hador table  II'), identical  in appearance
 to  the  tables  of  the  House  of  Beor,  followed, no  doubt immediately,
 and  this  I  have  redrawn on  p. 234,  in the  form in  which it  was made
 (i.e. omitting subsequent alterations).  I notice  here some  points arising
 from these tables.                                                         
  The  date  of  Marach's  entry  into  Beleriand  differs  by one  year (314
 for  313)  from  that  given  in the  chapter (commentary  on $13);  table I
 had  315  altered  to  314.  In  table  I  Marach's  son  Imlach,  father of
 Amlach, is named Imrach.                                                   
  In  agreement  with  the  genealogical  tables  of   the  House   of  Beor,
 Adanel  wife  of  Belemir  is  the  daughter  of  Malach  Aradan;  in  Hador
 table  I  it was  said that  Adanel 'wedded  Belemir of  the House  of Beor,
 and  he  joined  the people  of Aradan',  the last  words being  struck out.
 It is also said in table I that Beren (I) was the fifth child of  Adanel and
 Belemir; and that Emeldir was the third child of Beren.                    
  In  Hador  table  I  there  is  the  statement  that  'the  other  children
 of  Aradan'  (i.e.  beside  Adanel  and  Magor)  'are   not  named   in  the
 Chronicles'.  In  table  II  a  third  child  of  Malach  Aradan  was named,
 however:  'Sael  ..  th  the  Wise  344',  together  with  the   mention  of
 'others not concerned  in these  Chronicles'; Sael ..  th was  first changed
 to  Saelon,  and  then  the  name  and  the birth-date  were struck  out, so
 that  the  middle  letters  of  the  first  name  cannot  be read.  This was
 probably done at the  time of  the making  of the  table. Saelon  appears in
 draft  material  for  the  Athrabeth  (X.351 -  2) as  the name  of Andreth,
 replaced in  the finished  text (X.305)  by Saelind  ('the Eldar  called her
 Saelind,  Wise-heart  ).  In  this  sister  of  Magor  and  Adanel  is seen,
 very  probably,  the  first  hint  of the  Athrabeth; subsequently,  when my
 father  perceived  that  the  wise-women  came  of  different houses  of the
 Edain, with different  'lore and  traditions' (X.305),  he wrote  Saelin and
 Andreth the Wise against  the name  Andreth in  Beor table  II (p.  230). It
 seems  a  possibility  that  Adanel  and  Andreth  were  already  present in
 the genealogies before their significance as 'wise-women' emerged.         
  In  Hador  table  I  Hador  was  named  Glorindol,  as in  the text  of the
 chapter  ($31),  emended  to  Lorindol, the  form in  table II.  - I  do not
 know  why  Gundor's  death  should  be  dated  (in  both  I  and II)  a year
 later (456) than that of his father Hador. All the  sources state  that they
 both died at Eithel Sirion.                                                
  The  'double   marriage'  of   Hador's  daughter   and  elder   son,  named
 Glorwendil  and  Galion,  to  the  son   (Hundor)  and   daughter  (unnamed)

  of  Haleth  the  Hunter  had  already  emerged  in  the  Grey  Annals   (see  the
  commentary   on   $$161,   171,   pp.   126,   128).   Now  named   Gloredel  and
  Galdor,  the   double  marriage   remains,  but   with  the   entire  reconstitu-
  tion  of  the  People   of  Haleth   the  chronological   place  of   Haleth  the
  Hunter  had  been  taken  by  Halmir:  it  is   now  his   son  Haldir   and  his
  daughter Hareth who marry Gloredel and Galdor.*                                  
      The date of Hurin's death is given as '500?'  in table  I ('501?'  in table
  II).                                                                             
      Tuor's name Eladar is translated 'Starfather' in table I,  and in            
  addition he is named Ulmondil; the form Irilde was added  after Idril            
  (so spelt): see II.343 and V.366-7 (stem KYELEP); and to Earendil was            
  added 'whose name was foretold by Ulmo'.                                         
      For Urwen Lalaeth see Unfinished Tales pp. 57-9.                             
                                                                                  
      In  hasty  pencillings  on  Hador  table  II  the  note  saying   that  Magor
  and  Hathol  served  no  Elf-lord  but  dwelt  near   the  sources   of  Teiglin,
  and  that  Hador  was  the  first  lord  of  Dor-lomin,  was  struck  out;  while
  at  the  same  time   Hador  Lorindol   first  lord   of  Dorlomin   was  written
  above   Magor   (the   Sword),   and   Magor    Dagorlind   the    Sword   singer
  in  battle  above  Hador  Lorindol.  This  reversal  has  been  seen  already  in
  emendations  made  to  the  carbon  copy  only  of  the   text  of   the  chapter
  (pp.  225  -  6,  $$16,  31-2  -  where  my  father  changed  Glorindol,  not  to
  Lorindol,  but  to  Glorindal).  That  this  was  not  an  ephemeral   change  is
  seen   from   the   Athrabeth,   where   Adanel   is   the   sister    of   Hador
  Lorindol, not of Magor.                                                          
      I  do  not  know  of  any  statement  elsewhere  that  bears on  this change,
  but  the  words  'first  lord  of  Dorlomin'  that  (so  to   speak)  accompanied
  Hador's   movement   back   by   half  a   century  are   evidently  significant,
  suggesting  that  my  father  had  in  mind  to  place  Fingolfin's  gift  of the
  lordship  of  Dorlomin  much  earlier:  he  had  said  both  in  the text  of the
  chapter  and  in  the  genealogical  table  that  Malach   (whose  son   was  now
  Hador    Lorindol)   passed    fourteen   years    in   Hithlum.    This   change
  would  not  of  itself  entail  the  reversal  of  the  names  Magor  and  Hador;
  but  the  House  of  Hador  was  a  name  so  embedded  in  the   tradition  that
  my  father  would  not  lose  it  even  when  Hador  was  no  longer   the  first
  ruler   in   Beleriand,   while   on   the   other   hand   the   importance  and
  illustriousness  of  that  house  was  closely   associated  with   the  lordship
  of   Dorlomin   -   in   other  words,   the  name   must  accompany   the  first
  lordship.  But  it  seems   that  he   never  wrote   anything  further   on  the
  matter,  nor  made  any  other  alterations to  the existing  texts in  the light
  of it.                                                                           
      The  only  other  change  made  to  Hador  table  11  (it  was  made  also to
  table I) was the writing of the name Ardamir above Earendil.                     
                                                                                  
     (* In table I the son of Halmir was still Hundor, and his daughter was Hiriel.
  Hiriel  was  changed  to  Hareth;  and  Hundor  was  changed  to   Hundar  before
  reaching Haldir. See pp. 236-7.)                                                 

                              (iii) The Haladin.                            
                                                                           
 This  house  of  the  Edain  underwent  the greatest  change, since  in this
 case  the  original  'Father'  Haleth  the  Hunter  disappeared, and  of the
 Haladin (a  name that  first occurs  in this  new chapter,  $10) it  is said
 ($24) that they 'did not live  under the  rule of  lords or  many together'.
 The  name  Haleth  now  becomes   that  of   the  formidable   Lady  Haleth,
 daughter  of  Haldad,   who  had   become  the   leader  when   the  Haladin
 were  attacked  by  Orcs  in Thargelion.  In the  genealogical table  of the
 House  of  Hador  Halmir  occupies  the  place   in  the   history  formerly
 taken  by  Haleth  the  Hunter,  and  it  was  his  son  and   daughter  who
 married the son and daughter of Hador Goldenhead.                          
  A  genealogical  table of  the Haladin  exists in  a single  copy (preceded
 by  rough  workings  in  which  the  names  were  moved   about  in   a  be-
 wildering  fashion), this  table being  a companion,  obviously made  at the
 same time, to those of the Houses of Beor  and Hador.  I give  it on  p. 237
 as it was first made. As in the table of the Beorians, the  numerals against
 certain of the names refer to the leaders of the Haladin in sequence.      
                                                                           
  A   particularly   confusing   element  in   the  transformation   of  'the
 People  of  Haleth'  (who  are  confusing  enough  in  any  event)  lies  in
 the offspring of Halmir.                                                   
  (1) In GA $212 (p.  70) it  was told,  in the  annal for  468, that  at the
 time  of  the  Union  of  Maidros Haleth  the Hunter  'gathered his  folk in
 Brethil,  and  they  whetted  their axes;  but he  died of  age ere  the war
 came,  and  Hundor  his  son  ruled  his   people'  (in   The  Silmarillion,
 Chapter 20,  p. 189,  I retained  this, substituting  Halmir for  Haleth the
 Hunter and Haldir for Hundor).                                             
  (2) I have  noticed (p.  235, footnote)  that in  'Hador table  I' Halmir's
 son  was  still  Hundor;  and  that  this  was  changed  to   Hundar  (found
 also in one of the constituent texts of  the Narn  as the  name of  the son)
 before reaching the final form Haldir.                                     
  (3)  In  the  Narn  version  of  the  story  of  the  Battle  of Unnumbered
 Tears the leader of the men of Brethil is Hundar (pp. 166, 168).           
  (4)  In a  late alteration  to the  GA version  of the  story (see  p. 133,
 commentary  on  $221)  the  sentence   'many  of   the  woodmen   came  also
 with  Hundor  of  Brethil'  was  changed  to  'came  also  with  Haldir  and
 Hundar'.                                                                   
  (6)  In  the  genealogical  table  of  the  Haladin  both  Haldir,  son of
 Halmir  and  leader  of  the  Haladin  after  his  father's  death,  and his
 brother  Hundar,  are  shown as  having been  slain in  the Nirnaeth  in the
 year 472.                                                                  
  It  is  seen  therefore  that  when  Hundar  son  of Halmir  became Haldir,
 the  name  Hundar  was  not  lost  but  was  given to  a brother  of Haldir;
 and  both  went  to  the  battle  and  both  were  slain. This  is expressly
 stated  in  The  Wanderings  of  Hurin  (p.  281  and  note 37);  and indeed
 the line of Hundar is of great importance in that tale.                    

   Handir,  son  of  Haldir,  retained his  name from  far back;  but the
 original story of his death in the battle  of Tumhalad  in 495  had been
 changed: he was  slain in  Brethil earlier  in that  year by  'Orcs that
 invaded  his  land'  (GA  $275).  On  his  marriage  with Beldis  of the
 House of Beor see p. 268.                                               
   Hunthor  was  Turin's  companion  in  the  attack on  Glaurung, killed
 by a  falling stone  (Unfinished Tales,  p. 134);  called Torbarth  in GA
 (see p. 156).                                                           
                                                                        
   Most of the later changes  made to  this table  relate closely  to the
 story of The Wanderings of  Hurin, and  these I  neglect here.  Of other
 alterations,  one  has  been  mentioned  already  (commentary   on  $28,
 p. 228): Hardan  son of  Haldar (twin  brother of  the Lady  Haleth) was
 changed  to  Haldan,  and  this  name  was  adopted  in   the  published
 Silmarillion; but also pencilled against Hardan (either before  or after
 the change to Haldan) is  the name  Harathor (the  name repeated  in his
 descendant, the seventh leader of the Haladin, four  generations later).
 -  The  birth-dates  of  Hundar  and  Hareth  were  changed  to  418 and
 420;  and  Hundar's  daughter  Hunleth  was  an  addition,  though prob-
 ably of the time of the making of the table.                            
   Pencilled on a corner of the page is:  'Hal- in  old language  of this
 people  =  head,  chief. bar  = man.  Halbar =  chieftain'; at  the same
 time  my father  wrote 'b'  against the  name Haldar  (Haleth's brother)
 and perhaps very faintly struck out the 'd' of this name: sc. Halbar. On
 this see p. 309.                                                        
                                                                        
                   15. OF THE RUIN OF BELERIAND AND THE                   
                            FALL OF FINGOLFIN.                           
                                                                        
 We come now to Chapter 11 in QS, given in V.279-89. The text was
 not much emended on the manuscript, and I give such changes as were
 made in the form of notes referenced to the numbered paragraphs in
 Vol.V.
 $134.  Bladorion > Ard-galen and subsequently.
    'fires of many colours, and the fume stank upon the air' > 'fires of
  many poisonous hues, and the fume thereof stank upon the air'
    Dor-na-Fauglith > Dor-no-Fauglith
    Dagor Vreged-sir > Dagor Bragollach
    'the Battle of Sudden Fire' > 'the Battle of Sudden Flame' (and
  subsequently)
 $137.  'In that battle King Inglor Felagund was cut off from his folk
  and surrounded by the Orcs, and he would have been slain ...' >
  'surrounded by the Orcs in the Fen of Serech betwixt Mithrim and
  Dorthonion, and there he would have been slain'. The Fen of Rivil,
  changed to Fen of Serech, was added to the second map (p. 181, $3),
  and the latter name occurs several times in GA.

 $138.  'fled now from Dorthonion' > 'fled away from Dorthonion'         
    'it  was  after  called   by  the   Gnomes  Taur-na-Fuin,   which  is
   Mirkwood,  and  Delduwath,   Deadly  Nightshade'   >  'it   was  after
   called  by  the  Dark-elves  Taur-na-Fuin, which  is Mirkwood,  but by
   the Gnomes Delduwath, Deadly Nightshade'                              
 $141.  'Celegorn  and  Curufin  ...  sought  harbour with  their friend
   Orodreth'  >  '...  sought  harbour  with  Inglor  and  Orodreth'. See
   V.289, $141.                                                          
 $142.  'or  the  wild  of  South  Beleriand'  >  'nor  to Taur-im-Duinath
   and the  wilds of  the south'.  On Taur-im-Duinath  see p.  193, $108,
   and p. 195, $113.                                                     
 $143  'Sauron  was  the  chief  servant of  the evil  Vala, whom  he had
   suborned  to  his  service  in Valinor  from among  the people  of the
   gods.  He  was  become  a   wizard  of   dreadful  power,   master  of
   necromancy,  foul  in  wisdom'   >  'Now   Sauron,  whom   the  Noldor
   call  Gorthu,  was the  chief servant  of Morgoth.  In Valinor  he had
   dwelt  among  the  people  of the  gods, but  there Morgoth  had drawn
   him  to  evil and  to his  service. He  was become  now a  sorcerer of
   dreadful  power, master  of shadows  and of  ghosts, foul  in wisdom'.
   On  this  passage,  and  the  name  Gorthu,  see  V.333, 338,  and the
   commentary on QS $143 (V.290).                                        
    In  the  footnote  to  this   paragraph  Tol-na-Gaurhoth   >  Tol-in-
   Gaurhoth (cf. GA $154 and commentary, pp. 54, 125).                   
 $144.  In 'for though his might is greatest of all things in this world,
   alone of the  Valar he  knows fear'  the words  'is' and  'knows' were
   changed to 'was' and 'knew'.                                          
 $147.  'for  sorrow; but  the tale  of it  is remembered,  for Thorondor,
   king of eagles, brought the tidings to Gondolin,  and to  Hithlum. For
   Morgoth'  >  'for their  sorrow is  too deep.  Yet the  tale of  it is
   remembered still, for Thorondor, king of  eagles, brought  the tidings
   to Gondolin, and to Hithlum afar off. Lo! Morgoth'                    
    Gochressiel > Crisaegrim (see V.290, $147).                          
 $149.  'And  most  the  Gnomes feared'  > 'And  ever the  Gnomes feared
   most'.                                                                 
 $151.  'Dwarfs' > 'Dwarves'.                                               
                                                                        
 All  these changes  were taken  up into  the early  typescript LQ  1 (in
 which the  footnotes to  $$143, 156  were as  usual incorporated  in the
 text, and  so remained).  LQ 1  received no  emendation from  my father,
 not  even  the  correction  of  misspelt names  and other  errors. These
 errors reappear in the late typescript of the LQ 2 series,  showing that
 in this case the typist did not work from the manuscript. To the text in
 LQ  2  my  father  gave  the  chapter-number 'XVIII'  (see p.  215), and
 made the following emendations.                                         
                                                                        
 $134.  Dor-no-Fauglith   (changed    from   Dor-na-Fauglith    on   the
   manuscript,  as  noted above)  > Dor-nu-Fauglith;  a translation  of the

   name added in a footnote 'That is Land under Choking Ash';  and 'in     
   the Noldorin tongue' (where  LQ 1  had 'in  the Gnomish  tongue') >     
   'in the Sindarin tongue'.                                               
    Eredwethion > Eredwethrin (and subsequently)                           
 $135.  Glomund > Glaurung (and subsequently). See p. 180, $104.           
 $137.  Finrod > Finarfin (this change was missed in $144).                  
    'Bregolas, son of  Beor [the  typescript has  Breor, a  mere error    j
   going back to LQ 1], who was lord of  that house  of men  after his     
   father's death' > 'Bregolas, son  of Bregor  ... after  Boromir his     
   father's death'. This accommodates  the text  to the  new genealogy     
   that came in with the new  chapter Of  the Coming  of Men  into the     
   West. That was extant in the LQ 2 series, but for the present chapter
   my father gave the typist the old LQ 1 text to copy.                    
    Inglor > Finrod (and subsequently)                                     
    'Barahir son of Beor' > 'Barahir son of Bregor'                        
 $138.  Taur-na-Fuin  >  Taur-nu-Fuin  (cf.  GA $158  and commentary,     
   pp. 56, 126).                                                           
 $139.  The  name  Arthod  of  one  of  the  companions of  Barahir had     
   been misspelt Arthrod by the typist of LQ 1, and this error surviving
   into  LQ  2  was  not  observed   by  my   father.  In   GA  ($159,     
   p.  56)  the name  is Arthad,  which was  adopted in  the published     
   Silmarillion.                                                           
 $140.  Gumlin  >  Galdor  and  subsequently  (see  p.  229,  $32); the     
   intervening  name  Galion,  appearing  in   GA  ($127),   was  here     
   jumped.                                                                 
 $141.  'sought harbour  with Inglor  and Orodreth'  (see p.  239, $141)     
   > 'sought harbour with Finrod and Orodreth'                             
 $142.  Cranthir > Caranthir                                                 
    Damrod and Diriel > Amrod and Amras                                    
 $143.  Now  Sauron,  whom  the  Noldor  call   Gorthu  (see   p.  239,     
   $143) > 'Now Sauron, whom the Sindar call Gorthaur'                     
    'In Valinor he had dwelt among the people of the Valar,  but there     
   Morgoth had drawn  him to  evil and  to his  service' (see  p. 239,     
   $143; LQ 1 has 'gods'): this was struck out.                            
 $147.  In 'Morgoth goes ever halt of one foot since  that day,  and the     
   pain of his wounds cannot be healed; and in his face is the scar that
   Thorondor made' the words 'goes', 'since', 'cannot', and  'is' were     
   changed to 'went', 'after', 'could not', and 'was'. Cf. p. 239, $144.
 $151.  Borlas  and  Boromir  and  Borthandos  >  Borlad  and Borlach     
   and Borthand. In GA, in a  passage extant  in two  versions, appear     
   both  Borthandos  and  Borthand  (pp.  61,  64),  the  other  names     
   remaining  as  in  QS.  Here  Borlad  replaces  Borlas  and Borlach     
   replaces Boromir, which latter had  become the  name of  the fourth     
   ruler of the People of Beor.                                            
 $152.  'Yet Haleth and his men' > 'Yet the People of Haleth'                
    Haleth  >  Halmir (and  subsequently); at  the first  occurrence >     

 'Halmir Lord of the Haladin'. For Halmir see p. 236 and the               
 genealogical table of the Haladin on p. 237.                              
$153.  Since  no  alteration  to  this passage  in QS  had ever  been made,
 at this late date the LQ 2 typescript still retained the old story that it
 was  Haleth  the  Hunter  and  his  fosterson  Hurin  who, hunting  in the
 vale  of  Sirion  in  the  autumn  of  the  year of  the Battle  of Sudden
 Flame  (455),  came  upon  the  entrance  into  Gondolin.  That  story had
 already  been  altered  in  the  Grey  Annals  ($149),  in   that  Hurin's
 companion   had   become  Haleth's   grandson  Handir,   and  in   a  long
 rider  inserted  into  the  Annals  ($$161-6,  and  see   the  commentary,
 pp.  126-7)  it  had   been  much   further  changed:   Hurin's  companion
 was  now  his  brother  Huor,  and  it was  their presence  (as fostersons
 of  Haleth)  among  the  Men  of Brethil  in the  battle against  the Orcs
 three  years  later  (458)  that  led  to  their  coming to  Gondolin. The
 only  alterations  that  my  father  made   to  the   passage  in   LQ  2,
 however,  were  the  replacement  of  Gumlin  by  Galdor  and   Haleth  by
 Halmir - thus  retaining the  long since  rejected story  while substitut-
 ing  the  new  names  that  had  entered  with the  chapter Of  the Coming
 of  Men  into  the  West.  This  was  obviously  not his  intention (prob-
 ably  he  altered  the  names  rapidly  throughout  the   chapter  without
 considering  the  content  in  this  paragraph),  and  indeed   he  marked
 the  passage  in  the  margin  with  an X  and noted  against it  'This is
 incorrect  story.  See  Annals  and  tale  of  Turin'. This  treatment may
 have been due to haste, or disinclination to  deal with  the text  at that
 time;  but  it possibly  implies uncertainty  as to  how he  should relate
 the  content  of  the  Quenta  Silmarillion  at  this  point  to  the same
 material  appearing  in  closely  similar  form  both  in the  Grey Annals
 and in the Narn: see pp. 165 ff.  In the  published work  the old  text of
 QS  $153  was  replaced  by  that   of  GA   $$161-6  (with   a  different
 ending: see p. 169).                                                      
                                                                          
 Two  alterations  made  hastily  to  the  QS manuscript  are not  found in
 the typescripts. The first  of these  concerns the  opening of  $133: 'But
 when  the sons  of the  sons of  the Fathers  of Men  were but  newly come
 to manhood'; this  referred to  the second  generation after  Beor, Hador,
 and  Haleth  according to  the old  genealogies, i.e.  Baragund, Belegund,
 Beren;  Hurin,  Huor; Handir  of Brethil.  When correcting  the LQ  2 text
 my father had not observed the need to correct  this in  the light  of the
 revised history of the Edain in Beleriand,  and when  he did  recognise it
 he made the change only on the QS manuscript, thus:                       
    But  when  the  fifth  generation  of  Men after  Beor and  Marach were
 not yet come to full manhood                                              
 Even so, the change is not quite as is to  be expected;  for in  the fifth
 generation  after  Beor  and  Marach   were  Bregolas,   Barahir;  Gundor,
 Galdor. There is of course no question that  the men  referred to  are not
 these,  but  their  sons  -  and  even so  the new  reading 'not  yet come

 to  full  manhood'  is  hardly  suitable  to  Baragund and  Belegund, who
 according  to the  changed dates  in the  genealogical table  (pp. 231-2)
 were at this time 35 and 33 years old. At  any rate  it seems  clear that
 'fifth' was an error for 'sixth'.                                           
   The  other  alteration  made  to  QS  only,  and  obviously  made  much
 earlier than that just given, was an addition to the  end of  $137, after
 the words 'he [Felagund] gave to Barahir his ring'.                         
   But fearing now  that all  strong places  were doomed  to fall  at last
 before  the  might  of  Morgoth,  he  sent  away  his  wife Meril  to her
 own folk in Eglorest, and  with her  went their  son, yet  an elvenchild,
 and Gilgalad Starlight he was called for the brightness of his eye.         
 Felagund's wife Meril has not been named  before, nor  any child  of his;
 and  this  is  the first  appearance of  Gil-galad from  The Lord  of the
 Rings. Another note on the  subject is  found in  the QS  manuscript near
 the opening of the 'short' (i.e. condensed) version of the tale  of Beren
 and Luthien (see  V.293), pencilled  rapidly at  the foot  of a  page but
 clearly referring to the  statement in  the text  that Felagund  gave the
 crown  of  Nargothrond  to  Orodreth  before  his  departure  with  Beren
 (The Silmarillion p. 170):                                                  
   But  foreseeing  evil  he  commanded  Orodreth  to  send  away  his son
 Gilgalad, and wife.                                                         
 This was struck out; and somewhat  further on  in the  tale of  Beren and
 Luthien in the same version is a third hasty note, without  direction for
 insertion  but  evidently  referring  to  the  passage in  which Orodreth
 expelled  Celegorn  and  Curufin   from  Nargothrond   (The  Silmarillion
 p. 176):                                                                 
   But   the  Lady   wife  of   Inglor  forsook   the  folk   of  Nargoth-
 rond and went with her son Gilgalad to the Havens of the Falas.             
 A blank space is here left for the name  of Felagund's  wife. In  each of
 these mentions, taking them in  sequence, her  departure is  displaced to
 a later point; but  of course  they need  not have  been written  in that
 sequence  (although  the  third  presumably  replaced  the  second, which
 was  struck  out).  On the  other hand  it seems  very unlikely  that the
 three  additions  do not  belong together,  though there  seems to  be no
 way  of  discovering  with  certainty when  they were  written. -  It may
 also  be  noticed  that a  later correction  to the  old AB  2 manuscript
 changed  the sentence  in the  concluding annal  (V.144) 'But  Elrond the
 Half-elfin remained, and ruled in the West of the  world' to  'But Elrond
 the  Half-elven  remained  with  Gilgalad  son  of  Inglor  Felagund  who
 ruled in the West of the world.'                                            
   In  this  connection  must  be  mentioned  the  passage  in   the  Grey
 Annals $$108-9 (p. 44), where it  is expressly  stated that  'King Inglor
 Felagund  had  no  wife',  and  that when  Galadriel came  to Nargothrond
 for the feast celebrating its completion in  the year  102 she  asked him
 why:                                                                     
 ...  but  foresight  came  upon  Felagund  as  she  spoke,  and  he said:

 'An oath I too shall swear and must  be free  to fulfill  it and  go into
 darkness.  Nor  shall  anything  of  all  my  realm  endure  that  a  son
 should inherit.'                                                         
      But it is said that not until that hour had such cold thoughts ruled
 him;  for  indeed  she  whom  he  had  loved  was  Amarie of  the Vanyar,
 and she was not permitted to go with him into exile.                     
 Amarie appears again  in GA,  in both  versions of  the retelling  of the
 story  of  Beren  and  Luthien  ($$180,  199),  where  it  is  said  that
 Felagund dwells in Valinor with Amarie.                                  
   Later evidence makes it  certain that  the notes  on the  QS manuscript
 represent a rejected  idea for  the incorporation  of Gil-galad  into the
 traditions of the Elder Days; and the  passage just  cited from  the Grey
 Annals  is  to  be  taken  as showing  that it  had been  abandoned. That
 Gil-galad was the son of Fingon  (The Silmarillion  p. 154)  derives from
 the late  note pencilled  on the  manuscript of  GA ($157),  stating that
 when Fingon became  King of  the Noldor  on the  death of  Fingolfin 'his
 young son  (?Findor) [sic]  Gilgalad he  sent to  the Havens.'  But this,
 adopted after much hesitation, was not in fact by any  means the  last of
 my father's speculations on this question.                               
                                                                         
                         THE LAST CHAPTERS OF THE                         
                            QUENTA SILMARILLION.                          
                                                                         
 Of the next chapters in  QS (12  - 15),  the tale  of Beren  and Luthien,
 there is almost nothing to add to my  account in  V.292 ff.  A typescript
 in  the  LQ 1  series was  made, but  my father  only glanced  through it
 cursorily, correcting  a few  errors in  the typing  and missing  a major
 one; from this it was copied in the LQ  2 series,  which again  he looked
 at  in  a cursory  and uncomparative  fashion: such  old names  as Inglor
 and  Finrod  were not  changed to  Finrod and  Finarfin. The  only change
 that  he  made  to  the  LQ  2 text  was at  the very  beginning (V.296),
 where  against 'Noldor'  he wrote  in the  margin 'Numenor',  i.e. 'which
 is  the  longest  save  one  of  the  songs  of  [the  Noldor  >] Numenor
 concerning the world of old.' With this cf. X.373.                       
                                                                         
   The  textual  history  of  the following  chapters (16  and 17)  of the
 Quenta Silmarillion  has been  fully described  in Vol.V  (see especially
 pp. 293-4), and need not be repeated here.  To Chapter  16, the  story of
 the  Battle  of  Unnumbered  Tears,  no  further changes  to the  text as
 given  in  V.306-13  had  been  made  (apart  from  those   mentioned  in
 V.313,  $1)  when the  LQ 1  typescript was  taken from  it, and  this my
 father did not correct  or change  at any  point. Years  later, the  LQ 2
 typescript  was  simply  a  copy of  LQ 1,  perpetuating its  errors, and
 similarly  neglected.  Thus  the confused  account of  Turgon's emergence
 from  Gondolin, discussed  in V.314-15,  which had  been resolved  in the

  story as  told in  the Grey  Annals (see  p. 133,  $221), remained  in this
  text without so much as a comment in the margin.                               
    With  Chapter  17,  the  beginning  of  the  story  of  Turin (V.316-21),
  my  father  abandoned,  in  December  1937,  the  writing  of  the continu-
  ous  Quenta  Silmarillion.  He  had  made  no changes  to the  chapter when
  the last typescript of the LQ 1 series was taken from it, and this  text he
  never  touched.  In  this  case  he   did  indeed   return  later   to  the
  manuscript,  making  many  additions  and  corrections  (and  rejecting the   j
  whole of the latter part of the chapter, V.319 - 21,  $34-40); but  this is
  best regarded as an aspect of  the vast,  unfinished work  on the  'Saga of
  Turin'  that  engaged   him  during   the  1950s,   from  which   no  brief
  retelling  suitable  in  scale  to  the  Quenta Silmarillion  ever emerged.
  LQ  2  was  again  a  simple  copy  of  LQ  1,  by  that   time  altogether
  obsolete.                                                                      
                                                                                
    Chapter 17   ended  with   Turin's  flight   from  Menegroth   after  the
  slaying  of  Orgof  and  his  gathering  of  a band  of outlaws  beyond the
  borders  of  Doriath:  'their  hands were  turned against  all who  came in
  their  path,  Elves,  Men,  or  Orcs'  (V.321).  The  antecedent   of  this
  passage  is  found  in  Q  (Quenta  Noldorinwa),  IV.123;  and   from  this
  point,  in  terms  of  the  Silmarillion  narrative  strictly  or  narrowly
  defined, there is nothing later than Q (written, or the greater part of it,
  in 1930) for the rest of the tale of Turin, and  for all  the story  of the
  return  of  Hurin,  the Nauglamir,  the death  of Thingol,  the destruction
  of  Doriath,  the  fall  of  Gondolin,  and the  attack on  Sirion's Haven,
  until we  come to  the rewriting  of the  conclusion of  Q which  my father
  carried out in 1937.                                                           
    This  is  not  to  suggest  for  a moment,  of course,  that he  had lost
  interest in the later tales: 'Turin' is the  most obvious  contradiction to
  that, while the  later Tale  of Tuor  was undoubtedly  intended to  lead to
  a  richly  detailed account  of the  Fall of  Gondolin, and  The Wanderings
  of Hurin  was not  to end  with his  departure from  Brethil, but  to lead
  into  the  tale  of   the  Necklace   of  the   Dwarves.  But   the  Quenta
  Silmarillion  was  at  an end.  I have  said of  the Quenta  Noldorinwa (Q)
  in IV.76:                                                                      
    The title ['This is the  brief History  of the  Noldoli or  Gnomes, drawn
  from  the  Book  of  Lost  Tales']  makes it  very plain  that while  Q was
  written  in  a  finished  manner,  my  father  saw  it  as a  compendium, a
  'brief  history'  that  was  'drawn  from'  a  much  longer work;  and this
  aspect  remained   an  important   element  in   his  conception   of  'The
  Silmarillion'  properly  so called.  I do  not know  whether this  idea did
  indeed arise from  the fact  that the  starting point  of the  second phase
  of  the  mythological  narrative   was  a   condensed  synopsis   (S)  [the
  Sketch  of  the  Mythology];  but  it  seems likely  enough, from  the step
  by  step  continuity  that  leads  from  S  through Q  to the  version that
  was interrupted towards its end in 1937.                                       

 In  these  versions  my  father  was  drawing  on  (while  also  of  course
 continually  developing  and  extending)  long  works that  already existed
 in  prose  and  verse,  and in  the Quenta  Silmarillion he  perfected that
 characteristic tone, melodious, grave,  elegiac, burdened  with a  sense of
 loss  and distance  in time,  which resides  partly, as  I believe,  in the
 literary  fact  that  he  was  drawing  down   into  a   brief  compendious
 history  what  he  could  also  see  in far  more detailed,  immediate, and
 dramatic  form.  With  the   completion  of   the  great   'intrusion'  and
 departure  of  The Lord  of the  Rings, it  seems that  he returned  to the
 Elder  Days  with  a  desire  to  take up  again the  far more  ample scale
 with  which  he  had  begun long  before, in  The Book  of Lost  Tales. The
 completion  of  the  Quenta Silmarillion  remained an  aim; but  the 'great
 tales', vastly developed from their  original forms,  from which  its later
 chapters should be derived were never achieved.                            
                                                                           
   It remains only to record the later history of the  final element  in QS,
 the  rewritten  conclusion  of  the  Quenta  Noldorinwa,  which  was given
 in V.323  ff. with  such emendations  as I  judged to  have been  made very
 early and before the abandonment of work on QS at the end of 1937.         
   It is curious  to find  that a  final typescript  in the  LQ 2  series of
 1958(?)  was  made,  in  which  the  text of  Q was  copied from  the words
 'Hurin  gathered  therefore  a  few   outlaws  of   the  woods   unto  him,
 and  they  came  to  Nargothrond'  (IV.132) to  the end.  It has  no title,
 and  apart  from  some  corrections  made  to  it  by  my  father   has  no
 independent value: its interest lies only in the fact of its existence. The
 reason why it begins  at this  place in  the narrative  is, I  think, clear
 (though not why it begins at  precisely this  point). At  the time  when my
 father  decided to  'get copies  made of  all copyable  material' (December
 1957,  see  X.141-2)  he  provided  the  typist  not  only with  the Quenta
 Silmarillion  papers  but  also  with  (among  other manuscripts)  the Grey
 Annals.  Thus  the  story  of  Turin,  in  that  form,  was  (or  would be)
 secure  in  two  typescript  copies.  But  from  the  death  of  Turin,  if
 anything  of  the concluding  parts of  The Silmarillion  was to  be copied
 in this  way, it  had to  be the  text of  Q: for  there was  nothing later
 (except the rewritten version of the conclusion). Yet in  this text  we are
 of  course  in  quite early  writing: for  a single  example among  many, Q
 has  (IV.139)  'For  Turgon  deemed, when  first they  came into  that vale
 after  the  dreadful  battle  ...'  -  an  explicit  reference  to  the now
 long-discarded  story of  the foundation  of Gondolin  after the  Battle of
 Unnumbered  Tears;  and  so  this  appears  in  the  late  typescript. That
 was of course a mere pis-aller, an insurance against  the possibility  of a
 catastrophe, but  its existence  underlines, and  must have  underlined for
 my  father, the  essential and  far-reaching work  that still  awaited him,
 but which he would never achieve.                                          
   The typist  of LQ  2 was  given the  manuscript (see  V.323) of  the 1937
 rewriting  of  the conclusion  of Q,  beginning 'And  they looked  upon the

  Lonely Isle and there they tarried not'. Some of the later,  roughly made
  emendations  (see  V.324)  had  already  been  made  to  the  manuscript,
  but others had not. Up to the point  where the  rewritten text  begins my
  father understandably paid no attention at all to the typescript, but the
  concluding portion he corrected cursorily - it is clear  that he  did not
  have the  actual manuscript  by him  to refer  to. These  corrections are
  mostly no  more than  regular changes  of name,  but he  made one  or two
  independent  alterations as  well, and  these are  recorded in  the notes
  that follow.                                                                
    The corrections to the  manuscript, carried  out as  it appears  in two
  stages (before and after the making of the typescript), are mostly fairly
  minor, and a few so slight as not to be worth recording.  I refer  to the
  numbered paragraphs in V.324 - 34.                                          
    Changes  of  name  or  forms of  name were:  Airandir >  Aerandir ($1);
  Tun  >  Tirion  ($3  and  subsequently);  Kor  >  Tuna  ($4);  Lindar  >
  Vanyar  ($$6,  26);  Vingelot  >  Vingilot  ($11,  but  not at  the other
  occurrences);  Gumlin  >  Galion  ($16);  Gorthu  >  Gorthaur  ($30,  see
  p. 240, $143); Palurien > Kementari ($32); Eriol > Ereol ($33).            
    Fionwe  was  changed  to  Eonwe  throughout,  and  son  of  Manwe  to
  'herald  of  Manwe'  in  $5 (but  in $6  'Fionwe son  of Manwe'  > 'Eonwe
  to  whom Manwe  gave his  sword'); 'the  sons of  the Valar'  became 'the
  host of the Valar' in $6, but 'the Children  of the  Valar' in  $18, 'the
  sons of the Gods' in $20, and 'the sons of the Valar'  in $$29,  32, were
  not corrected (see also under $15 below).                                   
    Other changes were:                                                       
                                                                             
  $6.  'Ingwiel son  of Ingwe  was their  chief': observing  the apparent     
    error, in that Ingwiel appears to be named the  leader of  the Noldor     
    (see V.334, $6), my father changed this to 'Finarphin son  of Finwe':     
    see IV.196, second  footnote. In  the typescript  he let  the passage     
    stand,  but  changed Ingwiel  to Ingwion  (and also  'Light-elves' to     
    'Fair-elves', see X.168, 180).                                            
  $9.  'Manwe' > 'Manwe the Elder King'                                         
  $12.  'she let build for her' > 'there was built for her'                     
  $13.  'they took it for a sign of hope' > 'they took it  for a  sign, and     
    they called it Gil-Orrain, the  Star of  high hope',  with Gil-Orrain     
    subsequently  changed to  Gil-Amdir (see  X.320). The  typescript had     
    the  revised  reading, with  Gil-Orrain, which  my father  emended to     
    Gil-Estel; on the carbon copy he wrote Orestel above Orrain.              
  $15.  'the Light-elves of Valinor' > 'the Light-elves in Valinor'             
      'the sons of the Gods were young and fair and terrible' > 'the host     
    of the Gods were arrayed in forms of Valinor'                             
  $16.  'the most part of the sons of Men' > 'a great part  of the  sons of     
    Men'                                                                     
  $17.  'was like a great roar of thunder, and  a tempest  of fire'  > 'was     
    with a great thunder, and lightning, and a tempest of fire'               
  $18.  'and  in his  fall the  towers of  Thangorodrim were  thrown down'     
                                                                             
                                                                             

    >  'and  he  fell  upon  the  towers  of   Thangorodrim  and   they  were
    broken and thrown down'                                                  
      'the  chain  Angainor,  which  long  had  been  prepared' >  'the chain
    Angainor, which he had worn aforetime'                                   
  $20.  'But  Maidros  would  not  harken,  and  he  prepared...  to attempt
    in  despair  the  fulfilment  of  his  oath'  >  'But Maidros  and Maglor
    would not harken...', with change of 'he' to 'they' and 'his' to 'their'.
  $26.  'and especially upon the great isles' > 'and upon the great isles'     
  $30.  'and  bears dark  fruit even  to these  latest days'  > 'and  will bear
    dark fruit even unto the latest days'                                    
      'Sauron  ...  who  served  Morgoth  even  in  Valinor  and   came  with
    him'  >  '...  who  served  Morgoth  long  ago  and  came  with  him into
    the  world' (cf.  the removal  of the  passage on  this subject  from the
    chapter Of the Ruin of Beleriand, p. 240, $143).                         
  $31.  'Turin  Turambar...  coming  from  the  halls  of  Mandos'   >  'Turin
    Turambar...  returning  from  the  Doom  of  Men  at  the  ending  of the
    world'.  In  the  margin  of the  manuscript my  father wrote  'and Beren
    Camlost' without direction for its insertion.                            
  $32.  'and  she  will  break  them  [the  Silmarils]  and  with  their  fire
    rekindle  the  Two  Trees':  this  was  emended  on  the  carbon  copy of
    the  typescript  only  to:  'and  he  [Feanor] will  break them  and with
    their fire Yavanna will rekindle the Two Trees'                          
      Approximately  against  the  last  two   sentences  of   the  paragraph
    (from  'In  that  light  the Gods  will grow  young again...')  my father
    put a large X in the margin of the manuscript.                           
                                                                            
    Among  these  later  changes  were  also  the  subheadings (Of  the Great
  Battle  and  the  War  of Wrath  at $15,  Of the  Last End  of the  Oath of
  Feanor  and  his  Sons at  $20, and  Of the  Passing of  the Elves  at $26)
  which  were  noticed in  the commentary  on this  text, V.336;  I neglected
  however  to  mention  there  the  introduction  of  a  further  subheading,
  The Second Prophecy of Mandos, at $31.                                     
                                                                            
    I  said  of  this text  in V.324:  'The very  fact that  the end  of "The
  Silmarillion"  still  took  this  form  when  The  Lord  of  the  Rings was
  begun  is  sufficiently  remarkable'.  It seems  much more  remarkable, and
  not easy to interpret, that my father was treating it  as a  text requiring
  only  minor  and  particular  revision  at  this much  later time.  But his
  mode   of   emendation   could   sometimes   be    decidedly   perfunctory,
  suggesting  not  a  close,  comparative  consideration  of an  earlier text
  so  much  as  a series  of descents  on particular  points that  struck his
  attention; and it may be that  such later  emendations as  he made  in this
  case are to be  regarded rather  in that  light than  as implying  any sort
  of  final  approval  of  the  content. But  this text  was peculiar  in its
  inception,  jumping  forward  from  the  beginning  of  the story  of Turin
  to  the  middle  of  a  sentence  much further  on in  the Quenta,  and its
  later history does not diminish its somewhat mysterious nature.            
