      PART THREE.      
                      
    THE WANDERINGS     
          OF           
         HURIN         
                      
  AND OTHER WRITINGS
   NOT FORMING PART
        OF THE         
 QUENTA SILMARILLION.

                                     I                                    
                          THE WANDERINGS OF HURIN.                        
                                                                         
 In  The  Wanderings  of  Hurin  ('WH') it  is not  convenient to  use the
 device  of  numbered  paragraphs, and  commentary (pp.  298 ff.)  is here
 related to numbered notes in the text.                                   
  The earliest  account of  Hurin after  his release  by Morgoth  is found
 in the Tale of  Turambar (II.112  - 15,  135-6), leading  to that  in the
 Sketch of the Mythology  (IV.32) and  in Q  (IV.132); see  also AB  1 and
 AB 2 (IV.306, V.141). It  is not  necessary to  say anything  about these
 here, since in none of them is there any  suggestion that  Hurin returned
 to Hithlum (or went to Brethil) before he came to Nargothrond.           
                                                                         
  I  have  described  (p.  103)  how  the  manuscript  of the  Grey Annals
 (GA) ends with strange abruptness at the foot  of a  page, and  said that
 'it always  seemed to  me strange  that my  father should  have abandoned
 the Grey Annals where he did,  without at  least writing  the inscription
 that was carved on the stone'. At some later time (see ibid.)  he entered
 roughly on the manuscript  the inscription  on the  stone, and  the words
 of conclusion to the tale, derived from the last part of the Narn (NE).
  The  explanation  of  this  was  simple,  when  I  discovered, misplaced
 among  miscellaneous  papers,  manuscript pages  that are  very obviously
 the continuation of the Grey Annals (the first of  these pages  is indeed
 numbered  continuously  with  the  last  page  of  the  main manuscript);
 this continuation, it is plain, was already lost in my father's lifetime.
 The original conclusion was in fact exactly  as in  the addition  made to
 GA when he presumed the original ending  lost, except  that the  title of
 the  work  was  then  Glaer  nia  Chin Hurin,  as in  NE (p.  160, $349).
 Subsequently  my  father  had  added  the  words 'and  was made  by Men',
 as in the conclusion added to  GA (p.  103), and  later again  he changed
 the title to Narn i Chin Hurin, as he did also in NE.                    
  In the scarcely changing script of the main manuscript this  'lost' text
 stopped here, but  was then  continued on  the same  page in  a different
 ink and  script, with  the date  500 twice  written against  this further
 entry and each time struck out.                                          
                                                                         
  It  is  said  by  some  that  Morwen  on  a  time  came  in  her witless
 wandering   to   that   stone   and   read   it,  and   died  afterwards,
 though  haply  she  did  not  understand the  tale that  it told,  and in
 that  was  less  tormented  than  Hurin.  For   all  that   Morgoth  knew
 of  the  working  of  his  curse  Hurin  knew also;  but lies  and malice

 were  mingled  with  the  truth,  and  he that  sees through  the eyes
 of   Morgoth,  willing   or  unwilling,   sees  all   things  crooked.
 [Written  in  the  margin  later:   Some  fate   of  Morwen   must  be
 devised. Did Morwen and Hurin meet again?](1)                             
                                                                          
   At this point the ink and to a slight degree the style of the script
 change again. The following narrative is the first account  of Hurin's
 release since the Quenta of 1930.                                         
                                                                          
                                  500.                                     
                                                                          
   Especially  Morgoth  endeavoured  to  cast  an  evil light  upon all
 that  Thingol  and  Melian  had   done  (for   he  hated   and  feared
 them  most);  and  when  at  last  he  deemed  the  time ripe,  in the
 year  after  the  death  of  his  children,  he  released  Hurin  from
 bondage  and  let  him  go  whither  he  would.  He  feigned  that  in
 this  he  was  moved  by  generosity  to  a  defeated  enemy,  but  in
 truth  his  purpose  was  that  Hurin should  further his  malice. And
 little  though  Hurin  trusted  aught  that  Morgoth  said or  did, he
 went forth in grief, embittered by the lies of the Dark Lord.             
   Twenty-eight  years  Hurin  was  captive  in  Angband,  and  at  his
 release  was  in  his  sixtieth year,(2) but great  strength was  in him
 still, in spite of the weight of his grief, for it suited  the purpose  ]
 of  Morgoth  that  this  should  be  so.  He was  sent under  guard as
 far as the east-marches of Hithlum, and there he was let go free.         
   None  that  had  known  him  [in]  youth  could  mistake  him still,  .]
 though  he  had  grown  grim  to  look  on:  his  hair and  beard were
 white and long, but  there was  a fell  light in  his eyes.  He walked
 unbowed,  and  yet  carried  a  great  black  staff;  but he  was girt
 with  his  sword.  Great wonder  and dread  fell on  the land  when it
 was  noised  in  Hithlum  that  the  Lord  Hurin  had   returned.  The
 Easterlings   were   dismayed,   fearing   that  their   Master  would
 prove  faithless  again  and  give  back  the  land  to  the Westrons,
 and  that  they  would  be  enslaved  in  their  turn.   For  watchmen
 had reported that Hurin came out of Angband.                              
   'There was a great  riding,' they  said, 'of  the black  soldiers of
 Thangorodrim   over   the   Anfauglith,  and   with  them   came  this
 man, as one that was held in honour.'                                     
   Therefore  the  chieftains of  the Easterlings  dared not  lay hands
 on Hurin,  and let  him walk  at will.  In which  they were  wise; for
 the  remnant  of  his  own   people  shunned   him,  because   of  his
 coming   from   Angband,   as   one   in   league   and   honour  with
 Morgoth;  and  indeed  all  escaped  captives  were held  in suspicion

 of  spying  and  treachery  in those  days, as  has been  told. Thus
 freedom only  increased the  bitterness of  Hurin's heart;  for even
 had  he  so  wished,  he  could  not   have  roused   any  rebellion
 against  the  new  lords  of  the  land. All  the following  that he
 gathered  was  a  small  company  of  the  homeless men  and outlaws
 chat lurked in the hills; but they  had done  no great  deed against
 the Incomers since the passing of Turin, some five years before.
   Of Turin's deeds in  Brodda's hall  Hurin now  learned from  the '
 outlaws  the  true  tale,.  and  he  looked  on Asgon {3} and his men,
 and  he  said:  'Men  are  changed  here.  In  thraldom   they  have
 found  thrall hearts. I desire  no longer  any lordship  among them,
 nor elsewhere in  Middle-earth. I  will leave  this land  and wander
 alone, unless any of you will go with me, to meet what we may.     
 For  I  have  no purpose  now, unless  I find  chance to  avenge the
 wrongs of my son.'                                                 
   Asgorn {4} and six  other  desperate  men were  willing to  go with
 him; and Hurin led them  to the  halls of  Lorgan, who  still called
 himself  the  Lord  of  Hithlum.  Lorgan heard  of their  coming and
 was afraid, and he gathered other  chieftains and  their men  in his
 house for defence. But Hurin coming to the gates looked on the     
 Eastrons {5} in scorn.                                                
   'Fear not!' he said.  'I should  have needed  no companions,  if I
 had come to fight with  you. I  am come  only to  take leave  of the
 lord of the land. I have no liking for it any  more, since  you have
 defiled it. Hold it  while you  may, until  your Master  recalls you
 to the slave-tasks that fit you better.'                           
   Then  Lorgan  was  not  ill-pleased  to  think  that  he  would so
 soon and easily be rid of the  fear of  Hurin, without  crossing the
 will of Angband; and he came forward.                              
   'As you will, friend,' he said. 'I have done you no ill,  and have
 let you be, and of this I hope you will  bring a  true tale,  if you
 come again to the Master.'                                         
   Hurin eyed him in  wrath. 'Friend  me not,  thrall and  churl!' he
 said. 'And believe not the lies that I have heard: that I  have ever
 entered into the service  of the  Enemy. Of  the Edain  am I  and so
 remain,  and  there  shall  be  no   friendship  between   mine  and
 yours for ever.'                                                   
   Then hearing that Hurin had not after all the favour of          
 Morgoth,  or  forswore  it,   many  of   Lorgan's  men   drew  their
 swords to put  an end  to him.  But Lorgan  restrained them;  for he
 was  wary,  and  more  cunning  and  wicked  than  the  others,  and
 quicker therefore to guess at the purposes of the Master.          

   'Go  then,  greybeard,  to  evil fortune,'  he said.  'For that  is your
 doom.  Folly  and  violence  and  self-hurt  are  all  the  deeds  of your
 kin. Fare you ill!'                                                       
   'Tol  acharn!'  said  Hurin.  'Vengeance  comes.  I  am  not   the  last
 of  the  Edain,  whether  I  fare  ill   or  well.'   And  with   that  he
 departed, and left the land of Hithlum.                                   
                                                                          
                                    501.                                   
                                                                          
   Of  the  wanderings  of  Hurin  there   is  no   tale  told,   until  he
 came  at  last  late  in  this  year to  Nargothrond. It  is said  that he
 had  then  gathered  to  him  other  fugitives   and  masterless   men  in
 the   wild,   and  came   south  with   a  following   of  a   hundred  or
 more.  But  why  it  was  that  he  went  to  Nargothrond   is  uncertain,
 save  that  so  his  doom  and  the  fate  of  the  Jewels  led  him. Some
 have said that                                                            
                                                                          
   At  this  point the  'lost continuation'  of the  Grey Annals  stops, at
 the foot of  a page;  but a  further page  is found,  written in  a wholly
 different script (a rapid italic that my father  used quite  frequently in
 the period after the publication of The Lord of  the Rings),  that clearly
 joins  to  the  abandoned  sentence  'Some   have  said   that'.  Together
 with  the  first  extension  of  the Annals,  that concerning  Morwen (pp.
 251-2),  and  then  the  narrative recounting  Hurin's return  to Hithlum,
 this page is a further and final link in the series of additions that were
 made at intervals whose length cannot be determined.                      
                                                                          
 [Some   have   said   that]   maybe   he  knew   not  that   Glaurung  was
 dead,  and  hoped   in  his   heart  distraught   to  take   vengeance  on
 this   evil   thing   -   for   Morgoth   would   conceal  the   death  of
 Glaurung,  if  he  could,  both  because  the  loss  was  a  grief  to him
 and  a  hurt  to  his  pride,  and  because  (from  Hurin  especially)  he
 would  conceal  all  that  was  most  valiant  or  successful  of  Turin's
 deeds.  Yet  this  can  scarce be so,(6) since  the  death   of   Glaurung
 was  so  bound  up  with  the  death  of  his  children and  revelation of
 their  evil  case;   while  the   rumour  of   the  assault   of  Glaurung
 upon   Brethil   went  far   and  wide.   Certainly  Morgoth   fenced  men
 in  Hithlum,  as  he  was  able,  and   little  news   came  to   them  of
 events  in  other  lands;  but  so  soon  as  Hurin  passed  southward  or
 met  any   wanderers  in   the  wild   he  would   hear  tidings   of  the
 battle in the ravine of Taiglin.                                          
   More  likely  is  it  that  he  was  drawn thither  to discover  news of
 Turin; to Brethil he would not yet come, nor to Doriath.                  
   He  went  first  seeking  a  way  into  Gondolin,  and   the  friendship
 of  Turgon  (which   indeed  would   have  been   great);  but   he  found

                                                        
                                                                        
 it not. His doom was unwilling (for Morgoth's curse was ever            
 upon him still); and moreover since the Nirnaeth  Turgon had            
 expended every art upon the hiding of his realm. It was then            
 that Hurin finding                                                      
                                                                        
 Here the text stops abruptly; but on the  same page  and clearly  at the
 same time my father wrote the following:                                
                                                                        
 Hurin  goes  to  seek  Gondolin.  Fails.  Passes  by  Brethil,  and his
 anguish  is  increased.  They  will  not  admit him  - saying  that the
 Halethrim   do  not   wish  any   more  to   become  enmeshed   in  the
 shadow   of   his   kin.   But   A  [?new] Lord (7) gives  the  dragon-
 helm  to  Hurin.  His  heart  is  hot  against  Thingol.  He  passes it
 [Doriath]  by  and  goes  on  to  Nargothrond.   Why?  To   seek  news,
 plunder, - he had been an admirer of Felagund.                          
  News  of  the  fall  of  Nargothrond  came  to  sons  of  Feanor,  and
 dismayed   Maedros,  but   did  not   all  displease   Celeg[orn]  and
 Curufin.  But  when  the  news  of  the dragon's  fall was  heard, then
 many  wondered   concerning  its   hoard  and   who  was   the  master?
 Some   Orc-lord,   men   thought.   But  the   Dwarves  of   [sic]  How
 did Mim find it? He must come of a different race.(8)                   
                                                                        
  These  two  pieces,  especially  the  latter, are  plainly a  record of
 emerging ideas.  In the  first there  is what  is probably  the earliest
 reference to the story that Hurin sought but failed to find the entrance
 to Gondolin. In the second appears a new  articulation in  the unwritten
 history  of  the Dragon-helm,  together with  other new  detail (Hurin's
 admiration  of  Felagund,  and the  effect of  the news  of the  fall of
 Nargothrond  on  the  sons  of  Feanor);  and  there  is seen  the first
 adumbration of a story of Hurin's adventures in  Brethil before  he went
 to Nargothrond.                                                         
                                                                        
  Before coming to the  fully achieved  story of  Hurin in  Brethil there
 remains one  further text  to consider.  When my  father was  engaged on
 his later work on the Narn i  Chin Hurin  he made  several plot-synopses
 arranged in annalistic form. Much of that material is not relevant here,
 since it is primarily concerned with  the evolving  story of  Turin; but
 one of  them, which  begins with  the birth  of Turin,  continues beyond
 his death and gives some account, though very brief, of Hurin  after his
 release by Morgoth.                                                     
  I give here the conclusion of this text (certainly somewhat  later than
 any of the writings given thus far in Part Three), taking it up a little
 before the death of Turin, since there are  many interesting  details in
 the  annals  for  490-9  bearing  on the  accounts given  in NE  and GA.
 The text was written legibly but very rapidly.                          

                              490-5.                             
                                                                
  Turin  becomes  a  great  captain  in  Nargothrond   under  the
 name  of  Iarwaeth,  and  is  called  Mormegil  Black   Sword  .
 [Altered  later  to  read:  Turin  becomes  a  great  captain in
 Nargothrond. He only  tells that  he was  lord of  Cuarthol, and
 gives out his name as Thuringud  the Hidden  Foe; but  is called
 Mormegil 'Black Sword'.                                         
  Gwindor  reveals  his  true  name  to  Finduilas, and  Turin is
 angry.(9)                                                       
                                                                
                               494.                              
                                                                
  Morgoth stirs up the Eastrons  to greater  hatred of  Elves and
 Edain,  and  sends  Orcs  to  aid  them  and impel  them. Lorgan
 hearing  of  Nienor's  beauty  is  eager to  take her  by force.
 Morwen  and  Nienor  flee  the  land and  come to  Doriath. They
 seek news of Turin.(10)                                        
                                                                
                               495.                              
                                                                
  Tuor  escapes  from  Hithlum  by Cirith  Ninniach and  comes to
 Nivrost. He meets  Gelmir and  Arminas. Ulmo  visits him  on the
 shores  by  Mount  Taras,  and  sends Voronwe  to him.  Tuor and
 Voronwe  go  to  seek  Gondolin  which  they  reach  in  winter.
 Winter of 495 -  6 is  the Fell  Winter with  ice and  snow from
 November to March (5 months).                                   
  Gelmir  and  Arminas  come  to  Nargothrond  and   bring  warn-
 ing  of  forces  mustering  in  Narrow  Land  and   under  Eryd-
 wethian [sic]. They are rejected by Turin.                      
  Handir  of  Brethil  slain  in  battle  with  the  Orcs  at the
 Crossings of Taeglin [sic]. His son Brandir  the lame  is chosen
 Chieftain,  though  many  would   have  preferred   his  cousins
 Hunthor or Hardang.                                             
  Turin  and  Orodreth  defeated  in Battle  of Tum-halad  by the
 dread  of  Glaurung.  Gwindor   also  slain.   Glaurung  ravages
 Nargothrond, and cozens Turin.                                  
  Turin  breaks  his  word  to  Gwindor  to  endeavour   to  save
 Finduilas,  who  is  carried  off.  Instead  under the  spell of
 Glaurung he goes to Dorlomin to seek Morwen and Nienor.         
  Finduilas is slain by the  Orcs near  Crossings of  Taeglin and
 buried by Men of Brethil in Haudh-en-Elleth.                    
  Tuor sees Turin near ravaged place of Eithil Ivrin but does not
 know who he is.                                                 
  Glaurung takes possession of Nargothrond.(11)                  

                               496.                               
                                                                 
  Early  in  year  Turin  comes  to Dorlomin.  He slays  Brodda in
 his  hall.  Death  of  Sador.  Turin flies  with Asgon  and other
 outlawed  Edain  to the  Mountains, and  then leaves  Dorlomin by
 himself. He comes at last to Brethil  and learns  of the  fate of
 Finduilas.                                                       
  Morwen  and  Nienor  come  to  Nargothrond,  but   their  escort
 (under Mablung) is  scattered, and  Morwen is  lost in  the wild,
 but  Nienor  is  bewitched  by  Glaurung,  and loses  her memory,
 and runs into the wild.                                          
  Nienor comes to Brethil, and is called Niniel.(12)              
                                                                 
                               496-                               
                                                                 
  Under  the  name  of  Turambar  Turin  becomes chief  warrior of
 Brethil, and men give no heed to Brandir.  Brandir falls  in love
 with Niniel, but she loves Turambar.                             
                                                                 
                               497.                               
  Dior Halfelven weds Lindis of Ossiriand.(13)                    
                                                                 
                               498.                               
    Turin weds Niniel (autumn).(14)                              
                                                                 
                               499.                               
                                                                 
  Glaurung  assails  Brethil.  Turin  goes  against him  with Hun-
 thor  and  Dorlas.  Dorlas'  heart  fails  and  he  leaves  them.
 Hunthor  is  slain  by  a  falling  stone. Turin  slays Glaurung.
 Glaurung  ere death  reveals to  Turin and  Nienor who  they are.
 Turin  slays  Brandir.  Nienor casts  herself into  Taeglin. [The
 following  are  separate  additions  to  the  text:]  Turin slays
 Brandir and takes his own life. / Men of Brethil erect the Talbor
 or  St[anding] Stone  to their  memory. /  Mim comes  to Nargoth-
 rond and takes possession of the treasure.(15)                   
                                                                 
                               500.                               
  Elrun and Eldun twin sons of Dior are born.                     
  Morgoth releases Hurin. Hurin goes to Hithlum.(16)              
                                                                 
                           501.                                   
           Hurin leaves Hithlum and with Asgon and six men goes
 down into the Narrow Land.                                       
  Hurin leaves his  companions and  seeks in  vain an  entrance to

                               
                                                                              
 Gondolin,  but  Morgoth's  spies  thus learn  in what  region it              
 stands.                                                                       
    Hurin comes to the Stone  and there  finds Morwen,  who dies.              
 Hurin is put in prison by Hardang Chief of Brethil, but is aided              
 by  Manthor  his  kinsman  (cousin  of  Hardang).   In  uprising              
 Hardang  and  Manthor  are  slain  and  Obel  Halad  is  burned.              
 Hurin  finds  Asgon  again  and  gathers  other  men   and  goes              
 towards Nargothrond.(17)                                                      
                                                                              
                                      502.                                     
    Tuor weds Idril daughter of Turgon.                                        
    Hurin comes to Nargothrond and slays Mim the petty-dwarf.
 He and his men carry off the treasure of Glaurung and bring it                
 to Doriath. Hurin is admitted in pity.(18)                                    
                                                                              
    Here  this  plot-synopsis  ends,  at  the  foot  of  a  manuscript  page. I
 come  now  to  the  substantial  complex of  writing leading  to a  final text
 which  my  father  ultimately  entitled  The  Wanderings  of   Hurin  (earlier
 Of  the  Fate  of  Hurin  and  Morwen). The  final  title  seems  not   to  be
 entirely   apposite   to   the   content   of  the   work,  which   is  wholly
 concerned  with   the  story   of  Hurin   in  Brethil;   it  may   have  been
 intended  to  have  a  larger  scope, to  include the  further story  of Hurin
 told  on  the  same  scale,  which  was never  written (see  p. 310,  note 57,
 and also the other title given below).                                        
    There  is,  first,  a  draft  manuscript  and  associated   rough  workings
 (often  of  an  extreme  roughness).  Many  pages  of  the draft  material are
 the  backs  of  University   documents  dated   1954,  others   are  documents
 from  1957.  Secondly,  there  is  a  typescript  made  by  my  father  on his
 later  typewriter   (see  X.300),   much  emended   in  manuscript   and  with
 some  substantial  passages  rejected   and  replaced   by  new   material  in
 typescript;  and  lastly  an  amanuensis  typescript  of  virtually  no  inde-
 pendent  value.  The  work  can  be  placed  with  fair certainty  towards the
 end of the 1950s.                                                             
    My father's typescript, as typed, bore  no title,  but he  wrote in  ink on
 the top copy:                                                                 
                        Of the Fate of Hurin and Morwen                        
             Link to the Necklace of the Dwarves, 'Sigil Elu-naeth'            
                         Necklace of the Woe of Thingol                        
 The text opens thus:                                                          
                                                                              
    So ended the tale of Turin the hapless; and it has ever been               
 held one of  the worst  of the  deeds of  Morgoth among  Men in               
 the ancient world. It is  said by  some that  on a  time Morwen               
 came in her witless wandering to the graven stone,  and knowing               
 that her children were dead, though she understood not  in what               

 way their tale had ended, she sat beside the stone awaiting              
 death; and there Hurin found her at last, as is after told.              
  Less happy than hers was the lot of Hurin.                              
                                                                         
 This passage derives, in its first  sentence, from  Q (IV.131),  and then
 from the  first continuation  of the  Grey Annals  (pp. 251-2),  with the
 addition that  Hurin found  Morwen beside  the stone  (cf. p.  258, annal
 501). The  passage was  struck from  the typescript  and replaced  by the
 following, written on a document dating from 1957:                       
                                                                         
  So  ended  the  tale  of  Turin  the  Hapless, the  worst of  the works
 of  Morgoth  among   Men  in   the  ancient   world.  But   Morgoth  did
 not  sleep  nor  rest  from  evil,  and  this  was  not  the end  of his
 dealings  with  the  House  of  Hador,  against  which  his  malice  was
 unsated,    though    Hurin    was   under    his   Eye,    and   Morwen
 wandered distraught in the wild.                                         
  Unhappy was the lot of Hurin.                                           
                                                                         
 At  the  head  of  this my  father subsequently  wrote The  Wanderings of
 Hurin, and the final amanuensis typescript was given this title also (see
 p. 258). The typescript  continues, from  'Less happy  than hers  was the
 lot of Hurin':                                                           
                                                                         
 For  all  that  Morgoth  knew  of  the  working   of  his   malice  Hurin
 knew  also;  but  lies  were  mingled  with  the  truth,  and  aught that
 was  good  was  hidden  or  distorted.  He  that  sees  through  the eyes
 of Morgoth, willing or unwilling, sees all things crooked.               
  It  was  Morgoth's  special  endeavour  to  cast  an  evil   light  upon
 all  that  Thingol  and  Melian  had  done,  for  he  feared   and  hated
 them  most;  and  when,  therefore,  he  deemed  the  time  ripe,  in the
 year  after  the  death  of  Turin  he   released  Hurin   from  bondage,
 bidding him go whither he would.                                         
  He  feigned  that  in  this  he  was   moved  by   pity  for   an  enemy
 utterly  defeated,   marvelling  at   his  endurance.   'Such  steadfast-
 ness,'  he  said,  'should  have  been  shown  in  a  better  cause,  and
 would  have  been  otherwise  rewarded.   But  I   have  no   longer  any
 use for you, Hurin,  in the  waning of  your little  life.' And  he lied,
 for  his  purpose  was  that  Hurin  should  still  further   his  malice
 against Elves and Men, ere he died.                                      
  Then  little   though  Hurin   trusted  aught   that  Morgoth   said  or
 did,  knowing  that  he  was  without  pity,  he  took  his  freedom  and
 went  forth  in  grief,  embittered  by  the  deceits  of the  Dark Lord.
 Twenty-eight years Hurin was captive in Angband...                       

  In  this  passage  my  father  was  following,  with  some  expansion, the
  continuation of  the Grey  Annals (p.  252); from  this point  he followed
  it almost without alteration as  far as  'And with  that he  departed, and
  left the land of Hithlum' (p. 254).(19) There are  thus two  closely similar,
  and  for  most  of their  length all  but identical,  texts of  this short
  narrative,  which  may  be  called 'Hurin  in Hithlum';  but the  first of
  them is the  continuation of  the Annals,  and the  second is  the opening
  of a wholly new  story of  Hurin in  Brethil -  causing a  postponement of
  the  story  of  'Hurin  in  Nargothrond',  which  in  the event  was never
  reached. Seeing then that the  second text  of 'Hurin  in Hithlum'  has an
  entirely distinct function, there is clearly no question of  regarding the
  story of Hurin in Brethil as a further  extension of  the Annals.  As will
  be  seen,  my  father  was  very  evidently  no  longer writing  annals of
  Beleriand:  that  work   was  now   abandoned  -   or  possibly,   in  his
  intention, left in abeyance,  until the  new story  had been  completed on
  the scale that he found congenial.                                            
    I  now  give  the  further text  of The  Wanderings of  Hurin (following
  from  the  words  'And  with  that  he  departed,  and  left  the  land of
  Hithlum').  The  work  is  of peculiar  complexity in  this, that  when my
  father was well advanced in  the story  he came  to a  clearer understand-
  ing (as he might have said) of  the situation  in Brethil  at the  time of
  Hurin's  advent;  and  these  new  conceptions overtook  it before  it was
  completed  in  a  primary  form.  In  other  words,  the  story  grew  and
  changed as he wrote, but  in this  case he  did not  abandon it  and start
  again at the  beginning: he  returned to  earlier parts  of the  story and
  reconstructed them. For the  most part  the text  as actually  typed could
  stand,  but  required  continual  emendation  in  respect  of   names  and
  other details. It is not easy to find a perfectly satisfactory and readily   ]
  comprehensible  way  of  presenting  this,  but  after  much  experimenta-
  tion I concluded that the best method  is to  give as  the text  the final
  form achieved in the typescript, but to interrupt it (pp. 265 ff.)  at the
  point  where  the  new  conceptions first  appear and  give an  account of
  the  development.  Two  passages are  concerned: the  revised form  of the
  first is marked by single asterisks  on pp.  262-3, and  of the  second by
  double asterisks on pp. 264-5.                                                
                                                                               
    It is said that the hunters of Lorgan dogged his footsteps and              
  did not leave his trail until he and his companions went up into              
  the mountains. When Hurin stood again in the high places he                   
  descried far away amid the clouds the peaks of the Crisaegrim,                
  and he remembered Turgon; and his heart desired to come again                 
  to the Hidden Realm, if he could, for there at least he would be              
  remembered with honour. He had heard naught of the things                     
  that had come to pass in Gondolin, and knew not that Turgon                   
  now hardened his heart against wisdom and pity, and allowed                   

 no one either to enter or to go forth for any cause whatsoever.(20)  
 Therefore,  unaware  that  all   ways  were   shut  beyond   hope,  he
 resolved  to  turn  his  steps  towards  the  Crisaegrim; but  he said
 nothing  of  his purpose  to his  companions, for  he was  still bound
 by his oath  to reveal  to no  one that  he knew  even in  what region
 Turgon abode.                                                        
   Nonetheless  he had  need of  help; for  he had  never lived  in the
 wild,  whereas  the  outlaws  were  long  inured to  the hard  life of
 hunters  and  gatherers,  and  they  brought  with  them such  food as
 they  could,  though  the  Fell  Winter  had  much   diminished  their
 store.  Therefore  Hurin  said  to  them:  'We  must  leave  this land
 now;  for  Lorgan  will  leave  me  in  peace  no  longer.  Let  us go
 down into the vales of Sirion, where Spring has come at last! '      
   Then  Asgon (21) guided  them  to  one  of  the  ancient  passes that
 led  east  out  of Mithrim,  and they  went down  from the  sources of
 the Lithir, until they came to the  falls where  it raced  into Sirion
 at  the  southern  end  of  the Narrow Land.(22) Now  they   went  with
 great  wariness;  for  Hurin put  little trust  in the  'freedom' that
 Morgoth  had  granted  him.   And  rightly:   for  Morgoth   had  news
 of  all  his  movements,  and  though  for  a while  he was  hidden in
 the   mountains,  his   coming  down   was  soon   espied.  Thereafter
 he  was  followed  and  watched,  yet  with   such  cunning   that  he
 seldom  got  wind  of  it. All  the creatures  of Morgoth  avoided his
 sight, and he was never waylaid or molested.(23)                     
   They  journeyed  southward  on   the  west   side  of   Sirion,  and
 Hurin  debated  with  himself  how  to   part  from   his  companions,
 at  least  for  so  long  that  he  could  seek  for  an  entrance  to
 Gondolin  without  betraying  his  word.  At   length  they   came  to
 the  Brithiach;  and  there  Asgon  said to  Hurin: 'Whither  shall we
 go  now,  lord?  Beyond  this  ford  the  ways  east are  too perilous
 for mortal men, if tales be true.'                                   
   'Then let us  go to  Brethil, which  is nigh  at hand,'  said Hurin.
 'I have an errand there. In that land my son died.'                  
   So that night they took shelter in a grove of trees,  first outliers
 of  the Forest  of Brethil  on its  northern border  only a  short way
 south of  the Brithiach.  Hurin lay  a little  apart from  the others;
 and  next  day  before  it  was  light he  arose while  they slumbered
 deep  in  weariness,  and  he  left  them  and  crossed  the  ford and
 came into Dimbar.                                                    
                                                                     
   When  the  men  awoke  he  was  already  gone  far,  and  there  was
 a  thick  morning  mist about  the river.  As time  passed and  he did

 not  return  nor  answer any  call they  began to  fear that  he had
 been  taken  by  some  beast  or  prowling  enemy.  'We  have become
 heedless of late,' said Asgon. 'The  land is  quiet, too  quiet, but
 there are eyes under leaves and ears behind stones.'                   
   They followed his trail when the mist  lifted; but  it led  to the
 ford and there failed, and they were at a loss. 'If he has  left us,
 let  us  return  to  our  own  land,'  said  Ragnir.(24) He was  the
 youngest  of  the  company,  and  remembered  little  of   the  days
 before  the  Nirnaeth.  'The  old  man's  wits  are wild.  He speaks
 with strange voices to shadows in his sleep.'                          
   'Little wonder if it  were so,'  said Asgon.  'But who  else could
 stand as straight as he, after such woe? Nay, he is our  right lord,
 do as he may, and I have sworn to follow him.'                         
   'Even east over the ford?' said the others.                          
   'Nay, there is  small hope  in that  way,' said  Asgon, 'and  I do
 not  think  that  Hurin  will go  far upon  it. All  we know  of his
 purpose  was  to  go  soon  to Brethil,  and that  he has  an errand
 there. We are on the very border. Let us seek him there.'              
   'By  whose   leave?'  said   Ragnir.  'Men   there  do   not  love
 strangers.'                                                            
   'Good  men  dwell  there,'  said  Asgon,   'and  the   [Master  >]
 Lord of Brethil is  kin to  our old  lords.'(25) Nonetheless  the others
 were  doubtful,  for no  tidings had  come out  of Brethil  for some  ]
 years. 'It may be ruled by Orcs for all we know,' they said.           
   'We  shall  soon  find  what  way  things  go,' said  Asgon. 'Orcs
 are  little  worse  than  Eastrons,  I  guess.  If  outlaws  we must
 remain,  I would  rather lurk  in the  fair woods  than in  the cold
 hills.'                                                                
   Asgon,  therefore,  turned  and  went  back  towards  Brethil; and
 the  others followed  him, for  he had  a stout  heart and  men said
 that  he  was  born  with  good  luck.  Before  that day  ended they
 had  come  deep  into  the  forest,  and  their  coming  was marked;
 for  the  Haladin  were  more wary  than ever  and kept  close watch
 on  their  borders.  In  the  [middle of  the night  >] grey  of the
 morning, as  all but  one of  the incomers  were asleep,  their camp
 was  surrounded,  and  their  watchman  was   held  and   gagged  as
 soon as he cried out.                                                  
   Then  Asgon  leapt  up,  and called  to his  men that  they should
 draw  no  weapon.  'See  now,' he  cried, 'we  come in  peace! Edain
 we are out of [Mithrim > Hithlum >] Dorlomin.'                         
   *'That  may  be  so,'  said  the march-wardens.  'But the  morn is
 dim. Our captain will judge you better when light is more.'            

       
                                                                
  Then   being  many   times  outnumbered   Asgon  and   his  men
 were  made  prisoners, and  their weapons  were taken  and their
 hands  bound.  Thus  they  were brought  to Ebor  their captain;
 and he asked their names and whence they came.                  
  'So you are Edain of the  North,' he  said. 'Your  speech bears
 you  out, and  your gear.  You look  for friendship,  maybe. But
 alas! evil things have befallen us  here, and  we live  in fear.
 Manthor my lord, Master of the North-march, is  not here,  and I
 must therefore  obey the  commands of  the Halad,  the Chieftain
 of Brethil.  To him  you must  be sent  at once  without further
 question. There may you speed well! '                           
  So  Ebor  spoke in  courtesy, but  he did  not hope  over much.
 For the  new Chieftain  was now  Hardang son  of Hundad.  At the
 death of Brandir childless he had been made Halad, being  of the
 Haladin,  the  kin  of  Haleth, from  which all  chieftains were
 chosen. He had not loved Turin, and he  had no  love now  at all
 for the House of Hador, in whose blood he  had no  part. Neither
 had  he  much  friendship  with  Manthor,  who  was also  of the
 Haladin.                                                        
  To  Hardang  Asgon  and  his  men  were  led  by  devious ways,
 and they were blindfolded. Thus at length they came to  the hall
 of  the  Chieftains  in  Obel Halad;(26) and  their eyes  were un-
 covered, and the guards led them  in. Hardang  sat in  his great
 chair, and he looked unkindly upon them.                        
  'From Dorlomin  you come,  I am  told,' he  said. 'But  why you
 come I know not.* Little good has  come to  Brethil out  of that
 land; and I look for none  now: it  is a  fief of  Angband. Cold
 welcome you  will find  here, creeping  in thus  to spy  out our
 ways! '                                                         
  Asgon  restrained  his  anger,  but  answered stoutly:  'We did
 not come in stealth, lord. We have  as great  craft in  woods as
 your folk, and we should not so  easily have  been taken,  if we
 had  known  any  cause for  fear. We  are Edain,  and we  do not
 serve  Angband  but  hold  to  the House  of Hador.  We believed
 that the Men of Brethil were of  like sort  and friendly  to all
 faithful men.'                                                  
  'To those of proved faith,' said Hardang. 'To  be Edain  is not
 enough alone. And as for the House of Hador it is held in little
 love here. Why should the folk of that House come here now?'
  To  that Asgon  made no  answer; for  from the  unfriendship of
 the [Master >] Chieftain  he thought  it best  not to  speak yet
 of Hurin.                                                       

   'I  see  that  you  will  not  speak  of  all  that  you  know,' said
 Hardang. 'So be it. I must judge as I see; but I will be just.  This is
 my  judgement.  Here  Turin  son  of  Hurin  dwelt for  a time,  and he
 delivered  the  land  from  the  Serpent  of Angband.  For this  I give
 you  your  lives.  **But  he  scorned   Brandir,  right   Chieftain  of
 Brethil, and  he slew  him without  justice or  pity. Therefore  I will
 not  harbour  you  here.  You  shall  be   thrust  forth,   whence  you
 entered. Go now, and if you return it will be to death!'              
   'Then  shall  we  not  receive  our   weapons  again?'   said  Asgon.
 'Will  you  cast  us  back  into  the  wild  without  bow  or  steel to
 perish among the beasts?'                                             
   'No  man  of  Hithlum  shall  ever  again  bear  weapon  in Brethil,'
 said Hardang. Not by my leave. Lead them hence.                       
   But  as  they  were  haled  from the  hall Asgon  cried: This  is the
 justice  of  Eastrons  not  of  Edain!  We  were  not here  with Turin,
 either  in  good  deed  or  evil.  Hurin  we  serve.  He  lives  still.
 Lurking  in  your  wood  do  you  not   remember  the   Nirnaeth?  Will
 you then dishonour him also in your spite, if he comes?'              
   'If  Hurin  comes,  do   you  say?'   said  Hardang.   'When  Morgoth
 sleeps, maybe! '                                                      
   'Nay,'  said  Asgon.  'He  has   returned.  With   him  we   came  to
 your borders. He has an errand here, he said. He will come!'          
   'Then  I  shall  be  here  to  meet  him,'  said  Hardang.  'But  you
 will  not.  Now  go!'  He  spoke as  in scorn,  but his  face whitened
 in  sudden  fear  that  some  strange  thing  had  happened  boding yet
 worse  to  come.  Then  a  great  dread  of  the  shadow  of  the House
 of  Hador  fell  upon  him, so  that his  heart grew  dark. For  he was
 not  a  man  of  great  spirit,  such  as  were  Hunthor  and  Manthor,
 descendants of Hiril.                                                 
   Asgon   and   his   company   were   blindfolded  again,   lest  they
 should  espy  out  the  pathways  of  Brethil, and  they were  led back
 to  the  North-march.   Ebor  was   ill  pleased   when  he   heard  of
 what  had  passed  in   Obel  Halad,   and  he   spoke  to   them  more
 courteously.                                                          
   'Alas!  '  he  said,  'you  must  needs  go forth  again. But  see! I
 return  to  you  your  gear  and   weapons.  For   so  would   my  lord
 Manthor  do,  at  the  least.  I  would  he  were here!  But he  is the
 doughtiest   man   now   among   us;  and   by  Hardang's   command  is
 Captain  of  the  guards  at the  Crossings of  Taiglin. There  we have
 most fear of  assault, and  most fighting.  Well, this  much I  will do
 in his stead; but I beg you,  do not  enter Brethil  again, for  if you
 do,  we  may  feel  constrained  to  obey  the  word  of  Hardang  that

 has now gone out to all the marches: to slay you at sight.'               
   Then  Asgon  thanked  him,   and  Ebor   led  them   to  the   eaves  of
 Brethil, and there wished them good speed.                                
   'Well,  thy  luck  has  held,'  said Ragnir,  'for at  least we  are not
 slain, though we came nigh it. Now what shall we do?'                     
   'I  desire  still  to  find  my  lord  Hurin,'   said  Asgon,   'and  my
 heart tells me that he will come to Brethil yet.'                         
   'Whither   we   cannot  return,'   said  Ragnir,   'unless  we   seek  a
 death swifter than hunger.'                                               
   'If   he   comes,   he  will   come,  I   guess,  by   the  north-march,
 between  Sirion  and  [Taiglin  >]  Taeglin,'  said  Asgon.  'Let   us  go
 down  towards  the  Crossings  of  [Taiglin  >]   Taeglin.  There   it  is
 more likely that we may hear news.'                                       
   'Or   bow-strings,'   said   Ragnir.   Nonetheless  they   took  Asgon's
 counsel,   and   went   away   westward,  keeping   such  watch   as  they
 could from afar upon the dark eaves of Brethil.                           
   But  Ebor  was  troubled,   and  sent   swiftly  to   Manthor  reporting
 the   coming   of   Asgon   and  his   strange  words   concerning  Hurin.
 But   of   this   matter  rumour   now  ran   through  all   Brethil.  And
 Hardang  sat  in  Obel  Halad  in  doubt,  and   took  counsel   with  his
 friends.**                                                                
                                                                          
   In the foregoing text two  passages are  replacements in  the typescript
 of shorter  passages that  were rejected.  The first  of these,  marked by
 asterisks at its beginning and end,  runs from  ' "That  may be  so," said
 the  march-wardens'  on  p.  262  to  '"But  why you  come I  know not"'
 on p. 263. The rejected passage read as follows:                          
                                                                          
    'Maybe,'  answered  the  captain  of  the  guards;   'but  the   morn  is
   dim. Others shall judge you in a better light.'                         
    Then,   being   many  times   outnumbered,  Asgorn   and  his   men  were
   made   prisoners,   and  their   weapons  were   taken  and   their  hands
   bound;  and  in  this  way  they  were  brought  at  last  before  the new
   Master of the Haladin.                                                  
    He  was  Harathor,  brother  of   that  Hunthor   who  perished   in  the
   ravine of  Taeglin. By  the childless  death of  Brandir he  had inherited
   the  lordship  descending  from  Haldad.  He  had  no  love for  the house
   of  Hador,  and  no  part  in  their blood;  and he  said to  Asgorn, when
   the  captives   stood  before   him:  'From   [Hithlum  >]   Dorlomin  you
   come,  I  am  told,  and  your speech  bears it  out. But  why you  come I
   know not.                                                               
                                                                          
 For reference in the following pages I shall call this passage A 1 and its
 replacement A 2.                                                          
   The   second   replacement   passage,   marked   by  two   asterisks  at

 beginning  and end,  runs from  'But he  scorned Brandir'  on p.  264 to     
 'And  Hardang sat  in Obel  Halad in  doubt, and  took counsel  with his     
 friends' on p. 265. Here the rejected passage read:                          
                                                                             
   '... But  he scorned  Brandir, right  Master of  Brethil, and  he slew     
   him without justice or pity. For this  I will  take your  freedom. You     
   shall be held in bonds; and I shall  not relent  until good  reason is     
   shown me.'                                                                 
    Then he ordered them to  be taken  and shut  in a  cave and  there to     
   be guarded day  and night.  But as  they were  led away  Asgorn cried:     
   'This is the justice of Eastrons not of Edain! We  were not  here with     
   Turin, either in good deed or evil. Hurin we  serve, who  still lives.     
   Maybe  lurking  in  your  little   wood  you   do  not   remember  the     
   Nirnaeth or his great deeds. Will you slay him to ease your griefs, if     
   he comes?'                                                                 
    'If  Hurin  comes,  do  you  say?'   said  Harathor.   'When  Morgoth     
   sleeps, maybe.'                                                            
    'Nay,'  said  Asgorn.  'He  has  returned,  and we  came with  him to     
   your borders. He has an errand here, he said. He will come!'               
    'Then  we  will  await  him.  And  you  shall  too,'  said  Harathor,     
   smiling grimly.  But afterwards  his heart  misgave him,  fearing that     
   Asgorn  spoke  the  truth and  that some  strange thing  had happened,     
   boding worse to  follow. For  he dreaded  the shadow  of the  House of     
   Hador, lest it  should overwhelm  his lesser  folk, and  he was  not a     
   man of great heart such as Hunthor his  brother [later  > such  as the   .1
   descendants of Haldir and Hiril his sister].                               
                                                                             
 The rejected  text then  moved straight  on to  'Now Hurin,  coming into     
 Dimbar'  on p.  271. The  passage just  given I  will call  B 1  and its     
 replacement B 2.                                                             
   Among  the  draft  manuscript  papers  is  found  the  following text,     
 which I will call 'C': in this my father reflected on the development of     
 the story.  Written very  rapidly and  roughly, with  many abbreviations     
 which  I have  expanded, it  preceded, and  was the  basis for,  the two     
 replacement passages A 2 and B 2.                                            
                                                                             
   The Wanderings of Hurin.                                                   
   ? Where is to come in the revelation  that Asgorn  and company  are in     
   jail. They do not seem to fit, yet their coming  to Brethil  is needed     
   to  'cast the  shadow' by  arousing fear  and hatred  in the  heart of     
   Harathor.                                                                  
    I suggest that the two jailings [i.e. that of Asgorn and his  men and     
   that of Hurin, told later] are too repetitive; and also Harathor is too
   fierce all at once. His doom is that because of the killing of Glaurung
   their lives are spared; but because of the killing of Brandir they are     
   to be thrust out: he will have none of the House of Hador.                  
    Asgorn  says  this  is cruel  treatment. He  demands return  of their     

  weapons,  'or  how  else are  they to  live in  the wild?'  But Harathor
  says  no  man  of Dorlomin  shall bear  a weapon  in Brethil.  Asgorn as
  they are led off asks if he will treat Hurin in like orkish  manner. 'We
  will wait and see,' said Harathor.                                     
     [This  paragraph  was  struck  out  as  soon  as  written:  [Manthor,
  captain >] The  captain /  of the  Taiglin-guard returns  their weapons,
  and bids them a fairly courteous  farewell; but  warns them  that 'state
  of war' has  been declared  (which gives  the Master  / Warden  right to
  issue orders to all under duty-rota) and that if  they cross  again into
  Brethil  he  or  any  other captain  or watchman  will shoot  them. They
  go  off  but  lurk  in  watch  of  the  crossings,  but miss  Hurin, who
  entered  out  of  Dimbar.  Hurin should  not enter  by Taiglin-crossing,
  nor  be  found  by  Haud-en-Elleth.  (This  has  no significance  in his
  case, and overworks the Haud.)]                                        
     Asgorn  and  company  are  blindfolded  as they  are brought  to Obel
  Halad  and  are  put  out  by the  same way  as they  entered (so  as to
  learn no more  of the  ways of  Brethil). They  therefore lurk  near the
  eaves  in  that  region,  and so  miss Hurin  who crossed  the Brithiach
  and went to the Crossings of Taiglin.                                  
     The  region  nigh Brithiach  and along  Sirion for  some way  was the
  land  of  Manthor  (brother  of  Hunthor  who fell  in the  ravine). But
  Manthor, as one of the chief  warriors and  of the  kin of  the Haladin,
  was  in  command  of  the  chief  forces  kept  near  the  Crossings  of
  Taiglin.  (Manthor  was  not  liked  by  Harathor,  for many  had wished
  to  elect  him Warden  - it  being... law  to do  so. And  maybe Manthor
  too  desired   the  Wardenship.)   The  captain   of  the   guards  near
  Brithiach  was  Enthor  [>  was  therefore  a  chief   henchman,  called
  Ebor,   of   Manthor's   (appointed   by   him)]   younger   brother  of
  Hunthor   and   Manthor.   So   Manthor   heard   soon   of   what   had
  happened:  for  all  this  family  had been  supporters and  admirers of
  Turin,  and were  proud of  their kinship  with the  House of  Hador. So
  Enthor  [>  Ebor]  sent  messengers to  Manthor to  tell him  that Hurin
  might come, escaping from Angband.                                     
                                                                        
 In the  last part  of the  Narn (NE)  the emergence  of Hunthor  (< Tor-
 barth) can be followed, from his origin in Albarth, at first  simply one
 of  those  who  volunteered  to  accompany  Turin   to  the   attack  on
 Glaurung  and  named   only  because   he  fell   and  was   drowned  at
 Cabed-en-Aras. In the first of these rejected passages (A 1, p. 265) the
 new lord of Brethil after the death of Brandir is Harathor,  'brother of
 that Hunthor who perished in the ravine of Taeglin'; and it is expressly
 said of him that 'he had no love for the house of Hador  and no  part in
 their blood'. These words, repeated in the revision A 2 (p. 263), are of
 great importance in the story.                                          
  An essential element in the older history of the  People of  Haleth was
 the intermingling of the line of their lords with that  of the  House of

 Hador which came about  through the  'double marriage'  of Hador's           
 son Galion with the daughter (unnamed) of  Haleth the  Hunter, and           
 of  his  daughter  Glorwendil  with Haleth's  son Hundor  (GA $171           
 and commentary). This double marriage was  preserved in  the later           
 transformed history of the Edain, when  the genealogical  place of           
 Haleth the Hunter had been taken by Halmir (p. 236); the resulting           
 relationships can be displayed thus:                                         
                                                                             
                      Hador                    Halmir                         
                                                           
                                                                             
     Hareth = Galdor         Gloredel = Haldir           Hareth = Galdor      
                                                                             
          Hurin                   Handir                     Hurin            
                                                                             
          Turin                   Brandir                    Turin            
                                                                             
 But   the   complexity   was   further  increased   by  the   introduction  of
 another  connection  with  the  House  of Beor  in the  marriage of  Beldis to
 Handir of Brethil (see the tables on pp. 231, 237):                          
                                                                             
                                  Bregor                                      
                                                                             
            Bregil                                   Bregolas                 
                                                                             
      Handir = Beldis                                Baragund                 
                                                                             
          Brandir                                     Morwen = Hurin          
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                               Turin          
                                                                             
 Thus  Turin  was  the  second  cousin  of  Brandir  on  the  'Hadorian'  side,
 and  he  was  also  his  second  cousin  on  the  Haladin  side; while  in the
 'Beorian'   line   he   was  Brandir's   second  cousin   once  removed   -  a
 genealogical   situation   to   delight   the   heart   of   Hamfast   Gamgee.
 Pointing  out  these  relationships  in  an  isolated  note  of this  time, my
 father  observed  that  'Turin  would   be  more   readily  accepted   by  the
 Haladin   when   his   true  name   and  lineage   were  known   or  guessed',
 since  he  was  akin  to their  lords in  these ways.  Harathor, on  the other
 hand,  'had  no  love  for  the house  of Hador  and no  part in  their blood'
 (although  he  also  was   Turin's  second   cousin,  his   great-aunt  Hareth
 being Turin's grandmother).                                                  
   The  genealogical  table  of  the Haladin  (p. 237)  belongs to  this stage:
 Harathor  is  shown   as  the   seventh  lord   of  the   Haladin,  succeeding

  Brandir,  and  as  the  brother  of Hunthor:  they are  the sons  of Hundad,
  son of Hundar who died in the Nirnaeth.                                     
    The hostility  of the  new lord  to the  House of  Hador was  an essential
  idea in the story of Hurin in Brethil from  the beginning;  but in  the last
  paragraph  of  the  discussion  C  (p.  267)  we  see  the  emergence  of  a
  family within the  larger clan  who, on  the contrary,  took pride  in their
  kinship  with  the  House of  Hador, and  were thus  divided in  spirit from
  the new lord.                                                               
    In  C  the  significance  of  Hunthor  is  moved   a  stage   further:  he
  becomes  the  dead  brother  of  Manthor  (and  must  therefore, as  will be
  seen  in  a  moment,  cease  to  be  the brother  of Harathor).  Manthor had
  indeed already entered  the story  in the  original drafting  of WH,  but he
  did  not  make  his  appearance  until  the  discovery  of Hurin  beside the
  Haud-en-Elleth (p. 275 in the  final version),  as captain  of the  guard in
  those  parts;  now   in  C   he  becomes   a  kinsman   of  Hurin,   and  an
  upholder  of  the  values and  virtues of  the Edain.  How his  kinship with
  the  House  of  Hador  was  introduced  is  seen  from  the  correction made
  to the ending of  the rejected  passage B  1 (p.  266): '[Harathor]  was not
  a  man  of  great heart  such as  Hunthor his  brother' >  '... such  as the
  descendants of Haldir and Hiril his sister'.* Hiril here enters the  line of
  the People of Haleth,  and the  family tree  is extended  by a  fourth child
  of  Halmir:  Haldir,  Hundar,  Hareth,  and  Hiril. In  the replacement  B 2
  (p. 264) the  phrase becomes  'he was  not a  man of  great spirit,  such as
  were   Hunthor  and   Manthor,  descendants   of  Hiril'.   (That  Manthor's
  mother  was  the  daughter  of  Hiril  is stated  later in  the text  of WH,
  p. 289.)                                                                    
    In  C  Harathor  was  still  so  named,  but  he  must  have  been  on the
  point  of  receiving  a  new  name,  and  must have  already received  a new
  lineage,   separating   him   from   those   with   'Hadorian'   sympathies,
  Hunthor  and  Manthor.   The  new   name,  Hardang,   appears  in   the  re-
  placement  text  A  2 (p.  263) -  and the  occurrence of  this name  in the
  plot-sequence  from  the  Narn  papers  shows  incidentally  that  that text
  was  written  when  my  father's  work  on  The  Wanderings  of   Hurin  was
  far  advanced,  if  not  completed.  It  is  said there  (p. 256)  that when
  Brandir  the  Lame  was  chosen  to  be  the  Chieftain  of   Brethil  'many
  would  have  preferred  his  cousins  Hunthor  or  Hardang',  and  (p.  258)
  that Manthor was a kinsman of Hurin and a cousin of Hardang.                
    This  new  'family  within  the  larger  clan'  was  entered   in  roughly
  made alterations  to the  table of  the Haladin  (p. 237),  of which  I give
  the essentials in compressed form:                                          
                                                                             
   (* Before Hiril was introduced as a second daughter of Halmir, his daughter
  Hareth was first named Hiriel (p. 235, footnote).)                          

                               Halmir                                    
                                                                        
     Haldir        Hundar                Hareth             Hiril        
   = Gloredel                           = Galdor                         
                                                                        
    Handir         Hundad                Hurin              Meleth       
                                                                        
    Brandir        Hardang                Turin        Hunthor Manthor
                                                                        
 Hardang's  birthdate is  given as  470, Hunthor's  as 467,  and Manthor's
 as 469.                                                                 
 It also  appears from  C (p.  267) that  a new  conception of  the social
 organisation  of  the  Men  of  Brethil had  entered, and  with it  a new
 meaning of the name  Haladin: Manthor  is said  to be  'one of  the chief
 warriors and of the kin of  the Haladin',  and that  'many had  wished to
 elect him Warden'. In this connection, an isolated  note (written  on the
 reverse of that  on the  relationships of  Turin referred  to on  p. 268)
 states:                                                                 
 The title of the chieftains  of Brethil  should be  not lord  nor Master.
 They  were  elected  from  the  family  of Haldad  - called  the Haladin,
 that is 'wardens'. For hal(a) =  in the  old tongue  of Beor's  house and
 Haldad's  'watch,  guard'.  Halad   was  a   warden.  (Haldad   =  watch-
 dog.)                                                                   
 These  new  conceptions  appear  in  the  revision  A  2 (p.  263), where
 Hardang  is said  to have  been made  Halad, 'being  of the  Haladin, the
 kin of Haleth, from which all chieftains were chosen'.  It is  also said,
 following the discussion in  C, that  Hardang was  no friend  to Manthor,
 'who was also of  the Haladin'.  In contrast,  in the  first form  of the
 passage (p.  265) Harathor  is called  'the new  Master of  the Haladin',
 where Haladin clearly still means the whole people.                     
 In  the  last  paragraph  of  C  (p.  267) a  younger brother  of Hunthor
 and  Manthor  appears,  Enthor,  'captain of  the guards  near Brithiach'
 (in the  additions made  to the  genealogical table  of the  Haladin this
 name  Enthor  was  given  to  Hiril's husband,  not otherwise  named; and
 Meleth's  husband  is  apparently  named  Agathor).  The  removal  of the
 name  Enthor  in  this sentence  and substitution  of 'a  chief henchman,
 called Ebor, of  Manthor's (appointed  by him)'  suggests that  my father
 intended  to  cut  out  the  words  'younger   brother  of   Hunthor  and
 Manthor', but omitted to do so; this is supported by the fact  that Ebor,
 when  he  appears  in  the  revision  A  2 (p.  263), refers  to 'Manthor
 my  lord,  Master  of  the  North-march',  who  was  not  there.  Manthor
 was  not   there  because,   as  stated   in  C,   he  was   'in  command
 of  the  chief  forces  kept near  the Crossings  of Taiglin';  Asgon and
 his  companions  entered  Brethil  from  the  north, near  the Brithiach,

  and they left by the  same way,  meeting Ebor  again and  retrieving their
  weapons.                                                                  
    The  only  obscure  point  concerns  the  failure  of  Asgon's  party to
  encounter  Hurin  on  his  return.  My  father  was  in  two  minds  about
  this.  The  rejected  fourth  paragraph in  C (p.  267) shows  him (having
  decided  that  Asgorn and  his men  were not  imprisoned) taking  the view
  that they were ejected from Brethil near the Crossings: it is 'the captain
  of  the  Taiglin-guard'  who  restores  their  weapons;  and  they  remain
  lurking  in  that  neighbourhood.  Thus  they  missed Hurin,  'who entered
  out  of  Dimbar' (i.e.  came into  Brethil from  the north  after crossing
  the  Brithiach,  as  Asgorn  had done).  Hurin, he  wrote, must  not enter
  Brethil  at the  Crossings and  be found  lying beside  the Haud-en-Elleth
  (as the story was already in the draft manuscript).                       
    But he  at once,  and understandably,  thought better  of this,  and (in
  the  fifth paragraph)  retained the  existing story  that Hurin  was found
  by the guards near  the Crossings;  he said  now that  Asgorn and  his men
  were put  out of  Brethil in  the same  region as  they entered,  and that
  they lurked 'near the eaves in that region' - hence their failure  to meet
  with  Hurin.  But in  the replacement  passage B  2 (p.  265) he  has them
  decide not to stay near the north eaves of  the forest,  and they  go down
  towards the Crossings.                                                    
    I return now  to the  text, left  at the  end of  the second  passage of
  rewriting (B 2) on p. 265. It must be  borne in  mind that  the typescript
  from this point belongs to the stage before  the important  alterations in
  the narrative  entered in  the two  replacement passages  discussed above.
  Thus  for  a  long  way  'the  Master  of  Brethil' remains  Harathor; the
  term  Halad  was  not  yet  devised, and  his dwelling  was not  yet named
  Obel  Halad.  Rather  than  rewrite  the  existing  text  after   the  new
  conceptions  had  arisen,  my father  found it  sufficient to  correct it.
  These  corrections  are  very numerous  but for  the most  part repetitive
  and  systematic (as  'Master' to  'Halad' or  'Chieftain'), and  to record
  each  case  in  the  text  would  make  it  unreadable.  I  have therefore
  ignored the  rejected names  and titles  (this applies  also to  the short
  passage  on   pp.  263-4   between  the   two  rewritten   sections:  here
  Hardang is in fact a correction on the typescript of Harathor).           
                                                                           
    Now    Hurin,    coming    into    Dimbar,    summoned    his   strength
  and  went  on  alone  towards  the  dark  feet  of  the   Echoriad.(27) All
  the  land  was  cold  and  desolate;  and  when  at  last it  rose steeply
  before  him  and  he  could  see  no  way  to  go  further, he  halted and
  looked  about  him  in  little  hope.  He  stood  now  at  the  foot  of a
  great  fall  of  stones  beneath  a  sheer  rock-wall,  and  he   did  not
  know  that  this  was  all that  was now  left to  see of  the old  Way of
  Escape:   the   Dry   River   was   blocked  and   the  arched   gate  was
  buried.(28)                                                               

   Then  Hurin  looked  up  to  the  grey  sky,  thinking   that  by
 fortune  he  might  once  more descry  the Eagles,  as he  had done
 long  ago  in  his  youth.(29) But he  saw  only the  shadows blown
 from the East, and  clouds swirling  about the  inaccessible peaks;
 and  wind  hissed  over  the  stones.  But the  watch of  the Great
 Eagles  was  now  redoubled,  and  they  marked  Hurin   well,  far
 below,  forlorn  in  the failing  light. And  straightaway Sorontar
 himself,  since  the   tidings  seemed   great,  brought   word  to
 Turgon.                                                           
   But  Turgon  said:  'Nay!  This  is  past belief!  Unless Morgoth
 sleeps. Ye were mistaken.'                                         
   'Nay,  not  so,'  answered  Sorontar.  'If  the  Eagles  of Manwe
 were  wont  to  err  thus,  Lord,  your hiding  would have  been in
 vain.'                                                             
   'Then  your  words  bode ill,'  said Turgon;  'for they  can mean
 only  that  even  Hurin  Thalion  hath surrendered  to the  will of
 Morgoth.   My   heart  is   shut.'  But   when  he   had  dismissed
 Sorontar,  Turgon  sat  long  in  thought,  and  he  was  troubled,
 remembering  the  deeds  of  Hurin.  And he  opened his  heart, and
 he sent to the Eagles to seek for Hurin, and to bring him,  if they
 could, to Gondolin. But it  was too  late, and  they saw  him never
 again in light or in shadow.                                       
   For Hurin stood at last in  despair before  the stern  silence of
 the Echoriad, and the westering sun,  piercing the  clouds, stained
 his white hair with  red. Then  he cried  aloud in  the wilderness,
 heedless of any ears, and he cursed the pitiless land: 'hard as the
 hearts  of  Elves  and  Men'.  And he  stood at  last upon  a great
 stone,  and  spreading  wide  his  arms, looking  towards Gondolin,
 he  called  in  a great  voice: 'Turgon,  Turgon! Remember  the Fen
 of Serech!' And  again: 'Turgon!  Hurin calls  you. O  Turgon, will
 you not hear in your hidden halls?'                                
   But  there  was  no answer,  and all  that he  heard was  wind in
 the dry grasses. 'Even so they hissed in Serech at the  sunset,' he
 said.  And  as  he  spoke  the  sun  went  behind the  Mountains of
 Shadow,  and  a  darkness  fell  about  him,  and the  wind ceased,
 and there was silence in the waste.                                
   Yet  there  were  ears  that  had  heard  the  words  that  Hurin
 spoke, and eyes that marked well  his gestures;  and report  of all
 came  soon  to  the  Dark  Throne  in   the  North.   Then  Morgoth
 smiled,  and  knew  now  clearly  in  what  region   Turgon  dwelt,
 though  because  of  the  Eagles  no  spy  of  his  could  yet come
 within  sight  of the  land behind  the encircling  mountains. This

 was the first evil that the freedom of Hurin achieved.{30}         
                                                                   
   As  darkness  fell  Hurin stumbled  from the  stone, and  fell, as
 one aswoon, into a deep sleep of grief.  But in  his sleep  he heard
 the  voice  of  Morwen  lamenting,  and  often  she spoke  his name;
 and  it  seemed  to  him  that  her  voice  came  out   of  Brethil.
 Therefore,  when  he  awoke  with the  coming of  day, he  arose and
 returned;  and  he  came  back to  the ford,  and as  one led  by an
 unseen hand [he passed along  the river  Taeglin, until  ere evening
 of the third day he reached  the place  >] he  went along  the eaves
 of Brethil,  until he  came in  four days'  journey to  the Taeglin,
 and  all  his  scanty  food  was  then spent,  and he  was famished.
 But he went  on like  the shadow  of a  man driven  by a  dark wind,
 and he came  to the  Crossings by  night, and  there he  passed over
 into Brethil.                                                      
   The  night-sentinels  saw him,  but they  were filled  with dread,
 so that  they did  not dare  to move  or cry  out; for  they thought
 that  they  saw a  ghost out  of some  old battle-mound  that walked
 with  darkness  about  it.  And for  many days  after men  feared to
 be  near  the Crossings  at night,  save in  great company  and with
 fire kindled.                                                      
   But  Hurin passed  on, and  at evening  of the  sixth day  he came
 at last to the place I of the burning of Glaurung, and saw  the tall
 stone standing near the brink of Cabed Naeramarth.                 
   But  Hurin  did  not  look  at  the  stone, for  he knew  what was
 written  there,  and  his  eyes  had  seen  that  he was  not alone.
 Sitting in the shadow of the stone there was a figure bent  over its
 knees.  Some  homeless  wanderer  broken  with  age  it  seemed, too
 wayworn  to  heed  his  coming; but  its rags  were the  remnants of
 a  woman's  garb. At  length as  Hurin stood  there silent  she cast
 back  her  tattered  hood  and  lifted up  her face  slowly, haggard
 and  hungry  as  a  long-hunted  wolf.  Grey  she  was,  sharp-nosed
 with broken teeth,  and with  a lean  hand she  clawed at  the cloak
 upon her breast. But  suddenly her  eyes looked  into his,  and then
 Hurin knew her;  for though  they were  wild now  and full  of fear,
 a light still gleamed in them hard to  endure: the  elven-light that
 long  ago  had  earned  her  her name,  Edelwen, proudest  of mortal
 women in the days of old.                                          
   'Edelwen!  Edelwen!'  Hurin  cried;  and  she  rose  and  stumbled
 forward, and he caught her in his arms.                            
   'You come at last,' she said. 'I have waited too long.'          
   'It was a dark road. I have come as I could,' he answered.       

 'But you are late,' she said, 'too late. They are lost.'             
 'I know,' he said. 'But thou art not.'                               
 'Almost,' she said. 'I am spent utterly. I shall go with the sun.
 They are lost.' She clutched at his cloak. 'Little time is left,' she
 said. 'If you know, tell me! How did she find him?'                  
 But  Hurin  did  not  answer,  and  he  sat  beside  the  stone  with
 Morwen  in  his  arms;  and  they  did  not  speak  again.   The  sun
 went  down,  and  Morwen  sighed  and  clasped   his  hand   and  was
 still; and Hurin knew that she had died.                             
 So   passed   Morwen   the   proud   and   fair;  and   Hurin  looked
 down at her in the twilight, and it  seemed that  the lines  of grief
 and  cruel   hardship  were   smoothed  away.   Cold  and   pale  and
 stern  was  her  face.  'She  was  not  conquered,'  he said;  and he
 closed  her  eyes,  and  sat  on  unmoving beside  her as  night drew
 down.   The   waters   of   Cabed  Naeramarth   roared  on,   but  he
 heard  no  sound  and  saw  nothing,  and  he  felt nothing,  for his
 heart  was  stone  within  him,  and  he  thought  that he  would sit
 there until he too died.                                             
 Then  there  came  a chill  wind and  drove sharp  rain in  his face;
 and  suddenly  he  was roused,  and out  of a  black deep  anger rose
 in him like a smoke,  mastering reason,  so that  all his  desire was
 to seek vengeance  for his  wrongs, and  for the  wrongs of  his kin,
 accusing in  his anguish  all those  who ever  had had  dealings with
 them.                                                                
 He  arose  and  lifted  Morwen  up;  and  suddenly  he  knew  that it
 was  beyond  his  strength  to  bear  her.  He  was  hungry  and old,
 and  weary  as  winter.  Slowly  he  laid her  down again  beside the
 standing stone. 'Lie there a little longer, Edelwen,' he said, 'until
 I  return.  Not even  a wolf  would do  you more  hurt. But  the folk
 of this hard land shall rue the day that you died here!'             
 Then   Hurin   stumbled   away,   and  he   came  back   towards  the
 ford of Taeglin;  and there  he fell  beside the  Haud-en-Elleth, and
 a  darkness  overcame  him,  and  he  lay  as  one drowned  in sleep.
 In the morning, before  the light  had recalled  him to  full waking,
 he  was  found  by  the   guards  that   Hardang  had   commanded  to
 keep special watch in that place.                                    
 It   was   a  man   named  Sagroth   who  first   saw  him,   and  he
 looked  at  him  in  wonder  and  was  afraid,  for  he   thought  he
 knew  who  this  old  man  was.  'Come!'  he  cried  to  others  that
 followed.  'Look  here!  It  must  be   Hurin.  The   incomers  spoke
 truly. He has come!'                                                 
 'Trust  you  to  find  trouble,  as  ever,  Sagroth!'  said  Forhend.

 'The  Halad  will  not be  pleased with  such findings.  What is  to be
 done?  Maybe  Hardang  would  be  better  pleased   to  hear   that  we
 had stopped the trouble at his borders and thrust it out.'            
   'Thrust  it  out?'  said  Avranc.  He  was   Dorlas' son,{31} a young
 man  short  and  dark,  but  strong,  well-liked  by  Hardang,  as  his
 father  had  been.  'Thrust  it  out? Of  what good  would that  be? It
 would  come  again!  It  can walk  - all  the way  from Angband,  if it
 is  what  you  guess.  See!  He  looks  grim  and has  a sword,  but he
 sleeps  deep.  Need  he  wake  to  more  woe?  [Added:]  If  you  would
 please the Chieftain, Forhend, he would end here.'                    
   Such  was  the  shadow  that  now  fell  upon the  hearts of  men, as
 the  power  of  Morgoth  spread,   and  fear   walked  far   and  wide;
 but  not  all  hearts  were  yet  darkened.  'Shame  upon  you!'  cried
 Manthor  the   captain,  who   coming  behind   had  heard   what  they
 said.  'And  upon  you  most,   Avranc,  young   though  you   are!  At
 least  you  have  heard  of  the  deeds  of  Hurin  of Hithlum,  or did
 you  hold  them  only  fireside  fables?  What is  to be  done, indeed!
 So,  slay  him in  his sleep  is your  counsel. Out  of hell  comes the
 thought! '                                                            
   'And  so  does  he,'  answered  Avranc.  'If  indeed  he   is  Hurin.
 Who knows? '                                                          
   'It  can  soon  be  known,'  said  Manthor;   and  coming   to  Hurin
 as he lay he  knelt and  raised his  hand and  kissed it.  'Awake!' he
 cried. 'Help is near. And if you  are Hurin,  there is  no help  that I
 would think enough.'                                                  
   'And  no  help  that  he  will  not  repay  with evil,'  said Avranc.
 'He comes from Angband, I say.'                                       
   'What  he  may   do  is   unknown,'  said   Manthor.  'What   he  has
 done  we  know,  and  our  debt  is  unpaid.' Then  he called  again in
 a loud voice: 'Hail Hurin Thalion! Hail, Captain of Men!'             
   Thereupon   Hurin   opened   his   eyes,   remembering   evil   words
 that  he  had  heard  in  the  drowse  before  waking,  and he  saw men
 about  him  with  weapons  in  hand.  He  stood  up  stiffly,  fumbling
 at  his  sword;  and  he  glared   upon  them   in  anger   and  scorn.
 'Curs!'  he  cried.  'Would  you  slay  an old  man sleeping?  You look
 like  Men,  but  you  are  Orcs  under  the skin,  I guess.  Come then!
 Slay  me  awake,  if  you  dare.  But  it  will  not please  your black
 Master,  I  think.  I  am  Hurin  Galdor's  son,  a  name that  Orcs at
 least will remember.'                                                 
   'Nay,  nay,'  said Manthor.  'Dream not.  We are  Men. But  these are
 evil days of doubt, and we are hard pressed. It is perilous  here. Will
 you not come with us? At least we can find you food and rest.'        

    'Rest?'  said  Hurin. 'You  cannot find  me that.  But food  I will
 take in my need.'                                                     
    Then  Manthor  gave  him  a  little  bread  and  meat   and  water;
 but  they  seemed  to  choke  him, and  he spat  them forth.  'How far
 is it to the house of your  lord?' he  asked. 'Until  I have  seen him
 the  food  that  you  denied  to  my  beloved  will  not  go  down  my
 throat.'                                                              
    'He  raves  and  he  scorns  us,'  muttered  Avranc.  'What  did  I
 say?'  But  Manthor  looked  on  him  with  pity,  though  he  did not
 understand  his  words.  'It  is  a  long road  for the  weary, lord,'
 he   said;  'and   the  house   of  Hardang   Halad  is   hidden  from
 strangers.'                                                           
    'Then lead me thither!' said Hurin.  'I will  go as  I can.  I have
 an errand to that house.'                                             
                                                                      
    Soon  they  set  forth.  Of  his strong  company Manthor  left most
 to  their  duty;  but  he  himself  went  with  Hurin,  and  with  him
 he  took  Forhend.  Hurin  walked  as he  could, but  after a  time he
 began  to  stumble  and  fall;  and  yet  he  always  rose  again  and
 struggled  on,  and  he  would  not  allow  them  to  support  him. In
 this  way  at  last  with  many  halts  they  came  to  the   hall  of
 Hardang  in  Obel  Halad  deep  in the  forest; and  he knew  of their
 coming,  for  Avranc,  unbidden,  had  run   ahead  and   brought  the
 tidings before them;  and he  did not  fail to  report the  wild words
 of Hurin at his waking and his spitting forth of their food.          
    So  it  was  that  they  found  the  hall  well guarded,  with many
 men  in  the  [fenced  courtyard  >]  outer  garth,  and  men  at  the
 doors.  At  the  gate  of  the  [court  >]  garth  the captain  of the
 guards stayed them. 'Deliver the prisoner to me! ' he said.           
    'Prisoner!'  said  Manthor.  'I have  no prisoner,  but a  man you
 should honour.'                                                       
    'The  Halad's  words,  not mine,'  said the  captain. 'But  you may
 come too. He has words for you also.'                                 
    Then  they  led  Hurin  before  the  Chieftain;  and   Hardang  did
 not  greet  him, but  sat in  his great  chair and  eyed Hurin  up and
 down. But  Hurin returned  his gaze,  and held  himself as  stiffly as
 he  could,  though he  leaned on  his staff.  So he  stood a  while in
 silence, until at last he sank to the  ground. 'Lo!'  he said.  'I see
 that there are so few chairs in Brethil that a guest  must sit  on the
 floor.'                                                               
    'Guest?' said Hardang. 'Not  one bidden  by me.  But bring  the old
 carl a stool. If he will not disdain it, though he spits on our food.'

   Manthor  was  grieved   at  the   discourtesy;  and   hearing  one
 laugh  in  the  shadow  behind  the  great chair  he looked  and saw
 that it was Avranc, and his face darkened in wrath.                
   'Your  pardon,  lord,'  he  said  to  Hurin.  'There  is misunder-
 standing  here.'  Then  turning  to  Hardang  he  drew  himself  up.
 'Has  my  company  a  new  captain  then, my  Halad?' he  said. 'For
 otherwise  I  do  not  understand  how  one  who  has left  his duty
 and  broken  my  command  should  stand   here  unrebuked.   He  has
 brought  news before  me, I  see; but  it seems  he forgot  the name
 of  the  guest,  or  Hurin  Thalion  would  not  have  been  left to
 stand.'                                                            
   'The  name  was  told  to  me,'  answered  Hardang, 'and  his fell
 words  also which  bear it  out. Such  are the  House of  Hador. But
 it is the part of a stranger to name himself first in my  house, and
 I waited to hear  him. Also  to hear  his errand  hither -  since he
 says that he has one. But  as for  your duty,  such matters  are not
 dealt with before strangers.'                                      
   Then  he  turned  towards  Hurin,  who   sat  meanwhile   bent  on
 the  low  stool;  his eyes  were closed,  and he  seemed to  take no
 heed  of  what  was said.  'Well, Hurin  of Hithlum,'  said Hardang,
 'what of  your errand?  Is it  a matter  of haste?  Or will  you not
 perhaps take thought and rest  and speak  of it  later more  at your
 ease?  Meanwhile  we  may find  you  some  food  less  distasteful.'
 Hardang's  tone  was  now  more  gentle,  and he  rose as  he spoke;
 for  he  was a  wary man,  and [struck  out: in  his heart  not over
 sure  of his  seat in  the Master's  chair; and]  he had  marked the
 displeasure on the faces of others beside Manthor.                 
   Then  suddenly  Hurin  rose  to  his feet.  'Well, Master  Reed of
 the  Bog,'  he  said.  'So  you  bend  with  each  breath,  do  you?
 Beware lest  mine blow  you flat.  Go take  thought to  stiffen you,
 ere  I  call  on  you  again! Scorner  of grey  hairs, food-niggard,
 starver  of wanderers.  This stool  fits you  better.' With  that he
 cast the stool at Hardang,  so that  it smote  him on  the forehead;
 and then he turned to walk from the hall.                          
   Some  of  the men  gave way,  whether in  pity or  in fear  of his
 wrath; but Avranc ran  before him.  'Not so  swift, carl  Hurin!' he
 cried.  'At  least  I  no  longer  doubt your  name. You  bring your
 manners  from  Angband.  But  we  do  not  love  orc-deeds  in hall.
 You have assaulted the Chieftain in  his chair,  and a  prisoner you
 now shall be, whatever your name.'                                 
   'I  thank you,  Captain Avranc,'  said Hardang,  who sat  still in
 his  chair,  while  some staunched  the blood  that flowed  from his

 brow.  'Now  let  the  old  madman  be  put  in  bonds  and  kept  close.
 I will judge him later.'                                                 
   Then  they  put  thongs  about  Hurin's  arms,   and  a   halter  about
 his  neck,  and  led  him  away;   and  he   made  no   more  resistance,
 for  the  wrath  had  run  off  him,  and  he  walked as  one in  a dream
 with  eyes   closed.  But   Manthor,  though   Avranc  scowled   at  him,
 put  his  arm  about  the  old   man's  shoulder   and  steered   him  so
 that he should not stumble.                                              
   But  when  Hurin  was  shut  in  a  cave  [struck  out:  nigh   to  the
 one   in  which   Asgorn  and   his  men   were  still   imprisoned]  and
 Manthor  could  do  no  more  to  help  him,  he  returned  to  the hall.
 There   he   found   Avranc   in   speech   with   Hardang,   and  though
 they  fell  silent  at  his  coming,  he  caught  the  last   words  that
 Avranc   spoke,   and   it  seemed   to  him   that  Avranc   urged  that
 Hurin should be put to death straightway.                                
   'So,  Captain  Avranc,'  he  said,  'things  go well  for you  today! I
 have  seen  you  at  like  sports  before:  goading  an  old  badger  and
 having  him  killed  when  he  bites.  Not  so  swift,   Captain  Avranc!
 Nor  you,  Hardang  Halad.  This   is  no   matter  for   lordly  dealing
 out   of   hand.   The   coming   of   Hurin,   and  his   welcome  here,
 concerns  all the  folk, and  they shall  hear all  that is  said, before
 any judgement is given.'                                                 
   'You  have  leave  to  go,'  said  Hardang.  'Return  to  your  duty on
 the marches, until Captain Avranc comes to take command.'                
   'Nay,  lord,'  said  Manthor,  'I  have  no  duty.  I  am  out  of your
 service   from   today.   I   left Sagroth (32) in   charge,  a  woodsman
 somewhat  older  and  wiser  than  one  you  name.  In  due  time  I will
 return to my own marches.*(33) But now I will summon the folk.               
   As   he   went   to   the  door   Avranc  seized   his  bow   to  shoot
 Manthor  down,  but  Hardang   restrained  him.   'Not  yet,'   he  said.
 But  Manthor  was  unaware  of  this  (though  some   in  the   hall  had
 marked  it),  and  he  went out,  and sent  all he  could find  that were
                                                                         
   ' For Manthor was  a descendant  of Haldad,  and he  had a  little land
 of his  own on  the east  march of  Brethil beside  Sirion where  it runs
 through Dimbar. But all the folk of Brethil  were freemen,  holding their
 homesteads  and  more  or  less  land  about them  of their  right. Their
 Master  was  chosen  from  the  descendants of  Haldad, out  of reverence
 for the deeds  of Haleth  and Haldar;  and though  as yet  the mastership
 had been given, as if it were a lordship or kingdom, to the eldest of the
 eldest line, the folk had the right to set anyone aside or to remove him,
 for  grave  cause.  And  some knew  well enough  that Harathor  had tried
 to have Brandir the Lame passed over in his own favour.                  

 willing to go as messengers to bring together  all the  masters of
 homesteads and any others that  could be  spared. [Struck  out: It
 was  the  custom of  the Haladin {34} that in  all matters  other than
 war  the  wives  were  also  summoned  to  counsel  and  had equal
 voices with the husbands.]                                        
    Now  rumour  ran  wild through  the woods,  and the  tales grew
 in the telling; and some said this,  and some  that, and  the most
 spoke in praise of the Halad and set forth  Hurin in  the likeness
 of  some  fell  Orc-chieftain;  for  Avranc  was  also  busy  with
 messengers.  Soon there  was a  great concourse  of folk,  and the
 small  town {35} about  the Hall  of the  Chieftains was  swelled with
 tents  and booths.{36} But all  the men  bore arms,  for fear  lest a
 sudden alarm should come from the marches.                        
                                                                  
    When  he  had  sent   out  his   messengers  Manthor   went  to
 Hurin's prison, and the guards would not  let him  enter. 'Come!'
 said  Manthor.  'You know  well that  it is  our good  custom that
 any prisoner should have a  friend that  may come  to him  and see
 how he fares and give him counsel.'                               
    'The friend is chosen  by the  prisoner,' the  guards answered;
 'but this wild man has no friends.'                               
    'He has one,' said Manthor, 'and I ask leave to offer myself to
 his choice.'                                                      
    'The  Halad  forbids  us to  admit any  save the  guards,' they
 said. But Manthor  who was  wise in  the laws  and customs  of his
 people replied: 'No doubt. But  in this  he has  no right.  Why is
 the   incomer   in   bondage?  We   do  not   bind  old   men  and
 wanderers  because  they  speak  ill  words when  distraught. This
 one  is  imprisoned  because  of  his  assault  upon  Hardang, and
 Hardang  cannot  judge  his   own  cause,   but  must   bring  his
 grievance  to  the  judgement of  the Folk  [struck out:  and some
 other must sit in the chair at the  hearing]. Meanwhile  he cannot
 deny to the prisoner all counsel and help. If he were  wise he
 would see that  he does  not in  this way  advance his  own cause.
 But maybe another mouth spoke for him?'                           
    'True,' they said. 'Avranc brought the order.'                 
    'Then forget  it,' said  Manthor. 'For  Avranc was  under other
 orders,  to  remain  on  his  duty  on  the  marches.  Choose then
 between a young runagate, and the laws of the Folk.'              
    Then the guards let him in to  the cave;  for Manthor  was well
 esteemed  in  Brethil,  and  men  did  not  like  the  [masters >]
 chieftains who  tried to  overrule the  folk. Manthor  found Hurin

 sitting  on  a  bench.  There were  fetters on  his ankles,  but his
 hands   were   unbound;  and   there  was   some  food   before  him
 untasted. He did not look up.                                      
   'Hail,  lord!  '  said  Manthor.  'Things  have  not gone  as they
 should,  nor  as  I  would  have  ordered  them.  But  now  you have
 need of a friend.'                                                 
   'I have no friend, and wish for none in this land,' said Hurin.
   'One  stands  before  you,'  answered   Manthor.  'Do   not  scorn
 me.  For  now,  alas!  the  matter  between  you  and  Hardang Halad
 must  be  brought  to the  judgement of  the Folk,  and it  would be
 well,  as  our  law  allows,  to have  a friend  to counsel  you and
 plead your case.'                                                  
   'I will not plead, and I need no counsel,' said Hurin.           
   'You  need  this  counsel  at least,'  said Manthor.  'Master your
 wrath  for  the  time,  and  take some  food, so  that you  may have
 strength  before  your  enemies.  I  do  not   know  what   is  your
 errand here, but it will speed better,  if you  are not  starved. Do
 not slay yourself while there is hope! '                           
   'Slay  myself?'  cried  Hurin,  and  he  staggered  up  and  leant
 against  the  wall,  and  his  eyes  were red.  'Shall I  be dragged
 before  a  rabble  of  wood-men with  fetters upon  me to  hear what
 death they will give me? I will slay myself first,  if my  hands are
 left free.' Then suddenly, swift as an old trapped beast,  he sprang
 forward,  and  before  Manthor  could  avoid   him  he   snatched  a
 knife from his belt. Then he sank down on the bench.               
   'You  could  have  had  the  knife  as  a  gift,'   said  Manthor,
 'though  we  do  not  deem  self-slaughter  a  noble  deed  in those
 who  have not  lost their  reason. Hide  the knife  and keep  it for
 some better use! But have a care,  for it  is a  fell blade,  from a
 forge  of the  Dwarves. Now,  lord, will  you not  take me  for your
 friend? Say no word; but if you will now  eat with  me, I  will take
 that for yea.'                                                     
   Then  Hurin  looked  at  him  and  the  wrath  left his  eyes; and
 together  they  drank  and  ate  in  silence.   And  when   all  was
 finished,  Hurin  said:  'By  your  voice  you  have   overcome  me.
 Never  since  the  Day  of  Dread have  I heard  any man's  voice so
 fair. Alas! alas!  it calls  to my  mind the  voices in  my father's
 house, long ago when the shadow seemed far away.'                  
   'That  may  well  be,'  said  Manthor.  'Hiril  my  foremother was
 sister of thy mother, Hareth.'                                     
   'Then thou art both kin and friend,' said Hurin.                 
   'But  not  I  alone,'  said Manthor.  'We are  few and have little

 wealth,  but  we  too  are  Edain, and  bound by  many ties  to your
 people.  Your  name  has  long  been  held  in  honour here;  but no
 news  of  your  deeds  would   have  reached   us,  if   Haldir  and
 Hundar  had  not  marched  to  the  Nirnaeth.  There they  fell, but
 [seven  o]  three  of  their  company returned,  for they  were suc-
 coured by Mablung of Doriath and healed of their wounds.(37)       
 The  days  have  gone  dark   since  then,   and  many   hearts  are
 overshadowed, but not all.'                                        
   'Yet  the  voice  of  your  Chieftain  comes  from  the  shadows,'
 'said  Hurin,  'and  your  Folk  obey  him,  even  in deeds  of dis-
 honour and cruelty.'                                               
   'Grief  darkens  your eyes,  lord, dare  I say  it. But  lest this
 should prove true, let us take counsel together. For I see  peril of
 evil  ahead,  both  to  thee  and  to my  folk, though  maybe wisdom
 may avert  it. Of  one thing  I must  warn thee,  though it  may not
 please thee. Hardang is a  lesser man  than his  fathers, but  I saw
 no  evil  in  him  till  he  heard  of thy  coming. Thou  bringest a
 shadow   with  thee,   Hurin  Thalion,   in  which   lesser  shadows
 grow darker.'                                                      
   'Dark words  from a  friend!' said  Hurin. 'Long  I lived  in the
 Shadow,  but  I  endured  it  and  did  not yield.  If there  is any
 darkness upon  me, it  is only  that grief  beyond grief  has robbed
 me of light. But in the Shadow I have no part.'                    
   'Nevertheless,  I  say to  thee,' said  Manthor, 'that  it follows
 behind  thee.  I  know  not  how  thou  hast  won  freedom;  but the
 thought of Morgoth has not forgotten thee. Beware.'                
   'Do  not dote,  dotard, you  would say,'  answered Hurin.  'I will
 take  this  much  from  you, for  your fair  voice and  our kinship,
 but no more! Let us speak of other things, or cease.'              
   Then  Manthor  was  patient,  and  stayed  long with  Hurin, until
 the  evening  brought  darkness  into  the cave;  and they  ate once
 more  together.  Then   Manthor  commanded   that  a   light  should
 be  brought  to  Hurin;  and  he  took his  leave until  the morrow,
 and went to his booth with a heavy heart.                          
                                                                   
   The  next  day  it  was  proclaimed that  the Folkmoot  for Judge-
 ment  should  be  held on  the morning  following, for  already five
 hundred  of  the  headmen  had  come  in,  and  that  was  by custom
 deemed  the  least number  which might  count as  a full  meeting of
 the  Folk.  Manthor went  early to  find Hurin;  but the  guards had
 been   changed.   Three   men   of   Hardang's  own   household  now
 stood at the door, and they were unfriendly.                       

   'The prisoner is asleep,' their leader said. 'And that is well; it
 may settle his wits.'                                               
   'But  I  am  his  appointed  friend,  as was  declared yesterday,'
 said Manthor.                                                       
   'A  friend would  leave him  in peace,  while he  may have  it. To
 what good would you wake him?'                                      
   'Why  should  my  coming  wake  him,  more  easily  than  the feet
 of a jailer?' said Manthor. 'I wish to see how he sleeps.'          
   'Do you think all men lie but yourself?'                          
   'Nay,  nay;  but  I  think that  some would  fain forget  our laws
 when   they   do   not  suit   their  purpose,'   answered  Manthor.
 Nonetheless  it  seemed  to  him  that  he would  do little  good to
 Hurin's case if  he debated  further, and  he went  away. So  it was
 that  many  things   remained  unspoken   between  them   until  too
 late.  For  when  he  returned  day  was  waning.  No  hindrance was
 now offered to  his entry,  and he  found Hurin  lying on  a pallet;
 [added:]  and  he  noted  with anger  that he  now had  fetters also
 upon his wrists with a short chain between them.                    
   'A  friend delayed  is hope  denied,' said  Hurin. 'I  have waited
 long  for  thee,  but  now I  am heavy  with sleep  and my  eyes are
 dimmed.'                                                            
   'I  came  at  mid-morning,'  said  Manthor,  'but  they  said that
 thou wert sleeping then.'                                           
   'Drowsing,  drowsing  in  wanhope,'  said  Hurin;  'but  thy voice
 might  have  recalled  me. I  have been  so since  I broke  my fast.
 That counsel of thine at  least I  have taken,  my friend;  but food
 doth me ill rather  than good.  Now I  must sleep.  But come  in the
 morning! '                                                          
   Manthor  wondered  darkly  at  this.  He  could  not  see  Hurin's
 face, for there was little light left, but bending down  he listened
 to his breathing. Then  with a  grim face  he stood  up and  took up
 under his cloak such food as remained, and went out.                
   'Well, how did you find the wild man?' said the chief guard.      
   'Bemused  with  sleep,'  answered  Manthor.  'He  must   be  wake-
 ful  tomorrow.  Rouse him  early. Bring  food for  two, for  I will
 come and break fast with him.'(38)                                  
                                                                    
   The  next  day, long  before the  set time  at mid-morn,  the Moot
 began   to   assemble.  Almost   a  thousand   had  now   come,  for
 the  most  part  the  older  men  [struck  out:  and  women],(39) since
 the watch  on the  marches must  still be  maintained. Soon  all the
 Moot-ring  was filled.  This was  shaped as  a great  crescent, with

 seven  tiers  of  turf-banks rising  up from  a smooth  floor delved
 back into the hillside. A high fence was set all  about it,  and the
 only  entry was  by a  heavy gate  in the  stockade that  closed the
 open end of the crescent. In the middle of the lowest tier  of seats
 was  set  [added:] the  Angbor or  Doom-rock, I  a great  flat stone
 upon  which  the Halad (40) would sit.  Those  who  were   brought to
 judgement stood before the stone and faced the assembly.           
    There was a great  babel of  voices; but  at a  horn-call silence
 fell,  and  the  Halad  entered,  and  he  had  many  men  of his
 household  with  him.  The  gate  was  closed  behind  him,  and  he
 paced  slowly  to  the  Stone.  Then  he  stood facing  the assembly
 and  hallowed  the  Moot  according  to   custom.  First   he  named
 Manwe   and   Mandos,  after   the  manner   which  the   Edain  had
 learned from the Eldar,  and then,  speaking the  old tongue  of the
 Folk  which was  now out  of daily  use, he  declared that  the Moot
 was duly set, being  the three  hundred and  first Moot  of Brethil,
 called to give judgement in a grave matter.                     
    When  as  custom  was  all  the  assembly  cried  in   the  same
  tongue  'We  are  ready',  he  took  his seat  upon the  [stone >]
  Angbor,  and  called  in  the  speech  of Beleriand (41) to  men that
  stood  by: 'Sound  the horn!  Let the  prisoner be  brought before
  us!'(42)                                                           
                                                                   
    The  horn  sounded  twice,  but  for  some  time no  one entered,
  and the sound of  angry voices  could be  heard outside  the fence.
  At length the gate was  thrust open,  and six  men came  in bearing
  Hurin between them.                                               
    'I am  brought by  violence and  misuse,' he  cried. 'I  will not
  walk  slave-fettered  to  any  Moot upon  earth, not  though Elven-
  kings  should  sit  there. And  while I  am bound  thus I  deny all
  authority and justice to your dooms.' But  the men  set him  on the
  ground before the Stone and held him there by force.              
    Now  it  was  the  custom  of  the  Moot that,  when any  man was
  brought  before it,  the Halad  should be  the accuser,  and should
  first  in  brief  recite  the  misdeed with  which he  was charged.
  Whereupon  it was  his right,  by himself  or by  the mouth  of his
  friend, to deny the charge, or to offer a defence  for what  he had
  done. And when  these things  had been  said, if  any point  was in
  doubt  or  was  denied  by  either side,  then witnesses  were sum-
  moned.                                                            
    Hardang,(43) therefore,   now   stood   up   and  turning   to  the
  assembly he began to recite the charge.  'This prisoner,'  he said,
  'whom  you  see  before  you,  names  himself  Hurin  Galdor's son,

 once  of  Dorlomin,  but  long  in  Angband  whence he  came hither.
 Be that as it may.'(44)                                             
   But  hereupon  Manthor  arose  and  came  before  the  Stone.  'By
 your leave, my lord Halad  and Folk!'  he cried.  'As friend  to the
 prisoner I claim the right  to ask:  Is the  charge against  him any
 matter  that  touches  the  Halad in  person? Or  has the  Halad any
 grievance against him?'                                             
   'Grievance?'  cried  Hardang,  and  anger  clouded  his   wits  so
 that  he did  not see  Manthor's trend.  'Grievance indeed!  This is
 not  a  new  fashion  in  headgear for  the Moot.  I come  here with
 wounds new-dressed.'                                                
   'Alas!' said Manthor. 'But if that is so, I claim that the matter
 cannot be  dealt with  in this  way. In  our law  no man  may recite
 an  offence  against  himself;  nor  may  he  sit  in  the  seat  of
 judgement while that charge is heard. Is not this the law?'         
   'It is the law,' the assembly answered.                           
   'Then,'  said  Manthor, 'before  this charge  is heard  some other
 than Hardang son of Hundad must be appointed to the Stone.'         
   Thereupon  many  names  were  cried,  but  most  voices   and  the
 loudest  called  upon  Manthor.  'Nay,'  said he,  'I am  engaged to
 one part and cannot be judge. Moreover  it is  the Halad's  right in
 such  a  case  to  name  the  one  who  should  take  his  place, as
 doubtless he knows well.'                                           
   'I  thank  you,'  said  Hardang,  'though  I  need  no self-chosen
 lawman  to  teach  me.'  Then  he  looked  about  him,  as  if  con-
 sidering  whom  he  should name.  But he  was in  a black  anger and
 all  wisdom  failed  him.  If  he  had  named  any  of  the  headmen
 there  present, things  might have  gone otherwise.  But in  an evil
 moment  he  chose,  and  to  all  men's  wonder  he  cried:  'Avranc
 Dorlas' son!  It seems  that the  Halad needs  a friend  also today,
 when lawmen are so pert. I summon you to the Stone.'                
   Silence   fell.  But   when  Hardang   stepped  down   and  Avranc
 came  to  the  Stone  there  was  a loud  murmuring like  the rumour
 of  a  coming  storm.  Avranc  was  a  young  man, not  long wedded,
 and  his  youth  was taken  ill by  all the  elder headmen  that sat
 there.  [For  he  was  not  loved  for  himself. >]  And he  was not
 loved  for  himself; for  though he  was bold,  he was  scornful, as
 was Dorlas  his father  before him.  / And  dark tales  were [struck
 out:  still] whispered  concerning Dorlas  [struck out:  his father,
 who  had  been  Hardang's  close  friend];(45) for  though  naught was
 known  for  certain, he  was found  slain far  from the  battle with

 Glaurung,  and  the  reddened  sword  that  lay  by  him  had  been the
 sword of Brandir.(46)                                                 
   But  Avranc  took   no  heed   of  the   murmur,  and   bore  himself
 airily, as if it were a light matter soon to be dealt with.           
   'Well,' he said,  'if that  is settled,  let us  waste no  more time!
 The  matter  is  clear  enough.'  Then  standing  up  he  continued the
 recital.  'This  prisoner,  this  wild  man,'  he  said,   'comes  from
 Angband,  as  you  have  heard.  He  was  found  within   our  borders.
 Not  by chance,  for as  he himself  declared, he  has an  errand here.
 What  that  may  be  he  has  not  revealed,  but it  cannot be  one of
 good will. He hates this  folk. As  soon as  he saw  us he  reviled us.
 We  gave  him  food  and he  spat on  it. I  have seen  Orcs do  so, if
 any  were  fools   enough  to   show  them   mercy.  From   Angband  he
 comes,  it  is  clear,  whatever  his  name  be.  But   worse  followed
 after.  By  his  own  asking  he  was  brought  before  the   Halad  of
 Brethil  -  by  this man  who now  calls himself  his friend;  but when
 he  came  into  hall  he  would   not  name   himself.  And   when  the
 Halad  asked  him  what  was  his  errand  and  bade  him   rest  first
 and speak of it later, if it pleased  him, he  began to  rave, reviling
 the  Halad,  and  suddenly  he cast  a stool  in his  face and  did him
 great hurt.  It is  well for  all that  he had  nothing more  deadly to
 hand,  or  the  Halad  would  have  been  slain.  As  was  plainly  the
 prisoner's intent, and it lessens his guilt very little that  the worst
 did  not  happen,  for which  the penalty  is death.  But even  so, the
 Halad sat in the great chair in his hall:  to revile  him there  was an
 evil deed, and to assault him an outrage.                             
   'This  then  is  the  charge  against  the  prisoner:  that  he  came
 here with  evil intent  against us,  and against  the Halad  of Brethil
 in  special  (at  the  bidding   of  Angband   one  may   guess);  that
 gaining  the  presence  of  the   Halad  he   reviled  him,   and  then
 sought to  slay him  in his  chair. The  penalty is  under the  doom of
 the Moot, but it could justly be death.'                              
   Then  it  seemed  to  some  that  Avranc  spoke  justly,  and  to all
 that  he  had spoken  with skill.  For a  while no  one raised  a voice
 upon  either  side.  Then  Avranc,  not  hiding  his smile,  rose again
 and  said:  'The  prisoner  may  now  answer  the  charge  if  he will,
 but let him be brief and not rave!'                                  
   But  Hurin  did  not   speak,  though   he  strained   against  those
 that  held  him.  'Prisoner,  will  you  not  speak?' said  Avranc, and
 still Hurin gave no answer. 'So be it,'  said Avranc.  'If he  will not
 speak,  not  even to  deny the  charge, then  there is  no more  to do.

 The  charge  is  made  good,  and the  one that  is appointed  to the
 Stone must propound to the Moot a penalty that seems just.'         
   But  now  Manthor  stood  up  and  said: First  he should  at least
 be  asked  why  he will  not speak.  And to  that question  reply may
 be made by his friend.'                                             
   'The  question  is put,'  said Avranc  with a  shrug. 'If  you know
 the answer give it.'                                                
   'Because   he  is   fettered  [added:   hand  and   foot],'(47) said
 Manthor.  'Never  before  have  we  dragged  to  the Moot  in fetters
 a  man  yet  uncondemned.  Still  less  one of  the Edain  whose name
 deserves   honour,   whatsoever   may   have  happened   since.  Yes,
 "uncondemned"  I  say;  for  the  accuser has  left much  unsaid that
 this Moot must hear before judgement is given.'                     
   'But  this is  foolishness,' said  Avranc. 'Adan  or no,  and what-
 ever  his  name,  the  prisoner  is  ungovernable and  malicious. The
 bonds  are  a  needed  precaution.  Those  who  come  near  him  must
 be protected from his violence.'                                    
   'If  you  wish   to  beget   violence,'  answered   Manthor,  'what
 surer  way  than  openly  to  dishonour  a  proud  man, old  in years
 of  great  grief.  And  here  is  one  now  weakened  by  hunger  and
 long  journeying,  unarmed  among  a  host.  I  would  ask  the  folk
 here  assembled:  do  you  deem  such  caution  worthy  of  the  free
 men of Brethil,  or would  you rather  that we  used the  courtesy of
 old?'                                                               
   'The  fetters  were  put  on  the  prisoner  by  the  order  of the
 Halad,' said Avranc. 'In this he used his right for the  restraint of
 violence in his hall. Therefore  this order  cannot be  gainsaid save
 by the full assembly.'                                              
   Then  there  went  up  a  great  shout  'Release him,  release him!
 Hurin  Thalion!  Release  Hurin  Thalion!'  Not  all  joined  in this
 cry, yet there were no voices heard on the other side.              
   'Nay,  nay!  ' said  Avranc. 'Shouting  will not  avail. In  such a
 case there must be a vote in due form.'                             
                                                                    
   Now  by  custom  in  matters  grave  or doubtful  the votes  of the
 Moot  were  cast  with  pebbles,  and  all  who  entered   bore  with
 them each  two pebbles,  a black  and a  white for  nay and  for yea.
 But  the   gathering  and   counting  would   take  much   time,  and
 meanwhile   Manthor   saw  that   with  each   moment  the   mood  of
 Hurin grew worse.                                                   
   'There  is  another  way  more  simple,'  he  said.  'There  is  no
 danger here to  justify the  bonds, and  so think  all who  have used

 their voice. The Halad is in the Moot-ring, and  he can  remit his
 own order, if he will.'                                          
   'He will,' said Hardang, for it seemed to him  that the  mood of
 the assembly was restive, and he  hoped by  this stroke  to regain
 its favour. 'Let  the prisoner  be released,  and stand  up before
 you!'                                                            
   Then  the  fetters  were  struck  off  Hurin's  hands  and feet.
 Straightway  he  stood  up,  and  turning  away  from   Avranc  he
 faced the assembly. 'I am here,' he said. 'I will answer  my name.
 I  am  Hurin  Thalion  son  of  Galdor  Orchal,(48) Lord of Dorlomin
 and  once  a  high-captain  in  the  host  of  Fingon King  of the
 North-realm.  Let  no  man  dare  to  deny  it!  That   should  be
 enough. I will not plead before you. Do as you will!  Neither will
 I  bandy words  with the  upstart whom  you permit  to sit  in the
 high seat. Let him lie as he will! [Struck out:  But if  my friend
 wishes to speak and to set forth  the truth  of what  has chanced,
 let him do so. Listen who will!]                                 
   'In  the name  of the  Lords of  the West,  what manner  of folk
 are  you,  or  to  what  have  you  become?  While  the   ruin  of
 Darkness is all about you will you sit here  in patience  and hear
 this runagate guard  ask for  a doom  of death  upon me  - because
 I broke the head of an insolent young man, whether  in a  chair or
 out of it? He should have learned how to  treat his  elders before
 you made him your Chieftain forsooth.                            
   'Death?  'Fore  Manwe,  if  I  had   not  endured   torment  for
 twenty years and eight, if I were  as at  the Nirnaeth,  you would
 not  dare  to sit  here to  face me.  But I  am not  dangerous any
 longer, I hear. So you are  brave. I  can stand  up unbound  to be
 baited.  I  am  broken  in  war and  made tame.  Tame! Be  not too
 sure!' He lifted up his arms and knotted his hands.              
   But here Manthor laid a  restraining hand  on his  shoulder, and
 spoke earnestly in his ear. 'My lord, you  mistake them.  Most are
 your friends, or would be. But there are  proud freemen  here too.
 Let me now speak to them! '                                      
   Hardang  and  Avranc  said  naught, but  smiled one  to another,
 for  Hurin's  speech,  they  thought,  did his  part no  good. But
 Manthor  cried:  'Let  the  Lord  Hurin  be given  a seat  while I
 speak. His wrath you  will understand  better, and  maybe forgive,
 when you have heard me.                                          
   'Hear  me  now, Folk  of Brethil.  My friend  does not  deny the
 main  charge,  but  he  claims  that he  was misused  and provoked
 beyond  bearing.  My  masters  [struck  out:  and  good  wives],(49)I

 was  captain  of  the  march-wardens  that  found  this  man asleep
 by the Haud-en-Elleth. Or asleep he  seemed, but  he lay  rather in
 weariness on the brink of awaking,  and as  he lay  he heard,  as I
 fear, words that were spoken.                                      
   'There  was  a  man  called  Avranc Dorlas'  son, I  remember, as
 one of my  company, and  he should  be there  still, for  such were
 my orders. As I came  behind I  heard this  Avranc give  counsel to
 the  man  who  had  first  found  Hurin  and  guessed at  his name.
 Folk of Brethil, I heard  him speak  thus. "It  would be  better to
 slay the old man  asleep and  prevent further  trouble. And  so the
 Halad would be pleased," said he.                                  
   'Now  maybe  you  will  wonder  less  that when  I called  him to
 full  waking  and  he  found  men  with weapons  all about  him, he
 spoke bitter words to us.  One at  least of  us deserved  them. Yet
 as for despising our food: he  took it  from my  hands, and  he did
 not spit upon it. He spat  it forth,  for it  choked him.  Have you
 never,  my  masters,  seen  a  man   half-starved  who   could  not
 swallow food in  haste though  he needed  it? And  this man  was in
 great grief also and full of anger.                                
   'Nay, he did not disdain our food.  Though well  he might,  if he
 had  known  the  devices  to  which  some   who  dwell   here  have
 fallen! Hear me now and  believe me,  if you  may, for  witness can
 be brought. In his prison the Lord Hurin  ate with  me, for  I used
 him with  courtesy. That  was two  days ago.  But yesterday  he was
 drowsed  and  could  not speak  clearly, nor  take counsel  with me
 against the trial today.'                                           ]
   'Little wonder in that!' cried Hardang.                          
   Manthor paused and looked at Hardang. 'Little wonder             
 indeed, my lord Halad,' he  said; 'for  his food  had been         
 drugged.'                                                          
   Then Hardang in wrath cried out: 'Must the drowsy dreams         
 of this dotard be recited to our weariness?'                       
   'I speak of no dreams,' answered Manthor.  'Witness will         
                                                                   
 will  answer  now.  I  took  away  from  the  prison food  of which
 Hurin  had  eaten  some.  Before witnesses  I gave  it to  a hound,
 and he lies still asleep as if dead. Maybe the Halad of Brethil did
 not contrive  this himself,  but one  who is  eager to  please him.
 But  with  what  lawful  purpose?  To  restrain him  from violence,
 forsooth,  when he  was already  fettered and  in prison?  There is
 malice  abroad  among  us,  Folk  of  Brethil,  and  I look  to the
 assembly to amend it!'                                            

   At this there was  great stir  and murmur  in the  Moot-ring; and
 when  Avranc  stood  up  calling  for  silence,  the  clamour  grew
 greater. At last  when the  assembly had  quieted a  little Manthor
 said: 'May I now continue, for there is more to be said?'        
   'Proceed!' said Avranc. 'But let your wind  be shortened.  And I
 must  warn  you  all,  my  masters,  to hear  this man  warily. His
 good  faith  cannot  be  trusted.  The  prisoner  and he  are close
 akin.'                                                            
   These  words  were  unwise,  for  Manthor  answered at  once: 'It
 is  so  indeed.  The  mother  of  Hurin  was  Hareth   daughter  of
 Halmir,  once  Halad  of  Brethil,  and  Hiril  her sister  was the
 mother of my mother. But  this lineage  does not  prove me  a liar.
 More, if Hurin of  Dorlomin be  akin to  me, he  is kinsman  of all
 the House of Haleth. Yea, and of all this Folk.  Yet he  is treated
 as an outlaw, a robber, a wild man without honour!                
   'Let us proceed then to the chief charge,  which the  accuser has
 said  may  bear  the  penalty  of  death.  You  see before  you the
 broken head, though it seems to sit firm on  its shoulders  and can
 use its tongue. It was hurt by the cast of a small wooden  stool. A
 wicked  deed,  you  will  say.  And  far  worse  when  done  to the
 Halad of Brethil in his great chair.                              
   'But  my  masters,  ill  deeds  may  be  provoked.  Let  any  one
 of  you  in  thought set  himself in  the place  of Hardang  son of
 Hundad.  Well,  here  comes  Hurin,  Lord  of Dorlomin,  your kins-
 man,  before you:  head of  a great  House, a  man whose  deeds are
 sung  by  Elves and  Men. But  he is  now grown  old, dispossessed,
 grief-laden,  travel-worn. He  asks to  see you.  There you  sit at
 ease in your chair. You do not rise. You do not  speak to  him. But
 you  eye  him  up  and down  as he  stands, until  he sinks  to the
 floor.  Then  of your  pity and  courtesy you  cry: "Bring  the old
 carl a stool!"                                                    
   'O  shame and  wonder! He  flings it  at your  head. 0  shame and
 wonder rather  I say  that you  so dishonour  your chair,  that you
 so  dishonour  your  hall,  that  you  so  dishonour  the  Folk  of
 Brethil!                                                          
   'My masters, I freely admit that  it would  have been  better, if
 the  Lord  Hurin  had  shown  patience,  marvellous  patience.  Why
 did he not wait to  see what  further slights  he must  endure? Yet
 as I stood in hall and saw all this I wondered, and I  still wonder
 and I ask you to  tell me:  How do  you like  such manners  in this
 man that we have made Halad of Brethil?'                          

   Great  uproar  arose  at  this  question,  until  Manthor  held  up
 his hand, and suddenly all was still  again. But  under cover  of the
 noise  Hardang  had  drawn  near  to  Avranc   to  speak   with  him,
 and  surprised  by  the  silence  they  spoke   too  loud,   so  that
 Manthor  and  others  also  heard  Hardang  say: 'I  would I  had not
 hindered  thy  shooting!'(50) And Avranc  answered,  I  will  seek  a
 time yet.'                                                          
   But   Manthor   proceeded.   'I  am   answered.  Such   manners  do
 not  please  you,  I  see.  Then what  would you  have done  with the
 caster  of  the  stool? Bound  him, put  a halter  on his  neck, shut
 him in a cave, fettered him, drugged  his food,  and at  last dragged
 him  hither and  called for  his death?  Or would  you set  him free?
 Or  would  you,  maybe,  ask  pardon,  or   command  this   Halad  to
 do so?'                                                             
   Thereupon  there  was  even  greater  uproar,  and  men   stood  up
 on  the  turfbanks,  clashing  their arms,  and crying:  'Free! Free!
 Set  him  free!'  And  many  voices were  heard also  shouting: 'Away
 with this Halad! Put him in the caves! '                            
   Many  of  the  older men  who sat  in the  lowest tier  ran forward
 and  knelt before  Hurin to  ask his  pardon; and  one offered  him a
 staff, and another gave him a fair cloak and a great belt  of silver.
 And  when  Hurin  was  so  clad,  and had  a staff  in hand,  he went
 to  the  [added: Angbor]  Stone and  stood up  on it,  in no  wise as
 a  suppliant,  but  in  mien  as  a  king;  and  facing  the assembly
 he cried in  a great  voice: 'I  thank you,  Masters of  Brethil here
 present,  who  have  released  me  from  dishonour.  There   is  then
 justice still in  your land,  though it  has slept  and been  slow to
 awake. But now I have a charge to bring in my turn.                 
   'What  is my  errand here,  it is  asked? What  think you?  Did not
 Turin  my  son,  and  Nienor  my  daughter, die  in this  land? Alas!
 from  afar I  have learned  much of  the griefs  that have  here come
 to pass. Is it then a  wonder that  a father  should seek  the graves
 of  his  children?  More  wonder  it  is,  meseems,  that  none  here
 have yet ever spoken their names to me.                             
   'Are  ye  ashamed  that  ye  let  Turin  my son  die for  you? That
 two  only  dared  go  with  him  to  face  the  terror  of  the Worm?
 That  none  dared  go  down  to  succour  him  when  the  battle  was
 over, though the worst evils might thus have been stayed?           
   'Ashamed  ye  may  be.  But this  is not  my charge.  I do  not ask
 that  any  in  this land  should match  the son  of Hurin  in valour.
 But if I forgive those griefs, shall I forgive this? Hear me,  Men of
 Brethil! There  lies by  the Standing  Stone that  you raised  an old

 beggar-woman. Long she sat  in your  land, without  fire, without
 food,  without  pity.  Now  she  is  dead.  Dead. She  was Morwen
 my  wife.  Morwen  Edelwen,  the lady  elven-fair who  bore Turin
 the slayer of Glaurung. She is dead.                            
    'If ye, who have some ruth, cry to me that you  are guiltless,
 then  I  ask  who  bears  the  guilt?  By  whose command  was she
 thrust out to starve at your doors like an outcast dog?         
    'Did your Chieftain contrive this? So I believe. For  would he
 not have dealt with me in like manner, if he could? Such  are his
 gifts: dishonour, starvation, poison. Have you  no part  in this?
 Will  you  not  work  all  his  will? Then  how long,  Masters of
 Brethil, will you endure him? How long will  you suffer  this man
 called Hardang to sit in your chair?'                           
                                                                
    Now  Hardang  was  aghast  at  this  turn,  and his  face went
 white  with  fear  and  amazement.  But  before  he  could speak,
 Hurin pointed a long hand  at him.  'See! '  he cried.  'There he
 stands with  a sneer  on his  mouth! Does  he deem  himself safe?
 For  I  am  robbed  of  my  sword;  and  I am  old and  weary, he
 thinks. Nay, too often has he called me a wild man. He  shall see
 one! Only hands, hands, are needed  to wring  his throat  full of
 lies.'                                                          
    With that  Hurin left  the Stone  and strode  towards Hardang;
 but  he  gave back  before him,  calling his  household-men about
 him; and  they drew  off towards  the gate.  Thus it  appeared to
 many  that  Hardang  admitted  his  guilt,  and  they  drew their
 weapons,  and  came  down  from  the   banks,  crying   out  upon
 him.(51)                                                        
    Now there was peril of  battle within  the hallowed  Ring. For
 others joined themselves to  Hardang, some  without love  for him
 or his deeds, who nonetheless held to their loyalty and  would at
 least defend him from violence, until he could answer  before the
 Moot.                                                           
    Manthor stood between  the two  parties and  cried to  them to
 hold their  hands and  shed no  blood in  the Moot-ring;  but the
 spark  that  he  had himself  kindled now  burst to  flame beyond
 his quenching, and a press of  men thrust  him aside.  'Away with
 this Halad!' they shouted. 'Away with Hardang,  take him  to the
 caves!   Down   with   Hardang!   Up   Manthor!   We   will  have
 Manthor!'  And  they fell  upon the  men that  barred the  way to
 the gate, so that Hardang might have time to escape.            
    But  Manthor  went  back  to  Hurin,  who  now stood  alone by

  the Stone. 'Alas,  lord,' he  said, 'I  feared that  this day  held great
  peril for us all. There is little I can do, but still I must try to avert
  the  worst  evil.  They  will  soon break  out, and  I must  follow. Will
  you come with me?'                                                       
                                                                          
    Many  fell  at  the  gate  on  either  side  ere  it  was  taken. There
  Avranc  fought  bravely,  and  was  the  last  to  retreat.  Then  as  he
  turned  to  flee  suddenly  he  drew  his  bow  and  shot  at  Manthor as
  he  stood  by  the  Stone.  But  the arrow  missed in  his haste  and hit
  on  the  Stone,  striking  fire  beside  Manthor   as  it   broke.  'Next
  time nearer!' cried Avranc as he fled after Hardang.                    
    Then   the   rebels   burst  out   of  the   Ring  and   hotly  pursued
  Hardang's   men   to   the  Obel   Halad,  some   half  mile   away.  But
  before  they  could  come  there   Hardang  had   gained  the   hall  and
  shut  it  against  them;  and  there  he  was  now  besieged.   The  Hall
  of  the  Chieftains  stood  in  a  garth  with  a  round   earthwall  all
  about  it  rising  from  a dry  outer dyke.  In the  wall there  was only
  one  gate,  from  which  a  stone-path  led  to  the  great   doors.  The
  assailants  drove  through  the  gate  and  swiftly  surrounded  all  the
  hall; and all was quiet for a while.                                     
    But   Manthor   and   Hurin   came   to    the   gate;    and   Manthor
  would  have  a  parley,   but  men   said:  'Of   what  use   are  words?
  Rats  will  not  come  out  while  dogs  are  abroad.'  And  some  cried:
  'Our kin have been slain, and we will avenge them! '                     
    'Well  then,'  said  Manthor,  'allow  me  at  least   to  do   what  I
  can!'                                                                   
    'Do  so!'  they  said.  'But go  not too  near, or  you may  receive a
  sharp answer.'                                                           
    Therefore  Manthor  stood  by  the  gate  and   lifted  up   his  great
  voice,  crying  out  to  both  sides  that  they  should cease  from this
  kin-slaying.  And  to  those  within  he  promised  that  all  should  go
  free   who   came   forth   without   weapons,   even   Hardang,   if  he
  would  give  his  word   to  stand   before  the   Moot  the   next  day.
  'And no man shall bring any weapon thither,' he said.                    
    But  while   he  spoke   there  came   a  shot   from  a   window,  and
  an  arrow  went  by  the   ear  of   Manthor  and   stood  deep   in  the
  gate-post.  Then   the  voice   of  Avranc   was  heard   crying:  'Third
  time shall thrive best!'                                                 
    Now  the  anger  of  those   without  burst   forth  again,   and  many
  rushed  to  the  great  doors  and   tried  to   break  them   down;  but
  there  was  a  sortie,  and  many  were  slain or  hurt, and  others also
  in  the  garth  were  wounded  by   shots  from   the  windows.   So  the

 assailants  being  now  in  mad  wrath  brought  kindlings  and great
 store of  wood and  set it  by the  gate; and  they shouted  to those
 within: 'See! the sun is setting. We give you till nightfall.  If you
 do not come forth ere then, we will burn  the hall  and you  in it!'
 Then  they  all  withdrew  from the  garth out  of bowshot,  but they
 made a ring of men all round the outer dyke.                        
   The  sun  set,  and  none  came  from  the  hall.  And when  it was
 dark  the  assailants  came  back  into the  garth bearing  the wood,
 and they piled it against the walls  of the  hall. Then  some bearing
 flaming  pine-torches  ran  across  the  garth  to  put  fire  in the
 faggots. One  was shot  to his  death, but  others reached  the piles
 and soon they began to blaze.                                       
   Manthor  stood  aghast  at  the  ruin  of the  hall and  the wicked
 deed of the burning of  men. 'Out  of the  dark days  of our  past it
 comes,'  he  said,  'before  we turned  our faces  west. A  shadow is
 upon  us.'  And  he  felt  one  lay a  hand on  his shoulder,  and he
 turned  and  saw  Hurin  who  stood  behind  him,  with  a  grim face
 watching the kindling of the fires; and Hurin laughed.              
   'A  strange  folk  are  ye,'  he  said. 'Now  cold, now  hot. First
 wrath,  then  ruth.  Under your  chieftain's feet  or at  his throat.
 Down with Hardang! Up with Manthor! Wilt thou go up?'               
   'The  Folk  must   choose,'  said   Manthor.  'And   Hardang  still
 lives.'                                                             
   'Not for long, I hope,' said Hurin.                               
                                                                    
   Now  the  fires  grew  hot  and soon  the Hall  of the  Haladin was
 aflame  in  many  places.  The   men  within   threw  out   upon  the
 faggots  earth  and water,  such as  they had,  and great  smoke went
 up.  Then  some  sought  to  escape  under  its  cover,  but  few got
 through  the  ring  of  men;  most  were  taken,  or  slain  if  they
 fought.                                                             
   There was  a small  door at  the rear  of the  hall with  a jutting
 porch that  came nearer  to the  garth-wall than  the great  doors in
 front;  and the  wall at  the back  was lower,  because the  hall was
 built on a slope of the hillside.  At last  when the  roof-beams were
 on fire,  Hardang and  Avranc crept  out of  the rear-door,  and they
 reached  the  top  of  the  wall and  stole down  into the  dyke, and
 they  were  not  marked  until  they  tried  to  climb out.  But then
 with  shouts  men  ran  upon  them,  though  they  did  not  know who
 they  were.  Avranc  flung  himself  at  the feet  of one  that would
 seize  him,  so  that  he  was  thrown  to  the  ground,  and  Avranc
 sprang  up  and  away and  escaped in  the mirk.  But another  cast a

 spear  at  Hardang's  back  as  he  ran,  and he  fell with  a great
 wound.                                                             
   When  it  was seen  who he  was, men  lifted him  up and  laid him
 before  Manthor.  'Set  him  not  before  me,'  said  Manthor,  'but
 before the one he misused. I have no grudge against him.'          
   'Have  you  not?'  said  Hardang.  'Then  you must  be sure  of my
 death.  I  think  that  you  have  always  begrudged  that  the Folk
 chose me to the chair and not you.'                                
   'Think  what  you  will!'  said  Manthor   and  he   turned  away.
 Then   Hardang   was   aware   of   Hurin   who   was   behind.  And
 Hurin  stood  looking  down  on   Hardang,  a   dark  form   in  the
 gloom,  but  the  light  of  the  fire  was on  his face,  and there
 Hardang saw no pity.                                               
   'You are a mightier man  than I,  Hurin of  Hithlum,' he  said. 'I
 had  such  fear  of  your  shadow  that  all  wisdom   and  largesse
 forsook  me.  But  now  I  do  not  think that  any wisdom  or mercy
 would  have  saved  me  from  you, for  you have  none. You  came to
 destroy me, and you at least have not denied it.  But your  last lie
 against  me  I  cast  back upon  you ere  I die.  Never' -  but with
 that blood gushed  from his  mouth, and  he fell  back, and  said no
 more.                                                              
   Then  Manthor  said:  'Alas!  He  should   not  have   died  thus.
 Such evil as he wrought did not merit this end.'                   
   'Why  not?'  said  Hurin.  'He  spoke  hate from  a foul  mouth to
 the last. What lie have I spoken against him?'                    
   Manthor  sighed.  'No  lie  wittingly  maybe,'  he said.  'But the
 last  charge  that  you brought  was false,  I deem;  and he  had no
 chance  to  deny  it.  I  would  that  you  had spoken  to me  of it
 before the Moot!'                                                  
   Hurin clenched his hands. 'It is not false!'  he cried.  'She lies
 where I said. Morwen! She is dead! '                               
   'Alas! lord, where she died I do not  doubt. But  of this  I judge
 that Hardang knew  no more  than I  till you  spoke. Tell  me, lord:
 did she ever walk further in this land?'                           
   'I know not. I found her as I said. She is dead.'                
   'But, lord, if she came no  further, but  finding the  Stone there
 sat in grief and despair by the grave of her son, as I  can believe,
 then...'                                                           
   'What then?' said Hurin.                                         
   'Then,  Hurin  Hadorion,  out   of  the   darkness  of   your  woe
 know this! My lord, so great a grief, and so great  a horror  of the
 things  that  there  came  to pass  is upon  us that  no man  and no

 woman  since  the  setting  up  of  the Stone  has ever  again gone
 nigh  to  that  place.  Nay! the  Lord Orome  himself might  sit by
 that stone with all his  hunt about  him, and  we should  not know.
 Not  unless  he  blew  his  great  horn, and  even that  summons we
 should refuse!'                                                   
   'But if  Mandos the  Just spake,  would you  not hear  him?' said
 Hurin.  'Now  some  shall  go  thither,  if you  have any  ruth! Or
 would you let her lie  there till  her bones  are white?  Will that
 cleanse your land?'                                               
   'Nay, nay!' said Manthor. 'I will  find some  men of  great heart
 and some women  of mercy,  and you  shall lead  us thither,  and we
 will do as you bid. But it is a long road to wend, and this  day is
 now old in evil. A new day is needed.'                            
                                                                  
   The  next  day,  when  the  news  that  Hardang  was   dead  went
 abroad,  a  great  throng  of  people  sought  for  Manthor, crying
 that he must be Chieftain.  But he  said: 'Nay,  this must  be laid
 before  the  full  Moot.  That  cannot  be  yet;  for  the  Ring is
 unhallowed,  and  there  are  other  things  more  pressing  to do.
 First I have an errand.  I must  go to  the Field  of the  Worm and
 the  Stone  of  the  Hapless,  where Morwen  their mother  lies un-
 tended. Will any come with me?'                                   
   Then  ruth  smote  the  hearts  of  those  that  heard  him;  and
 though  some  drew  back  in  fear,  many were  willing to  go, but
 among these there were more women than men.                       
   Therefore at  length they  set off  in silence  on the  path that
 led  down  along the  falling torrent  of Celebros.  Wellnigh eight
 leagues  was  that road,  and darkness  fell ere  they came  to Nen
 Girith,(52) and there they passed the  night as  they could.  And the
 next  morning  they  went on  down the  steep way  to the  Field of
 Burning,  and they  found the  body of  Morwen at  the foot  of the
 Standing  Stone.  Then  they looked  upon her  in pity  and wonder;
 for  it  seemed  to  them  that  they  beheld  a great  queen whose
 dignity neither age nor beggary nor all  the woe  of the  world had
 taken from her.                                                   
   Then  they  desired to  do her  honour in  death; and  some said:
 'This is  a dark  place. Let  us lift  her up,  and bring  the Lady
 Morwen  to  the  Garth  of  the  Graves  and  lay  her   among  the
 House of Haleth with whom she had kinship.'                       
   But Hurin said: 'Nay, Nienor is not here, but  it is  fitter that
 she should lie here near her son  than with  any strangers.  So she
 would  have  chosen.'  Therefore  they  made  a  grave  for  Morwen

 above  Cabed  Naeramarth  on  the  west  side  of  the  Stone; and
 when  the  earth  was  laid  upon  her they  carved on  the Stone:
 Here  lies  also  Morwen  Edelwen,  while  some  sang  in  the old
 tongue  the  laments  that  long ago  had been  made for  those of
 their  people  who  had  fallen  on  the  March  far   beyond  the
 Mountains.                                                        
   And  while  they  sang  there  came  a  grey  rain and  all that
 desolate place was heavy with grief, and the roaring of  the river
 was  like  the mourning  of many  voices. And  when all  was ended
 they turned away, and Hurin  went bowed  on his  staff. But  it is
 said  that  after  that day  fear left  that place,  though sorrow
 remained, and it was ever leafless and bare. But until the  end of
 Beleriand  women  of  Brethil  would come  with flowers  in spring
 and berries in  autumn and  sing there  a while  of the  Grey Lady
 who sought in  vain for  her son.  And a  seer and  harp-player of
 Brethil, Glirhuin, made  a song  saying the  Stone of  the Hapless
 should  not  be  defiled  by  Morgoth  nor  ever thrown  down, not
 though the Sea should drown all the land. As after  indeed befell,
 and still  the Tol  Morwen stands  alone in  the water  beyond the
 new coasts that were made in the days of the  wrath of  the Valar.
 But  Hurin does  not lie  there, for  his doom  drove him  on, and
 the Shadow still followed him.                                    
                                                                  
   Now  when  the  company  had  come  back  to  Nen   Girith  they
 halted;  and  Hurin looked  back, out  across Taeglin  towards the
 westering sun that came  through the  clouds; and  he was  loth to
 return  into  the  Forest.  But  Manthor  looked eastward  and was
 troubled, for there was a red glow in the sky there also.(53)     
   'Lord,' he said, 'tarry here if you will, and any others who are
 weary. But I am the last of the Haladin and I  fear that  the fire
 which we  kindled is  not yet  quenched. I  must go  back swiftly,
 lest the madness of men bring all Brethil to ruin.'               
   But even as he said this an arrow  came from  the trees,  and he
 stumbled and sank  to the  ground. Then  men ran  to seek  for the
 bowman;  and  they  saw  a  man running  like a  deer up  the path
 towards  the  Obel,  and  they  could not  overtake him;  but they
 saw that it was Avranc.                                           
   Now Manthor sat gasping with his back to a tree.  'It is  a poor
 archer that will miss his mark at the third aim,' he said.        
   Hurin  leaned  on  his staff  and looked  down at  Manthor. 'But
 thou hast missed thy mark, kinsman,'  he said.  'Thou hast  been a
 valiant friend, and yet I think thou wert so hot in the  cause for

 thyself  also.  Manthor  would  have  sat  more  worthily  in  the  chair
 of the Chieftains.'                                                      
   'Thou  hast  a  hard  eye,  Hurin,  to  pierce  all  hearts  but  thine
 own,'   said   Manthor.  'Yea,   thy  darkness   touched  me   also.  Now
 alas!  the  Haladin  are  ended;  for  this  wound is  to the  death. Was
 not  this  your  true  errand,  Man  of  the  North:  to bring  ruin upon
 us   to   weigh   against   thine   own?   The   House   of   Hador   has
 conquered   us,   and   four   now   have   fallen   under   its  shadow:
 Brandir,   and   Hunthor,  and   Hardang,  and   Manthor.  Is   that  not
 enough? Wilt thou not go and leave this land ere it dies?'               
   'I  will,'  said  Hurin.  'But  if  the  well  of  my  tears  were  not
 utterly  dried  up,  I  would  weep  for  thee,  Manthor;  for  thou hast
 saved me from dishonour, and thou hadst love for my son.'                
   'Then,  lord,  use  in  peace  the  little  more life  that I  have won
 for   thee,'   said   Manthor.   'Do   not   bring   your   shadow   upon
 others!'                                                                
   'Why,  must  I  not  still  walk  in  the world?'  said Hurin.  'I will
 go on till the shadow overtakes me. Farewell!'                           
   Thus   Hurin   parted   from   Manthor.   When   men   came   to   tend
 his  wound  they  found  that  it  was  grave,  for  the  arrow  had gone
 deep  into  his  side;  and  they   wished  to   bear  Manthor   back  as
 swiftly  as  they  could  to  the  Obel  to  have  the  care  of  skilled
 leeches.  'Too  late,'  said  Manthor,  and  he  plucked  out  the arrow,
 and  gave  a  great  cry,  and  was  still.  Thus  ended  the   House  of
 Haleth, and lesser men ruled in Brethil in the time that was left.       
   But   Hurin   stood   silent,   and   when   the    company   departed,
 bearing  away  the  body  of  Manthor,  he  did   not  turn.   He  looked
 ever west till the sun fell  into dark  cloud and  the light  failed; and
 then he went down alone towards the Haud-en-Elleth.                      
                                                                         
   Both my  father's typescript  and the  amanuensis typescript  end here,
 and this is clearly the designed conclusion of 'Hurin in Brethil'; but in
 draft manuscript material there are some suggestions (very slight)  as to
 the course of the narrative  immediately beyond  this point.(54) There are
 also a few other brief writings and notes of interest.(55)               
                                                                         
   My  father  never  returned  to  follow   the  further   wanderings  of
 Hurin.(56) We come  here to  the furthest  point in  the narrative  of the
 Elder  Days  that  he reached  in his  work on  The Silmarillion  (in the
 widest sense) after  the Second  War and  the completion  of The  Lord of
 the Rings. There are  bits of  information about  the succeeding  parts -
 not  much -  but no  further new  or revised  narrative; and  the promise
 held out in his  words (p.  258) 'Link  to the  Necklace of  the Dwarves,
 Sigil Elu-naeth, Necklace of the Woe of Thingol' was never  fulfilled. It

  is as  if we  come to  the brink  of a  great cliff,  and look  down from
  highlands raised in some later age onto an ancient  plain far  below. For
  the story of the Nauglamir and the  destruction of  Doriath, the  fall of
  Gondolin,  the  attack  on  the  Havens,  we  must  return  through  more
  than a quarter  of a  century to  the Quenta  Noldorinwa (Q),  or beyond.
  The  huge  abruptness  of  the  divide  is still  more emphasised  by the
  nature of this last story of the Elder  Days, the  Shadow that  fell upon
  Brethil.(57) In its portrayal of the life of Brethil into which  Hurin came
  for its ruin, the intricacies of law and lineage, the history of ambition
  and conflicting sentiment within the ruling clan, it stands apart. In the
  published  Silmarillion  I  excluded  it, apart  from using  Hurin's vain
  attempt to  reach Gondolin  and his  finding of  Morwen dying  beside the
  Standing  Stone.  Morwen's  grave  is  made  by  Hurin alone;  and having
  made  it,  'he  passed  southwards  down  the  ancient  road that  led to
  Nargothrond'.                                                            
    To have included it, as it  seemed to  me, would  have entailed  a huge
  reduction, indeed an entire re-telling of a kind that I  did not  wish to
  undertake; and since the story is intricate I was afraid that  this would
  produce  a  dense  tangle of  narrative statement  with all  the subtlety
  gone, and above  all that  it would  diminish the  fearful figure  of the
  old  man, the  great hero,  Thalion the  Steadfast, furthering  still the
  purposes  of  Morgoth,  as  he  was  doomed  to  do. But  it seems  to me
  now,  many  years  later,  to have  been an  excessive tampering  with my
  father's  actual  thought  and  intention:  thus  raising  the  question,
  whether the attempt  to make  a 'unified'  Silmarillion should  have been
  embarked on.                                                             
                                                                          
                                    NOTES.                                  
                                                                          
   1.  With  the beginning  of this  passage cf.  Q (IV.131):  'Some have
       said   that   Morwen,  wandering   woefully  from   Thingol's  halls,
       when she found Nienor  not there  on her  return, came  on a  time to
       that stone and read it,  and there  died.' -  For the  abandoned idea
       that   it   was   Turin  who   met  Morwen   in  her   wandering  see
       pp. 161-2.                                                          
   2.  Hurin was born in 441 (GA $141). - At this point the first  side of
       the  'lost  manuscript'  ends.  The  text on  the reverse  was struck
       through  and  replaced  by  a  new  text  on  a  new  sheet,  all but
       identical in content but  finely written  - suggestive  of confidence
       in this further extension of the Grey Annals.                       
   3.  Asgon  reappears  here,  without   introduction,  from   NE  (Unfinished
       Tales  p. 109),  one of  the men  who fled  with Turin  from Brodda's
       hall; in the condensed account in GA ($297) he was not named.       
   4.  The  spellings  Asgorn  here,  but  Asgon  in the  preceding paragraph
       (see note 3), are clear. See note 21.                               
   5.  The term Eastron has not been used before.                            

  6.  'Yet this can scarce be so': i.e., ignorance  of Glaurung's  death can
      scarcely be the reason for Hurin's going to Nargothrond.              
  7.  The  space  marked  by  a  caret  evidently  awaited  the name  of the
      new Lord of Brethil.                                                  
  8.  'He must come of a different race': is this the first reference to the
      Petty-dwarves?                                                        
  9.  (Annal  490-5)  The  name  Iarwaeth  has  appeared  in  GA  $268  (see
      also  p.  142,  commentary  on  $277,  at  end),  but  Thuringud  'the
      Hidden  Foe' is  found nowhere  else: cf.  Finduilas' name  for Turin,
      Thurin 'the Secret', Unfinished Tales pp. 157, 159).                  
 10.  (Annal  494)  The  statements  that  Morgoth  stirred up  the Eastrons
      (see  note  5)  to greater  hatred of  the Elves  and Edain,  and that
      Lorgan  sought  to  take  Nienor  by  force, are  entirely new.  In GA
      ($274)  it  is  clear that  Morwen and  Nienor left  Dor-lomin because
      the lands had become more safe.                                       
 11.  (Annal  495)  Cirith  Ninniach,   the  final   name  of   the  Rainbow
      Cleft, is found in the later Tale  of Tuor  (Unfinished Tales  p. 23),
      where  also  the  meeting  of  Tuor  with  Gelmir  and Arminas  is re-
      counted  (pp.  21  -  2);  the  name  was  added to  the map  (p. 182,
      square  c 4).  On the  story of  their coming  to Nargothrond  and its
      relation  to the  Grey Annals  see pp.  141 -  2, commentary  on $277.
      It  may  be mentioned  here that  in another  'plot-synopsis' concern-
      ing  Turin  my  father  referred  to  the  two  Elves  by   the  names
      Faramir  and  Arminas,  adding  in  a   note:  'Faramir   and  Arminas
      were later Earendil's companions on voyage'.                          
        The  'Narrow  Land'  is  the   Pass  of   Sirion.  The   form  Eryd-
      wethian  occurs  in  the  typescript  text  of  'Gelmir  and  Arminas'
      (p. 142).                                                             
        '[Handir's]  son  Brandir  the  lame  is  chosen  Chieftain,  though
      many   would  have   preferred  his   cousins  Hunthor   or  Hardang':
      there  has  been  no previous  suggestion of  a disagreement  over the
      succession  to  Brandir; judging  by the  outspokenness of  the people
      of  Brethil  as  recorded  in  NE,  they  would  surely  have  used it
      against  Brandir  if  they  had  known  of  it.  -  The  name  Hunthor
      replaced  Torbarth  as  that  of  the 'kinsman  of Brandir',  who died
      at  Cabed-en-Aras,  in  NE  (this  change  was  not  made  in  GA: see
      p.  156).  He  appears  in  the  genealogical  table  of  the  Haladin
      (p. 237), but his descent  had by  this time  been changed:  for this,
      and for Hardang, another cousin, see pp. 268-70.                      
        The  defeat  of  Tum-halad  has  not  previously been  attributed to
      'the dread of  Glaurung', nor  has it  been said  that Turin  gave his
      word to Gwindor that he would endeavour to save Finduilas.            
        On the form Haudh-en-Elleth see p. 148, $301.                       
        The   story   that   Tuor   and   Voronwe   saw   Turin   journeying
      northward  at Eithil  Ivrin has  appeared in  an inserted  annal entry
      in  GA  ($299),  but  no  more  was  said  there  than that  'they saw

                              
                                                                         
     Turin pass,  but spoke  not with  him'. For  the fullest  account see
     the later Tale of Tuor, Unfinished Tales pp. 37-8.                   
 12. (Annal  496)  The death  of Sador  in the  fighting in  Brodda's hall
     is  told  in  NE  (Unfinished  Tales  p.  108),  where also  Asgon of
     Dor-lomin first appears (p. 109).                                    
 13. (Annal  497)  Lindis  of   Ossiriand:  no   mention  has   been  made
     before of the wife of Dior Thingol's  heir. See  further The  Tale of
     Years, pp. 349-51.                                                   
 14. (Annal  498)  In  GA  ($319) Turin  and Niniel  were married  'at the
     mid-summer' of 498, and she conceived in the spring of 499.          
 15. (Annal  499)  Of  course  Glaurung did  not reveal  to Turin  'who he
     was': he did not need to. But this is without significance: it  was a
     short-hand  when  writing  very  fast  (in the  same annal  my father
     wrote  'Nargothrond'  for  'Brethil'  and  'Tuor'  for  'Turin'), and
     means  that  it  was  through the  words of  Glaurung that  Turin and
     Nienor came to know that they were brother and sister.               
        The  name  Talbor  of  the  memorial  stone  raised  at  Cabed-en-
     Aras has not been given before.                                      
        For  previous  mentions  of  Mim  and  the  treasure  of  Nargoth-
     rond,  and  his  death  at  the  hand  of  Hurin,  see  the  Tale  of
     Turambar,  II.113  -  14;  the  Sketch of  the Mythology,  IV.32; the
     Annals  of  Beleriand  (AB  1  and AB  2), IV.306  and V.141;  and Q,
     IV.132 and commentary IV.187 - 8.                                    
 16. (Annal  500)  The  names  Elrun  and  Eldun  of  the  sons   of  Dior
     appear  in  emendations  made  to  Q  (IV.135)  and  AB 2  (V.142 and
     note  42),  replacing  Elboron  and  Elbereth. It  has not  been said
     that  they  were twin  brothers (in  the Genealogies  associated with
                                                                         
     - AB 1,  of which  some extracts  were given  in V.403,  their birth-
     dates were three years apart, 192 and  195, -  later 492,  495: these
     latter are  found in  the genealogical  table of  the House  of Beor,
     p. 231).                                                             
        In AB 2  (following AB  1) Hurin  was released  by Morgoth  in the
     year  499  (IV.306,  V.141),  and  'he departed  and sought  for Mor-
     wen'; in the continuation of GA (p. 252) the year  was 500,  as here.
 17. (Annal  501)  In  AB  2  (following  AB 1)  Hurin and  his companions
     (described simply as 'men'; in Q, IV.132,  as 'a  few outlaws  of the
     woods')  came  to  Nargothrond  in  500  (see  note  16),  whereas in
     this text, after his visit to Brethil, he sets out for Nargothrond in
     501  and comes  there in  502. The  earlier sources  do not  say that
     he  found Morwen  (cf. the  note written  against the  first continu-
     ation  of  GA,  p. 252:  'Some fate  of Morwen  must be  devised. Did
     Morwen  and  Hurin   meet  again?'),   nor  do   they  know   of  his
     attempting to return  to Gondolin  (see the  end of  the continuation
     of GA, pp. 254-5,  where this  is first  referred to,  though without
     mention  of  the  discovery by  Morgoth's spies  of the  region where
     Gondolin lay).                                                       

       The  story  of  Hurin  in   Brethil  was   now  in   existence  and
       probably in its final form (see p. 269). - A first mention  of Obel
       Halad, replacing Ephel  Brandir, is  found in  a note  pencilled on
       the typescript of NE (p. 148, $302).                              
  18.  (Annal 502) In AB 2 Tuor wedded Idri1 in 499 (V. 141); the  date in
       The Tale of Years is (with some hesitation) 502  (pp. 346  ff.). On
       the  bringing  of  the  treasure  of  Nargothrond  to  Doriath  see
       IV.188.                                                           
  19.  Only the following points in the  WH version  need be  noted. After
       the words  (p. 252)  'it suited  the purpose  of Morgoth  that this
       should be so' my  father added  to the  typescript later:  'and the
       needs of his body had been well served to this end'; and  'unless I
       find chance  to avenge  the wrongs  of my  children' (where  GA has
       'the  wrongs of  my son',  p. 253)  was changed  to 'unless  I find
       chance to hear more news of my kin, or to  avenge their  wrongs, if
       I  may.'  Where  the  GA  continuation  has  Asgon and  then Asgorn
       (note 4),  WH has  Asgorn, corrected  to Asgon,  and further  on in
       the narrative Asgon as typed (see note 21). Eastrons of GA  is here
       Easterlings.  On  the  amanuensis  typescript  Hurin's   words  Tol
       acharn were corrected to Tul acharn.                              
 20.   The  passage  recounting  Hurin's  ignorance  of what  had happened
       in Gondolin to his crossing the  Brithiach into  Dimbar was  a good
       deal changed at the time of typing, though for  the most  part this
       was a matter of rearrangement. Here the text as first typed read:
          He knew not the things that had come to  pass there,  since Tuor
       brought thither the  message of  Ulmo, as  is yet  to be  told; and
       now  Turgon,  refusing  the   counsel  of   the  Lord   of  Waters,
       allowed none  to enter  or to  go forth  for any  cause whatsoever,
       hardening his heart against pity and wisdom.                      
       Tuor had reached Gondolin in 495 (GA $299).                       
 21.   Asgon  was  an  emendation  of  the  name  as  typed,  Asgorn. This
       was a regular change, until the form Asgon appears  in the  text as
       typed:  I  print  Asgon  throughout, except  in passages  that were
       rejected before the name was changed.                             
 22.   Here the text as first typed read:                                
          Hurin  came  down  from the  sources of  the Lithir,  which fell
       tumbling  into  Sirion  and  was  held  to be  the south  bounds of
       the  Narrow  Land.  There  Sirion  was  already  too wide  and deep
       to cross, and too perilous for any  but the  young and  hardiest to
       swim;  so  Hurin and  his men  journeyed on,  seeking the  fords of
       the Brithiach.                                                    
       The name Lithir was written against  a river  already shown  on the
       original form of the second map: p. 182, squares C 6 to D 7.      
 23.   At this point there  followed in  the draft  manuscript and  in the
       typescript as first typed: 'and though this seemed  to him  to bode
       evil rather than good, after a time he grew less heedful.'        

  24. The  name  Ragnir  is  found  also  as  that  of  a blind  servant of
      Morwen's  in  Dor-lomin  (Unfinished  Tales  p.  71).  In  a rejected
      phrase  in  the  draft  manuscript  this  companion  of   Asgon's  is
      called 'Ragnir the tracker'.                                        
  25. Asgon  supposed  that  the  Lord  of  Brethil  was still  Brandir the
      Lame.  Cf.  what  is  said  of Brandir's  successor Hardang  a little
      further on: 'he had no love now  at all  for the  House of  Hador, in
      whose blood he had no part.'                                        
  26. On Obel Halad see note 17.                                          
  27. Echoriad:  the   Encircling  Mountains   about  Gondolin.   The  form
      Echoriath in the published Silmarillion derives  from the  later Tale
      of Tuor; but Echoriad here is much later.                           
  28. The  old story  in the  tale of  The Fall  of Gondolin  (II.189) that
      those of the  fugitives from  the sack  of Gondolin  who fled  to the
      Way  of  Escape  were  destroyed  by a  dragon lying  in wait  at its
      outer  issue,  a  story  that  survived  into  Q  (IV.144),  had been
      abandoned,  and  was  excluded  from  The  Silmarillion on  the basis
      of the present passage: see II.213, second footnote, and IV.194.
  29. Cf.  GA  $161  (p.  57),  of  the  escape  of  Hurin  and  Huor  into
      Dimbar  forty-three  years before  this time:  they 'wandered  in the
      hills  beneath  the sheer  walls of  the Crisaegrim.  There Thorondor
      espied  them,  and  sent  two  Eagles  that took  them and  bore them
                                                                         
      up...'                                                              
                                                                         
  30. At this point in the draft manuscript my father wrote:              
        Later  when  captured  and  Maeglin  wished  to  buy   his  release
      with  treachery,   Morgoth  must   answer  laughing,   saying:  Stale
      news  will  buy  nothing.  I  know  this  already,  I  am  not easily
      blinded!  So  Maeglin  was  obliged  to  offer  more  -  to undermine
      resistance in Gondolin.                                             
      Almost  exactly  the  same  note  is  found  on  the slip  giving in-
      formation  about  the  new  meaning  of  the  name Haladin  (p. 270);
      but  here,  after the  words 'undermine  resistance in  Gondolin', my
      father  continued: 'and  to compass  the death  of Tuor  and Earendel
      if he could. If  he did  he would  be allowed  to retain  Idril (said
      Morgoth).'                                                          
        Thus the story in Q was changed (IV.143):                         
        [Meglin]  purchased  his  life  and   freedom  by   revealing  unto
      Morgoth  the  place  of  Gondolin  and  the  ways  whereby  it  might
      be  found  and  assailed.  Great  indeed  was  the joy  of Morgoth...
      Both  the  present  passage  in  WH  (telling  that  Morgoth  learned
      from  Hurin's  wandering  'in  what  region  Turgon dwelt')  and that
      from  Q  were  used  in  the published  Silmarillion (pp.  228, 242),
      'the very place of  Gondolin' for  'the place  of Gondolin'  being an
      editorial addition.                                                 
  31. There  was  a  series  of  alterations  to  the names  of the  men of
      Manthor's   company  near   the  Crossings   of  Taeglin   (and  some

      speeches  were  reassigned   among  the   speakers).  In   the  draft
      manuscript  the  names  were  Sagroth;  Forhend  son  of  Dorlas; and
      his  friend Farang.  In the  typescript as  typed they  were Sagroth;
      Forhend;  and  his friend  Farang son  of Dorlas.  The son  of Dorlas
      is  the  one  who,  plays  an  important  part   in  the   story.  By
      emendation  to  the  typescript  the  statement  that Farang  was the
      friend of  Forhend was  removed, and  - further  on in  the narrative
      -  the  name  Farang  became  Faranc; then,  near the  end of  WH, it
      became  Avranc,  and  this  name   was  substituted   throughout  the
      text  from  his  first  appearance.  I  print  throughout  the  final
      formulation only.                                                   
  32. Sagroth  was  here  emended   to  Galhir,   but  later   Sagroth  was
      reinstated.  Galhir  was  perhaps  intended to  be another  member of
      Manthor's   company,   rather   than  a   replacement  of   the  name
      Sagroth.                                                            
  33. The footnote at this point was typed at  the same  time as  the text.
      The   statement   concerning   Manthor's  domain   in  the   east  of
      Brethil  preceded  that  in  the text  C (p.  267): 'The  region nigh
      Brithiach  and  along   Sirion  for   some  way   was  the   land  of
      Manthor'.  Haldar  was  the  son  of  Haldad,  founder  of  the line,
      and twin brother  of the  Lady Haleth  (p. 221,  $25). With  the last
      sentence cf. the plot-synopsis, p. 256: 'Brandir  the lame  is chosen
      Chieftain,  though  many  would  have  preferred  his   cousins  Hun-
      thor   or   Hardang.'   The   whole   footnote  was   struck  through
      (before the emendation of Harathor to Hardang).                     
  34. The  term  Haladin  is  used here,  in a  sentence that  was rejected
      rather than corrected, in the original sense of the whole  'People of
      Haleth'.                                                            
  35. With the use of the word town cf. p. 148, $302.                    
  36. The word booth  is used  in the  old sense  of 'a  temporary dwelling
      covered with  boughs of  trees or  other slight  materials' (O.E.D.).
      My  father  may  well  have  had  in  mind the  Norse word  bud, used
      in the Sagas especially of the temporary  dwellings at  the Icelandic
      parliament, and regularly rendered 'booth' in translations.         
  37. It is said also in the Narn plot-synopsis, of which  a part  is given
      on pp. 256 - 8, but at an earlier point (the  year 472),  that Haldir
      and  Hundar  were  slain  in the  Nirnaeth, and  that 'three  only of
      their  men  were  left  alive,  but Mablung  of Doriath  healed their
      wounds and brought them back.' See further pp. 236-7.               
  38. The draft manuscript has here:                                      
            'He must be wakeful  tomorrow. It  may be  that better  food is
      needed.  Take  care,  or  maybe  the  guards   will  have   to  stand
      before the Folk also.'                                              
            'What do you mean by that?' said the leader.                  
            'Unriddle it as you will,' said Manthor.                      
  39. 'and  women'  derives  from  the  draft  manuscript. Cf.  the passage

       struck  out  on  p.  279,  concerning  the  summoning  of  wives  to
       counsel according to the customs of Brethil.                        
  40.  Here  and  often  subsequently  Halad  is  an emendation  of Warden;
       see the statement cited on p. 270, where  Halad, plural  Haladin, is
       translated 'warden(s)'. I give Halad in all these  cases and  do not
       record the changes.                                                 
  41.  There seems not to have  been any  specific reference  previously to
       the passing out of common use  of the  old speech  of the  People of
       Haleth  (where  the  draft  manuscript  has 'the  old tongue  of the
       Haladin', and also 'Moot of  the Haladin'),  and its  replacement by
       'the speech of Beleriand'.                                          
  42.  The  draft manuscript  has here  a passage  depending on  the story,
       still in being, of the captivity of Asgorn (Asgon) and his  men (cf.
       the rejected sentence in the typescript, p. 278: Hurin was shut in a
       cave  'nigh  to  the  one  in which  Asgorn and  his men  were still
       imprisoned'):                                                       
            'Let the first prisoners  be brought  before us! '  Then Asgorn
       and   his   companions  were   led  in,   with  their   hands  bound
       behind them.                                                        
            At  that  there  was  much  murmuring;  and  [an  old   man  >]
       Manthor stood  up. 'By  your leave,  Master and  Folk,' he  said. 'I
       would ask: why are these men in bonds?'                             
       There  is  then  a  note:  'Harathor  should  conceal the  fact that
       Asgorn  &c. are still in  durance, and  Manthor should  reveal why.'
       Here the text stops, and begins on a new page with  a draft  for the
       changed story as found in the typescript text.                      
  43.  At this point the name Hardang,  for Harathor,  appears in  the text
       as typed.                                                           
  44.  The draft manuscript  has 'Be  that as  it may  - ',  i.e. Hardang's
       sentence was interrupted by Manthor.                                
  45.  An  addition to  the draft  manuscript says:  'He [Dorlas]  had also
       been  Harathor's  friend, and  a scorner  of Brandir  while Harathor
       desired  to  oust him.'  That Dorlas  had been  a friend  of Hardang
       (Harathor) has been mentioned  earlier, at  the first  appearance of
       Dorlas' son Avranc (p. 275): 'well-liked by  Hardang, as  his father
       had been.'                                                          
  46.  In the story of Dorlas' death in the last part of  the Narn  (NE) as
       told  in  the  manuscript, Brandir  retained his  sword. It  is said
       subsequently in that text that 'Brandir, seeing his death in Turin's
       face,  drew  his  small  sword  and  stood  in  defence';  and Turin
       'lifted  up  Gurthang  and  struck down  Brandir's sword,  and smote
       him  to  death.'  By  changes  made  to  the  much  later amanuensis
       typescript of NE the story was altered to  that given  in Unfinished
       Tales:  Brandir  cast  down his  sword after  the slaying  of Dorlas
       (p. 139), facing Turin 'he stood still and did not quail,  though he
       had  no  weapon  but  his  crutch',  and  the  words   'struck  down

      Brandir's  sword'  were  removed (p.  143). It  seems to  me unlikely
      that  my  father  would  have  made  these  changes,  whereby Turin's
      murder  of  Brandir  becomes  even  worse, in  order to  make Dorlas'
      reputation  seem  more  murky in  the rumours  current in  Brethil: I
      believe  that  he  made  them  precisely  because  he  wished  so  to
      represent Turin in his  encounter with  Brandir -  in which  case, of
      course,  the  changes  to  the  NE typescript  had already  been made
      when   the  present   passage  was   written.  Subsequently   it  was
      bracketed, from 'And dark tales were whispered concerning           
      Dorlas',  presumably  implying  doubt  about  its inclusion;  and the
      matter is not referred to again.                                    
  47. 'hand  and  foot':  an  addition  had  been  made  earlier  (p.  282)
      concerning the further fettering of Hurin on his wrists.            
  48. Galdor  Orchal:  'Galdor the  Tall'. The  'title' has  not previously
      appeared in Elvish form.                                            
  49. With the rejected words 'and good wives' cf. note 39.               
  50. 'I would I had not hindered thy shooting': see p. 278.              
  51. The  story  of  the events  in the  Moot-ring was  told in  the draft
      manuscript (written in  ink over  a pencilled  text) in  fairly close
      accord with the final form to the point where Hurin cries out on
      Harathor (as is still the name):  'Only hands,  hands, are  needed to
      wring such a throat full of lies'. Then follows:                    
         With that, in a fury, Hurin sprang off the Stone and made for
         Harathor.  But  Harathor fled  before him,  calling on  his house-
      hold  men  to  gather  round  him;  and  at   the  gate   he  turned,
      crying: 'It is a  lie that  he speaks,  Men of  Brethil. He  raves as
      ever. I knew naught of this till now!'  In this  he spoke  the truth;
      but too late. In their wrath few of the assembly believed him.      
      (In the original pencilled text  Harathor said  more in  his defence,
      using the argument given in the final form to Manthor (pp.          
      294-5): 'None of the Folk go  ever to  that stone,  for the  place is
      accursed.  Not  till  now  have I  or any  man or  woman of  the Folk
      heard  tale  of  her  coming  to the  stone.') At  this point  in the
      superimposed  text  in  ink  my  father stopped,  and wrote:  'Do not
      allow Harathor to defend himself.  He flies  in fear  - and  so seems
      to most of the Folk to acknowledge his guilt.'                      
         From  here  onwards  the  draft  manuscript  becomes  chaotic. The
      pencilled text, in part illegible,  continues, interspersed  here and
      there with later passages written in ink,  to the  end of  the story,
      but  the 'layers'  are so  confused that  a coherent  development can
      scarcely be deduced. It seems, however, that at this stage  the story
      of  the  siege  and burning  of the  Hall of  the Chieftains  had not
      entered. The rout of Harathor and his supporters from the           
      Moot-ring  seems  to  have  been  followed   at  once   by  Manthor's
      reproaches to Hurin - a defence of the conduct of the Men of        
      Brethil  towards  Turin,  and  a  denial that  Harathor could  have .

 known  anything  of  the  coming  of  Morwen,  which  in  turn  leads  at
 once  to  the  expedition  to   Cabed  Naeramarth   and  the   burial  of
 Morwen.  In  his  words  to   Hurin  Manthor   declares  himself   to  be
 now  'the  last  of the  Haladin', but  there seems  to be  no indication
 of the fate of Harathor. See further note 53.                           
        A new draft text, very roughly written but  coherent, takes  up at
 the  opening  of  Hurin's  speech  to  the  assembly  (p. 290):  this was
 the text from which the final form was closely derived.                 
52.   In NE (Unfinished Tales p.  136) it  was 'five  leagues at  the least'
 from  Ephel  Brandir  to  Nen  Girith;  in  an  earlier  draft   of  that
 passage   it   was  seven   leagues  (commentary   on  GA   $$329-32,  p.
 158).                                                                   
53.   The end  of the  original draft  manuscript (see  note 51)  is partly
 illegible,  but  after  the  burial of  Morwen 'they  return and  see red
 fire.  The  Obel  is burning  as the  rebels assault  the... But  as they
 make  their   way  an   arrow  comes   out  of   the  wood   and  Manthor
 falls.' This  suggests that  the burning  of the  Hall of  the Chieftains
 originally  followed   the  burial   of  Morwen,   and  that   when  that
 burning  became  a  central  event  in  the  story  the  red glow  in the
 sky  seen  from  Nen  Girith  was  retained  as  the  sign  of  a further
 eruption  of  rioting  on  the following  day. This  is supported  by the
 conclusion  of  the  second  draft  manuscript,  given  in  note  54  (at
 end); but the matter is very uncertain.                                 
54.   The end  of the  original draft  manuscript (see  notes 51,  53) after
 the  death  of  Manthor,  pencilled  over  by  my   father  to   make  it
 clearer  but  with  a  gap  where  there  is  a word,  or words,  that he
 could not interpret, reads thus: ?                                     
        A few men fearing the end of Brethil and desiring to  flee further
 from  Morgoth  -  having  no  homes  or   lands  of   their  own   -  are
 willing  to  go  with  Hurin.  They  depart  -  and  fall  in  [sic]  But
 now   Hurin   seems   to  pick   up  strength   and  youth   -  vengeance
 seems   to   have   heartened   him,   and   he   [   ]  and   walks  now
 strongly.  They  pass  into  the  woods  and  gather  the  last fugitives
 of the wood-men (the kin of the folk of Brethil).                       
          Asgorn they choose  for captain,  but he  treats Hurin  as lord,
 and   does   as   he   will[s].   Whither   shall   we   go?   They  must
 [? know] a place of refuge. They go towards Nargothrond.                
                                                                        
      Another, isolated page gives this version of the end:              
                                                                        
 For  a  while  he  stood  there  grim  and  silent.  But  Manthor  looked
 back  and  saw  red  light  far  away.  'I  must  return,'  he  said. The
 party begins to go back wearily towards Obel Halad.                     
   An  arrow  slays  Manthor.  -  The  voice  of  Faranc  [see   note  31]
 cries:  'Third time  thriven. At  least you  shall not  sit in  the Chair
 you coveted.' They give chase but he escapes in the dark.               

    The Moot   Ring   has   been   'unhallowed'.   The   confederation
  breaks  up.  Men  go  each  to  their  own  homesteads.  Hurin  must
  depart.  He  gathers  a  few  men  who  despair  now   of  defending
  Brethil  from  the  growing strength  of Morgoth  [and] wish  to fly
  south. At  the Taiglin  crossing they  fall in  with Asgon,  who has
  heard  rumour  of  the  wild  deeds  in  Brethil,  and   of  Hurin's
  coming,  and  are  now  venturing back  into the  land to  seek him.
  Asgon   greets  him   -  and   is  glad   that  Harathor   has  been
  punished.  Angered  that  no  one  had told  Hurin of  their coming.
  They   go   on   and   gather   fugitive   'wood-men'.   They  elect
  Asgon  captain  but  he  ever  defers  to  Hurin.  Whither   to  go?
  Hurin elects to go to Nargothrond. Why?                             
  The references to 'wood-men' ('kin of the folk of Brethil') in these
  passages  are  no  doubt  to  the  men  who  dwelt  in  the woodland
  south  of  the  Taeglin,  described  in  the  Narn  (Unfinished Tales
  p. 85, and thereafter called 'the Woodmen'):                        
    There  before  the  Nirnaeth  many  Men  had  dwelt  in  scattered
  homesteads;  they  were  of  Haleth's  folk for  the most  part, but
  owned   no   lord,   and  they   lived  both   by  hunting   and  by
  husbandry,  keeping  swine  in  the  mast-lands, and  tilling clear-
  ings  in  the  forest  which  were  fenced from  the wild.  But most
  were  now  destroyed,  or  had  fled  into  Brethil,  and  all  that
  region lay under the fear of Orcs, and of outlaws.                  
  These   hasty   sketches  of   Hurin's  immediate   movements  after
  leaving  Brethil  agree  with  what  is  said  in  the plot-synopsis
  (p.  258):  'Hurin  finds  Asgon  again  and  gathers other  men and
  goes  towards  Nargothrond'.  The  question  'Why?' of  his decision
  to go there  reappears from  the final  addition to  the end  of the
  Grey  Annals  (p.  255),  which  probably did  not long  precede the
  writing of The Wanderings of Hurin.                                 
    The second draft  manuscript (see  note 51,  at end)  continues on
  from the point where the typescript  text ends,  though with  a line
  drawn  across  the  page  beneath  the  words  'he  went  down alone
  towards the Haud-en-Elleth'. I give this partly illegible conclusion
  from the death of Manthor.                                          
                                                                     
    ...  and  plucked  out  the  arrow, and  gave a  great cry,  and lay
    still.                                                            
      Then  they  wept,  and  they  took  him up,  and prepared  to bear
    him  back,  and  they  took  no  more  heed of  Hurin. But  he stood
    silent,  and  turned  soon  away;  the  sun   was  gone   down  into
    cloud  and  the light  failed, and  he went  down alone  towards the
    Haud-en-Elleth.                                                   
      [Thus befell the ruin of Brethil.  For >]  Now it  is said  that I
    those  who  ...  with  Hardang  were  not  all  caught,  and  others

 came in hearing the  news, and  there was  fighting in  the Obel,
 and a great burning, until all was well nigh destroyed  [see note
 53].  But when  the madness  [written above:  wrath] of  men had
 cooled  they  made  peace,  and some  said: 'What  hath bewitched
 us?  Surely Hurin  begot all  this evil,  and Hardang  and Avranc
 were more  wise. They  would have  kept him  out if  they could.'
 So they chose Avranc to be their chief, since  none of  the House
 of Haleth were left, but [??  he wielded  no] such  authority and
 reverence as the Chieftains before, and the Folk of  Brethil fell
 back again to be  more like  their kinsmen  in the  [?open] woods
 - each minding his own houselands  and little  ... and  their ...
 was loosened.                                                   
   But  some   misliked  this  and  would  not serve  under Avranc
 and made ready to depart, and they joined Hurin.                

55.  The following brief writing on the subject  of Manthor  is another
  'discussion' like the text 'C' (pp.  266-7) and  no doubt  belongs to
  much  the  same  time.  Here  as there  the name  is Harathor,  but I
  suggested  (p.  269)  that  he  must  have  been  on  the   point  of
  receiving  a  new  name,  and  on  the  same  page  as   the  present
  passage appear the workings leading to the name Hardang.             
    The  page  begins  with a  draft for  the last  words of  Hurin and
  Manthor at  Nen Girith,  closely similar  to the  ending both  in the
  second draft manuscript (on which  see note  51, at  end) and  in the
  final typescript (pp.  296-7). I  believe that  the present  form was
  the first, and that my father set it down experimentally, as it were,
  and then proceeded to explain and  justify it,  as follows  (the many
  contractions of words and names are expanded):                       

  I think it  would be  good to  make Manthor  a less  merely 'good'
  character. For so his  extremely zealous  and cunning  espousal of
  Hurin's  cause  would  better  be  explained.  Certainly he  has a
  great  natural concern  for 'courtesy'  - sc.  civilized behaviour
  and  mercy,  and  he  would have  been angry  at the  treatment of
  Hurin  whoever  he  was.  But  (a)  he  was  proud of  his kinship
  with  the  House of  Hador; (b)  he had  desired the  Wardenship -
  and  many had  wanted to  elect him.  He was  of the  senior line,
  but by  a daughter  (Hiril). But  though so  far descent  had been
  by eldest son, it had  been laid  down by  Haleth (and  Haldar her
  brother)  that  daughters  and  their   descendants  were   to  be
  eligible  for  election.  The   descendants  of   Hundar:  Hundad,
  Harathor had not been men of mark or gallantry.                   
    So  plainly  Manthor  was  also  using  the  coming of  Hurin to
  further his  ambition -  or rather,  the shadow  of Hurin  fell on
  him,  and  awoke  the  ambition  (dormant).  Note:  Manthor never
  raises the matter of Hurin's errand, or (as was fairly plain) that
  Hurin  came  with  ill-will,  especially  towards  the  rulers  of
  Brethil and the 'anti-Turin' party.                               

     Mention should be made in the tale of Turin (dwelling in
   Brethil and death) - a propos of Hunthor? - of Manthor and
   the friendship of his branch for Turin and reverence for the
   House of Hador.
     There was some ill-feeling between the branches: on the one
   side akin to the House of Hador (via Gloredel and via Hareth
   and Hiril) and [on the other] the line of Hundar.
 This enlarges and defines some of the things said in the last
 paragraph of the discussion in the text 'C' (p. 267), where the
 friendship for Turin among the descendants of Hiril, and pride in
 their kinship with the House of Hador, were referred to, and the
 idea that Manthor 'desired the Wardenship' referred to as a
 possibility.
                                                                   
   An isolated slip, headed Names, has the following notes:         
   The Haladin name of people directly descended from Haldar        
   Haleth's brother (by male or female line), a family or           
   'nothlir' from which the Chieftains or Halbars of Brethil        
   were chosen by the Folk.                                         
   For halad sg. 'chieftain'..... halbar.                           
   The Chieftain after Brandir was Hardang.                         
   His evil-counsellor friend to be Daruin.                         
   Dorlas > Darlas                                                  
   Dar = mastery, lordship                                          
   bor = stone. The Stone in the Ring was the halabor. The Stand-
   ing Stone was the Talbor.                                        
                                                                   
 The word halbar 'chieftain', to be  substituted for  halad, appears
 in  a  note  pencilled on  the genealogical  table of  the Haladin,
 where  also  the  name  Haldar  was  apparently altered  to Halbar:
 see p.  238. The  name Talbor  of the  Standing Stone  appears also
 in an addition to the Narn plot-synopsis (p. 257), but the stone in
 the  Moot-ring  is  named  Angbor 'Doom-rock'  in additions  to the
 typescript text of WH  (see p.  283). These  new names,  and Darlas
 for Dorlas, Daruin for Avranc,  must represent  a further  group of
 substitutions subsequent to the final  text of  WH, although  it is
 odd in that case that Hardang should be included.                  
   Following these  notes on  the same  slip of  paper are  notes on
 the name Taeglin;  these were  struck out,  but virtually  the same
 notes in more finished form are found on another slip:             
   Taeglin(d) better Taeglind                                       
  * taika  (V taya mark,  line,  limit  >  tayak)  maere,  boundary,
 limit,                        boundary                        line.
 linde  'singer  /  singing',  name  (or element  in names)  of many
 rivers   of   quick   course   that   make   a    rippling   sound.
 mure is an Old English word of the  same meaning.  - It  seems that

 the form chosen for the published Silmarillion should have been        
 Taeglin rather than Teiglin (see p. 228, $28).                         
56.   Some interesting remarks of my father's concerning The Wander-      
 ings of Hurin are found on the back of one of the slips on which       
 Professor Clyde Kilby wrote comments and criticisms of the             
 work:                                                                  
   The criticisms seem to me largely mistaken - no doubt because        
 this is a fragment of a great saga, e.g. Thingol and Melian are        
 mentioned as objects of Morgoth's malice, because Hurin's              
 next exploit will be to bring ruin to Doriath. The outlaws are         
 not a 'device', but already accounted for - and play a part in         
 the story of Turin when he came to Dor Lomin. Hurin does               
 pick them up again and they are the nucleus of the force with          
 which he goes to Nargothrond and slays Mim and seizes the              
 gold of the dragon.                                                    
       As for 'too little action,' 'too much speech', I have re-read
 this quite impersonally after many years when I had practically        
 forgotten it - the speeches are bitter and pungent and in .            
 themselves exciting. I thought the whole business from the             
 entry of Hurin not only moving but very exciting.                      
 The reference to Thingol and Melian arose from Professor Kilby's       
 taking exception to their only being mentioned in one place            
 (p. 259). The response that his remarks (written, I believe, in        
 1966) elicited is particularly interesting in that they show that the
 story of Hurin's seizing the treasure of Nargothrond was still         
 fully in being, although my father never even approached it again.     
 Very striking is his phrase, 'Hurin's next exploit will be to bring
 ruin to Doriath'.                                                      
57.   On the amanuensis typescript my father pencilled, beneath The       
 Wanderings of Hurin: 'I The Shadow Falls on Brethil'. At the           
 beginning of his discussion of the story in text C (p. 266) he said
 of Asgorn and his men that 'their coming to Brethil is needed to       
 "cast the shadow" by arousing fear and hatred in the heart of          
 Harathor.' It may be therefore that the subheading The Shadow          
 Falls on Brethil was intended to refer only to the first part of the
 story of Hurin in Brethil. On the other hand, he introduced no .       
 other sub-headings into the body of the text, and it seems equally     
 possible that he meant this as the title of the whole story, 'II' to be
 the next stage of Hurin's 'wanderings', Hurin in Nargothrond.          

                                      II.                                   
                            AELFWINE AND DIRHAVAL.                          
                                                                           
 In Unfinished  Tales  (p.  146)  I referred  to the  existence of  an 'intro-
 ductory note' to the  Narn i  Chin Hurin,  found in  different forms,  and I
 gave  a  very  condensed  and  selective  account  of  the content.  The two
 versions are in  fact more  distinct than  this suggests,  and here  I print
 them  both  in  full.  One  of  them  is  a  clear  manuscript  written with
 almost no hesitations or alterations (whether at  the time  or-later): this,
 which I will call 'A', clearly preceded the other, and I give it  first. The
 numbered notes will be found on p. 315.                                    
                                                                           
                               Turin Turumarth.(1)                          
                                                                           
 Here begins that tale which AElfwine made from  the Hurinien:            
 which is the longest of all the lays of  Beleriand now  held in            
 memory  in  Eressea.  But it  is said  there that,  though made            
 in  Elvish  speech and  using much  Elvish lore  (especially of            
 Doriath), this lay was the  work of  a Mannish  poet, Dirhavel,            
 who  lived  at the  Havens in  the days  of Earendel  and there            
 gathered all the tidings and lore that he could of the House of            
 Hador,  whether  among  Men  or  Elves, remnants  and fugitives            
 of  Dorlomin,  of  Nargothrond,  or  of  Doriath.  From Mablung            
 he learned  much; and  by fortune  also he  found a  man named          
 Andvir, and he was very  old, but  was the  son of  that Androg          
 who was in  the outlaw-band  of Turin,  and alone  survived the          
 battle  on  the  summit of  Amon Rudh.(2) Otherwise all that time          
 between  the flight  of Turin  from Doriath  and his  coming to          
 Nargothrond,  and  Turin's  deeds in  those days,  would have          
 remained  hidden, save  the little  that was  remembered among          
 the people of Nargothrond concerning  such matters  as Gwindor          
 or Turin ever revealed. In this way  also the  matter of  Mim and          
 his later dealings with Hurin were made clear.  This lay  was all          
 that  Dirhavel  ever made,  but it  was prized  by the  Elves and          
 remembered by them. Dirhavel they say perished  in the  last raid          
 of the sons of Feanor upon  the Havens.  His lay  was composed          
 in that mode of verse which was called Minlamad thent / estent.(3)       
 Though  this  verse  was  not  wholly unlike  the verse  known to          
 AElfwine, he translated the lay into prose (including in it, or          

 adding  in  the  margins  as  seemed  fit  to  him,  matter  from the
 Elvish  commentaries  that  he  had heard  or seen);  for he  was not
 himself  skilled  in  the making  of verse,  and the  transference of
 this  long  tale  from  Elvish  into  English  was  difficult enough.
 Indeed  even  as  it  was  made,  with the  help of  the Elves  as it
 would  seem  from  his  notes  and additions,  in places  his account
 is obscure.                                                          
   This  version  into  'modern'  English,  that  is forms  of English
 intelligible to living  users of  the English  tongue (who  have some
 knowledge  of  letters,  and  are  not  limited  to  the  language of
 daily  use  from  mouth  to mouth)  does not  attempt to  imitate the
 idiom  of  AElfwine,  nor  that  of  the  Elvish  which  often  shows
 through especially in the  dialogue. But  since it  is even  to Elves
 now  'a  tale  of  long ago',  and depicts  high and  ancient persons
 and  their  speech  (such  as  Thingol  and  Melian),  there   is  in
 AElfwine's  version,  and  clearly  was   in  Dirhavel's   day,  much
 archaic  language,  of  words  and  usage, and  the older  and nobler
 Elves do not speak in the same  style as  Men, or  in quite  the same
 language  as that  of the  main narrative;  there are  therefore here
 retained similar elements. It is for this  reason that,  for example,
 Thingol's  speech  is not  that of  our present  day: for  indeed the
 speech  of  Doriath,  whether  of  the  king or  others, was  even in
 the  days  of  Turin  more  antique  than  that  used  elsewhere. One
 thing  (as  Mim  observed)   of  which   Turin  never   rid  himself,
 despite  his  grievance  against  Doriath,  was  the  speech  he  had
 acquired  during  his  fostering.  Though  a  Man,  he spoke  like an
 Elf  of  the  Hidden Kingdom,(4) which  is  as  though  a  Man  should
 now   appear,    whose   speech    and   schooling    until   manhood
 had  been   that  of   some  secluded   country  where   the  English
 had  remained  nearer  that  of  the  court  of  Elizabeth I  than of
 Elizabeth II.                                                        
                                                                     
   The second text ('B') is very much briefer, and was composed on the
 typewriter which my father used for  several of  the Narn  texts, and
 other writings such  as the  chapter Of  the Coming  of Men  into the
 West.                                                                
                                                                     
 Many songs are yet sung and many tales are yet told by the           
 Elves in the Lonely  Isle of  the Nirnaeth  Arnoediad, the  Battle of
 Unnumbered Tears, in which Fingon fell and the flower of the         
 Eldar withered. But here I  will tell  as I  may a  Tale of  Men that
 Dirhaval (5) of the  Havens  made in  the days  of Earendel  long ago.

 Narn  i  Chin  Hurin  he  called  it,  the Tale * of  the Children of
 Hurin,  which  is  the  longest  of  all  the  lays  that  are  now remem-
 bered in Eressea, though it was made by a man.                            
   For  such  was  Dirhaval.  He  came  of  the  House  of  Hador,   it  is
 said,  and  the  glory  and  sorrow  of  that  House  was  nearest  to his
 heart.  Dwelling  at  the  Havens  of  Sirion, he  gathered there  all the
 tidings  and  lore  that  he  could;  for  in the  last days  of Beleriand
 chere  came  thither  remnants  out  of  all   the  countries,   both  Men
 and    Elves:    from    Hithlum    and   Dor-lomin,    from   Nargothrond
 and   Doriath,   from   Gondolin   and   the   realms   of  the   Sons  of
 Feanor in the east.                                                       
   This  lay  was  all  that  Dirhaval  ever  made,  but  it was  prized by
 the  Eldar,  for  Dirhaval  used  the  Grey-elven  tongue,  in   which  he
 had  great  skill.  He   used  that   mode  of   Elvish  verse   which  is
 called  [long  space  left  in  typescript]  which  was  of old  proper to
 the  narn;  but  though  this  verse  mode  is  not  unlike  the  verse of
 the  English,  I  have  rendered  it  in  prose,  judging  my   skill  too
 small  to  be  at  once   scop  and walhstod.(6) Even   so  my   task  has
 been  hard  enough,  and  without  the  help  of   the  Elves   could  not
 have  been  completed.  I  have   not  added   to  Dirhaval's   tale,  nor
 omitted  from  it  anything  that  he  told;  neither  have I  changed the
 order  of  his  history.  But  on  matters  that  seemed  of  interest, or
 that  were  become  dark   with  the   passing  of   the  years,   I  have
 made   notes,   whether   within   the   tale   or   upon   its   margins,
 according to such lore as I found in Eressea.                             
                                                                          
 That A preceded B, at whatever interval (but I  do not  think that  it was
 long),  is  seen,  among  other considerations,  from the  use of  the old
 name 'the Hurinien' in  the opening  sentence of  A (whereas  in B  it is
 called  Narn i  Chin Hurin).  This name  had appeared  years before  in QS
 Chapter  17,  Of Turin  Turamarth or  Turin the  Hapless: 'that  lay which
 is called iChurinien, the Children of Hurin, and is the longest of all the
 lays  that  speak  of those  days' (V.317).  (For Hurinien  beside iChuri-
 nien, and my reason  for substituting  Hin for  Chin in  Unfinished Tales,
 see V.322.)                                                               
   It is possible to state with certainty at what period these  pieces were
 written.  I said  in Unfinished  Tales (p.  150): 'From  the point  in the
 story  where  Turin  and  his  men established  themselves in  the ancient
 dwelling  of  the  Petty-dwarves  on  Amon  Rudh  there  is  no  completed
 narrative on the same  detailed plan  [as in  the preceding  parts], until
 the Narn takes up  again with  Turin's journey  northwards after  the fall
                                                                          
  (* [ footnote to the text] narn among the Elves signifies a tale  that is
 told in verse to be spoken and not sung.)                                 

  of  Nargothrond':  from  the  existing  materials  I  formed  a  brief narrative
  in  The  Silmarillion,  Chapter  21,  and  gave  some  further   citations  from
  the  texts  in  Unfinished  Tales,  pp.  150  -  4.  Now the  story of  Turin and
  Beleg   in   Mim's   hidden   dwelling   on  Amon   Rudh  and   the  short-lived
  'Land  of  Bow  and  Helm',  Dor-Cuarthol,  belongs  (like   all  the   rest  of
  the  huge  extension of  this part  of the  'Turins Saga')  to the  period after
  the  publication  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings; and  the mention  in text  A of
  the  man  Andvir,  'the  son  of  that  Androg  who   was  in   the  outlaw-band
  of  Turin,  and  alone  survived  the  battle  on  the  summit  of   Amon  Rudh'
  (see  note  2) shows  that this  story was  fully in  being (so  far as  it ever
  went)  when  A   was  written   -  indeed   it  seems   likely  enough   that  A
  belongs to the time when my father was working on it.                           
    It  is  therefore  very  notable  that  at  this relatively  late date  he was
  propounding  such   a  view   of  the   'transmission'  of   the  Narn   i  Chin
  Hurin  (in  contrast  to  the  statement  cited  in   X.373,  that   'the  three
  Great   Tales   must   be   Numenorean,  and   derived  from   matter  preserved
  in  Gondor':  the  second  of  the  'Great   Tales'  being   the  Narn   i  Chin
  Hurin).  Striking  also  is  the  information  (in both  texts) that  the verse-
  form   of   Dirhaval's  lay   bore  some   likeness  to   the  verse   known  to
  AElfwine   (meaning  of   course  the   Anglo-Saxon  alliterative   verse),  but
  that  because  AElfwine  was  no  scop  (see  note  6)  he  translated  it  into
  (Anglo-Saxon)  prose.  I  do  not  know  of  any  other  statement   bearing  on
  this.  It  is  tempting  to  suspect  some  sort  of  oblique reference  here to
  my  father's  abandoned  alliterative  Lay  of  the  Children  of  Hurin  of the
  1920s, but this may he delusory.                                                
                                                                                 
    The   second   version   B,   in   which   the   introductory    note   becomes
  a  preface  by  AElfwine  himself,  rather  than  an  'editorial'  recounting  of
  what  AElfwine  did,  was  clipped  to  and  clearly  belonged  with   a  twelve-
  page typescript composed ab initio by my father and bearing the title           
  'Here  begins  the  tale  of  the  Children   of  Hurin,   Narn  i   Chin  Hurin,
  which  Dirhaval  wrought.'   This  text   provides  the   opening  of   the  Narn
  in  Unfinished  Tales  (pp.  57-8),  and  continues  into  the  story   of  Hurin
  and   Huor  in   Gondolin  (omitted   in  Unfinished   Tales)  which   was  based
  very  closely  indeed  on  the  version  in  the  Grey  Annals  and  is described
  on  pp.  169  -  70  (then follows  the story  of Turin's  sister Lalaeth  and of
  his friendship with Sador Labadal, ending with the riding away of               
  Hurin to the Battle of Unnumbered Tears, which is given in Unfinished           
  Tales pp. 58 - 65). It is very difficult to interpret, in the story of  the visit
  to  Gondolin,  the  close  similarity  or  (often)  actual  identity  of  wording
  in  Dirhaval's  lay  with that  of the  version in  the Grey  Annals. The  same '
  question  arises,  despite a  central difference  in the  narrative, in  the case
  of the Narn version of the Battle of Unnumbered Tears and that in the           
  Annals  (see  pp.  165 ff.).  The Narn  text is  not linked,  as is  the Gondolin
  story,  to  the  name  of  Dirhaval;  but  it is  a curious  fact that  it begins
  (p.  165)  'Many  songs  are  yet  sung,  and  many  tales  are  yet told  by the

  Elves  of the  Nirnaeth Arnoediad,  the Battle  of Unnumbered  Tears, in
  which Fingon fell and the flower  of the  Eldar withered  - for  this is
  identical to the opening of AElfwine's preface (text B, p. 312), except
  that the latter has 'are yet told by the Elves in the Lonely Isle'.     

                             NOTES.                                      
                                                                        
  1. In  the  old  Tale  of  Turambar  the  Gnomish  form of  Turambar was
     Turumart,  and  in  Q  Turumarth,  where  however  it was  changed to
     Turamarth,  as  it  was  also  in  QS  (V.321).  Turumarth  here must
     represent a reversion to the original form.                         
  2. Andvir son of  Androg appears  nowhere else.  It is  expressly stated
     in a plot-outline of this part of the  Narn that  Androg died  in the
     battle on  the summit  of Amon  Rudh (see  Unfinished Tales  p. 154).
     The wording here is plain, and can hardly  be taken  to mean  that it
     was   Andvir   (also  a   member  of   the  outlaw-band)   who  alone
     survived.                                                           
  3. The name of the verse  is clearly  Minlamad thent / estent: Minlamed
     in Unfinished Tales p. 146 is erroneous.                            
  4. Cf. the 'linguistic excursus' in the Grey Annals, p. 26,  where there
                                                                        
     is a  reference to  the speech  of the  Grey-elves becoming  the com-
     mon  tongue  of  Beleriand and  being affected  by words  and devices
     drawn  from  Noldorin  -   'save  in   Doriath  where   the  language
     remained purer and less changed by time'.                           
                                                                        
  5. The name is perfectly clearly Dirhavel  in A,  but is  typed Dirhaval
     in B, which being the later  should have  been adopted  in Unfinished
     Tales.                                                              
  6. Against  scop  my  father  noted:  'O.English  =  poet',  and against
     walhstod  'O.English  =  interpreter'  (on  the  carbon  copy 'inter-
     preter / translator').                                              

                                     III.                                  
                                   MAEGLIN.                                
                                                                          
 The  tale  of Isfin  and Eol  and their  son Meglin  (in the  earliest form
 of  his  name)  had  long roots,  and I  have set  out its  earlier history
 in  concise  form  on  pp.  121  -  2, $$117-20.  As the  text of  the Grey
 Annals  was  first written  the form  of the  story in  AB 2  was repeated:
 Isfin left  Gondolin in  the year  before the  Battle of  Unnumbered Tears,
 and  twenty-one  years  later  Meglin  was  sent  alone  to   Gondolin  (GA
 original annals 471 and 492, pp. 47, 84). It was at that stage that  a full
 tale of Meglin and how he came to Gondolin was first written.             
   This was  a clear  manuscript of  12 sides,  fairly heavily  emended both
 at the time of writing and later; it belongs in  style very  evidently with
 the  Annals  of Aman,  the Grey  Annals, the  later Tale  of Tuor,  and the
 text  which I  have called  the End  of the  Narn ('NE',  see p.  145), and
 can be firmly dated to the same time (1951). It  was on  the basis  of this
 work  that  revised  annals  concerning  the  story  were  introduced  into
 GA (years 316, 320, and  400, pp.  47 -  8), as  noticed earlier  (p. 123);
 these   were  written   on  a   page  from   an  engagement   calendar  for
 November 1951 (p. 47).                                                    
   An  amanuensis  typescript  with   carbon  copy   was  made   many  years
 later, as  appears from  the fact  that it  was typed  on my  father's last
 typewriter.  This typescript  took up  almost all  of the  emendations made
 to the  manuscript. For  the present  purpose I  shall call  the manuscript
 of 1951 'A'  and the  late typescript  'B', distinguishing  where necessary
 the top copy as 'B(i)' and the carbon as 'B(ii)'.                         
   The  B  text  was  corrected  and  annotated  in  ball-point pen,  and so
 also  was  the  carbon  copy  -  but  not  in the  same ways;  the original
 manuscript  A   also  received   some  late   emendations,  which   do  not
 appear  in  B  as  typed.  Moreover,  a  great  deal  of  late  writing  in
 manuscript  from  the  same  time  was  inserted  into  B(i),   with  other
 similar  material,  overlapping in  content, found  elsewhere; for  this my
 father  used  scrap  paper  supplied  to him  by Allen  and Unwin,  and two
 of these sheets  are publication  notes issued  on 19  January 1970  - thus
 this material is very late indeed, and it is of outstanding difficulty.
   Although  the  typescript  B  was  also  very late,  as evidenced  by the
 typewriter  used,  details  of  names  show  that  the  manuscript   A  had
 actually  reached  many years  earlier the  form from  which it  was typed;
 it seems very probable that my father had it  typed in  order to  provide a
 copy  on  which  substantial  further  change   and  annotation   could  be
 carried  out  c.1970.  Only  those  few  changes  to  A made  in ball-point

 pen and not taken up into B belong  to the  final period  of work  on the
 story.                                                                   
                                                                         
   To set out in detail the evolution of  all this  material would  take a
 very great deal of space, and for much of its  length involve  the simple
 repetition of Chapter  16 Of  Maeglin in  the published  Silmarillion. In
 this case, therefore, I shall use that chapter as the text for reference,
 and concentrate chiefly on  the very  late work,  which has  many notable
 features that of their nature could have no place in the  published book.
 I shall  refer in  this account  to the  paragraphs in  The Silmarillion,
 numbering  them  for convenience  of internal  reference, and  giving the
 opening words  of each  for ease  of identification.  It should  be noted
 here that the Silmarillion text takes  up emendations  from both  the top
 copy  (B(i))  and carbon  (B(ii)) of  the typescript,  and that  in cases
 (which  are  numerous)  where they  differ in  the rewriting  of original
 passages the published text is often an amalgam of both.                 
                                                                         
 The Title.                                                               
 The manuscript A as written had no  title; later  my father  pencilled on
 it Of Meglin, changing this  to Of  Isfin and  Glindur. The  typescript B
 has the  title (as  typed) Of  Maeglin, with  the subtitle  Sister-son of
 Turgon,  King  of Gondolin.  At the  head of  the first  page of  B(i) my
 father  wrote that  the text  is 'An  enlarged version  of the  coming of
 Maeglin to Gondolin, to be inserted in FG in its  place', and  noted also
 that  'FG  =  Fall  of Gondolin'.  This can  only be  a reference  to the
 abandoned  Tale  of  Tuor  (entitled Of  Tuor and  the Fall  of Gondolin,
 but  retitled  Of  Tuor  and  his  Coming  to  Gondolin for  inclusion in
 Unfinished Tales), which  belongs to  the same  period as  the manuscript
 A. Thus at this very late date my father was still holding to the hope of
 an entirely rewritten story of the Fall of Gondolin,  of which  so little
 had  actually  been  done  (and  those parts  some twenty  years before).
 The only evidence that he  at any  time considered  the story  of Maeglin
 as  a  possible  component  in  the  Quenta  Silmarillion  is   the  word
 Silmarillion with  a query  pencilled against  the opening  paragraphs of
 the manuscript; and this was struck out.                                 
                                                                         
 $1. Aredhel Ar-Feiniel, the White Lady of the Noldor...                   
   Here, and  throughout B(i),  Isfin was  changed to  Arehel; and  in the
 margin against the first occurrence my father wrote:                     
   This name is derived from the oldest (1916)  version of  FG. It  is now
 quite  unacceptable  in form,  unsuitable to  the position  and character
 of Turgon's sister, and also meaningless.                                
 Presumably he  meant that  since no  etymology of  Isfin was  feasible it
 was on that account unsuitable  to be  the name  of Turgon's  sister (cf.
 II.344,  where  the  original  explanation  of  the name  as 'snow-locks'
 or 'exceeding-cunning' is given, and  the present  note is  referred to).
 Also written in the margin is '? Rodwen = High Virgin Noble' and

 'Rodwen Los in Golodh..' (last  letters illegible;  the word  'Virgin' is
 also not perfectly clear).                                               
   At the top of the first page of the carbon B(ii) the notes on  the name
 are  different.  Here  my  father  wrote:  'Name  Isfin  must  be changed
 throughout  to  Feiniel  (=  White Lady)'.  Against this  he wrote  an X,
 and 'Change Isfin to  Aredhel (Noble-elf)'.  Whereas in  B(i), as  I have
 noted,  Isfin  was  changed  to  Aredel  throughout,  in B(ii)  Isfin was
 merely circled, except in  two cases  where it  was replaced  by Feiniel,
 and  in  one  case where  it was  replaced by  Ar-Feiniel. My  father was
 correcting the  top copy  and the  carbon independently  but at  (more or
 less) the same time, very probably because he  had the  one in  one place
 and  the  other  in  another.  In the  published Silmarillion  I combined
 them as Aredhel Ar-Feiniel, although there is no  warrant for  this; they
 were  evidently  competing  names,  and  the  notes  at  the head  of the
 carbon  copy  cited  above  suggest  that Aredel (Aredhel) was  his final
 choice.                                                                  
   The  name  Nivrost  was changed  on both  copies of  B to  Nevrost (not
 Nevrast, the usual later form).                                          
   In the manuscript A it was said of Isfin that she  longed to  'hunt' in
 the forests, emended to 'walk'  and thus  appearing in  B. With  this cf.
 the rider inserted into the passage in QS concerning  the princes  of the
 Noldor, where it is told that  in Valinor  Isfin 'loved  much to  ride on
 horse and to hunt in the forests, and there was often  in the  company of
 her  kinsmen, the  sons of  Feanor'. Subsequently  Isfin in  this passage
 was  changed to  frith (see  X.177, 182);  this name  is found  in Quendi
 and Eldar (see p. 409 and note 34).                                      
   The  published  text  uses 'you'  forms throughout.  In A  'thou' forms
 were  used  throughout,  but  in  the  passage ($5)  in which  the march-
 wardens of Doriath address  Isfin the  'thou' forms  were altered  to the
 'polite' plural. Noldor was changed to Noldor throughout B(i).           
   In A, the text begins with the date 316.                               
                                                                         
 $4. And Turgon appointed three lords of his household...                  
   On  B(i)  only,  my father  pencilled with  reference to  these opening
 words  the  names  Glorfindel, Egalmoth,  and  Ecthelion,  and  also  'On
 etymologies of Egalmoth  and Ecthelion  see note'.  This note  is written
 on the same typescript page and its reverse, but is very hard to read:
   These  names  are  also  derived  from  primitive  FG,  but  are  well-
 sounding  and  have  been  in  print.  They  are  late  popular  forms of
 archaic AEgamloth, AEgthelion.  Note  amloth  is  said  (where?)   to  be
 probably  not  S[indarin]. Q  * ambalotse  uprising-flower   -  referring
 to the flower or floreate device used as a crest fixed to point of a tall
 ... helmet. Name therefore = pointed helm-crest.                         
    Ecthelion  must  be  similarly  from Aegthelion.  Latter element  is a
 derivative  of  V stel  'remain  firm'. The  form with  prefix 'sundoma',
 estel, was used in Q and S for  'hope' -  sc. a  temper of  mind, steady,

                      
                                                                          
 fixed in  purpose, and  difficult to  dissuade and  unlikely to  fall into
 despair  or  abandon its  purpose. The  unprefixed stel-  gave [?  S verb]
 thel  'intend,  mean,  purpose,  resolve,  will'.  So Q  ? pelma  'a fixed
 idea,..., will.'                                                          
 The  illegible word in 'a tall... helmet' might possibly be 'archaic'. The
 word  sundoma  is  an  important   term  in   the  analysis   of  Quendian
 phonological  structure.  Very  briefly  indeed, the  Quendian consonantal
 'base'  or   sundo  was   characterised  by   a  'determinant   vowel'  or
 sundoma:  thus  the  sundo KAT  has  a  medial  sundoma  'A',   and  TALAT
 has  the  sundoma  repeated.  In  derivative  forms  the sundoma  might be
 placed before the first consonant, e.g. ATALAT; thus estel beside  stel in
 this note.                                                                
 On  the  words  'These  names...  have  been in  print' (referring  to the
 Ruling   Stewards   of   Gondor   named   Egalmoth   and   Ecthelion)  see
 II.211-12 and  footnote, where  the present  note is  referred to;  for my
                                                                          
 [':::: remark there chat my father 'subsequently decided against naming
 Aredhel's escort' see p. 328.                                             
                                                                          
 $5. But when she came to the Ford of Brithiach...                          
 'his kinsfolk of  the house  of Finarfin':  B still  has Finrod  here, and
 the change to Finarfin was made on B(ii) only.                            
 In A  and B  the march-wardens  said to  Isfin: 'The  speediest way  is by
 the East Road from  Brithiach through  eastern Brethil,  and so  along the
 north-march  of  this  Kingdom,  until  you pass  Esgalduin and  Aros, and
 so  come  to  the  woods  behind  the  Hill  of  Himring.' In  B(ii) only,
 'Esgalduin  and  Aros' was  changed to  'the Bridge  of Esgalduin  and the
 Ford of Aros'.                                                            
 In the published  text 'the  lands that  lie behind  the Hill  of Himring'
 seems to be a mere error for 'the woods...' which was not observed.       
                                                                          
 $6. Then Aredhel turned back...                                            
 A  and  B  have  'the  Eryd Gorgoroth',  but on  B(ii), and  also on  A at
 the  same  time,  this  was  changed  to  'the  haunted  valleys   of  the
 Gorgorath';  similarly  A  and  B  'Dungorthin'  >  'Nan Dungortheb'  on A
 and B(ii).                                                                
 The  original  form  of  this  paragraph  was  not  changed  on  B(i), but
 was rewritten on B(ii). This  rewriting did  not significantly  change the
 sense, but added that  the companions  of 'Feiniel'  (see under  $1 above)
 'had  no  choice  but  to  follow  her,  for  they  were not  permitted to
 restrain  her  by  force',  and  that  when  they  returned   to  Gondolin
 'Turgon  said  to  them:  "At least  I should  be glad  that three  whom I
 trust and love were not led to death by the wilfulness of one."' These
 additions were not included in the published text.
 $7. But Aredbel, having sought in vain for her companions...
   Where the published text has 'she held on her way' the original text,
 preserved in B(i), has 'she held to the East Road'; in B(ii) this was
 emended to 'At last she found the East Road again'. In B(ii) the name

  Celon was at both occurrences  in the  paragraph circled  for correction,
  and at the second the name Limhir was written above (see p. 337).        
    Of Isfin's coming to the land of Himlad (a name  which first  occurs in
  this    story)    the    original    text    of    A    and    B    read:
  ...  at  that  time  they   [Celegorm  and   Curufin]  were   from  home,
  riding  with  Cranthir,  east  in  Thargelion. But  the folk  of Celegorm
  welcomed  her,  and  did  all that  she asked;  and for  a while  she had
  great  joy  in  the  freedom  of  the  woods.  And  ever  she  would ride
  further  abroad,  often  alone,  save it  were for  hounds that  she led,
  seeking for new paths...                                                 
  This was rewritten on B(i) to the form it has in the published text. In a
  first stage of the rewriting the phrase 'save it were for hounds that she
  led' was bracketed with the note: 'Omit  unless the  presence of  dogs is
  afterwards of importance'; in the  second stage  it was  omitted. Against
  the o of Thargelion my father wrote a (sc. Thargelian), with a  query. In
  B(ii) the rewriting was different, retaining more  of the  original text,
  including  the  reference  to  hounds; Thargelion  was changed  here also
  to Thargelian, without a query (on the latter form see pp. 336 - 7).     
                                                                          
  $8. In that wood in ages past...                                          
    On  B(i)  my  father  wrote  the following  note in  the margin  of the
  typescript against the first  occurrence in  the story  of the  name Eol,
  which he bracketed:                                                      
    Another  name  from  prim[itive)  FG  - meaningless  then and  now. But
  it  was  not  intended  to have  any meaning  in Q[uenya]  or S[indarin].
  For Eol was said to be a 'Dark  Elf', a  term then  applied to  any Elves
  who  had  not  been  willing  to  leave  Middle-earth  -  and  were  then
  (before  the  history  and  geography  had  been  organized)  imagined as
  wandering  about,  and  often  ill-disposed  towards  the  'Light-Elves'.
  But  it  was  also  sometimes  applied  to  Elves  captured   by  Morgoth
  and  enslaved  and  then  released  to  do  mischief  among the  Elves. I
  think  this  latter  idea  should  be  taken  up.  It would  explain much
  about Eol and  his smithcraft.  (I think  the name  might stay.  It isn't
  really absolutely necessary that names should be significant.)           
  In the old tale of The Fall of Gondolin Eol was not  in fact  called 'the
  Dark  Elf',  although  in  the  soon  abandoned  Lay   of  the   Fall  of
  Gondolin (III.146) he is called 'dark Eol', and it is said that 'the Dark
  Elves  were  his  kindred  that wander  without home'.  In the  Sketch of
  the Mythology (IV.34) he was called 'the Dark  Elf Eol',  and so  also in
  the Quenta (IV.136); in AB 1 (IV.301) he is 'Eol a  Dark-elf', and  in AB
  2 (V.136) 'Eol the Dark-elf' - so also in all the entries in GA. I do not
  think that 'Dark-elves' had ever been used  in the  sense referred  to in
  this  note, that  of 'darkened  Elves', Elves  ensnared and  corrupted by
  Morgoth.  The words  'I think  this latter  idea should  be taken  up. It
  would  explain  much about  Eol and  his smithcraft'  were the  basis for
  an abandoned sketch of Eol's history given below.                        

      The original text had 'Of old he was of the kin of Thingol, but he
 loved him not, and when the  Girdle of  Melian was  set about  the Forest
 of Region he fled  thence to  Nan Elmoth.'  In a  passage of  the 'Turins
 Saga'  which  was  excluded  in  Unfinished  Tales  (p.  96 and  note 12)
 because it had been used in The Silmarillion (pp. 201-2), it is told that
 Eol  gave  the  sword Anglachel  which he  had made  'to Thingol  as fee,
 which he begrudged, for leave to dwell in Nan Elmoth'.                   
   Against  the  words  'but  he  loved him  not' my  father wrote  in the
 margin  of  the  carbon copy,  B(ii), Because  Thingol was  friendly with
 the  Noldor  before  they  left  Middle-earth'  (cf.  X.172). On  B(i) he
 emended the words 'he loved him not' to 'he was ill at ease  in Doriath',
 and on an inserted page he roughed  out a  new story  about Eol.  This is
 in two versions, which are  however largely  identical. The  first reads:
 but he was restless and ill at ease in  Doriath, and  when the  Girdle of
 Melian  was  set  about  the  Forest   of  Region   where  he   dwelt  he
 departed. It is  thought (though  no clear  tale was  known) that  he was
 captured  by   orks  and   taken  to   Thangorodrim,  and   there  became
 enslaved;  but  owing  to  his skills  (which in  that place  were turned
 much  to  smithcraft  and  metalwork)  he   received  some   favour,  and
 was  freer  than  most  slaves  to  move  about,  and  so  eventually  he
 escaped  and  sought  hiding  in  Nan  Elmoth  (maybe  not   without  the
 knowledge  of   Morgoth,  who   used  such   'escaped'  slaves   to  work
 mischief among the Elves).                                               
 The                 second                 version                begins:
 and  when  he  heard  that  Melian  would  put  a  Girdle  about  Doriath
 that none could  pass..... without  the leave  of the  king or  of Melian
 herself,  he left  the Forest  of Region  where he  had dwelt  and sought
 for a place to dwell. But since he did not  love the  Noldor he  found it
 hard  to  find  a place  where he  would be  unmolested. It  was believed
 afterwards  (though  no  certain  tale  was  known)  that in  his wander-
 ing he was captured [@ c. as in the first version]                       
 This is possibly compatible  with the  story that  Eol gave  Anglachel to
 Thingol as fee to dwell in Nan Elmoth.  It would  be interesting  to know
 why  my  father  wished thus  to change  Eol's history  - or  rather, why
 he wished to attribute  Eol's skill  in metals  to a  time of  slavery in
 Angband; but in any event he  thought better  of it,  for in  a scribbled
 note beside the two versions of  the story  he said  that this  would not
 do, being too repetitive of the later history of Maeglin, and  that Eol's
 skill was derived from the Dwarves.                                      
 $9. Now the traffic of the Dwarves...                                     
   The opening of this paragraph read as follows in A:                    
   Now the  traffic of  the Dwarves  followed two  roads, the  northern of
 which,  going  towards  Himring,  passed  nigh  Nan  Elmoth,   and  there
 Eol  would  meet  the  Enfeng  and  hold  converse  with  them.  And,  as
 their friendship  grew, he  would at  times go  and dwell  as a  guest in
 the deep mansions of Belegost.                                           

 The  only emendation  to A  was the  replacement of  the old  term Enfeng
 (Longbeards,  the  Dwarves  of  Belegost,  see  pp.  108,  207  -  8)  by
 Anfangrim,  here  first  appearing.  In  B(ii)  'the  deep   mansions  of
 Belegost' was changed to '... of  Nogrod or  Belegost'; adopting  this in
 the published  text I  altered in  consequence Anfangrim  'Longbeards' to
 the general term Naugrim.                                               
   In the following passage A had originally:                            
   There  he  learned  much  of  metalwork,  and   came  to   great  skill
 therein; and he devised a metal  hard and  thin and  yet pliable,  and it
 was black and shining like jet. Rodeol, the  metal of  Eol, he  named it,
 and he was clad therein, and so escaped many wounds.                    
 The  name  of  the  metal  was  changed  many  times.  First  Rodeol  was
 altered to Glindur, then to  Targlin and  Morlin; then  (apparently) back
 to Glindur, and finally to Maeglin, the form in B.                      
   The  idea  that the  name of  Eol's son  was derived  from that  of the
 metal is found in the revised annal  for 320  in GA  (p. 48):  'Eol named
 him Glindur, for that was  the name  of the  metal of  Eol'; subsequently
 Glindur was  changed to  Maeglin both  as the  name of  the metal  and as
 the name of the son (as also in A: see under $10 below).                
   The passage was left as it stood in B(i), but at the head of  the first
 page of B(ii) my  father wrote:  'The metal  must not  have same  name as
 Maeglin';  and  he  emended  the  text  to the  form that  it has  in the
 published Silmarillion, with the  name of  the metal  galvorn. (Following
 'whenever  he  went  abroad'  the  words  'and  so  escaped  many wounds'
 were omitted in The Silmarillion, apparently through inadvertence.)     
   To the passage 'But Eol... was no Dwarf, but a tall Elf  of a  high kin
 of  the  Teleri'  my  father  wrote  on  the manuscript  A (only)  a note
 beginning  with  the  words  'Not  in  revision'  - which  probably means
 that what follows is not in  the corrections  made to  the copies  of the
 typescript ('the revision'). In this note  my father  was copying  a very
 faint and illegible form of it on the same page, and trying  to interpret
 his own writing; I give it exactly as it stands:                        
   Eol should  not be  one of  Thingol's kin,  but one  of the  Teleri who
 refused to cross the Hithaeglir. But [later] he and a few others  of like
 mood,  averse  to  concourse  of  people,  ...  [had]  crossed  the [Mts]
 long ago and come to Beleriand.                                         
 Against this note he wrote 'but  the relationship  to Thingol  would have
 point', and the date 1971.                                              
   Aredhel  Ar-Feiniel: B(ii)  has here  Ar-Feiniel (emended  from Isfin);
 see p. 318.                                                             
                                                                        
 $10. It is not said that Aredhel was wholly unwilling...                 
   In the margin of the manuscript at the  mention of  the birth  of Eol's
 son my father wrote later the date 320  (cf. p.  48, $119).  The sentence
 in A as originally written read:                                        
   After  some  years  Isfin  bore  to  Eol a  son in  the shadows  of Nan

 Elmoth, and he was named Meglin by his father, for he was dark          
 and supple, as the metal of Eol.                                        
 The fact that  the metal  was originally  named Rodeol  in A  (see under
 $9 above) but the son Meglin (the original  name) seems  to suggest that
 the idea that the  son was  named from  the metal  only arose  after the
 initial writing of the manuscript, despite the words  'for he  was dark
 and supple, as the metal of Eol'. The changing forms  of the  son's name
 in A were Meglin > Targlin > Morlin > Glindur and finally Maeglin.     
 The  sentence  in  this form  (with the  name Maeglin,  as of  the metal
 also) was preserved in B(i); but in B(ii), the text on which  my father
 declared that  the same  name must  not be  used both  of Eol's  son and
 Eol's metal and changed that of the latter to galvorn, he altered  it to
 the form in the published text, in which Aredhel  secretly gave  her son
 the  Noldorin  name  Lomion  'Child  of  the  Twilight',  and  Eol named
 him  Maeglin  (interpreted  'Sharp  Glance',  see  p.  337) when  he was
 twelve years old.                                                       
                                                                        
 $12. Yet it is said that Maeglin loved his mother better...              
 'Turgon... had no heir;  for Elenwe  his wife  perished in  the crossing
 of the Helcaraxe': here A has  'Turgon ...  had no  heir: for  his wife,
 Alaire, was of the Vanyar and would  not forsake  Valinor'. On  the page
 of  jottings  that  concludes  the  abandoned  later  Tale of  Tuor (see
 Unfinished Tales p. 56) a note which I did not include says that 'Alaire
 remained in Aman'. That this was  the case  because she  was a  Vanya is
 reminiscent  of  the story  of Amarie,  beloved of  Felagund, who  was a
 Vanya, 'and was not permitted to go with him into exile' (p.  44, $109).
 The typescript B as typed has Alaire, but on  both A  and B(ii),  not on
 B(i), my father corrected (presumptively  in 1970)  the name  to Anaire.
 The substitution of Elenwe in The Silmarillion was based on  the Elvish
 genealogies  of  1959 (see  pp. 229,  350), where  Anaire (defined  as a
 Vanya  'who  remained  in  Tuna')  was  later  corrected to  'Elenwe who
 perished in the Ice';  on the  same table  at the  same time  Anaire was
 entered as the wife of Fingolfin, with  the note  that she  'remained in
 Aman'.                                                                  
 In  a  note  added  to  the  typescript  of the  Annals of  Aman (X.128,
 $163) my father said  that in  the crossing  of the  Helkaraxe 'Turgon's
 wife was  lost and  he had  then only  one daughter  and no  other heir.
 Turgon was nearly lost himself in attempts to rescue his  wife -  and he
 had less love for the Sons of Feanor than any other'; but  Turgon's wife
 is not named.                                                           
                                                                        
 $13. In the telling of these tales...                                    
 Golodhrim:   A   had   Noldor,    changed   immediately    to   Golodrim
 (Golodhrim B).                                                          
 In this paragraph, and in $14,  the name  of Eol's  son (see  under $$9,
 10  above)  passed  through  these  forms  in A:  Morleg (which  has not
 occurred before) > Morlin > Glindur > Maeglin.                          

 $$14 ff. It came to pass that at the midsummer...                        
   Against  the  opening  sentence  in A  my father  later wrote  the date
 400 (cf. p. 48,  $120). The  original text,  preserved unchanged  in both
 copies of B, read here:                                                  
   And it came to pass that the  Dwarves bade  Eol to  a feast  in Nogrod,
 and  he  rode  away.  Then  Maeglin   went  to   his  mother   and  said:
 'Lady, let  us depart  while there  is time!  What hope  is there  in the
 wood for thee  or for  me? Here  we are  held in  bondage, and  no profit
 more shall I find in this place. For I  have learned  all that  my father
 or  the  [Nornwaith  >]  Naugrim  have to  teach, or  will reveal  to me;
 and I  would not  for ever  dwell in  the dark  woods with  few servants,
 and  those  skilled only  in smith-craft.  Shall we  not go  to Gondolin?
 Be thou my guide, and I will be thy guard.'                              
      Then  Isfin  was glad,  and looked  with pride  upon her  son. 'That
 indeed I will do, and swiftly,' she said; 'and no fear shall I  have upon
 the road with a guard so valiant.'                                       
      Therefore  they arose  and departed  in haste,  as secretly  as they
 might.  But  Eol  returned, ere  his time,  and found  them gone;  and so
 great was his wrath that he  followed after  them, even  by the  light of
 day.                                                                     
 (For Nornwaith, replaced by  Naugrim, see  p. 209.)  At this  point there
 are two earlier versions of the text in A, both struck through. The first
 reads:                                                                   
   But  Morleg  had  also  mistrusted  his  father,  and  he  took cunning
 counsel, and so he went  not at  once by  the East  Road, but  rode first
 to  Celegorm  and  found  him  in  the  hills  south  of Himring.  And of
 Celegorm  he  got  horses  surpassing  swift,  and  the promise  of other
 aid.  Then  Morleg  and  Isfin  passed  over  Aros  and Esgalduin  far to
 the  north  where  they  spilled  from the  highlands of  Dorthonion, and
 turned  then  southward,  and  came  to the  East Road  far to  the west.
 But  Celegorm  and  Curufin  waylaid  the  East  Road  and its  ford over
 Aros,  and  denied it  to Eol,  and though  he escaped  from them  in the
 darkness he was long delayed.                                            
 The next version reads:                                                  
   For his servants reported to him that they had fled to the fords of the
 East  Road  over  Aros  and  Esgalduin.  But  they  were two  days ahead,
 and  had  taken  the  swiftest  of  his  horses,   and  hard   though  he
 pursued them, he  came never  in sight  of them,  until they  passed over
 the  Brithiach  and  abandoned  their horses.  But there  by ill  fate he
 saw them  even as  they took  the secret  path, which  lay in  the course
 of  the  Dry  River; and  he followed  them with  great stealth,  step by
 step,  and  came  upon  them  even  in  the darkness  of the  great vault
 where  the  Guards  of  the  Way  kept  watch  unceasing.  Thus   he  was
 taken, even as they, by the Guards                                       
 It is interesting to see the intervention of Celegorm and Curufin  in the
 story here, removed at once but reappearing many years later.            

                      
                                                                        
  On the  page  carrying  these  rejected   passages  there   follow  very
 rapidly pencilled notes outlining the further course of the story:      
  After they entered he  entered. Taken  by guards.  Claims to  be Isfin's
 husband.  Words  to  Turgon.  Isfin  acknowledges  it. Turgon  treats Eol
 with  honour.  Eol  draws  a  bow  and  shoots  at  Morleg in  the King's
 hall,  saying  that  his own  son shall  not be  filched. But  Isfin sets
 herself  in  way  and  is  wounded.  While  Eol is  in prison  Isfin dies
 of  venom.  Eol   condemned  to   death.  Taken   to  the   precipice  of
 Caragdar.  Morleg  stands  by coldly.  They hurl  him over  the precipice
 and all save Idril approve.                                             
 After the rejection of the passages given above my  father wrote  a final
 version,  beginning  again  at  'even  by the  light of  day' on  p. 324:
 even by the light  of day;  for his  servants reported  to him  that they
 had  ridden  to  the  East Road  and the  ford over  Aros. But  they were
 two  days  ahead,  and  hard  though  he  pursued   them,  and   had  the
 swiftest  steed,  he  came  never  in  sight  of  them, until  they [came
 under  the  shadows  of  the  Crisaegrim,  and  sought  for   the  secret
 path >] reached the Brithiach, and abandoned their horses.              
 The  text  then  continues   as  in   The  Silmarillion   $23  (paragraph
 beginning Then Eol rode off in haste...).                               
  The final text of A was preserved in  the typescript  B, and  in neither
 the  top  copy nor  the carbon  did my  father change  it (except  for 'a
 feast' > 'a midsummer feast' in the latter). From here onwards,  in fact,
 there  were  no  further emendations  or annotations  made to  the carbon
 copy B(ii), and this text no longer concerns  us. But  in B(i)  my father
 inserted into  the typescript  a long  text on  separate pages;  and this
 appears to be the last piece of  substantial narrative  that he  wrote on
 the  Matter  of the  Elder Days  - it  cannot be  earlier than  1970 (see
 p. 316). It begins at  the words  'It came  to pass  that at  the midsum-
 mer',  and continues  through the  flight of  Maeglin and  Aredhel, Eol's
 pursuit, and  the intervention  of Curufin:  The Silmarillion  pp. 134-6,
 $$14-23, where it joins the original A  text at  'until they  reached the
 Brithiach, and abandoned their horses'.                                 
  As has been seen  '(p. 317)  this story  of Maeglin  was not  written to
 stand as an element in  the Quenta  Silmarillion; and  the detail  of the
 narrative in this  very late  interpolation was  somewhat reduced  in the
 published text,  chiefly by  the removal  of all  the precise  timing and
 numbering of days  and a  return to  the manner  of the  original simpler
 and   more  remote   narrative.  The   chief  omissions   and  consequent
 alterations are as follows.                                             
 $14. and  he  rode  away.  Original text:  'and he  rode away,  though he
 thought it likely that in  his absence  Maeglin might  seek to  visit the
 sons of Feanor  in spite  of his  counsels, and  he secretly  ordered his
 servants to keep close watch on his wife and son.'                      
  Therefore  he  said  to  Aredhel:  'Therefore  when  Eol  had  been gone
 some days Maeglin went to his mother and said,                          

  $$15-16. and  telling  the servants  of Eol  that they  went to  seek the
  sons of Feanor...: 'Therefore that night as secretly  as they  could they
  made  provision for  a journey,  and they  rode away  at daybreak  to the
  north-eaves  of  Nan  Elmoth. There  as they  crossed the  slender stream
  of Celon they  spied a  watchman, and  Maeglin cried  to him:  "Tell your
  master that we go to  visit our  kin in  Aglon." Then  they rode  on over
  the  Himlad to  the Fords  of Aros,  and then  westward along  the Fences
  of Doriath. But they had tarried overlong. For on the first night  of the
  three days feast, as he slept, a  dark shadow  of ill  foreboding visited
  Eol,  and  in  the  morning  he  forsook  Nogrod  without   ceremony  and
  rode  homeward  with  all  speed.  Thus  he  returned  some  days earlier
  than Maeglin  had expected,  coming to  Nan Elmoth  at nightfall  of the
  day after  their flight.  There he  learned from  his watchman  that they
  had  ridden  north  less than  two days  before and  had passed  into the
  Himlad, on their way to Aglon.                                           
    'Then  so great  was Eol's  anger that  he resolved  to follow  them at
  once; so staying only to take a fresh horse, the swiftest that he had, he
  rode  away  that  night. But  as he  entered the  Himlad he  mastered his
  wrath...'                                                                
    Against Celon is written? Limhir (see under $7 above).                 
  $16. Curufin  moreover  was  of   perilous  mood;   but  the   scouts  of
  Aglon  had  marked  the riding  of Maeglin  and Aredhel...:  'Curufin was
  a man of perilous mood. So far they  had left  him [Eol]  free to  go his
  ways,  but could  if they  wished confine  him within  the bounds  of Nan
  Elmoth  and  cut  him  off  from  his friendship  with Dwarves,  of which
  Curufin was jealous. Things proved little better than he feared;  for the
  scouts of Aglon...'                                                      
    And before  Eol had  ridden far  ...: So  ere Eol  had ridden  half the
  way   over   Himlad   he   was  waylaid   by  well-armed   horsemen,  who
  forced  him  to  go with  them to  their lord  Curufin. They  reached his
  camp about noon; and he greeted Eol with little courtesy.'               
  $19. It  is  not  two  days  since  they passed  over the  Arossiach ...:
  'Nearly two days ago they were seen  to pass  the Fords  of Aros,  and to
  ride  swiftly  westward.'  For  the  name  Arossiach introduced  into the
  published text see p. 338, note 2.                                       
  $22. to  find a  kinsman thus  kindly at  need: 'to  find one's  nephew so
  kindly at need.' On this alteration see $23 below.                       
    By the laws of the Eldar I may not slay you at this time: here there is
  a  footnote  in  the  original:  'Because the  Eldar (which  included the
  Sindar) were  forbidden to  slay one  another in  revenge for  any griev-
  ance  however  great.  Also  at this  time Eol  had ridden  towards Aglon
  with no ill intent, and it was  not unjust  that he  should seek  news of
  Aredel and Maeglin.'                                                     
  $23. for  he  perceived  now  that  Maeglin and  Aredhel were  fleeing to
  Gondolin: 'For he saw now that  he had  been cheated,  and that  his wife
  and son were fleeing to Gondolin,  and he  had been  delayed, so  that it

 was now more than two days since they crossed the Fords.'                 
                                                                          
   This narrative is followed by various notes. One of these is a          
 genealogical table:                                                       
                  Miriel = Finwe = Indis                                   
                                                                          
                  Feanor  Turgon, Arehel = Eol                             
                                                                          
                  Curufin  Maeglin                                         
                                                                          
 To  this  is  added:  So  Curufin  was  half-nephew  of Turgon  and Areal.
 Eol was uncle by  marriage of  Curufin, but  that was  denied as  a forced
 marriage".' This genealogy is the basis  for Eol's  words cited  under $22
 above, 'to  find one's  nephew so  kindly at  need'; but  it is  of course
 entirely wrong. The correct genealogy is:                                 
                                                                          
                  Miriel = Finwe = Indis                                   
                                                                          
                  Feanor  Fingolfin                                        
                                                                          
                  Curufin  Turgon, Aredel = Eol                            
                                                                          
 Curufin  was  not  Eol's  nephew  (through  Aredel),  but  his  cousin (by
 marriage). It is a strange error, one might say unprecedented, since it is
 not a mere casual slip.                                                   
   On  another page  is the  following long,  rapidly written,  and remark-
 ably elaborate discussion of the motives of Celegorm and Curufin.         
                                                                          
   The  meeting  between  Eol  and  Curufin  (if  not  too  long   an  inter-
   ruption) is  good, since  it shows  (as is  desirable) Curufin,  too often
   the villain (especially in the  Tale of  Tinuviel), in  a better  and more
   honourable  light  -  though  still  one  of   dangerous  mood   and  con-
   temptuous  speech.  Curufin  of  course  knew  well  of  Eol's  hatred  of
   the  Noldor,  and  especially  of  Feanor  and  his  sons,  as  'usurpers'
   (though  in  this  case unjust,  since the  lands occupied  by the  5 sons
   had  not  been  peopled  before  by  the  Sindar). Also  he knew  of Eol's
   friendship  with  the  Dwarves  of  Nogrod  (indeed  Eol  could  not  have
   journeyed  alone  across  E.  Beleriand  to   Nogrod  unless   allowed  by
   the  5  sons),  among  whom  he  had tried  with some  success to  stir up
   unfriendliness  to  the  Noldor.  Which  was  a grievance  to the  5 sons,
   who  had,  before  Eol's  coming  to  Nan  Elmoth,  had  much  profit from
   the  help  of  the  Dwarves.  Curufin  also  knew that  Eol's wife  was of
   the   Noldor,   indeed  he   had  long   known  who   she  was,   and  now
   shrewdly   guessed   that   she   was  [?seeking]   to  escape   from  her
   husband at  last. Curufin  could have  slain Eol  (as he  greatly wished!)
   and  no  one  beyond  the  few  men  with  him  at  his  camp  (who  would
   never  have  betrayed  him)  would  ever  have  heard  of  it  -  or  much
   mourned  it.  In  Elmoth  it  would  simply  be   learned  that   Eol  had
   ridden  in  pursuit  of  Aredel  and  never  come  back,  and  there  were

  perils  enough  upon  the  road  to  account  for  that. But  this would
  have  been  in  Eldarin  law and  sentiment murder;  Eol came  alone, on
  no  errand of  mischief at  that time,  but in  distress. Also  [he] had
  answered  Curufin's  contempt  and  insults   soberly  or   indeed  with
  courtesy (whether  it were  ironic or  not). Also  and more  cogently he
  was  one  of  the  Eldar,  and  not  so  far  as  was  known  under  any
  shadow  of  Morgoth  -  unless  that  vague  one  which  afflicted  many
  others  of  the  Sindar  (?  due  to  whispers  inspired  by  Morgoth) -
  jealousy  of  the  Noldor.  Which  was  dangerous  (whatever  the faults
  of  their  rebellion)  since  if Morgoth  had not  been followed  by the
  Exiles,  it  seems  clear  that  all  the Sindar  would soon   have been
  destroyed or enslaved.                                                  
    An  important  point  not  made  clear   is  Curufin   and  Celegorm's
  earlier action in the  matter of  Aredel. She  had actually  stayed with
  them,  and  made  no  secret  of  who  she  was -  indeed they  knew her
  well  from  of  old.  Why  did  they  not  send  word  to  Gondolin? Her
  escort  though  valiant  chiefs would  seem to  have been  so bewildered
  and  daunted  by  the  horrors  of  the valleys  west of  Esgalduin that
  they  had  never  reached  the  Bridge  of  Esgalduin  or  come  near to
  Aglond.  This  makes  it  necessary,  I  think,  not  to  name  the most
  eminent  and  bravest  chieftains  (Glorfindel,  Egalmoth,   and  Ecthe-
  lion) as her escort. The answer then to the above question is  this: the
  perils of Dungorthin  etc. were  universally dreaded  by the  Eldar, and
  not  least  by  the sons  of Feanor,  to him  [read whom]  refuge south-
  ward  into  Doriath  was  utterly  closed.  It  had,  of   course,  been
  expressly  forbidden  by  Turgon that  Aredel should  go that  way. Only
  her  wilfulness  had  done  this.  Her  escort  plainly  endured  to the
  utmost of their strength the perils in their search, and so doubtless in
  fact  aided her  escape, by  drawing to  themselves the  chief attention
  of  the  evil  creatures.  Now  there  had  [been]  since  Gondolin  was
  'closed'  no  communication  at  all  between  the  sons  of  Feanor and
  Turgon. It was known  of course  that any  of these  sons (or  any fully
  accredited  messengers)  bearing tidings  of Aredel  would at  once have
  been  admitted.  But  Aredel  had  evidently  told  Curufin  (and  later
  Celegorm   of  whom   she  was   most  fond)   enough  of   herself,  to
  understand  that  she  had  escaped  from  Gondolin  by  her   own  will
  and was  glad to  dwell [with]  them and  be free.  Now they  could only
  get  word  to  Gondolin  by facing  evil perils,  which only  her rescue
  from  misery  would  have  seemed  to  them  sufficient   reason.  More-
  over  while she  was happy  and at  ease they  delayed -  believing that
  even  if  Turgon  was  informed   he  would   only  have   demanded  her
  return  (since  his  permission  to  her  to depart  was void  after her
  disobedience).  But  before  they  had  made  up  their  minds  she  was
  again lost, and it  was a  long time  before they  knew or  even guessed
  what  had  become of  her. This  they did  eventually when  Aredel again
  began to visit  the borders  of Nan  Elmoth, or  stray beyond  them. For

 they  held  a  constant  watch  on  Nan  Elmoth,  mistrusting  the  doings
 and goings of Eol,  and their  scouts espied  her at  times riding  in the
 sunlight  by  the  wood-eaves.  But  now  it  seemed  too late  [to] them;
 and  they  all  [?  read they  thought that  all] they  would get  for any
 peril  would  be  the  rebuke  or  wrath  of   Turgon.  And   this  [they]
 wished  in  no  way  to  receive.  For  they  were now  under a  shadow of
 fear,  and  beginning  to  prepare  for  war  again  ere  the  strength of
 Thangorodrim became insuperable.                                          
                                                                          
 In this piece there are major difficulties, and also some minor  points to
 mention. (1) It is said that Curufin  'knew of  Eol's friendship  with the
 Dwarves  of  Nogrod':  in  the  narrative Eol's  visits were  to Belegost,
 changed  on  B(ii)  to  'Nogrod  or  Belegost' (see  under $9  above), but
 already in A the feast to which he had gone at the time  of the  flight of
 his  wife  and  son  was  held  at  Nogrod  ($14).  Elsewhere  among these
 late 'Maeglin' writings it is said of Eol: 'Lately  he had  visited Nogrod
 often;  he  had become  very friendly  with the  Dwarves of  Nogrod, since
 those of Belegost  to the  north had  become friends  of Caranthir  son of
 Feanor.' (2) The pass  is here  named Aglond,  though in  the interpolated
 narrative  itself  it is  named Aglon;  see p.  338, note  3. (3)  For the
 naming of Aredhel's escort,  here rejected,  see under  $4 above.  (4) The
 reference  to  Dungorthin  rather  than Dungortheb  is a  casual reversion
 to the old and long-enduring name.                                        
 (5)  The five  sons  of  Feanor are  three times  mentioned, but  I cannot
 explain this. It does not  seem credible  that the  Seven Sons  of Feanor,
 so  deeply rooted  and so  constantly recurring  in the  tradition, should
 become  five  by  a  mere  slip of  forgetfulness, as  in the  omission of
 Fingolfin  from  the  genealogy  (p.  327).  By  this  time the  story had
 entered  that  one of  the twin  brothers Damrod  and Diriel,  later Amrod
 and  Amras, the  youngest of  Feanor's sons,  died in  the burning  of the
 ships of the Teleri at Losgar, because he  'had returned  to sleep  in his
 ship': this was stated in a pencilled note on the typescript of the Annals
 of  Aman  (X.128,  $162),  although  no  consequential  alteration  to any
 text  was ever  made. Possibly  my father  had come  to believe  that both
 Amrod and Amras died in the burning ship.                                 
 (6)  Lastly,  the concluding  sentence of  the discussion,  concerning the
 preparation  for war  by Celegorm  and Curufin,  is surprising.  The Siege
 of  Angband  ended   very  suddenly   at  midwinter   of  the   year  455.
 Between  the  rout  of  Glaurung  in 260  and the  Battle of  Sudden Flame
 there was (in the words  of the  Grey Annals,  p. 46)  'the long  peace of
 wellnigh two  hundred years.  In that  time there  was naught  but affrays
 on  the  north-marches  ...'  It is  true that  in 402  (p. 49)  there was
 'fighting  on the  north-marches, more  bitter than  there had  been since
 the routing of  Glaurung; for  the Orcs  attempted to  pierce the  pass of
 Aglon';  while  in  422  (p.  50)  Fingolfin 'began  to ponder  an assault
 upon  Angband',  which  came  to  nothing,  because  'most  of  the  Eldar

 were content with matters as they were and slow to  begin an  assault in
 which  many  must  surely  perish'.  But  Maeglin  and  Aredhel  fled to
 Gondolin  from  Nan  Elmoth  in   400.  There   has  nowhere   been  any
 indication that the sons  of Feanor  were beginning  to prepare  for war
 55  years  before  the  Dagor  Bragollach,  with  which  the   Siege  of
 Angband ended.                                                          
                                                                        
 For the remainder of  the narrative  there are  very few  alterations to
 the top copy B(i) of the typescript, and I notice only the following:
 $35. It  was  appointed that  Eol should  be brought...:  at the  end of
 the paragraph my father added:                                          
   For  the  Eldar never  used any  poison, not  even against  their most
 cruel  enemies,  beast, ork,  or man;  and they  were filled  with shame
 and horror that Eol should have meditated this evil deed.               
 From  this  point  also  the  published text  follows the  original very
 closely, and the small amount of editorial alteration in no  way affects
 the narrative.                                                          
                                                                        
   I have mentioned  (p. 316)  that in  addition to  the very  late emen-
 dations and annotations,  recorded above,  made to  the text  of Maeglin
 there is also much further material from the  same time.  These writings
 are  primarily  concerned with  the geography,  times, and  distances of
 the  journeys  on  horseback,  but  they  are complicated  and confused,
 often repeating themselves with slight  differences of  calculation, and
 in part virtually illegible. They contain  however many  curious details
 about the geography and the ways taken by travellers in those regions.
   To set out this material in ordered form, treating it page by page and
 attempting to trace the development in sequence, is not possible, and if
 it were possible unnecessary. My father  himself noted:  'These calcula-
 tions of times in Eol's journeys though  interesting (and  sufficient to
 establish their possibility) are not really necessary in the narrative -
 which  seems  credible  as it  stands even  when faced  by a  map.' What
 follows is a discussion with some citation of what  can be  learned (and
 still more, of what can not be learned) of the roads in  East Beleriand.
 The numbered notes are found on pp. 338-9.                              
   Associated  with  this  material  are rather  pale photocopies  of the
 North-east  and  South-east  sections  of  the  map.  These  photocopies
 were taken when the  map had  received almost  all the  alterations that
 were ever made to it,(1) and my father used the copies, not  the original,
 to indicate features  arising from  his reconsideration  and development
 of the story of Maeglin c.1970. Since  the tracks  are far  more readily
 understood visually  than by  description, the  redrawing of  the North-
 east section (p. 183) is reproduced again on p. 331 with the alterations
 shown;  the  markings  on  the  South-east  section  are few  and easily
 understood from a description, and for  these reference  is made  to the
 redrawing on p. 185.                                                    
   My father had stated in a  note on  the back  of the  original 'second

  map' (see V.272) that  the scale  is 50  miles to  3-2  cm, which  is the
  length of the sides of the squares. On the  back of  one of  these photo-
  copies,  however,  he wrote:  'The centimetre  reckoning on  the original
  map is unnecessary, clumsy, and inaccurate.  Actually 2  squares of  1 25
  [inches] each =  100  miles....  The scale  is therefore  40 miles  to an
  inch.  50  miles  to  1  25  inches =  one square.'  Although he  did not
  precisely say so here, it looks to me as if he made the original  grid on
  the basis of inches, but  subsequently interpreted  it as  if it  were in
  centimetres.                                                             
    The  East  Road.  In  the  original text  of Maeglin  (p. 319,  $5) the
  march-wardens of  Doriath said  to Isfin  that 'the  speediest way  is by
  the East Road from Brithiach through  eastern Brethil,  and so  along the
  north-march  of  this  Kingdom, until  you pass  Esgalduin and  Aros, and
  so  come  to  the  woods  behind  the  Hill  of  Himring', which  was not
  altered  when  the  corrections were  made to  the text  long afterwards,
  except  by  changing  'Esgalduin and  Aros' to  'the Bridge  of Esgalduin
  and  the  Ford  of  Aros' on  one copy.  In $6,  she 'sought'  the 'road'
  between the  Mountains of  Terror and  the north  fences of  Doriath, and
  in  $7  'she  held to  the East  Road, and  crossed Esgalduin  and Aros',
  changed on one copy  to 'At  last she  found the  East Road  again...' In
  one of the  rejected passages  in the  manuscript A  given under  $$14 ff
  on p. 324 it is said that 'Morleg [Maeglin] went not at once by  the East
  Road, but rode first to Celegorm', while in  the second  rejected passage
  (ibid.) '[Eol's] servants reported to him that they had fled to the fords
  of the East Road over Aros  and Esgalduin';  in the  third form  (p. 325)
  'his  servants reported  to him  that they  had ridden  to the  East Road
  and the ford over Aros.'                                                 
    From all these passages it  is clear  that when  he wrote  the original
  text  of  Maeglin in  1951 my  father conceived  of an  East -  West road
  running  from  the  ford  of  Brithiach between  the Mountains  of Terror
  and  the northern  borders of  Doriath, and  across the  rivers Esgalduin
  and Aros; and the fact that the first  of these  passages was  allowed to
  stand  in  both typescripts  seems to  show that  he still  retained this
  conception  in 1970.  The only  difference seems  to be  the introduction
  of a bridge, rather than a ford, over Esgalduin. That this  was certainly
  the case is seen from the following passage:                             
    Eol's  house (in  the middle  of Elmoth)  was about  15 miles  from the
  northmost  point  of  the  wood  beside  Celon.  From  that point  it was
  about  65  miles  N.W.  to the  Ford of  Aros.(2) At that time  Curufin was
  dwelling  at  the  S.E.  corner  of the  Pass of  Aglond (3) about  45 miles
  N.E.  from  the  Ford  of  Aros.  The  Himlad (cool-plain)  behind Aglond
  and  Himring,  between  the  northern  courses  of  the  Rivers  Aros and
  Celon,  he  claimed  as  his land.(4) He  and  his people  naturally kept
  watch  on  the  Ford  of Aros;  but they  did not  prevent the  few hardy
  travellers (Elves or Dwarves) that  used the  road West  - East  past the

 north  fences  of  Doriath.  (Beyond   the  Ford   was  an   entirely  unin-
 habited  region  between  the  mountains  north  [?  read  in   the  north,]
 Esgalduin  and  Aros  and  Doriath:  not  even  birds  came  there.  It  was
 thus called Dor Dhinen the 'Silent Land'.)(5)                               
   Beyond   the   Aros   (some   25   miles)   lay   the    more   formidable
 obstacle  of  the  Esgalduin  in  which   no  fordable   point  was   to  be
 found.  In  the   'peaceful  days'   before  the   return  of   Morgoth  and
 Ungoliant,   when   Doriath's   north   borders   were   the   mountains  of
 Fuin  (not  yet  evil),  the  West  -  East road  passed over  the Esgalduin
 by  a  bridge  outside  the  later  fence  of  Melian.   This  stone-bridge,
 the  Esgaliant  or  Iant  Iaur  (old  bridge)  was  still in  existence, and
 watched  by  the  wardens  of  Doriath,  but  its  use  by  Eldar   was  not
 hindered.  It  was  necessary  therefore  to  fugitives  crossing   Aros  to
 turn  S.W.  to  the  bridge; From  there they  would keep  as close  as they
 could  to  the  Fences  of  Doriath   (if  Thingol   and  Melian   were  not
 hostile  to  them).  At the  time of  this story,  though many  evils lurked
 in  the  Mountains   the  chief   peril  lay   in  passing   Nan  Dungortheb
 from   which  clouds   and  darkness   would  creep   down  almost   to  the
 Fences.                                                                     
                                                                            
 Turning  to  the  photocopy  of  the   map,  Eol's   house  was   marked  in
 Nan  Elmoth  as  shown  in  my  redrawing (p.  331). A  line in  green ball-
 point  pen  connects his  house to  a point  on the  northern border  of the
 wood  beside  the  river;  and from  here a  green dotted  line (represented
 as  a  line  of  dashes  in  the redrawing)  runs across  the Himlad  to the
 'Fords  of  Aros',  marked  in  red  ball-point pen.(6) The green  dots then
 run  S.W.  to  the  bridge  over  Esgalduin,  this  being  labelled 'Bridge'
 simply (Esgaliant or Iant Iaur  in the  text just  cited).(7) Beyond  the Iant
 Iaur  the  green dots  continue S.W.  for a  short way  and then  stop: they
 are not shown in relation to the List Melian (the Girdle of Melian).        
 It is stated  in a  note on  the photocopy  map that  this green  line marks
 the 'track of Maeglin and  his mother,  fleeing to  Gondolin'. In  the light
 of the text just cited, it is also the line of the East - West road from the
 Ford of Aros  to the  Iant Iaur;  but otherwise  the course  of the  road is
 not  represented.  The  dotted  line along  the edge  of Neldoreth  is named
 on  the  map  List  Melian, and  does not  mark a  road. Westward  this line
 was  indeed  extended  beyond  Mindeb  to  the  Brithiach,  but  these  dots
 were  struck  out  (p.  188,  $38);  eastwards   it  was   extended  between
 Esgalduin  and  Aros,  and  then  between  Aros  and  Celon, and  this seems
 to represent the continuation of the List Melian.                           
 On  account  of  these  obscurities  I  excluded  from   the  text   of  the
 chapter  Of  Maeglin  in  The  Silmarillion  the  references  to  the  'East
 Road'  and  rephrased  the  passages;  but  on  the  map   accompanying  the
 book  I  marked  in  its  course.  This  seems  now to  have been  the wrong
 thing to do in both cases: for  there certainly  was an  East Road,  but its
 course  is  unclear  and  its  destination unknown.  Beyond Aros  going east

 there is no indication of where it  went: it  is said  in the  passage cited
 above  that  it  and  the  bridge  by  which it  passed over  Esgalduin were
 ancient  works  deriving  from  the  'peaceful  days'  before the  return of
 Morgoth:  it  was  not  a  road  made  by   the  Noldor   for  communication
 between  the  western  realms  and   the  Feanorians.   There  is   also  no
 justification  for  marking  it  as turning  S.E. after  the Fords  of Aros.
 Beyond  Esgalduin  going west  it is  said in  this passage  that travellers
 'would  keep  as  close  as  they  could  to the  Fences of  Doriath', which
 does not sound like the following of a beaten road.                         
                                                                            
   The  Dwarf-roads.  Equally  obscure   is  the   question  of   the  Dwarf-
 roads  in  Eastern Beleriand.  In the  earliest Annals  of Beleriand  (AB 1,
 IV.332)  it  was  said that  the Dwarves  had of  old a  road into  the West
 that  came  up  along  Eredlindon  to the  East and  passed westward  in the
 passes  south  of  Mount  Dolm  and  down  the  course  of  the  River Ascar
 and  over  Gelion  at  the ford  Sarn Athrad  and so  to Aros.'  This agrees
 exactly  with  the   (revised)  course   of  the   road  on   the  'Eastward
 Extension'  of  the first  Silmarillion map  (see IV.231,  336). It  is seen
 from the central  (original) part  of the  first map  that it  crossed Celon
 and  Aros west  of Nan  Elmoth (which  of course  did not  at that  time yet
 exist)  and  so  ran   in  a   W.S.W.  direction   to  the   Thousand  Caves
 (between  pp.  220  and  221  in  Vol.IV).  But  the  course of  the ancient
 route  of  the  Dwarves  after  the  passage  of   Sarn  Athrad   was  never
 marked  in  on  the  second map  - unless  the vague  line described  in the
 notes  on  the  map, p.  190, $68,  is correctly  interpreted as  the Dwarf-
 road. If that is so, then its  course had  been changed  to cross  Aros much
 further  to the  south, and  then to  run northwards  through the  Forest of
 Region  to  Menegroth.  But  better  evidence  is   provided  in   the  late
 Quenta  Silmarillion  chapter  Of  the   Coming  of   Men  into   the  West,
 pp.  218  -  19,  where  it  is  said  that  'Marach   ...  came   down  the
 Dwarf-road  and settled  his people  in the  country to  the south  and east
 of the dwellings of Baran son  of Beor':  this was  Estolad, 'the  name ever
 after  of  the  land  east  of  Celon  and  south  of  Nan  Elmoth'.  On the
 disuse  of  the old  Dwarf-road(s) into  Beleriand after  the coming  of the
 Noldor see p. 121, commentary on GA $114.                                   
   It was said already in the original text of Maeglin (p. 321, $9) that 'the
 traffic of  the Dwarves  followed two  roads, the  northern of  which, going
 towards  Himring,  passed  nigh  Nan Elmoth'.  This was  not altered  in the
 late  work  on  Maeglin;  and  on  the  primary  map  (already  present when
 the  photocopy  was made)  a line  of faintly  pencilled dots  marked 'north
 road  of  Dwarves'  (see  p.  189, $50)  runs E.S.E.  from near  Nan Elmoth,
 crosses  Gelion  some  way south  of the  confluence of  its arms,  and then
 turns southward, running more or  less parallel  to the  river. There  is no
 trace of its course west or north  of Nan  Elmoth, and  it is  impossible to
 be  sure  whether  any  further  continuation  southwards  or  eastwards  is
 marked beyond the point where it ends in my redrawing (p. 183).             

   The Maeglin papers  do not  resolve the  course of  this 'north  road of
 the  Dwarves',  because  (although  all  obviously  belong  to   the  same
 time) they evidently represent different conceptions.                      
                                                                          
   (i) Writing of Eol's journey to Nogrod, my father said:                 
                                                                          
   From  Elmoth  to  Gelion  the  land  was,  north  of  the  Andram  and the
   Falls  below the  last Ford  over Gelion (8)(just above  the inflow  of the
   River  Ascar  from  the  Mountains),  mostly  rolling  plain,  with  large
   regions  of  big  trees  without  thickets.  There  were   several  beaten
   tracks  made  originally  by  Dwarves  from   Belegost  and   Nogrod,  the
   best  (most  used  and  widest)  being  from  the  Little  Ford  past  the
   north  of  Elmoth  and  to  the  Ford of  Aros, it  crossed the  Bridge of
   Esgalduin  but  went  no  further  for,  if  the  Dwarves wished  to visit
   Menegroth                                                               
                                                                          
 This text then becomes altogether illegible. At the  mention of  'the last
 Ford  over  Gelion' he  added a  note that  the name  Sarn Athrad  of this
 ford  must  be  changed  to Harathrad  'South Ford',  'in contrast  to the
 much  used  northern  ford  where  the  river  was not  yet very  swift or
 deep, nearly  due east  of Eol's  house (72  miles distant)';  and against
 Harathrad here he wrote Athrad Daer ( the Great Ford ).(9)               
   The implication  seems to  be that  Eol crossed  Gelion at  the northern
 ford, but this is not actually stated.  There are  two alterations  to the
 photocopies  of  the map  that relate  to what  is said  here. One  is the
 marking of a crossing  over Gelion  on square  E 13  (p. 331),  just above
 the  point  where  the  dotted line  'north road  of Dwarves'  crosses the
 river  on  the  primary  map,  but  without  any  track  leading  to  this
 crossing.  The  other  is at  the ford  of Sarn  Athrad on  the South-east
 section  (p.  185),  where  on  the  photocopy  my  father wrote  the name
 anew over the existing name, circled it, and wrote beside it Harathrad.
   Beyond  this  nothing  can be  said of  the north  road of  the Dwarves,
 and there is no indication in  map or  text of  where, or  indeed whether,
 it joined the 'south road'. It is indeed very puzzling that this northerly
 road,  which  in  the  text  of  Maeglin  is  said  to have  gone 'towards
 Himring' (as is  to be  expected: leading  to territories  of the  Sons of
 Feanor), is in the citation (i) just given said to pass  the Ford  of Aros
 and the Bridge of Esgalduin:  for these  crossings were  on the  East Road
 to the  Brithiach (pp.  332 -  3). And  apart from  this, why  should this
 road  turn  westward,  and why  should it  go no  further than  the Bridge
 of Esgalduin?                                                             
                                                                          
          (ii) On another page my father said that the journey from Eol's
 house to Nan Elmoth in the direction of Nogrod was.                       
                                                                          
   through  wilds  (but  not  generally  in  difficult  country  for  horses)
   without   any   made   roads,   but   along   a   beaten  track   made  by
   Dwarvish  traders  to  the  Sarn Athrad  (the last  point where  the River

                                                                         
                                                                          
 Gelion  could  be  crossed)  meeting  the  Dwarf-road  up  to  and through
 the high pass in the mountains leading to Nogrod.                         
                                                                          
 Here  there  is  no  mention  of  the  northern  ford,  or  indeed  of the
 northern  road;  and it  seems to  be implied  that Eol  would necessarily
 cross at Sarn Athrad (still so called, not Harathrad); moreover it is said
 that  Eol  riding  from Nan  Elmoth to  Nogrod took  'a beaten  track made
 by  Dwarvish  traders'  to  Sarn  Athrad  that  met  the Dwarf-road  up to
 the high pass.                                                            
 In  addition to  the green  dotted line  entered on  the photocopy  of the
 map  and  stated  to  be  the track  of Maeglin  and Aredhel  fleeing from
 Nan  Elmoth  (p.  333),  lines of  red dots  (represented on  my redrawing
 as  lines  of  closely-spaced dots)  run from  Nan Elmoth  to the  Ford of
 Aros,  and  also  south-east  from  Nan  Elmoth  (p.  331). On  the South-
 east  section  in  the  photocopy (see  the redrawing  of the  primary map
 on p. 185) this red dotted line continues straight on  across square  G 13
 to  Sarn  Athrad,  and  then  coincides  with the  Dwarf-road up  into the
 mountains,  already  present  on  the  primary  map. There  is no  note on
 the photocopy  to explain  what these  lines represent,  but there  can be
 no  doubt  that  they  mark  the  journeys  of Eol  (even though  the dots
 continue all  the way  to the  Ford of  Aros, whereas  he was  arrested in
 his pursuit of Maeglin and Aredhel by the  riders of  Curufin 'ere  he had
 ridden half the  way over  Himlad', p.  326, $16).  Thus the  line running
 from  Nan  Elmoth  to  Sarn  Athrad  clearly corresponds  to what  is said
 in citation (ii).                                                         
                                                                          
 The  absence  of  any  really  clear  and  full  statement  -  indeed  the
 suggestion  that  my father's  ideas on  the subject  had not  reached any
 stability, and the extreme  doubtfulness of  some of  the markings  on the
 map,  led  me  to  omit  the course  of the  Dwarf-roads on  the published
 map.                                                                      
 Apart  from  the  matter  of  roads,  there  are  some  notes on  names in
 these  papers  that  show  my  father's  dissatisfaction  with  old  names
 already seen in the cases of Isfin and Eol (pp. 317,  320): here  those in
 question  are  Gelion  and  Celon  (cf.  his  note  on  the  primary  map,
 p.  191,  where  he  said  that  'these   river-names  need   revision  to
 etymologizable words').(10) In notes in different  places he  proposed (in
 sequence)  Gelduin,  Gevilon,  Gevelon,  and  also  Duin  Daer  (cf.  Duin
 Dhaer  in  the  note  on  the primary  map just  referred to);  Gevelon is
 derived  from  Dwarvish  Gabilan  'great  river'.  On the  back of  one of
 the photocopies of the map he wrote:                                      
 The land east of it [the river] is Thorewilan [the  a is  underlined]. The
 Dwarvish   name   was   also   often  translated   Duin  Daer.   The  name
 Gabilan  was  by  the  Dwarves  given  only  to  the  River  south  of the
 Falls  where  (after  the  junction  of  the River  with the  Asgar coming
 from  the  Mountains)  it  became  swift  and  was  steadily  increased in
 volume by the inflow of five more tributaries.                            

 The  name  Thargelion  on  the  primary  map  was  changed  to  Thargelian
 (with  the  a  underlined:  p.  331):  the  latter  form  has  appeared in
 emendations  to  the  typescripts  of  Maeglin  (p.  320). The  form Asgar
 appeared in the 1930s (beside  Ascar), see  IV.209; cf.  the Etymologies,
 V..386,  stem  SKAR:  'N[oldorin] asgar,  ascar violent,  rushing, impetu-
 ous'.                                                                    
 The  substitution  of  the  name  Limhir  for  Celon  has  appeared  as  a
 proposal in one  of the  typescripts of  Maeglin (p.  320), and  among the
 'geographical' papers is the following note:                             
    Celon  is too  hackneyed a  river-name. Limhir  (the clear  / sparkling
 river)  -  repeated  in  L.R.  as  were not  unnaturally other  names from
 Beleriand - is more suitable for the river,  a tributary  of the  Aros and
 a clear slender stream coming down from the Hill of Himring.             
 The  name  Limhir  does  not occur  in The  Lord of  the Rings,  unless my
 father was referring to the Limlight,  of which  he said  in Guide  to the
 Names  in   The  Lord  of  the  Rings  (A  Tolkien  Compass,  ed. Lobdell,
 p.  188):  'The spelling  -light indicates  that this  is a  Common Speech
 name;  but  leave  the  obscured  element  lim-  unchanged  and  translate
 -light: the adjective light here means "bright, clear".'                 
    Lastly,  it  remains  to  mention  the   etymology  of   Maeglin  found
 among these papers.                                                  

  mik   pierce:   *mikra   sharp-pointed  (Q   mixa,  S   *megr):  strong
  adjective'  maika  sharp,  penetrating,  going  deep  in  -   often  in
  transferred   sense  (as   Q  hendumaika   sharp-eye,  S   maegheneb  >
  maecheneb).                                                            
  glim gleam, glint (usually of fine slender but bright shafts of light}.
  Particularly  applied  to  light  of  eyes;  not  Q. S  glintha- glance
  (at), glinn.                                                           
  From  these  two  is  derived  the  name  Maeglin,  since  Maeglin had,
  even more than his father, very  bright eyes,  and was  both physically
  very   keen-sighted  and   mentally  very   penetrant,  and   quick  to
  interpret  the  looks  and  gestures  of  people,  and  perceive  their
  thoughts   and  purposes.   The  name   was  only   given  to   him  in
  boyhood, when these  characteristics were  recognized. His  father till
  then was  contented to  call him  Ion, son.  (His mother  secretly gave
  him  a  N.   Quenya  name   Lomion  'son   of  twilight';   and  taught
  Maeglin the Quenya tongue, though Eol had forbidden it.)               

            
                                                                              
 This  development  of  the  story  of  Maeglin  from  the  form  in   which  he
 had   written   it  twenty   years  before   seems  to   have  been   the  last
 concentrated  work  that  my  father  did  on  the  actual  narratives  of  the
 Elder Days.  Why he  should have  turned to  this legend  in particular I do
 not know; but one sees, in his minute consideration of  the possibilities
 of the story, from the motives of the actors to  the  detail of  the terrain,
 of roads, of the speed and endurance of riders, how the focus  of his
 vision of the old tales had changed.                                        

                              NOTES.                                      
                                                                         
  1. The   words   'read   (71)   Dor-na-Daerachas'   were  added   to  the
     primary map later: see p. 187, $30, and note 6 below.                
  2. In  another  passage  among  these  papers  the  Ford(s)  of  Aros are
     called  Arossiach;  this  name  was  adopted  on  the  map  accompany-
     ing The Silmarillion and introduced into the text.                   
  3. The text has 'at the S.W. corner', but this was a slip of the  pen. It
     is  stated  elsewhere  in these  papers that  the dwelling  of Curufin
     and Celegorm was  on a  low hill  at the  S.E. corner  of the  Pass of
     Aglond,  and  on  the  photocopy   map  Curufin   is  marked   with  a
     circle on the most westerly  of the  lower heights  about the  Hill of
     Himring  (p.  331,  square  D  11). -  The form  Aglond occurs  in the
     discussion  of  the  motives  of  Celegorm   and  Curufin   (p.  328),
     beside Aglon  in the  interpolated narrative  of Eol's  encounter with
     Curufin.  On  the   map  the   name  is   written  Aglon(d,   which  I
     retained  on  my  redrawing  (V.409)  of  the  map  as first  made and
     lettered,  in  the  belief  that  the  variant  lond  was  an original
     element.  Although  it  looks  to be  so, it  may be  that the  (d was
     added much later.                                                    
  4. My father noted here: 'In spite of what Eol said, it  had in  fact not
     been  inhabited  by  Sindar  before  the  coming  of the  Noldor'; and
     also that the name  'cool-plain' derived  from the  fact that  'it was
     higher  in  its middle  part and  felt often  the chill  northern airs
     through Aglon. It had no trees except  in its  southern part  near the
     rivers.' In another place it is said that 'Himlad  rose to  a swelling
     highland at its centre (some 300 feet high at its flat top)'.        
  5. For the first mention  of Dor  Dinen (so  spelt, as  also on  the map,
     not Dor Dhinen) see p. 194.                                          
  6. The  primary  map  had  no  crossing  marked  on  the  Aros  when  the
     photocopy  was  made.  The  word  Ford  was  put in  after, or  at the
     same time as, Fords of Aros was entered on the photocopy.            
  7. The  name  Iant  Iaur  was  adopted  from this  text in  The Silmaril-
     lion,  both  on  the  map and  in a  mention of  'the stone  bridge of
     Iant Iaur' in Chapter 14,  Of Beleriand  and its  Realms, p.  121 (for
     the original passage see p. 194).                                    
  8. The  falls  in  Gelion  below Sarn  Athrad have  not been  referred to
     before,  and  indeed  in  QS  Chapter  9  Of  Beleriand and  its Realms
     (V.262-3, $113; The Silmarillion  p. 122)  their existence  is denied:
     'Gelion had neither fall nor rapids throughout his course'.          
  9. On  another  page  the  following  names  are  proposed   as  replace-
     ments  for  Sarn  Athrad:  'Athrad  i-Nogoth  [>  Negyth]   or  Athrad
     Dhaer, "Ford of the Dwarves" or "Great Ford" '.                      
 10. The fact that the note on  the primary  map (p.  191) saying  that the
     names  Celon  and  Gelion  need   to  be   changed  bears   (like  the

 addition  of  Dor-na-Daerachas,  p.  187,  $30)  the  number '71',
 clearly meaning the year 1971, suggests that all the late  work on
 Maeglin belongs to that year. My father died two years later.

                                     IV.                                   
                         OF THE ENTS AND THE EAGLES.                       
                                                                          
 This brief text belongs to the late, or last, period  of my  father's work,
 and must be dated at the earliest  to 1958-9,  but may  well be  later than
 that. The original draft is extant, a manuscript on two  sides of  a single
 sheet, written at great speed with very little correction in a  script that
 is just legible. It is titled Anaxartamel.                                
  This  was  followed  by  a  text  made  on  my  father's  later typewriter
 (see  X.300)  that  expanded  the  first  draft,  but  from  which scarcely
 anything  of  any  significance  in that  draft was  excluded. It  bears no
 title. In the published Silmarillion it was  used to  form the  second part
 of  Chapter  2  Of  Aule  and  Yavanna,  pp. 44-6,  beginning at  the words
 'Now  when  Aule  laboured  in  the  making  of  the  Dwarves...'  This was
 of course a purely editorial combination.                                 
  The published  text followed  the typescript  with very  little deviation,
 except  in the  matter of  'thou' and  'you' forms,  about which  my father
 was initially uncertain, as he  was also  in the  text concerning  Aule and
 the Dwarves which  forms the  first part  of the  chapter in  the published
 Silmarillion  (see  p.  210).  In  the  manuscript  draft  he   used  'you'
 throughout; in the typescript he  used both  'you' and  'thy, hast'  in the
 opening  paragraphs,  but  then   'you,  your'   exclusively,  subsequently
 correcting the inconsistencies. As in the first part of the  chapter 'thou,
 thee, thy' forms were adopted in the published work.                      
  There  are  two  amanuensis  typescripts,   independent  of   each  other,
 taken  from  the  typescript  after  all  corrections  had been  made. They
 have  no textual  value, except  that on  one of  them my  father pencilled
 the  title  Of  the  Ents  and  the  Eagles,  and  on  the other  the title
 Anaxartaron Onyalie.                                                      
                                                                          
                                    NOTES.                                 
                                                                          
 In these notes, which are largely confined to  differences of  reading, the
 original draft is called A, the typescript B, and the published text S.
  When  Yavanna   went  to   Manwe  (p.   45)  'she   did  not   betray  the
 counsel  of  Aule':  the meaning  of this  is that  Yavanna did  not reveal
 anything  to  Manwe of  the making  of the  Dwarves; in  the first  part of
 the chapter (p. 43) 'fearing  that the  other Valar  might blame  his work,
 he  wrought  in  secret',  and  the  intervention  of  Iluvatar  (who 'knew
 what  was  done')  was  directly  to  Aule.  The  word  betray  in S  is an
 editorial alteration of bewray in A and B.                                
  'But the  kelvar can  flee or  defend themselves,  whereas the  olvar that

  grow  cannot' (p.  45): in  B there  is a  marginal note  against kelvar,
  'animals, all living things that  move', which  was omitted  in S.  In A
  these  words  were  not used,  but a  blank space  was left  where kelvar
  stands in  B. Immediately  following this,  A has:  Long in  the growing,
  swift in the felling, and unless they pay toll with fruit upon  the bough
  little  mourned at  the ending,  as even  among the  Valar I  have seen';
  in  B  the  last  phrase  became  'as I  have seen  even among  the Maiar
  in Middle-earth', but this was at once  rejected. The  final text  of the
  passage is as in S.                                                      
    In Yavanna's following  words beginning  'I lifted  up the  branches of
  great trees...' B has 'and some sang to Eru amid  the  wind and  the rain
  and the glitter of the Sun'; the last words were omitted in S  on account
  of the implication that the Sun existed from the beginning of Arda.      
    In  the passage  describing Manwe's  experience of  the renewal  of the
  Vision of the Ainur (p. 46; entirely lacking in A) the text of B as typed
  read: 'but it was not now remote, for he  was himself  in the  midst, and
  yet he  saw that  all was  upheld by  the hand  of Eru  and that  too was
  within',  subsequently  changed  to  the  reading  of S  (in which  Eru >
  Iluvatar).                                                               
    In  the  words  of  Eru  recounted  by  Manwe  to Yavanna  on Ezellohar
  the sentence 'For a time:  while the  Firstborn are  in their  power, and
  while the Secondborn are  young' was  bracketed for  exclusion in  B, but
  was retained in S.                                                       
    In  Manwe's  last  speech, 'In  the mountains  the Eagles  shall house,
  and hear the voices of those who call upon  us' was  first written  in B:
  '... and hear the voices  of those  who call  upon me,  and of  those who
  gainsay me.'                                                             
                                                                          
  At the end of a draft  letter dated  September 1963,  of which  a passage
  is  cited on  p. 353,  my father  added in  a very  rough note  (given in
  Letters p. 335):                                                         
    No  one  knew  whence  they  (Ents)  came or  first appeared.  The High
  Elves  said  that  the Valar  did not  mention them  in the  'Music'. But
  some  (Galadriel)  were  [of   the)  opinion   that  when   Yavanna  dis-
  covered  the  mercy of  Eru to  Aule in  the matter  of the  Dwarves, she
  besought  Eru  (through  Manwe)  asking  him  to  give  life   to  things
  made of living  things not  stone, and  that the  Ents were  either souls
  sent to inhabit trees, or  else that  slowly took  the likeness  of trees
  owing to their inborn love of trees.                                     
  With the words 'the Ents were either souls sent to inhabit trees' cf. the
  words of Eru in  the text  (p. 46):  'When the  Children awake,  then the
  thought  of  Yavanna will  awake also,  and it  will summon  spirits from
  afar, and they will  go among  the kelvar  and the  olvar, and  some will
  dwell therein ...'  It seems  likely enough  that the  note on  the draft
  letter  and  the  writing  of  Anaxartaron  Onyalie  belong  to  much the
  same time.                                                               

                                      V.                                   
                              THE TALE OF YEARS.                           
                                                                          
 The  Tale  of  Years  was  an  evolving  work  that  accompanied successive
 stages  in  the  development  of  the  Annals.  I  have  given it  no place
 hitherto  in  The  History  of  Middle-earth  (but  see X.49),  because its
 value to the narrative of the Elder Days  is very  small until  towards the
 end  of  the  later (post-Lord  of the  Rings) version,  when it  becomes a
 document  of  importance;  but  here  some  very brief  account of  it must
 be given.                                                                 
  The earliest form is a manuscript with this  title that  sets out  in very
 concise  form  the major  events of  the Elder  Days. The  dates throughout
 are in  all but  perfect accord  with those  given in  the pre-Lord  of the
 Rings  texts  'The  Later  Annals  of  Valinor'  and  'The Later  Annals of
 Beleriand'  (AV  2  and  AB  2).  Since  this Tale  of Years  was obviously
 written  as an  accompaniment to  and at  the same  time as  those versions
 of the Annals, adding nothing to them, I did not include it in Volume V.
  Much  later  a  new  version  of  The  Tale  of Years  was made,  and this
 alone will concern us here.  It very  clearly belongs  with the  major work
 on the Annals carried out in 1951( - 2), issuing in the last  versions, the
 Annals  of  Aman  and  the  Grey  Annals.  My  father  subsequently  made a
 typescript text of it, but this obviously belongs to the same period.     
  The  manuscript  of this  version as  originally written  was a  very good
 clear text, but it was  heavily corrected,  interpolated, and  rewritten in
 many  stages;  and  since  it  was  my  father's working  chronology during
 that period the dates,  more especially  in the  first or  Valinorean part,
 were  changed  so  often,  with  bewildering  movements  back   and  forth,
 as  to  make  the  evolution  of  the  chronology  extremely  difficult  to
 understand.  The  important  point,  so  far  as  the  Valinorean  part  is
 concerned, is that the  dates in  the manuscript  of The  Tale of  Years as
 originally written  were essentially  the same  as those  in the  Annals of
 Aman  as  originally  written;  while   modification  to   that  chronology
 went together step by step in the two  texts. In  the case  of AAm  I noted
 (X.47 - 8) that with so  many alterations  to the  dates it  was impractic-
 able to do more than  give the  final chronology,  and in  the case  of The
 Tale  of  Years  the evolution  is even  more complex.  In the  result, the
 latter work is of very  little independent  value in  this part;  there are
 however a small number of matters that should be recorded.                
  In  the  manuscript  as  it was  originally written  the Elder  Days began
 with  the  Awakening  of  the  Elves:  Here  begin the  Elder Days,  or the
 First Age of the  Children of  Iluvatar -,  but the  Elder Days  was struck

  out  and  does  not  appear  in  the typescript.  Further on  in The  Tale of
  Years  there  is  recorded  a difference  in application  of the  term 'Elder
  Days'  in  respect  of  their  ending  (a  difference  not, to  my knowledge,
  found  elsewhere):  after  the  entry  for  V.Y.1500  'Fingolfin  and  Inglor
  cross the Straits of Ice' (this being the date in the Grey Annals, p. 29) it
  is said in the manuscript:                                                   
                                                                              
  Here  end  the  Elder  Days  with  the  new  reckoning  of   time,  according
  to  some.  But  most  lore-masters  give  that  name  also  to  the  years of
  the war with Morgoth until his overthrow and casting forth.                  
      So  far  did  Quennar  Onotimo  compile  this   count  and   compute  the
  years.                                                                       
      Here follows the continuation which Pengolod made in Eressea.            
  In the typescript text  this was  retained, but  with this  difference: 'Here
  end  the  Elder  Days,  with  the  new  reckoning of  Time, according  to the
  Lore-masters  of  Valinor.  But  the  Lore-masters  of  the Noldor  give that
  name also to the years of the war with Morgoth...'                           
    Quennar  Onotimo  appears  in  the  Annals  of   Aman  (see   X.49),  where
  he is cited as the  source for  the passage  on the  reckoning of  time. This
  passage  was  marked  for  transference  to  The Tale  of Years,  and appears
  in  manuscript  pages  (one  of which  is reproduced  as the  frontispiece to
  Vol.X,  Morgoth's  Ring)  of  a  new  opening  of the  work written  in forms
  so splendid that it is not surprising that it did not proceed very far.      
    The   authorship   of   the   Annals   underwent   many  changes.   In  the
  earliest  Annals  of  Valinor  (AV  1,  IV.263)  Pengolod  is  named  as  the
  author,  and  also  of the  Annals of  Beleriand (AB  1), but  the conception
  soon entered that  Rumil was  the author  of the  first part  of AV  and that
  the  work  was  only  completed  by  Pengolod:  in  AV  2  Rumil's  part ends
  with  the  return  to  Valinor  of  those Noldor,  led by  Finrod (Finarfin),
  who   did   not   continue   the   northward  journey   after  the   Doom  of
  Mandos  (see  V.116,  123).  In  the  first  form  of  the  opening   of  the
  Annals  of  Aman  (X.48)  it is  said that  they 'were  written by  Quennar i
  Onotimo,   who   learned   much,   and  borrowed   much  also,   from  Rumil;
  but  they  were  enlarged  by  Pengolod'.  In  the  second  version   of  the
  opening,  however,  Rumil  alone  is  named:  'Here   begin  the   Annals  of
  Aman,   which   Rumil   made'.   In   the  fine   manuscript  pages   of  the
  opening of The Tale  of Years  referred to  above there  is no  ascription of
  authorship  (apart  from  the  naming  of  Quennar  Onotimo  as   the  author
  of the passage on the reckoning of time).                                    
    A  few  points  of  content in  this part  remain to  be mentioned.  In the
  entry  for  1125  (cf.  X.83)  the  manuscript  reads:  'The foremost  of the
  Eldar reach  Beleriand. They  are filled  with a  great fear  of the  Sea and
  for  long  refuse  to  go  further.   Orome  departs   to  Valinor   to  seek
  counsel.'  This  was  not  emended,   but  in   the  typescript   this  entry
  appears in its  place: 'The  foremost of  the Eldar  reach the  coastlands of
  Middle-earth   and   that   country   which   was   after    named   Eglador.

                    
                                                                            
 Thereof Beleriand was the  larger part.'  This is  apparently to  be related
 to  one  of  the entries  Eglador added  to the  map: see  p. 186,  $14; but
 the concluding phrase is mysterious.                                        
    In  this  connection,  the  entry  for the  year 1150  reads thus  in the
 manuscript:  'The  Teleri of  Olwe's host  at length  also depart  over Sea.
 The  friends  of Elwe  remain behind:  these are  the Eglath,  the Forsaken,
 or  the Sindar  (the Grey-elves).'  The form  Eglath is  found in  the annal
 for  this  year  in  AAm  (X.85);  but  on  the  manuscript  of The  Tale of
 Years  it  was  emended  subsequently  to  Eglim,  while  in  the typescript
 the  form is  Eglir: it  seems that  neither of  these occur  elsewhere (see
 pp. 365, 379).                                                              
    Lastly,  the  entry  for  1497  begins  with the  words 'Morgoth  'from a
 new  stronghold  at  Angband  assails  the  Grey-elves  of   Beleriand.'  At
 this  stage  the story  was still  that Angband  was built  on the  ruins of
 Utumno   (see   GA   $35   and   commentary,   pp.   15,  111).   My  father
 pencilled  on  the  typescript  (referring to  the interval  since Morgoth's
 return  from  Valinor  in  1495):  'Too small  a time  for Morgoth  to build
 Angband', and  also 'Time  too small,  should be  10 at  least or  20 Valian
 Years'.   This  would   have  required   substantial  modification   of  the
 chronology;  and  it  seems  conceivable  that  this  consideration   was  a
 factor  in  the  emergence  of  the  later  story  that  Utumno  and Angband
 were  distinct fortresses  in different  regions, both  built by  Morgoth in
 ancient days (X.156, $12).                                                  
                                                                            
    Of the latter or Beleriandic part of The Tale of Years there is little to
 say  until  the  last  entries  are reached.  The chronology  agrees closely
 with  that  of  the  Grey  Annals,  including  the  revised  stories  of the
 origins of Gondolin  and of  Eol, and  the brief  entries (agreeing  with GA
 in  such  names  as  Galion  for  Galdor  and   Glindur  for   Maeglin)  add
 nothing to the major text.  There is  in fact  only one  point that  need be
 noticed:  in  the  entry for  495 my  father added  to the  manuscript 'Tuor
 leaves  Dorlomin,  dwells a  year at  Falasquil.' The  last five  words were
 subsequently  struck  out.  Falasquil  was  the  name  of  the  cove  in the
 sea-coast  where  Tuor  dwelt  for  a  while  in  the  tale  of The  Fall of
 Gondolin  (II.152);  and  it  was  written also  onto the  map (see  p. 181,
 $5).  It  seems  quite likely  that both  these additions  were made  at the
 time  when  my  father  was writing  the later  Tale of  Tuor, and  had been
 rereading the old tale (as he clearly did, II.203);  but Falasquil  does not
 appear in the later Tuor.                                                   
    Subsequent  very  cursory  emendation  of   the  typescript   brought  in
 the  radically  changed  legend  of  the  Coming of  the Edain,  revision of
 names to later forms, and additions to the story of Turin.                  
    But  from  the   point  where   the  Grey   Annals  were   abandoned  The
 Tale  of  Years  becomes  a  major  source for  the end  of the  Elder Days,
 and  indeed  in  almost  all  respects  the  only  source deriving  from the
 time  following  the  completion  of  The  Lord   of  the   Rings,  woefully

  inadequate  as  it is.  As the  manuscript was  originally made  (in which
  condition I will distinguish it as 'A') the entries from  500 to  the end,
  very brief,  followed the  first (pre-Lord  of the  Rings) version  of The
  Tale of Years (see p. 342) closely: my  father clearly  had that  in front
  of  him,  and  did  no more  than make  a fair  copy with  fuller entries,
  introducing  virtually  no  new  matter  or  dates  not  found  in   AB  2
  (V.141 - 4). It will make things clearer, however, to give the text of the
  entries for those years as they were first written.                       
                                                                           
    500. Birth of Earendil in Gondolin.                                
    501. Making   of    the   Naugla-mir.    Thingol   quarrels    with   the
         Dwarves.                                                          
    502. The  Dwarves  invade Doriath.  Thingol is  slain and  his realm
         ended.  Melian  returns  to  Valinor.  Beren  destroys   the  Dwarf-
         host at Rath-loriel.                                              
    506. The Second Kin-slaying.                                             
    507. The Fall of Gondolin. Death of King Turgon.                         
    508. The  gathering  of  the  remnants  of  the  Elves  at  the  Mouths of
         Sirion is begun.                                                  
    524. Tuor and Idril depart over Sea.                                     
    525. The voyages of Earendil begun.                                      
    529. The Third and Last Kin-slaying.                                     
    533. Earendil comes to Valinor.                                    
    540. The  last  free  Elves  and  remnants  of  the  Fathers  of  Men  are
         driven out of Beleriand and take refuge in the Isle of Balar.     
    547. The  host  of  the  Valar comes  up out  of the  West. Fionwe  son of
         Manwe lands in Beleriand with great power.                        
    550-597. The  last  war  of  the  Elder  Days,  and the  Great Battle,
         is  begun.  In  this   war  Beleriand   is  broken   and  destroyed.
         Morgoth  is   at  last   utterly  overcome,   and  Angband   is  un-
         roofed   and   unmade.   Morgoth   is  bound,   and  the   last  two
         Silmarils are regained.                                           
    597. Maidros and  Maglor, last  surviving sons  of Feanor,  seize the
         Silmarils.  Maidros  perishes. The  Silmarils are  lost in  fire and
         sea.                                                              
    600. The  Elves  and  the   Fathers  of   Men  depart   from  Middle-earth
         and pass over Sea.                                                
           Here ends the First Age of the Children of Iluvatar.           
                                                                           
  The  only  points  of  any significance  in which  this differs  from what
  was  said  in  AB 2  or the  original version  of The  Tale of  Years that
  accompanied it are the additions in the  entry 540  of the  statement that
  when 'the last free  Elves' took  refuge in  the Isle  of Balar  they were
  accompanied  by  'remnants  of  the  Fathers  of  Men',  and in  the entry
  600  that  the  Fathers  of  Men  departed  from  Middle-earth   with  the
  Elves and passed over the Sea.                                            

   In  the  next  stage,  which I  will call  'B', many  corrections and
 interpolations and alterations of date were made to A; I give  here the
 text in this form, so far as is necessary.                            

 501. Return of Hurin.                                          
 502. After seven years' service Tuor weds Idril of Gondolin.        
      Making   of   the  Naugla-mir.   Thingol  quarrels   with  the
      Dwarves.                                                      
 503. Birth of Earendil in Gondolin.                                 
      The Dwarves  invade Doriath.  Thingol is  slain and  his realm
      ended.  Melian  takes  Nauglamir  to  Beren  and  Luthien  and
      then  returns  to  Valinor. Celegorm  and Curufin  destroy the
      Dwarf-host  at Sarn-athrad  in Rath-loriel;  and are  wroth to
      find the Silmaril not there. Dior goes to Doriath.            
 505. (Spring) Second  death of  Beren, and  Luthien dies  also. Dior
      Thingol's  heir  wears  Silmaril [struck  out: and  returns to
      Doriath].                                                     
      509 (Spring) Second Kinslaying. Last warning of Ulmo to Gondo-
      lin.                                                          
 510. The fall of Gondolin at Midsummer. Death of King Turgon.       
 511. The gathering of the  remnants of  the Elves  at the  Mouths of
      Sirion is begun.                                              

 In the remaining entries some of the dates were  altered but  very few
 changes were made to the content; the text of A need not  therefore be
 repeated.                                                            

 533. The date of Earendil's  coming to  Valinor was  changed several
      times, apparently > 536 > 540 > 542.                              
 547. The coming of the host of the Valar was moved to 545.         
 550-597. The  dates of  'the last  war of  the Elder  Days' were
      changed  to  545-587,  and  after  the last  words of  the original
      entry  the  following  was  added:  'Ancalagon  is  cast   down  by
      Earendil and all save two of the Dragons are destroyed.'          
 597. This entry was changed to 587.                                
 600. This  final entry  was changed  to 590,  and the  following was
      added  to  it:  'Morgoth  is  thrust  from  Arda  into   the  Outer
      Dark.'                                                            
 'Here ends the First Age of the Children  of Iluvatar'  was changed
 to: 'Here end the Elder Days with the passing of  Melkor, according
 to the reckoning  of most  lore-masters; here  ends also  the First
 Age...'                                                           

 The hastily made alterations and additions to  the entry  503 (502  in A)
 introduced major new turns into the story as it had been told in  all the
 versions:  the  tale  of  The  Nauglafring  (II.238),  the Sketch  of the
 Mythology  (IV.33),  the  Quenta  (IV.134),  and AB  2 (V.141).  There it
 was Beren, after his return from  the dead,  who with  his host  of Elves

  ambushed   the   Dwarves   at   Sarn-athrad,   and   took  from   them  the
  Nauglamir  in  which  was  set  the  Silmaril;  now  it   becomes  Celegorm
  and  Curufin  who  fought  the  battle  at Sarn-athrad  - but  the Silmaril
  was  not  there,  because  Melian  had  taken  it  from Menegroth  to Beren
  and  Luthien  in  Ossiriand. In  the old  tale, Gwendelin  (Melian), coming
  to the  Land of  the Dead  that Live  after the  battle, was  wrathful when
  she  saw  Luthien  wearing  the  Necklace  of  the  Dwarves,  since  it was
  made of  accursed gold,  and the  Silmaril itself  was unhallowed  from its
  having  been  set  in  Morgoth's  crown;  while  in  the  Sketch (probably)
  and  in  the  Quenta  (explicitly)  it  was  Melian who  told Beren  of the
  approach   of   the   Dwarves   coming   from   Doriath  and   enabled  the
  ambush  to  be  prepared  (her  warning  afterwards,  when the  Necklace of
  the Dwarves had been recovered, against the Silmaril being retained).      
    The  entrance  of  Celegorm  and  Curufin  into the  story seems  to have
  arisen  in  the act  of emending  the text;  for my  father first  added to
  the original  entry ('Beren  destroys the  Dwarf-host at  Rath-loriel') the
  words  'and  is  wounded  in  battle',  referring to  Beren (cf.  the Tale,
  II.237:  'Beren  got  many  hurts').  He  then   at  once   changed  'Beren
  destroys'  to 'Celegorm  and Curufin  destroy' and  'is wounded  in battle'
  to 'are wroth to find the Silmaril not there'.                             
    In the original entry in A 'at Rath-loriel' was just a slip for 'in'; but
  the  replacement  'at  Sarn-athrad  in Rath-loriel'  is strange,  for Sarn-
  athrad was  not a  ford over  that river  (Ascar) but  over Gelion,  and so
  remained  in  the  latest  writing,  though  the  name  was   changed  (see
  p. 335).                                                                   
    In  505,  the  striking  out  of  Dior's return  to Doriath  preceded its
  inclusion  under  503.  There  has  never  been  any  mention of  a further
  warning  of  Ulmo  (509)  since  the  coming  of Tuor  to Gondolin.  On the
  addition  in  545  -  587  concerning  Ancalagon see  V.329, $18;  and with
  the reference to  the end  of the  Elder Days  'according to  the reckoning
  of most lore-masters' cf. p. 343.                                          
                                                                           
    The third stage was the striking out of the whole manuscript from
  the year 400 almost to the end, and its replacement by a new version
  ('C'), which I give here for the same period, from the return of Hurin
  from Angband: this is a clear text with some later changes to the dates
  (changes which largely return the dates to those in B).
     501. Return of Hurin from captivity. He goes to Nargothrond and
          seizes the treasure of Glaurung.
     502. Making of the Nauglamir. Thingol quarrels with the
          Dwarves.
     503. The Dwarves of Belegost and Nogrod invade Doriath.
          Thingol is slain, and his realm ended. The Dwarves carry off
          the Dragon-gold, but Melian escaped and carried off the
          Nauglamir and the Silmaril, and brought it to Beren and
          Luthien. Then she returned to Valinor; but Luthien wore the

                                       
                                                                          
            Silmaril.  Now  Curufin  and  Celegorm hearing  of the  sack of
            Menegroth  ambushed  the  Dwarves  at  the  fords of  Ascar and
            defeated them; but the Dwarves  cast the  gold into  the river,
            which  was  after named  Rathloriel. Great  was the  chagrin of
            the Sons of Feanor to discover that the  Silmaril was  not with
            the Dwarves; but they dared not assail Luthien.                
             Dior  goes  to  Doriath  and  endeavours  to  reestablish  the
            realm.                                                         
    504 [> 502]. Tuor wedded Idril Celebrindal Turgon's  daughter of
            Gondolin.                                                      
    505 [> 503]. Birth  of  Earendil  Half-elven  in  Gondolin  (Spring).
            Here  a  messenger  brought the  Silmaril by  night to  Dior in
            Doriath, and he wore it; and by its  power Doriath  revived for
            a while. But it is believed that in this year Luthien and Beren
            passed  away,  for  they were  never heard  of again  on earth:
            mayhap the Silmaril hastened their  end, for  the flame  of the
            beauty of  Luthien as  she wore  it was  too bright  for mortal
            lands.                                                         
    511 [> 509]. The  Second  Kinslaying. The  Sons of  Feanor assail[ed]
            Dior, and he was slain;  slain also  were Celegorm  and Curufin
            and Cranthir. Eldun and  Elrun sons  of Dior  were left  in the
            woods  to  starve. Elwing  escaped and  came with  the Silmaril
            to  the  Mouths  of  Sirion.  Ulmo  sends  a  last  warning  to
            Gondolin,  which now  alone is  left; but  Turgon will  have no
            alliance  with  any  after the  kinslaying of  Doriath. Maeglin
            Eol's son, sister-son of Turgon,  was taken  in the  hills, and
            betrayed Gondolin to Morgoth.                                  
    512 [> 510]. The Fall of Gondolin. Death of King Turgon.                
    513 [> 511]. Tuor  and  Idril  bring  Earendil  and  the  remnant  of
            Gondolin to the Mouths of Sirion.                              
    527 [> 530]. Earendil  weds  Elwing.  Unquiet  of  Ulmo   comes  upon
            Tuor.  Tuor  and Idril  depart over  Sea, and  are heard  of no
            more on earth.                                                 
    528 [> 530 > 534]. Voyages of Earendil begin.                           
    [Added   entry:]  528   [>  532]   Elros  and   Elrond  twin   sons  of
            Earendil born.                                                 
    532 [> 534 > 538]. The  Third  and Last  Kinslaying. The  Havens of
            Sirion destroyed and Elros  and Elrond  sons of  Earendel taken
            captive, but are fostered with care by Maidros.  Elwing carries
            away the Silmaril, and comes  to Earendel  [> Earendil]  in the
            likeness of a bird.                                            
  536 [> 540 > 542]. Earendil comes to Valinor.                            
                                                                          
  Here  the replacement  text C  comes to  an end.  In the  entries 400-499
  in C (not given here)  this text  is so  close in  every date  and detail
  of  narrative  to  the  Grey  Annals  as  to  be scarcely  an independent

  document; and The Tale of Years was beginning  to turn  in on  itself, so
  to  speak,  and to  become 'Annals'  again. In  the entries  given above,
  where  we  reach  narrative  not  treated  in  GA  and  where  AB   2  is
  otherwise the latest source, it is much  to be  regretted that  my father
  did not allow this tendency even fuller scope, and did not extend  into a
  more  substantial  narrative  of  Celegorm  and  Curufin at  Sarn Athrad,
  the revival of Doriath, and the Second Kinslaying.                       
    I add a few notes on particular points.                                
    503.  The  ford   at  which   the  Dwarves   were  ambushed,   not  now
  itself named, is still over Ascar, not Gelion (see p. 347). The statement
  that the Dwarves 'cast the gold into the river' is  at variance  with the
  story told in the Sketch and  the Quenta  (where this  was done  by Beren
  and the Green-elves), and was perhaps a conscious return  to the  tale of
  The Nauglafring (II.237), in which the gold fell into the river  with the
  bodies of the Dwarves who bore it,  or else  was cast  into the  water by
  Dwarves seeking to reach the banks.                                      
    505  With  the  changed  dating of  this entry  the whole  narrative of
  the invasion of Doriath, the battle at the  ford, the  coming of  Dior to
  Doriath,  the  deaths  of  Beren  and  Luthien, and  the bringing  of the
  Silmaril to Dior, is comprised within the  single year  503. -  The brief
  revival of Doriath under  Dior has  not before  been associated  with the
  Silmaril; cf. what is said of its presence at the  Havens of  Sirion (pp.
  351, 354). On the probable association  of the  Silmaril with  the deaths
  of Beren and Luthien (though of  an entirely  different nature  from that
  suggested here) see IV.63, 190.                                          
    511. On the  fate of  Dior's sons  cf. AB  2 (V.142),  where it  is told
  that they  'were taken  captive by  the evil  men of  Maidros' following,
  and  they were  left to  starve in  the woods;  but Maidros  lamented the
  cruel deed, and sought unavailingly for them.' -  It seems  possible that
  'Turgon will have no alliance with any' was intended  to be  'no alliance
  with  any  son  of  Feanor';  cf.  the  Quenta (IV.140):  'Tidings Turgon
  heard of Thorndor  concerning the  slaying of  Dior, Thingol's  heir, and
  thereafter he shut his  ear to  word of  the woes  without; and  he vowed
  to march never at the side of any son of Feanor.'                        
    528  (added  entry)  On  the  statement  that  Elros  and  Elrond  were
  twins see V.152.  It is  stated in  The Line  of Elros  (Unfinished Tales
  p. 218) that Elros was born 58 years  before the  Second Age  began: this
  agrees with the changed date here (532) and the end of  the First  Age in
  590 (p. 346).                                                            
                                                                          
    Finally, we come to stage  'D', the  typescript of  The Tale  of Years;
  but before  turning to  the entries  beginning with  the return  of Hurin
  there are two pencilled entries on the typescript  at a  slightly earlier
  point which must be noticed:                                             
                                                                          
    497. Dior weds of the Green-elves > Dior weds Nimloth.          
    500. Birth of the twin sons of Dior, Elrun and Eldun.                   

                                                                              
                                                                               
  In connection with the first of these, there is an  isolated note  (it was
  written  in  fact  on  the  back  of  the   single  page   concerning  the
  Dragon-helm of Dorlomin referred to on pp. 140, 143):                       
    Dior  born  (in  Tol  Galen?)  c.470.  He appears  in Doriath  after its
  ruin, and is welcomed by Melian with his wife Elulin of Ossiriand.            
  On this note see p.  353, year  504. The  fourth letter  of Elulin  is not  
  perfectly certain. - In addition, the name of Dior's wife is also given as
  Lindis: see pp. 351, 353.                                                     
    The  name  Nimloth  was  adopted  in  the  published  Silmarillion  (see
  p.  234,  where  she is  said to  be 'kinswoman  of Celeborn')  on account
  of its appearance in the series of Elvish genealogies  which can  be dated
  to  December  1959  (p.  229). This  table gives  the descendants  of Elwe
  (Thingol) and of his  younger brother  Elmo, of  whom it  is said  that he
  was  'beloved  of  Elwe  with  whom  he  remained.'  On  one  side  of the
  table (descent from Elwe)  the wife  of Dior  Eluchil (Thingol's  heir) is
  Nimloth  'sister of  Celeborn'. Similarly  on the  other side,  Elmo's son  j
  is  Galahon,  and  Galahon  has  two sons,  Galathil and  Celeborn 'prince
  of Doriath', and a daughter  Nimloth, wife  of Dior  Eluchil. But  on the  ,1
  same  table  Nimloth  wife  of  Dior  also  appears  as  the  daughter  of
  Galathil (thus in the first case she was the second cousin of Dior, and in
  the latter the third cousin of Elwing). It is clear from rough pencillings
  on this page that  my father  was uncertain  about this,  and it  looks as
  if Nimloth as  niece of  Celeborn was  his second  thought. I  referred to
  this  genealogy  in  Unfinished  Tales, p.  233, but  did not  mention the
  alternative placing of Nimloth as Celeborn's sister.                          
    On the second of these late additions  to the  typescript, the  birth of
  Eldun and Elrun in the year 500, see pp. 257 and 300, note 16.                
                                                                               
    I give now the text of the typescript of The Tale of  Years in  its con-
  cluding entries. At the end the typescript becomes  manuscript, and  it is
  convenient to distinguish the two parts as 'D 1' and 'D 2'.                   
                                                                               
                                  

 501. Hurin is released from captivity. He goes to Nargothrond and
      seizes  the  treasure  of  Glaurung.  He  takes the  treasure to
      Menegroth and casts it at the feet of Thingol.                  
 502. The  Nauglamir  is  wrought  of  the  treasure of  Glaurung, and
      the  Silmaril  is  hung  thereon.  Thingol  quarrels   with  the
      Dwarves who had wrought for him the Necklace.                   
 503. The  Dwarves  of  Belegost  and  Nogrod  invade   Doriath.  King
      Elu Thingol is  slain and  his realm  ended. Melian  escapes and
      carries away  the Nauglamir  and the  Silmaril, and  brings them
      to  Beren  and Luthien.  She then  forsook Middle-earth  and re-
      turned to Valinor.                                              
         Curufin  and  Celegorm,  hearing  of  the sack  of Menegroth,
      ambushed  the  Dwarves  at  the  Fords of  Ascar as  they sought
      to  carry  off  the  Dragon-gold to  the mountains.  The Dwarves

 were  defeated  with  great  loss,  but  they  cast  the  gold  into the
 river,   which  was   therefore  after   named  Rathloriel.   Great  was
 the  anger  of  the  sons  of  Feanor  to  discover  that  the  Silmaril
 was   not   with   the   Dwarves;   but   they   dared  not   to  assail
 Luthien.  Dior   goes  to   Doriath  and   endeavours  to   recover  the
 realm of Thingol.                                                       
            In this year, or according to others in the year before, Tuor
 wedded   Idril   Celebrindal   Turgon's   daughter   of   Gondolin;  and
 in  the  spring  of  the  year  after  was  born  in  Gondolin  Earendil
 Halfelven.   [This   paragraph   was   struck   out   later   with   the
 words Must be placed in 502.]                                           
            In the autumn of this year a messenger  brought by  night the
 Silmaril to Dior in Doriath.                                            
 Here the typewritten text D 1  ends abruptly  near the  head of  a page,
 but  is  continued in  very rough  manuscript for  some distance  (D 2),
 though not so far as the end of version C  (which itself  did not  go by
 any mean's so far as B).                                                

  503. Elwing the White daughter of Dior born in Ossiriand.           
  504. Dior returns to  Doriath, and  with the  power of  the Silmaril
       restores it; but Melian departed to Valinor. Dior  now publicly
       wore the Nauglamir and the Jewel.                              
  505. The sons of Feanor hearing news of the Silmaril  that it  is in
       Doriath  hold council.  Maidros restrains  his brethren,  but a
       message is sent to Dior  demanding the  Jewel. Dior  returns no
       answer.                                                        
  506. Celegorn  inflames the  brethren, and  they prepare  an assault
       on Doriath. They come up at unawares in winter.                
                                                                     
  506-507. At Yule Dior fought the sons of Feanor on the east        
                                                                     
       marches of  Doriath, and  was slain.  There fell  also Celegorn
       (by Dior's hand) and Curufin and  Cranthir. The  cruel servants
       of  Celegorn  seize  Dior's  sons (Elrun  and Eldun)  and leave
       them  to starve  in the  forest. (Nothing  certain is  known of
       their fate, but some say that the birds succoured them, and led
       them to Ossir.)  [In margin:  Maidros repenting  seeks unavail-
       ingly for the children of Dior.] The  Lady Lindis  escaped with
       Elwing, and came  hardly to  Ossir, with  the Necklace  and the
       Jewel.  Thence hearing  the rumour  she fled  to the  Havens of
       Sirion.                                                        
  509. Maeglin captured by spies of Melkor (Sauron?).                 
  510. Midsummer.   Assault   and   sack   of   Gondolin,   owing   to
       treachery of Maeglin who revealed where it lay.                
  511. Exiles  of  Gondolin  (Tuor,  Idril  and  Earendil   &c.) reach
       Sirion, which now prospers in the power of the Silmaril.       
  512. Sons of Feanor learn  of the  uprising of  the New  Havens, and
       that the Silmaril is there, but Maidros forswears his oath.

  525. The  Unquiet  of  Ulmo  carne  upon   Tuor  and   he  built   a  ship
       Earame,    and    departed    into    the    West    with    Idril    (and
       Voronwe?)   and  is   heard  of   in  no   tale  since.   Earendil  wedded
       Elwing and became Lord of the men of the Havens.                          
  527. Torment  fell  upon   Maidros  and   his  brethren   (Maglor,  Dam-
       rod and Diriel) because of their unfulfilled oath.                        
  Here  the  text  ends,  halfway  down the  last page.  A commentary  on it
  follows.                                                                  
    501. In  the  original  story  of  Hurin's  coming  to Menegroth  in the
  Tale of  Turambar (II.114  - 15)  he with  his 'band'  or 'host'  of 'wild
  Elves'  brought  the  treasure  of  Nargothrond  in  a huge  assemblage of
  sacks and boxes, and they 'cast down  that treasury  at the  king's feet.'
  So also in the Sketch of the Mythology  (IV.32) 'Hurin  casts the  gold at
  Thingol's  feet',  without  however  any  indication of  how the  gold was
  brought  to  Doriath;  but  in  the  Quenta  (IV.132)  'Hurin   went  unto
  Thingol and sought  his aid,  and the  folk of  Thingol bore  the treasure
  to  the  Thousand  Caves' (on  the unsatisfactory  nature of  this version
  see IV.188). In  AB 2  (V.141) 'Hurin  brought the  gold to  Thingol.' See
  further p. 258.                                                           
    503. Against  'The  Dwarves  of  Belegost  and  Nogrod  invade  Doriath'
  my father pencilled an X and the single word  'cannot': i.e.,  the Dwarves
  could not pass the Girdle  of Melian.  In the  old sources  the protective
  magic was defeated by the device  of a  treacherous Elf  (in the  Tale) or
  Elves (in the Sketch and the Quenta);  but since  the Quenta  the question
  had never again come to the surface. In this connection there is a page of
  rough  notes, such  as my  father often  made when  meditating on  a story
  at large, concerned with the 'Turins Saga' (such as  'An account  of Beleg
  and his bow must be  put in  at the  point where  Turin first  meets him',
  and 'Turin must be faithless to Gwindor  - for  his character  is through-
  out that of a man of good will,  kind and  loyal, who  is carried  away by
  emotion,  especially  wrath  ...');  and  among these  and written  at the
  same time, though entirely unconnected, is the following:                 
    Doriath  cannot  be  entered  by  a  hostile  army!  Somehow it  must be
  contrived  that  Thingol  is  lured  outside  or  induced  to  go  to  war
  beyond  his  borders  and  is  there  slain  by  the Dwarves.  Then Melian
  departs,  and  the  girdle  being  removed  Doriath  is  ravaged   by  the
  Dwarves.                                                                  
  The  word  'cannot'  may  well  have  been written  against the  entry for
  503 in The Tale of Years at the same time as this.                        
    The  story  that  it  was   Celegorm  and   Curufin  who   ambushed  the
  Dwarves  at  'the  Fords  of Ascar'  is repeated  without change  from the
  previous version C (p. 348).  There is  a passing  reference to  a similar
  story (for in this case  it was  Caranthir, not  Celegorm and  Curufin) in
  the  post-Lord  of  the  Rings  text  Concerning  Galadriel  and Celeborn.
  This  was  published  in   Unfinished  Tales   in  a   'retold',  somewhat

 selective form for the purposes of that section of the  book; and  in the
 passage  (p.  235)  saying  that Celeborn  had no  love for  any Dwarves,
 and  never  forgave them  for their  part in  the destruction  of Doriath
 ('passing  over  Morgoth's  part  in  this  (by  angering of  Hurin), and
 Thingol's own faults'), my father proposed rather  than stated  that only
 the  Dwarves  of  Nogrod took  part in  the assault,  and that  they were
 'almost entirely destroyed by Caranthir'.                                
   This was not, however, his final view, as  it appears.  In a  letter of
 1963  (Letters  no.247,  p.  334) he  wrote that  he could  'foresee' one
 event in the Elder Days in which the Ents took a part:                   
   It was in Ossiriand... that Beren and Luthien dwelt  for a  while after
 Beren's  return  from  the  Dead.  Beren  did  not  show   himself  among
 mortals  again,  except  once.  He  intercepted  a  dwarf-army  that  had
 descended  from  the  mountains,   sacked  the   realm  of   Doriath  and
 slain  King  Thingol,  Luthien's  father,  carrying  off  a  great booty,
 including  Thingol's  necklace  upon  which  hung  the   Silmaril.  There
 was  a  battle about  a ford  across one  of the  Seven Rivers  of Ossir,
 and  the  Silmaril  was  recovered  ...  It seems  clear that  Beren, who
 had no army,  received the  aid of  the Ents  - and  that would  not make
 for love between Ents and Dwarves.                                       
                                                                         
 In this it is also notable that the old story that  the Dwarves  took the
 Nauglamir from Menegroth reappears (see pp. 346-7).                      
   Beneath the -loriel  of Rathloriel  my father  wrote in  pencil: lorion
 (Rathlorion  was the  original form  of this  river-name), but  he struck
 this out  and then  wrote mallen,  sc. Rathmallen  (cf. Rathmalad  (?) on
 the map, p. 191, $69).                                                   
   504. Dior's  return  to  Doriath has  been given  already under  503 in
 D 1, the typescript part of  the text.  - In  the B  and C  versions (pp.
 346-7)  Melian brought  the Silmaril  to Beren  and Luthien  in Ossiriand
 and then departed to Valinor, and this is said also in D 1 (p.  350). The
 present entry in D 2, a year later, repeats that Melian went  to Valinor,
 and the suggestion is that she  was in  Doriath when  Dior came;  cf. the
 note cited on p. 350: 'Dior... appears in Doriath after its ruin,  and is
 welcomed  by  Melian'.  This  seems  clearly  to have  been the  story in
 AB 1 (IV.307) and AB 2 (V.141 - 2). But it is impossible to be certain of
 anything with such compressed entries.                                   
   506-507. Ossir:  Ossiriand.  -  On   Maidros'  unavailing   search  for
 Elrun and Eldun see p. 349, year 511.                                    
   The  Lady  Lindis:  Lindis  appears  elsewhere  as  the name  of Dior's
 wife (see p. 257). The sentence 'Thence  hearing the  rumour she  fled to
 the  Havens  of  Sirion' presumably  means that  Lindis heard  the rumour
 that  the  survivors  of  Gondolin  had  reached  the  Havens  (an  event
 recorded in this text under the year 511).                               
                                                                         
 by Maeglin was later changed: see pp. 272-3 and note 30.                 

   511. Cf.  the  Quenta  (IV.152):  'for  them seemed  that in  that jewel
 lay the gift of  bliss and  healing that  had come  upon their  houses and
 their ships'; also AB 2 (V.143).                                             
   512. That  Maidros  'forswore  his  oath'  was stated  in AB  2 (V.142);
 in this and the following entries my father was  following that  text very
 closely (indeed D 2 is based upon it throughout).                            
   525. The  suggestion  that  Voronwe  was  the  companion  of   Tuor  and
 Idril on their voyage into  the West  is notable.  He (Bronweg  / Voronwe)
 was  originally  Earendil's  fellow-mariner   (IV.38,  150).   Cf.  Tuor's
 words to him in  the later  Tale of  Tuor (Unfinished  Tales p.  33): 'far
 from  the  Shadow  your  long  road shall  lead you,  and your  hope shall
 return to the Sea.'                                                          
                                                                             
   It  would  be  interesting  to  know  when  this  manuscript  conclusion
 D 2 was written. It looks as if it  belongs with  some of  the alterations
 and  additions  made to  the typescript  in earlier  entries, particularly
 those  pertaining  to  the  story  of  Turin,  and  in  these   there  are
 suggestions  that  they  derive  from the  period of  my father's  work on
 the Narn. But this is very  uncertain; and  if it  is so,  it is  the more
 remarkable  that  he should  have based  these entries  so closely  on the
 old pre-Lord of the Rings annals.                                            
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                A note on Chapter 22 Of the Ruin of Doriath                   
                       in the published Silmarillion.                         
                                                                             
 Apart  from  a few  matters of  detail in  texts and  notes that  have not
 been published, all that my father ever wrote on the  subject of  the ruin
 of Doriath  has now  been set  out: from  the original  story told  in the
 Tale  of  Turambar  (II.113-15) and  the Tale  of the  Nauglafring (II.221
 ff.), through  the Sketch  of the  Mythology (IV.32  - 3,  with commentary
 61 - 3)  and the  Quenta (IV.132  - 4,  with commentary  187-91), together  j
 with what little can be  gleaned from  The Tale  of Years  and a  very few
 later references  (see especially  pp. 352  - 3).  If these  materials are
 compared with the story told in The Silmarillion it is  seen at  once that
 this  latter  is fundamentally  changed, to  a form  for which  in certain
 essential  features  there  is no  authority whatever  in my  father's own
 writings.                                                                    
   There  were  very  evident  problems  with  the old  story. Had  he ever
 turned  to  it  again,  my  father  would  undoubtedly  have   found  some
 solution  other  than  that in  the Quenta  to the  question, How  was the
 treasure  of  Nargothrond  brought  to  Doriath?  There,  the  curse  that
 Mim laid upon the  gold at  his death  'came upon  the possessors  in this
 wise.  Each one  of Hurin's  company died  or was  slain in  quarrels upon
 the  road;  but  Hurin  went  unto  Thingol  and sought  his aid,  and the

  folk of Thingol bore the treasure  to the  Thousand Caves.'  As I  said in
  IV.188, 'it ruins the gesture, if Hurin must get the king himself to send
  for the gold  with which  he is  then to  be humiliated'.  It seems  to me
  most likely  (but  this  is mere  speculation) that  my father  would have
  reintroduced  the outlaws  from the  old Tales  (II.113-15, 222-3)  as the
  bearers of the treasure  (though not  the fierce  battle between  them and
  the Elves of the Thousand Caves): in the  scrappy writings  at the  end of
  The  Wanderings  of  Hurin  Asgon  and   his  companions   reappear  after
  the disaster in Brethil and go with Hurin  to Nargothrond  (pp. 306  - 7).
  How   he   would   have   treated   Thingol's   behaviour    towards   the
  Dwarves  is  impossible  to  say.  That  story was  only once  told fully,
  in  the  Tale  of  the  Nauglafring,  in  which  the conduct  of Tinwelint
  (precursor  of  Thingol)  was wholly  at variance  with the  later concep-
  tion of the king (see  II.245-6). In  the Sketch  no more  is said  of the
  matter  than  that  the  Dwarves  were  'driven  away   without  payment',
  while  in the  Quenta 'Thingol...  scanted his  promised reward  for their
  labour;  and  bitter  words  grew between  them, and  there was  battle in
  Thingol's halls'. There seems to be no clue or hint  in later  writing (in
  The  Tale  of Years  the same  bare phrase  is used  in all  the versions:
  'Thingol quarrels  with the  Dwarves'), unless  one is  seen in  the words
  quoted  from  Concerning  Galadriel  and  Celeborn  on  p.  353:  Celeborn
  in his view of the  destruction of  Doriath ignored  Morgoth's part  in it
  'and Thingol's own faults'.                                               
   In  The  Tale  of  Years  my  father  seems  not  to have  considered the
  problem  of  the  passage  of  the  Dwarvish  host  into  Doriath  despite
  the  Girdle of  Melian, but  in writing  the word  'cannot' against  the D
  version (p. 352)  he showed  that he  regarded the  story he  had outlined
  as impossible, for that reason. In  another place  he sketched  a possible
  solution  (ibid.): 'Somehow  it must  be contrived  that Thingol  is lured
  outside or induced to  go to  war beyond  his borders  and is  there slain
  by  the  Dwarves.  Then  Melian  departs,  and  the  girdle  being removed
  Doriath is ravaged by the Dwarves.'                                       
                                                                           
    In  the  story that  appears in  The Silmarillion  the outlaws  who went
  with  Hurin  to  Nargothrond  were  removed,  as  also  was  the  curse of
  Mim;  and  the  only  treasure  that  Hurin  took  from   Nargothrond  was
  the  Nauglamir  -  which  was  here   supposed  to   have  been   made  by
  Dwarves  for  Finrod  Felagund,  and  to  have  been  the  most  prized by
  him  of  all  the  hoard of  Nargothrond. Hurin  was represented  as being
  at last  freed from  the delusions  inspired by  Morgoth in  his encounter
  with  Melian  in  Menegroth.  The  Dwarves  who  set  the Silmaril  in the
  Nauglamir  were  already  in  Menegroth  engaged  on  other works,  and it
  was  they  who  slew  Thingol;  at  that  time  Melian's  power  was with-
  drawn  from  Neldoreth  and  Region,  and  she  vanished  out  of  Middle-
  earth,  leaving  Doriath  unprotected.  The  ambush  and   destruction  of
  the  Dwarves  at  Sarn  Athrad  was  given  again to  Beren and  the Green

 Elves (following my father's letter of  1963 quoted  on p.  353, where
                                                                      
 the Ents, 'Shepherds of the Trees', were introduced.                  
   This story was not lightly or easily conceived,  but was  the outcome
 of  long experimentation  among alternative  conceptions. In  this work
 Guy Kay took a major part, and the  chapter that  I finally  wrote owes
 much to my discussions with him. It is,  and was,  obvious that  a Step
 was being taken of a different order from  any other  'manipulation' of
 my father's own writing in the  course of  the book:  even in  the case
 of the story of  The Fall  of Gondolin,  to which  my father  had never
 returned,  something  could  be  contrived without  introducing radical
 changes  in  the  narrative.  It seemed  at that  time that  there were
 elements inherent in the story of the Ruin of Doriath as it  stood that
 were radically incompatible with 'The  Silmarillion' as  projected, and
 that  there  was  here an  inescapable choice:  either to  abandon thai
 conception, or else to alter the  story. I  think now  that this  was a
 mistaken view,  and that  the undoubted  difficulties could  have been,
 and  should  have  been,  surmounted  without  so far  overstepping the
 bounds of the editorial function.                                     
