 PART FOUR.
         
   QUENDI
    AND
   ELDAR.

                             QUENDI AND ELDAR.                           
                                                                        
 The title Quendi and Eldar clearly  belongs properly  to the  long essay
 that is printed here, though my father used it also to include  two other
 much briefer  works, obviously  written at  much the  same time;  one of
 these, on the origin of the Orcs, was published  in Morgoth's  Ring (see
 X.415, where  a more  detailed account  is given).  Quendi and  Eldar is
 extant in a typescript  with carbon  copy that  can be  fairly certainly
 dated to  the years  1959-60 (ibid.);  and both  copies are  preceded by
 a manuscript page that  in addition  to the  following preamble  gives a
 parallel title Essekenta Eldarinwa.                                    
                                                                        
      Enquiry  into  the  origins  of  the  Elvish  names  for Elves     
      and  their  varieties  clans  and  divisions:  with Appendices     
      on  their  names  for  the  other  Incarnates:  Men,  Dwarves,     
      and Orcs; and on their analysis of their own language,             
        Quenya: with a note on the 'Language of the Valar'.              
                                                                        
 My father corrected the two copies carefully and  in precisely  the same
 ways (except for a few  later pencilled  alterations). The  text printed
 here follows the original very  closely, apart  from very  minor changes
 made for consistency or clarity, the omission of a passage  of extremely
 complex phonology, and a reorganisation of  the text  in respect  of the
 notes. As often elsewhere in his later  writings, my  father interrupted
 his main  text with  notes, some  of them  long; and  these I  have num-
 bered  and  collected  at  the  end,  distinguishing  them  from  my own
 numbered notes by referring to them in the body of the  text as  Note 1,
 Note 2,  &c., with  a reference  to the  page on  which they  are found.
 Also, and more drastically, I have omitted one substantial  section from
 Appendix D  (see p.  396). This  was done  primarily for  reasons of
 space,  but  the  passage  in  question is  a somewhat  abstract account
 of the phonological theories of earlier  linguistic Loremasters  and the
 contributions of Feanor, relying rather allusively on  phonological data
 that are taken for granted: it stands apart from the content of the work
 at  large  (and entered,  I suspect,  from the  movement of  my father's
 train of thought rather than as a planned element in the whole).         
   Also  for  reasons  of  space  my  commentary  is  kept  to  a  severe
 minimum.   Abbreviations   used   are   PQ   (Primitive   Quendian),  CE
 (Common  Eldarin),  CT  (Common  Telerin),  Q  (Quenya),   T  (Telerin),
 N (Noldorin), S (Sindarin), V (Valarin).                                

                           QUENDI AND ELDAR.                           
                                                                     
 Origin  and  Meanings  of  the  Elvish   words  referring   to  Elves
 and  their  varieties.  With  Appendices  on  their  names  for other
 Incarnates.                                                          
                                                                     
                    A. The principal linguistic elements concerned.
 1. *KWENE.
   (a) PQ *kwene 'person' (m. or f.). CE *kwen (-kwen), pl.
      *kweni, person (m. or f.), one, (some)body-, pl. per-
      sons', '(some) people'.
   (b) PQ and CE *kwende, pl. *kwendf. This form was made
      from *kwene by primitive fortification of the median n )
      nd. It was probably at first only used in the plural, in the
      sense 'people, the people as a whole', sc. embracing all the
      three original clans.
   (c) *kwendja adj. 'belonging to the *kwendi, to the people as
      a whole'.                                                       
                                                                     
 2.  *ELE According to Elvish legend this was a primitive             
     exclamation, 'lo! ' 'behold! ' made by the Elves when they       
     first saw the stars. Hence:                                      
                                                                     
   (a)   CE    *el,    *ele,     *el-a,    'lo!'  'look!' 'see!'
   (b)   CE    *el,    pl.       *eli,     eli,   'star'.
   (c)   CE   *elen,   pl.   'elena,   'star',  with   'extended  base'.
   (d)   CE   *elda,   an  adjectival   formation  'connected   or  con-
   cerned  with  the  stars',  used  as  a  description of  the *kwendi.
   According  to  legend  this  name,   and  the   next,  were   due  to
   the  Vala  Orome.  They  were  thus  probably  at  first   only  used
   in the  plural,  meaning  'star-folk'.
   (e)  CE *elena,  an   adjectival  form   made  from   the  extended
                                                                     
      stem *elen, of the same meaning and use as *elda.               
 3.   *DELE.                                                           
                                                                     
   (a)  A  verbal  base  'dele,  also  with  suffix *del-ja,  'walk, go,
   proceed, travel'.
   (b)  *edelo,  an  agental  formation   of  primitive   pattern:  'one
   who  goes,  traveller,  migrant'.  A  name  made   at  the   time  of
   the   Separation   for   those   who   decided   to   follow   Orome.
   (c)   *awa-delo,   *awa-delo, ?*wa-delo.   Old   compounds  with
   the   element   *awa   'away'   (see   below).   A   name   made   in
   Beleriand   for   those   who    finally   departed    from   Middle-
   earth.                                                             

 4. *HEKE.  Probably not in  origin a  verbal base, but an
    adverbial  element  'aside,  apart, separate'.
 (a)  PQ  *heke  'apart, not including'.
 (b)  PQ  and CE  verbal derivative,  transitive: 'hek-ta  'set aside,
    cast out, forsake'.
 (c)  PQ  *hekla  'any  thing  (or  person)  put  aside from,  or left
    out from, its  normal   company'.   Also   in    personal   form
    *heklo 'a  waif  or   outcast';   adjectival  forms   'hekla  and
    *hekela.                                                            
 The  element *AWA,  appearing  in  3(c)  above,  referred   to  move-
 ment  away,  viewed  from  the point  of view  of the  thing, person,
 or  place  left. As  a prefix  it had  probably already  developed in
 CE  the  form  *au-.  The  form  *awa  was  originally   an  indepen-
 dent  adverbial  form,  but  appears  to  have  been  also used  as a
 prefix  (as  an intensive  form of  *awa-, 'au-).  The form  *wa- was
 probably  originally  used  as a  verbal stem,  and possibly  also in
 composition with verbal stems.                                      
   In  the  Eldarin  languages  this  stem made  contact in  form with
 other elements, distinct in origin and in  sense.*ABA  'refuse', 'say
 nay (in refusal or denial)': this is the source of the CE  *abar, pl.
 *abari 'a refuser,' one  who  declined  to   follow  Orome.   *wo  in
 forms *wo and *wo- (the latter  only as  a prefix):  this was  a dual
 adverb  'together',  referring  to  the  junction  of two  things, or
 groups, in a pair or whole.  The plural  equivalent was   *jo,  *jom,
 and  as  a  prefix  *jo, *jom.  *HO in  forms >ho  and >ho:  this was
 an  adverb  'from,  coming  from',  the point  of view  being outside
 the thing referred to.                                              
                                                                    
 The  principal  derivatives in  form (their  use is  discussed below)
 of the CE words given above were as follows:                        
                                                                    
                                 *KWEN.                              
 QUENYA.  1(a)  quen,  pl.  queni;  unstressed,   as  a   pronoun  or
   final element in a compound, quen.                                
      1(b)  Quendi.  The  sg.  quende  (not  much  used)  was  made in
   Quenya  from  Quendi,  on  the   model  of   other  nouns   in  -e,
   the  majority  of  which  formed  their plurals  in -i.  There were
   also  two  old  compounds:   Kalaquendi  'Light-elves'   and  Mori-
   quendi 'Dark-elves'.                                              
      1(c)  Quendya,  which  remained  in  the  Vanyarin  dialect, but
   in   Noldorin   became   Quenya.   This   was   only    used   with
   reference to language.                                            

 TELERIN. 1(a)  pen  as  a  pronoun,  and  -pen   in  a   few  old
 compounds.                                                       
    1(b)  Pendi,  plural  only.  Also  in the  compounds Calapendi
 and Moripendi.                                                   
    1(c) Not found.                                               
                                                                 
 SINDARIN. 1(a)  pen,  usually  mutated  ben,  as a  pronoun. Also
 -ben, -phen in a few old compounds.                              
    1(b)  Not  found.  The  compounds  Calben  (pl.   Celbin)  and
 Morben   (pl.   Moerbin,   Morbin)   must   certainly   have  de-
 scended  from  the  same  source  as  those mentioned  above, but
 their  final  element  was  evidently altered  to agree  with the
 compounds  of  *kwen.  The   unaltered  derivatives   would  have
 been  *Calbend,  *Moerbend;  but  though  final   -nd  eventually
 became  -n  in  Sindarin,  this  change had  not occurred  in the
 early  records, and  no cases  of -bend  are found.  In addition,
 the  form  Morben  (without  affection (1) of the o)  shows either
 an  alteration  to  *mora-  for  mori-,  after  *kala-,  or  more
 probably  substitution  of  S  morn-  from  *morna,  the  usual S
 adjectival form.                                                 
     1(c) Not found.                                              
                                                                 
                               *EL                                
 QUENYA. 2(a)  ela!  imperative  exclamation,  directing  sight to
 an actually visible object.                                      
    2(b) el, pl. eli, 'star' (poetic word).                       
    2(c) elen, pl. eleni (occasionally in verse eldi), 'star'. The
 normal word  for a  star of  the actual  firmament. The  pl. form
 eleni, without syncope, is re-formed after the singular.         
    2(d) Elda only used as a noun, chiefly in  the pl.  Eldar. See
 also (Quenya) 3(b) below.                                        
    2(e) Elda as  above. As  an adjective  referring to  stars the
 form used was elenya.                                            
                                                                 
 TELERIN. 2(a) ela! as in Quenya.                                  
    2(b) el, pl. eli. The ordinary word for 'star'.               
    2(c)  elen,  pl.  elni. An  archaic or  poetic variant  of the
 preceding.                                                       
    2(d)  Ella.  An   occasional  variant   of  Ello,   which  was
 the  normal  form  of  the  word.  This  shows  contact  with the
 products of *edelo: see further under (Telerin) 3.               
    2(e) Not found. The form would have been *Elna.               
                                                                 
 SINDARIN.  2(a)  elo!  An  exclamation  of   wonder,  admiration,
 delight.                                                         

 2(b) Not found.                                                  
 2(c)  el,  pl. elin,  class-plural elenath.  An archaic  word for
 'star', little used except in verse, apart from the  form elenath
 'all the host of the stars of heaven'.                           
 2(d)  Ell-,  only  used  in the  m. and  f. forms  Ellon, Elleth,
 elf-man,  elf-woman;  the class-plural  El(d)rim; and  final -el,
 pl. -il, in some old compounds: see (Sindarin) 3(b).             
 2(e)  Elen,  pl.  Elin, with  class-plural Eledhrim,  Elf, Elves.
 dhr is < n-r in secondary  contact. On  usage see  further below.
                                                                 
                                      *DEL.                       
 QUENYA. 3(a)  lelya-'go,  proceed  (in  any  direction), travel,,
 past tense lende. This form is due to  the early  change in  Q of
 initial  d  >  l.  The change  was regular  in both  Vanyarin and
 Noldorin  dialects  of  Quenya.  It  occurs occasionally  also in
 Telerin  languages,  though  this  may  be  due  rather   to  d/l
 variation  in PQ,  for which  there is  some evidence.  A notable
 example   being  de/le   as  pronominal   elements  in   the  2nd
 person.                                                          
 In  Q  *del-  seems  to  have  become  *led,   by  dissimilation.
 The  past  form  clearly  shows  *led,  while  lelya may  also be
 derived from *ledja, since dj became ly medially in Quenya       
 3(b)  Eldo.   An  archaic   variant  of   Elda,  with   which  it
 coalesced  in  form and  sense. Eldo  cannot however  be directly
 descended  from  *edelo.  Its form  is probably  due to  a change
 *edelo  > eledo,  following the  change in  the verb.  The change
 of initial d > l  was early  and may  have preceded  syncope, and
 the  loss  of  feeling  for  the  etymological connexions  of the
 word, which finally resulted in the blending  of the  products of
 2  and  3.  Unchanged   *edelo  would   by  syncope   have  given
 *edlo  >  *ello  (which  is  not  found).  See,   however,  under
 Sindarin for reasons  for supposing  that there  may have  been a
 variant  form  *edlo  (with  loss of  sundoma):(2) this could have
 produced  a  Quenya  form  *eldo,  since  transposition of  dl in
 primary  contact  to  the favoured  sequence Id  not infrequently
 occurred in the pre-record period of Quenya.                     
 3(c)   Aurel   <   *aw(a)delo.   Oarel   <   *awadelo.   In   the
 Vanyarin  dialect  Auzel  and  Oazel.  Oarel  (Oazel)  were  the
 forms  commonly  used  in Q.  The plurals  took the  forms -eldi.
 This  shows  that  the ending  -el was  associated with  the noun
 Elda.  This  was  facilitated  by  a  normal  development   in  Q
 morphology:  a  word  of  such  a  form  independently  as *elda,
 when  used  as the  final element  in a  compound of  early date,

 was  shortened  to  *elda,  pl.  *elch  >  *eld, *eldi  > historic
 Q  -el,  -eldi.  In  addition oar  was in  actual use  in Q  as an
 adverbial  form  derived  from *AWA  (see  below):  a  fact  which
 also accounts for the selection of oarel, oazel.                   
                                                                   
 TELERIN. 3(a) delia 'go, proceed'. Past tense delle.                
    3(b)  Ello.  The  usual  form,  preferred  to Ella,  from which,
 however,  it  did  not  differ  in  sense.  Both  *edelo  and *edlo
 regularly became ello in Telerin.                                  
    3(c)  Audel,  pl.  Audelli.  This  shows  the  same  association
 with  -el,  the  shortened form  in composition  of ella,  ello, as
 that seen in Q.                                                    
                                                                   
 SINDARIN. 3(a) Not found.                                           
    3(b) Edhel, pl. Edhil. The most used word in Sindarin; but      
 only normally used in these forms. As noted above under            
 (Sindarin) 2(d) the m. and f. forms were Ellon, Elleth; and        
 there was also a class-plural Eldrim, Elrim (ll-r in secondary     
 contact > ldr, later again simplified). As suggested under         
 (Quenya) 3(b), there may have been a variant *edlo, which          
 would regularly give ell- in Sindarin. Since this shorter form     
 would be most likely to appear in compounds and extended           
 forms, it would account for the limitation of Sindarin ell- to     
 such forms as Ellon, Elleth, Eldrim. It would also account for     
 the blending of the products of stems 2 El and 3 Del in            
 Sindarin, as well as in Quenya. The form -el, pl. -il also occurs '
 in some old compounds (especially personal names), where it        
 may be due also to a blending of *elda and *edlo. In later         
 compounds -edhel is used.                                          
    3(c) Odhel, pl. Odhil; beside later more usual Godhel,        
 Godhil. Also a class-plural Odhellim, Godhellim. Odhel is          
 from *aw(a)delo, and the exact equivalent of Q Aurel, T            
 Audel. Godhel could be derived from *wadelo: S initial *wa-       
 > gwo > go. But since it appears later than Odhel, and after       
 this term had become specially applied to the Exiled Noldor,       
 it seems most probable that it took g- from the old clan-name      
 Golodh, pl. Goelydh, which it practically replaced. Golodh         
 was the S equivalent of Q Noldo, both from PQ *ngolodo.            
                                                                   
                                *HEK.                               
 QUENYA.  4(a)   heka!  imperative   exclamation  'be   gone!  stand
 aside!'.  Normally  only  addressed  to  persons. It  often appears
 in  the  forms  hekat  sg.  and hekal  pl. with  reduced pronominal
 affixes  of  the  2nd   person.  Also   bequa  (?   from *hek-wa)

 adverb and  preposition 'leaving  aside, not  counting, exclud-
 ing, except'.                                                  
   4(b)  hehta-,  past  tense  hehtane,  'put aside,  leave out,
 exclude, abandon, forsake'.                                    
   4(c) hekil and hekilo m., hekile f.: 'one lost or forsaken by
 friends,  waif,  outcast,  outlaw'.  Also  Hekel,  pl. Hekeldi,
 re-formed to match Oarel, especially applied to the  Eldar left
 in  Beleriand.  Hence  Hekelmar  and  Hekeldamar,  the  name in
 the language of the loremasters of Aman  for Beleriand.  It was
 thought  of as  a long  shoreland beside  the Sea  (cf. Eglamar
 under Sindarin below).                                         

 TELERIN. 4(a) heca! For  Q hequa  the T  form is  heco (?  < *hek
 + au).                                                           
   4(b) hecta- 'reject, abandon'.                                 
   4(c) hecul, heculo. Also with special  reference to  those left
 in Beleriand, Hecello; Heculbar or Hecellubar, Beleriand.        
                                                                 
 SINDARIN. PQ  h-  only  survived  in  the  dialects  of  Aman. It
 disappeared   without   trace   in   Sindarin.   *hek   therefore
 appears as *ek, identical in form with PQ *eke 'sharp point'.
   4(a) ego! 'be off!' This is  from *hek(e)  a: a  the imperative
 particle,  being  originally independent  and variable  in place,
 survived  in S  as o  > o,  though this  now always  followed the
 verb stem and had become an inflexion.                           
   4(b) eitha-. This is  in the  main a  derivative of  PQ *ek-ta,
 and  means  'prick  with a  sharp point',  'stab'; but  the sense
 'treat with scorn, insult' (often with reference to  rejection or
 dismissal)  may  show  the  effect of  blending with  PQ *hek-ta.
 To say to anyone ego! was indeed the gravest eithad.             
   4(c)  Eglan,  mostly  used  in  the  plural  Eglain, Egladhrim.
 The  name  that the  Sindar gave  to themselves  ('the Forsaken')
 as  distinguished  from  the Elves  who left  Middle-earth. Eglan
 is  <  an extended  adjectival form  *heklana. The  older shorter
 form  (*hekla  or  *hekla)  survives in  a few  place-names, such
 as Eglamar  (cf. Hekelmar,  etc.), Eglarest.  These are  shown to
 be  old  from  their  formation,   with  the   genitival  element
 preceding: *ekla-mbar, *ekla-rista.                              
                                                                 
                               *AWA.                              
 QUENYA. au- as a verbal prefix: <  either *au  or *awa,.  as in
 au-kiri- 'cut off'. The point of  view was  in origin  'away from
 the speaker or the place of his thought', and this distinction is
 usually preserved in Q.  Thus aukiri  meant 'cut  off, so  that a

 portion is lost or no longer available', but hokiri (see below)
 meant 'cut off a required portion, so as to have it or use it'.
      oa, oar. Adverbs: < *awa,. the form oar shows addition     
 of the ending -d (prehistoric -da) indicating motion to or      
 towards a point. The form awa appears originally to have        
 been used either of rest or motion, and oa can still be so used
 in Q. This adverbial oa, oar was occasionally used as a prefix
 in compounds of later formation. Though, as has been            
 shown, in Oareldi, the most commonly used, the r is in fact of
 different origin.                                               
      The verb auta- 'go away, leave (the point of the speaker's
 thought)' had an old 'strong' past tense anwe, only found in
 archaic language. The most frequently used past and perfect     
 were vane, avanie, made from the stem *wa; together with a      
 past participle form vanwa. This last was an old formation      
 (which is also found in Sindarin), and was the most frequent-
 ly used part of the verb. It developed the meanings 'gone, lost,
 no longer to be had, vanished, departed, dead, past and over'.
 With it the forms vane and avanie were specially associated in
 use and meaning. In the more purely physical sense 'went        
 away (to another place)' the regular forms (for a -ta verb of
 this class) oante, oantie were used. The form perfect avanie is
 regularly developed from *a-waniie, made in the prehistoric
 period from the older perfect form of this type *awawiie,       
 with intrusion of n from the past (the forms of past and        
 perfect became progressively more closely associated in         
 Quenya). The accent remained on the wa, since the augment       
 or reduplication in verbal forms was never accented even in     
 the retraction period of Quenya (hence no form *oanie           
 developed: contrast oante < *awa-n-te). The form vanie          
 appearing in verse has no augment: probably a phonetic         
 development after a preceding vowel; but such forms are not     
 uncommon in verse.                                              
SINDARIN. The only normal derivative is the preposition o,       
 the usual word for 'from, of'. None of the forms of the         
 element *awa are found as a prefix in S, probably because       
 they became like or the same as the products of *wo, *wo (see
 next). The form Odhel is isolated (see above, Sindarin 3(c)).
 As the mutations following the preposition o show, it must      
 prehistorically have ended in -t or -d. Possibly, therefore, it
 comes from *aud, with d of the same origin as that seen in Q
 oar (see above). Some have thought that it received the         

                                                          
                                                               
 addition -t (at a period  when *au  had already  become q  > o)
 by association with *et out, out  of .  The latter  retains its
 consonant in the  form ed  before vowels,  but loses  it before
 consonants, though es, ef, eth are often found before s, f, th.
 o, however, is normally o in all  positions, though  od appears
 occasionally  before  vowels,  especially  before  o-.  The in-
 fluence of *et > ed is therefore probably only a late  one, and
 does not account for the mutations.                            
                                                               
TELERIN. The  Telerin  forms  are closely  similar to  those of
 Quenya  in  form  and  meaning,  though  the  development  *aua
 > oa does not occur, and  v remains  w in  sound. Thus  we have
 prefix au-, adverb au or avad; verb auta- with  past participle
 vanua, and  associated past  and perfect  vane and  avanie; and
 in physical senses vante, avantie.                             
                                                               
                           *WO.                                 
QUENYA. This  does  not  remain  in Q  as an  independent word.
 It is however a frequent prefix in the form o- (usually reduced
 to o- when unstressed), used in  words describing  the meeting,
 junction, or union of two things or persons,  or of  two groups
 thought of  as units.  Thus: o-mentie  (meeting or  junction of
 the  directions  of  two  people) as  in the  familiar greeting
 between  two  people,  or two  companies each  going on  a path
 that crosses that of the other: Elen sila lumenna omentielvo!(3)
 'A  star  shines upon  the hour  of the  meeting of  our ways.'
 (Note 1, p. 407)                                               
    This prefix was normally unstressed in verbs  or derivatives
 of verbs;  or generally  when the  next following  syllable was
 long. When stressed it had the  form o-,  as in  ononi 'twins',
 beside the adj. onona 'twin-born', also used as a noun  'one of
 a pair of twins'.                                              
                                                               
TELERIN use does  not materially  differ; but  in form  the su-
 (lost in Quenya before o) is retained: prefix vo, vo-. (Note 1,
 p. 407)                                                        
SINDARIN. In the prefix  gwa-, go-  'together, co-,  com-'. The
 dual  limitation was  no longer  made; and  go- had  the senses
 both  of  *wo  and  *jo.  *jo, *jom-  disappeared as  a living
 prefix. gwa- occurred only in  a few  S dissyllables,  where it
 was stressed, or in their recognizable derivatives: e.g. gwanun
 'a pair  of twins',  gwanunig one  of such  a pair.  These were
 mostly  of  ancient  formation,  and  so  retained  their  dual
 significance.  gwa-  is regularly  developed from  *wo >  *wa >

 gwa, when stressed in  prehistoric Sindarin.  go- is  from *wo >
 gwo  >  go,  when  primitively  unstressed;  and  also  from gwa- 
 >  go-,  when  it  became  again  unstressed.  Since PQ  *wa (one
 of  the  forms  of  *AWA) would  also have  produced go-,  go-, Or
 gwa-  if  primitively  shortened  (e.g.  before  two  consonants),
 while  *au  would  have  produced  o-,  the  same as  the frequent
 initially mutated form of go- 'together', the prefixal forms of
 *AWA were lost in Sindarin.                                       
                                                                  
                                *HO.                               
QUENYA.  This   was  evidently   an  ancient   adverbial  element,
 occurring principally as a proclitic or enclitic: proclitic,  as a
 prefix  to verb  stems; and  enclitic, as  attached to  noun stems
 (the  usual  place  for  the  simpler 'prepositional'  elements in
 PQ).  Hence  Quenya  ho-  (usually  so,  even  when it  had become
 unstressed),  as  a  verb  prefix.  It  meant  'away,  from,  from
 among', but the point  of view  was outside  the thing,  place, or
 group  in  thought,  whereas  in  the   derivatives  of  *AWA  the
 point  in  thought was  the place  or thing  left. Thus  Q hokiri-
 'cut  off',  so  as  to have  or use  a required  portion; whereas
 aukiri- meant 'cut off' and get rid of or lose a  portion. hotuli-
 'come away', so  as to  leave a  place or  group and  join another
 in  the  thought or  place of  the speaker;  whereas au  could not
 be used with the stem tul- 'come'.                                
    As a  noun enclitic  *-ho became  -o, since  medial h  was very
 early lost without trace in CE. This  was the  source of  the most
 used  'genitive'  inflexion  of  Quenya.  Properly  it   was  used
 partitively,  or  to  describe  the  source  or  origin, not  as a
 'possessive', or adjectivally to describe qualities; but naturally
 this 'derivative genitive' (as English of) could  be used  in many
 circumstances  that  might  have  possessive  or   adjectival  im-
 plications, though  'possession' was  indicated by  the adjectival
 suffix -va, or (especially  in general  descriptions) by  a 'loose
 compound'.   Thus  'Orome's   horn'  was   roma  Oromeva   (if  it
 remained   in  his   possession);  Orome   roma  would   mean  'an
 Orome  horn',  sc.  one  of  Orome's  horns (if  he had  more than
 one);  but  roma  Oromeo  meant  'a   horn  coming   from  Orome',
 e.g.  as  a gift,  in circumstances  where the  recipient, showing
 the gift with pride, might say 'this is Orome's horn'. If  he said
 'this  was  Orome's  horn',  he   would  say   Oromeva.  Similarly
 lambe  Eldaron  would  not  be  used  for  'the  language  of  the
 Eldar'  (unless  conceivably in  a case  where the  whole language

 was  adopted  by  another  people), which  is expressed  either by
 Elda-lambe or lambe Eldaiva. (Note 2, p. 407)                    
   There  remained  naturally  many  cases  where   either  posses-
 sive-adjectival or partitive-derivative  genitives might  be used,
 and the tendency to prefer the latter, or to use them in  place of
 the  former,  increased.  Thus  alkar  Oromeo  or  alkar  Oromeva
 could  be  used  for 'the  splendour of  Orome', though the latter
 was  proper  in  a  description  of Orome  as he  permanently was,
 and  the  former  of  his   splendour  as   seen  at   the  moment
 (proceeding  from  him)  or  at  some point  in a  narrative. 'The
 Kings of the Eldar' might  be either  i arani  Eldaron or  i arani
 Eldaive,  though  the  former  would   mean  if   accurately  used
 'those  among  the  Eldar who  were kings'  and the  latter 'those
 (kings)  in  a  particular  assembly  who  were  Elvish'.  In such
 expressions  as  'Elwe, King  of the  Sindar (people),  or Doriath
 (country)'   the   derivative   form   was   usual:   Elwe,   Aran
 Sindaron, or Aran Lestanoreo.                                    
                                                                 
TELERIN. The  Telerin  use  of the  prefix ho-  was as  in Quenya.
 The inflexion was  -o, as  in Quenya,  but it  did not  receive -n
 addition  in  the plural.  It was  more widely  used than  in pure
 Quenya,  sc.  in  most  cases  where  English  would   employ  the
 inflexion -s,  or of;  though the  possessive, especially  when it
 concerned   a   single   person   or   possessor,   was  expressed
 without  inflexion: either  with the  possessor placed  first (the
 older usage), or (possibly  under the  influence of  the genitival
 or  adjectival  expressions  which  were  placed  second)  follow-
 ing the  possessed. In  the latter  case, the  appropriate posses-
 sive suffix ('his, hers, its, their') was usually appended  to the
 noun.  So  Olue  cava;  or  cava Olue,  usually cavaria  Olue (sc.
 'the  house  of  him,  Olwe');  =  'Olwe's  house'. The  last form
 was  also  used  in  Quenya  with  proper  names, as  koarya Olwe.
 Both  languages also  used the  adjectival possessive  suffixes in
 a  curious  way,  attaching  them  to  adjectives   attributed  to
 proper names  (or names  of personal  functions, like  'king'): as
 Varda  Aratarya,  'Varda  the  Lofty,  Varda  in  her  sublimity'.
 This  was  most  usual  in  the  vocative:  as  in  Meletyalda, or
 fuller  Aran  Meletyalda  (literally 'your  mighty' or  'king your
 mighty'),  more  or  less  equivalents  of  'Your   Majesty'.  Cf.
 Aragorn's farewell: Arwen vanimalda, namarie!(4)                  
                                                                 
SINDARIN. Since initial h- disappeared in Sindarin *ho would
    have become u and so, clashing with the negative u, naturally

 did not  survive. >ho  as a  proclitic might  have given  o;  butg
 it  does  not  occur  as  a  verbal  prefix, although  it possibly
 contributed to the Sindarin preposition o (see under *Awa,       
 Sindarin)  which  is  used  in  either direction,  from or  to the
 point  of  view  of  the  speaker.  Since  all  final  vowels  dis-
 appeared  in  Sindarin,  it  cannot be  determined whether  or not
 this  language  had  in  the  primitive  period  developed inflex-
 ional  -o.  Its  presence  in  Telerin  of  Aman makes  its former
 presence  in  Sindarin  probable.  The  placing  of  the  genitive
 noun  second  in   normal  Sindarin   is  also   probably  derived
 from   inflexional   forms.   Compounds   of   which   the   first
 element was 'genitival' were evidently in  the older  period still
 normal, as  is seen  in many  place- and  personal names  (such as
 Egla-mar), and  was still  in more  limited use  later, especially
 where  the  first  element  was  or was  regarded as  an adjective
 (as  Mordor  'Land  of  Darkness' or  'Dark Land').  But genitival
 sequences  with  the possessor  or qualifier  second in  the later
 period  also  became   fixed  compounds:   as  Doriath,   for  Dor
 lath 'Land of the Fence'.                                         
                                                                  
                                *ABA.                              
 Though  this became  a verbal  stem, it  is probably  derived from
 a  primitive  negative  element,  or   exclamation,  such   as *BA
 'no!'  It  did  not,  however,  deny  facts, but  always expressed
 concern or will; that is, it expressed refusal  to do  what others
 might  wish  or  urge, or  prohibition of  some action  by others.
 As  a verbal  stem it  developed the  form *aba-  (with connecting
 vowel a in the aorist); as a  particle or  prefix the  forms *aba,
 *ba, and *aba.                                                    
                                                                  
QUENYA. In Quenya the verb ava- was little used in ordinary        
 language, and revealed that it was not in origin a 'strong' or
 basic verbal stem by having the 'weak' past form avane. In        
 ordinary use it was replaced by the compound va-quet              
 (vaquetin, vaquenten) 'to say no', sc. 'to say I will not', or 'do
 not', 'to refuse' or 'to forbid'.                                 
    As a prefix the form used was usually ava-, the force of      
 which can be observed in avaquetima 'not to be said, that         
 must not be said', avanyarima 'not to be told or related', as     
 contrasted with uquetima 'unspeakable', that is, 'impossible 
 to say, put into words, or unpronounceable', unydrima 'impos-     
 sible to recount', sc. because all the facts are not known, or
 the tale is too long. Compare also Avamanyar 'those who did       

 not  go  to  Aman,  because  they  would  not' (an  equivalent of
 Avari)  with  Uamanyar  'those  who  did not  in the  event reach
 Aman' (an equivalent of Hekeldi).                               
   As a  particle (the  form of  this stem  most used  in ordinary
 language)  the  Quenya  form   was  usually   va!  This   was  an
 exclamation  or  particle  expressing  the  will  or wish  of the
 speaker, meaning according to context 'I will not' or 'Do  not! '
 Note  that  it  was  not  used, even  in the  first person,  in a
 statement  about  the  speaker's  future  action,   depending  on
 foresight,  or  a  judgement  of the  force of  circumstances. It
 could  sometimes,  as  seen  in  vaquet-  (above),  be used  as a
 verbal prefix.                                                  
   A  longer  form  ava or  ava (stressed  on the  last syllable),
 which  shows  combination  with   the  imperative   particle  *a,
 was  commonly  used  as  a  negative imperative  'Don't!', either
 used  alone  or  with an  uninflected verbal  stem, as  ava kare!
 'Don't  do  it!'  Both  va  and  ava  sometimes  received  verbal
 pronominal  affixes  of  the  first  singular  and  first  plural
 exclusive:  as  avan,  van,  vanye 'I  won't', avamme,  vamme 'we
 won't'.                                                         
   An  old  derivative  of  *aba-  as  a  quasi-verbal   stem  was
 *abaro  >  CE  *abar.  This  was  an  old  agental  formation, as
 seen also in Teler, pl. Teleri, made with  the suffix  -ro, added
 to  omataina.(5) (Other  forms of  this suffix  were -ro  added to
 stem,  with or  without n-infixion;  and -rdo  > rd.)  *abar thus
 meant  'recusant,  one  who   refuses  to   act  as   advised  or
 commanded'.  It  was  specially  applied  to  (or  first  made to
 describe?) the section of the Elves  who refused  to join  in the
 Westward March: Q Avar, pl. Avari.                              

TELERIN. The  Telerin  use  was  closely  similar  to  that of
 Quenya.   The   forms   were  the   same,  except   that  Telerin
 preserved  CE  b  distinct  from  v  or u:  hence the  prefix was
 aba-  (abapetima  'not  to  be  said');  the  particle   ba;  the
 exclamation  aba.  The  verbal  form,  however,  was   in  normal
 use: aban 'I refuse, I will not'. In a negative command  only the
 uninflected aba was used: aba care 'don't do it!'               

SINDARIN. In Sindarin the following  forms are  found. baw!
 imperious  negative: 'No,  no! Don't!  ' avo  negative adverb
 with verbs, as avo garo! 'don't do it';  sometimes used  as a
 prefix: avgaro (< *aba-kar a). This could be  personalized in
 the  form  avon  'I won't',  avam 'we  won't': these  were of

                         
                                                                     
   course  not  in  fact  derived  from  avo,  which   contained  the
   imperative  -o  <  >a,  but   from  the   verb  stem   *aba,  with
   inflexions  assimilated to  the tense  stems in  -a; but  no other
   parts  of  the  verb  survived  in  use,  except  the   noun  avad
   refusal,  reluctance'.  Derived  direct  from  baw! (*ha)  was the
   verb boda- 'ban, prohibit' (*ba-ta).                               
                                                                     
   (With the uses of this stem, primary meaning  'refuse, be          
   unwilling', to form negative imperatives, cf. Latin noli,          
   nolite.)                                                            
                                                                     
          B. Meanings and use of the various terms applied to         
    the Elves and their varieties in Quenya, Telerin, and Sindarin.
                                                                     
                                 Quenya.                              
   1. quen, pl. queni, person, individual, man or woman.              
 Chiefly used in the unstressed form quen. Mostly found in           
 the singular: 'one, somebody'; in the pl. 'people, they'. Also       
 combined with other elements, as in aiquen 'if anybody,              
 whoever', ilquen 'everybody'. In a number of old compounds           
 -quen, pl. queni was combined with noun or adjective stems to        
 denote habitual occupations or functions, or to describe those       
 having some notable (permanent) quality: as -man in English          
 (but without distinction of sex) in horseman, seaman, work-         
 man, nobleman, etc. Q roquen 'horseman, rider'; (Note 3,             
 p. 407) kiryaquen 'shipman, sailor'; arquen 'a noble'. These         
 words belong to everyday speech, and have no special reference       
 to Elves. They were freely applied to other Incarnates, such as      
 Men or Dwarves, when the Eldar became acquainted with                
 them.                                                                
   2. Quendi Elves, of any kind, including the Avari. The sg.         
 Quende was naturally less frequently used. As has been seen,         
 the word was made when the Elves as yet knew of no other             
 'people' than themselves. The sense 'the Elvish people, as a         
 whole', or in the sg. 'an Elf and not some other similar creature',
 developed first in Aman, where the Elves lived among or in           
 contact with the Valar and Maiar. During the Exile when the          
 Noldor became re-associated with their Elvish kin, the Sindar,       
 but met other non-Elvish people, such as Orcs, Dwarves, and          
 Men, it became an even more useful term. But in fact it had          
 ceased in Aman to be a word of everyday use, and remained            
 thereafter mainly used in the special language of Lore: histories
 or tales of old days, or learned writings on peoples and             

 languages.  In  ordinary  language  the   Elves  of   Aman  called
 themselves Eldar (or in Telerin Elloi): see below.               
   There  also  existed  two  old  compounds   containing  *kwendi:
 *kala-kwendi  and  *mori-kwendi,  the  Light-folk  and  the  Dark-
 folk.  These  terms appear  to go  back to  the period  before the
 Separation,  or  rather  to  the  time  of  the  debate  among the
 Quendi  concerning  the  invitation  of   the  Valar.   They  were
 evidently  made  by the  party favourable  to Orome,  and referred
 originally to those who desired  the Light  of Valinor  (where the
 ambassadors of  the Elves  reported that  there was  no darkness),
 and those  who did  not wish  for a  place in  which there  was no
 night.  But  already  before  the  final  separation *mori-kwendi
 may  have  referred  to  the  glooms  and  the clouds  dimming the
 sun and the  stars during  the War  of the  Valar and  Melkor,(6) so
 that the term from the beginning  had a  tinge of  scorn, implying
 that  such  folk were  not averse  to the  shadows of  Melkor upon
 Middle-earth.                                                    
   The  lineal  descendants  of  these terms  survived only  in the
 languages   of   Aman.   The   Quenya   forms    were   Kalaquendi
 and  Moriquendi.  The  Kalaquendi  in   Quenya  applied   only  to
 the  Elves  who  actually  lived  or  had lived  in Aman;  and the
 Moriquendi  was  applied  to  all  others,  whether they  had come
 on the March or not. The latter were regarded as  greatly inferior
 to  the  Kalaquendi,  who  had experienced  the Light  of Valinor,
 and  had  also  acquired  far  greater  knowledge  and  powers  by
 their association with the Valar and Maiar.                      
   In the period of Exile the  Noldor modified  their use  of these
 terms,  which  was offensive  to the  Sindar. Kalaquendi  went out
 of  use,  except  in  written  Noldorin  lore. Moriquendi  was now
 applied to all other Elves, except the Noldor and Sindar,  that is
 to Avari or to any kind of Elves that  at the  time of  the coming
 of  the  Noldor  had  not  long  dwelt in  Beleriand and  were not
 subjects  of  Elwe.  It  was  never applied,  however, to  any but
 Elvish  peoples.  The  old distinction,  when made,  was represen-
 ted  by  the  new  terms  Amanyar  'those  of Aman',  and Uamanyar
 or Umanyar  'those  not   of  Aman',   beside  the   longer  forms
 Amaneldi and Umaneldi.                                           
   3.  Quendya,  in   the  Noldorin   dialect  Quenya.   This  word
 remained in ordinary  use, but  it was  only used  as a  noun 'the
 Quendian  language'.  (Note  4,  p.  407)  This  use   of  Quendya
 must  have  arisen  in  Aman,  while  Quendi still  remained in
 general use. Historically, and in the more accurate use  of the

 linguistic   Loremasters,   Quenya  included   the  dialect   of  the
 Teleri,  which  though  divergent  (in some  points from  days before
 settlement  in   Aman,  such   as  *kw   >  p),   remained  generally
 intelligible  to  the  Vanyar  and  Noldor.  But  in ordinary  use it
 was  applied  only  to  the dialects  of the  Vanyar and  Noldor, the
 differences  between  which  only   appeared  later,   and  remained,
 up to the period just before the Exile, of minor importance.        
   In  the  use  of  the  Exiles  Quenya  naturally  came to  mean the
 language  of  the  Noldor,  developed  in  Aman,  as   distinct  from
 other  tongues,  whether  Elvish  or  not.  But  the  Noldor  did not
 forget  its   connexion  with   the  old   word  Quendi,   and  still
 regarded  the name  as implying  'Elvish', that  is the  chief Elvish
 tongue,  the  noblest,  and  the  one  most  nearly   preserving  the
 ancient  character  of  Elvish  speech.  For  a  note  on  the Elvish
 words   for   'language',   especially   among  the   Noldorin  Lore-
 masters, see Appendix D (p. 391).                                   
   4.  Elda  and   Eldo.  The   original  distinction   between  these
 forms as meaning 'one  of the  Star-folk, or  Elves in  general', and
 one  of  the  'Marchers',  became  obscured  by  the  close  approach
 of  the  forms.  The form  Eldo went  out of  use, and  Elda remained
 the chief word for 'Elf' in Quenya. But  it was  not in  accurate use
 held   to   include  the   Avari  (when   they  were   remembered  or
 considered); i.e.  it took  on the  sense of  Eldo. It  may, however,
 have  been  partly  due to  its older  sense that  in popular  use it
 was  the  word  ordinarily  employed  for  any  Elf,  that is,  as an
 equivalent  of  the  Quende  of  the  Loremasters.  When  one  of the
 Elves  of  Aman  spoke  of  the Eldalie,  'the Elven-folk',  he meant
 vaguely  all  the  race  of  Elves,  though   he  was   probably  not
 thinking of the Avari.                                              
   For,  of  course,  the special  kinship of  the Amanyar  with those
 left  in  Beleriand  (or   Hekeldamar)  was   remembered,  especially
 by  the  Teleri.  When  it  was  necessary  to distinguish  these two
 branches  of  the  Eldar  (or  properly  Eldor),  those who  had come
 to  Aman  were  called  the  Odzeldi   N  Oareldi, for  which another
 form  (less  used)  was  Auzeldi,  N  Aureldi;  those  who   had  re-
 mained   behind  were   the  Hekeldi.   These  terms   naturally  be-
 longed  rather to  history than  everyday speech,  and in  the period
 of the Exile they fell out of use, being unsuitable to  the situation
 in  Beleriand.  The  Exiles  still  claimed  to  be  Amanyar,  but in
 practice  this  term  usually  now  meant  those  Elves  remaining in
 Aman,  while   the  Exiles   called  themselves   Etyangoldi  'Exiled
 Noldor',  or  simply  (since  the  great majority  of their  clan had

            
                                                                     
 come into exile) Noldor. All the subjects of Elwe they called        
 Sindar or 'Grey-elves'.                                              
                                                                     
                               Telerin.                               
  1.   The   derivatives   of *KWEN   were  more   sparingly  represen-
 ted  in  the  Telerin  dialects,  of  Aman or  Beleriand. This  was in
 part  due  to  the  Common  Telerin  change  of  kw  >  p,   (Note  5,
 p. 407) which caused *pen < *kwen to clash with the PQ stem          
 *PEN 'lack, be without', and also with some of the derivatives of     
 *PED 'slope,  slant  down'  (e.g. *penda  'sloping'). Also  the Teleri
 felt  themselves  to  be  a  separate  people,  as  compared  with the
 Vanyar   and   Noldor,   whom   taken   together   they   outnumbered.
 This  sentiment  began  before  the   Separation,  and   increased  on
 the  March  and  in  Beleriand.  In  consequence  they  did  not  feel
 strongly  the  need  for  a  general word  embracing all  Elves, until
 they came in contact with other non-Elvish Incarnates.               
  As  a  pronoun  enclitic  (e.g.   in  aipen,   Q  aiquen;   ilpen,  Q
 ilquen)  *kwen  survived  in  Telerin;  but   few  of   the  compounds
 with  pen  'man'  remained  in  ordinary  use,  except   arpen  'noble
 (man)', and the derived adjective arpenia.                           
  Pendi,  the  dialectal  equivalent  of  Q  Quendi,  survived  only as
 a  learned  word  of the  historians, used  with reference  to ancient
 days  before  the  Separation;  the  adjective  *Pendia  (the  equiva-
 lent  of  Quendya)  had  fallen  out  of  use.. (Note  6, p.  408) The
 Teleri had little interest in linguistic lore, which they left  to the
 Noldor.  They  did  not  regard  their  language  as  a  'dialect'  of
 Quenya,   but   called   it  Lindarin   or  Lindalambe.   Quenya  they
 called  Goldorin  or  Goldolambe;  for  they  had  few  contacts  with
 the Vanyar.                                                          
  The   old   compounds   in  Telerin   form  Calapendi   and  Moripen-
 di  survived  in  historical  use; but  since the  Teleri in  Aman re-
 mained  more  conscious  of  their  kinship  with  the  Elves  left in
 Beleriand,  while  Calapendi  was  used,  as  Kalaquendi   in  Quenya,
 to  refer  only  to  the  Elves  of  Aman,  Moripendi was  not applied
 to the Elves of Telerin origin who had not reached Aman.             
  2.  Ello  and  Ella.  The  history  of  the  meanings of  these words
 was  almost  identical  with  that  of  the  corresponding   Elda  and
 Eldo  in  Quenya.  In  Telerin  the  -o  form  became   preferred,  so
 that  generally  T  Ello  was  the  equivalent  of  Q  Elda.  But Ella
 remained  in  use  in  quasi-adjectival  function  (e.g. as  the first
 element  in  loose  or  genitival compounds):  thus the  equivalent of
 Q Eldalie was in T Ellalie.                                          

   In contrast to the Elloi left in Beleriand those in Aman were in
 histories called Audel, pl. Audelli. Those  in Beleriand  were the
 Hecelloi of Heculbar (or Hecellubar).                             
                                                                  
                              Sindarin.                            
   1. Derivatives  of *KWEN  were limited  to the  sense: pronomin-
 al  'one,  somebody,  anybody', and  to a  few old  compounds that
 survived.  PQ  *kwende,   *kwendi  disappeared   altogether.  The
 reasons for this were partly the linguistic changes already cited;
 and partly the circumstances in which the Sindar lived,  until the
 return  of  the  Noldor,  and  the coming  of Men.  The linguistic
 changes  made  the  words  unsuitable  for  survival;  the circum-
 stances removed all  practical need  for the  term. The  old unity
 of  the  Elves had  been broken  at the  Separation. The  Elves of
 Beleriand were isolated,  without contact  with any  other people,
 Elvish  or  of  other  kind;  and they  were all  of one  clan and
 language:  Telerin  (or  Lindarin).  Their  own  language  was the
 only  one  that  they  ever  heard;  and  they  needed no  word to
 distinguish it, nor to distinguish themselves.                    
   As  a  pronoun,  usually  enclitic, the  form pen,  mutated ben,
 survived.  A  few  compounds  survived,  such  as  rochben 'rider'
 (m.  or  f.),  orodben  'a  mountaineer'  or  'one  living  in the
 mountains',  arphen  'a  noble'.  Their   plurals  were   made  by
 i-affection,  originally  carried through  the word:  as roechbin,
 oerydbin, erphin, but  the normal  form of  the first  element was
 often  restored  when  the  nature  of  the  composition  remained
 evident:  as  rochbin,  but  always  erphin.  These  words  had no
 special association with Elves.                                   
   Associated  with  these  compounds  were   the  two   old  words
 Calben  (Celbin)  and  Morben  (Moerbin).  On the  formal relation
 of  these  to  Quenya  Kalaquendi  and  Moriquendi  see   p.  362.
 They  had no  reference to  Elves, except  by accident  of circum-
 stance. Celbin retained what was, as has  been said,  probably its
 original meaning: all Elves other than the Avari; and  it included
 the Sindar. It was in fact  the equivalent  (when one  was needed)
 of the Quenya Eldar, Telerin Elloi. But it referred to  Elves only
 because  no  other  people  qualified for  the title.  Moerbin was
 similarly an equivalent for Avari; but that it  did not  mean only
 'Dark-elves' is seen by its ready application to other Incarnates,
 when  they  later  became  known.  By  the Sindar  anyone dwelling
 outside  Beleriand,  or  entering  their  realm from  outside, was
 called a Morben.  The first  people of  this kind  to be  met were

                                                                   
                                                                   
 the  Nandor,  who  entered East  Beleriand over  the passes  of the
 Mountains before  the return  of Morgoth;  soon after  his return
 came the first  invasions of  his Orcs from the  North.(7) Somewhat
 later the  Sindar became  aware of  Avari, who  had crept  in small
 and secret groups  into Beleriand  from the  South. Later  came the
 Men  of  the  Three  Houses,  who  were  friendly; and  later still
 Men of other  kinds. All  these were  at first  acquaintance called
 Moerbin.  (Note  7,  p.  408)  But  when  the  Nandor  were  recog-
 nized  as  kinsfolk  of Lindarin  origin and  speech (as  was still
 recognizable), they  were received  into the  class of  Celbin. The
 Men  of  the  Three  Houses  were  also   soon  removed   from  the
 class  of  Moerbin.  (Note  8, p.  408) They  were given  their own
 name,  Edain,  and  were  seldom actually  called Celbin,  but they
 were  recognized  as   belonging  to   this  class,   which  became
 . practically equivalent to 'peoples in alliance in the War against
 Morgoth'.   The  Avari   thus  remained   the  chief   examples  of
 Moerbin.  Any  individual  Avar  who  joined  with or  was admitted
 among  the Sindar  (it rarely  happened) became  a Calben;  but the
 Avari  in  general remained  secretive, hostile  to the  Eldar, and
 untrustworthy;  and  they  dwelt  in  hidden  places in  the deeper
 woods, or in caves. (Note  9, p.  408) Moerbin  as applied  to them
 is usually  translated 'Dark-elves',  partly because  Moriquendi in
 the  Quenya  of  the Exiled  Noldor usually  referred to  them. But
 that no special  reference to  Elves was  intended by  the Sindarin
 word  is shown  by the  fact that  Moerbin was  at once  applied to
 the  new  bands  of  Men  (Easterlings)  that  appeared  before the
 Battle of the Nirnaeth. (Note 9, p. 408) If in Sindarin an Avar, as
 distinct  from  other  kinds  of  Morben,  was  intended,   he  was
 called Mornedhel.                                                  
    2. Edhel, pl. Edhil. In  spite of  its ultimate  derivation (see
 p. 360) this was the general word for 'Elf, Elves'. In  the earlier
 days it naturally referred only to the Eldarin Sindar, for no other
 kind was ever seen; but later it was freely applied to Elves of any
 kind  that entered  Beleriand. It  was however  only used  in these
 two forms.                                                         
    The masculine and  feminine forms  were Ellon  m. and  Elleth f.
 and the class-plural  was Eldrim,  later Elrim,  when this  was not
 replaced  by  the  more  commonly  used  Eledhrim (see  below). The
 form without the m. and f. suffixes  was not  in use,  and survived
 only  in  some  old  compounds, especially  personal names,  in the
 form el, pl. il, as a final element.                               
    The  form  Elen,  pl.  Elin was  only used  in histories  or the

 
                                                                  
 works of the Loremasters,  as a  word to  include all  Elves (Eldar
 and  Avari).  But  the  class-plural  Eledhrim  was the  usual word
 for  'all  the  Elvish  race',  whenever  such  an  expression  was
 needed.                                                           
   All  these  words  and  forms,  whatever  their  etymologies (see
 above),  were  applicable to  any kind  of Elf.  In fact  Edhel was
 properly  applied  only  to Eldar;  Ell- may  have a  mixed origin;
 and Elen was an ancient general word. (Note 10, p. 410)           
   3.  The Sindar  had no  general name  for themselves  as distinct
 from other varieties of Elf, until  other kinds  entered Beleriand.
 The  descendant  of  the  old  clan  name  *Lindai  (Q  Lindar) had
 fallen out of normal  use, being  no longer  needed in  a situation
 were all the  Edhil were  of the  same kind,  and people  were more
 aware  of  the  growing  differences  in  speech and  other matters
 between those sections of the Elves that  lived in  widely sundered
 parts  of  a  large  and mostly  pathless land.  They were  thus in
 ordinary  speech all  Edhil, but  some belonged  to one  region and
 some  to  another:  they  were  Falathrim  from  the  sea-board  of
 West Beleriand, or  lathrim from  Doriath (the  land of  the Fence,
 or  iath),  or  Mithrim  who  had  gone  north  from  Beleriand and
 inhabited the  regions about  the great  lake that  afterwards bore
 their name. (Note 11, p. 410)                                     
   The   old   clan-name   *Lindai   survived   in    the   compound
 Glinnel, pl. Glinnil,  a word  only known  in historical  lore, and
 the equivalent of Quenya  Teleri or  Lindar; see  the Notes  on the
 Clan-names  below.  All   the  Sindarin   subjects  of   King  Elu-
 Thingol,   as   distinguished  from   the  incoming   Noldor,  were
 sometimes  later  called the  Eluwaith. Dunedhil  'West-elves' (the
 reference being to the  West of  Middle-earth) was  a term  made to
 match  Dunedain  'West-men'  (applied  only  to  the  Men   of  the
 Three  Houses).   But  with   the  growing   amalgamation,  outside
 Doriath,  of  the  Noldor  and  Sindar  into  one people  using the
 Sindarin tongue  as their  daily speech,  this soon  became applied
 to both Noldor and Sindar.                                        
   While  the  Noldor  were  still  distinct,  and  whenever  it was
 desired to  recall their  difference of  origin, they  were usually
 called Odhil (sg. Odhel). This as has been seen was  originally a
 name for all the  Elves that  left Beleriand  for Aman.  These were
 also  called  by  the  Sindar  Gwanwen,  pl.  Gwenwin  (or Gwanwel,
 Gwenwil)  'the  departed':  cf.  Q  vanwa.  This term,  which could
 not  suitably  be  applied  to  those who  had come  back, remained
 the  usual  Sindarin  name  for  the Elves  that remained  in Aman.

 Odhil thus became specially the name of the Exiled Noldor.     
   In this sense  the form  Godhel, pl.  Godhil soon  replaced the
 older form. It seems to  have been  due to  the influence  of the
 clan-name  Golodh,  pl.  Goelydh;  or  rather  to   a  deliberate
 blending  of  the  two words.  The old  clan-name had  not fallen
 out  of  memory  (for  the  Noldor  and the  Sindar owing  to the
 great  friendship  of  Finwe  and  Elwe  were  closely associated
 during their sojourn in  Beleriand before  the Departure)  and it
 had  in  consequence  a  genuine Sindarin  form (<  CE *ngolodo).
 But  the  form Golodh  seems to  have been  phonetically unpleas-
 ing  to  the  Noldor.  The  name was,  moreover, chiefly  used by
 those  who  wished  to  mark  the  difference between  the Noldor
 and  the  Sindar, and  to ignore  the dwelling  of the  Noldor in
 Aman  which  might  give them  a claim  to superiority.  This was
 especially the case in  Doriath, where  King Thingol  was hostile
 to the Noldorin chieftains, Feanor and  his sons,  and Fingolfin,
 because of their assault upon the Teleri in  Aman, the  people of
 his  brother Olwe.  The Noldor,  therefore, when  using Sindarin,
 never applied this name (Golodh) to themselves,  and it  fell out
 of use among those friendly to them.                            
   4.  Eglan,  pl.  Eglain, Egladrim.  This name,  'the Forsaken',
 was, as has been said, given by the Sindar to themselves.  But it
 was  not  in  Beleriand  a name  for all  the Elves  who remained
 there, as were the related names, Hekeldi, Hecelloi, in  Aman. It
 applied only to those who wished  to depart,  and waited  long in
 vain for the return of  Ulmo, taking  up their  abode on  or near
 the  coasts.  There  they  became  skilled  in  the  building and
 management of ships. Cirdan was their lord.                     
   Cirdan's folk were  made up  both of  numbers of  the following
 of Olwe, who straying or lingering came to  the shores  too late,
 and also  of many  of the  following of  Elwe, who  abandoned the
 search for him and did  not wish  to be  separated for  ever from
 their kin and friends. This folk remained in  the desire  of Aman
 for long  years, and  they were  among the  most friendly  to the
 Exiles.                                                         
   They continued to call themselves the  Eglain, and  the regions
 where they dwelt Eglamar and  Eglador. The  latter name  fell out
 of general use.  It had  originally been  applied to  all western
 Beleriand between Mount Taras and the Bay  of Balar,  its eastern
 boundary   being   roughly  along   the  River   Narog.  Eglamar,
 however,  remained  the  name of  the 'Home  of the  Eglain': the
 sea-board  from  Cape  Andras  to  the  headland   of  Bar-in-Myl

 ('Home  of  the   Gulls'),(8) which   included  the   ship-havens  of
 Cirdan at Brithonbar (9) and at the head of the firth of Eglarest.       
   The  Eglain  became  a  people  somewhat  apart  from  the inland
 Elves, and at the time of the coming of  the Exiles  their language
 was  in  many  ways  different.   (Note  12,   p.  411)   But  they
 acknowledged  the  high-kingship  of  Thingol,  and   Cirdan  never
 took the title of king.(10)                                           
                                                                      
                               *Abari.                                
 This  name,  evidently  made  by  the  Eldar  at  the  time  of the
 Separation, is found  in histories  in the  Quenya form  Avari, and
 the Telerin form Abari. It was still used by the historians  of the
 Exiled  Noldor,   though  it   hardly  differed   from  Moriquendi,
 which  (see  above) was  no longer  used by  the Exiles  to include
 Elves of Eldarin  origin. The  plural Evair  was known  to Sindarin
 loremasters, but  was no  longer in  use. Such  Avari as  came into
 Beleriand  were,  as has  been said,  called Morben,  or Mornedhel.
                                                                      
                         C. The Clan-names,                            
        with notes on other names for divisions of the Eldar.          
                                                                      
 In  Quenya  form  the  names   of  the   three  great   Clans  were
 Vanyar,  Noldor,  and  Lindar.  The  oldest  of  these   names  was
 Lindar,  which  certainly  goes  back  to  days before  the Separa-
 tion.  The  other  two  probably  arose  in  the  same  period,  if
 somewhat later: their original  forms may  thus be  given in  PQ as 
 *wanja, *ngolodo, and linda /glinda. (Note 13, p. 411)                
   According  to  the  legend,  preserved  in almost  identical form
 among  both  the  Elves  of Aman  and the  Sindar, the  Three Clans
 were in  the beginning  derived from  the three  Elf-fathers: Imin,
 Tata,  and  Enel  (sc.  One,  Two,  Three),  and  those  whom  each
 chose to join his following. So they had at first simply  the names
 Minyar  'Firsts',  Tatyar  'Seconds',  and  Nelyar  'Thirds'. These
 numbered, out of the original 144 Elves that  first awoke,  14, 56,
 and  74;  and  these  proportions  were   approximately  maintained
 until the Separation.(11)                                             
   It  is said  that of  the small  clan of  the Minyar  none became
 Avari.  The  Tatyar  were  evenly  divided.  The  Nelyar  were most
 reluctant  to  leave  their  lakeside  homes;  but  they  were very
 cohesive, and very conscious of  the separate  unity of  their Clan
 (as they continued to be), so that when it became clear  that their
 chieftains  Elwe  and  Olwe  were  resolved  to  depart  and  would
 have  a  large  following,  many  of  those among  them who  had at

 
                                                                  
 first  joined  the Avari  went over  to the  Eldar rather  than be
 separated from  their kin.  The Noldor  indeed asserted  that most
 of the  'Teleri' were  at heart  Avari, and  that only  the Eglain
 really regretted being left in Beleriand.                          
   According  to the  Noldorin historians  the proportions,  out of
 144,  that  when  the  March  began  became  Avari  or  Eldar were
 approximately so:                                                 
   Minyar 14: Avari 0  Eldar 14                                     
   Tatyar 56: Avari 28 Eldar 28                                    
   Nelyar 74: Avari 28 Eldar 46 > Amanyar Teleri 20;               
      Sindar and Nandor 26                                         
 In the result the Noldor were the largest clan  of Elves  in Aman;
 while  the  Elves  that remained  in Middle-earth  (the Moriquendi
 in  the   Quenya  of   Aman)  outnumbered   the  Amanyar   in  the
 proportion of 82 to 62.(12)                                       
   How  far  the  descriptive  Clan-names,  *wanja,  *ngolodo,  and
 *linda  were  preserved  among  the  Avari is  not now  known; but
 the  existence  of  the old  clans was  remembered, and  a special
 kinship  between  those of  the same  original clan,  whether they
 had gone away or remained, was still  recognized. The  first Avari
 that the Eldar met again in Beleriand seem to  have claimed  to be
 Tatyar,  who acknowledged  their kinship  with the  Exiles, though
 there  is  no  record  of  their  using  the  name  Noldo  in  any
 recognizable  Avarin form.  They were  actually unfriendly  to the
 Noldor,  and  jealous  of  their  more  exalted  kin,   whom  they
 accused of arrogance.                                             
   This ill-feeling descended in  part from  the bitterness  of the
 Debate  before  the March  of the  Eldar began,  and was  no doubt
 later  increased  by  the  machinations  of  Morgoth; but  it also
 throws  some  light  upon  the  temperament   of  the   Noldor  in
 general, and of Feanor in particular. Indeed  the Teleri  on their
 side  asserted  that most  of the  Noldor in  Aman itself  were in
 heart  Avari, and  returned to  Middle-earth when  they discovered
 their mistake; they  needed room  to quarrel  in. For  in contrast
 the Lindarin elements in the  western Avari  were friendly  to the
 Eldar,  and  willing  to  learn  from  them;  and  so   close  was
 the feeling of  kinship between  the remnants  of the  Sindar, the
 Nandor,  and the  Lindarin Avari,  that later  in Eriador  and the
 Vale of Anduin they often became merged together.                 
                                                                  
                          Lindar (Teleri).(13)                      
   These were, as has been seen, much the largest of the ancient

 clans.  The  name,  later  appearing  in   Quenya  form   as  Lindar
 (Telerin  Lindai),  is  already referred  to in  the legend  of 'The
 Awakening  of  the  Quendi',  which  says of  the Nelyar  that 'they
 sang  before  they  could  speak  with  words  .  The   name  *Linda
 is  therefore  clearly  a  derivative  of  the  primitive  stem *LIN
 (showing  reinforcement  of the  medial x  and adjectival  -a). This
 stem  was  possibly  one  of  the  contributions  of  the  Nelyar to
 Primitive  Quendian,  for  it   reflects  their   predilections  and
 associations,  and  produces  more  derivatives in  Lindarin tongues
 than  in  others.  Its  primary  reference   was  to   melodious  or
 pleasing  sound,  but  it  also refers  (especially in  Lindarin) to
 water,   the   motions   of   which  were   always  by   the  Lindar
 associated  with  vocal (Elvish)  sound. The  reinforcements, either
 medial lind- or initial  glin-, glind-,  were however  almost solely
 used  of  musical,  especially  vocal,  sounds produced  with intent
 to please. It is thus to the love of the Nelyar for song,  for vocal
 music with or without  the use  of articulate  words, that  the name
 Lindar  originally  referred;  though  they  also  loved  water, and
 before  the   Separation  never   moved  far   from  the   lake  and
 waterfall (14) of  Cuivienen,  and  those  that  moved  into  the West
 became enamoured of the Sea. (Note 14, p. 411)                     
   In Quenya,  that is,  in the  language of  the Vanyar  and Noldor,
 those of this clan that joined in the March were called  the Teleri.
 This  name  was applied  in particular  to those  that came  at last
 and latest to Aman; but  it was  also later  applied to  the Sindar.
 The  name  Lindar  was  not  forgotten,  but  in  Noldorin  lore  it
 was chiefly used  to describe  the whole  clan, including  the Avari
 among  them.  Teleri  meant  'those  at  the  end  of the  line, the
 hindmost',  and  was  evidently  a   nickname  arising   during  the
 March,  when the  Teleri, the  least eager  to depart,  often lagged
 far behind. (Note 15, p. 411)                                      
                                                                   
                                Vanyar.                             
 This  name  was  probably  given to  the First  Clan by  the Noldor.
 They accepted it,  but continued  to call  themselves most  often by
 their  old  numerical  name  Minyar  (since the  whole of  this clan
 had  joined  the  Eldar  and  reached  Aman).  The name  referred to
 the  hair of  the Minyar,  which was  in nearly  all members  of the
 clan  yellow  or  deep  golden.  This  was  regarded as  a beautiful
 feature  by  the  Noldor   (who  loved   gold),  though   they  were
 themselves   mostly   dark-haired.   Owing   to   intermarriage  the
 golden   hair  of   the  Vanyar   sometimes  later   appeared  among

 the Noldor: notably in the case of Finarfin,  and in  his children
 Finrod  and  Galadriel,  in  whom  it  came  from  King   Finwe  s
 second wife, Indis of the Vanyar.                                 
   Vanyar  thus  comes  from an  adjectival derivative  *wanja from
 the  stem  *WAN.  Its  primary  sense  seems  to  have  been  very
 similar to English (modern) use of 'fair'  with reference  to hair
 and  complexion;  though  its actual  development was  the reverse
 of  the  English:  it  meant 'pale,  light-coloured, not  brown or
 dark', and  its implication  of beauty  was secondary.  In English
 the  meaning  'beautiful'  is  primary.  From  the  same  stem was
 derived  the  name  given  in  Quenya  to the  Valie Vana  wife of
 Orome.                                                            
   Since the Lindar had little  contact with  the Vanyar  either on
 the  March  or  later  in  Aman, this  name was  not much  used by
 them  for  the  First  Clan.  The  Amanyar  Teleri  had  the  form
 Vaniai  (no doubt  taken from  the Noldor),  but the  name appears
 to  have been  forgotten in  Beleriand, where  the First  Clan (in
 lore and history only) were called Miniel, pl. Minil.             
                                                                  
                               Noldor.                             
 This  name  was  probably  older  than Vanyar,  and may  have been
 made before the  March. It  was given  to the  Second Clan  by the
 others.  It  was  accepted,  and  was  used  as their  regular and
 proper  name by  all the  Eldarin members  of the  clan throughout
 their later history.                                              
   The  name  meant  'the  Wise',  that  is  those  who  have great
 knowledge   and   understanding.    The   Noldor    indeed   early
 showed the greatest talents of all the Elves both for intellectual
 pursuits and for technical skills.                                
   The  variant  forms  of  the name:  Q Noldo,  T Goldo,  S Golodh
 (Ngolodh), indicate a PQ original *ngolodo.  This is  a derivative
 of the  stem *NGOL 'knowledge, wisdom,  lore'. This  is seen  in Q
 Role  'long  study  (of  any  subject)',  ingole  'lore',  ingolmo
 'loremaster'. In T gole, engole had the  same senses  as in  Q but
 were  used  most  often  of  the special  'lore' possessed  by the
 Noldor.  In  S  the  word  gul  (equivalent  of  Q nole)  had less
 laudatory  associations,  being used  mostly of  secret knowledge,
 especially  such  as  possessed by  artificers who  made wonderful
 things;  and  the  word  became further  darkened by  its frequent
 use  in  the  compound  morgul  'black   arts',  applied   to  the
 delusory  or  perilous  arts and  knowledge derived  from Morgoth.
 Those  indeed  among  the  Sindar  who  were  unfriendly   to  the

 Noldor attributed their  supremacy in  the arts  and lore  to their
 learning  from  Melkor-Morgoth.  This   was  a   falsehood,  coming
 itself  ultimately  from  Morgoth;  though it  was not  without any
 foundation  (as the  lies of  Morgoth seldom  were). But  the great
 gifts  of  the Noldor  did not  come from  the teaching  of Melkor.
 Feanor  the  greatest  of  them  all  never  had any  dealings with
 Melkor in Aman, and was his greatest foe.                          
                                                                   
                               Sindar.                              
 Less commonly the form Sindel, pl. Sindeldi, is also met  in Exilic
 Quenya.  This  was  the  name  given  by  the  Exiled  Noldor  (see
 Note  11)  to the  second largest  of the  divisions of  the Eldar.
 (Note 16, p. 412) It was applied to all the Elves of Telerin origin
 that the Noldor found in  Beleriand, though  it later  excluded the
 Nandor,  except  those  who were  the direct  subjects of  Elwe, or
 had  become   merged  with   his  people.   The  name   meant  'the
 Grey',  or  'the  Grey-elves',  and  was  derived  from  *THIN,  PQ
 *thindi 'grey, pale or silvery grey', Q pinde, N dialect sinde.
   On the  origin of  this name  see Note  11. The  Loremasters also
 supposed that reference was made to  the hair  of the  Sindar. Elwe
 himself had indeed long and beautiful hair of silver hue,  but this
 does not seem to have been a  common  feature of the Sindar,
 though  it  was found  among them  occasionally, especially  in the
 nearer  or remoter  kin of  Elwe (as  in the  case of Cirdan).(15) In
 general  the  Sindar  appear  to  have  very closely  resembled the
 Exiles, being dark-haired, strong and tall, but lithe.  Indeed they
 could hardly be told apart except by  their eyes;  for the  eyes of
 all  the  Elves  that  had  dwelt  in   Aman  impressed   those  of
 Middle-earth  by their  piercing brightness.  For which  reason the
 Sindar often called them Lachend, pl. Lechind 'flame-eyed'.        
                                                                   
                               Nandor.                              
 This name must have been made at the  time, in  the latter  days of
 the  March,  when  certain  groups  of  the  Teleri  gave   up  the
 March;  and it  was especially  applied to  the large  following of
 Lenwe, (Note 17, p. 412) who refused to cross the Hithaeglir.(16)  
 The  name  was often  interpreted as  'Those who  go back';  but in
 fact  none  of  the  Nandor  appear  to have  returned, or  to have
 rejoined the Avari. Many remained  and settled  in lands  that they
 had  reached,  especially  beside  the  River  Anduin;  some turned
 aside  and  wandered  southwards.  (Note  18,  p.  412)  There was,
 however,  as  was  later  seen,  a  slow  drift  westward   of  the
 Moriquendi  during   the  captivity   of  Melkor,   and  eventually

 groups  of   the  Nandor,   coming  through   the  Gap   between  the
 Hithaeglir  and  Eryd  Nimrais,  spread  widely  in Eriador.  Some of
 these  finally  entered  Beleriand,  not  long  before the  return of
 Morgoth.(17) These  were   under  the   leadership  of   Denethor,  son
 of  Denweg  (see  Note  17),  who  became  an  ally  of  Elwe  in the
 first  battles  with  the   creatures  of   Morgoth.  The   old  name
 Nandor    was    however    only    remembered   by    the   Noldorin
 historians  in  Aman;  and  they  knew nothing  of the  later history
 of this folk, recalling only that the leader of the  defection before
 the  crossing  of  the  dread  Hithaeglir   was  named   Lenwe  (i.e.
 Denweg).   The   Sindarin    loremasters   remembered    the   Nandor
 as  Danwaith,  or  by  confusion  with  the  name  of   their  leader
 Denwaith.                                                          
   This  name  they  at  first applied  to the  Nandor that  came into
 Eastern Beleriand;  but this  people still  called themselves  by the
 old  clan-name  *Lindai,  which  had  at  that  time  taken  the form
 Lindi  in  their  tongue.  The   country  in   which  most   of  them
 eventually  settled,  as  a  small  independent  folk,   they  called
 Lindon  (<  *Lindana):  this  was  the  country  at the  western feet
 of  the Blue  Mountains (Eryd  Luin), watered  by the  tributaries of
 the  great  River  Gelion,  and  previously   named  by   the  Sindar
 Ossiriand,   the   Land   of   Seven   Rivers.  The   Sindar  quickly
 recognized  the  Lindi as  kinsfolk of  Lindarin origin  (S Glinnil),
 using  a  tongue  that  in  spite  of  great  differences  was  still
 perceived  to  be  akin  to  their  own; and  they adopted  the names
 Lindi  and  Lindon,  giving  them  the forms  Lindil (sg.  Lindel) or
 Lindedhil,  and  Lindon  or   Dor  Lindon.   In  Exilic   Quenya  the
 forms  used  (derived  from  the  Sindar or  direct from  the Nandor)
 were  Lindi  and  Lindon  (or  Lindone).   The  Exiled   Noldor  also
 usually  referred  to  the  Eryd  Luin  as  Eryd  Lindon,  since  the
 highest  parts  of  that  range  made  the  eastern  borders  of  the
 country of Lindon.                                                  
   These  names  were   however  later   replaced  among   the  Sindar
 by the  name 'Green-elves',  at least  as far  as the  inhabitants of
 Ossiriand   were   concerned;  for   they  withdrew   themselves  and
 took as little part in the strife  with Morgoth  as they  could. This
 name,  S  Laegel,  pl.  Laegil,  class-plural  Laegrim  or Laegel(d)-
 rim,  was  given  both  because  of  the  greenness  of  the  land of
 Lindon,  and  because  the  Laegrim  clothed  themselves in  green as
 an  aid  to  secrecy.  This  term the  Noldor translated  into Quenya
 Laiquendi; but it was not much used.                                

                 Appendix A. Elvish names for Men.                
                                                                 
 The first Elves  that Men  met in  the world  were Avari,  some of
 whom  were  friendly  to  them,  but  the  most  avoided  them  or
 were  hostile  (according  to the  tales of  Men). What  names Men
 and  Elves  gave to  one another  in those  remote days,  of which
 little  was  remembered  when  the  Loremasters in  Beleriand made
 the acquaintance of  the After-born,  there is  now no  record. By
 the Dunedain the Elves were called Nimir (the Beautiful).(18)    
  The  Eldar  did  not  meet  Men  of  any kind  or race  until the
 Noldor  had  long  returned  to  Beleriand  and  were at  war with
 Morgoth. The Sindar did not  even know  of their  existence, until
 the  coming  of the  Nandor; and  these brought  only rumour  of a
 strange  people  (whom  they  had  not themselves  seen) wandering
 in  the  lands  of  the  East  beyond  the Hithaeglir.  From these
 uncertain  tales the  Sindar concluded  that the  'strange people'
 were either some diminished race of the Avari, or else  related to
 Orcs, creatures of  Melkor, bred  in mockery  of the  true Quendi.
 But  the  Noldor  had  already  heard  of   Men  in   Aman.  Their
 knowledge  came   in  the   first  place   from  Melkor   and  was
 perverted  by his  malice, but  before the  Exile those  who would
 listen had  learned more  of the  truth from  the Valar,  and they
 knew  that  the  newcomers  were  akin  to themselves,  being also
 Children of Iluvatar, though differing in  gifts and  fate. There-
 fore  the  Noldor  made  names   for  the   Second  Race   of  the
 Children, calling them the  Atani 'the  Second Folk'.  Other names
 that  they  devised  were  Apanonar  'the After-born',  and Hildor
 'the Followers'.                                                 
  In Beleriand Atan, pl. Atani, was  the name  most used  at first.
 But  since  for  a  long  time the  only Men  known to  the Noldor
 and  Sindar were  those of  the Three  Houses of  the Elf-friends,
 this name became specially associated  with them,  so that  it was
 seldom  in  ordinary  speech applied  to other  kinds of  Men that
 came  later to  Beleriand, or  that were  reported to  be dwelling
 beyond  the  Mountains.  The  Elf-friends (Note  19, p.  412) were
 sometimes  called  by  the  Loremasters  Nunatani   (S  Dunedain),
 'Western  Men',  a  term  made  to  match  Dunedhil,  which  was a
 name  for  all  the  Elves of  Beleriand, allied  in the  War (see
 p. 378). The original reference was to  the West  of Middle-earth,
 but  the  name  Nunatani,  Dunedain   was  later   applied  solely
 to  the  Numenoreans,  descendants  of the  Atani, who  removed to
 the far western isle of Numenore.                                

                                                                   
                                                                    
   Apanonar  'the  After-born'  was  a  word  of  lore,  not  used  in
 daily  speech. A  general term  for Men  of all  kinds and  races, as
 distinct  from  Elves,  was  only devised  after their  mortality and
 brief  life-span  became  known  to  the  Elves  by  experience. They
 were  then  called  Firyar  'Mortals',  or  Firimar of  similar sense
 (literally 'those apt to die'). (Note  20, p.  412) These  words were
 derived  from  the   stem *PHIRI   'exhale,  expire,   breathe  out',
 which  had  no  original   connexion  with death.(19) Of   death,  as
 suffered  by  Men,  the  Elves  knew  nothing  until  they  came into
 close  association  with  the Atani;  but there  were cases  in which
 an  Elf,  overcome  by  a  great  sorrow  or weariness,  had resigned
 life in the body. The chief of  these, the  departure of  Miriel wife
 of  King  Finwe,  was a  matter of  deep concern  to all  the Noldor,
 and it was told of her that her last act, as she gave up her  life in
 the  body  and went  to the  keeping of  Mandos, was  a deep  sigh of
 weariness.                                                          
   These   Quenya   names  were   later  adapted   to  the   forms  of
 Sindarin  speech:  Atan  >  Adan, pl.  Edain; Firya  > Feir,  pl. Fir
 (with Firion m.sg.,  Firieth f.sg.),  class-plural Firiath;  Firima >
 Fireb,  pl.  Firib,  class-plural   Firebrim.  These   forms,  which
 cannot  for  historical  reasons  have  been  inherited from  CE, but
 are  those  which  the  words  if  inherited  would have  taken, show
 that  they  were  adapted  by  people  with   considerable  knowledge
 of  both  tongues  and  understanding  of  their  relations   to  one
 another;  that  is,  they  were  probably  first  made by  the Noldor
 for  use  in  Sindarin,  when  they  had  adopted  this  language for
 daily  use  in  Beleriand. Fireb  as compared  with Firima  shows the
 use of a different suffix, (Note 21, p. 412)  since the  S equivalent
 of  Q  -ima  (*-ef)  was  not  current.  Apanonar  was  rendered  by
 Abonnen,  pl.  Eboennin,  using  a  different  participial  formation
 from the stem *ONO 'beget, give birth to'. Hildor, since the stem
 *KHILI  'follow'  was  not  current  in  Sindarin,  was  rendered  by
 Aphadon,   pl.   Ephedyn,  class-plural   Aphadrim,  from   S  aphad-
 'follow' < *ap-pata 'walk behind, on a track or path'.              
                                                                    
               Appendix B. Elvish names for the Dwarves.             
                                                                    
 The  Sindar  had  long  known   the  Dwarves,  and  had  entered into
 peaceful  relations  with  them,  though  of  trade  and  exchange of
 skills  rather  than  of true  friendship, before  the coming  of the
 Exiles.  The  name  (in  the  plural)  that   the  Dwarves   gave  to
 themselves  was  Khazad,  and  this  the  Sindar  rendered   as  they

 might  in  the terms  of their  own speech,  giving it  the form
 *chadod  >  *chadaud  >  Hadhod.  (Note  22,  p.   412)  Hadhod,
 Hadhodrim was the  name which  they continued  to use  in actual
 intercourse  with  the  Dwarves;   but  among   themselves  they
 referred  to  the Dwarves  usually as  the Naugrim  'the Stunted
 Folk'.  The  adjective naug  'dwarf(ed), stunted',  however, was
 not used by  itself for  one of  the Khazad.  The word  used was
 Nogoth, pl.  Noegyth, class-plural  Nogothrim (as  an occasional
 equivalent  of  Naugrim).  (Note  23,  p.  413) They  also often
 referred to  the Dwarves  as a  race by  the name  Dornhoth 'the
 Thrawn Folk', because of their stubborn mood  as well  as bodily
 toughness.                                                      
   The Exiles heard  of the  Dwarves first  from the  Sindar, and
 when  using the  Sindarin tongue  naturally adopted  the already
 established  names. But  later in  Eastern Beleriand  the Noldor
 came  into  independent  relations  with  the  Dwarves  of  Eryd
 Lindon,  and  they  adapted  the  name  Khazad  anew for  use in
 Quenya, giving it the form  Kasar, pl.  Kasari or  Kasari. (Note
 24,  p.  413) This  was the  word most  commonly used  in Quenya
 for the  Dwarves, the  partitive plural  being Kasalli,  and the
 race-name  Kasallie. But  the Sindarin  names were  also adapted
 or  imitated, a  Dwarf being  called Nauko  or Norno  (the whole
 people  Naukalie  or  Nornalie).  Norno  was  the  more friendly
 term. (Note 25, p. 413)                                         
   The Petty-dwarves. See also Note 7. The Eldar did not  at first
 recognize these as Incarnates,  for they  seldom caught  sight of
 them in clear light. They  only became  aware of  their existence
 indeed when they attacked the Eldar  by stealth  at night,  or if
 they  caught  them  alone  in  wild  places. The  Eldar therefore
 thought  that  they  were  a kind  of cunning  two-legged animals
 living in caves, and they called them Levain tad-dail,  or simply
 Tad-dail,  and they  hunted them.  But after  the Eldar  had made
 the  acquaintance of  the Naugrim,  the Tad-dail  were recognized
 as a  variety of  Dwarves and  were left  alone. There  were then
 few of them surviving, and they were very  wary, and  too fearful
 to  attack any  Elf, unless  their hiding-places  were approached
 too  nearly.  The  Sindar  gave them  the names  Nogotheg 'Dwarf-
 let', or Nogoth niben 'Petty Dwarf'.(20)                        
   The  great  Dwarves  despised the  Petty-dwarves, who  were (it
 is said) the descendants of Dwarves who had  left or  been driven
 our  from  the  Communities,  being  deformed  or  undersized, or
 slothful  and  rebellious.  But  they  still  acknowledged  their

                                                                        
                                                                        
 kinship  and  resented  any  injuries  done  to  them.  Indeed   it  was
 one  of  their  grievances  against  the  Eldar  that  they  had  hunted
 and  slain  their  lesser  kin,  who  had  settled  in  Beleriand before
 the  Elves  came  there.  This  grievance was  set aside,  when treaties
 were  made   between  the   Dwarves  and   the  Sindar,   in  considera-
 tion   of   the  plea   that  the   Petty-dwarves  had   never  declared
 themselves  to  the  Eldar,  nor  presented  any   claims  to   land  or
 habitations,   but   had   at   once    attacked   the    newcomers   in
 darkness   and   ambush.   But  the   grievance  still   smouldered,  as
 was  later  seen  in  the  case  of  Mim,   the  only   Petty-dwarf  who
 played a memorable part in the Annals of Beleriand.                     
   The   Noldor,   for   use   in   Quenya,  translated   these  Sindarin
 names  for  the  Petty-dwarves  by   Attalyar  'Bipeds',   and  Pikinau-
 kor or Pitya-naukor.                                                    
                                                                        
   The  chief  dwellings  of  the  Dwarves  that  became  known   to  the
 Sindar  (though  few  ever  visited  them)  were upon  the east  side of
 the  Eryd  Luin.  They   were  called   in  the   Dwarf-tongue  Gabilga-
 thol  and  Tumunzahar.  The  greatest  of  all   the  mansions   of  the
 Dwarves,   Khazad-dum,  beneath   the  Hithaeglir   far  to   the  east,
 was  known  to  the  Eldar  only  by  name   and  rumour   derived  from
 the western Dwarves.                                                    
   These   names   the   Sindar   did   not   attempt   to   adapt,   but
 translated  according   to  their   sense,  as   Belegost  'Mickleburg';
 Novrod,   later   Nogrod,    meaning   originally    'Hollowbold';   and
 Hadhodrond   'Dwarrowvault'.(21)   (Note   26,   p.  414)   These  names
 the  Noldor  naturally  used  in  speaking  or  writing   Sindarin,  but
 for  use  in  Quenya  they  translated  the   names  anew   as  Turosto,
 Navarot, and Casarrondo.                                                
                                                                        
                  Appendix C. Elvish names for the Orcs.                 
                                                                        
   The  opening  paragraphs  of   this  Appendix   have  been   given  in
   Morgoth's  Ring  p.  416  and are  not repeated  here. The  words that
   now follow, 'these shapes and the terror that they inspired', refer to
   the 'dreadful shapes' that haunted the dwellings of  the Elves  in the
   land of their awakening.                                              
                                                                        
   For  these  shapes  and  the  terror  that  they inspired  the element
 chiefly  used  in  the  ancient  tongue  of  the  Elves appears  to have
 been *RUKU.  In  all  the  Eldarin  tongues  (and,  it  is said,  in the
 Avarin  also)  there  are  many  derivatives of  this stem,  having such
 ancient  forms  as:   ruk-,  rauk-,   uruk-,  urk(u),   runk-,  rukut/s,
 besides  the  strengthened  stem  gruk-,   and  the   elaborated  guruk-,

 nguruk.  (Note  27,  p.  415) Already  in PQ  that word  must have
 been  formed  which  had  in CE  the form  *rauku or  *rauko. This
 was applied to the larger and more terrible  of the  enemy shapes.
 But ancient were also the forms uruk,  urku/o, and  the adjectival
 urka 'horrible'. (Note 28, p. 415)                               
   In Quenya  we meet  the noun  urko, pl.  urqui, deriving  as the
 plural  form  shows  from *urku  or *uruku.  In Sindarin  is found
 the  corresponding urug;  but there  is in  frequent use  the form
 orch,  which  must  be  derived  from  *urko  or   the  adjectival
 *urka.                                                           
   In the lore of  the Blessed  Realm the  Q urko  naturally seldom
 occurs, except in tales  of the  ancient days  and the  March, and
 then is vague in meaning, referring to  anything that  caused fear
 to  the  Elves,  any   dubious  shape   or  shadow,   or  prowling
 creature. In Sindarin urug has a similar use.  It might  indeed be
 translated 'bogey'. But the form orch seems at  once to  have been
 applied  to  the Orcs,  as soon  as they  appeared; and  Orch, pl.
 Yrch,  class-plural Orchoth  remained the  regular name  for these
 creatures  in  Sindarin  afterwards.   The  kinship,   though  not
 precise equivalence, of S orch  to Q  urko, urqui  was recognized,
 and  in  Exilic  Quenya  urko  was  commonly  used   to  translate
 S orch, though  a form  showing the  influence of  Sindarin, orko,
 pl. orkor and orqui, is also often found.                        
   These  names,  derived  by  various   routes  from   the  Elvish
 tongues,   from   Quenya,   Sindarin,   Nandorin,  and   no  doubt
 Avarin dialects,  went far  and wide,  and seem  to have  been the
 source of the names for the Orcs in most of  the languages  of the
 Elder Days and the early ages of  which there  is any  record. The
 form  in  Adunaic  urku,  urkhu  may  be  direct  from  Quenya  or
 Sindarin;  and  this  form  underlies  the  words  for Orc  in the
 languages  of  Men  of  the  North-West  in  the Second  and Third
 Ages.  The  Orcs  themselves  adopted  it,  for  the fact  that it
 referred  to  terror  and  detestation  delighted  them.  The word
 uruk that  occurs in  the Black  Speech, devised  (it is  said) by
 Sauron to serve as a lingua franca for his subjects,  was probably
 borrowed  by  him  from the  Elvish tongues  of earlier  times. It
 referred, however, specially to the  trained and  disciplined Orcs
 of  the  regiments  of  Mordor.  Lesser breeds  seem to  have been
 called snaga.(22)                                                
   The  Dwarves  claimed  to  have  met  and  fought the  Orcs long
 before the Eldar in Beleriand were  aware of  them. It  was indeed
 their obvious detestation of  the Orcs,  and their  willingness to

 assist in any war against them, that convinced the Eldar  that the
 Dwarves   were   no   creatures   of   Morgoth.   Nonetheless  the
 Dwarvish  name  for  Orcs,  Rukhs,  pl.  Rakhas,  seems   to  show
 affinity to the Elvish names, and was possibly  ultimately derived
 from Avarin.                                                     
   The  Eldar  had  many  other  names  for the  Orcs, but  most of
 these were 'kennings',  descriptive terms  of occasional  use. One
 was,  however,  in  frequent  use  in  Sindarin:  more  often than
 Orchoth the general name for Orcs as  a race  that appears  in the
 Annals  was  Glamhoth.  Glam  meant  'din,  uproar,  the  confused
 yelling  and  bellowing  of  beasts', so  that Glamboth  in origin
 meant  more  or less  'the Yelling-horde',  with reference  to the
 horrible clamour of the Orcs in battle or when  in pursuit  - they
 could  be  stealthy  enough  at  need.  But  Glamhoth   became  so
 firmly  associated  with  Orcs that  Glam alone  could be  used of
 any  body  of  Orcs,  and  a  singular  form  was  made  from  it,
 glamog. (Compare the name of the sword Glamdring.)               
                                                                 
   Note.  The  word  used  in  translation  of Q  urko, S  orch, is
 Orc. But that is because of the similarity of the  ancient English
 word orc, 'evil spirit or bogey',  to the  Elvish words.  There is
 possibly  no  connexion  between  them.  The  English word  is now
 generally supposed to be derived from Latin Orcus.               
   The  word  for  Orc  in   the  now   forgotten  tongue   of  the
 Druedain  in  the  realm  of  Gondor  is recorded  as being  (? in
 the plural) gorgun. This is possibly  derived ultimately  from the
 Elvish words.                                                    
                                                                 
                            Appendix D.                           
        *Kwen, Quenya, and the Elvish (especially Noldorin)       
                       words for 'Language'.                      
                                                                 
 The  Noldorin  Loremasters  state  often   that  the   meaning  of
 Quendi  was  'speakers',  'those  who  form  words with  voices' -
 i  karir  quettar  omainen.  Since  they  were  in  possession  of
 traditions  coming  down  from  ancient  days  before  the Separa-
 tion, this statement  cannot be  disregarded; though  the develop-
 ment of sense set out above may also stand as correct.           
   It  might  be  objected  that  in  fact  no  stem *KWEN  clearly
 referring to speech or vocal sound  is found  in any  known Elvish
 tongue.  The  nearest  in  form  is  the  stem *KWET 'speak, utter
 words, say'.  But in  dealing with  this ancient  word we  must go
 back  to  the  beginnings  of  Elvish  speech,  before  the  later

 organisation of its basic structure, with its  preference (especially
 in  stems  of  verbal significance)  for the  pattern X-X(-),  with a
 fixed  medial  consonant,  as  e.g.  in  stems   already  exemplified
 above,   such   as   *Dele,  *Heke,   *Tele,  *Kala,   *Kiri,  *Nuku,
 *Ruku,  etc.  A  large  number  of  monosyllabic  stems   (with  only
 an  initial  consonant  or  consonant  group)  still  appear  in  the
 Eldarin  tongues;  and  many  of  the  dissyllabic  stems  must  have
 been made by elaboration of these, just as, at  a later  stage again,
 the  so-called  *kalat-  stems  were  extended  from  the  disyllabic
 forms: *kala > *kalat(a).                                              
   If we assume, then,  that the  oldest form  of this  stem referring
 to  vocal  speech   was  *KWE,   of  which  *KWENE  and  *KWETE  were
 elaborations,  we  shall  find a  striking parallel  in the  forms of
 *KWA.  This  stem  evidently  referred  to  'completion'. As  such it
 survives  as  an element  in many  of the  Eldarin words  for 'whole,
 total,  all,  etc.  But  it  also  appears  in  the  form  *KWAN, and
 cannot  well  be  separated  from  the  verb  stem *KWATA,   Q  quat-
 'fill'.  The  assumption  also  helps  to   explain  a   curious  and
 evidently  archaic  form  that  survives  only  in  the  languages of
 Aman:  *ekwe,  Q  eque,  T  epe. It  has no  tense forms  and usually
 receives  no  pronominal  affixes,  (Note  29,  p. 415)  being mostly
 used  only  before  either  a  proper  name  (sg. or  pl.) or  a full
 independent  pronoun,  in  the  senses   say  /   says  or   said.  A
 quotation  then  follows,  either  direct,  or less  usually indirect
 after a 'that'-conjunction.                                            
   In this  *ekwe we  have plainly  a last  survivor of  the primitive
 *KWE.  It  is  again paralleled  by a  similar formation  (though of
 different  function)  from  *KWA:  *akwa.  This survives  in Quenya
 only  as  aqua  'fully,  completely,  altogether, wholly'.  (Note 30,
 p.  415)  Compare  the  use of  -kwa in  the formation  of adjectives
 from  nouns,  such  as  -ful in  English, except  that the  sense has
 been  less  weakened,  and  remains  closer  to the  original meaning
 of the stem: completely . (Note 31, p. 415)                            
   In  Quenya  the  form  eques,  originally  meaning  'said  he, said
 someone'  (see  Note  29) was  also used  as a  noun eques,  with the
 analogical  plural  equessi,  'a  saying,  dictum,  a  quotation from
 someone's  uttered  words',  hence  also  'a  saying,  a  current  or
 proverbial dictum'.                                                    
   We   may   therefore   accept  the   etymology  of   *kwene,  *kwen
 that  would  make  its  original  meaning  'speaking,   speaker,  one
 using  vocal language'.  It would  indeed be  natural for  the Elves,
 requiring  a  word  for  one  of  their  own  kind  as  distinguished

 from other creatures then known, to select the use  of speech  as a
 chief  characteristic.  But once  formed the  word must  have taken
 the meaning 'person', without specific reference to this  talent of
 the  Incarnates.  Thus  *nere,  *ner  a  male  person,  a  man  was
 derived  from *NERE  referring  to  physical  strength  and valour,
 but  it  was  possible  to  speak  of  a weak  or cowardly  ner; or
 indeed to speak of a dumb or silent kwen.                         
    It  might  therefore  still  be doubted  that in  the derivative
 *kwendi  the  notion  of  speaking   was  any   longer  effectively
 present.  The  statement  of  the  Loremasters cannot,  however, be
 dismissed;  while  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  Elves  were
 always  more  deeply  concerned  with  language  than   were  other
 races. Up to the  time at  least of  the Separation,  then, *Kwendi
 must still have implied 'we,  the speaking  people'; it  may indeed
 have  primarily  applied  to  concourses  for  discussion,  or  for
 listening to speeches and recitations. But when  the Elves  came to
 know  of  other creatures  of similar  forms, and  other Incarnates
 who  used  vocal  language,  and  the  name  *Kwendi,   Quendi  was
 used  to  distinguish  themselves  from  these  other   kinds,  the
 linguistic  sense  must  have  been no  longer present  in ordinary
 language.                                                         
                                                                  
    With  regard  to  the  word  Quenya: an  account is  given above
 of  the  way  in  which  this word  became used  first in  Aman for
 Elvish speech, (Note 32, p. 416) and then for  the dialects  of the
 Eldar  in  Aman,  and  later  for  the language  of the  Vanyar and
 Noldor, and finally in Middle-earth for the  ancient tongue  of the
 Noldor  preserved  as  a  language  of  ritual  and  lore.  This is
 historically  correct, whatever  may be  the ultimate  etymology of
 Quenya  before  the  Eldar  came  to  Aman.  The  view  taken above
 (p. 360) is that it is  derived from  an adjective  *kwendja formed
 upon  the  stem  *kwende   (of  which  *kwendi  was   the  plural),
 meaning 'belonging to the Quendi or Elves'.                       
    Pengolodh  the  Loremaster  of  Eressea says,  in his  Lammas or
 Account  of   Tongues,  that   Quenya  meant   properly  'language,
 speech', and was the oldest word for  this meaning.  This is  not a
 statement  based  on tradition,  but an  opinion of  Pengolodh; and
 he  appears  to  mean  only  that   Quendya,  Quenya   is  actually
 never  recorded  except  as  the  name  of  a  language,  and  that
 language was  the only  one known  to exist  when this  word was
 first made.                                                     
    In  any  case  it  is  clear  that  Quenya  was  always  in fact

 particular in its reference; for  when the  Noldorin Loremasters
 came  to  consider  linguistic matters,  and required  words for
 speech or vocal language in general, as a mode of  expression or
 communication, and for  different aspects  of speech,  they made
 no use of the element *kwen, quen or its derivatives.          
   The  usual  word,  in  non-technical  use, for  'language' was
 'lambe, Q and T lambe, S  lam. This  was undoubtedly  related to
 the  word  for  the  physical  tongue:  *lamba,  Q and  T lamba,
 S lam. It meant  'tongue-movement, (way  of) using  the tongue'.
 (Note 33, p. 416) This use of a word  indicating the  tongue and
 its movements for articulate language no doubt arose, even  in a
 period  when  all  known speakers  spoke substantially  the same
 language,  from  elementary  observation  of the  important part
 played by the tongue in articulate  speaking, and  from noticing
 the peculiarities of individuals, and the  soon-developing minor
 differences in the language of groups and clans.               
   Lambe  thus  meant  primarily  'a  way  of talking',  within a
 common  generally  intelligible  system, and  was nearer  to our
 'dialect' than to 'language';  but later  when the  Eldar became
 aware of other  tongues, not  intelligible without  study, lambe
 naturally  became  applied  to  the  separate  languages  of any
 people or region. The Loremasters, therefore, did not  use lambe
 as a term for language or  speech in  general. Their  terms were
 derived  from  the  stem *TEN  'indicate,  signify',  from which
 was  formed  the  already  well-known  word  *tenwe  >  Q tengwe
 'indication,  sign,  token'.  From  this  they  made   the  word
 tengwesta 'a system or code of signs'. Every 'language'  was one
 such system. A lambe was  a tengwesta  built of  sounds (hloni).
 For the  sense Language,  as a  whole, the  peculiar art  of the
 Incarnates  of which  each tengwesta  was a  particular product,
 they used the abstract formation tengwestie.                   
   Now  *TEN  had no  special reference  to sound.  Ultimately it
 meant 'to point at', and  so to  indicate a  thing, or  convey a
 thought,  by  some  gesture,  or  by  any  sign  that  would  be
 understood.  This  was  appreciated  by  the   Loremasters,  who
 wished for a word free from any limitations  with regard  to the
 kind of signs  or tengwi  used. They  could thus  include under
 tengwesta any group of signs,  including visible  gestures, used
 and recognized by a community.                                 
   They knew of such systems  of gesture.  The Eldar  possessed a
 fairly elaborate system, (Note  34, p.  416) containing  a large
 number  of  conventional  gesture-signs, some  of which  were as

                                                                 
                                                                  
 'arbitrary'  as those  of phonetic  systems. That  is, they  had no
 more  obvious  connexion  with  self-explanatory gestures  (such as
 pointing in a  desired direction)  than had  the majority  of vocal
 elements  or combinations  with 'echoic'  or imitative  words (such
 ps *mama, Q mama sheep, or *k(a)wak, Q quako 'crow').              
   The  Dwarves  indeed,  as  later  became  known,  had a  far more
 elaborate  and  organized   system.  They   possessed  in   fact  a
 secondary  tengwesta  of  gestures,  concurrent  with  their spoken
 language,  which  they  began  to  learn  almost  as  soon  as they
 began  learning  to  speak.  It  should  be  said rather  that they
 possessed  a  number  of  such  gesture-codes;  for   unlike  their
 spoken   language,   which   remained  astonishingly   uniform  and
 unchanged  both  in  time  and  in  locality,  their  gesture-codes
 varied  greatly  from  community  to   community.  And   they  were
 differently  employed.  Not  for communication  at a  distance, for
 the   Dwarves  were   short-sighted,  but   for  secrecy   and  the
 exclusion of strangers.                                           
   The  component  sign-elements  of  any  such  code were  often so
 slight and so swift that they could hardly be detected,  still less
 interpreted  by  uninitiated  onlookers.  As  the  Eldar eventually
 discovered in  their dealings  with the  Naugrim, they  could speak
 with  their  voices but  at the  same time  by 'gesture'  convey to
 their  own  folk  modifications  of  what was  being said.  Or they
 could  stand silent  considering some  proposition, and  yet confer
 among themselves meanwhile.                                       
   This  'gesture-language',  or  as they  called it  iglishmek, the
 Dwarves  were  no  more  eager  to  teach  than  their  own tongue.
 But  they  understood  and respected  the disinterested  desire for
 knowledge,  and  some  of  the  later  Noldorin   loremasters  were
 allowed  to  learn  enough of  both their  lambe (aglab)  and their
 iglishmek to understand their systems.                            
   Though  a  lambe  was  thus  theoretically  simply   a  tengwesta
 that  happened  to  employ  phonetic  signs,  hloniti  tengwi,  the
 early  loremasters  held  that  it was  the superior  form, capable
 of  producing  a  system  incalculably  more  subtle,  precise  and
 extensive  than  any  hwerme  or  gesture-code.  When  unqualified,
 therefore,  tengwesta  meant  a spoken  language. But  in technical
 use it meant more  than lambe.  The study'  of a  language included
 not only lambe, the way of speaking  (that is  what we  should call
 its phonetics and phonology), but also its morphology, gram-
 mar, and vocabulary.                                              

 The section omitted from Appendix D (see p. 359) begins  here. The
 remainder of the text, which now follows, was all included  in this
 Appendix.                                                         
                                                                  
 Before   he  turned   to  other   matters  Feanor   completed  his
 alphabetic  system,  and  here  also  he  introduced  a  change in
 terms  that  was  afterwards  followed.  He  called   the  written
 representation  of  a  spoken  tengwe  (according  to  his defini-
 tion)(23) a tengwa. A  'letter' or  any individual  significant mark
 had previously been  called a  sarat, from *SAR 'score,  incise' >
 'write'.(24) The Feanorian  letters were  always called  tengwar in
 Quenya,  though  sarati  remained  the   name  for   the  Rumilian
 letters. Since,  however, in  the mode  of spelling  commonly used
 the  full signs  were consonantal,  in ordinary  non-technical use
 tengwar  became  equivalent to  'consonants', and  the vowel-signs
 were   called   omatehtar.   When   the  Feanorian   letters  were
 brought  to  Beleriand  and  applied  (first  by  the  Noldor)  to
 Sindarin,  tengwa   was  rendered   by  its   recognized  Sindarin
 equivalent tew, pl. tiw. The letters of the native S alphabet were
 called  certh, pl.  cirth. The  word in  Exilic Quenya  certa, pl.
 certar  was  an  accommodated  loan  from  Sindarin; there  was no
 such  word  in  older  Quenya.  The  Sindarin  certh  is  probably
 from *kirte 'cutting', a verbal derivative of a  type not  used in
 Quenya, the  form of  which would  in any  case have  been *kirte,
 if inherited.                                                     
 Though  Feanor  after the  days of  his first  youth took  no more
 active  part in  linguistic lore  and enquiry,  he is  credited by
 tradition  with  the  foundation  of a  school of  Lambengolmor or
 'Loremasters of  Tongues' to  carry on  this work.  This continued
 in  existence  among  the  Noldor,  even  through the  rigours and
 disasters  of  the  Flight from  Aman and  the Wars  in Beleriand,
 and it survived indeed to return to Eressea.                      
 Of  the  School  the  most  eminent   member  after   the  founder
 was,  or  still  is,  Pengolodh,(25) an Elf  of  mixed  Sindarin and
 Noldorin  ancestry,  born  in  Nevrast,  who  lived   in  Gondolin
 from  its foundation.  He wrote  both in  Sindarin and  in Quenya.
 He  was  one  of  the  survivors of  the destruction  of Gondolin,
 from which  he rescued  a few  ancient writings,  and some  of his
 own copies,  compilations, and  commentaries. It  is due  to this,
 and  to  his  prodigious  memory,  that much  of the  knowledge of
 the Elder Days was preserved.                                     
 All  that  has  here  been  said concerning  the Elvish  names and
 their origins, and concerning the views of the  older loremasters,

 
                                                                  
 is derived directly or indirectly from  Pengolodh. For  before the
 overthrow  of  Morgoth  and  the ruin  of Beleriand,  he collected
 much  material  among  the  survivors  of  the  wars  at  Sirion's
 Mouth  concerning  languages   and  gesture-systems   with  which,
 owing to  the isolation  of Gondolin,  he had  not before  had any
 direct  acquaintance.  Pengolodh  is  said  to  have  remained  in
 Middle-earth until far  on into  the Second  Age for  the further-
 ance of his enquiries, and  for a  while to  have dwelt  among the
 Dwarves   of   Casarrondo  (Khazad-dum).   But  when   the  shadow
 of Sauron fell upon Eriador, he left Middle-earth, the last of the
 Lambengolmor,  and  sailed  to  Eressea,  where  maybe   he  still
 abides.                                                           
                                                                  
                Note on the 'Language of the Valar'.               
                                                                  
 Little  is  said  in Noldorin  lore, such  as has  been preserved,
 concerning the 'language of the  Valar and  Maiar'; though  it has
 been supposed above  that the  application of  Quenya  to  the
 speech of the Elves in Aman was  due to  the contrast  between the
 tongue of the Valar and the tongue  of the  Elves, which  they had
 before supposed to be the  only language  in the  world. Consider-
 ing the interest of the  Noldor in  all matters  concerning speech
 this  is  strange. Pengolodh  indeed comments  upon it  and offers
 explanations.  What  he  says in  the beginning  of his  Lammas is
 here  summarized;  for  his  comment  contains  all  that  is  now
 known of the matter.                                              
   'Even if we  had no  knowledge of  it,' he  says, 'we  could not
 reasonably  doubt  that the  Valar had  a lambe  of their  own. We
 know  that all  members of  their order  were incarnated  by their
 own desire, and that most of them chose to  take forms  like those
 of  the  Children  of Eru,  as they  name us.  In such  forms they
 would take on all the characters of the  Incarnates that  were due
 to the  co-operation of  hroa with  indwelling fea,  for otherwise
 the  assumption  of  these  forms  would  have been  needless, and
 they arrayed themselves in this  manner long  before they  had any
 cause to appear before us visibly.  Since, then,  the making  of a
 lambe is the chief character  of an  Incarnate, the  Valar, having
 arrayed them in this  manner, would  inevitably during  their long
 sojourn in Arda have made a lambe for themselves.                 
   'But  without  argument  we  know  that they  did so;  for there
 are references to the Lambe Valarinwa in  old lore  and histories,
 though  these  are  few  and scattered.  Most of  these references
 appear to be  derived, by  tradition of  mouth, from  "the Sayings

 of  Rumil"  (I  Equessi  Rumilo),  the   ancient  sage   of  Tirion,
 concerning  the  early days  of the  Eldar in  Aman and  their first
 dealings  with  the  Valar.   Only  part   of  these Equessi (26) were
 preserved  in  the  memory  of  the  Lambengolmor  during  the  dark
 years of the Flight and the Exile. All that I  can find  or remember
 I have here put together.'                                         
   The  information  that  Pengolodh  then  gives  is  here  set  out
 more briefly. His  preliminary points  are these.  Few of  the Eldar
 ever  learned  to speak  Valarin, even  haltingly; among  the people
 as  a  whole  only  a  small  number  of   words  or   names  became
 widely  known.  Feanor  indeed,  before  the  growth  of   his  dis-
 content,  is  said  to  have learned  more of  this tongue  than any
 others before  his time,  and his  knowledge must  at any  rate have
 far surpassed  the little  that is  now recorded;  but what  he knew
 he  kept  to  himself, and  he refused  to transmit  it even  to the
 Lambengolmor because of his quarrel with the Valar.                
   Our  knowledge  (Note  35, p.  416) is  therefore now  limited (1)
 to  statements  of  the  'ancients'  that  certain  words  in Quenya
 were  actually  derived   from  Valarin;   (2)  to   the  occasional
 citation  of  words  and  names  purporting  to be  Valarin (neither
 adopted   in  Quenya   nor  adapted   to  it),   though  undoubtedly
 recorded  with  only  approximate  accuracy,   since  no   signs  or
 letters  not  already known  in the  Elvish alphabets  are employed;
 (3)  to  statements  that  certain  names  (especially those  of the
 Valar  or of  places in  Valinor) were  translations of  the Valarin
 forms.  In  cases  (1)  and  (3)  the actual  Valarin words  are not
 always indicated.                                                  
   With  regard to  group (1)  Pengolodh cites  a 'Saying'  of Rumil:
 'The Eldar took  few words  from the  Valar, for  they were  rich in
 words  and  ready  in  invention  at  need.  But  though  the honour
 which  they  gave  to  the  Valar  might  have  caused them  to take
 words  from  their  speech,  whether  needed  or  not, few  words of
 Valarin could be  fitted to  Elvish speech  without great  change or
 diminution.  For  the  tongues  and  voices of  the Valar  are great
 and  stern,  and  yet  also  swift  and  subtle in  movement, making
 sounds  that  we  find  hard  to  counterfeit;  and their  words are
 mostly long and rapid, like the glitter of swords, like the  rush of
 leaves in a  great wind  or the  fall of  stones in  the mountains.'
 pengolodh   comments:   'Plainly   the   effect   of   Valarin  upon
 Elvish  ears was  not pleasing.'  It was,  he adds,  as may  be seen
 or  guessed  from  what  survives,   filled  with   many  consonants
 unfamiliar to the Eldar and alien to the  system of  their speech.(27)

                                                
                                                                 
 The examples that Pengolodh gives are as follows.                
                                                                 
 (1) (a) words.                                                   
 Ainu 'one  of the  "order" of  the Valar  and Maiar,  made before
 Ea'.  Valarin  ayanuz.  It  was  from  this  ainu that  in Quenya
 was made  the adjective  aina 'holy',  since according  to Quenya
 derivation  ainu  appeared  to  be  a  personal  form of  such an
 adjective.                                                       
 aman 'blessed, free from evil'. Chiefly used as  the name  of the
 land in which the Valar  dwelt. V  form not  given; said  to mean
 'at    peace,   in    accord   (with    Eru)'.   See    Manu   e.
 apar,  N  asar  'fixed  time,  festival'.  V  apara 'appointed'.
 axan  'law,  rule,  commandment'.  V  akasan,  said  to  mean 'He
 says', referring   to Eru.
 indil  'a  lily,  or  other  large  single  flower'.   V  inidil.
 mahalma  'throne'.   V  maxallam   (adapted  to   Quenya),  pro-
 perly one of the seats  of the  Valar in  the Mahanaxar  or 'Doom
 Ring'. The element maxan, said to mean  'authority, authorita-
 tive decision', was also used in the form Mahan, one of the eight
 chiefs   of   the   Valar,   usually   translated    as   Aratar.
 miruvore,  miruvor  'a  special wine  or cordial'.  V mirubhoze-;
 said  to  be  the  beginning  of  a  longer word,  containing the
 element  mirub- 'wine'.(28)
  telluma  'dome',  especially  the 'Dome  of Varda'  over Valinor;
 but  also  applied  to  the  domes  of the  mansion of  Manwe and
 Varda  upon Taniquetil.  V delguma,  altered by  association with
 Q telume. See Note 15.                                           
                                                                 
 Pengolodh also cites the colour-words, which he says may be      
 found in ancient verse, though they are used only by the Vanyar,
 'who, as Rumil reports, adopted many more words than did the     
 Noldor':                                                         
 ezel, ezella 'green'. See Ezellohar.                             
 nasar 'red'; ulban 'blue'. V forms not given.                    
 tulka 'yellow'. See Tulkas.   
                                   
   (b) names.                                                     
 Aule V Azulez (meaning not given).                               
 Manwe Reduction and alteration to fit Quenya, in which           
 words of this shape, ending in -we, were frequent in personal
 names. V Manawenuz 'Blessed One, One {closest) in accord         
 with Eru'. Oldest Q forms Manwen, Manwe.                         
 Tulkas V Tulukhastaz; said to contain V elements tuluk-          
 ha(n) 'yellow', and (a)sata- 'hair of head': 'the golden-haired'.

   Osse,   Orome   On  these   two  names,   the  only   ones  that
 became  known  to  the Eldar  before they  reached Aman,  see note
 below.                                                            
   Ulmo   Like   Manwe,   a   reduction   and  alteration   to  fit
 Quenya,  in  which  the  ending  -mo  often  appeared in  names or
 titles,  sometimes   with  an   agental  significance:   Ulmo  was
 interpreted  as  'the  Pourer'  < *UL  'pour out'.  The V  form is
 given as Ul(l)uboz, containing the element ul(l)u 'water'.        
                                                                  
   Osse and Orome. Orome was  the first  of the  Valar that  any of
 the Eldar saw. Osse they met  in Beleriand,  and he  remained long
 upon   the   coasts,  and   became  well   known  to   the  Sindar
 (especially  to  the  Eglain).  Both  these  names  therefore have
 Sindarin  forms.  To  Osse  corresponds  S  Yssion  or  Gaerys; to
 Orome  the  S  Araw.  The  V  forms  are  given as  Os(o)sai (said
 to mean 'spuming, foaming'); and Aromez.                         
   The  first  name  was  evidently  adopted  in  the  form  Ossai,
 which  became  naturally  Q  Osse.  In S  Ossai would  become ossi
 >  ussi  >  yssi  to  which  the  ending (of  male names)  -on was
 added; or else the adjective *gaira 'awful, fearful' was prefixed,
 producing Gaerys. The  latter was  more often  used by  the inland
 Teleri. *gaira  is from  *gay- 'astound,  make aghast',  which was
 also used in the oldest Eldarin word for the  Sea: *gayar,  Q ear,
 S gaear.                                                          
   Aromez  evidently,  as  was  pointed  out  by  Feanor, contained
 the open  a-like q  (which did  as a  matter of  later observation
 occur frequently in Valarin). This was treated as was  the Eldarin
 q,  so  that  the  Sindarin development  was >  *arame >  aromae >
 araum(a)  >   araum,  arauv   >  araw.   (In  North   Sindarin  or
 Mithrim,  where  the  diphthongization  of  o  and the  opening of
 intervocalic  m did  not occur,  the form  produced was  Arum; cf.
 the  North  Sindarin  transformation of  the Exilic  Noldorin name
 Hisilome   >   Hithlum.)   The   Quenya   form   with   Orome  for
 *Arome  <  *Arome,  may  show  assimilation  of  the initial  o to
 the following o before the retraction  of the  normal Q  accent to
 the first  syllable; but  Pengolodh says  that it  was due  to the
 association  of  the  name  with the  native Q  *rom, used  of the
 sound of trumps or horns, seen in the  Q name  for the  great horn
 of  Orome,  the  Vala-roma  (also  in  Q  romba  'horn,  trumpet',
 S rom).                                                           
   'The  Eldar,'  he  says, 'now  take the  name to  signify "horn-
 blowing"  or  "horn-blower";  but  to  the  Valar  it had  no such
 meaning.  Now  the  names  that  we  have  for  the  Valar  or the

 Maiar,  whether  adapted  from  the Valarin  or translated,  are not
 right names but titles, referring to some  function or  character of
 the  person;  for though  the Valar  have right  names, they  do not
 reveal them. Save only in the case of Orome. For it  is said  in the
 histories  of  the  most  ancient  days  of  the  Quendi  that, when
 Orome   appeared   among  them,   and  at   length  some   dared  to
 approach  him,   they  asked   him  his   name,  and   he  answered:
 Orome.  Then  they  asked  him  what  that  signified, and  again he
 answered:  Orome.  To  me  only  is it  given; for  I am  Orome. Yet
 the titles  that he  bore were  many and  glorious; but  he withheld
 them at that time, that the Quendi should not be afraid.'          
                                                                   
   Nahar,  the  name  of  Orome's  horse.  'Otherwise  it  was,' says
 Pengolodh,  'with  the  steed  upon  which  the  Lord   Orome  rode.
 When  the  Quendi  asked  his name,  and if  that bore  any meaning,
 Orome  answered:  "Nahar,  and  he  is  called  from  the  sound  of
 his  voice,  when  he  is eager  to run>.'  But the  V form  that is
 recorded by Rumil was naexaerra.                                    
   Ezellohar  (also  translated as  Koron Oiolaire,  Korollaire), the
 Green Mound upon which grew the Two Trees. V Ezelloxar.            
   Mahanaxar,  the  'Doom-ring'  in  which  were  set the  thrones of
 the  Valar  whereon  they  sat  in  council  (see   mahalma  above,
 p.   399).   Reduced   and   altered   from  V   maxananaskad.  Also
 translated as Rithil-Anamo.                                        
                                                                   
   (2) Valarin words and names, recorded but not adopted.          
      (a) words                                                       
   urus, rusur 'fire'.                                              
   ithtr 'light'.                                                   
   ul(l)u 'water'.                                                  
   sebeth 'air'. 
                                                   
      (b) names                                                        
   Arda: V Aparaphelun (said to mean 'appointed dwelling').         
 Arda Unmarred: Aparaphelun Amanaisal; Arda Marred:
 Aparaphelun Dusamanudan.                                          
   Telperion: V Ibrtnidilpathanezel.                                
   Laurelin: V Tulukhedelgorus.                                     
   Ithil 'moon': V Phanaikeluth. Said to mean 'bright mirror'.      
   Anar Sun: V Aparaigas. Said to mean appointed heat .             
                                                                   
 At  the  end of  this short  list Pengolodh  cites another  eques of
 Rumil,   which   might   seem  contrary   to  that   already  quoted
 above:  'Let  none  be  surprised  who  endeavour  to   learn  some-

 what of the tongue of  the Lords  of the  West, as  have I,  if they
 find  therein  many  words  or  parts  of  words  that  resemble our
 own  words  for  the  same  or  similar meanings.  For even  as they
 took our form for love of  us, so  in that  form their  voices would
 be likely to light upon similar tengwi.'                           
   Upon  this  Pengolodh  comments:  He  knew  not   of  Men   or  of
 Dwarves.   But   we   who   have   dwelt   among   Men   know   that
 (strange though that seems  to some)  the Valar  love them  no less.
 And for my part I perceive a  likeness no  less, or  indeed greater,
 between  the   Valarin  and   the  tongues   of  Men,   notably  the
 language  of  the  Dunedain  and  of  the  Children  of  Marach (sc.
 Adunaic). Also in  general manner  it resembles  the tongues  of the
 Kasari; though this is not to be wondered at, if the  tradition that
 they have is true that  Aule devised  for them  their tongue  in its
 beginning, and therefore  it changes  little, whereas  the iglishmek
 which they made for themselves is changeable.'                     
                                                                   
   (3)  [Cf.  p.  398:  'statements  that  certain  names (especially
 those of the Valar  or of  places in  Valinor) were  translations of
 the Valarin forms']                                                
   Arda  Q  arda  (<  *garda,  S  gardh)  meant  any  more   or  less
 bounded or defined place, a  region. Its  use as  a proper  name for
 the World was due to V Aparaphelun.                                
   Aratar  'the  Supreme',  was  a  version  of  the  V  maxanaz, pl.
 maxanumaz 'Authorities', also adapted as Mahan, pl. Mahani.        
   Ea 'All Creation', meaning 'it is',  or 'let  it be'.  Valarin not
 recorded.                                                          
   Ambar  'the  Earth',  meaning   'habitation'.  Though   the  Eldar
 often  used  Arda  in  much the  same sense,  the proper  meaning of
 Ambar  was  the  Earth  only,  as  the  place  where the  Aratar had
 taken  up  their  dwelling,  and  the  Incarnate  were  destined  to
 appear.(29)                                                        
   Eru  'the  One'.  Iluvatar  was,  however,  a  name  made  by  the
 Eldar  (when  they  had  learned  of  Eru  from  the  Valar),  which
 they  used  more  often  than  Eru,  reserved  for  the  most solemn
 occasions. It was made from iluve 'allness, the all',  an equivalent
 of Ea, and atar 'father'.                                          
   Varda 'the Sublime'. V form not given.                           
   Melkor  'He  who  arises  in  Might',  oldest  Q  form *mbelekoro.
 V form not given.                                                  
   Namo  'Judge';  usually  called  by  the  Eldar Mandos,  the place
 of his dwelling.                                                   

   Irmo  'Desirer';  usually  called  by  the  name of  his dwelling
 Lorien.                                                           
   Este  'Repose'.  (*SED:  CE  *esde >  *ezde, Q  Este, .T  Ede (as
 names only); S idh 'rest, repose'.)                               
   Vala 'has  power' (sc.  over the  matter of  Ea), 'a  Power'; pl.
 Valar,  'they  have  power,  the  Powers'.  Since  these  words are
 from  the  point  of  Q  structure  verbal  in  origin,  they  were
 probably  versions  of  V  words  of   verbal  meaning.   Cf.  axan
 (p. 399), Ea; and also Q eques.                                   
   Atan,  pl.  Atani  'Men',  meaning  'the  Second,   those  coming
 next'. The Valar called them in full 'the Second Children  of Eru',
 but the Quendi were 'the first Children of  Eru'. From  these terms
 the  Q  Minnonar  'First-born'   and  Apanonar   'After-born'  were
 imitated; but Q Eruhin, pl.  Eruhini 'Children  of Eru',  or 'Elves
 and Men', is a translation of the  Valarin expression  'Children of
 Eru' (of which the actual  Valarin form  is not  recorded, probably
 because  the  V  equivalent  of Eru  is nowhere  revealed). Besides
 the  form -hin,  -hini only  used in  composition after  a parental
 name,  Q  has  hina  'child', and  hina only  used in  the vocative
 addressing a  (young) child,  especially in  hinya (<  hinanya) 'my
 child'. S has hen, pl. hin, mostly used as a prefix  in patronymics
 or  metronymics:  as  Hin  Hurin  'The  Children  of  Hurin'. These
 words  are  derivatives  of  stem  *khin:  khina   (in  composition
 khina > Q -hin), and khina.                                       
   Kalakiryan 'the Cleft of Light', the pass in  the Pelori  not far
 from the north side of Taniquetil  through which  the Light  of the
 Trees in Valinor flowed out to the shores of Aman.                
   Taniquetil,  the  highest of  the mountains  of the  Pelori, upon
 which  were  the  mansions  of  Manwe  and  Varda.  The   name  was
 properly  only  that  of  the  topmost  peak,   meaning  High-Snow-
 Peak.  The  whole  mountain  was  most  often  called by  the Eldar
 (Oron)   Oiolosse,   '(Mount)   Everwhite'  or   'Eversnow'.  There
 were  many  names  for  this  mountain  in  Quenya.  A  variant  or
 close  equivalent  of Taniquetil  was Arfanyaras(se).  The Sindarin
 forms  of  the  names  were  made  by  the  Noldor, for  the Sindar
 knew  nothing  of  the  land  of  Aman  except  by  report  of  the
 Exiles: e.g. Amon-Uilos and Ras-Arphain.                          
   Pelori  'the  fencing,  or defensive  Heights'. The  mountains of
 Aman,  ranging  in a  crescent from  North to  South, close  to the
 western shores.                                                   
                                                                  
   On this list Pengolodh comments: 'These are all that I can find

                              
                                                                 
 in old lore or remember to  have read  or heard.  But the  list is
 plainly  incomplete.  Many  of  the  names  once  known  and used,
 whether they be  now found  in the  surviving histories  or passed
 over, must have belonged  to the  first or  the last  group. Among
 those that are still remembered I  note Avathar,  the name  of the
 dim and narrow land  between the  southern Pelori  and the  Sea in
 which Ungoliante housed. This is  not Elvish.  There are  also the
 names  Nessa,  the  spouse  of  Tulkas,  and  Uinen the  spouse of
 Osse. These too are not Elvish,  so far  as can  now be  seen; and
 since  the  names  Tulkas and  Osse come  from Valarin,  the names
 of their spouses may also represent titles in the  Valarin tongue,
 or such part of them as the Eldar could  adapt. I  say "so  far as
 can  now  be  seen",  for  there  is no  certainty in  this matter
 without record. It is clear that  some, or  indeed many,  of these
 adoptions  and  translations were  made in  very early  days, when
 the  language of  the Eldar  was otherwise  than it  became before
 the  Exile.  In  the  long  years, owing  to the  restlessness and
 inventiveness  of  the Eldar  (and of  the Noldor  in particular),
 words  have  been  set  aside and  new words  made; but  the names
 of the enduring have endured, as  memorials of  the speech  of the
 past.  There  is  also  this  to  consider.  When words  of Elvish
 tongue  had  been used  to make  the names  of things  and persons
 high  and  admirable,  they  seem  to  have  been  felt  no longer
 suitable to apply to lesser things, and so  passed from  the daily
 speech.                                                          
    'Thus  we  see  that vala  is no  longer used  of any  power or
 authority  less than  that of  the Valar  themselves. One  may say
 A  vala  Manwe!  "may  Manwe  order  it!";  or Valar  valuvar "the
 will of the Valar will be done";  but we  do not  say this  of any
 lesser name. In like manner Este or Ede  is the  name only  of the
 spouse  of  Lorien,  whereas  the  form  that  that  word  has  in
 Sindarin  (idh)  means  "rest",  such  as even  a tired  hound may
 find before a fire.' (Note 36, p. 416)                           
                                                                 
    The reasons  that Pengolodh  gives or  surmises for  the scanty
 knowledge  of  Valarin  preserved  in   Noldorin  lore   are  here
 summarized. Some have already been alluded to.                   
    Though  Valarin  had  many  more  sounds  than   Eldarin,  some
 alien to the Eldarin style and system, this only imposed  any real
 difficulty upon  the borrowing  of words  and their  adaptation to
 Eldarin.  To  learn  Valarin  was probably  not beyond  the powers
 of  the  Eldar, if  they had  felt the  need or  desire to  do so;

 references to the difficulty of Valarin are mainly due to  the fact
 that  for  most  of  the Eldar  learning it  was an  ungrateful and
 profitless task.                                                  
   For the Eldar had no need to  learn the  language of  Valinor for
 the  purposes  of  communication;  and  they  had no  desire either
 to  abandon  or to  alter their  own tongue,  which they  loved and
 of  which  they  were  proud.  Only  those  among  them, therefore,
 who had special linguistic curiosity desired  to learn  Valarin for
 its  own  sake.  Such  'loremasters'  did  not always  record their
 knowledge,  and  many  of  the  records  that  were made  have been
 lost. Feanor,  who probably  knew more  of the  matter than  any of
 the  younger  generations  born  in  Aman,   deliberately  withheld
 his knowledge.                                                    
   It  was  probably  only  in the  very early  days that  the Eldar
 heard  Valarin  much spoken,  or had  opportunity for  learning it,
 unless by special individual effort. The Teleri had  little immedi-
 ate  contact with  the Valar  and Maiar  after their  settlement on
 the  shores.  The  Noldor  became  more  and  more  engrossed  with
 their  own  pursuits.   Only  the   Vanyar  remained   in  constant
 association  with  the  Valar.  And  in any  case the  Valar appear
 quickly to have adopted Quenya.                                   
   All the orders of Eru's creatures have each some  special talent,
 which higher orders may admire. It  was the  special talent  of the
 Incarnate,  who  lived  by  necessary  union  of  hroa and  fea, to
 make  language.  The  Quendi,  first  and  chief of  the Incarnate,
 had (or so they held) the greatest talent for the making  of lambe.
 The  Valar  and  Maiar  admired  and  took  delight in  the Eldarin
 lambe,  as  they did  in many  other of  the skilled  and delicate
 works of the Eldar.                                               
   The Valar,  therefore, learned  Quenya by  their own  choice, for
 pleasure  as well  as for  communication; and  it seems  clear that
 they  preferred  that  the  Eldar  should make  new words  of their
 own  style, or  should translate  the meanings  of names  into fair
 Eldarin forms, rather than  [that] they  should retain  the Valarin
 words  or  adapt  them  to  Quenya  (a process  that in  most cases
 did justice to neither tongue).                                   
   Soon  after  the  coming  of  the  Vanyar  and  Noldor  the Valar
 ceased to speak in their own tongue in the  presence of  the Eldar,
 save rarely: as for instance in  the great  Councils, at  which the
 Eldar were sometimes  present. Indeed,  it is  said that  often the
 Valar   and   Maiar   might   be   heard   speaking   Quenya  among
 themselves.                                                       

   In any case, to speak  of the  early days  of the  settlement at
 Tirion,  it  was far  easier and  swifter for  the Valar  to learn
 Quenya than to teach the Eldar Valarin.  For in  a sense  no lambe
 was 'alien' to the  Self-incarnate. Even  when using  bodily forms
 they had less need of any tengwesta than  had the  Incarnate; and
 they had made a lambe for  the pleasure  of exercising  the powers
 and skills of the bodily form, and (more remotely) for  the better
 understanding  of  the  minds  of the  Incarnate when  they should
 appear,  rather  than  for  any  need that  they felt  among them-
 selves.  For  the  Valar  and  Maiar  could  transmit  and receive
 thought directly (by the will of both parties) according  to their
 right  nature;(30) and  though  the  use  of  bodily   form  (albeit
 assumed  and  not  imposed)  in  a  measure  made  this   mode  of
 communication less swift and precise,  they retained  this faculty
 in a degree far surpassing that seen among any of the Incarnate.
   At this  point Pengolodh  does not  further discuss  this matter
 of the transmission and reception of thought, and  its limitations
 in any order  of creatures.  But he  cites, as  an example  of the
 speed  with which  by its  aid a  tengwesta may  be learned  by a
 higher order, the story of the Finding of the Edain.  According to
 this  the  Noldorin king,  Finrod, quickly  learned the  tongue of
 the  folk  of  Beor  whom  he  discovered  in  Ossiriand,  for  he
 understood  in  large measure  what they  meant while  they spoke.
 'Now  Finrod,' he  says, 'was  renowned among  the Eldar  for this
 power which he had, because  of the  warmth of  his heart  and his
 desire to understand  others; yet  his power  was no  greater than
 that of the least of the Maiar.'(31)                             
                                                                 
   Pengolodh concludes as follows. 'In the histories the  Valar are
 always  presented  as  speaking   Quenya  in   all  circumstances.
 (Note  37, p.  417) But  this cannot  proceed from  translation by
 the  Eldar,  few of  whose historians  knew Valarin.  The transla-
 tion  must  have  been  made  by  the  Valar or  Maiar themselves.
 Indeed those histories or legends that deal with times  before the
 awaking  of  the  Quendi,  or  with  the  uttermost past,  or with
 things  that  the  Eldar  could  not  have  known, must  have been
 presented  from  the first  in Quenya  by the  Valar or  the Maiar
 when  they instructed  the Eldar.  Moreover this  translation must
 have  concerned  more  than  the  mere  words  of language.  If we
 consider the First History, which is called the  Ainulindale: this
 must  have  come  from the  Aratar themselves  (for the  most part
 indeed  from Manwe,  it is  believed). Though  it was  plainly put

 into its  present  form  by  Eldar,  and  was  already in  that form
 when  it  was  recorded  by  Rumil, it  must nonetheless  have been
 from the first  presented to  us not  only in  the words  of Quenya,
 but  also  according  to  our  modes  of  thought  and  our imagina-
 tion of the visible world, in symbols that were intelligible  to us.
 And  these  things  the  Valar understood  because they  had learned
 our tongue.'                                                       
                                                                   
                  Author's Notes to Quendi and Eldar.               
                                                                   
 Note 1 (p. 367; referred to in two passages).                      
 Distinguish  yomenie   'meeting,  gathering'   (of  three   or  more
 coming from  different directions).  The Telerin  form was:  el sila
 lumena vomentienguo.                                              
                                                                   
 Note 2 (p. 369).                                                   
 It was  a later  development in  Quenya, after  the elements  -o and
 -va had  become inflexions,  applicable to  all nouns,  to pluralize
 -o by the addition of the  plural sign  -n, when  added to  a plural
 stem (as by natural function it could  be): as  lasseo 'of  a leaf',
 lassio > lassion 'of leaves'. Similarly with -va;  but this  was and
 remained  an  adjective,  and  had  the  plural  form -ve  in plural
 attribution  (archaic  Q  -vai);  it  could  not,  however, indicate
 plurality  of  source,  originally,  and  the  Q  distinction Eldava
 Elf s and Eldaiva Elves ?was a Q innovation.                      
                                                                   
 Note 3 (p. 372).                                                   
 roquen  is  <  *roko-kwen  with  Quenya  syncope,  *roko   being  an
 older  simpler  form  of  the  stem,  found  in  some  compounds and
 compound  names,  though   the  normal   form  of   the  independent
 word  'horse'  had  the  fortified   form  rokko.   These  compounds
 being  old  were  accented  as  unitary  words  and the  main stress
 came on the syllable preceding -quen: kirya:quen, kirya:queni.
                                                                   
 Note 4 (p. 373).                                                   
 That  is,  elliptically  for  Quenya lambe,  as English  for English
 language.  When  historians  needed   a  general   adjective  'Quen-
 dian,  belonging  to  the  Elves  as  a  whole',  they made  the new
 adjective  Quenderin  (on  the  model  of Eldarin,  Noldorin, etc.);
 but this remained a learned word.                                  
                                                                   
 Note 5 (p. 375).                                                   
 This  change  took  place  far  back  in Elvish  linguistic history;
 possibly before  the Separation.  It is  in any  case common  to the
 Telerin of Aman, Sindarin, and Nandorin.                           

 Note 6 (p. 375).                                                   
 The  Noldorin  Loremasters  record  that  Pendi  was  used  by  the
 Teleri only of the earliest days, because they  felt that  it meant
 the  lacking, the  poor (*PEN), with  reference to  the indigence
 and ignorance of the primitive Elves.                              
                                                                   
 Note 7 (p. 377).                                                   
 The  Dwarves  were  in  a  special position.  They claimed  to have
 known  Beleriand  before  even  the  Eldar  first  came  there; and
 there do appear  to have  been small  groups dwelling  furtively in
 the  highlands  west  of  Sirion  from  a  very  early  date:  they
 attacked and waylaid the Elves by  stealth, and  the Elves  did not
 at  first  recognize  them as  Incarnates, but  thought them  to be
 some  kind  of  cunning  animal,  and  hunted  them.  By  their own
 account they were fugitives,  driven into  the wilderness  by their
 own  kin  further  east,  and  later they  were called  the Noegyth
 Nibin (32) or Petty-dwarves,  for  they  had  become smaller  than the
 norm of their kind, and filled with hate  for all  other creatures.
 When   the   Elves  met   the  powerful   Dwarves  of   Nogrod  and
 Belegost, in  the eastern  side of  the Mountains,  they recognized
 them  as  Incarnates,  for  they  had  skill  in  many  crafts, and
 learned the Elvish speech readily for purposes of traffic. At first
 the  Elves  were  in doubt  concerning them,  believing them  to be
 related  to  Orcs  and creatures  of Morgoth;  but when  they found
 that, though proud and unfriendly,  they could  be trusted  to keep
 any treaties  that they  made, and  did not  molest those  who left
 them  in peace,  they traded  with them  and let  them come  and go
 as  they  would.  They  no  longer  classed  them  as  Moerbin, but
 neither  did  they  ever reckon  them as  Celbin, calling  them the
 Dornhoth  ('the  thrawn  folk')  or   the  Naugrim   ('the  stunted
 people'). [See further on the Petty-dwarves pp. 388 - 9.]          
                                                                   
 Note 8 (p. 377).                                                   
 Though  Morben  might  still  be  applied  to   them  by   any  who
 remained hostile  to Men  (as were  the people  of Doriath  for the
 most part); but this was intended to be insulting.                 
                                                                   
 Note 9 (p. 377; referred to in two passages).                      
 The  implication  that  as  opposed  to  Celbin  the  Moerbin  were
 allies of Morgoth, or at  least of  dubious loyalty,  was, however,
 untrue with regard  to the  Avari. No  Elf of  any kind  ever sided
 with Morgoth of free will, though  under torture  or the  stress of
 great  fear,  or  deluded by  lies, they  might obey  his commands:
 but this applied also to Celbin.  The 'Dark-elves',  however, often

 were  hostile,  and even  treacherous, in  their dealings  with the
 Sindar  and  Noldor;  and  if  they  fought,   as  they   did  when
 themselves  assailed by  the Orcs,  they never  took any  open part
 in the War on the side of the Celbin. They  were, it  seems, filled
 with  an  inherited  bitterness  against   the  Eldar,   whom  they
 regarded as deserters of their kin, and  in Beleriand  this feeling
 was  increased  by  envy  (especially  of  the  Amanyar),   and  by
 resentment of their lordliness. The belief of  the Celbin  that, at
 the least, they were weaker in resistance to  the pressures  or lies
 of  Morgoth,  if  this  grievance  was  concerned,  may  have  been
 justified; but the only case recorded in the  histories is  that of
 Maeglin,  the  son  of Eol.  Eol was  a Mornedhel,  and is  said to
 have   belonged   to   the   Second  Clan   (whose  representatives
 among  the  Eldar  were  the  Noldor).(33) He dwelt in  East Beleriand
 not  far from  the borders  of Doriath.  He had  great smith-craft,
 especially  in the  making of  swords, in  which work  he surpassed
 even  the  Noldor  of  Aman;  and many  therefore believed  that he
 used  the  morgul,  the black  arts taught  by Morgoth.  The Noldor
 themselves  had  indeed  learned  much  from  Morgoth  in  the days
 of his captivity in Valinor;  but it  is more  likely that  Eol was
 acquainted  with  the  Dwarves,  for  in  many  places   the  Avari
 became  closer  in  friendship  with that  people than  the Amanyar
 or the Sindar. Eol found Irith,(34) the sister  of King  Turgon, astray
 in the wild near his dwelling, and he took her to wife by  force: a
 very wicked deed  in the  eyes of  the Eldar.  His son  Maeglin was
 later  admitted  to  Gondolin,  and  given  honour  as  the  king's
 sisterson;  but  in  the  end  he  betrayed  Gondolin  to  Morgoth.
 Maeglin was indeed  an Elf  of evil  temper and  dark mind,  and he
 had a lust and grudge of his  own to  satisfy; but  even so  he did
 what he did  only after  torment and  under a  cloud of  fear. Some
 of  the  Nandor,  who  were  allowed  to  be  Celbin, were  not any
 better. Saeros, a  counsellor of  King Thingol,  who belonged  to a
 small  clan  of  Nandor  living  in  eastern  Doriath,  was chiefly
 responsible for the driving into  outlawry of  Turin son  of Hurin.
 Turin's  mother  was  named  Morwen   'dark  maiden',   because  of
 her dark hair, and it was one of Saeros' worst insults to  call her
 Morben. For that Turin smote him in the king's hall.(35)          
   This resentment on the part of  the Avari  is illustrated  by the
 history  of  PQ  *kwendi.  This word,  as has  been shown,  did not
 survive  in  the  Telerin  languages   of  Middle-earth,   and  was
 almost  forgotten  even  in  the  Telerin  of  Aman. But  the Lore-
 masters  of  later  days,  when  more  friendly relations  had been

                                                                      
                                                                      
 established  with  Avari  of  various  kinds in  Eriador and  the Vale
 of  Anduin,  record  that  it  was  frequently to  be found  in Avarin
 dialects.  These  were   numerous,  and   often  as   widely  sundered
 from  one  another  as  they  were  from the  Eldarin forms  of Elvish
 speech,.  but  wherever  the  descendants  of  *kwendi  were  found,
 they  meant  not  'Elves  in  general',  but were  the names  that the
 Avari  gave  to  themselves.  They  had  evidently  continued  to call
 themselves   *kwendi,   the   People,   regarding   those   who   went
 away  as  deserters  -  though  according  to  Eldarin  tradition  the
 numbers  of  the  Eldar  at  the time  of the  Separation were  in the
 approximate  proportion  of  3:2,  as  compared  with  the  Avari (see
 p.  381).  The  Avarin  forms  cited by  the Loremasters  were: kindi,
 cuind, hwenti,  windan, kinn-lai,  penni. The  last is  interesting as
 showing  the  change  kw  >  p.  This  might  be  independent  of the
 Common  Telerin  change;  but   it  suggests   that  it   had  already
 occurred   among   the   Lindar  before   the  Separation.   The  form
 penni  is  cited  as  coming  from  the  'Wood-elven'  speech  of  the
 Vale  of  Anduin,  and  these  Elves  were  among  the  most  friendly
 to  the  fugitives  from Beleriand,  and held  themselves akin  to the
 remnants of the Sindar.                                               
                                                                      
 Note 10 (p. 378).                                                     
 It  is  not  surprising that  the Edain,  when they  learned Sindarin,
 and to a certain  extent Quenya  also, found  it difficult  to discern
 whether  words  and  names  containing  the  element  el  referred  to
 the stars or to the Elves.  This is  seen in  the name  Elendil, which
 became  a  favourite  name  among   the  Edain,   but  was   meant  to
 bear  the sense  'Elf-friend'. Properly  in Quenya  it meant  'a lover
 or  student  of  the  stars',  and  was  applied  to those  devoted to
 astronomical  lore.  'Elf-friend'  would  have  been   more  correctly
 represented by Quen(den)dil or Eldandil.                              
                                                                      
 Note 11 (p. 378).                                                     
 Lake   Mithrim,   meaning   originally   'Lake   of    the   Mithrim'.
 Mithrim  was  a  name   given  to   them  by   the  southern-dwellers,
 because  of  the cooler  climate and  greyer skies,  and the  mists of
 the  North.  It  was  probably  because  the  Noldor  first  came into
 contact  with  this  northerly  branch  that they  gave in  Quenya the
 name  Sindar  or  Sindeldi  'Grey-elves'  to  all the  Telerin inhabi-
 tants of the Westlands who spoke the Sindarin language.               
 Though  this  name  was  also  later  held  to  refer  to  Elwe's name
 Thingol   (Sindikollo)   'Grey-cloak',   since  he   was  acknowledged
 as high-king of all the land and its peoples. It is said also that the

 folk  of  the  North  were   clad  much   in  grey,   especially  after
 the   return   of  Morgoth   when  secrecy   became  needed;   and  the
 Mithrim  had  an  art   of  weaving   a  grey   cloth  that   made  its
 wearers  almost  invisible  in  shadowy  places  or  in a  stony land.
 This  art was  later used  even in  the southern  lands as  the dangers
 of the War increased.                                                  
                                                                       
 Note 12 (p. 380).                                                      
 The  language  of  Mithrim  was  also  a  marked  dialect; but  none of
 the  dialects  of  Sindarin  differed widely  enough to  interfere with
 intercourse.  Their  divergences  were  no  greater  than   those  that
 had  arisen  between  the  Quenya  as  spoken  by  the  Vanyar,  and as
 spoken by the Noldor at the time of the Exile.                         
                                                                       
 Note 13 (p. 380).                                                      
 For the late PQ gl- as an initial variation of l- see General          
 Phonology.(37) Though  this Clan-name  has *glind-  in Sindarin,          
 the g- does not appear in Amanya Telerin, nor in Nandorin, so          
 that in this case it may  be an  addition in  Sindarin, which          
 favoured and much increased initial groups of this kind.               
                                                                       
 Note 14 (p. 382).                                                     
 For this reason the most frequently used of the 'titles' or            
 secondary names of the Lindar was Nendili 'Water-lovers'.              
                                                                       
 Note 15 (p. 382).                                                      
 A   simple   agental  formation   (like  *abaro   >  *abar   from *ABA)
 from  the  stem  *TELE,  the  primary  sense   of  which   appears  to
 have  been  'close,  end, come  at the  end': hence  in Q  telda 'last,
 final'; tele- intransitive verb 'finish, end', or 'be the last thing or
 person  in  a  series  or  sequence of  events'; telya  transitive verb
 'finish,  wind  up,  conclude';  telma  'a  conclusion,  anything used
 to  finish  off  a  work or  affair'. This  was possibly  distinct from
 *tel-u  'roof  in,  put  the  crown on  a building',  seen in  Q telume
 'roof,  canopy'.  (This  was  probably  one  of  the  earliest Quendian
 words  for  the  heavens,  the  firmament,   before  the   increase  of
 their  knowledge,  and  the  invention  of  the  Eldarin   word  Menel.
 Cf.   Telumehtar   'warrior   of   the   sky',   an   older   name  for
 Menelmakil,   Orion.)   The   word   telluma   'dome,  cupola'   is  an
 alteration  of  telume  under  the influence  of Valarin  delgsima: see
 p.  399.  But  *telu  may  be  simply  a  differentiated form  of *TELE,
 since  the roof  was the  final work  of a  building; cf.  telma, which
 was  often  applied  to  the  last  item  in  a  structure,  such  as a
 coping-stone, or a topmost pinnacle.                                   

 Note 16 (p. 384).                                                  
 See  above,  p.  381.  The  proportion,  per  144,  of   the  Eldar
 remaining  in  Middle-earth  was  reckoned  at  26, of  which about
 8 were Nandor.                                                     
                                                                   
 Note 17 (p. 384).                                                 
 Lenwe  is  the   form  in   which  his   name  was   remembered  in
 Noldorin   histories.   His  name   was  probably   *Denwego,  Nan-
 dorin  Denweg.  His  son  was  the  Nandorin   chieftain  Denethor.
 These  names  probably  meant  'lithe-and-active'  and  'lithe-and-
 lank', from *dene- 'thin  and strong,  pliant, lithe',  and *thara-
 'tall (or long) and slender'.                                      
                                                                   
 Note 18 (p. 384).                                                  
 The  name  Nandor  was  a  derivative of  the element  *dan, *ndan-
 indicating the reversal of an action, so as to undo or  nullify its
 effect, as in 'undo, go back (the same way), unsay, give  back (the
 same  gift:  not another  in return)'.  The original  word *ndando,
 therefore,  probably  only  implied  'one  who  goes  back  on  his
 word or decision'.                                                 
                                                                   
 Note 19 (p. 386).                                                
 In  Q  Eldameldor,  S  Elvellyn. That  is, 'Elf-lovers'.  The words
 Quendili,   Eldandili   (see   Note   10),  though   not  excluding
 affection  and  personal  loyalties, would  have implied  also deep
 concern  with  all  lore  relative  to  the  Elves,  which  was not
 necessarily  included  in  the   words  meldor,   mellyn  'lovers,
 friends'.                                                          
                                                                   
 Note 20 (p. 387).                                                  
 That is, to die by nature, of age or weariness, and inevitably, not
 only (as the Elves) of some grievous hurt or sorrow.               
                                                                   
 Note 21 (p. 387).                                                  
 S -eb is from *ikwa, CT *-ipa, probably related  to the  Q -inqua.
 Cf.  S  aglareb  'glorious',  Q   alkarinqua.  Both   are  probably
 related  to the  element *kwa,  *kwa-ta seen  in Eldarin  words for
 'full'.                                                            
                                                                   
 Note 22 (p. 388).                                                  
 S  ch  was  only  an  approximation;  the Dwarvish  kh was  in fact
 a strong  aspirate, not  a spirant.  Similarly at  the time  of the
 borrowing Sindarin did not possess either  the sound  z or  long a.
 This does  not mean  that the  Elves could  not imitate  or acquire
 sounds alien to their native speech. All the Elves had  great skill
 in  language,  and  far surpassed  Men in  this matter.  The Noldor

 were  the chief  linguists of  the Elves,  but their  superiority was
 shown  not so  much in  the acquisition  of new  tongues as  in their
 love of  language, their  inventiveness, and  their concern  with the
 lore  of  language,  and  the  history  and  relations  of  different
 tongues.  In  adopting  a  word for  use in  their own  tongue (which
 they loved) Elves fitted it to their own style for  aesthetic reasons.
 Note 23 (p. 388)                                                    
 These  words  are  derived  from  the  stem *NUKU   'dwarf,  stunted,
 not  reaching  full  growth  or  achievement,  failing  of  some mark
 or  Standard',  seen  in  *nukta-,  Q  nuhta-  'stunt,  prevent  from
 coming  to  completion,  stop  short,  not  allow  to   continue',  S
 nuitha-  of  similar  senses.  An  adjectival  formation  was *nauka,
 from  which  were  derived S  naug, Q  nauka, especially  applied to
 things  that  though  in  themselves   full-grown  were   smaller  or
 shorter  than  their  kind,  and  were  hard, twisted  or ill-shapen.
 Nogoth   is   probably  from   some  such   form  as   *nukotto/a  'a
 stunted or ill-shapen thing (or person)'.                           
                                                                    
 Note 24 (p. 388).                                                   
 The  Q  h  had  become  too  weak  to  represent  aspirate  kh  which
 was  therefore  rendered  by  k.  Final  d  had  become  r,  and this
 change  was  recognized  in  the  adaptation.  Medial   z  <   s  had
 become  r  in  the  Noldorin  dialect  of Q  except when  an adjacent
 syllable, or (as here) the same syllable, already contained an r.
                                                                    
 Note 25 (p. 388).                                                   
 Norno  is  a  personalized  form  of   the  adjective   norna 'stiff,
 tough', the Q equivalent of S dorn. Both are from the stem          
 *DORO  'dried  up,  hard,  unyielding'.  With  the  frequent  initial
 enrichment  d  >  nd  this  appears  in  PQ  *ndore  'the  hard,  dry
 land as  opposed to  water or  bog >  land in  general as  opposed to
 sea;  a  land  (a  particular  region  with  more  or   less  defined
 bounds)'.  Hence  S  dor  (-ndor  >  -nor, -nnor)  'land'. In  Q this
 word became  confused or  blended with  the distinct  *nore from
 the  stem  *ONO  (see  p.  387),  family,   tribe  or   group  having
 a  common  ancestry,  the  land  or  region  in  which  they  dwelt'.
 Thus  Q  nore  was  generally  used  for  'land'  associated  with  a
 particular  people,  and  the  old  *ndore  survived  only  in  name-
 compounds:  as Valinore  < *Valinore  'the people  and land  of the
 Valar',  beside  Valinor,  Valandor.  A  particular  land  or  region
 was  in  Q  arda,.  land  as  opposed  to  water   or  sea   was  nor
 (<  *ndoro)  as  opposed  to  ear.  The Q  forms norna,  Norno may
 also contain  nd-, though  S dorn  does not;  but this  is probably

 one of the cases in which Q initial d became n-, not l-, by       
 assimilation to an n occurring later in the word.                 
                                                                  
 Note 26 (p. 389).                                                 
 Novrod was the  oldest form,  and appears  in the  earlier annals,
 beside  the  variant  Grodnof.  These  contain  the   CE  elements
 *naba  'hollow',  and   (g)rota  'excavation,   underground  dwel-
 ling'.  Novrod  retains  the  older  Eldarin  (and  the  Dwarvish)
 order with the adjectival element first. At the time of its making
 *naba-grota  had  no  doubt  already  reached  its archaic  S form
 *nov-3rot  >  novrod.  Grodnof  has  the  same  elements   in  the
 later  more  usual  Sindarin  order. The  form Nogrod  which later
 became usual is due to the substitution of Nog-,  taken as  a form
 of  Naug 'dwarf'  (with the  usual change  of au  > o),  after the
 element  Nov-  had  become  obscure.  The  adjective *naba  > nov,
 nof  only  remained  current  in the  Northern dialect,  where the
 name Novrod originated. In the other dialects  nov, as  a stressed
 independent  word,  proceeded  to  nauv  >  naw  (with  the  usual
 loss of final v after au, u), and this word ceased  to be  used in
 current  speech.  Novrod  in  earlier  annals  is  sometimes found
 glossed  Bar-goll  'hollow  dwelling',  using  the   more  current
 adjective coll < *kulda.                                          
  Hadhodrond   uses  the   adapted  form   Hadhod  =   Khazad.  The
 element rond  is not  related to  grod, -rod.  The latter  is from
 *groto 'dig, excavate,  tunnel'. S  rond, Q  rondo are  from *rono
 'arch over, roof in'. This could be applied both to natural and to
 artificial  structures,  but its  view was  always from  below and
 from the  inside. (Contrast  the derivatives  of *tel,  *telu men-
 tioned in Note 15.)  CE *rondo  meant 'a  vaulted or  arched roof,
 as seen from below (and usually not visible from outside)',  or 'a
 (large) hall or  chamber so  roofed'. It  was still  often applied
 pictorially  to  the  heavens  after the  Elves had  obtained much
 greater  knowledge  of  'Star-lore'.  Cf.  the name  Elrond 'Star-
 dome' (Elros meant 'Star-glitter'). Cf. also S othrond  applied to
 an  underground  stronghold,  made  or  enlarged   by  excavation,
 containing one or  more of  such great  vaulted halls.  othrond is
 < S ost+ rond.  CE *osto,  Q osto,  S ost,  is derived  from *soto
 'shelter, protect,  defend', and  was applied  to any  fortress or
 stronghold  made  or   strengthened  by   art.  The   most  famous
 example,  after  the  great  dwelling  of  Elwe at  Menegroth, was
 Nargothrond   <  Narog-ost-rond   ('the  great   underground  burg
 and  halls  upon  the  River  Narog'), which  was made  by Finrod,

 or  completed   and  enlarged   by  him   from  the   more  primitive
 dwellings made by the Petty-dwarves.                                 
   Though  distinct  in  origin  the derivatives  of *groto  and *rono
 naturally  came  into  contact,  since  they  were not  dissimilar in
 shape,  and   a  'rondo   was  usually   made  by   excavation.  Thus
 S groth < *grotta (an  intensified form  of grod  < *grota)  'a large
 excavation'  might  well  apply  to  a  rond.  Menegroth  means  'the
 Thousand  Caves  or  Delvings',  but  it  contained  one  great  rond
 and many minor ones.                                                 
                                                                     
 Note 27 (p. 390).                                                    
 *(n)guruk   is   due   to   a  combination   of  *(g)ruk   with *NGUR
 'horror', seen in S gorth, gorthob 'horror, horrible',  and (redupli-
 cated) gorgor 'extreme horror'.                                      
 Note 28 (p. 390)                                                     
 Some  other  derivatives  are  in  Quenya:  rukin  'I  feel  fear  or
 horror'  (constructed  with  'from'  of  the  object  feared); ruhta-
 'terrify';  rukima  'terrible';  rauko  and  arauko  <   *grauk-)  'a
 powerful,  hostile,  and  terrible   creature',  especially   in  the
 compound   Valarauko  'Demon   of  Might',   applied  later   to  the
 more  powerful  and  terrible  of  the Maia  servants of  Morgoth. In
 Sindarin  appear,  for  instance,  raug  and  graug,  and   the  com-
 pound Balrog (equivalents of  Q rauko,  etc.); groga-  'feel terror';
 gruitha 'terrify'; gorog (< *guruk) 'horror'.                        
                                                                     
 Note 29 (p. 392).                                                    
 Affixes appear in  equen 'said  I', eques  'said he  I she',  used in
 reporting a dialogue.                                                
 Note 30 (p. 392).                                                    
 *ekwe  was  probably  a  primitive  past  tense,  marked  as  such by
 the  'augment'  or  reduplicated  base-vowel,  and  the   long  stem-
 vowel. Past tenses of this form  were usual  in Sindarin  'strong' or
 primary  verbs:  as  *akara  'made,  did' >  S agor.  *akwa, however,
 was  probably  not  verbal,  but an  extension or  intensification of
 *kwa, used adverbially.                                              
                                                                     
 Note 31 (p. 392).                                                    
 In Eldarin  languages this  is usually  found in  the forms  -ikwa or
 -ukwa,  or  with  nasal  infixion  -inkwa,  -unkwa.  The vowels  i, u
 were  probably  derived  from  the  terminations  of  nouns  or other
 stems  to  which  kwa  was  added,  but the  dissyllabic suffixal
 forms  had  become  quite  independent  of  this  origin.  The  forms
 using  u were  mainly applied  to things  heavy, clumsy,  ugly or
 bad.                                                                 

 Note 32 (p. 393).                                                 
 Little is said  in Noldorin  lore concerning  the language  of the
 Valar and Maiar; but on this point a note is added  at the  end of
 this Appendix (pp. 397 ff.).                                      
                                                                  
 Note 33 (p. 394).                                                 
 lamba  is  derived  from *LABA  'move the  tongue, lick',  and may
 be referred to *lab-ma  (with a  suffix frequent  in the  names of
 implements):  the  group  bm  >  mb  in  CE and  possibly earlier.
 lambe is  probably from  *lab-me, denoting  the action  of *LABA,
 or the use of the *lamba.  (Cf. *JULU   'drink', *julma,  Q yulma,
 S ylf 'drinking-vessel'; *julme,  Q yulme,  'drinking, carousal'.)
 These   words  have   no  original   connexion  with  *LAMA  which
 refers  to  sounds, especially  to vocal  sounds, but  was applied
 only to those that were confused or inarticulate. It was generally
 used  to  describe  the various  cries of  beasts. Hence  the word
 *laman(a), *laman, Q  laman, pl.  lamni or  lamani; S  lavan, pl.
 levain, 'animal', usually only applied to four-footed  beasts, and
 never  to reptiles  or birds.  (This may  be compared  with *kwene
 'user  of  articulate  speech'.) The  Sindarin glam  < glamb/glamm
 (p. 391) is an elaboration of *LAM.                               
                                                                  
 Note 34 (p. 394).                                                 
 In  genuine  independent  use  mainly  employed   between  persons
 out of earshot: the Elves  had astonishingly  acute eyesight  at a
 distance. These 'signals' were really  distinct from  the gestures
 (especially those  of the  hands) made  as concomitants  to speech
 and  additions  to  tone-changes  for  the conveyance  of feeling,
 though  some of  the gestures  in both  systems were  similar. The
 Elves  made   considerable  use   of  the   concomitant  gestures,
 especially in oration or recitation.                              
                                                                  
 Note 35 (p. 398).                                                 
 By  which  Pengolodh  meant  the  knowledge  available  in Middle-
 earth. The Lammas was composed in Eriador.                        
                                                                  
 Note 36 (p. 404).                                                 
 Other  later  Loremasters  conjectured  that  Nessa  was  in  fact
 Elvish  in form  (though archaic,  on Pengolodh's  own principle),
 being  <  *neresa,  a  feminine  adjectival  formation  from *NER,
 meaning  'she  that  has  manlike valour  or strength'.  They also
 would  remove  Taniquetil  from   the  group   of  'translations'.
 Arfanyarasse,  they say,  is the  translation: 'high  (i.e. noble,
 revered) - shining  white -  peak', but  Taniquetil is  an adapta-
 tion, though one that  has probably  greatly altered  the original

 in  the  attempt  to  give  the   name  some   kind  of   Eldarin  sig-
 nificance:  ?  high  white  point.  As  they  say,  ta-  does  not mean
 'lofty'  in  Eldarin, though  it may  remind one  of tara  'tall, high'
 (*TAR);  nique  does  not  refer  to snow,  but to  cold; and  Q tilde,
 -til  is  not  a mountain  peak, but  a fine  sharp point  (mostly used
 of small and slender things).  For nique  cf. Q  niku- 'be  chill, cold
 (of weather)'; nique 'it is cold, it freezes'; ninque  'chill, pallid',
 nixe  'frost',  niquis,  niquesse   'frost-patterns'  (the   latter  by
 association with quesse 'feather').                                   
   Most  significant, they  cite from  an ancient  legend of  the Flight
 the   tale  that   as  the   mists  of   Araman  wrapped   the  distant
 mountains   of   Valinor  from   the  sight   of  the   Noldor,  Feanor
 raised his hands in token  of rejection  and cried:  'I go.  Neither in
 light  or  shadow  will   I  look   upon  you   again,  Dahanigwishtil-
 gun.'  So  it  was  recorded, though  the writers  of the  histories no
 longer  knew  what  he  meant.  For  which  reason  the   strange  word
 may  have  been  ill  transmitted.  But  even  so  it still  bears some
 likeness  to  Taniquetil,  though  it  can no  longer be  analysed. (In
 a   few   versions,  say   the  Loremasters,   it  is   written  dahan-
 igwis-telgun.)  They  also  cite  Fionwe  [read  Eonwe?]   (the  herald
 of  Manwe)  as  another  name   for  which   no  Elvish   etymology  is
 known.                                                                
                                                                      
 Note 37 (p. 406).                                                     
 Usually in a formal and elevated style. Often, when there were        
 differences, rather according to the Vanyarin manner  than the        
 Noldorin, for the Vanyar  were most  in their  company; though        
 the  Noldorin  writers  have  sometimes substituted  their own        
 forms.                                                                

                     Editorial Notes.                                  
                                                                      
 1. 'affection': mutation (of the vowel o caused by the following i in
    Mori(quendi) ).                                                     
 2. sundoma: see p. 319.                                              
 3. omentielvo:  this  was  typed  omentielmo, subsequently  changed to
    omentielvo.  The  same  change  was  made in  the Second  Edition of
    The Fellowship of the Ring (p. 90).                                 
 4. The  Fellowship  of  the Ring  p. 367  (at the  end of  the chapter
    Lothlorien); First Edition vanimalda, Second Edition vanimelda.     
 5. The term omataina or 'vocalic extension' is  used of  the addition
    to the 'base' of a final vowel identical to the sundoma (p. 319).
 6. 'The  glooms  and the  clouds dimming  the sun  and the  stars': an
    explicit  reference,  it  seems,  to  some   form  of   the  changed
    astronomical  myth  adumbrated  in  Text  II  of the  section 'Myths

                                          
                                                                           
        Transformed' in Morgoth's  Ring. In  that text  my father  raised the
        question 'how can the Eldar be  called the  "Star-folk"?' if  the Sun
        is  'coeval with  the Earth'  (X.375); and  proposed a  complex story
        (X.377  -  8)  in which  the darkening  of the  world by  Melkor, who
        brought up vast glooms to shut out all  vision of  the heavens,  is a
        chief element. See further pp. 423-4.                               
    7.  'The  first people  of this  kind to  be met  were the  Nandor': this
        strangely contradicts  the history  recorded in  the Annals  (GA $19,
        p.  9;  also AAm  $84, X.93),  according to  which the  Dwarves first
        entered  Beleriand  in  Valian  Year  1250,   and  the   building  of
        Menegroth  was  achieved  before  the  coming  of   Denethor,  leader
        of  the Nandor,  in 1350  (pp. 11-13).  The following  statement here
        that the first  invasions of  the Orcs  followed Morgoth's  return is
        an  equally  striking  contradiction  of  the  Annals:  according  to
        GA  $27  Orcs  entered  Beleriand  in  1330  (cf.  also  X.106, $85):
        'Whence  they  came,  or  what they  were, the  Elves knew  not then,
        deeming  them  to  be  Avari,  maybe,  that   had  become   evil  and
        savage in the wild.'                                                
    8.  'from  Cape  Andras  to  the  headland  of  Bar-in-Myl':  Cape Andras
        was entered on the  map (p.  184, square  G 2),  but the  headland to
        the south (itself an extension of the coastline as  originally drawn)
        is  there  called  Ras  Mewrim  (p.  190,  $63).  The  name   in  the
        present  text  was  typed  Bar-in-Gwael;  the  translation  'Home  of
        the Gulls' was added at  the same  time as  the change  to Bar-in-Myl
        (by a later pencilled change on one copy -in- > -i-).               
    9.  Brithonbar,  not  Brithombar,  is  the  form  typed,  and   not  cor-
        rected.                                                             
  10.   With this passage on the subject of the Eglain cf. p. 189, $ 57, and
        pp.  343-4.  The  concluding  sentence  'But  they  acknowledged  the
        high-kingship of Thingol, and Cirdan  never took  the title  of king'
        differs   from   the   Annals,   where  Cirdan   either  acknowledged
        Felagund of Nargothrond as  overlord, or  else was  (as it  seems) an
        independent  Lord of  the Falas  'yet ever  close in  friendship with
        Nargothrond' (GA $85, and commentary p. 117).                       
  11.   For the legend of Imin, Tata, and Enel see pp. 420 ff.              
  12.   The  story  found  in the  Annals of  Aman of  the kindreds  of Morwe
        and  Nurwe,  who  refused  the  summons  of  the  Valar   and  became
        the Avari (X.81-2, 88, 168), had been abandoned.                    
  13.   The  name  Lindar  'Singers'  of  the  Teleri  has  appeared  in  the
        'Glossary'  to  the  Athrabeth  Finrod  ah  Andreth  (X.349);  it was
        for long the name of the First Kindred, the later Vanyar.           
  14.   On the waterfall of Cuivienen see p. 424.                           
  15.   In other  late writing  Cirdan is  said to  have been  of the  kin of
        Elwe,  but  I  have  not  found any  statement of  the nature  of the
        kinship.                                                            
  16.   Lenwe  has  replaced  the  long-standing  name  Dan   of  Denethor's

      father; from this text it was adopted in The Silmarillion.           
  17. The statement that the Nandor entered Beleriand 'not long before     
                                                                          
      the  return  of  Morgoth'  is  another  remarkable  contradiction  of
      the Annals (cf. note 7 above). Earlier (p. 377) it is said  that they
      came  'before  the  return of  Morgoth', which  no doubt  implies the
      same. But in  GA $31  there is  a marvellous  evocation of  'the long
      years  of  peace  that followed  after the  coming of  Denethor', and
      they  were  indeed  long:  from 1350  to 1495,  145 Valian  Years, or
      1389 Years  of the  Sun. I  am at  a loss  to explain  these profound
      changes in the embedded history.                                     
                                                                          
  18. On  the  Adunaic  word  Nimir  'Elf'  see   The  Drowning   of  Anadune
      (Vol. IX, Index II, p. 473).                                         
  19. Firimar:  the  old  form  was  Firimor  (QS  $83, V.245,  footnote). An
      account of the  development of  meaning in  the verb  fire is  given in
      connection with Firiel, the later name of Miriel, in X.250.          
  20. The  name  Nogoth  niben  was  adopted  in  The  Silmarillion  (in  the
      plural, Noegyth nibin: see Note  7 to  the present  text, p.  408); the
      word  nogoth  of  the  Dwarves  has  not occurred  before (see  note 32
      below).   For  other   names  and   name-forms  of   the  Petty-dwarves
      see p. 187, $26.                                                     
  21. In  the  revision  of  the  QS  chapter  on  the  Dwarves  the Sindarin
      name   of   Khazad-dum   was   Nornhabar,    translated   'Dwarrowdelf'
      (p.  206).  'Dwarrowdelf'  is  found  also  in  The  Fellowship  of the
      Ring;  in  the  present  text  the Sindarin  name was  typed Hadhodrud
      and   translated   'Dwarrowmine',   but   the   change   to  Hadhodrond
      'Dwarrowvault'     was     made     immediately.     Hadhodrond     was
      adopted in The Silmarillion.                                         
  22. Cf.  Appendix  F  to  The  Lord  of  the  Rings,  p.  409:  'The lesser
      kinds were called, especially by the Uruk-hai, snaga "slave".'       
  23. Feanor  held  that,  in  spite of  the usual  mode of  spelling, vowels
      were each independent tengwi or word-building elements.              
  24. On  one  copy  only  a  later  pencilled  correction  changed  *SAR  to
                                                                          
       *SYAR.                                                              
                                                                          
  25. At  the  head  of  the page  is a  pencilled note  on one  copy only:
      'Change Pengolodh to Thingodhel'.                                    
  26. For the word equessi  see p.  392. Both  in that  passage and  in the
      present one the word was typed Equeri and then corrected.            
  27. For  the  old  conception  in  the  Lhammas  of the  1930s, according
      to which the origin of all Elvish speech was in  the language  of the
      Valar (communicated to the Elves by Orome), see V.168, 192-3.        
  28. In  The  Road  Goes  Ever  On,  p. 61,  the name  miruvore (occurring
      in Namarie) is said to be of Valarin origin.                         
  29. Cf.  Note  2   on  the   Commentary  on   the  Athrabeth   Finrod  ah
      Andreth  (X.337), where  it is  said that  'Physically Arda  was what
      we should call the Solar System', and that in Elvish  traditions 'the
      principal part of  Arda was  the Earth  (Imbar "the  Habitation") ...

       so  that  loosely  used  Arda  often  seems to  mean the  Earth'. For
       Ambar see the references given in X.359, note 12.                    
  30.  Cf.  AAm  $164  (X.129):  without  voices in  silence [the  gods] may
       hold  council  one  with  another',  and the  passage cited  from The
       Return of the King in my note on that passage (X.135).               
  31.  Cf.  the  late  QS  chapter  Of  the  Coming  of  Men into  the West,
       p. 217:  'Felagund discovered  ... that  he could  read in  the minds
       of Men such  thoughts as  they wished  to reveal  in speech,  so that
       their words were easily interpreted.'                                
  32.  Noegyth  Nibin  was  a  correction  of  the  name  typed,  Nibinn..g,
       probably  Nibinnoeg  (see  p.  187,  $26).  The  notes  being  inter-
       spersed in  the text,  this note  was written  before the  passage on
       p. 388 was reached.                                                  
  33.  It is curious that - as in the original text of Maeglin, where he was
       'of the kin of Thingol' - in my father's very late work on  the story
       Eol  becomes  again  'one  of  the Eldar'  (p. 328),  though consumed
       with  hatred  of  the  Noldor; whereas  here he  is a  Mornedhel (one
       of the Avari), and moreover of the aboriginal Second Clan.           
  34.  The  name  frith  is  found as  a correction  (made after  the publi-
       cation of The Lord of  the Rings)  of the  old name  Isfin in  QS $42
       (X.177).  When  my  father  worked  on  the  Maeglin story  c.1970 he
       appears to have forgotten frith, for his notes  at that  time express
       dissatisfaction with the 'meaningless' name Isfin as if it  had never
       been replaced (pp. 317 - 18).                                        
  35.  Saeros'  insulting  of  Turin  by  calling  his mother  Morwen Morben
       was  a  development  in  the  story  (see  QS  $39,  V.321,  and  Un-
       finished Tales  p. 80)  that could  only arise,  of course,  with the
       emergence of the words Calben and Morben.                            
  36.  Neither the interpretation of Mithrim as  the name  of a  people (for
       the old etymology see  V.383 -  4, stem  RINGI) nor  this explanation
       of the name Sindar have been met before.                             
  37.  'General  Phonology':  my  father  was  not  here  referring  to  any
       specific, completed work.                                            

                                    APPENDIX.                       
                                                                   
                    The legend of the Awaking of the Quendi         
                                 (Cuivienyarna).                    
 It is said in Quendi and Eldar, p. 380:                            
                                                                   
  According to the legend, preserved in  almost identical  form among
  both the Elves of Aman and the Sindar, the Three Clans were  in the
  beginning derived from the three Elf-fathers: Imin, Tata,  and Enel
  (sc.  One,  Two,  Three),  and those  whom each  chose to  join his
  following. So they had at first simply  the names  Minyar 'Firsts',
  Tatyar 'Seconds', and Nelyar 'Thirds'. These  numbered, out  of the

 original  144  Elves  that first  awoke, 14,  56, and  74; and  these pro-
 portions were approximately maintained until the Separation.              
                                                                          
 A form of this legend is found in  a single  typescript with  carbon copy.
 On  one  copy  my  father  wrote (and  similarly but  mare briefly  on the
 other): 'Actually written (in style and simple notions) to be a surviving
 Elvish "fairytale" or child s tale, mingled  with counting-lore  . Correc-
 tions to either copy are taken up in the text that follows.               
                                                                          
 While  their  first  bodies  were  being  made  from  the 'flesh  of Arda'
 the  Quendi  slept  'in  the  womb  of  the  Earth',  beneath   the  green
 sward,   and   awoke   when   they   were   full-grown.   But   the  First
 Elves  (also  called  the  Unbegotten,  or   the  Eru-begotten)   did  not
 all   wake  together.   Eru  had   so  ordained   that  each   should  lie
 beside  his  or  her  'destined spouse'.  But three  Elves awoke  first of
 all,  and  they  were  elf-men,  for  elf-men  are  more  strong  in  body
 and  more   eager  and   adventurous  in   strange  places.   These  three
 Elf-fathers  are  named  in  the  ancient  tales  Imin,  Tata,  and  Enel.
 They  awoke  in  that  order,  but  with  little  time  between  each; and
 from  them,  say  the   Eldar,  the   words  for   one,  two,   and  three
 were made: the oldest of all numerals.*                                   
 Imin,  Tata  and  Enel  awoke   before  their   spouses,  and   the  first
 thing  that  they  saw  was  the  stars,  for  they  woke  in   the  early
 twilight   before  dawn.   And  the   next  thing   they  saw   was  their
 destined  spouses   lying  asleep   on  the   green  sward   beside  them.
 Then  they  were  so  enamoured   of  their   beauty  that   their  desire
 for  speech   was  immediately   quickened  and   they  began   to  'think
 of  words'  to  speak  and  sing  in.  And  being  impatient   they  could
 not  wait  but  woke  up  their spouses.  Thus, the  Eldar say,  the first
 thing  that  each  elf-woman  saw  was  her  spouse,  and  her   love  for
 him  was   her  first   love;  and   her  love   and  reverence   for  the
 wonders of Arda came later.                                               
 Now  after  a  time,  when  they   had  dwelt   together  a   little,  and
 had  devised  many  words,  Imin   and  Iminye,   Tata  and   Tatie,  Enel
 and  Enelye  walked   together,  and   left  the   green  dell   of  their
 waking,   and  they   came  soon   to  another   larger  dell   and  found
 there  six  pairs  of  Quendi,  and the  stars were  again shining  in the
 morrow-dim and the elf-men were just waking.                              
 Then  Imin  claimed  to  be  the  eldest   and  to   have  the   right  of
                                                                          
 (* [footnote to  the text]  The Eldarin  words referred  to are  Min, Atta
 (or  Tata),  Nel. The  reverse is  probably historical.  The Three  had no
 names  until  they  had  developed  language,  and  were  given  (or took)
 names after they had devised numerals (or at least the first twelve).)    

 first  choice;  and  he  said:  'I  choose  these  twelve  to  be my
 companions.'  And  the   elf-men  woke   their  spouses,   and  when
 the  eighteen  Elves  had dwelt  together a  little and  had learned
 many  words  and  devised  more,  they   walked  on   together,  and
 soon  in  another  even  deeper  and  wider  hollow they  found nine
 pairs of Quendi, and the elf-men had just waked in the starlight.
   Then Tata  claimed the  right of  second choice,  and he  said: 'I
 choose  these  eighteen  to  be  my  companions.'  Then   again  the
 elf-men  woke  their  spouses,  and they  dwelt and  spoke together,
 and  devised  many  new  sounds  and  longer  words;  and  then  the
 thirty-six  walked  abroad  together,  until  they  came to  a grove
 of  birches  by  a  stream,  and  there they  found twelve  pairs of
 Quendi,  and  the  elf-men  likewise  were  just  standing  up,  and
 looking at the stars through the birch boughs.                     
   Then  Enel  claimed the  right of  third choice,  and he  said: 'I
 choose   these  twenty-four   to  be   my  companions.'   Again  the
 elf-men  woke  their  spouses;  and  for many  days the  sixty Elves
 dwelt  by  the  stream,  and  soon  they  began  to  make  verse and
 song to the music of the water.                                    
   At length they all set out together again.  But Imin  noticed that
 each  time  they  had  found  more  Quendi   than  before,   and  he
 thought  to  himself:  'I  have only  twelve companions  (although I
 am the eldest); I will take  a later  choice.' Soon  they came  to a
 sweet-smelling  firwood  on  a  hill-side,  and  there   they  found
 eighteen pairs of Quendi, and all were still sleeping. It  was still
 night  and clouds  were in  the sky.  But before  dawn a  wind came,
 and  roused  the  elf-men,  and  they  woke and  were amazed  at the
 stars;  for  all  the  clouds  were  blown away  and the  stars were
 bright  from east  to west.  And for  a long  time the  eighteen new
 Quendi  took no  heed of  the others,  but looked  at the  lights of
 Menel. But when at last they turned  their eyes  back to  earth they
 beheld their  spouses and  woke them  to look  at the  stars, crying
 to them elen, elen! And so the stars got their name.               
   Now  Imin  said:  'I  will  not  choose  again  yet';   and  Tata,
 therefore, chose  these thirty-six  to be  his companions;  and they
 were  tall  and  dark-haired  and  strong  like fir-trees,  and from
 them most of the Noldor later were sprung.                         
   And   the   ninety-six   Quendi  now   spoke  together,   and  the
 newly-waked  devised  many  new  and   beautiful  words,   and  many
 cunning  artifices  of  speech;  and they  laughed, and  danced upon
 the hill-side, until at last they desired  to find  more companions.
 Then they all  set out  again together,  until they  came to  a lake

 dark in the twilight; and there was a  great cliff  about it  upon the
 east-side,  and  a  waterfall  came  down  from  the  height,  and the
 stars  glittered on  the foam.  But the  elf-men were  already bathing
 in  the  waterfall,  and  they  had  waked  their spouses.  There were
 twenty-four  pairs;  but  as  yet  they had  no formed  speech, though
 they  sang  sweetly  and their  voices echoed  in the  stone, mingling
 with the rush of the falls.                                           
   But  again Imin  withheld his  choice, thinking  'next time  it will
 be  a  great  company  .  Therefore  Enel  said,  I  have  the choice,
 and  I  choose  these  forty-eight  to  be  my  companions.'  And  the
 hundred  and  forty-four  Quendi  dwelt  long  together  by  the lake,
 until they all became of one mind and speech, and were glad.          
   At  length  Imin said:  'It is  time now  that we  should go  on and
 seek  more  companions.'  But  most  of  the  others were  content. So
 Imin  and  Iminye  and  their  twelve  companions  set  out,  and they
 walked  long  by  day  and  by  twilight  in  the  country  about  the
 lake,  near  which   all  the   Quendi  had   awakened  -   for  which
 reason  it is  called Cuivienen.  But they  never found  any more
 companions, for the tale of the First Elves was complete.             
   And  so  it  was  that the  Quendi ever  after reckoned  in twelves,
 and  that  144  was for  long their  highest number,  so that  in none
 of  their  later  tongues  was  there  any common  name for  a greater
 number.  And  so  also  it   came  about   that  the   'Companions  of
 Imin'  or  the  Eldest  Company  (of  whom   came  the   Vanyar)  were
 nonetheless  only  fourteen  in  all,  and  the smallest  company; and
 the   'Companions   of   Tata'   (of  whom   came  the   Noldor)  were
 fifty-six  in  all;  but  the  'Companions   of  Enel'   although  the
 Youngest  Company  were  the  largest;  from  them  came   the  Teleri
 (or Lindar), and they were in the beginning seventy-four in all.      
   Now  the  Quendi  loved  all  of Arda  that they  had yet  seen, and
 green  things  that grew  and the  sun of  summer were  their delight;
 but  nonetheless  they  were  ever   moved  most   in  heart   by  the
 Stars,  and  the  hours  of  twilight  in  clear weather,  at 'morrow-
 dim' and  at 'even-dim',  were the  times of  their greatest  joy. For
 in  those hours  in the  spring of  the year  they had  first awakened
 to life in  Arda. But  the Lindar,  above all  the other  Quendi, from
 their  beginning  were  most  in  love  with  water,  and  sang before
 they could speak.                                                     
                                                                      
 It seems that my father had resolved (at least for the purpose of this
 'fairy-tale') the problem of the  name 'Star-folk'  of the  Elves (see

                              
                                                                      
 late night under skies of unclouded stars, and the stars were their
 earliest memory.
   In Quendi and Eldar (p. 382) my father wrote of 'the lake and
 waterfall of Cuivienen', and this is explained in the Cuivienyarna:
 'they came to a lake dark in the twilight; and there was a great cliff
 about it upon the east-side, and a waterfall came down from the
 height, and the stars glittered on the foam.' Through so many years he
 was returning to Gilfanon's Tale in The Book of Lost Tales (1.232):
   Now the places about Koivie-neni the Waters of Awakening are
   rugged and full of mighty rocks, and the stream that feeds that
   water falls therein down a deep cleft... a pale and slender thread,
   but the issue of the dark lake was beneath the earth into many
   endless caverns falling ever more deeply into the bosom of the
   world.
