 
DELEUZE: 16/11/71 : Codes
Capitalism
Flows
The Decoding of Flows
Capitalism and Schizophrenia
Psychoanalysis
Translated by Rojan Josh
jdg221@is7.nyu.edu
 

What is it that moves over the body of a society? It is always flows, and a person is always a cutting off [coupure] of a flow. A person is always a point of departure for the production of a flow, a point of destination for the reception of a flow, a flow of any kind; or, better yet, an interception of many flows. 

If a person has hair, this hair can move through many stages: the hairstyle of a young girl is not the same as that of a married woman, it is not the same as that of a widow: there is a whole hairstyle code. A person, insofar as she styles her hair, typically presents herself as an interceptor in relation to flows of hair that exceed her and exceed her case and these flows of hair are themselves coded according to very different codes: widow code, young girl code, married woman code, etc. This is ultimately the essential problem of coding and of the territorialization which is always coding flows with it, as a fundamental means of operation: marking persons (because persons are situated at the interception and at the cutting off [coupure] of flows, they exist at the points where flows are cut off [coupure]). 

But, now, more than marking persons--marking persons is the apparent means of operation--coding has a deeper function, that is to say, a society is only afraid of one thing: the deluge; it is not afraid of the void, it is not afraid of dearth or scarcity. Over a society, over its social body, something flows [coule] and we do not know what it is, something flows that is not coded, and something which, in relation to this society, even appears as the uncodable. Something which would flow and which would carry away this society to a kind of deterritorialization which would make the earth upon which it has set itself up dissolve: this, then, is the crisis. We encounter something that crumbles and we do not know what it is, it responds to no code, it flees underneath the codes; and this is even true, in this respect, for capitalism, which for a long time believed it could always secure simili-codes; this, then, is what we call the well-known power [puissance] of recuperation within capitalism--when we say recuperate we mean: each time something seems to escape capitalism, seems to pass beneath its simili-codes; it reabsorbs all this, it adds one more axiom and the machine starts up again; think of capitalism in the 19th century: it sees the flowing of a pole of flow that is, literally, a flow, the flow of workers, a proletariat flow: well, what is this which flows, which flows wickedly and which carries away our earth, where are we headed? The thinkers of the 19th century have a very strange response, notably the French historical school: it was the first in the 19th century to have thought in terms of classes, they are the ones who invent the theoretical notion of classes and invent it precisely as an essential fragment of the capitalist code, namely: the legitimacy of capitalism comes from this: the victory of the bourgeoisie as a class opposed to the aristocracy. 

The system that appears in the works of Saint Simon, A. Thierry, E. Quinet is the radical seizure of consciousness by the bourgeoisie as a class and they interpret all of history as a class struggle. It is not Marx who invents the understanding of history as a class struggle, it is the bourgeois historical school of the 19th century: 1789, yes, it is a class struggle, they are struck blind when they see flowing, on the actual surface of the social body, this weird flow that they do not recognize: the proletariat flow. The idea that this is a class is not possible, it is not one at this moment: the day when capitalism can no longer deny that the proletariat is a class, this coincides with the moment when, in its head, it found the moment to recode all this. That which we call the power [puissance] of recuperation of capitalism, what is it? 

[It consists] in having at its disposal a kind of axiomatic, and when it sets upon [dispose de] some new thing which it does not recognize, as with every axiomatic, it is an axiomatic with a limit that cannot be saturated: it is always ready to add one more axiom to restore its functioning. When capitalism can no longer deny that the proletariat is a class, when it comes to recognize a type of class bipolarity, under the influence of workers' struggles in the 19th century, and under the influence of the revolution, this moment is extraordinarily ambiguous, for it is an important moment in the revolutionary struggle, but it is also an essential moment in capitalist recuperation: I make you one more axiom, I make you axioms for the working class and for the union power [puissance] that represents them, and the capitalist machine grinds its gears and starts up again, it has sealed the breach. In other words, all the bodies of a society are essential: to prevent the flowing over society, over its back, over its body, of flows that it cannot code and to which it cannot assign a territoriality. 

Need, scarcity, famine, a society can code these, what it cannot code, is when this thing appears, when it says to itself: what is up with these guys? So, in a first phase, the repressive apparatus puts itself into motion, if we can't code it, we will try to annihilate it. In a second phase, we try to find new axioms which allow it to be recoded for better or worse. 

A social body is well defined as follows: there is perpetual trickery, flows flow over from one pole to another, and they are perpetually coded, and there are flows that escape from the codes and then there is the social effort to recuperate all that, to axiomatize all this, to manipulate the code a little, so as to make room for flows that are also dangerous: all of a sudden, there are young people who do not respond to the code: they insist on having a flow of hair which was not expected, what shall we do now? We try to recode it, we will add an axiom, we will try to recuperate [it] but then [if] there is something within it that continues not to let itself be coded, what then? 

In other words, this is the fundamental action of a society: to code the flows and to treat as an enemy anyone who presents himself, in relation to society, as an uncodable flow, because, once again, it challenges [met en question] the entire earth, the whole body of this society. 

I will say this of every society, except perhaps of our own--that is, capitalism, even though just now I spoke of capitalism as if it coded all the flows in the same way as all other societies and did not have any other problems, but perhaps I was going too fast. 

There is a fundamental paradox in capitalism as a social formation: if it is true that the terror of all the other social formations was decoded flows, capitalism, for its part, historically constituted itself on an unbelievable thing: namely, that which was the terror of other societies: the existence and the reality of decoded flows and these capitalism made its proper concern. If this were true, it would explain that capitalism is, in a very precise sense, the universal form of all societies: in a negative sense, capitalism would be that which all societies dreaded above all, and we cannot help but have the impression that, historically speaking, capitalism...in a certain sense, is what every social formation constantly tried to exorcise, what it constantly tried to avoid, why? Because it was the ruin of every other social formation. And the paradox of capitalism is that a social formation constituted itself on the basis of that which was the negative of all the others. This means that capitalism was not able to constitute itself except through a conjunction, an encounter between decoded flows of all kinds. The thing which was dreaded most of all by every social formation was the basis for a social formation that had to engulf all the others: that what was the negative of all formations has become the very positivity of ours, this makes one shudder. And in what sense was capitalism constituted on the conjunction of decoded flows: it required extraordinary encounters at the end of a process [processus] of decodings of every kind, which were formed with the decline of feudalism. These decodings of all kinds consisted in the decoding of land flows, under the form of the constitution of large private properties, the decoding of monetary flows, under the form of the development of merchant fortunes, the decoding of a flow of workers under the form of expropriation, of the deterritorialization of serfs and peasant landholders. And this is not enough, for if we take the example of Rome, the decoding in decadent Rome, all this clearly happened: the decoding of flows of property under the form of large private properties , the decoding of monetary flows under the forms of large private fortunes, the decoding of labourers with the formation of an urban sub-proletariat: everything is found here, almost everything. The elements of capitalism are found here all together, only there is no encounter. What was necessary for the encounter to be made between the decoded flows of capital or of money and the decoded flows of labourers, for the encounter to be made between the flow of emergent capital and the flow of deterritorialized manpower, literally, the flow of decoded money and the flow of deterritorialized labourers. Indeed, the manner in which money is decoded so as to become money capital and the manner in which the labourer is ripped from the earth in order to become the owner of his/her labour power [force de travail] alone: these are two processes totally independent from each other, there must be an encounter between the two. 

Indeed, for the process of the decoding of money to form capital that is made all across the embryonic forms of commercial capital and banking capital, the flow of labour, the free possessor of his/her labour power alone, is made across a whole other line that is the deterritorialization of the labourer at the end of feudalism, and this could very well not have been encountered. A conjunction of decoded and deterritorialized flows, this is at the basis of capitalism. Capitalism is constituted on the failure of all the pre-existent codes and social territorialities. 

If we admit this, what does this represent: the capitalist machine, it is literally demented. A social machine that functions on the basis of decoded, deterritorialized flows, once again, it is not that societies did not have any idea of this; they had the idea in the form of panic, they acted to prevent this--it was the overturning of all the social codes known up to that point--; so, a society that constitutes itself on the negative of all pre-existing societies, how can it function? A society for which it is proper to decode and deterritorialize all the flows: flow of production, flow of consumption, how can it function, under what form: perhaps capitalism has other processes than coding to make it work, perhaps it is completely different. What I have been seeking up until now was to reground, at a certain level, the problem of the relation CAPITALISM-SCHIZOPHRENIA--and the grounding of a relation is found in something common between capitalism and the schizo: what they have totally in common, and it is perhaps a community that is never realized, that does not assume a concrete figure, it is a community of a principle that remains abstract, namely, the one like the other does not cease to filter, to emit, to intercept, to concentrate decoded and deterritorialized flows. 

This is their profound identity and it is not at the level of a way of life that capitalism renders us schizophrenic, it is at the level of the economic process: all this only works through a system of conjunction, say the word then, on condition of accepting that this word implies a veritable difference in nature from codes. It is capitalism that functions like an axiomatic, an axiomatic of decoded flows. All other social formations functioned on the basis of a coding and of a territorialization of flows and between a capitalist machine that makes an axiomatic of decoded flows such as they are or deterritorialized flows, such as they are, and other social formations, there is truly a difference in nature that makes capitalism the negative of other societies. Now, the schizo, in his own way, with his own tottering walk, he does the same thing. In a sense, he is more capitalist than the capitalist, more `prole' than the `prole': he decodes, he deterritorializes the flows and knots together a kind of identity in nature of capitalism and the schizo. 

Schizophrenia is the negative of the capitalist formation. In a sense, schizophrenia goes further, capitalism functioned on a conjunction of decoded flows, on one condition, that is, at the same time that it perpetually decoded flows of money, flows of labour, etc., it incorporated them, it constructed a new type of machine, at the same time, not afterwards, that was not a coding machine, but an axiomatic machine. 

It is in this way that it succeeds in making a coherent system, on condition that we say what profoundly distinguishes an axiomatic of decoded flows and a coding of flows. 

Whereas the schizo, he does more, he does not let himself be axiomatized either, he always goes further with the decoded flows, making do with no flows at all, rather than letting himself be coded, no earth at all, rather than letting himself be territorialized. 

What is their relation to each other? It is from this point that the problem arises. One must study more closely the relation capitalism / schizophrenia, giving the greatest importance to this: is it true and in what sense can we define capitalism as a machine that functions on the basis of decoded flows, on the basis of deterritorialized flows? In what sense is it the negative of all social formations and along the same lines, in what sense is schizophrenia the negative of capitalism, that it goes even further in decoding and in deterritorialization, and just where does it go, and where does that take it? Towards a new earth, towards no earth at all, towards the deluge? 

If I try to link up with the problems of psychoanalysis, in what sense, in what manner--this is strictly a beginning--, I assume that there is something in common between capitalism, as a social structure, and schizophrenia as a process. Something in common that makes it so that the schizo is produced as the negative of capitalism (itself the negative of all the rest), and that this relation, we can now comprehend it by considering its terms: coding of flows, decoded and deterritorialized flows, axiomatic of decoded flows, etc. 

It remains to be seen what in the psychoanalytic and psychiatric problem continues to preoccupy us. One must reread three texts of Marx: in book I: the production of surplus value, the chapter on the tendential fall in the last book, and finally, in the ?Grundrisse,? the chapter on automation. 

Richard Zrehen: I did not understand what you said in regard to the analogy between capitalism and schizophrenia, when you said capitalism is the negative of other societies and the schizo is the negative of capitalism, I would have understood that capitalism is to other societies what the schizo is to capitalism, but, I would have thought, on the contrary, that you were not going to make this opposition. I would have thought of the opposition: capitalism / other societies and schizophrenia/ something else, instead of an analogy in three terms, to make one in four terms. 

Cyril: Richard means to say the opposition between: capitalism/ other societies and schizophrenia and neuroses, for example. 

Deleuze: Haaa, yes, yes, yes, yes. We are defining flows in political economy, its importance with actual economists confirms what I have been saying. For the moment, a flow is something, in a society, that flows from one pole to another, and that passes through a person, only to the degree that persons are interceptors. 

Intervention of a guy with a strange accent 

Deleuze: Let me take an example, you say that in a society one does not stop decoding, I'm not sure: I believe that there are two things in a society, one of which pertains to the principle by which a society comes to an end [se termine], one of which pertains to the death of a society: all death, in a certain manner, appears--this is the great principle of Thanatos--from inside [dedans] and all death comes from outside [dehors]; I mean that there is an internal menace in every society, this menace being represented by the danger of flows decoding themselves, it makes sense. There is never a flow first, and then a code that imposes itself upon it. The two are coexistent. Which is the problem, if I again take up the studies, already quite old, of Levi-Strauss on marriage: he tells us: the essential in a society is circulation and exchange. 

Marriage, alliance, is exchanging, and what is important is that it circulates and that it exchanges. There is, then, a flow of women--raising something to a coefficient flow seems to me to be a social operation, the social operation of flows; at the level of society, there are no women, there is a flow of women that refers to a code, a code of age-old things, of clans, of tribes, but there is always flow of women, and then, in a second moment, a code: the code and the flow are absolutely formed face to face with one another. What is it the problem then, at the level of marriage, in a so-called primitive society: it is that, in relation to flows of women, by virtue of a code, there is something that must pass through. It involves forming a sort of system, not at all like Levi-Strauss suggests, not at all a logical combinatory [combinatoire], but a physical system with territorialities: something enters, something exits, so here we clearly see that, brought into relation with a physical system of marriage, women present themselves in the form of a flow, of this flow, the social code means this: in relation to such a flow, something of the flow must pass through, i.e.: flow; something must not go through, and, thirdly--this will make up the three fundamental terms of every code--something must effect the passing through or, on the contrary, the blocking: for example, in matrilineal systems, everyone knows the importance of the maternal [uterine] uncle, why, in the flow of women, what passes through is the permitted or even prescribed marriage. A schizo, in a society like that, he is not there, literally, it belongs to us, over there, it is something else. There, it is different: there is a very good case studied by P. Clastres; there is a guy who does not know, he does not know whom he must marry, he attempts a voyage of deterritorialization to see a faraway sorcerer. There is a great English ethnologist named Leach whose whole thesis consists in saying: it never works like Levi-Strauss says it does, he does not believe in Levi-Strauss' system: no one knows who to marry; Leach makes a fundamental discovery, that which he calls local groups and distinguishes from groups of filiation. Local groups, these are the little groups that machine [machinent] marriages and alliances and they do not deduce them from filiations: the alliance is a kind of strategy that responds to political givens. A local group is literally a group (perverse, specialists in coding) that determines, for each caste, what can pass through, what can not pass through, that which must be blocked, that which can flow. In a matrilineal system, what is blocked? That which is blocked in all systems, that which falls under the rules of the prohibition of incest. Here, something in the flow of women is blocked; namely, certain persons are eliminated from the flow of marriageable women, in relation to other persons. That which, on the contrary, passes through is, we could say, the first permitted incest: the first legal incests in the form of preferential marriages; but everyone knows that the first permitted incests are never practiced in fact, it is still too close to that which is blocked. You see that the flow is interrupted here, something in the flow is blocked, something passes through, and here, there are the great perverts who machine marriages, who block or who effect passages. In the history of the maternal uncle, the aunt is blocked as an image of forbidden incest, in the form of a jesting kinship, the nephew has, with his aunt, a very joyous relation, with his uncle, a relation of theft, but theft, injuries, these are coded, see Malinkowski. 

Question: These local groups have magical powers? 

Deleuze: They have an overtly political power [pouvoir], they sometimes call upon sorcery, but they are not witchcraft groups, they are political groups who define the strategy of a village in relation to another village, and a clan in relation to another clan. 

Every code in relation to flows implies that we prevent something of this flow from passing through, we block it, we let something pass: there will be people having a key position as interceptors, i.e. so as to prevent passage or, on the contrary, to effect passage, and when we take note that these characters are such that, according to the code, certain prestations return to them, we better understand how the whole system works. 

In all societies, the problem was always to code flows and to recode those that tended to escape--when is it that the codes vacillate in so-called primitive societies: essentially at the moment of colonialization, there where the code flees under the pressure of capitalism: for that is what it represents in a society of codes, the introduction of money: it scatters to the winds their entire circuit of flows, in the sense that they distinguish essentially three types of flows: the flows of production to be consumed, the flows of prestige, objects of prestige and flows of women. When money is introduced therein, it is a catastrophe (see what Jaudin analyses as ethnocide: money, Oedipus complex) 

They try to relate money to their code, as such it can only be a prestige good, it is not a production or consumption good, it is not a woman, but the young people of the tribe who understand quicker than the elders take advantage of money in order to seize hold of the circuit of consumption goods, the circuit of consumption that was traditionally, in certain tribes, controlled by women. So the young people, with money, seize hold of the circuit of consumption. With money which itself can no longer be coded, within a certain framework, we begin with money and we end with money. 

M[oney]-C[ommodity]-M[oney], there is absolutely no means of coding this thing here because the qualified flows are replaced by a flow of abstract quantity whose proper essence is the infinite reproduction for which the formula is M-C-M. No code can support infinite reproduction. What is formidable in so-called primitive societies is how debt exists, but exists in the form of a finite block, debt is finite. So, in this sense flows pass their time by fleeing, it does not prevent the codes from being correlative and coding the flows: undoubtedly, it escapes from all sides, and the one who does not let her/himself be coded, and so we say: that's a madman, we will code him/her: the village madman, we will make a code of the code. 

The originality of capitalism is that it no longer counts on any code, there are code residues, but no one believes in them: we no longer believe in anything: the last code that capitalism knew how to produce was fascism: an effort to recode and reterritorialize even at the economic level, at the level of the functioning of the market in the fascist economy, here we clearly see an extreme effort to resuscitate a kind of code that would function like the code of capitalism, literally, it could have lasted in the form in which it has lasted, as for capitalism, it is incapable of furnishing a code that covers the ensemble of the social field like a grid [quadrille], because its problems no longer pose themselves in terms of code, its problem is to make a mechanism of decoded flows as such, so it is uniquely in this sense that I oppose capitalism as a social formation to all the other known social formations. Can we say that between a coding of flows corresponding to pre-capitalist formations and a decoded axiomatic, there is a difference in nature or is there simply a variation: there is a radical difference in nature! Capitalism cannot furnish any code. 

We cannot say that the struggle against a system is totally independent of the manner in which this system was characterized: it is difficult to consider that the struggle of socialism against capitalism in the 19th century was independent of the theory of surplus value, in so far as this theory specified the characteristic of capitalism. Suppose that capitalism can be defined as an economic machine excluding the codes and making decoded flows function by taking them into an axiomatic, this already permits us to bring together the capitalist situation and the schizophrenic situation. Even at the level of analysis that has a practical influence, the analysis of monetary mechanisms (the neocapitalist economists, this is schizophrenic) when we see how the monetary practice of capitalism works, at the concrete level, and not just in theory, its schizoid character, can we say that it is totally indifferent to revolutionary practice. All that we are doing in relation to psychoanalysis and psychiatry comes down to what? Desire, or, it matters little, the unconscious: it is not imaginary or symbolic, it is uniquely machinic, and as long as you have not reached the region of the machine of desire, as long as you remain in the imaginary, the structural or the symbolic, you do not have a genuine hold on the unconscious. They are machines that, like all machines, are confirmed as such by their functioning (confirmations==the painter Lindner obsessed by ?children with machine [enfants avec machine]?: huge little boys in the foreground holding a strange little machine, a kind of little kite and behind him, a big social technical machine and his little machine is plugged into the big one, in the background==that is what I attempted last year to call the orphan unconscious, the true unconscious, the one that does not pass through daddy-mommy, the one that passes through delirious machines, these being in a given relation with the large social machines: second confirmation: an Englishman, Niderland, was aware of Schreber's father. This is what I object to in the text of Freud, it is as if psychoanalysis was a veritable millstone which crushed the deepest character of the guy, namely, his social character... When we read Schreber, the Great Mongol, the Aryans, the Jews, etc. and when we read Freud, not a word about all this, it is as if it was just some manifest content and that one had to discover the latent content=the eternal daddy-mommy of Oedipus. All the political, politico-sexual, politico-libidinal content, because in the end, when Schreber pere imagined himself to be a little Alsatian girl defending Alsace against a French officer, there is political libido here. It is sexual and political at the same time, the one in the other; we learn that Schreber was well-known because he had invented a system of education == Schreber Gardens. He had produced a system of universal pedagogy. Schizoanalysis procedes in a direction that is the opposite of psychoanalysis, indeed, each time that the subject narrates something that brings her/him in the vicinity of Oedipus or castration, the schizo being analyzed says `Enough.' What he sees as important, is that: Schreber pere invents a pedagogic system of universal value, that is not brought to bear on his own child, but globally: PAN gymnasticon. If we suppress from the delirium [delire] of the son the politico-global dimension of the paternal pedagogic system, we can longer understand anything. The father does not supply a structural function, but a political system: I am saying that the libido passes through here, not through daddy and mommy, through the political system. In the PAN gymnasticon, there are machines: no system without machines, a system, rigourously speaking, is a structural unity of machines, so much so that one must burst the system to reach the machines. And what are Schreber's machines: they are SADO-PARANOIAC machines, a type of delirious machine. They are sado-paranoiac in the sense that they are applied to children, preferably to little girls. 

With these machines, the children stay calm, in this delirium, the universal pedagogic dimension clearly appears: it is not a delirium about his son, it is a delirium that he constructs about the formation of a higher race. Schreber pere acts against his son, not as a father, but as a libidinal promoter of a delirious investment of the social field. It is no longer the paternal function, but rather that the father is there to make something delirious pass through, this is certain, but the father acts here as an agent of transmission in relation to a field that is not the familial field, but that is a political and historical field, once again, the names of history and not the name of the father. 

Comtess: We do not catch flies with vinegar, even with a machine = the system of Schreber pere had a global development (belt-whipping for good conduct). It was a big social machine and it was, at the same time, sown in the social machine, full of little delirious sado-paranoiac machines. So too, in the delirium of the son, certainly it is papa, but as a representative of what authority does he intervene. He intervenes as an agent of transmission in a libidinal investment of a certain type of social formation. On the contrary, the drama of psychoanalysis is the eternal familialism that consists in referring the libido, and with it all sexuality, to the familial machine, and we can go on to structuralize it, it changes nothing, we remain within the closed circle of: symbolic castration, structuring function of the family, parental characters, and we continue to crush all the outside [dehors]. Blanchot: ?a new type of relation with the outside,? yet, and this is the critical point, psychoanalysis tends to suppress any relation of itself and of the subject who has just been analyzed with the outside. On itself alone it pretends to reterritorialize us, onto the territoriality or onto the most mediocre earth, the most shabby, the oedipal territoriality, or worse, onto the couch. Here, we clearly see the relation of psychoanalysis and capitalism: if it is true that in capitalism, flows are decoded, are deterritorialized constantly, i.e. that capitalism produces the schizo like it produces money, the whole capitalist project [tentative] consists in reinventing artificial territorialities in order to reinscribe people, to vaguely recode them: they invent anything: HLM [Habitation a Loyer Moyen, i.e.: government-controlled housing], home, and there is familial reterritorialization, the family, it is after all the social cell, so they will reterritorialize the guy in a family (community psychiatry): they reterritorialize people there where all the territorialities are floating ones, they proceed through an artificial, imaginary, residual reterritorialization. And psychoanalysis--classical psychoanalysis--fabricates familial reterritorialization, most of all by skipping over all that is effective in delirium, all that is aggressive in delirium, namely, that delirium is a system of politico-social investments, not just of any type: it is the libido that hooks itself onto political social determinations: Schreber is not dreaming at all when he makes love to his mother, he dreams when he is being raped like a little Alsacian girl by a French officer: this depends on something much deeper than Oedipus, namely, the manner in which the libido invests social formations, to the point that one must distinguish 2 types of social investments by the (?) desire: social investments of interests that are of the preconscious type, that, if necessary, pass through classes, and below these, not exactly in harmony with them, unconscious investments, the libidinal investments of desire. Traditional psychoanalysis enclosed the libidinal investments of desire in the familial triangle and structuralism is the last attempt [tentative] to save Oedipus at the moment when Oedipus is coming apart at the seams. 

The task of schizoanalysis is to see that parents play a role in the unconscious only as agents of interception, agents of transmission in a system of the flows of desire, of desiring machines, and what counts is my unconscious relation with my desiring machines. What are my own desiring machines, and, through them, the unconscious relation of these desiring machines with the large social machines with which they carry out...and that hence, there is no reason to support psychoanalysis in its attempt to reterritorialize us. I take an example from Leclaire' last book: there is something that no longer works: ?the most fundamental act in the history of psychoanalysis was a decentering that consisted in passing from the parents' room as referent to the analytical office,? there was a time when we believed in Oedipus, and in the reality of seduction, it was not going strong even then, because the whole unconscious had been familiarized, a crushing of the libido onto daddy-mommy-me: the whole development of psychoanalysis was made in this direction [sens]: substitution of the phantasm for real seduction and substitution of castration for Oedipus. Leclaire: ?to tell the truth the displacement of the living kernel of the oedipal conjuncture, of the familial scene to the psychoanalytic scene is strictly correlative to a sociological mutation in which we can psychoanalytically demarcate a recourse to the level of the familial institution? page 30 = the family is shabby = the unconscious protests and no longer works to triangulate itself, happily there is the analyst to serve as a relay. 

It no longer supports the family, custody and the concealment [derobement] of an all-powerful real. We say, ouf!, we will finally have a relation with the extra familial real, ha! no! says Leclaire, for that which serves as a relay for the family, and that which becomes the guardian, the unveiling veiling of the all-powerful real is the office of the analyst. 

You can no longer triangulate, oedipalize in the family, it no longer works, you will come onto the couch to triangulate and oedipalize yourself and indeed, adds Leclaire: ?if the psychoanalytic couch has become the place where the confrontation with the real is unfolded.? The confrontation with the real does not take place on the earth, in the movement of territorialization, reterritorialization, of deterritorialization, it takes place on this rotten earth that is the couch of the analyst. ?It is of no importance that the oedipal scene has no referent exterior to the office, that castration has no referent outside the office of the analyst,? which signifies that psychoanalysis, like capitalism, finds itself faced with the decoded flows of desire, finds itself before the schizophrenic phenomena of decoding and deterritorialization, has chosen to make for itself a little axiomatic. The couch, the ultimate earth of European man today, his very own little earth. This situation of psychoanalysis tends to introduce an axiomatic excluding all reference, excluding all relation with the outside whatever it may be, appears as a catastrophic movement of interiority when it comes to understanding the true investments of desire. From the moment we seized upon the family as referent, it was all screwed up. (last earth, the couch that valorizes and justifies itself on its own terms). It was compromised from the beginning, from the moment when we cut desire off from the double dimension--what I call the double dimension of desire: and its relation, on the one hand, with desiring machines irreducible to any symbolic or structural dimension, to functional desiring machines, and the problem of schizoanalysis is to know how these desiring machines work, and to reach the level where they work in someone's unconscious, which assumes that we will skip over Oedipus, castration, etc. On the other hand, with social-political-cosmic investments, and here one must not say, that there would be any desexualization of the findings of psychoanalysis, for I am saying that desire, in its fundamental sexual form, can only be understood in its sexual investments, in so far as they do not bear on daddy-mommy, this is secondary, but in so far as they bear--on the one hand, on desiring machines, and on the other hand, in so far they traverse our sexual, homosexual, heterosexual loves. That which is invested is always what cuts up [des coupures] of the dimensions of a historical social field, and certainly, the father and the mother play a role within it, they are agents of communication of desiring machines, on one hand, of the machines with each other, and on the other hand, of the desiring machines with the large desiring machines. Schizoanalysis is made up of three operations: A destructive task: skipping over the oedipal and castrating structures in order to reach a region of the unconscious where there is no castration etc. because desiring machines ignore this. 

A positive task: That is to see and to analyze functionally, there is nothing to interpret = we do not interpret a machine, we grasp its functioning and its failures, the why of its failures: it is the oedipal collar, the psychoanalytic collar of the couch that introduces failures into desiring machines: The desiring machines only work as long as they invest the social machines. And what are the types of libidinal investments, distinct from the preconscious investments of interests, these sexual investments--across all the beings that we love, all our loves, it is a complex of deterritorialization and reterritorialization, that which we love, it is always a certain mulatto, a movement of deterritorialization and reterritorialization, it is not the scrawny and hysteric territoriality of the couch, and across each being that we love, what we invest is a social field, these are the dimensions of this social field, and the parents are agents of transmission in the social field. 

--see Jackson's letter = the classic black mother who says to her son, don't fool around and marry well, make money. This classic mother here, is she acting like a mother and like an oedipal object of desire, or is she acting in such a way that she transmits a certain type of libidinal investment of the social field, namely the type that marries well, he makes love, and this in the strictest sense of the term, with something through his wife, unconsciously, with a certain number of economic, political, social processes, and that love has always been a means through which the libido attains something other than the beloved person, namely a whole cutting up [decoupage] of the historical social field, ultimately we always make love with the names of history. The other mother (of Jackson)--the one who says ?grab your gun,? it follows that the two act as agents of transmission in a certain type of social-historical investment, that from one to the other the pole of these investments has singularly changed, that in one case, we can say that they are reactionary investments, at the limit fascist, in the other case, it is a revolutionary libidinal investment. Our loves are like the conduits and the pathways of these investments that are not, once again, of a familial nature, but of a historico-political nature, and the final problem of schizoanalysis is not only the positive study of desiring machines, but the positive study of the manner in which desiring machines carry out the investment of social machines, whether it be in forming investments of the libido of a revolutionary type, whether it be in forming libidinal investments of the revolutionary type. The domain of schizoanalysis distinguishes itself at this moment from the domain of politics, in the sense that the preconscious political investments are investments of class interests that are determinable by certain types of studies, but these still do not tell us anything about the other type of investments, namely specifically libidinal investments--Desire. To the point that it can happen that a preconscious revolutionary investment can be doubled by a libidinal investment of the fascist type = which explains how displacements are made from one pole of delirium to another pole of delirium, how a delirium has fundamentally two poles--which Artaud said so well: ?the mystery of all is `Heliogabalus the Anarchist,' because these are the two poles--it is not only a contradiction, it is a fundamental human contradiction, namely a pole of unconscious investment of the fascist type, and an unconscious investment of the revolutionary type. What fascinates me in a delirium is the radical absence of daddy-mommy, except as agents of transmission, except as agents of interception for there they have a role, but on the other hand the task of schizoanalysis is to release in delirium the unconscious dimensions of a fascist investment and a revolutionary investment, and at a certain point, it slips, at a certain point it oscillates, this is the deep domain of the libido. In the most reactionary, most folkloric territoriality, a revolutionary ferment can surge forth (we never know), something schizo, something mad, a deterritorialization: the Basque problem: They did much for fascism, in other conditions, these same minorities could have determined, I am not saying this happens by chance, they could have secured a revolutionary role. It is extremely ambiguous: it is not at the level of political analysis, it is at the level of analysis of the unconscious: the way it whirls about [comment ca tourne]. (Mannoni: antipsychiatry in the question of the court judgement on Schreber = a completely fascist delirium). If antipsychiatry has a sense, if schizoanalysis has a sense, it is at the level of an analysis of the unconscious, to tip delirium from the pole that is always present, the reactionary fascist pole that implies a certain type of libidinal investment, towards the other pole, no matter if it is hard and slow, the revolutionary pole. 

Richard: Why only two poles? 

Deleuze: We can make many, but fundamentally, there are clearly two great types of investment, two poles. The reference of libidinal investments is daddy-mommy, these are the territorialities and the deterritorializations, this must be found in the unconscious, especially at the level of its loves. Phantasm of naturality: of a pure race, movement of the pendulum = revolutionary phantasm of deterritorialization. If you're saying that, on the analyst's couch, what flows still flows, alright then, but the problem that I would pose here is: there are types of flow that pass beneath the door, what psychoanalysts call the viscosity of the libido, an overly viscous libido that does not let itself be grasped by the code of psychoanalysis, alright here yes, there is deterritorialization, but psychoanalysis says: negative reaction [contre-indication]. What annoys me in psychoanalysis of the Lacanian camp is the cult of castration. The family is a system of transmission, the social investments of one generation passed on to another, but I absolutely do not think that the family is a necessary element in the making of social investments because, in any case, there are desiring machines that, on their own, constitute social libidinal investments of the large social machines. If you say: the madman is someone who remains with his desiring machines and who does not carry out social investments, I do not follow you: in all madness, I see an intense investment of a particular type of historical, political, social field, even in catatonic persons. This goes for adults as well as children, it is from earliest childhood that the desiring machines are plugged into the social field. In themselves, all territorialities are equal to each other in relation to the movement of deterritorialization, but there is something like a schizoanalysis of territorialities, of their types of functioning, and by functioning, I understand the following: if the desiring machines are on the side of a great deterritorialization, i.e. on the path of desire beyond territorialities, if to desire is to be deterritorialized, one must say that each type of territoriality is able to support such or such a genre of machinic index: the machinic index is that which, in a territoriality, will be able to make it flee in the direction [sens] of a deterritorialization. So, I take the example of the dream, from the point of view that I am attempting to explicate the role of machines, it is very important, different from that of psychoanalysis: when a plane flies or a sewing machine-the dream is a kind of little imaginary territoriality, sleep or a nightmare is a deterritorialization--we can say that deterritorialization and the reterritorialities only exist as a function of each other, but you can evaluate the force of a possible deterritorialization from the indexes on such or such a territoriality, i.e. how much it supports of a flow that flees--Flee and in fleeing, makes flee, not the others, but something from the system, a fragment. 

A machinic index in a territoriality is what measures the power [puissance] of flight in this territoriality by making flows flee, in this regard all territorialities are not equal to each other. There are artificial territorialities, the more it flees and the more we can flee while fleeing, the more it is deterritorialized. Our loves are always situated on a territoriality that, in relation to us, deterritorializes us or else reterritorializes us. In this regard, there are misunderstandings + a whole game of investments that are the problem of schizoanalysis: instead of having the family as a referent, it has as a referent the movements of deterritoralization and reterritorialization. 

Zrehen: I want to say that you employed the term ?code? for so-called primitive societies, while I think it is not possible to think of them in terms of code, because of the well-known mark, because there is a mark, which requires exchange, it is because there is a debt that we have an obligation to exchange. What happens from their society to ours, is the loss of the debt, so when you say that the schizo is the negative of the capitalist and that capitalism is the negative of primitive societies, it is evident exactly what is lost, it is castration. 

With this mark of principle, you are anticipating what makes up capitalism while crossing out castration. What is foreclosed in capitalism is this initial mark and what Marx tried to do was to reintroduce the notion of debt. When you propose to me a reactionary pole of investments and a revolutionary pole, I say that you are already taking the concepts of `revolutionary' and of `reactionary as already instituted in a field that does not permit an appreciation of what you are trying to say. You are using breaks [coupure], I will certainly admit that Oedipus and castration are depasse, but capitalism... 





































Deleuze 14/12/71
The Nature of Flows
Translated by Karen Isabel Ocana
ko@total.net

 

I would like to pursue the problem of the economy of flows; last time, someone wanted a more precise definition of flows, more precise, that is, than something which flows upon the socius.  What I call the socius is not society, but rather a particular social instance which plays the role of a full body.  Every society presents itself as a socius or full body upon which all kinds of flows flow and are interrupted, and the social investment of desire is this basic operation of the break-flow to which we can easily give the name of schizz.  It is not yet important for us to have a real definition of flows, but it is important, as a starting point, to have a nominal definition and this nominal definition must provide us with an initial system of concepts.  As a point of departure for our search for a nominal definition of flows, I'll take a recent study by a specialist in the flows of political economy: "Flows and stocks," by Daniel ENTIER.  Stocks and flows are two primary notions in modern political economy, remarked upon by Keynes, such that we find in Keynesian economy the first great theory of flows in his "General theory of employment, interest and money."  Entier informs us that, "from the economic point of view, we can call flows the values of the quantities of goods and services or money that are transmitted from one pole to another";  the first concept to be placed in relation with that of flows is that of pole: a flow, inasmuch as it flows on the socius, enters by one pole and exits by another.  At our last session, we had tried to show that flows implicated codes, in the sense that a flow could be called economic insofar as something passed, and where something else blocked it and made it pass; the example given was that of the rules of alliance in so-called primitive societies, where taboos represent a blockage of the flow of possible marriages; the first permitted marriages, i.e. the first permitted incests, called preferential unions, which are, in fact, hardly ever realized, represent something like the first modes of passage: something passes, something is blocked (this blockage taking the form of incest taboos), something passes, the preferential unions, something blocks it and makes it pass, for example the maternal [uterine] uncle.  There is, in any case, the determination of an incoming and of an outgoing flow; the notion of a pole implicates or is implicated in the movement of flows, and this takes us back to the idea that something flows, that something is blocked, that something makes it flow, that something blocks the flow.  Entier continues: "In the knowledge that the term pole will be given to an individual or a firm, or alternately a group of individuals or group of firms, or even a fraction of a firm..." "We are thereby defining the interceptors of flows... when the operations carried out by these -- the interceptions of flows -- can be described by a coherent accounting system..."  Thus, a correlative of the notion of flow is that of an accounting system; when the operation carried out - such as the passage of a flow from one pole to another - may be described by a coherent system, this evidently being expressed in terms of capitalism, by which I mean that in this context we are in the framework of capitalism at the level of abstract quantities, as the final residue of something that has an entirely different scope in pre-capitalist societies, to wit, what in pre-capitalist societies present themselves as veritable codes.  It's when a society is completely decoded that flows are prone to incorporation into an accounting system, that is, into an axiomatic of abstract quantities instead of referring to qualified codes; the accounting system under capitalism is the residue of quantities, abstracted from the coding of flows, and capitalism functions on the basis of decoded flows, from which point on these flows are taken up by a system based on accounting.  Entier continues: "...we can consider all goods arriving at the same level of material or legal transformation at the precise moment at which they arrive as constituting one and the same flow..."  Here you have a third correlative notion: material or legal transformation, "and if one is speaking of flows that are exchanged between industrial sectors, one must specify the notion of sector, if one is interested in precisely determining the flow of production, the flow of revenues, the flow of consumption, then one has to determine these terms carefully; take for example the flow of monetary revenue reached by calculating the totals of all liquid assets..."  The question is, what is meant by 'all liquid assets' [tous les biens en monnaie].  This is what economists refer to as nominal salaries - a concept that covers real wages, as well as management salaries and dividends (interest on assets).  Take for example the flow of cash revenues [flux de revenus monetaires]: this is determined by the total of all liquid assets at the disposal of all of the individuals making up the collectivity, where the revenue of a large number of individuals can be precisely evaluated since it is paid out by other individuals, such as state contractors, and since it has been precisely calculated; but for many kinds of revenue the importance of which must not be undervalued, one can't give an exact definition; well, well, so there's a sphere of indetermination in the sector?  This is doubtless related to something very profound in what is, as we shall see, the accounting sector; but, for all that, we now have a triple reference : the flows refer for one thing to poles and for another to codes or accounting systems, then - in fourfold fashion - to rates of transformation, next to sectors and finally to stocks.  This amounts to five correlative notions.  >From an economic viewpoint we will refer to stocks of goods and monetary stocks, as the goods held and the money held by only one pole; the flow, then, is what flows from one pole to another, what goes in and what goes out, and the stock is what is brought back as the material and legal possession of one of the poles considered; this clearly shows the correlative character of the two notions; we can thus define stocks in the following way: the utility of stocks changes from case to case, but is linked in one way or another, at one time or another, to the existence of flows; we will, nevertheless, receive the distinct impression that stocks and flows are effectively the same thing as they relate to two different units: first, the passage from one pole to the other, and secondly, attribution to one of the two poles, as two units of measure for one and the same thing.  The utility of stocks varies with every given case, but is linked in one way or another, and at one time or another, to the existence of flows; and yet, whereas flows allow one to extract the movements of values between different poles, stocks represent a sum of values that are at the disposal of a given pole; there are no goods related to a stock which are not, at a specified time, also correlated to a flow; this is, in fact, one of the fundamental principles of accounting, because the influx and output of a stock constitute flows; only the study of flows allows one to realize the role of the incoming and outgoing movements involved in stock variations... 

So, we have just seen the correlation between the notion of flux and five other notions: pole, code or accounting system, stage of transformation, sector and stock.  If we try to simplify all of this, I think that the notion which I was attempting to launch last time may be able to concentrate or group together all of these five references, this notion being that of the break-flow. 

For this notion of the break-flow has to be understood simultaneously in two ways: it is to be understood as the very correlation of flux and code, and if, returning once more to capitalism, we are aware that flows are "accounted for", it is in favour of a movement of decoding such that the accounting system has simply taken the place of codes; it is at this point that we come to realize that it's no longer sufficient to speak of an accounting system, but rather of a financing system or structure. 

The strict correlation of flux and code implies, apparently, that in a society -and this is clearly our point of departure - it's impossible to seize flows other than by and through the operation which codes them; the fact is that a non-coded flow is, strictly speaking, an unnameable or merely a thing.  This is what I was getting at last time, this is the terror of society - it is the flood, the deluge which is the flow that breaks through the barriers of codes.  Societies aren't exactly in mortal dread because everything is coded - the family is coded, death is coded; but what makes societies panic is when something or other breaks down, something that forces the codes to crack.  A flow is thus not recognizable as an economic and social flow except by and through the code which encodes it, but this operation of coding implies two simultaneous interruptions, and it is this simultaneity which allows us to define the notion of a break-flow:  simultaneously, in an operation of coding the flows, a subtraction [prelevement] from the flows is produced, due to the code, and this subtraction from the flows defines its poles: it defines a certain entry point and a certain exit, and it is between the two that the break-subtraction takes place; this occurs at the same time as the code itself relates to a break of another sort which is strictly simultaneous, meaning once more that... there is no subtraction from a flow which is not accompanied by a detachment of or from the code which encodes this flow, although it is the simultaneity of the subtraction of the flow and the detachment of a segment of code that permits one to define the flow with reference to poles, sectors, rates and stocks.  This notion of a break-flow presents itself in two-fold fashion, for it implies at once a break-subtraction of a flow and a break-detachment of a code.  Here you've got the mechanism of delirium: it's this double schizz operation -- it's the schizz which consists both in an operation of subtractions of flow as a function of detachments of code, and vice versa. 

If, to begin, I take an indeterminate flow as a purely nominal starting point, then what flows on the socius, cannot appear socially speaking as a flow, except in correlation to a code, or at least to an accounting system, and the flow itself is qualified as a function of the code, and the correlation of the two is where you have a break-subtraction on this flow itself (as qualified by the code), at the same time as and in reaction to which you have a break-detachment of the code.  A detachment of code is correlative to a subtraction of flow.  This is simply a formal description.  At first glance, a madman is someone who passes on the unnameable, who carries decoded flows: "a god speaks to me, but it's not your god".  The Greeks had a notion of the demon, they had gods and the gods were allotted, everything was very properly allocated, they had powers and spaces; in a way, they couldn't move, they were sedentary, they had their territory and the demons carried out the coding.  Religions are not to be understood from an ideological viewpoint, but at the level of their pertaining to a social code.  Demons were above all powers which did not respect the codes.  In Oedipus there is a text which is badly translated and which reads, "which demon has leapt the longest leap," a text which frankly leaps beyond the limits, it had to do with unnameable powers, with excess, and it is not forcing things to translate this as "decoding".  Thus, a demon speaks in a certain way so that a madman receives decoded flows, and in turn emits decoded flows, such that it flows and escapes on all sides, messing up all the codes.  Which is why in Oedipus' case, it just won't stick, because literally, Oedipus is a screwed-up code. 

When something goes bad, you always have to go back up to a higher level to see where things start to go bad (cf. the USSR), and psychoanalysis goes bad, but why and how so?  Derrida has seen very clearly in what way psychoanalysis, at least at the level of its first intentions, is opposed to the code;  it is in fact a system of decoding, and this is why this affair just couldn't help going bad.  Because decoding means either to read a code, to penetrate the secret of a code, or else it means to decode in an absolute sense, i.e. to destroy the codes in order to make the flows flow freely; a major part of the project of psychoanalysis was intended as an absolute decoding of the flows of desire and not as a relative decoding, to make the walls of the code cave in, and to make the flows of desire run wild.  It is in this sense that psychoanalysis was very close to a desiring economy, and properly speaking, to desiring-machines, the producers of the flows of desire; and this is seen very clearly in Freud's writings, such as The Interpretation of Dreams, where he says: what distinguishes my method from the method of the key of dreams?  The major difference is that the key of dreams proposes a code of desire;  Freud says that they have seen everything, but that they propose a systematic coding : this means that, that is the key of dreams; and from the perspective of a key of dreams, if one decodes the dream, one decodes it in a relative sense, i.e. one discovers the cipher of its code.  Now Freud says that psychoanalysis has nothing to do with all of that, that it does not interpret.  And Derrida, in his article on Freud in Writing and Difference shows this very well.  It carries out an absolute decoding, rendering the codes as flows in the raw state, and thereby psychoanalysis is opposed to codes.  It goes without saying that, at the same time, and from the outset, they are inventing a new code, that is, the oedipal code which is even more of a code than any other code; thus, the flows of desire pass into the oedipal code, or else, whatever the flow of desire, it is stuffed into the oedipal grid.  At this stage, psychoanalysis proves less and less capable of understanding madness, for the madman is really the being of decoded flows. 

And who has shown this in a most vital and convincing way if not Beckett, whose strange creatures spend their time decoding things, they make non-codable flows pass.  Social processes can't capture flows except in relation to codes which operate on them, and which are simultaneously a detachment of a flow and a subtraction of chains or codes, and the madman makes flows pass on it, flows from which it is no longer possible to detach anything; there are no more codes, there is a chain of decoded flows, but one can't cut into it.  There is a sort of deluge or failure of the body, maybe that's it, after all, the body-without-organs, when on the body, or from the body flows enter and exit by way of poles, flows on which one can no longer carry out any subtraction because there are no longer any codes from which to detach anything. 

The state of the body of someone who has undergone a fairly severe operation, the eyes of this patient are the eyes of someone who has not been very far from death, who has not been very far from madness, the eyes are elsewhere in a certain sense - he has gone through the wall.  It is interesting that what we call convalescence is a kind of return.  He's had a brush with death, it is an experience of the body, very strange, psychoanalysis: why does Freud cling so strongly to the notion of a death instinct?  He tells his secret in "Inhibition, Symptom and Anxiety."  It seems that if there is a death instinct, it's because there is neither a model nor an experience of death.  When pressed, he admits that there is a model of birth but not of death, thus, all the more reason to make of it a transcendent instinct.  Bizarre.  Perhaps the model of death could be something like the body-without-organs. 

Horror-story writers have understood, after Edgar Allen Poe, that death wasn't the model for schizophrenic catatonia, but that the contrary was true, and that the catatonic was the one who made of his body a body-without-organs, a decoded body, and that on such a body there is a kind of nullification of the organs.  On this decoded body, flows can flow under conditions where they can no longer be decoded.  This is why we fear decoded flows - the deluge; because once flows have been decoded, you can no longer subtract anything or break into them, no more than you can detach segments from any codes in order to dominate, orient or direct the flows.  And the experience of one who has been operated on, of her body-without-organs, is that, on this body, there are literally noncodable flows which constitute a thing, an unnameable thing.  At the very moment that she breathes, there is great confusion of the flows that form one great indivisible flow, no longer susceptible to subtractions, one can no longer interrupt it.  One long stream that cannot be tamed, where all of the flows that are usually distinguished by their codes are united in one and the same indivisible flow all flowing on one and the same non-differentiated body, the body without organs.  And as for the mad patient who has undergone an operation, every breath of air he takes is at the same time a breath of spittle, a flow of air and spit that tend to get mixed up together, so that there are no longer any distinctions.  Moreover, each time that he breathes and spits, he feels a vague desire to defecate, a vague erection: it's the body-without-organs that escapes on every side.  It is sad, but then again, it has moments of great joy, mixing up all the codes, it has its great moments, and this is what makes Beckett a comic writer. 

Though here again, one can't help saying, and then, and then, though this is what constitutes the madman and his place in society, as the place of one through whom all of the decoded flows pass, which is why he is perceived as the fundamental danger.  The madman doesn't decode in the sense that he would harbour a secret the meaning of which ordinary people have forgotten, but rather he decodes in the sense that he sits in his little corner and makes little machines which make the flows pass and which make social codes break down.  The schizophrenic process as such, of which a schizo is only the schizophrenic continuation, well that schizophrenic process is a revolutionary potential in itself, in opposition to paranoid investments which are fundamentally of a fascist type. 

This leads to a first result, namely, that the economic operation of coding flows involves a double break-flow, a break-detachment and a break-subtraction; and on the socius of a society one encounters these strange creatures, the mad, who make all of these decoded flows carry on. The strangest phenomenon of world history is the formation of capitalism because, in a certain sense, capitalism is madness in its pure state, and in another sense, it is likewise the opposite of madness.  Capitalism is the only social formation which presupposes, as its condition of emergence, the breakdown of all preceding codes.  In this sense, the flows of capitalism are decoded flows, and this poses the following problem: how could a society, with of all of its repressive formations, create itself on the basis of what constituted the terror of all other social formations: namely, the decoding of flows. 

The intimate bond between capitalism and schizophrenia consists in their common basis and installation on decoded flows (insofar as they are decoded).  How then was this decoding carried out?  One has to keep the following two requirements clearly in mind: the basic affinity between schizophrenia and capitalism, but, at the same time, find in this basic affinity the reason for which the repression of madness under capitalism is conducted with much greater harshness and specificity than under pre-capitalist formations.  In the one case there is a political economy and a libidinal economy, and, in the other, an economy of decoded flows. 

I'd like to show that, historically, this shift took place over a long period of time: there are synchronic social machines and there are diachronic social machines; despotic Asiatic social machines are of a truly synchronic nature - Marx's Asiatic state emerges in one blow, and all of the cogs and wheels of its state apparatus appear synchronically.  The formation of the capitalist machine extends over many centuries.  It's a diachronic machine and has taken two long periods to come about; it isn't capitalism that decodes the flows, rather, they are decoded on what we call the ruin and decline of great empires, and feudalism is only one of the forms of this ruin and decline.  Capitalism does not proceed from the decoding of flows because it presupposes them, it presupposes flows that have lost their codes. 

Marx is the author who has demonstrated the radical contingency of the formation of capital.  Any history of philosophy is either theological, or else it is the history of contingencies and unforeseen encounters.  The originary phenomenon of capitalism is this: decoded flows qua decoded flows must enter into conjunction.  What then assures that this conjunction will take place?  Here, one feels that history can teach us as much about the process of the decoding of flows, as about what ensures the conjunction of the decoded flows as such, and this can be nothing else than the processes of a specific historic sector. 

This tale of capitalism implies a generalised decoding of flows and at the same time something else, as if what ought to be put in place were an apparatus for conjugating decoded flows; this is what gives capitalism its purely illusory appearance of liberalism.  It has in fact never been liberal, it has always been state capitalism.  This tale begins in Portugal in the 12th century, this tale of state capitalism.  There has never been a time when flows were decoded and when everything was free, bringing recuperation, which is an awful thing.  If it's true that capitalism replaces the old ruined codes with conjugating machines, and axiomatic machines which are infinitely more cruel, crueller than the cruellest despot, although of another cruelty, it is at the same time as the decoding takes place [que ca se decode] that it is taken up by another machine which is a machine for conjugating decoded flows; whence capitalism?s affinity with schizophrenia, for it is based on decodings, and its opposition to schizophrenia, because instead of making the decoded flows pass, it blocks them in another way, and it makes them enter into a machine for conjugating decoded flows. 

Take an example from the history of painting, the very bizarre history of the Venetian School: it is marked very late by the so-called Byzantine style, while Venice itself was already very advanced in mercantile capitalism, but this merchant and banking capitalism remained entirely nestled in the pores of the old despotic society.  And all of Christianity at that time finds something like its pictorial form in these pyramidal structures, literally, in hierarchical mode, which respond to despotic overcoding.  These Byzantine paintings of the Venetian school continue until the middle of the 15th century.  Here you have this beautiful Byzantine style, and what do you see? - overcoded Christianity, Christianity interpreted according to the style and the manner of overcoding: there is an old despot, there is the father, there's Jesus and there are the tribes of the Apostles.  In one of Delphiore's paintings, there are rows of pyramids which are spread in fine rows facing straight ahead.  It is not just the people who are coded and overcoded in Byzantine art, it is also their organs which are coded, coded and overcoded, under the great unifying influence of the despot, whether this despot is God or the father or whether he is the great Byzantine Emperor.  We get the impression that their organs are the object of a collective hierarchic investment.  It would be mad for a Virgin to be looking to the right while baby Jesus was looking the other way.  You've got to be mad to invent something like that; you couldn't do something like that under a regime where organs are collectively invested, are coded by the collectivity and are overcoded.  Under Christianity, the codes are mixed up, but this is because despotic codes coexist with territorial codes, and the colours themselves enter into the pictorial code.  And if, in a museum, you change rooms, you will discover something else altogether, it is a great joy and a great anxiety too, for they are in the process of decoding the flows, a process which doesn't coincide with the explosion of capitalism, but comes quite a bit later.  The great decoding of the flows of painting takes place around 1450, right in mid-15th century, and it's a kind of radical break: all of a sudden we see the hierarchy of overcoding breaking down, the ruin of the territorial codes, the flows of painting go insane too, destroying all of the codes, a flow passes.  We get the impression that painters - occupying their usual position amongst artists in relation to the social system - create Christs that are totally queer, they are totally mannerist Christs, it's all sexualized, they create Virgins who stand in for all women, and baby boys who have just nursed, little boys pooping, they really play at this process of decoding flows of colour. 

And how does this happen?  Everything happens as if, for the first time, the characters represented became the owners of their own organs: the collective hierarchic codification of organs, the social investment of organs is done with; from now on the Virgin and every other character will, literally, start to run their own affair; in fact the painting escapes on all sides: the Virgin looks to one side, there are two guys looking at baby Jesus, a third is looking on as if something were happening, there are scenes in the background and the picture explodes in all directions so that every one starts possessing their own organs.  They are not insane, there is one member of the Venetian School who makes a creation of the world that is incredible: generally the creation of the world 'a la Byzantine' was done according to a hierarchy; there was a kind of cone or big pyramid of the despotic order and at the very bottom, the territorial codes.  The creation of the world that interests me is a departure from this: there is God the Father up in the sky in the position of a runner, and he gives a starting signal; in front of him are ducks and chickens who are racing away as fast as they can, and in the sea there are fish who are also racing away, and God is the one who sends it all away, it is the end of all the codes. 

And what do they do with the body of Christ?  The body of Christ is useful as a body without organs; so they machine it in every way and direction, they make it amorous, suffering, tortured, but you can feel that it is joyous.  The perspective, you see, the perspective, that's nothing, a useless trick; those who have done without it, it's because they didn't need it, they had other problems. Perspective is lines of flight, and can only be useful in a painting of decoding, but it is very secondary, it doesn't even count in the organization of a painting.  So what are they trying to do, we're going to cut low along Christ's hip, we're going to make a mannerist Christ, all the tortured bodies are good bodies without organs, Saint Sebastian with his arrows sticking out in all directions; again, in this overthrowing of the pictorial system, perspective is only a little thing.  The generalized decoding of flows has to be taken up again by something other than a code, and in effect, there is no longer a pictorial code, but instead a strange sort of pictorial machine that conjoins and that will give rise to the unity of the picture, no longer a signifying unity of a code or overcode, but a system of echoes, of repetitions, of oppositions, of symmetries, a veritable conjugating machine, where flows of colours and decoded features are conjugated.  There emerges a real pictorial axiomatic that replaces the failing codes. 

Capitalism doesn't arise by means of the simple decoding of flows, for it does not appear until such time as flows, inasmuch as they are decoded, enter into conjunction with one another.  Marx has said that when this happens it proves his great theory of contingency.  In Rome, as at the end of feudalism, the decoding of flows brought in a new kind of slavery and not at all capitalism.  For what had to take place was the meeting of the flow of decoded capital and that of deterritorialized labour.  Why did this encounter take place?  Refer to Marx's notion of primitive accumulation, on one condition and that is that primitive accumulation, this can be a dangerous thing, if we say: oh yes, primitive accumulation, this is what served to fuel the process of accumulation, and we might as well say the formation of stocks at the beginning of capitalism.  One has to see that primitive accumulation is called primitive to distinguish it from other types of accumulation, not primitive because it comes first... 

The way capitalism functions, even if we are talking about its industrial essence, is the way banking and trading work, and we must hold that capitalism is essentially industrial, although it only functions through its banking system and through its trade circuits.  Why?  There is a kind of conjunction: capital starts to take control of production, but is it the first time?  No. So, we take up Marx's analysis again, an analysis which Marx insists on: the control of production by capital has existed in a certain guise from the beginning, but it appears in another guise with capitalism.  I mean to say that even from the perspective of banking and mercantile capitalism, the banks and merchants create a monopoly for themselves: there is at the outset of capitalism, the way in which English mercantile capitalism forbids foreign capitalists from buying wool and woollen cloth; in that case, this exclusive clause is the means whereby the local merchant capitalists ensure that they control production because the producers can only sell through them; so, we have to mark two times: a first time where merchant capitalists, in England for example, make the producers work for them by means of a system of delegation whereby the producer becomes a sort of sub-contractor, and this is where commercial capital directly takes possession of production; it is the great historic moment when merchant capital declared war on the leagues, i.e. the associations of producers. It's a war between producers who looked with trepidation upon their being in the service of merchant capital, and merchant capital which, on the contrary, was trying to obtain greater and greater control of production via this sub-contracting method.  But it would take, as Marx declared, a second time ... 












GILLES DELEUZE - SEMINAR SESSION
ON SCHOLASTICISM & SPINOZA
Vincennes, 14 January 1974

Translated by Timothy S. Murphy
murphyx@ucla.edu 
I must pass by a kind of terminological detour. This detour consists in recalling a certain terminology. We find that, in the whole current of the Middle Ages up to and including the seventeenth century, a certain problem is posed concerning the nature of being. And this problem concerning the nature of being adopted some very precise notions: equivocity, analogy, univocity. 

At first sight these terms appear dead to us. They make up part of the great discussions of Scholasticism, but the great metaphysical disputes always hide something else: people are never burned or tortured over ideological questions, even less over metaphysical ones. I would like for us to try to feel what was very concretely in question in these stories which were presented under an abstract form: is being equivocal, is it analogical, is it univocal? 

And after all, this is not because today, except among the seminarians, we have abandoned these terms, not because we do not continue to think in them and through them. I would like to content myself with very simple definitions. 

There are people who said: being is equivocal. They argued, they burned one another for things like that. But ?being is equivocal? meant a precise thing: being is said in several senses. That means: being is said in several senses of that of which it is said. That is to say that the implication [sous-entendu] of the proposition was already: being is said of something. I'm not even interested in knowing if it's an ontological problem; it's a problem of utterances [EnoncEs] as well. Being is stated [s'Enonce] in several senses of that of which it is stated. Concretely, what does that mean? One assumes that a table is not in the same manner as an animal and that an animal is not in the same manner as a man; that a man is not in the same manner as God. Therefore there are several senses of being. 

Those who were called the partisans of equivocity, no matter who they were, argued a very simple thing: that the different senses of the word ?being? were without common measure and that, in all rigor?and what is interesting in theology are always the limit points at which heresy peeks out?in every doctrine one can always locate the exact point where, if the person says a word more, that's it, the machine is set in motion, one starts a process. That runs through the whole history of the Middle Ages, it's very interesting because it's an actual struggle of an obviously political nature. Well then, the heretical point of equivocity is that those who said that being is said in several senses, and that these different senses have no common measure, understood that at the limit they would have preferred to say: ?God is not,? rather than to say ?He is? to the extent that ?He is? was a utterance which was said of the table or the chair. Or else He is in a such an equivocal manner, such a different manner, without common measure with the being of the chair, with the being of man, etc... that, all things considered, it's much better to say: He is not, which means: He is superior to being. But if they had a sense of wordplay this became very dangerous, it sufficed that they insist only a little on ?God is not,? if they were discreet they said ?God is superior to being,? but if they said ?God is not,? that could turn out badly. Broadly speaking they were partisans of what is called the equivocity of being. 

Then there were those who were partisans of the Univocity of being. They risked even more because what does this mean, univocity, in opposition to the equivocity of being? And all the treatises of the Middle Ages are filled with long chapters on the univocity or equivocity of being, it's very interesting. But those who said that being is univocal, supposing that they had done so and were not immediately burned, what did that mean? That meant: being has only one sense and is said in one and the same sense of everything of which it is said. Here one feels that if the equivocists already had such a possible sin in themselves, the univocists were thinkers who told us: of everything which is, being is said in one and the same sense?of a chair, of an animal, of a man or of God. Yet again, I'm simplifying everything because perhaps they didn't dare go that far, perhaps there's only a single thinker who would have gone that far, perhaps none, but in the end there is this idea. 

And then inevitably there are those who were between the two, between the univocists and the equivocists. Those who are between the two are always those who establish what we call orthodoxy. These people said that being is not univocal because it's a scandal; to claim that being is said in one and the same sense of God and of the flea is a terrible thing, we must burn people like that; and then those who say ?being is said in several senses which have no common measure,? we no longer know where we are with them: there is no order anymore, there's no longer anything. Thus these third people said: being is neither equivocal nor univocal, it's analogical. Here we can say the name, the one who elaborated a theory of analogy on the basis of Aristotle, Saint Thomas, and historically he won. Being which is analogical meant: yes, being is said in several senses of that of which it is said. Only these senses are not without common measure: these senses are governed by relations of analogy. 

Thus the equivocity of being, the univocity of being, the analogy of being, you're going to ask me where all this leads us? 

So what does this mean: being is said in several senses of that of which it is said and these senses are not without common measure, they have an analogical measure. And in Saint Thomas' theses, which I am simplifying a lot, this means two things, because analogy, which is taken here in a technical or scientific sense, analogy was double, in any case taken in a technical or scientific sense, that is to say that it was not a question of common analogy. Common analogy is simple similarity of perception: something is analogous to something else. If you like it's the similarity of perception or the analogy of imagination, generally speaking. Scientific or technical analogy, the analogy of concepts, is double: the first sense was termed by Saint Thomas ?analogy of proportions? and the second was termed by Saint Thomas ?analogy of proportionality.? 

The analogy of proportion was the following: being is said in several senses and these senses are not without common measure, they have an internal measure, they have a conceptual measure, they have a measure in the concept. Why? Well, in the first sense of the analogy of proportion, that meant?because there's a primary sense of the word ?being? and then derived senses?the primary sense of the word ?being? was what's often translated by the term ?substance? or sometimes by the term ?essence.? The other senses of the word ?being? were the different senses of the word ?being? which were derived from the primary sense following a law of proportion. Thus being was said in several senses, but there was a primary sense from which the others were derived. 

This has hardly carried us forward because the primary substance was not univocal, it wasn't said in a single sense. At the level of substance in its turn there were going to be analogies, namely: substance was said in several analogical senses, and of that which was substance it was necessary to say that certain substances were primary in relation to others, which were not substance in the same sense. For example, the so-called ?incorruptible? substances were primary in relation to the perishable substances. Thus the analogy of proportion consisted in setting out a plurality of hierarchized and methodical senses on the basis of a sense that was assumed to be primary. This was the analogy of proportion. 

And then the second form of scientific analogy, which was not opposed to the first, this was the analogy of proportionality, which consisted this time in a figure quite close to its equivalent, mathematical analogy: A is to B as C is to D. Example given by Saint Thomas: God is good. Following the analogy of proportion: God is good and man is good; following the analogy of proportion God is formally good, that is to say possessing in Himself goodness in the plenitude of this quality, and man is only good by derivation insofar as he is a creature of God, thus man is secondarily good. This is the analogy of proportion. The analogy of proportionality is the same example, but you must sense how it changes. What infinite goodness is to God, finite goodness is to man. I would add, to finish with this: yet again do we not continue to think theologically? To this whole group of notions, analogy, analogy of proportion, analogy of proportionality, was linked a very precise notion which was that of category. 

In what way did the categories make up part of the analogical vision or the analogical conception? For example, the categories, common to Aristotle and much later to Kant, let's put down substance, quantity, etc.... Why categories and not concepts? What difference is there between the concept of causality or quantity and the concept of lion? Quite simple: every thing, all that is not [connected?], alternatively everything that is substance, has a quality, a quantity, etc... Hence the very strict definition of what must be called a category: one calls categories the concepts which are said of every possible object of experience. Lion is not a category because you cannot say ?lion? of every possible object of experience. On the other hand, every possible object of experience has a cause and is itself cause of other things. There, that clarifies everything. 

The categories, thus defined, are strictly inseparable from an analogical conception; one calls categories the concepts which are said of every possible object of experience, or what amounts strictly to the same thing: the different senses of the word ?being.? And the categories in Aristotle are presented as the different senses of the word ?being,? exactly as in Kant the categories are defined as the concepts which are said of every possible object of experience. Therefore there's no question of a thought proceeding by categories if it does not have, as background, the idea that being is analogical, which is to say that being is said of what is in an analogical manner. 

At this point I make a leap: what appears to me the strangest thought, the most difficult to think, if it has ever been thought, is univocity. Suppose someone arrives there, in an assembly of priests, or even here and says: being is said absolutely in one and the same sense of everything of which it is said. One could say that this does not go very far, but this means precisely that being is univocal, that is to say neither analogical nor equivocal?and understand well that in the Middle Ages those sorts were very up-to-date on all this, as you are?if someone happened by speaking of univocity of being, he was quickly spotted, he could pack his bags; that meant, yet again, that a chair, an animal, a man and God are in one and the same sense. Then what: you treat God as matter? Are a dog and a man in the same sense? Quite tricky, that. And nevertheless there is a man, the greatest thinker of the Middle Ages, who says yes, being is univocal, that is Duns Scotus. This story of Duns Scotus' univocal being turns out rather badly?but happily he took precautions, he said yes but be careful: being is univocal insofar as it is being. That is to say that it's metaphysically univocal. He said: sure it's analogical, which is to say that it's said in several senses physically. This is what interests me: he was at the border of heresy, had he not specified metaphysically univocal and physically analogical, he would have been done for. But for Duns Scotus' disciples, less prudent than he was, it turned out badly. Because I say: being is univocal, this means: there is no categorical difference between the assumed senses of the word ?being? and being is said in one and the same sense of everything which is. In a certain manner this means that the tick is God; there is no difference of category, there is no difference of substance, there is no difference of form. It becomes a mad [dEmente] thought. 

My question is, if I say being is univocal, it's said in the same sense of everything of which it's said, then what could the differences between [beings?] be? They can no longer be differences of category, they can no longer be differences of form, they can no longer be differences of genus and species. And why can they no longer be all that? Because, once again, if I say: the differences between beings are differences of form, are formal, generic, specific differences, at that moment I cannot escape from the analogy of being for this simple reason: the categories are the ultimate genera of being. If I say: there are several senses of the word ?being? which are precisely the categories, I must say that what is, that of which I say ?this is,? is distinguished by the form, the species, the genus. On the other hand, if I say that being is univocal and that it's said in one and the same sense of everything of which it's said, I fall into that which becomes the mad thought, the thought of infamy, the thought of the formless, the thought of the non-specific, the thought of the non-generic. 

The only means of getting out of this is to say: of course there are differences between beings, and in any case being is said in one and the same sense of everything which is. Then what do the differences between beings consist in? The only difference conceivable at this very moment, from the point of view of a univocal being, is obviously difference solely as degrees of power [puissance]. Beings are not distinguished by their form, their genus, their species, that's secondary; everything which is refers to a degree of power. 

Why is the idea of degrees of power fundamentally linked to that of the univocity of being? Because beings which are distinguished solely by the degree of their power are beings which realize a single univocal being, except for the difference in the degree of power or its withdrawal. So between a table, a little boy, a little girl, a locomotive, a cow, a god, the difference is solely one of degree of power in the realization of one and the same being. It's a strange way of thinking, since once again it consists in saying to us: the forms, the functions, the species and the genera are secondary. Beings are defined by degrees of power and there you are. Insofar as they are defined by degrees of power, each being realizes one and the same being, the same being as the other beings since being is said in one and the same sense, except for the difference in degree of power. At this level, there are no longer any categories, no longer any forms, no longer any species. In a sense it's a thought so very far from the ordinary notions of species and genus that, once again, between two members of the same species there can be more differences, more differences in the degree of power than between two beings of different species. Between a racehorse and a draft horse, which belong to the same species, the difference can perhaps be thought as greater than the difference between a draft horse and an ox. Which comes down to saying that the draft horse and the ox are taken in the same assemblage [agencement] and that their degrees of power are closer to one another's than is the draft horse's degree of power to the racehorse's. A further step can be taken, that is, that this thought of degrees of power is linked, no longer to a conception of genera and species, but to a conception of assemblages into which each being is capable of entering. 

We had begun with Spinoza for Spinoza is perhaps the only one to have worked from the point of view [sous les espEces] of reason, to have pursued a kind [espEce] of mad thought. There's always in Lovecraft, the author of novels of terror and science fiction, there's always reference to a mysterious book which falls from the hands of whomever touches it and this book is called the Necronomicon, the famous book of the mad Arab. And Spinoza's Ethics is just that, the famous book of the mad Jew. The true name of the Ethics is the Necronomicon. 

I had begun by explicating the following: imagine how Spinoza saw things; when he directed his eyes toward things he saw neither forms nor organs, neither genera nor species. It's easy to say, but less easy to live like that. It's necessary to train one's self, although there are those who are gifted. I open a parenthesis: French philosophy...there are bits of nationality about which I understand nothing, but I note that the French are the sort who believe for example in the ego [moi]; it's not by chance that their only philosopher said ?cogito.? The subject, the ego; there are some strange people who say ?the ego.? I don't understand. I think of the differences of nationality because the English are the sort who have never understood what the Ego means. There was a famous colloquium to which all the sorts of so-called analytical philosophy, of current English logic, had come, and then there was Merleau-Ponty on the French side, and the others, the English, were there like they were at the zoo. It's not that they were against him. 

But it's quite curious, if you take the great English philosophers?of course, they say ?I,? but yet again it's not this that's the problem?for them it's the most comical notion and they ask themselves from where can such a belief, that of the ego, come. A belief in the identity of the ego is a madman's trick [truc de fous]. And they really think like that, they don't sense ?egos? in themselves. The English novelists are similar: their heroes are never presented as ?egos.? Think of French novels, then it's truly the opposite, one wallows in ?egos,? everybody says ?cogito? in the French novel. 

Let's try to imagine how Spinoza saw things. He did not see genera, species, he did not see categories, so what did he see? He saw differences of degrees of power... 

I said broadly that to each thing will correspond a kind of degree of power and that, if need be, two things said to be of the same species might have degrees of power much more different that two things of different species. To make this more concrete we say that to each degree of power corresponds a certain power of being affected. Its power of being affected is what reveals the degree of power of a thing, of an animal, of [GAP IN TRANSCRIPT], in other words: you will not be defined by your form, by your organs, by your organism, by your genus or by your species, tell me the affections of which you are capable and I'll tell you who you are. Of what affects are you capable? 

It's self-evident that between a draft horse and a racehorse the power of being affected is not the same, in a fundamental way; the proof is that if you put a racehorse into the assemblage of a draft horse, it's quite likely that it will be worn out in three days. 

We have this group of notions: being is said in one and the same sense of everything of which it's said; hence beings are not distinguished by their form, their genus, their species, they're distinguished by degrees of power. These degrees of power refer to powers of being affected, the affects being precisely the intensities of which a being is capable. Now it's becoming more coherent. With the result that, I assume, when Spinoza directed his eyes toward whatever, he grasped powers of being affected. He grasped populations of intensities, he grasped capacities and perhaps he confused an ox and a draft horse, and on the other hand he did not confuse a racehorse and a draft horse. As we would say today, he makes these cuts [coupures] differently than the others. Then there's no longer just an effort to do: in any case, it's not necessary to believe that power [pouvoir] means a possibility that might not be fulfilled. Power [puissance] and degrees of power, this is no longer the Aristotelian world which is a world of analogy, it's not power which is distinguised from the act. The power of being affected, in any case, is or will be fulfilled, is fulfilled at each instant; it's necessarily fulfilled, and why? It's necessarily fulfilled at each instant by virtue of the variable assemblages into which it enters. That is, the affect is the manner in which a degree of power is necessarily actualized [effectuE] as a function of the assemblages into which the individual or the thing enters. 

A power of being affected is always fulfilled; it can be fulfilled in different ways, everything depends on the assemblage. In what ways can it be fulfilled, since it's fulfilled in any case? This is Spinoza's last thought: he says broadly that it's fulfilled in any case, but it can be fulfilled in two fashions. A degree of power is necessarily realized, or a power of being affected is necessarily fulfilled, that refers to these same two propositions, but very broadly speaking it can be fulfilled in two directions: either my power of being affected is fulfilled in such a way that my power of acting increases, or in such a way that my power of acting diminishes. Spinoza specifies: when my power of acting diminishes, this means, very broadly speaking, that my affects are sad; my power of being affected is completely fulfilled by sadness. For example ?I'm guilty? or ?I'm depressed? or ?it's not going well?; but ?it's not going well? completely fulfills my power of being affected. And why, when my affects are sad, is my power of acting diminished while my power of being affected is fulfilled? The way in which Spinoza views people is very very beautiful. It's even more beautiful when one sees the objections that people made to him, for example that imbecile [dEbile] Hegel. When Hegel says, against Spinoza, ?ah that one never understood anything of the labor of the negative,? it's perfect, the labor of the negative is a load of crap. It's not that he doesn't understand, he understands very well: the labor of the negative or the sad passions are those which fulfill my power of being affected in conditions such that my power of acting necessarily diminishes. When I'm sad my power of acting diminishes. It's obvious, it sufficed to think it: when you're affected with sad affects there's an object, something, an animal or a person which combines with you and that person or thing affects you with sadness. But in the case of the sad affect, the power of the other thing and your own would be subtracted since all your efforts at that moment would consist in struggling against this sadness and hence your power and the power of the thing which affects you would be subtracted. When, on the contrary, you are affected with joyful affects, the power of the thing which affects you with joyful affects and your own power are combined and added so that your power of acting, for that same power of being affected which is your own, is increased. Thus everything is crystal clear. 

There you are, the linkage of notions: univocity of being, differences of degrees of power, powers of being affected each of which corresponds to a degree of power, power of acting which increases or diminishes depending on whether the affects which fulfill your power of being affected are by nature sad or joyful. 

INTERVENTION: Are the degrees of power degrees of the same power? 

GILLES: Obviously. Power is being, therefore there's only one single power and the differences of power are intensive differences. 

INTERVENTION: Isn't this in fact a model of causality? Several years ago we had interpreted causality in Spinoza in terms of structural causality. For my part I think that one could interpret Spinoza's thought in terms of energetic causality. Effectively this would be a substance defined as potential energy and I would take this potential energy as an operational concept, a concept rigorously equivalent to the Nietzschean concept of the will to power. 

GILLES: Okay...this seems dangerous to me because we're just barely getting out of the abstract, and you're putting us back into it. 

It's not simply a question of a peculiar vision of the world, it's again eminently a question of politics. Spinoza's basic idea is very simple, it's that there are two plagues of the human genus and it's in this that Spinoza is Nietzschean and Nietzsche is Spinozist. He says that there are two scourges: hatred and remorse. Nietzsche will say that there are two scourges: man as malady, ressentiment and bad conscience. Ressentiment and bad conscience are literally what Spinoza called hatred and remorse. Here one could find a kind of psychiatric tableau of the affections of hatred and the affections of remorse. But what's interesting in his way of seeing all that is not a psychiatry; what's interesting is obviously politics. Spinoza asks himself: what are those things called powers-that-be [pouvoirs] ? He posed the question of power in a ridiculous enough way: power [pouvoir] is opposed to power [puissance]; power [puissance] is our bit in ourselves, in each one of us, in animals, in things; but power [pouvoir] is something else. He asks how it functions: people take power over others. What does it mean to have power over someone? Having power over someone is being in a position to affect her/him in such and such a way. The powers-that-be are fundamentally institutions built to affect you with sadness, they work like that and can only work like that. Things like hope, reward and security are put on the side of sad affects. 

INTERVENTION: Desire also. 

GILLES: No, how awful, what are you saying? Don't listen to him. 

The powers-that-be only keep hold on us by affecting us, which is to say by fulfilling our power of being affected with sad affects, and undoubtedly thousands of ways of doing this exist. And what Spinoza had in view is the power of the State and the power of the Church. He thinks that the power of the State and the power of the Church are fundamentally powers which take hold of their subjects by affecting them with sad affects, which is to say that power depresses them. This is the fundamental operation of power; affecting us with sadness, which obviously implies a whole play of compensations, ?if you were wise, you would have had a reward,? it's for that reason that Spinoza puts the taste for medals on the side of the sad affects, rewards are like a kind of compensation for a fundamental sadness of being. 

Power [pouvoir] and power [puissance] are opposed since power [pouvoir] is an institution which functions essentially by affecting us with sad affects, which is to say by diminishing our power of acting. It needs to diminish our power of acting precisely in order to exercise its own power over us. On the contrary the powers [puissances] of liberation are, or will be, those which affect us with joyful affects. If you're sad you are oppressed, depressed...you've been had. How do they live, the sad and depressed? They live under the form of contagion, they won't let you go. A depressed person is an explosive force, you grasp that. It's tragic, it's tragedy itself. Nietzsche developed this quite simple idea even further: the man of ressentiment is venomous; his idea is to render you ashamed of the least happiness. Spinoza won't even say that social institutions furnish us with models, he will say that they fulfill us with affections, a social institution is a machine of affects; it fulfills your power of being affected. This is not ideological. 

He's really very very clever and truly in the Nietzschean sense of ?why I am so clever,? he takes terms which are current in his epoch, most notably the Cartesian vocabulary, and turns it against Descartes. 

INTERVENTION: (inaudible) 

The whole discourse of representation is structured by analogical principles and thus Spinoza's whole operation consists in making, in imposing a kind of assemblage of affects which implies likewise a critique of representation. 

The Ethics is a book which proceeds via a quite malicious system; this system consists in producing texts, and then notes and notes to notes, and then notes to notes of notes. It's obviously in the notes to notes that an enormous thing will be let loose. Spinoza himself found a far more formidable thing, and doubtless the geometrical method was necessary for that. His book has the appearance of being completely continuous, but in fact when one looks at it, one sees that there are propositions?like geometrical propositions?there are demonstrations, and then there are corollaries and then there are these strange things he calls scholia; at first sight it all follows. If you look closely you'll notice that in fact it's not so tightly knit, that is to say the proposition-demonstration-corollary system is an autonomous system, that is the demonstrations always refer to other demonstrations or to other corollaries. And then the system of scholia is another system which coexists with the first and the scholia refer to one another. Thus there are two Ethics in one: an Ethics which functions in the mode of continuity and a secret Ethics which functions in the mode of discontinuity and which is constituted by the scholia. If need be there are forty pages without scholia and two scholia which refer to one another across these forty pages, and it's in the scholia that he gives an aggressive version of what he says geometrically in the other system; so much so that, literally, the Ethics is simultaneously written twice: a violent and affective version and a rational and geometrical version. 

It's in the scholia that he says what an ethics is, to make an ethics is to make a theory and a practice of powers of being affected, and an ethics is opposed to a satirics [satirique]. What he calls a satirics is tremendous enough: it's everything that takes pleasure one way or another in sad affects, everything which is depreciating and depressing. That's the satirics. It's obvious that all of morality goes under the name of satirics. 

What exactly does powers-that-be mean? And in what ways do the powers-that-be take hold in order to depress, to affect people with sad affects? 






























GILLES DELEUZE: SEMINAR SESSION - 3 May 1977 
On Music
Translated by Timothy S. Murphy
murphyx@ucla.edu 

 
Richard Pinhas: I have a series of questions which come from a very precise domain, the musical domain, but which open upon much more general problems, and I would like, if possible, to have replies of a general order and not ones particularly centered on music. I'm starting from what is easiest for me. The first question bears on a problem of time. It seemed to me that there were two predominant, principal types of time, in short two categories which are called Chronos and Aion; I started off on a ?reflection? on the positions of the sceptical school. Broadly they say that time, being neither engendered nor unengendered, neither finite nor infinite, time does not exist. It's a form of paradox, and it is found only at another level, in certain books, one finds [retrouve] a certain form of paradox uniting two forms of filiation: at the level of time, there is a part born of Aion and a part born of Chronos, and the typical paradox would be the position of the philosopher Meinong, who arrived at paradoxes of this sort: squared circle, unextended matter, perpetuum mobile, things like that. What I asked myself is: can one not attend [assister]?and I have the impression that in certain musical procedures one attends to this, perhaps one can generalize it or at least rediscover it in other domains?to a kind of process which I call for the moment a process of metalization [mEtallisation], a metallic process which would affect for example the repetitive musical syntheses, and which would be a kind of mixture (of course, this notion of mixture remains to be defined), and where one would have a time which would be both continuous and event-ual [EvEnementiel], which would be at the same time of the order of the continuum, which would be or which, rather, in certain respects, would cover?and I see it as a very particular form of Aion?this would be a non-barbarous mixed form because this would be a singular form to be defined, and which would be at the same time born of an uninterrupted line, from something which is not of the order of the event, which would be perhaps to reconcile [rapprocher] the chronological order, and which, from another side, would be proper to Stoic time, that is to say to the infinitive line and to an empty form of the present? 

I wanted to know if this form of mixture could be found. It's a mixture which would be situated on the side of Aion, but which would be a very singular qualification of Aion. And I have the impression, at the level of music, that one finds this time in a pulsed time, which is paradoxical, therefore a pulsed time on the side of Aion, which strolls about like that on an infinitive line, and that this pulsed time, by a series of extremely strong displacements, I'm thinking specifically of the music of Philip Glass, continuous displacement for example at the level of accentuations, this displacement would happen to produce an extra dimension. It could be called as you wish: a dimension + 1, a superpower [surpuissance] dimension, a dimension of superexecution [sureffectuation]...of extremely powerful [puissante] execution which would be even more interesting in certain respects than the notion of non-pulsed time which, itself a priori, would be situated on the side of Aion. Therefore, on the basis of this mixture or kind of interface between different times, between connected and differential lines of execution, one would attend to the innovation of this kind of time, which is a particular form of Aion, and which borrows some elements from a chronological time. Within the same idea, I have the impression that, on the basis of this pulsed time, which is directly opposed to the non-pulsed time of which Boulez, and a whole musical school, speaks, I have the impression that it is on the basis of a certain form of pulsed time (of course there are certain restrictions) that one happens to see executed movements of speed and slowness and extremely important differential executions. It's on the basis of a certain form of pulsed time?and not on the basis of a non-pulsed time (contradictory examples could of course be found)?one is going to find executions of movements of speed and slowness and even more important differentials than in non-pulsed music. Once more, I'm thinking of the music of Philip Glass, and certain Englishmen, they make repetitive metallic music, they really play on the sequences, on the variations of speed inside these sequences, on the displacement of accents that are always inside these sequences, and who, at the level of a whole musical piece or even a whole diagram, they are going to make the speeds of the sequences vary, they are going to produce interferences or even resonances, not merely harmonic ones but resonances of speed between sequences which will melt away [s'Ecouler] in the same moment, at different speeds, if necessary it will be the same sequence which will be accelerated or even slowed down, reduced, then superimposed one on the other. There are numerous possible movements. Paradoxically as well, this play of speeds, which is extremely interesting, this execution of movements of speed, will be found on the side of a certain pulsed time, by locating it on the side of Aion. This is the first question: can this type of mixed time be seen to arise elsewhere than in music, what can the value and efficacy of this type of mixture be? 

Gilles Deleuze: You have introduced a word which, I'm sure, has intrigued everyone: metallic synthesis. What is it? 

Richard: It's merely the name that I would like to give to this form of time. 

Gilles: You would call it metallic synthesis? 

Richard: I would call it rather a metallic form of Aion. It's a metalized Aion. It's a name which has been claimed by this music and it's a name which goes [collerait] well with this kind of mixture. Metallic is a term that one finds often. The second thing that interests me comes from the problem which gives rise to a whole musical school, in reading Sch뻨berg's book, one notices that he adopts a certain point of view. One rediscovers the same themes, moreover, from Sch뻨berg to Boulez, the same theoretical themes: of course, there's the apology for the series, for structure, a whole pile of things that we like a lot here, and relations between (discrete) elements, it's the viewpoint of structuralism in music, I say this very crudely. What appears to be extremely important is that Sch뻨berg seems to construct his music on the basis of a term which he himself employs, he employs many very Freudian terms: he calls his music a system of ?construction,? he explains that what matters are problems of form, broadly the affections of these forms, the variety of forms, images, sketches, themes, motives and transformations. In relation to this system of construction that could be opposed to the complex notion of assemblages [agencements], the latter comes under another point of view, a totally different perspective, in an assemblage for example, the sounds would have value for themselves etc.... 

This system of construction is built on the process of ?variation.? From Sch뻨berg to Boulez, these contemporary composers utilize a process which is called variation and which will permit them to find a new form of articulation between the musical sequences or series. What is extremely interesting is that this process of variation functions with the aid of two operations which Sch뻨berg himself calls ?condensation? and ?juxtaposition.? These two notions, like that of construction, find a bizarre resonance in psychoanalytic theory, in the form of displacement and condensation, or metaphor and metonymy. I'm saying this merely to try rapidly to define [cerner] this type of music which excludes from the outset lines of force, rhythmic complexity, systems of accentuations, harmonic resonances, sound value taken for itself, repetition as positive principle, work on sound, compositions beyond [hors] structural unity etc. 

Sch뻨berg's great haunting fear is repetition. He rejected it above all. Intervals, sequences, what he himself calls ?cells,? the problem is that of transitions. For him, two schools exist: there are those who proceed by variations, he claims to draw upon this school, and there are those whom he doesn't like and who proceed by juxtaposition or even by simple repetition. One sees that, in one case as in the other, these are two types of writing or of composition which respond to something, which could be called here a fundamental plane, and an execution of lines coded in segments. In this type of composition, it seems to me that the musicians of metallic music, ?those I like,? proceed by a totally different mode which allows, it's a diagrammatic mode of composition which allows sequential logics, a treatment of sounds, multiple variables of writing, different principles of repetition, extremely powerful lines of execution, sonorous mutations, becomings-molecular, relations of attraction and repulsion between the sounds and perhaps between the sequences, movements of speed and slowness, etc. Among which are differentiations of musical time. That is, rather, a mutant flux music on thresholds, as you have tried to tell us. And I have the impression that this music, which entails a whole pile of fundamental resonances and in fact very important moves [jeux] of differentiation, this music is a music which proceeds by ?translations? [translations], in opposition to a music which would proceed by variations or by juxtapositions, or by simple repetitions. 

Broadly I would try to oppose a music which proceeds by transitions, the serial and neo-serial school, to a totally different music which would proceed perhaps by translations. But it happens that the notion of translation, which remains for us to define, is a notion which belongs to a certain ?philosophical? domain. I would like for you to tell us what you think of this opposition on the one hand, and on the other hand, for you to give us a definition of the notion of translation. 

Gilles Deleuze: You're the one who's introducing this notion of translation. In what music do you find it? 

Richard: I couple this notion of translation with those of interference and harmonic resonance. It's a music that plays tirelessly with speeds, slownesses, strong differentiations or a complex repetition, or even both at once, there's nothing exclusive about it, it's a music which is built on totally inclusive syntheses. I suppose that it's the music I like, it goes from Hendrix to Phil Glass by way of Ravel, Reich, Fripp and Eno. 

Gilles: It makes a large group of problems, it's very good. Shall we begin right here? 

One thing disturbed me in what we did last time. We had spoken of the notions of mass and class, and of their utilization from the point of view of the problems which occupied us, and I tried to say a certain number of things. And then Guattari in turn said a certain number of things, and I was struck that we said opposite things. I told myself that it's perfect, but have those who listened been as sensitive as me, or was it the opposite? Well then, we commence upon this story of time. 

It would be necessary to find a definition of ?pulsation,? or else we cannot be understood. Or shall we bypass the difference between a pulsed time and a non-pulsed time? It's quite variable. 

Richard: But my question doesn't bear on pulsed or non-pulsed time, I used that as an ornament, it actually bears on a notion of time, that is could one, on the basis of the difference between Chronos and Aion, on the basis of this absolutely irreversible or unfathomable [non creusable] difference, could one happen to find a form of time participating in Aion, and belonging to it, and with what specific characteristics? 

Gilles: This is what's good in discussions, it's like we don't put the accent on the same bits, this is what makes them useful. Me, I believe on the contrary that the idea of pulsation is not something ornamental in what you said. It's the distribution [rEpartition] of pulsed and non-pulsed which commands, for me, the whole set of problems you are posing. Chronos, Aion, it's a notion that has a whole history within the history of philosophy. Chronos, broadly it's chronological time, as the Greeks said, Chronos is the number of movement; Aion is time also, but it's a much less simple time to understand. Broadly, pulsed time is the order of Chronos. Our question, broadly, is: is there another time, non-pulsed time for example, very well we will take the word Aion. The Stoics took the Aion-Chronos distinction very far, and for them Chronos is a time of bodies, and Aion is a time of the incorporeal. But the incorporeal is not spirit. I propose to start again [rEpartir] from the very notion of pulsation in order that we try to have a clear time of departure. If I should try to say that a time is pulsed, this is evidently not its periodicity: there are irregular pulsations. It's therefore not at the level of a chronometric regularity that I could define pulsed time or Chronos. The domain of Chronos, for the moment and by convenience, I identify Chronos and pulsed time, therefore Chronos is not regularity, it's not periodicity. Once again, there are perfectly irregular pulsations. I propose to say that you have a pulsed time when you find yourself always before three coordinates. It suffices that there be only one of the three. A pulsed time is always a territorialized time; regular or not, it's the number of the movement of the step that marks a territory: I cover [parcours] my territory! I can cover it in a thousand ways, not necessarily in a regular rhythm. Each time that I cover or haunt a territory, each time that I claim a territory as mine, I appropriate a pulsed time, or I beat [pulse] a time. I would say that the simplest musical form of pulsed time is not the metronome, neither is it whatever chronometry, it's the ritornello [ritournelle], namely this thing which is not yet musical, it's the little ritornello. The little ritornello of the child, it can even have a relatively complex rhythm, it can have a metronomy, an irregular metrology, it's from pulsed time because it's fundamentally the way in which a sonorous form, however simple it may be, marks a territory. Each time that there is a marking of a territoriality, there will be a pulsation of time. The cadastral survey is a pulsation of time. This is the first characteristic. A movement of deterritorialization is at the same time the release [dEgagement] of a non-pulsed time. When great musicians seize hold of a child's little ritornello, there are two ways in which they can seize it: either they make a collage of it, at such a moment in the development or unfolding [dEroulement] of their work they fling you a little ritornello, for example: Berg, Wozzeck. In this case it's above all of the collage type, the astonishing thing is that the work ends right there. It happens as well that a folkloric theme is tacked into a work, just as it happens that a becoming-animal is tacked into a work. Messiaen recording birdsongs. 

Mozart's birds are not the same thing, it's not a collage; it happens that at the same time that the music becomes bird, the bird becomes something other than a bird, there is a bloc of becomings here, two dissymetrical becomings: the bird becomes something other than music, at the same time that the music becomes bird. 

There are certain moments in Bartok when the folkloric themes are flung out, and then there is something totally different, when the folkloric theme is taken into a bloc of becomings. In this case, it is truly deterritorialized by the music: Berio. A musican like Schumann: ultimately [y la limite], we could say that all the sonorous forms are more or less borrowed from little ritornellos, and at the same time, the result is that these ritornellos are traversed by a movement of musical deterritorialization which makes us agree, in a time which is no longer precisely the pulsed time of the territory. Therefore, here is the first difference between pulsed and non-pulsed or between Chronos and Aion. 

And then there is a second difference: I would say that there is pulsation whenever time measures?territoriality is a notion of scansion, a territory is always something scanned?whenever you can fix [assigner] a state of development of a form and when time is used now no longer to scan a territory but to punctuate [rythmer] the development of a form. This is again the domain of Chronos. It has nothing to do with regularity. Pulsed time: it will not suffice to define it by a rhythm in general, or by a chronicity in general or by a chronometry in general. Whenever time is like the number of the development of a form...Biological time, obviously: a biological form which passes... It's not by chance that biologists and embryologists thus encounter the problem of time and encounter it in a variable way following each species, according to the succession of living forms, growth, etc. The same in music, as soon as you can fix a sonorous form, determinable by its internal coordinates, for example melody-harmony, as soon as you can fix a sonorous form endowed with intrinsic properties, this form is subject to developments, by which it is transformed into other forms or enters into relation or again is connected to other forms, and here, following these transformations and these connections, you can fix pulsations of time. 

Therefore the second characteristic of a pulsed time for me is a time which marks the temporality of a form in development. 

The third characteristic: there is Chronos when time marks or measures, or scans, the formation of a subject. In German this would be Bildung: the formation of a subject. Education. Education is a pulsed time. Sentimental education. It permits us to see again many things that were said: recollection [souvenir] is an agent of pulsation. Psychoanalysis is a formidable enterprise of the pulsation of time. 

Richard: When you say that, you render pulsed time absolutely sad. Even if your definition of pulsed time is right, things are not as clear-cut nor as obvious. I take an example: a work by Philip Glass, ?Music in changing parts,? it's a pulsed music, there are extremely measured, extremely subjectivized, or rather extremely segmented sequences, and it happens that in this music, outside of the work on harmonic resonances, and it's very important because it's entirely situated on the side of an incorporeal, one has a whole series of displacements of accents, accents of strong beats [temps] or secondary beats becoming strong, or else beats of resonance which rise up just like that, not at all in an aleatory manner, it could have been aleatory, but in this case it isn't that, and these accentuations come to form practically an involution of a chronological time?as Claire said?and which disorganize, but in the sense of organic time, which disorganize therefore the organic body of something like the melody or harmonies. One attends precisely to a process of metalization which comes back to exacerbate certain lines of flight and to engage a becoming-molecular in something which belonged to a chronological time. Then, one has a basic form, that can be called open-structured [structurelle] or structural [structural], subjectivized or subjectivizable, that can be called segmented or not, in short, everything we don't like, namely a chronological time, and on the other side, one has a process which comes completely to form an involution of this bit. And it's done perhaps with a surplus of measure, or with a mad measure, a kind of measure that plays precisely on the differences of speeds and which comes to get mixed up in this kind of chronological time. But if from the outset you say that every element of chronological time is negative, it closes many doors open to a transformation or to a metamorphosis of something which, a priori, is essentially, I would not say nihilist, because a nihilist essence is transformable only with difficulty, but an essence not totally finished off on the side of a becoming-molecular. (Gilles: hee, hee, hee.) You're going to have a lot of trouble defining non-pulsed time because even in the least pulsed time possible, one would be able to find something pulsed, pulsation or the inmost, infinitely small mark of the stroke of the bow on the violin, or something of the sort. And ultimately, this would be very easy, this would be an exercise in style or a theoretical game of composing and of executing a music which will theoretically be on the side of a non-pulsed time, but which in fact will not bear in itself any line of flight and any possible becoming; which will be in essence completely nihilist. 

Gilles: You'll see, we agree. We don't have the same method at all, because if what you mean is: don't go right into your definitions, wanting to make us feel that, in advance, everything which isn't good is on the side of pulsed time. At first, we don't know. You've made a bit of a plea for reintroducing the beauties of pulsed time. I am saying a slightly different thing, namely that it goes without saying that one never finds oneself facing anything but mixtures. I don't believe that anyone whatsoever could live in a non-pulsed time, for the simple reason that he would literally die there. Likewise, when we spoke at length of the body without organs, and the necessity of making ourselves one, I never thought that one could live without the organism. Likewise, no question of living without relying on and being territorialized on a pulsed time, which permits us the minimum development of forms of which we have need, the minimal allocations of subjects that we are, because subjectivation, organism, pulsation of time, these are the conditions of living. If one leaps over that, it's what we call a suicide. Certain deaths by drugs are typical of it: the organism leaped. It's a suicidal enterprise. Therefore, on this point, I would tell you that it's very obvious that, in this case, one finds oneself in a mixture of pulsed time and non-pulsed time. The question is: once the mixture is given, I consider that our task is to see what comes back to one such element of the mixture or to another. Therefore, if one is not held back and reterritorialized somewhere, one breaks out, but what we keep, taking this into account, what interests me is the other aspect. When Richard tells me that there is something good in pulsed time, I say that it depends: does this mean that pulsed time is absolutely necessary and that you won't live without it, then OK... 

The Wagnerian leitmotive, what does it mean? In the case of the mixture that occupies us, one sees well in what way the leitmotive in Wagner is typical of a pulsed time. Why? Because, and it's thus that many conductors interpret Wagner, understood and executed the leitmotive, it has in fact all the characteristics that we have just determined, the three characteristics of pulsed time: it indicates at least the germ of a sonorous form with a strong intrinsic or interior property, and it's executed like that; second characteristic: when Debussy made fun of the leitmotive in Wagner, he had a good formula, he said: it's exactly like a signpost, it's the signpost of a character, whose formation [formation] the Wagnerian drama will put on stage and in music, and the formation as subject. Parsifal formation, Lohengrin formation, it's the Goethean side of Wagner, his lyric drama will never cease to entail the formation of the character. Third characteristic: the leitmotive is fundamentally and functionally in the music, it serves as a function of sonorous territorialization, it comes and comes again. And it's the hero, in his formation, in his territoriality, and in the forms to which he refers, who is there, taken up in the leitmotive. Many conductors have placed the accent on these functions of the leitmotive. 

When Boulez plays Wagner, he has a completely different evaluation of the leitmotive. When he looks at the score [partition], he does not find such a leitmotive. Broadly he says: it's neither the germ of an intrinsic form nor the sign [indicateur] of a character in formation, he holds onto these two points, he says that the leitmotive is a veritable floating theme which happens to get stuck here or there, in very different spots. There is therefore another thing as well: there is a floating theme which can float just as well over mountains as over waters, over one such character or over another, and the variations of which are going to be, not formal variations but perpetual variations of speeds, accelerations and slowdowns, I'm saying that it's a completely different conception of the leitmotive. At the level of orchestra conducting, it's obvious that many things will change when the Wagnerian leitmotive is understood in one way or in the other; this will obviously not be the same execution, this goes without saying, and here, I would say just like Richard that it's not a question of obtaining a non-pulsed time in the pure state. Non-pulsed time, by definition, you can only wrest it from a pulsed time, and if you suppress all pulsation or pulsed time, then here I take over Richard's expression, it's pure nihilism, there's no longer even pulsed time or time that's not pulsed: there's no longer anything. 

Non-pulsed time you can only conquer, and because of this I insist on the inequality of status: in a certain manner, pulsed time will always be given to you, or it will be imposed on you, you will be forced to comply with it and from another side, it will order you; the other must be wrested. And here, it's not an individual or collective problem, once again there is something common to the problem of the individual and that of the collective: the individual is a collective as much as a collective is individuated. 

Question: When one makes a film, there is a screenplay, one secretes pulsed time, but this screenplay is going to situate itself in a non-pulsed time...? 

Gilles: In this connection, I would say that the example of cinema is marvelous. Pulsed time covers the whole development of internal sonorous forms, therefore the screenplay, the rhythm of images in the cinema makes up part of pulsed time. The question is how to wrest a non-pulsed time and what would it mean to wrest a non-pulsed time from this system of chronological pulsation? We can seek examples. What exactly does one wrest from sonorous forms in order to obtain a non-pulsed time? It consists in wresting what from forms, or from subjects, or from territorialities? My problem of non-pulsed time becomes: wresting something from the territorialities of time, you wrest something from the temporal development of forms and you wrest something from the formation of subjects. Here, Richard... Some of us can be moved by certain voices in the cinema. Bogart's voice. What interests us is not Bogart as subject, but how does Bogart's voice function? What is the function of the voice in speaking him? It's not the same function at all in the American comedy or in the detective film. Bogart's voice, it can't be said that this is an individualizing voice, even though it is that also, this is the pulsed aspect of it: I deterritorialize myself on Bogart. He wrests something, as though an emission?it's a kind of metallic voice, Claire says that it's a horizontal voice, it's a boring voice?it's a kind of thread which sends out a sort of very very very special sonorous particles. It's a metallic thread that unwinds, with a minimum of intonation; it's not at all the subjective voice. Here as well one could say that there is Bogart as character, that's the domain of the formation of the subject, Bogart's territories, the roles he is capable of playing, one sees again the sorts who have a raincoat like Bogart, Jean Cau, it's obvious that he takes himself for Bogart. 

Richard: Effectively we have two different methods for arriving at the same thing, that fits. But from this notion of mixture, it seems to me that you throw a kind of bridge, practically a bridge between the realms [pont inter-rEgne] of my two questions, namely that from the moment when you speak of the mixture, you arrive very quickly at the notion of translation. I would like you to explain a little bit. 

Gilles: I arrive there very quickly, but I would not call it translation. If I were to try to define my non-pulsed time, Aion, or another word, the two parts of a mixture are never equal. One of the two parts is always more less given, the other is always more or less to be made. It's for this reason that I've remained very Bergsonian. He said very beautiful things on that. He said that in a mixture, you never have two elements, but one element which plays the role of impurity and that one you have, it's given to you, and then you have a pure element that you don't have and that must be made. That's not bad. 

I would say therefore that this non-pulsed time, how to produce it? It's necessary to arrive at a concrete analysis of it. You have non-pulsed time when you have a movement of deterritorialization: example: the passage of the ritornello in its function from childlike reterritorialization to the deterritorialized ritornello in the work of Schumann. Second characteristic: you fabricate a non-pulsed time, if from the development of any form whatever, defined by intrinsic properties, you wrest particles which are defined only by their relations of speeds and slownesses, their relations of movement and rest. Not easy. If, from a form with strong intrinsic properties, you wrest indefinite [informelles] particles, which have among themselves only relations of speeds and slownesses, of movement and rest, you have wrested non-pulsed time from pulsed time. Who does a thing like that? Just now I said that it's the musician who deterritorializes the ritornello, he makes non-pulsed time from that moment, and nevertheless he holds onto pulsed time. Who makes particles wrest themselves into a form? 

Immediately I say the physicists, they do only that with their machines, they would agree and I hope that there are none of them here, just like that they agree in advance: they fabricate non-pulsed time. What is a cyclotron? I say it all the more joyfully because I have no idea about it. What are these machines? These are machines for wresting particles which have only differential speeds, to the point that at this particular level, one will not call it speed, the words are different, but this isn't our affair, from physical forms they wrest particles which have only kinematic [cinEmatique], quantum relations, the word is so pretty, and which will be defined by speeds, extremely complex speeds. A physicist passes his time doing that. 

Third characteristic of non-pulsed time: you no longer have the fixing [assignation] of a subject, there's no more subject formation, it's finished, death to Goethe. I tried to oppose Kleist to Goethe; Kleist, subject formation, he screws it up [se fout] completely. It's not his affair, his affair is a story of speeds and slownesses. I invoke the biologist. What does he do? You could be told two things: there are forms and these forms develop more or less quickly. Here, I would say that one is right in the mixture. There are forms which develop, I would say that there's a mixture of two languages in there: there are forms which develop, this belongs to language P, language of pulsed time, more or less quickly, this is from the mixture and belongs to language non-P, language of non-pulsed time. The problem is not to render everything coherent, the question is to know [savoir] where you're going to put the accent. Or else you're going to give primacy to the development of the form and you're going to say that the speeds and slownesses follow from the exigencies of the development of the form, here I could follow the history of biology and say, for example, that it has subordinated the whole play of speeds and slownesses to the theme of a form which develops, and the exigencies of a form which develops. I see others of them who, saying the same sentences?it's for this reason that beneath the language there are such settlings of scores, it's really at the moment when one says the same thing that it's war, inevitably?there are biologists who, on the contrary, mean that the form and the developments of form depend solely on the speeds, on finding particles, relations of speeds and slownesses, and even if one has not yet found these particles, and it's these relations of speeds and slownesses among ultimately indefinite particles that will command. There isn't any reason to decide among them, but when our heart goes either to the ones or to the others, once more, one lives, all this is not theoretical, you don't live in the same manner according to whether you develop a form or you find your way in relations of speeds and slownesses among particles, or things functioning as particles, insofar as you distribute affects. It's not the same mode of life at all. 

In biology everyone knows that there are broad differences among dogs, and yet they are part of the same species, while a cat and a tiger are not part of the same species, it's odd. Why? What defines a species? The form and its development define a species, but from another side, you would have the non-pulsed language in which what defines a species is solely speed and slowness. Example: what makes a Saint Bernard and a nasty greyhound the same species? As they say: it breeds, it bears a living offspring. But what makes it bear a living offspring? One can't even invoke the sizes, even when the coupling in impossible by virtue of pure dimensions, that changes nothing, in principle it's possible. What defines its possibility? Solely its speed, the speed with which the spermatozoa arrive at the ovum, where ovulation is done. It's solely a relation of speed and slowness, in sexuality, which defines fertilizability. While the cat and the tiger, it doesn't work, it's not the same period of gestation, while all dogs have the same period of gestation, the same speed of spermatozoa, the same speed of ovulation, so that however different they may be, it's a species not by virtue of a common form nor a common development of form, although there may also be that, but the system of speed-slowness relations. 

Therefore I say rapidly that the three characteristics of non-pulsed time are that you no longer have a development of the form, but a wresting of particles which have only relations of speed and slowness, you no longer have subject formation but you have hecceities; we saw this year the difference between individuations by subjectivation, the fixing of subjects, and individuations by hecceities, a season, a day. Deterritorialization. Emission of particles. Hecceities. 

So there's the general formula that I would give for non-pulsed time: you really have the formation of a non-pulsed time, or else the construction of a plane of consistency, therefore, when there is the construction of what's called a continuum of intensities, second point when there are conjugations of flux, the flux of drugs can only be practiced, for example, in relation to other fluxes, there is no monoflux machine or assemblage. Within such assemblages, there is always an emission of particles with relations of speeds and slownesses, there is a continuum of intensities and there is a conjugation of flux. At this level, it would be necessary to take a case and see how it puts these three aspects together, I could say that there is a plane of consistency here, whatever the level of the drug, whatever the level of the music, there is a plane of consistency because there is a continuum of definable intensities, you have quite a conjugation of diverse fluxes, you have quite a few emissions of particles which have only kinematic relations. It's for this reason that the voice in cinema is so important, it can be taken as a subjectivation, but equally as a hecceity. There is the individuation of a voice which is quite different from the individualization of the subject who has it. One could take up any trouble whatever: anorexia for example... What makes anorexia, in what way does its endeavor fail, in what way does it succeed? 

At the level of a study of concrete cases, is one going to find this conjugation of flux, this emission of particles. One sees well a first point. One tries to forget everything that the doctors or the psychoanalysts say about anorexia. Everyone knows that an anorexic is not someone who doesn't eat, it's someone who eats under a very curious regime. At first sight, this regime is an alternation, really, of emptiness and fullness. The anorexic empties herself, and she never ceases to fill herself, this already implies a certain alimentary regime. If one says: empty and full, in place of: not eating, one has already made great progress. It would be necessary to define a pessimal [pessimal] threshold and an optimal threshold. The pessimal is not necessarily the worst. I'm thinking of certain pages of Burroughs, he says that, finally, above all, it's a story of the cold, the cold inside and the warm. 








































 
GILLES DELEUZE
SEMINAR SESSION AT VINCENNES
27 February 1979 

Metal, metallurgy, music, Husserl, Simondon
Translated by Timothy S. Murphy

murphyx@ucla.edu

Richard Pinhas:  I have two questions to formulate regarding the last session, although what I mean may be quite confused.  It?s in relation to this little phrase concerning the metallic synthesis or synthesis of metallization [metallisation].  We saw last year, on the subject of what you said about music, that a synthesis was a synthesis of disparate elements [disparates] which defines a certain degree of consistency in order to render heterogeneous elements [heterogenes] discernible?we reviewed Dupreel?s "famous" texts on consolidation?and concerning the process of metallization I asked myself if there were not a synthetic relation of metallization or a specifically metallic synthesis which would relate, among other things, on one side (and these are not strict oppositions, it would be necessary to view it in a much more precise manner) a smooth space or a striated space, a matter flow or matter movement, and perhaps matter of a more or less congealed [fige] sort, but that would remain to be determined, a certain sort of duration which would relate to a territorial duration, and a different sort of duration which would relate perhaps to an itinerant pole, and I would like to know if this synthesis, for you, could bring out [degager] something like a properly qualitative pole which would make us apprehend affects that could be called metal affects or metallic affects.  At the level of music, I have the impression that these affects have their own sense, everything happens as if they constructed their own lines and as if they constructed their own contents, that is to say their own lines of efficiency or their own lines of execution [effectuation].  I also have the impression that they are presented under a specific form, that is for example a singular power [puissance], a specific force and probably certain sorts of processes.  I wanted to know if one could simply say that there are metal affects, that one can define them in a certain way, and I think that in music, if I disregard a whole eastern and western tradition, in modern music we began to speak of metallic music quite recently with the "new" American composers, and certain Englishmen, but we already began to speak of brass-heavy [cuivree] orchestration starting with Stravinsky and Varese.  That is to say that there are two composers who are supposed to have brought about something new which made what I would call, for the moment, very quickly, a metal affect stand out.  I wanted to know if you agreed in order to define more precisely something which would be a metallic synthesis or a synthesis of metallization, with its own specific character. 

The second point is to know if one couldn?t say that at least two technological lines exist?there are probably more of them?which would result in two types that we?ve already been able to define [cerner].  One would be the crystal type, and you spoke of this last year, we made allusions to Mozart?s music, to certain uses of certain instruments, and perhaps a metal type defining a metal music.  I relate it to music, but it could be related to a totally different domain.  One would therefore have one resultant [aboutissant] line of execution, or rather one outcome [aboutissant] of a technological line which would relate to a metal type, and another related to a crystal type, each one having its singular powers, its specific definitions, its singular mode of affection, its specific affects.  Technically I would say that there are heterogeneous zones of efficiency, for example in music, in order to have crystalline relations or metallic relations one appeals to dynamic relations, timbre relations, selections of hot and cold, heaviness, frequency breaks [coupures de frequence], in short filterings in very different harmonics in the cases of what one wishes to produce.  It goes without saying that it?s not inevitable that merely wanting to produce something would be sufficient for the result be of the metallic affect or crystal affect type.  But I see [them] as two different lines of execution calling up two different types and the two would mainly be the metal and the crystal.  I see a direct filiation as well between what is called metallic music today, or brass-heavy orchestration, and the metal affect of the blacksmith:  definitions of this type of affection would very probably be the same, but they remain to be found.  Speaking of hot and cold, I take it as a qualitative example, it?s perhaps a bit too simple, one sees right away in examples of analyses of musical pieces, one sees right away that it calls into question even more specific criteria, a whole palette of scales and colors, timbres, wave-forms in the case of synthesized music, there would still be break frequencies [frequences de coupures], appropriate dynamic relations, specific speeds, etc. 

The metallic and crystalline lines of execution, obviously differentiated, as outcome, but not in a finalist sense, of two technological lines, equally differentiated, that would collide with another synthesis which would have to be produced, like two cosmic elements.  That is to say that these are two modes of harnessing, harnessings of cosmic elements in the sense that the molecularized matter, in this case musical material, is cosmic and I also thought of cosmic in the way in which Nietzsche defined it:  there is an aphorism in the posthumous fragments from the era of The Gay Science in which he tells a whole story, and he finishes his aphorism by writing:  "to suffer [eprouver] in a cosmic way!"  I would like to know if you agree to conceive these affects of metal and of crystal in this way. 

Gilles Deleuze:  It?s a beautiful presentation because, I don?t know if you?re like me, and it happens to me personally as well, it seems almost too beautiful.  One realizes that it works too well.  Actually it?s a danger.  This isn?t a metaphor:  if we attach two names to what Richard said, to his crystal line in music and to his brass line, it?s not metaphorical that the crystal is something which obsessed Mozart.  That brings together very technical things in music.  Not only is the crystal an obsession that Mozart suffers in relation to his life, but he suffers it as well in relation to his work, and this is not only an obsession, it?s a factor, it?s an active element of this music.  When Richard indicates the role?I don?t much like the mythological tricks, all the myths recalling something to us and telling us something, to the point?but what?s important is the musician-blacksmith link, there is an intimate relation.  I don?t feel quite capable of doing a mythological analysis, but it must be seen.  Does the myth, in its own way, grasp something which would be an intimate relation between a certain musical direction, not music in general, and a metallurgical direction, the direction of the blacksmith and the direction of a certain music.  If  we leave myth behind, in western music?and of course there were brass instruments at all times, but broadly speaking, the brasses made their great entry in the 19th century with two great names, and I?m generalizing broadly, the point at which the brasses made their royal irruption into music is with Berlioz and Wagner.  These are fundamental moments.  And it?s one of the reasons why they, Wagner just as much as Berlioz, will be treated as barbarians.  A barbarian music. 

What does this link mean?  The brasses enter into music!  What does this entail in music?  If we succeed in posing the problem well?this is precisely why I must take up again, in closely related terms, what Richard said?if we perceive this problem well, then perhaps we may perceive the resurgence of ancient myths that have no connection with Berlioz or Wagner, and perhaps we will understand more clearly how a blacksmith-music link is forged.  What happens when the brasses burst into music?  We suddenly locate a type of sonority, but this type of sonority, if I were to try to situate things, after Wagner and Berlioz we start speaking of metallic sonority.  Varese constructs a theory of metallic sonorities.  But what?s odd is that Varese straddles the great Berlioz-Wagner tradition of brasses and electronic music which he is one of the first to found and already to extend [effectuer].  There is certainly a relation.  Music has been made possible only by a kind of current of metallic music.  We would need to find out why.  Couldn?t we speak of a kind of metallization, which of course doesn?t at all exhaust the whole history of western music from the 19th century on, but isn?t there a kind of process of metallization marked for us in a huge, visible way, made obvious by this eruption of brasses?  But that is at the instrumental level.  Isn?t it this, among other things, which?I?m not saying "determined," it?s obviously not the entry of the brasses into music which would have determined it?I?m saying that there?s a series of things which occur concomitantly, at the same time:  the irruption of brasses, a totally new problem of orchestration, orchestration as a creative dimension, as forming part of the musical composition itself, where the musician, the creator in music becomes an orchestrator.  The piano, from a certain moment on, is metallized.  There?s the formation of a metallic framework, and the strings are metallic.  Doesn?t the metallization of the piano coincide with a change in style, in the manner of playing?  Couldn?t one correlate, even quite vaguely, the irruption of the brasses into music, that is to say the advent of a kind of metallic synthesis, the creative importance that orchestration takes on, the evolution of other instruments of the piano type, advent of new styles, the preparation of electronic music?And on what basis could one say that a kind of metallic line and musical line are wed, become entangled, even if it means separating anew;  it?s not a matter of remaining there since, in my view, this will basically prepare the advent of an electronic music.  But perhaps it was necessary to pass that way.  But at that very moment, [there is] no question of saying that the crystal is finished, the crystalline line in music continues.  At no time is Mozart surpassed by the brasses, that goes without saying, but it?s going to reappear in a completely different form.  Varese is very much at a crossroads:  he invokes at the same time notions like those of prisms, metallic sonorities, which lead on to electronic music.  Just as the crystalline line passes by way of a whole complex conception of prisms, the metallic line passes by way of a whole complex conception of "ionization," and all that will get entangled and it will be like the genealogical lines of an electronic music.  Therefore it?s very complicated, and it all has interest only if you understand that these are not metaphors.  It?s not a matter of saying that Mozart?s music is like a crystal, that would only be of minimal interest, it?s a matter of saying that the crystal is an active operator in Mozart?s techniques as well as in the conception of music that Mozart constructs for himself, in the same way that metal is an active operator in the conception of music that musicians like Wagner, like Berlioz, like Varese, like the "electronicians" [electroniciens] construct for themselves. 

Richard Pinhas:  I would just like to add that, in this synthesis, or in this synthesization of elements?and it?s a question of differentiating as well as affirming insofar as such lines of metal and crystal are never replaced, all that can be had between the two are phenomena of resonance and percussion, that is, encounters of crystal lines and metal lines, but at no moment is there ascendancy or submission [descendance] of one in relation to the other?but what seems very important to me is that there aren?t only metallic elements and elements of a crystal type, but effectively, beyond this, there?s a process of crystallization and a process of metallization, and this process effectively passes by way of numerous criteria, numerous operators, there?s really a fabrication.  This process is a fabrication, and it?s going to be a matter of capturing or taking up blocks of crystal or blocks of metal, here these are abstract blocks that one finds concretized in concrete machines, for example metal machines in our musical illustration (the synthesizer, the use of percussion, etc.), but it must be valid for many other things, for the crystal line as well as for the metal line. 

Gilles Deleuze :  And it reacts.  It?s obvious that there aren?t just two lines.  In the case of music, there?s also a vocal line that has its own autonomy, there is a woodwind line which will never stop. 

Richard P. :  In these processes of metallization and crystallization, there?s the formation of blocks of space-time, and it?s through vibrations, transformations, compositions, projections, movements of exchange, movements of pure speed, movements of differential speed, that the fabrication of specific time, blocks of specific space-time, are produced, and perhaps it?s these that are going to form the metallic syntheses or the crystalline syntheses. 

Gilles :  That?s what I called assemblages [agencements] last time.  They?re musical assemblages.  These lines each have their own combinations, one cannot define them in an analogical [analogue] manner.  In what we vaguely call a crystalline line, which has a whole history of its own, the determination of a crystalline line is not at all in relation to the material in the same situation as the determination of a metallic line is in its relation to its own material;  therefore, neither of these lines will have any general formula.  Being a crystalline line does not imply that the matter of the instruments which trace it is crystal.  If I say metallic line, that implies that the instruments which trace it are brasses, at least at the beginning.  Therefore, these two lines have different statuses.  Actually they wobble [boitent] in relation to each other.  For the woodwinds, this will be something else as well, we clearly have wood as matter, but wood as matter in relation to a musical line of wood is not at all the same thing as metal as matter in relation to a musical line of metal. 

Richard P. :  In all cases, the plane of consistency on which the crystalline music or the metallic music will take shape, in the case of the musical example, is absolutely indifferent to the material.  At first, obviously, we could say that such and such metallic or crystalline instruments come into play, but what?s really important is the process of synthesis itself, it?s the plane of consistency that will bring out a process of affection of the metallic type or of the crystalline type, at such a point that purely electronic instruments could themselves release?while in themselves they don?t have any composition, neither of wood, nor metal nor crystal?affects of such and such type. 

Claire Parnet :  It?s the voice.  In Mozart?s era music starts from the voice and there was differentiation.  The crystal affect starts perhaps from the voice while in the 19th century the process of transformation of the voice is completely different. 

Gilles :  You know that Paul Klee was the painter who knew music most profoundly, and from within.  With Mozart he had a relation of which he often spoke in his journal, a very beautiful relation of affinity.  He considered that what he did and what Mozart had done in music were not without relation.  But the constant theme to which Klee clings when he compares himself to Mozart is obviously the key theme of the crystal.  Obviously in neither one case nor the other is it a metaphor.  I take the case of Varese.  There is a whole line which tries to establish sonorous lines, not at all in comparison with, but which would pass by way of or find in the sonorous world something analogous to optics.  He thinks of a new sonorous space which would take account of certain optical phenomena, but which would take account of them in its own way.  But it seems to me that this whole line culminates in a very beautiful work by Varese which is called "Hyperprism."  There?s a whole theme of the crystal which comes out again in Varese.  Then there is a whole other direction.  Along another track, which will tend toward an equally beautiful work, "Ionization," which is very important because it?s at the root of electronic music.  In "Hyperprism" there is actually a musical or sonorous crystalization, and "Ionization":  it seems to me that electronic music arises from, or in any case it would not have been possible in Europe without precisely this kind of metallic synthesis which took place, which hasn?t exhausted the music of the 19th century, but which is formed in the 19th century, beginning with Berlioz and Wagner.  Why?  These great stages of electronic music are founded on research linked to the phenomenon of ionization.  A phenomenon which brings the electrons of the atom into play.  There is ionization, and then there is the way of ionizing air.  How is air ionized?  Air is ionized, it?s said, in the vicinity of red-hot metal plates.  This introduction of metal is very important.  What does this do for music?  Obviously it?s a matter of making emitters of waves, [GAP] waves, it?s important for the birth of electronic music, emitters of waves that travel by ionization, the presence of metal in the process of ionization, and in short there would be reasons which could make us think that music is not a product of, but has been rendered possible by a metallic process which already concerned the sonorous world and the musical world. 

I?ll read several passages from this very good book by Odile Vivier on Varese, in the Seuil collection, regarding ionization:  "the variety of timbres is produced by selective groupings of instruments with reverberating membranes.  Drum, bass drum.  There you are, a line.   Instruments of woody resonance:  Chinese blocks, claves.  Friction instruments, metallic sonorities:  triangle, cymbals, anvil, low register, bells, etc?.like instruments that are waved, that are shaken:  tambourine, etc?.plus sirens."  That?s the ionization ensemble.  But in his commentary Varese says this:  "At a certain moment, there is a sudden crack, with resounding syncopated chords, and the musical scene changes completely.  There are now only metallic sonorities."  It?s quite curious because this work is at the crossing of a thousand things of extreme richness, and he feels the need to construct a range of pure metallic music:  "?there are now only metallic sonorities:  the large Chinese cymbal, the gong, the tam-tam, the triangle and the anvil.  While over them the sirens hover.  The contrast produced by this metallic interlude is calculated so as to mark the natural division of the music.  It is apparent that this metallic section is cast in the rhythmics of the opening pages.  Only the instrumentation ostensibly differs."  It?s quite curious, because this work will be made out to be gathering at the beginning all sorts of lines which intersect, and then a kind of specifically metallic assemblage, which positions itself as an interlude before something explodes which, in my view, is like the herald of electronic music. 

[There are] myths from time immemorial which tell us that there is a certain link between the musician and the blacksmith, but what would interest us would be to know, by way of a completely different horizon, why the blacksmith and the musician have something to do together, and if we get an answer, we will only get one aspect of metallurgy and one aspect of music, and we will simply ask ourselves if our result can serve for the analysis of myths.  We will have gone into a completely different place. 

I pick up where I was last time. 

We?ve acted as if we forgot the particular problem of metallurgy?and our question was:  what does the "materialist" proposition mean, according to which matter is movement?  Movement-matter or energy-matter.  What does that mean?  Is it the state of all matter, is it one type of matter?  The problem must not be posed abstractly.  When does intuition, in the simplest sense, apprehend matter in motion, when does intuition grasp matter as flow? 

You see well that my question is not to know if matter in itself is movement or energy.  My question is much simpler:  in which conditions is intuition determined to grasp matter in motion, and to grasp that which is in motion as matter?  When I perceive a table, the physicist has clearly explained to me that it?s electrons and atoms, yes, but a table, I do not necessarily grasp it as movement-matter.  I have been told, or I can understand that a table is a break [coupure] in a flow of wood, for example, but where is the flow of wood?  ?Therefore my question is very simple:  in which case are we determined, not to think of matter as movement, but in which case are we determined to apprehend matter as matter in motion?  As flow-matter?  If you understand the problem at the most concrete level on which I can pose it, it matters little that, for example, all matter is in motion in itself. This is not what interests me.  I would tell myself that there are other ways of grasping matter, and in these other ways, equally determined, in which intuition does not grasp matter as movement-matter, how does intuition grasp it?  We would have to confront not only intuitions but situations of intuition.   Sensory intuitions and sensory apprehensions.  And when I don?t grasp matter as movement-matter or flow-matter, how do I grasp it:  would we then have to distinguish several states of matter, not at all in itself, but in relation to the intuitions and the modes of apprehension of which we are capable? 

Last time we made a little progress along this track, and we said that movement-matter is perhaps matter as bearer of singularities subject to operations of deformation and bearer of affective qualities or traits of expression, in the mode of plus and minus.  More or less hard [resistant], more or less elastic, more or less porous.  Therefore matter as bearer of singularities, as bearer of affective qualities or traits of expression, and from that point on inseparable from processes of deformation which are practiced upon it, naturally or artificially, would be matter in motion.   This would obviously imply that there would be situations in which one would not grasp matter as bearer of singularities or bearer of traits of expression. 

Matter flow must be that, since it bears singularities here and there.  Roving [itinerer] from that point on is quite simple:  it?s following movement-matter.  Roving is prospecting.  The prospecter is the one who seeks matter as it presents one such singularity rather than another, one such affect rather than another, and makes this matter undergo operations to make the singularities converge on such and such trait of expression.  A very simple example:  wood fibers, wood fibers which sketch all the singularities of this tree trunk or this species of tree, converge on such a trait of expression, either porous (when I as an artisan want porous wood) or hard (when I want hard wood).  And an assemblage is precisely a set of material singularities converging on a small number of well-determined traits of expression 

I would like to confirm this idea via two sorts of texts which seem very important to me.  The first sort of text:  Husserl.  One of these texts is found in Ideas, paragraph 74, and the other is found in "The Origin of Geometry."  I?ll schematize what he says.  He?s a very severe author and here, all at once, is the only Husserl text in which there are amusing, very gay things.  I think that he makes a very important discovery.  He says that we distinguish fixed, intelligible, eternal essences.  And then we distinguish as well sensible, perceived things.  Formal, intelligible essences and sensible, formed things.  For example, the circle as geometrical essence, and then round things, sensible, formed, perceived things.   He says that there is nonetheless a domain which is intermediate, and he tries to christen this intermediate domain.  He says that there are nonetheless essences, and nevertheless they are not fixed and they are not formal, it?s intermediate;  it?s neither formal fixed essences nor formed, sensible and perceived things.  What is it?  These are morphological essences.  These are morphological essences in opposition to fixed or formal essences.  He says further that these are inexact essences, or better, anexact ones.  It?s in opposition to formal essences which are all the more exact since they are metrical.  These are therefore ametrical, anexact essences, and in a very beautiful formula he says:  their inexactitude comes neither from chance nor from a defect, it?s not a defect for them to be inexact;  they are essentially inexact, even more, he goes so far as to say  that they are deployed in a space and a time that are themselves anexact.  Therefore there would be an exact space and time, yes, metrical space and time, and there would be an anexact, non-metrical space and time;  and there would be essences which were deployed in an anexact space-time.  He adds, sublime word, these are vague essences. 

He knows very well that "vague" is vagus.  These are vagabond essences. 

They would have to be defined as a kind of corporeality [corporeite], and corporeality, Husserl says, is not the same thing as either thingness [choseite] or essentiality.  Essentiality is the property of formal, fixed essences, the circle.  Thingness is the property of sensible, perceived, formed things, for example the plate or the sun or the wheel.  And from all that he distinguishes corporeality, which he defines in two ways:  it is inseparable from processes of deformation of which it is the site [siege], that?s its first characteristic:  ablation, deletion, increase, passage to the limit, events.  Therefore corporeality is inseparable from processes of deformation of the event type of which it is the site, and on the other hand it is inseparable from certain types of qualities susceptible to greater and lesser intensities:  color, density, weight, etc. 

In the Ideas text, he says something to this effect:  the circle is a formal essence.  A plate, or the sun, or the wheel are sensible, formed things, be they natural or artificial.  What would a vague essence be that?s neither one nor the other?  The vague essence is roundness [le rond].  Roundness as what?  Roundness as corporeality.  How does roundness answer to this corporeality and to the exigencies of corporeality?  Because it?s inseparable from event processes or from operations that you make diverse matters undergo.  In effect, roundness is simply the result, or the passage to the limit, of the process of rounding [arrondir].  And roundness, which cannot be thought except as limit of the dynamic series, implies a passage to the limit, it doesn?t imply the tranquil and fixed essence of the circle as it is defined by Euclid, it implies a fundamental passage to the limit, for example:  the series of polygons of which the circle [le rond] will be the limit.  Just as roundness, thus defined as vague essence?you see why it is anexact since I defined it as the limit toward which the series of inscribed polygons, the sides of which multiply, tends, there is fundamentally a passage to the limit?this will be roundness as Archimedes conceives it via passage to the limit, in opposition to the circle as Euclid conceives it by essential definition. 

There?s no opposition, they?re two different worlds:  the world of roundness, where you constantly have a passage to the limit, and I would say that, just as roundness is a corporeality inseparable from the passage to the limit defined by rounding, rounding being precisely the limit of inscribed polygons, then, in the same way, it is inseparable from affects and affective qualities susceptible to greater and lesser intensities, namely:  what is the affect of roundness?  I would say that the circle has essential properties, and the essential properties are properties which unfold [decoulent] from the formal essence into matter where the essence is realized.  Roundness is something else, it?s inseparable from events, it?s inseparable from affects.  What is the affect of roundness?  It?s neither straight nor pointed.  It?s not negative, it?s something which already implies the operation of the hand, and constant correction [rectification, straightening].  Constant correction or rather circulation. 

You have a sort of strolling couple, affect-event.  Operation of deformation, affects which make these operations possible and which unfold from these operations. 

All these Husserl texts are like a confirmation of what we sought, namely what we called matter in motion, that is to say bearer of singularities and traits of expression.  It?s exactly what Husserl terms vague or morphological essences, which are actually defined by the processes of deformation of which they are capable on the one hand, and on the other, corresponding affects or qualities susceptible to greater and lesser intensities. 

If I indicate another type of text, these are the most recent texts of Gilbert Simondon, of whom I?ve already spoken because he is very important in technology.  Simondon did a book on the mode of existence of technical objects, but also another book which is called L?Individu et sa genese physico-biologique, from PUF, and this book, between pages 35 and 60, develops an idea which seems to me to be very close to those of Husserl, but with other arguments, and therefore he takes it up again on his own account.  Exactly as Husserl just now said that we have a habit of thinking in terms of formal essences and sensible formed things, but this tradition forgets something;  it forgets a sort of middle [entre-deux], an intermediary, but it?s at the level of this intermediary that everything gets done, with the result that we can understand nothing of formal essences, understand nothing of formed things, if we do not bring this hidden region of vague essences to light. 

Simondon says something strangely similar. 

There?s a long tradition which consists in thinking of technology in terms of form-matter, and at this very moment, we think of the technical operation as an operation of in-formation [information], that is to say the action of a form as in-forming a matter.  We could almost say that the technological model for this operation is:  mold-clay. 

The mold is like a form which is imprinted upon a matter;  and in scholarly terms it?s the schema, the hylomorphic model, in which hyle means matter and morphic means form.  It?s the form-matter schema.  And he says that it?s obvious that in this technological operation, this schema, he?s not the first one to criticize it.  What?s new in Simondon is the way he criticizes it.  The way he criticizes it is very interesting for us, because it consists in saying that in fact, here as well, when we privilege the form-matter schema, or the hylomorphic model, it?s as if we separated two half-schemas in which we no longer understand at all how these two half-schemas could be well adapted to one another.  The essential passes between the two.  Here as well, if we leave the middle hidden, we can no longer understand anything.  What is this middle?  It?s quite simple.  It?s what?s between the mold, between the mold which will impose the form, and the clay matter. 

What?s annoying [embetant] in this schema is the operation of the mold, it consists in inducing in the clay, or in determining the clay to take on an equilibrium state, and you remove the mold when this equilibrium state is reached. 

So much so that you risk not knowing what has happened.  What has happened?  What happened on the side of matter when it tended toward its equilibrium state?  This is not a problem of form and matter any longer, it?s a problem of energy.  It?s a problem of movement-matter:  the pressure [tension] of matter toward a determined equilibrium state.  But the form-matter schema does not take account of it since the form-matter schema in a way presupposes a prepared matter;  and on the side of form it?s not going any better since, on the side of form, what would be interesting is to be inside the mold, but not even the artisan is inside the mold.  If one was inside the mold, or if one imagined the mold as interiority present to itself, what happens?  It?s no longer an operation of molding.  It?s an operation, however brief it may be, and molding is a very brief operation, in which the clay matter arrives at its desired equilibrium state quite rapidly, and if one is inside the mold, and if one imagines oneself in molecular microscopic conditions, no matter how long it takes, what in fact happens?  It?s no longer an operation of molding, as Simondon says so well, it?s an operation of modulation.  What?s the difference between molding and modulating? 

Simondon shows very well that [from] all technological operations, one extracts the mode of molding, it?s convenient, at the most summary level it?s easiest to understand an operation of molding.  But in fact, technological operations are always combinations between the simple model of molding, [and] a more complex but no less effective model presupposed by molding, which is the model of modulation.  What is modulation?  Modulating is not difficult, it?s molding in a continuous and variable manner.  A modulator is a mold which constantly changes the measuring grid that it imposes [atteinte].  With the result that there is a continuous variation of matter across equilibrium states, and modulating is molding in a variable and continuous manner, but we could just as well say that molding is modulating in a constant and finite manner, determined in time.  In electronics, there are only modulations and modulators. 

Simondon insists on this kind of dimension which is not at all a synthesis, it?s not at all a matter of saying that this intermediary is a synthesis. Husserl?s vague essence is obviously not a synthesis of formal essences and sensible formed things.  Similarly, the domain that Simondon opens up between form and matter is not an intermediary that would retain an aspect of the form and an aspect of the matter, it?s not at all a synthesis.  This is really terra incognita, hidden by what it?s between.  Vague essence is always hidden, and this is why Husserl, in discovering vague essences, can call himself a phenomenologist:  he creates a phenomenology of matter or corporeality, he places himself within the conditions of discovering what is hidden, our conceptual thought operating via formal essences as well as our sensory perception apprehending formed things, it?s therefore a specifically phenomenological domain.  Phenomenology is itinerance, it?s in the process of following vague essence.  This is why he would never have had to write anything but these four pages; but in the end, it's stupid to say that, because we could say that about everyone.  Understand that if he had had to write them, it?s these here that he had to write, it?s here that he was most fully a phenomenologist.  The phenomenologist is the stroller, the blacksmith.  [For] Simondon it?s the same thing:  it?s not at all a matter of saying that it?s a synthesis of form and matter.  He discovers, in the energetic conditions of a system, in the succession of equilibrium states, in fact not really equilibrium, since these are so-called meta-stable forms, these are equilibria which are not defined by stability.  In this whole series of modulation defined as continuous variation of a matter, what will the characteristics be by which he will define this?I?m mixing together Husserl?s terms and Simondon?s?this energetic materiality or this vague, that is to say vagabond, corporeality? 

And there you are, Simondon tells us that it?s defined in two ways, on the one hand the existence and distribution of singularities, and secondly by the distribution and production of affect qualities:  more or less hard (for wood, Simondon?s example), more or less elastic, more or less porous, and the singularities are the wood fibres.  Simondon leaps directly to artisanal examples, clearly he loves wood, from wood to electronics.  This is his own example.  Why doesn?t he speak of metallurgy?  Well, that?s his affair. 

Up to the point where we are, we?ve made enormous progress.  We have defined a kind of nomos matter, or better yet a vagabond materiality.  We could say that it?s quite different from all the stories of matter-form. Moreover, the hylomorphic model, the matter-form model, is the moment for drawing conclusions:  when corporeality is submitted to the matter-form model, at the same time the technological operation is submitted to the labor [travail] model.  It?s obvious that the matter-form model is not in the least imposed by the technological operation, it?s imposed by the social conception of labor.  Therefore it?s at the same time that matter is submitted to this very specific model of labor.  On the other hand, the technological operation of free action is directly wed to movement-matter.  We have seen that there were two technological models:  labor model, free action model.  Therefore this will give us a sort of confirmation. 

We?re coming to our problem.  We receive confirmation from Husserl and Simondon.  Movement-matter or materiality or corporeality or vague essence, now we have a profusion of words, it?s matter detached or liberated from the matter-form model, and at the same time, the technological operation is detached from the labor model, and it?s matter endowed with singularities, bearer of traits of expression, subject to operations of deformation.  What is labor, other than all that?  We saw it.  I refer you to what we tried to see about how the labor model was brought out in a totally different fashion:  it is brought out by a double operation, [first] that by which matter is prepared, that is to say homogenized, made uniform, at that very moment it?s a legal matter, in contrast to a nomad matter.  And this is not an opposition, the two are mixed all the time, but it?s a legal matter, and not matter as nomad.  And on the other hand, but it?s entirely complementary, by a calculus of the time and space of labor, and it?s the great idea of an abstract quantity of labor which is constitutive of labor.  Historically, in 19th century political economy, the model of abstract labor, the labor model in political economy is brought out at the same time as the model which in physics will be called the work [travail] of a force, that is the operation by which a force displaces its point of application. 

Therefore we get a definition of movement-matter.  This movement-matter is, in its vague essence, I can?t say that it would be thus according to the laws of fixed essence,  so I can already expect some objection will be made to me, so everything?s going fine, by virtue of its vague essence, this movement-matter is essentially metallic.  The true matter flow is metal, and the other matters will be grasped as in motion, not by comparison, but only by communication with metal.  In what sense could that be said?  I?m not proposing the equality movement-matter = metal, I?m saying on the contrary that it?s fundamentally anexact, that it?s a vague identity.  But why say it? 

I am rapidly stating things that don?t exceed [depassent] sensory apprehension.  What is so bizarre about metal?  It?s not eaten, metal.  This means that the very peculiar situation of metal, from the point of view of sensory intuition?I?m  not invoking science at all, but we could ask ourselves what metal is from the point of view of chemistry, [what is] a metallic body, or what are mineral salts?  Ultimately they?re everywhere.  I claim that ultimately, metal is co-extensive with matter.  Not everything is metal, but there is metal everywhere, that?s the metallic synthesis.  There?s no assemblage that doesn?t include a metal bit [bout].  Metal is the fundamental procedure by which every assemblage is consolidated.  The man-horse unit is fastened together with the stirrup.  You say to me, but what happened before metal?  Stone?  There?s no co-extensivity with stone.  What does that mean, co-extensivity of metal and matter?  It doesn?t mean matter = metal, it means that in a certain manner, metal is the conductor [conducteur] of all matter.  When there was no metal, matter had no conductor.  What does it mean  to say that metal conducts matter, what?s so special about metal?  If you take another matter, vegetable or animal, or inanimate, we understand that the hylomorphic scheme, the form-matter model works in a certain way. You have a matter that you constantly subject, technologically, to various operations.  And in a sense, everyone knows that this is not true concretely but abstractly, we can proceed a bit as if each operation was bounded [comprise] by two thresholds, each operation is determinable between two thresholds:   an infra-threshold which defines the matter prepared for this operation, and a supra-threshold which is defined by the form that you?re going to communicate to this prepared matter.  It?s well understood that the form which you reach as a result [issue] of an operation can itself serve as matter for a different form.  For example, you begin by giving a matter to wood, first operation, and then it?s this already formed [informe] wood with which you?re going to make a piece of furniture.  There is a succession of operations, but each operation is as if bounded by determinable thresholds, and in a given order.  There?s a given order and it?s very important. 

This seems to me most simple in metallurgy, and above all in ancient metallurgy, one could say that operations always straddle thresholds, even more that they communicate beneath the threshold, but what pleases me is that Simondon, in the only paragraph he dedicates to metallurgy, says it very well:  metallurgy makes great use of the mold, in fact it never stops modulating.   Then of course it doesn?t always set the mold:  an epee is made without a mold, but a sabre is molded steel, but even when there?s a mold, the operation of metallurgy is modulatory.  It?s true everywhere, but metallurgy makes what is ordinarily hidden in other matters rise to sensory intuition.  In other words, metallurgy is consciousness or metal is the consciousness of matter itself, that?s why it?s the conductor of all matter.  It?s not the metallurgist who is conscious, it?s the metal that brings matter to consciousness.  That?s annoying, it?s too Hegelian.  Here?s what Simondon says in his five lines:  "metallurgy is not allowed entirely to think by means of the hylomorphic scheme, for the primary matter, rarely in a pure native state, must pass through a series of intermediary states before receiving the actual form (in other words, there is no determinate time).  After it has received a definite contour, it is again submitted to a series of transformations which add qualities to it."  In other words, the singularity operation, quality related to the metallic body, never stops straddling thresholds.  "The taking of form is not accomplished in a single, visible instant, but in several successive operations."  It could not be better said, already in the case of the clay it wasn?t accomplished in a single instant, only nothing was compelling us to know it.  Metal is what compels us to think matter, and it?s what compels us to think matter as continuous variation. 

That is to say as continuous development of the form and continuous variation of the matter itself.  While other material elements can always be thought in terms of succession of different forms and employment of varied matters.  But a continuous variation of matter and a continuous development of form are what metallurgy makes apparent, and what metallurgy makes conscious, and necessarily makes think as a state of all matter.  That?s how metal conducts matter.  Simondon:  "we cannot strictly distinguish the taking of form from the quantitative transformation.  The forging and the quenching of steel are respectively prior to and posterior to what could be termed the taking of form proper.  Forging and quenching are nevertheless constitutions of objects."  In other words it?s as if, beyond the thresholds which distinguish operations, the operations communicated in a kind of continuous process of variation [mise en variation] of matter itself.  No fixed order in the alloys.  There?s a scholarly book on metallurgic variability:  at the dawn of history, [in] the Sumerian empire, there are a dozen varieties of copper [cuivre] inventoried with different names according to their places of origin and degrees of refining.  This forms almost a kind of line, literally a continuous melody of copper, and the artisan will say:  that?s what I need.  But regardless of the breaks [coupures] operated by the artisan, there is no fixed order for alloys, variety of alloys, continuous variability of alloys, and in the end, why does Simondon speak so little of metallurgy?  What will really interest him is the point where operations of modulation, of continuous variation are going to become not only obvious, but are going to become the nomos itself, the normal state of matter, namely electronics.  Yeah [Ouais]. 

There?s something very disturbing in metal.  If you agree with me that there is no fixed order in alloys, obviously it?s not a matter of modern steel foundries, it?s a matter of ancient metallurgy, if you agree with me about this series of operations which follow from one another, with the result that what was hidden in other matters becomes obvious, where does that take us?  Metal is not consumable.   Matter, as flow, is revealed there where it is pure productivity, where the technological operation is therefore a fabrication of objects, tools, arms, and there?s obviously a link between this productivity-matter, this matter which can only be grasped as pure productivity, from that moment on in order to serve in the fabrication of objects, and this state of variation of matter which arises for itself.  Because in short, not only is there no fixed order, but there?s always the possibility of beginning again.  [Though] certainly not infinite, all the same there are phenomena of wear, of rust, but you can always remake the ingot.  Metal is matter susceptible to being put into ingot form.  But the ingot form is extraordinary, it didn?t appear yesterday.  Archaeology attests to the  fact that, from prehistory, metal was transported [transitait], that between the ingot and itinerance there?s a fundamental relation, metal was transported in ingot form.  Consider that the metallurgical centers of the Near East had absolutely no tin, they lacked copper.  Since prehistory there have been commercial circuits by which copper comes from Spain.  Sumer is a metallurgical civilization which had no metal, an extremely advanced state of metallurgy without metal, which comes in ingot form. 

We could distinguish very quickly the forms of consumption or the forms of use, it doesn?t interest us.  But outside of that, there is the stock form.  The stock form is linked to food reserves, it?s linked to the vegetable.  The first large stocks are the imperial stocks, the imperial granaries:  stocks of rice in the Chinese empire.  Stocking has always been considered a fundamental act of the ancient state.  The stock form implies the existence of a surplus which is not consumed and which, from then on, takes the stock form.  We will see the importance of this stock form in history.  There is another well-known form, the commodity form.  I would almost say that the true origin of the commodity form would perhaps be the herds.  There would be all sorts of myths which would establish the link of stock and vegetable, and these would then be the first commodities, that would be the herd.  And it?s inevitable because, in a way, the commodity form is a form which must be in motion, which is artificially in motion only insofar as it is naturally in motion. 

But the ingot form is neither stock nor commodity, it can be sold, but it?s only secondarily a commodity;  the ingot form is a very particular form which, in history, will decide the monetary value of metal.  Then, of course, it reacted upon the commodity.  It reacted in two senses:  you can make the ingot into a commodity, but the ingot form is the monetary determination, which is not at all the same thing as market determination;  the fact that the two enter into a relation is another question, but the ingot form only refers to metal.  It?s not even a stock of metal, the ingot is something else, I would say that the ingot is the continuous variation of matter, it?s a block. 

Metal is co-extensive with all matter in this sense, that it states [enonce] for itself a status which was that of all matter, but which could only be grasped in metal.  It?s the conductor of all matter, because metal puts matter into the double state of continuous development of form and continuous variation of matter.  In order to connect up with what Richard said just now, I no longer even need to say why the blacksmith is a musician, it?s not simply because the forge makes noise, it?s because music and metallurgy find themselves obsessed by the same problem:  namely that metallurgy puts matter into a state of continuous variation just as music is obsessed with putting sound into a state of continuous variation and instituting in the sonorous world a continuous development of form and a continuous variation of matter. 

From this moment on, it?s normal that the blacksmith and the musican should strictly be twins.  Afterwards it becomes quite secondary, if music is traversed by this kind of ideal line of continuous variation, if matter is traversed by this metallic line of continuous variation, how you want the blacksmith and the musician not to be twins.  It matters very little to us that, for example, in the West? 
(end of the tape) 


