       To      
 TAUM SANTOSKE.

                               FOREWORD.                             
                                                                    
 With this book my account of the writing of The Lord of the         
 Rings is completed. I regret that I did not manage to keep it even
 within the compass of three fat volumes; but the circumstances      
 were such that it was always difficult to project its structure and
 foresee its extent, and became more so, since when working on       
 The Return of the King I was largely ignorant of what was to        
 come. I shall not attempt a study of the history of the             
 Appendices at this time. That work will certainly prove both        
 far-ranging and intricate; and since my father soon turned          
 again, when The Lord of the Rings was finished, to the myths        
 and legends of the Elder Days, I hope after this to publish his     
 major writings and rewritings deriving from that period, some       
 of which are wholly unknown.                                        
  When The Lord of the Rings had still a long way to go -            
 during the halt that lasted through 1945 and extended into          
 1946, The Return of the King being then scarcely begun - my         
 father had embarked on a work of a very different nature: The       
 Notion Club Papers; and from this had emerged a new lan-            
 guage, Adunaic, and a new and remarkable version of the             
 Numenorean legend, The Drowning of Anadune, the develop-          
 ment of which was closely entwined with that of The Notion Club     
 Papers. To retain the chronological order of writing which it       
 has been my aim to follow (so far as I could discover it) in The
 History of Middle-earth I thought at one time to include in         
 Volume VIII, first, the history of the writing of The Two Towers
 (from the point reached in The Treason of Isengard) and then        
 this new work of 1945 - 6, reserving the history of The Return o f
 the King to Volume IX. I was persuaded against this, I am sure      
 rightly; and thus it is in the present book that the great disparity
 of subject-matter appears - and the great difficulty of finding a
 title for it. My father's suggested title for Book VI of The Lord
 of the Rings was The End of the Third Age; but it seemed very       
 unsatisfactory to name this volume The End of the Third Age         
 and Other Writings, when the 'other writings', constituting two     
 thirds of the book, were concerned with matters pertaining to       
 the Second Age (and to whatever Age we find ourselves in now).      

 Sauron  Defeated  is  my  best attempt  to find  some sort  of link
 between the disparate parts and so to name to the whole.          
   At  a  cursory  glance  my  edition  of  The  Notion  Club Papers
 and  The  Drowning  of  Anadune  may  appear   excessively  compli-
 cated;  but  I  have  in  fact  so  ordered  them  that  the  works
 themselves are presented in  the clearest  possible form.  Thus the
 final texts of the two parts of the Papers are each  given complete
 and without any editorial  interruption, as  also are  two versions
 of  The  Drowning  of Anadune.  All account  and discussion  of the
 evolution  of  the  works  is reserved  to commentaries  and appen-
 dages which are easily identified.                                
   In  view  of  the  great  disparity  between  Part One  and Parts
 Two and Three I have  thought that  it would  be helpful  to divide
 the Index into two, since there is scarcely  any overlap  of names.
                                                                  
 I  acknowledge  with  many  thanks  the help  of Dr  Judith Priest-
 man  of  the  Bodleian  Library,  and  of Mr  Charles B.  Elston of
 Marquette  Unversity,  in  making  available  photographs  for  use
 in  this  book (from  the Bodleian  those on  pages 42  and 138-41,
 from  Marquette  those   on  pages   19  and   130).  Mr   John  D.
 Rateliff  and  Mr  F. R.  Williamson have  very kindly  assisted me
 on   particular  points   in  connection   with  The   Notion  Club
 Papers;  and  Mr  Charles  Noad  has  again  generously  given  his
 time  to  an  independent  reading  of the  proofs and  checking of
 citations.                                                        
   This book is  dedicated to  Taum Santoski,  in gratitude  for his
 support  and  encouragement   throughout  my   work  on   The  Lord
 of  the  Rings  and  in  recognition  of  his  long  labour  in the
 ordering  and  preparation  for  copying  of  the   manuscripts  at
 Marquette,  a  labour  which  despite  grave and  worsening illness
 he drove himself to complete.                                     
                                                                  
   Since this book was set in type  Mr Rateliff  has pointed  out to
 me the  source of  Arundel Lowdham's  allusion to  'the Pig  on the
 Ruined  Pump'  (p.  179),  which  escaped  me,  although  my father
 knew  the  work from  which it  comes well,  and its  verses formed
 part of his large repertoire of  occasional recitation.  It derives
 from  Lewis  Carroll,  Sylvie   and  Bruno,   chapter  X   -  where
 however the Pig sat beside, not on, the Pump:                     
              There was a Pig, that sat alone,                     
                 Beside a ruined Pump.                             
              By day and night he made his moan:                   

              It would have stirred a heart of stone               
              To see him wring his hoofs and groan,                
               Because he could not jump.                          
   In  Sylvie  and  Bruno  Concluded,  chapter  XXIII,  this becomes
 the first verse of a poem called The Pig-Tale, at the end  of which
 the Pig, encouraged by a passing Frog, tries but signally  fails to
 jump to the top of the Pump:                                      
              Uprose that Pig, and rushed, full whack,             
               Against the ruined Pump:                            
              Rolled over like an empty sack,                      
              And settled down upon his back,                      
              While all his bones at once went 'Crack!'            
               It was a fatal jump.                                
                                                                  
   On  a  very  different   subject,  Mr   Noad  has   observed  and
 communicated  to  me  the  curious  fact  that   in  the   Plan  of
 Shelob's  Lair  reproduced  in  The  War  of the  Ring, p.  201, my
 father's compass-points  'N' and  'S' are  reversed. Frodo  and Sam
 were  of  course  moving  eastward  in  the  tunnel, and  the South
 was on their right. In my description (p. 200, lines  16 and  20) I
 evidently  followed  the  compass-points  without thinking,  and so
 carelessly  wrote  of  the 'southward'  instead of  the 'northward'
 tunnels that left the main tunnel near its eastern end.           
