     PART ONE.
              
 THE END OF THE
    THIRD AGE.

                                     I.                                   
                                                                         
                        THE STORY OF FRODO AND SAM                        
                                 IN MORDOR.                               
                                                                         
 Long foreseen, the story of the destruction of the Ring  in the  fires of
 Mount Doom was slow  to reach  its final  form. I  shall look  back first
 over the  earlier conceptions  that have  appeared in  The Return  of the
 Shadow  and  The  Treason  of  Isengard,  and  then  give  some  further
 outlines of the story.                                                   
  The  conception  of  the  Fiery  Mountain,  in  which  alone   the  Ring
 could be destroyed, and  to which  the Quest  will ultimately  lead, goes
 back to the earliest stages in the writing of The Lord  of the  Rings. It
 first  emerged  in  Gandalf's  conversation  with  Bingo  Bolger-Baggins,
 predecessor of Frodo,  at Bag  End (VI.82):  'I fancy  you would  have to
 find one of the  Cracks of  Earth in  the depths  of the  Fiery Mountain,
 and drop it down into the Secret Fire,  if you  really wanted  to destroy
 it.'  Already  in  an  outline  that  almost  certainly  dates  from 1939
 (VI.380) the scene on the Mountain appears:                              
                                                                         
  At end                                                                  
  When  Bingo  [>  Frodo]  at  last  reaches Crack  and Fiery  Mountain he
  cannot  make  himself   throu  the   Ring  away.   ?  He   hears  Necro-
  mancer's  voice  offering  him  great  reward  -  to  share  power  with
  him, if he will keep it.                                                
   At  that  moment  Gollum   -  who   had  seemed   to  reform   and  had
  guided   them   by   secret  ways   through  Mordor   -  comes   up  and
  treacherously  tries  to  take  Ring.  They  wrestle  and  Gollum  takes
  Ring and falls into the Crack.                                          
   The mountain begins to rumble.                                         
                                                                         
  Two years later,  in a  substantial sketch  of the  story to  come ('The
 Story Foreseen from Moria') it was still far from clear to my father just
 what happened on the Mountain (VII.209):                                 
                                                                         
   Orodruin  [written  above:   Mount  Doom]   has  three   great  fissures
  North, West, South  [> West,  South, East]  in its  sides. They  are very
  deep  and  at an  unguessable depth  a glow  of fire  is seen.  Every now
  and  again  fire  rolls  out  of  mountain's  heart  down   the  terrific
  channels.  The  mountain  towers  above  Frodo.  He   comes  to   a  flat
  place on the mountain-side where the fissure is full  of fire  - Sauron's
  well  of fire.  The Vultures  are coming.  He cannot  throw Ring  in. The
  Vultures  are  coming. All  goes dark  in his  eyes and  he falls  to his

 knees.  At  that  moment  Gollum  comes  up   and  wrestles   with  him,
 and takes Ring. Frodo falls flat.                                      
   Here  perhaps  Sam comes  up, beats  off a  vulture and  hurls himself
 and Gollum into the gulf?                                              
                                                                       
 Subsequently in this same outline is found:                            
                                                                       
   They escape [from Minas Morgol] but Gollum follows.                  
   It is Sam that wrestles with Gollum and [?throws] him finally in     
 the gulf.                                                              
                                                                       
 Not long after this,  in the  outline 'The  Story Foreseen  from Lorien'
 (VII.344), my father  noted that  'Sam must  fall out  somehow' (presum-
 ably  at  the  beginning of  the ascent  of Mount  Doom) and  that Frodo
 went up the mountain alone:                                            
                                                                       
   Sam  must fall  out somehow.  Stumble and  break leg:  thinks it  is a
 crack  in  ground  -  really   Gollum.  [?Makes   ?Make]  Frodo   go  on
 alone.                                                                 
   Frodo  toils  up  Mount  Doom.  Earth  quakes,  the  ground   is  hot.
 There  is  a  narrow  path  winding  up.  Three  fissures.  Near  summit
 there  is  Sauron's  Fire-well.  An  opening in  side of  mountain leads
 into a chamber the floor of which is split asunder by a cleft.         
   Frodo  turns  and  looks North-west,  sees the  dust of  battle. Faint
 sound  of  horn.  This is  Windbeam the  Horn of  Elendil blown  only in
 extremity.                                                             
   Birds circle over. Feet behind.                                      
                                                                       
 Since  the  publication of  The Treason  of Isengard  there has  come to
 light an outline that is obviously closely related to this  passage from
 'The  Story  Foreseen  from  Lorien'  (which  does not  necessarily mean
 that it belongs to the same time) but is very much  fuller. This  I will
 refer to as I. The opening sentences were added at the head of  the page
 but belong with the writing of the text.                               
                                                                       
 (I) Sam falls and hurts  leg (really  tripped by  Gollum). Frodo  has to
 go alone. (Gollum leaps on Sam as soon as Frodo is away.)              
                                                                       
   Frodo  toils  on  alone  up  slope  of  Mt.Doom.  Earth   quakes;  the
 ground  becomes  hot.  There  is a  narrow path  winding up.  It crosses
 one  great  fissure  by  a  dreadful bridge.  (There are  three fissures
 (W. S. E.).) Near the summit  is 'Sauron's  Fire-well'. The  path enters
 an opening in the side  of the  Mt. and  leads into  a low  chamber, the
 floor of which  is split  by a  profound fissure.  Frodo turns  back. He
 looks  NW  and  sees  dust and  smoke of  battle? (Sound  of horn  - the
 Horn  of  Elendil?)  Suddenly he  sees birds  circling above:  they come
 down  and  he  realizes  that  they  are  Nazgul!  He  crouches  in  the
 chamber-opening  but  still  dare  not  enter. He  hears feet  coming up
 the path.                                                              

                       
                                                                         
  At   same   moment   Frodo  suddenly   feels,  many   times  multiplied,
 the  impact  of the  (unseen) searching  eye; and  of the  enchantment of
 the  Ring.  He  does  not  wish  to enter  chamber or  to throw  away the
 Ring.  He  hears or  feels a  deep, slow,  but urgently  persuasive voice
 speaking:  offering  him  life,  peace,  honour:  rich  reward: lordship:
 power: finally  a  share in  the Great  Power -  if he  will stay  and go
 back with  a Ring  Wraith to  Baraddur. This  actually terrifies  him. He
 remains  immovably  balanced  between   resistance  and   yielding,  tor-
 mented,  it  seems to  him a  timeless, countless,  age. Then  suddenly a
 new  thought  arose  -  not  from  outside  -   a  thought   born  inside
 himself: he would  keep the  Ring himself,  and be  master of  all. Frodo
 King  of  Kings.  Hobbits  should  rule  (of  course  he  would  not  let
 down  his  friends)  and  Frodo  rule  hobbits.   He  would   make  great
 poems  and  sing  great  songs,  and  all the  earth should  blossom, and
 all should be bidden to  his feasts.  He puts  on the  Ring! A  great cry
 rings  out.  Nazgul  come  swooping   down  from   the  North.   The  Eye
 becomes  suddenly  like  a  beam  of  fire stabbing  sheer and  sharp out
 of  the  northern smoke.  He struggles  now to  take off  the Ring  - and
 fails.                                                                   
  The  Nazgul  come   circling  down   -  ever   nearer.  With   no  clear
 purpose  Frodo  withdraws  into  the  chamber.  Fire  boils in  the Crack
 of Doom. All goes dark and Frodo falls to his knees.                     
  At  that   moment  Gollum   arrives,  panting,   and  grabs   Frodo  and
 the Ring. They  fight fiercely  on the  very brink  of the  chasm. Gollum
 breaks  Frodo's  finger  and  gets  Ring.  Frodo  falls  in a  swoon. Sam
 crawls  in  while  Gollum  is  dancing  in   glee  and   suddenly  pushes
 Gollum into the crack.                                                   
  Fall of Mordor.                                                         
                                                                         
  Perhaps  better  would  be  to  make  Gollum  repent  in  a  way.  He is
 utterly  wretched,  and  commits  suicide.  Gollum has  it, he  cried. No
 one else shall have it. I will destroy you all. He leaps into crack. Fire
 goes mad. Frodo is like to be destroyed.                                 
  Nazgul  shape  at  the  door. Frodo  is caught  in the  fire-chamber and
 cannot get out!                                                          
  Here we all end together, said the Ring Wraith.                         
  Frodo is too weary and lifeless to say nay.                             
  You  first,  said  a  voice,  and  Sam  (with  Sting?)  stabs  the Black
 Rider from behind.                                                       
  Frodo   and   Sam  escape   and  flee   down  mountain-side.   But  they
 could  not  escape  the  running  molten  lava.  They see  Eagles driving
 the Nazgul. Eagles rescue them.                                          
                                                                         
  Make issue of fire below them so that  bridge is  cut off  and a  sea of
 fire  bars  their retreat  while mountain  quivers and  crumbles. Gandalf
 on white eagle rescues them.                                             

    Against  the  sentence  'He  is  utterly  wretched,  and  commits  suicide'
  my father subsequently wrote No.                                             
    Another outline, which I will call II, is closely related to outline I just
  given. It is written in ink  over a  briefer pencilled  text, very  little of
  which  can  be  read  -  partly  because of  the overwriting,  partly because
  of the script itself (my father could not  read the  conclusion of  the first
  sentence and marked it with dots and a query).(1)                            
                                                                              
    (II)  Frodo  now  feels  full  force  of the  Eye....... ?  He does  not want
    to  enter  Chamber  of  Fire  or  throw  away  the  Ring.  He  seems  to hear
    a  deep  slow  persuasive  voice  speaking:  offering life  and peace  - then
    rich  reward,  great  wealth  -  then  lordship  and  power  - and  finally a
    share  of  the  Great  Power:  if  he  will  take  Ring  intact  to  the Dark
    Tower.   He  rejects   this,  but   stands  still   -  while   thought  grows
    (absurd  though  it  may  seem):  he  will  keep  it,  wield it,  and himself
    have  Power  alone;  be  Master  of  All.  After  all  he  is  a  great hero.
    Hobbits   should   become   lords   of   men,   and   he  their   Lord,  King
    Frodo,   Emperor  Frodo.   He  thought   of  the   great  poems   that  would
    be  made,  and  mighty  songs,  and  saw  (as  if  far  away) a  great Feast,
    and  himself  enthroned  and  all  the  kings  of  the  world sitting  at his
    feet, while all the earth blossomed.                                       
      (Probably  now  Sauron  is  aware  of  the  Ring  and  its peril,  and this
    is  his  last  desperate  throw  to  halt  Frodo,  until  his  messenger  can
    reach Orodruin.)                                                           
      Frodo   puts   on   Ring!   A  great   cry  rings   out.  A   great  shadow
    swoops   down   from   Baraddur,   like   a   bird.   The   Wizard   King  is
    coming.   Frodo   feels   him   -   the   one    who   stabbed    him   under
    Weathertop.  He  is  wearing  Ring  and  has  been  seen.  He   struggles  to
    take  off  Ring  and  cannot.  The  Nazgul  draws  near  as  swift  as storm.
    Frodo's  one  idea  is  to  escape  it,  and without  thinking of  his errand
    he  now  flies  into  the Chamber  of Fire.  A great  fissure goes  across it
    from left to right. Fire boils in it.  All goes  dark to  Frodo and  he falls
    on  his  knees.  At  that  moment  Gollum  arrives   panting  and   grabs  at
    the  Ring.  That  rouses  Frodo,  and  they  fight  on   the  brink   of  the
    chasm.  Gollum  breaks  Frodo's  finger  and  gets   Ring.  Frodo   falls  in
    swoon.   But   Sam   who   has   now   arrived   rushes   in   suddenly   and
    pushes  Gollum  over  the   brink.  Gollum   and  Ring   go  into   the  Fire
    together.  The  Mountain  boils   and  erupts.   Barad-dur  falls.   A  great
    dust  and  a   dark  shadow   floats  away   NE  on   the  rising   SW  wind.
    Frodo   suddenly   thinks   he   can   hear   and   smell  Sea.   A  dreadful
    shuddering  cry  is  borne  away  and  until  it  dies  far  off all  men and
    things stand still.                                                        
      Frodo   turns   and   sees   door   blocked   by   the  Wizard   King.  The
    mountain   begins   to   erupt   and   crumble.    Here   we    will   perish
    together,   said   the   Wizard   King.   But  Frodo   draws  Sting.   He  no
    longer  has  any  fear  whatsoever.  He  is  master of  the Black  Riders. He

 commands the Black Rider to follow the Ring his master  and drives          
 it into the Fire.                                                           
   Then Frodo and Sam fly from the chamber. Fire is pouring  out of          
 the mountain-side by three great channels  W, SE,  S, and  makes a          
 burning moat all round. They are cut off.                                   
   Gandalf, of course, now knows that Frodo  has succeeded  and the          
 Ring  has  perished. He  sends Gwaihir  the Eagle  to see  what is          
 happening. Some of the eagles fall withered by flame?(2) But Gwaihir          
 sweeps  down  and  carries  off  Sam  and  Frodo back  to Gandalf,          
 Aragorn, etc. Joy at the reunion - especially of Merry and Pippin?          
                                                                            
 There  seems  to  be no  certain way  in which  to date  this text,  but the
 reference  to  the  coming  of  the  Wizard  King  from  Barad-dur  shows at
 any rate that his fate on the Pelennor Fields had not yet arisen.  I incline
 to think that it is relatively late, and would associate it tentatively with
 the  end  of  the outline  'The Story  Foreseen from  Forannest' (VIII.362):
                                                                            
   Gandalf   knows   that   Ring   must    have   reached    fire.   Suddenly
 Sauron is aware of the Ring  and its  peril. He  sees Frodo  afar off.  In a
 last  desperate  attempt  he  turns  his  thought from  the Battle  (so that
 his  men  waver  again  and  are  pressed  back)  and  tries to  stop Frodo.
 At  same  time  he  sends  the  Wizard  King  as  Nazgul  to  the  Mountain.
 The whole plot is clear to him....                                          
   Gandalf bids Gwaihir fly swiftly to Orodruin.                             
                                                                            
 With  this  d.  the words  of outline  II just  given: 'Probably  now Sauron
 is aware of the Ring and its peril, and this is his last desperate throw to
 halt  Frodo';  and   'Gandalf,  of   course,  now   knows  that   Frodo  has
 succeeded  and  the  Ring  has  perished.  He  sends  Gwaihir  the  Eagle to
 see what is happening.'                                                     
                                                                            
 I  turn  now  to  other   outlines  that   preceded  any   actual  narrative
 writing of  Book VI.  The first  of these,  Outline III,  also only  came to
 light  recently;  it  is  a  somewhat  disjointed  page, with  deletions and
 additions, but all belonging,to the  same time.  I believe  that time  to be
 the   brief   period   of  work   (October  1944)   when  my   father  began
 writing  'Minas  Tirith'  and  'The  Muster  of   Rohan',  and   wrote  also
 many  outlines  for  Book  V;  with  the  opening  of  the present  text cf.
 VIII.260:  '[12]  Gandalf  and   Aragorn  and   Eomer  and   Faramir  defeat
 Mordor.  Cross  into  Ithilien.  Ents  arrive  and   Elves  out   of  North.
 Faramir  invests  Morghul  and  main  force  comes  to   Morannon.  Parley.'
 It will be seen that the story of the  fighting and  slaughter in  the Tower
 of Kirith Ungol had not yet arisen.                                         
                                                                            
(III)  They  pass  into  Ithilien  [12  >] 11 (3) [and turn  >]   Eomer  and
 Faramir   invest  Minas   Morghul.  The   rest  turn   /  north   to  Moran-
 non.  Joined  by  Ents  and  Elves  out  of  Emyn  Muil.  Camp   on  [added:
 S.  edge  (of)]  Battle  Plain  [14  >)  evening  of 12.  Parley. Messengers

  [sic]   of   Sauron.   Gandalf   refuses.   [Added:   begins   assault  on
  Morannon.]                                                               
    Sam  rescues   Frodo  night   of  11/12.   They  descend   into  Mordor.
  [Gollum  comes  after  them.  They  see  a vast  host gathering  in Kirith
  Gorgor,  and  have  to  lie hid  (12). 12/13  They go  on and  are tracked
  by  Gollum.  This  was  struck  out  and   replaced  by   the  following:]
  Frodo  from  the  high  tower  holds  up  phial  and  as  if  with  Elvish
  sight (4) sees  the white  army in  Ithilien. On  the other  side he  sees the
  vast  secret  host  of  Mordor  (not  yet revealed)  gathered on  the dead
  fields  of  Gorgor.  ?  Sauron  delays  to  take  Frodo  because   of  the
  defeat at Gondor.                                                        
    Mt.Doom  (Orodruin)  stands  in   plain  at   inner  throat   of  Kirith
  Gorgor,  but  a  complete  darkness  comes  over  land,  and all  they can
  see  is  Mt.Doom's  fire  and  far   away  the   Eye  of   Baraddur.  They
  cannot find a path? It  is not  until night  of 12  that they  reach rocky
  slopes  above  the  levels  of Kirith  Gorgor. There  they see  an immense
  host  camped:  it  is  impossible  to  go further.  They remain  in hiding
  during  13  -  and  are  tracked  down  by  Gollum.  Suddenly   the  whole
  host  strikes   camp  and   pours  away   leaving  Mordor   empty.  Sauron
  himself  has  gone  out  to  war.(5) They  cross  plain and  climb Mt.Doom.
  Frodo looks back and sees the white army driven back.                    
                                                                          
    Frodo   captured   on   night  10/11.   But  Shagrat   persuades  Gorbag
  not  to  send  message  at  once,(6) until he's  had  a  look for  the real
  warrior  still  loose. Orcs  scatter and  hunt in  Kirith Ungol  (11). Sam
  at  last  finds  way  in  - he  has to  go back  and down pass (7) - then he
  finds  quite  a  small fort (8) of  many  houses  and  a  gate  and  a  path
  leading up to the cliff. It is not until [evening >] night  of 11  that he
  manages to get in.                                                       
    Rescue  of  Frodo  early  on  12.  Shagrat  sends  message  to  Lugburz.
  [Added:  How  do  messages  work.  Signal  from   Tower  to   Eye.  News.]
  Nazgul  arrives  at  Tower and  takes coat  of mail  and [clothes  etc. >]
  a sword to Baraddur (12).                                                
    Frodo  and  Sam  hide  in  rocks.  The  Gorgor  plain  is  covered  with
  armies.  They  are  in despair,  for crossing  is impossible.  Slowly they
  work  their  way  north to  where the  defile narrows,  to a  point nearer
  Mt.Doom [> Dum].(9)                                                      
                                                                          
  Another  outline  (IV)  describes  the  capture of  Frodo and  his rescue
 by Sam from the Tower of Kirith  Ungol; and  this is  yet another  text of
 which I was not aware until recently. Like outline II it is written in ink
 over  an underlying,  and much  briefer, pencilled  text. It  was written,
 very obviously at the same time, on the reverse of a  page that  carries a
 rejected  preliminary version  (also in  ink over  pencil) of  the outline
 'The march of  Aragorn and  defeat of  the Haradrim'  given in  VIII.397 -
 9,  which  preceded the  writing of  'The Battle  of the  Pelennor Fields'
 and  very  probably  accompanied  the  outline  'The  Story  Foreseen from

                           
                                                                          
 Forannest'  (see  VIII.397).  This  preliminary version  of 'The  march of
 Aragorn   and  defeat   of  the   Haradrim',  which   contains  remarkable
 features, is given at the end of this chapter (p. 14).                    
  In  this  outline  IV  Gorbag  is  expressly the  'Master of  the Tower',
 whereas  in  the  fair  copy   manuscript  of   'The  Choices   of  Master
 Samwise'  he  is  the  Orc from  Minas Morghul,  as in  RK. It  is notable
 however  that  at his first appearance  in this  text he  is the  Orc from
 Minas  Morghul,  changed  immediately  to  Shagrat  -  which   is  however
 marked  with  a  query.  This  query  suggests  to me  that after  so much
 changing back  and forth  of the  names of  these beauties  (see VIII.225,
 note  46)  my  father could  not remember  what decision  he had  come to,
 and  did not  at this  time check  it with  the manuscript  of the  end of
 Book IV (cf. the case of  'Thror' and  'Thrain', VII.159  - 60).  The same
 uncertainty is seen in outline III above (see note 6).                    
                                                                          
  (IV)  Frodo  is  captured  night  of  10-11.  Mar.12  Frodo   in  prison.
  (Sauron is distracted by news of  the Ents  and defeat  of his  forces in
  Eastemnet by Ents and Elves of Lorien.)                                  
  No  message  is  sent  for  some  time  to  Dark  Tower -  partly because
  of general.......(10) Frodo is stripped, and the Mithril coat is found.     
  [Gorbag  >]  Shagrat  (?)  covets   this,  and   tries  to   stop  Gorbag
  sending message:  at first  pleading need  of searching  for confederate.
  But  quarrel  breaks  out,  and Shagrat  and Gorbag  fight and  their men
  take  sides.  Sam at  last finds  way in  - by  a front  gate overlooking
  Mordor  -  and  a  steep  descent  down  into  a  long  narrow   dale  or
  trough  beyond  which  is  a  lower  ridge.(11) In end  Gorbag  (Master  of
  the  Tower)  wins,  because  he  has more  men, and  Shagrat and  all his
  folk  are  slain.  Gorbag then  sends tidings  to Baraddur  together with
  the  Mithril  coat  -  but  overlooks  Lorien  cloak.(12) Gorbag has  only
  very few men left, and  has to  send two  (since one  won't go  alone for
  fear of  the missing  spy) to  Baraddur. Sam  slips in  and slays  one of
  Gorbag's  remaining  two  at  the  gate,  another on  stair, and  so wins
  his  way  in  to  the  Upper Chamber.  There he  finds Gorbag.  Sam takes
  off  his  Ring  and  fights  him and  slays him.  He then  enters Frodo's
  chamber.  Frodo  lying  bound  and  naked;  he  has  recovered  his  wits
  owing to a  draught given  him by  orcs to  counter poison  - but  he has
  talked in  his delirium  and revealed  his name  and his  country, though
  not his errand.(13) Frodo is filled with fear, for at first he thinks it is an
  orc  that  enters.  Then hatred  for the  bearer of  the Ring  seizes him
  like  a  madness,  and he  reproaches Sam  for a  traitor and  thief. Sam
  in  grief; but  he speaks  kindly, and  the fit  passes and  Frodo weeps.
  This is night of 13th. Sam and Frodo escape from Tower on 14th.          
                                                                          
          It might be a good thing to increase the reckoning of time that
  Frodo,  Sam  and Gollum  took to  climb Kirith  Ungol by  a day,  so that
  Frodo  is  not  taken  until  night  of  11-12.  Quarrel between  Orcs on
  12th and sending of message that night or morning of 13th when           

 Gorbag is  victorious. Sam  gets in  on 13th.  Otherwise Sam  will have
 to spend all 11, 12 and part of 13 trying to get into Tower.           
   Make Sam get in before fight and  get mixed  up with  it. And  so let
 Sam hear message sent to Baraddur?                                     
                                                                       
 The  last  outline (V),  while written  independently of  IV, evidently
 belongs closely with it, and has the same story of the Tower  of Kirith
 Ungol - Gorbag is the captain of the garrison, and Sam slays  him. This
 text, giving the first detailed account of the journey of Frodo and Sam
 to  Mount  Doom,  is  identical  in appearance  to 'The  Story Foreseen
 from Forannest' and was clearly a companion to it.                     
 At the head of the  page are  written these  notes on  distances, which
 were struck through:                                                   
                                                                       
   Minas  Tirith  to  Osgiliath (W.  end) 24  - 5  miles. Width  of city
 [written  above:  ruin]  4  miles.  East  end  of  Osgiliath  to  Minas
 Morghul  about  60  miles  (52  to  Cross  Roads?).  Minas  Morghul  to
 top of Kirith Ungol (and  pass below  Tower) 15  miles on  flat. Kirith
 Ungol  to  crest  of  next  (lower)  ridge  beyond  Trough is  about 15
 miles.                                                                 
                                                                       
 The opening paragraph of the main text is  enclosed in  square brackets
 in  the  original.  All  the  changes shown  were made  subsequently in
 pencil, including the reduction of most of the dates by a day.         
                                                                       
 (V)  [Gorbag  sends  swift  runner  to Baraddur  on morn(ing)  of 13th.
 He  does  not  reach  plain and  make contact  with any  horseman until
 end  [>  morn(ing)]  of  14th?  A  rider  reaches  Baraddur on  15th [>
 night of 14], and  at same  time by  Nazgul news  of the  defeat before
 Gondor and the coming of Aragorn is brought to him [Sauron).(14)       
 He  sends  the  Nazgul  to  Kirith  Ungol  to  learn  more.  The Nazgul
 discovers Tower full of dead and the prisoner flown.]                  
   Sam  rescues  Frodo  and  slays  Gorbag  on  14th  [> 13].  Frodo and
 Sam  escape:  when  clear  of  the Tower,  they disguise  themselves in
 orc-guise. In this way they  reach the  bottom of  the Trough  at night
 on  14th  [>  13]. They  are surprised  that there  seems no  guard and
 no  one  about;  but  they avoid  the road.  (A steep  stair-path leads
 down  from  Tower  to  join  the  main  road  from  Minas  Morghul over
 Kirith  Ungol pass  to the  Plain of  Mordor and  so to  Baraddur.) The
 darkness is that of night.(15)                                         
   On  15th  [>  14)  March  they  climb  the inner  ridge -  about 1000
 feet at most, sheer on W. side, falling in jumbled  slopes on  E. side.
 They look  out on  the Plain  of Mordor,  but can  see little  owing to
 dark  [added:  but  the  clouds   are  blown   away].  Though   by  the
 wizardry of Sauron the air is clear of smokes (so  that his  troops can
 move) it hangs like a great pall in the upper air. It seems  largely to
 issue  from Orodruin  - or  so they  guess, where  far away  (50 miles)
 under the pall there is a  great glow,  and a  gush of  flame. Baraddur

               
                                                                        
 (further   and   S.  of   the  Mountain)   is  mantled   in  impenetrable
 shadow. Still, Frodo and Sam can see that  all plain  is full  of troops.
 Hosts of fires dot the  land as  far as  they can  see. They  cannot hope
 to cross. Frodo decides to try and find a  point where  the open  land is
 narrower,  in  or  nearer  to  Kirith  Gorgor.  They descend  into Trough
 again  and  work  north.  They  begin  to  count  their  food  anxiously.
 They  are  very  short of  water. Frodo  weak after  poison -  though the
 orcs  gave  him something  to cure  it, and  lembas seems  specially good
 as  antidote.,  he  cannot  go   fast.(16) They manage  10   miles  along
 Trough.                                                                 
  On  16th  [>  15]  they  continue  to  crawl  along  Trough,  until they
 are some 25 - 30 miles north of Kirith Ungol.                           
  On  17th  [>  16]  they  climb  ridge  again, and  lie hid.  They hardly
 dare  move  again  even  in  the  gloom,  since they  can see  below them
 great  hosts  of  warriors  marching  into  the  defile  out  of  Mordor.
 Frodo  guesses  they  are  going  to  war and  wonders what  is happening
 to  Gandalf  etc.  [Added:  No,  most  of  troops  are  now  coming  back
 in.]                                                                    
  On  19th  [>  18]  being  desperate  they  go  down  and  hide   in  the
 rocks  at  the  edge  of  the  defile.  At last  Sauron's troop-movements
 cease. There  is an  ominous silence.  Sauron is  waiting for  Gandalf to
 come  into trap.  Night of  19 -  20 [>  18 -  19] Frodo  and Sam  try to
 cross  the  defile  into  Ered-Lithui.  (About  this  time  let  Sam have
 suspicion that Gollum is still about, but say nothing to Frodo?)        
  After various  adventures they  get to  Eredlithui at  a point  about 55
 miles  NW  of  Orodruin. 20  (part), 21,  22, 23  they are  working along
 slopes of Eredlithui.(17)                                               
  On  24th  their  food  and water  is all  spent -  and Frodo  has little
 strength  left. Sam  feels a  blindness coming  on and  wonders if  it is
 due to water of Mordor.                                                 
  24th.  Frodo  with  a last  effort -  too desperate  for fear  - reaches
 foot  of  Orodruin  and  on  25 begins  the ascent.  There is  a constant
 rumble  underground  like  a  war of  thunder. It  is night.  Frodo looks
 round  fearing  the  ascent  -  a  great compulsion  of reluctance  is on
 him.  He  feels  the  weight  of  the  Eye.  And  behold  the  mantle  of
 shadow  over  Baraddur  is  drawn  aside:  and  like  a   window  looking
 into an inner fire he sees the Eye. He falls in a faint - but  the regard
 of  the  Eye  is  really  towards  Kirith Gorgor  and the  coming battle,
 and it sweeps past Orodruin.                                            
  Frodo   recovers   and   begins   ascent   of   Mt.Doom.   He   finds  a
 winding  path  that  leads  up  to  some unknown  destination; but  it is
 cut  across  by  wide  fissures.  The  whole  mountain  is  shaking.  Sam
 half-blind is lagging behind. He trips and falls - but calls to  Frodo to
 go  on:  and  then  suddenly  Gollum  has  him  from  behind  and  chokes
 his  cries.  Frodo  goes on  alone not  knowing that  Sam is  not behind,
 and  is  in  danger.  Gollum  would  have  killed  Sam  but  is  suddenly

                                    
                                                                            
   filled with fear  lest Frodo  destroy Ring.  Sam is  half throttled,  but he
   struggles on as soon as Gollum releases him.                             
                                                                            
    Here the text ends,  and at  the end  my father  wrote in  pencil: 'Carry
  on now with old sketch.' Possibly he was  referring to  outline II  (p. 6),
  although there seems reason to think (p.  7) that  that outline  belongs to
  much the same time as the present text. 
                                   
                                        *                                    

                           The chronology of writing.                        
                                                                            
  I take it as certain that my father  took up  The Lord  of the  Rings again,
  after the long halt at the end of 1944, in  the latter  part of  1946: this
  was  when  he  returned  to   the  abandoned   openings  of   the  chapters
  'Minas   Tirith'   and   'The   Muster  of   Rohan'.  For   the  subsequent
  chronology of writing there is  little evidence  beyond the  rather obscure
  statements  in  his  letters.  On  30  September  1946 (Letters  no.106, to
  Stanley Unwin) he said that he  'picked it  up again  last week'  and wrote
  a further chapter, but there is  really no  knowing what  this was;  and on
  7  December  1946 (Letters  no.107, to  Stanley Unwin)  he wrote:  'I still
  hope  shortly  to  finish  my  "magnum opus":  the Lord  of the  Rings: and
  let you see it, before long, or before January. I am on the last chapters.'
    In  an  unpublished  letter  to  Stanley Unwin  of 5  May 1947  he wrote:
  'It  [Farmer  Giles]  is  hardly a  worthy successor  to "The  Hobbit", but
  on  the  real  sequel  life  hardly  allows me  any time  to work';  and in
  another of  28 May  'I have  not had  a chance  to do  any writing.'  On 31
  July  1947  (Letters  no.109) he  was saying:  'The thing  is to finish the
  thing as devised and then let  it be  judged'; and  a further  eight months
  on  (7  April  1948,  Letters  no.114,  to  Hugh  Brogan)  he  wrote: 'Only
  the difficulty  of writing  the last  chapters, and  the shortage  of paper
  have so far prevented its printing. I hope at least to finish it  this year
  ...'   Then,  on   31  October  1948  (Letters   no.117,  again   to  Hugh
  Brogan),  he  said,  'I managed  to go  into "retreat"  in the  summer, and
  am  happy  to  announce  that  I succeeded  at last  in bringing  the "Lord
  of the Rings" to a successful conclusion.'                                 
    The  only  other  evidence  that  I  know  of  is found  in two  pages on
  which  my  father  made  a  list of  candidates for  an academic  post with
  notes  on  their  previous  experience.  Against  several  of the  names he
  noted both date of birth and present age, from which it  is clear  that the
  year was 1948. On the reverse of  one of  these pages  is drafting  for the
  passage  in  'The  Land  of  Shadow'  in  which  Frodo  and  Sam   see  the
  darkness  of  Mordor  being driven  back (RK  p. 196);  the second  part is
  overwritten with  drafting for  the discussion  of food  and water  in 'The
  Tower of Kirith Ungol' (RK p. 190), while  the reverse  of it  carries very
  rough sketching of the discovery of Frodo by Sam in the Tower.             

                        
                                                                         
  Thus in  December 1946  he was  'on the  last chapters'  of The  Lord of
 the Rings, and hoped to finish it 'before  January'; but  in 1948  he was
 drafting the  opening chapters  of Book  VI. The  explanation must  be, I
 think, that by  the end  of 1946  he had  completed or  largely completed
 Book V, and so (in  relation to  the whole  work) he  could feel  that he
 was now 'on the last chapters';  and greatly  underestimating (as  he had
 so  often  done  before) how  much needed  to be  told before  he reached
 the end, he thought that he could finish  it within  the month.  But 1947
 was  largely  unproductive, as  the letters  imply; and  Book VI  was not
 written until 1948.                                                      
                                                                         
                                   NOTES.                                 
                                                                         
  1.  The few words and sentences that I can make out are  sufficient to
      show that the  story in  the underlying  text was  substantially the
      same.  The  ink  overwriting  ends before  the pencilled  text does,
      and the last sentence of the  latter can  be read:  'Thorndor sweeps
      down  and  carries  off  Sam  and  Frodo.  They  rejoin the  host on
      Battle Plain.' The naming  of the  rescuing eagle  Thorndor (earlier
      form  of  Thorondor)  is  very  surprising,  but  is  perhaps  to be
      explained  as  an  unconscious reminiscence  (when writing  at great
      speed) of the rescue of Beren and Luthien in The Silmarillion.      
  2.  Cf. the fate of the Nazgul in RK (p. 224): And  into the  heart of
      the  storm  ...  the Nazgul  came, shooting  like flaming  bolts, as
      caught in the fiery ruin of  hill and  sky they  crackled, withered,
      and went out.'                                                      
  3.  The  dates are  still in  February. For  the change  in the  month see
      VIII.324 - 5; and with the chronology of this text cf. that given in
      VIII.226.                                                           
  4.  Cf.  the  outline  'The  Story  Foreseen  from   Fangorn'  (VII.438):
      'Then  return  to  Frodo.  Make  him  look  out   onto  impenetrable
      night. Then use phial which  has escaped  ... By  its light  he sees
      the  forces  of deliverance  approach and  the dark  host go  out to
      meet  them.  On this  I remarked  (VII.440, note  15), The  light of
      the  Phial  of  Galadriel  must  be  conceived  here  to be  of huge
      power, a veritable star in the darkness.'                           
  5.  Sauron  himself  has  gone  out  to war:  despite the  apparent plain
      significance of the words, it  is impossible  that my  father should
      have  meant  that  Sauron  was  no  longer   present  in   the  Dark
      Tower.                                                              
  6.  Gorbag   replaced  Yagul  as  the   name  of   the  Orc   from  Minas
      Morghul  in  the  fair  copy  manuscript of  'The Choices  of Master
      Samwise'  (see  VIII.225,  note  46).  Here 'Shagrat  persuades Gor-
      bag not to send message  at once'  suggests that  Gorbag is  the Orc
      from the Tower,  whereas a  few lines  later 'Shagrat  sends message
      to Lugburz'; see further outline IV, p. 9.                          

  7.  he has to go back and  down pass:  i.e., Sam  had to  go back  out of
      the tunnels and up to the pass, then down the other  side of  it (cf.
      RK                             pp.                            173-5).
  8.  quite a small fort: I think that this means, not 'only a small fort',
      but 'an actual fort, if not very large, not simply a tower'.         
  9.  For the spelling Mount Dum see VII.373, VIII.118.                    
 10.  My  father  could  not  read  the  pencilled  words  here  and  wrote
      queries against them.                                                
 11.  This is  the first  description of  the Morgai  (which is  marked and
      named on the Second Map, VIII.435, 438).                             
 12.  The  outline  'The  march  of  Aragorn and  defeat of  the Haradrim',
      closely associated with the present text, has  a brief  passage about
      the   rescue   of   Frodo   concerned  with   the  cloak   of  Lorien
      (VIII.398):                                                          
           Rescue of  Frodo. Frodo  is lying  naked in  the Tower;  but Sam
      finds by some chance that  the elven-cloak  of Lorien  is lying  in a
      corner.  When  they  disguise  themselves  they   put  on   the  grey
      cloaks  over all  and become  practically invisible  - in  Mordor the
      cloaks of the Elves become like a dark mantle of shadow.             
 13.  Cf. 'The Story Foreseen from Forannest' (VIII.361):                  
         He  [the ambassador  of Sauron  to the  Parley] bears  the Mithril
      coat  and  says  that  Sauron  has already  captured the  messenger -
      a  hobbit.  How  does  Sauron   know?  He   would  of   course  guess
      from  Gollum's  previous  visits  that  a  small  messenger  might be
      a  hobbit.  But  it  is  probable  that  either  Frodo talked  in his
      drugged  sleep  -  not  of  the Ring,  but of  his name  and country;
      and that Gorbag had sent tidings.                                    
 14.  A  pencilled  X  is  written  against this  sentence. Cf.  'The Story
      Foreseen  from  Forannest'  (VIII.360):  'Sauron  ... first  hears of
      Frodo  on  15  of  March, and  at the  same time,  by Nazgul,  of the
      defeat  in  Pelennor  and  the  coming  of  Aragorn.... He  sends the
      Nazgul to Kirith Ungol to get Frodo...'                              
 15.  Against  this  paragraph is  written in  the margin:  'Frodo's horror
      when  Sam  comes  in  and  looks   like  a   goblin.  Hate   for  the
      Ringbearer  seizes  him and  bitter words  of reproach  for treachery
      spring to his lips.'                                                 
 16.  In the margin is written here: 'Ring a great  burden, worse  since he
      had been for a while free of it.'                                    
 17.  Beside these dates is written '10 miles, 15, 15, 15'.                
                                                                          
                                     *                                     
                                                                          
         The rejected preliminary version o f 'The March of Aragorn        
                        and defeat of the Haradrim'                        
                                                                          
 I have mentioned  (pp. 8  - 9)  that on  the reverse  of the  page bearing
 outline IV (describing the capture and  rescue of  Frodo) is  the original

  form  of  the  outline  given  in  VIII.397-9,  entitled  'The  march of
  Aragorn and defeat of the Haradrim'. This is a  very puzzling  text, and
  I give it in full. It was in fact written in three forms. The first is a
  pencilled text (a) as follows:                                          
                                                                         
      Aragorn  takes  Paths  of  the  Dead  early  on  March 8th.  Comes out
    of  the  tunnel  (a  grievous  road)  and  reaches head  of the  Vale of
    Morthond   at   dusk.   He   blows  horns   [struck  out:   and  unfurls
    standard]  to  amazement  of  the people;  who acclaim  [him] as  a king
    risen from the  Dead. He  rests three  hours and  bidding all  to follow
    and send out the war-arrows he  rides for  the Stone  of Erech.  This is
    a  stone  set  up between  the mouths  of Lamedui  and the  Ethir Anduin
    delta  to  commemorate  the  landing  of  Isildur  and  Anarion.  It  is
    about 275  miles by  road from  the issuing  of the  Paths of  the Dead.
    Aragorn  rides  100  miles  and  reaches  the  Ringlo  Vale  (where  men
    are  assembling)  on  March  9.  There  he  gathers  news  and  men.  He
    rides after short rest into Lamedon (10) and then goes to             
                                                                         
  Here this version was abandoned and a  new start  made, also  in pencil,
  at 'Aragorn takes Paths of the Dead'; but this text (b)  was overwritten
  in ink and can only be  read here  and there.  The overwritten  form (c)
  reads thus:                                                             
                                                                         
      Aragorn  takes   Paths  of   the  Dead   morn(ing)  8   March,  passes
    tunnels  of  the  mountains  and  comes  out into  the head  of Morthond
    Vale at dusk.  Men of  the Dale  are filled  with fear  for it  seems to
    them that behind the dark shapes of the  living riders  a great  host of
    shadowy  men  come  nearly  as   swift  as   riders.  Aragorn   goes  on
    through  night  and  reaches  Stone of  Erech at  morn(ing) on  March 9.
    Stone  of  Erech  was  black  stone  fabled  to  have been  brought from
    Numenor,  and  set  to  mark  the  landing  of  Isildur and  Anarion and
    their reception as kings by the dark men of  the land.  It stood  on the
    shores  of  Cobas,  near the  outflow of  Morthond, and  about it  was a
    ruined wall within which was  also a  ruined tower.  In the  vault under
    the  tower  forgotten  was  one of  the Palantir[i].  From Erech  a road
    ran by [the] sea, skirting in a  loop the  hills of  Tarnost, and  so to
    Ethir Anduin and the Lebennin.                                        
      At  Stone  of  Erech  Aragorn  unfurls  his standard  (Isildur's) with
    white  crown  and  star  and  Tree  and  blows horns.  Men come  to him.
    (The  Shadow-men  cannot  be  seen  by  day.)  Aragorn learns  that what
    he  saw  in  Palantir  was  true  indeed:  Men of  Harad have  landed on
    the coasts near the Ethir, and their  ships have  sailed up  the estuary
    as  far  as Pelargir.  There the  men of  Lebennin have  made a  block -
    on the  basis of  an ancient  defence. The  Haradwaith are  ravaging the
    land.  It is  nearly 350  miles by  coast road  from Erech  to Pelargir.
    Aragorn  sends  out  swift  riders  north  into  the   Dales,  summoning
    what  men  remain  to  march  on  Pelargir.  He  does  not  himself take

  coast-road, since it is infested, but after a rest he sets out at dusk of
  March  9  -  and goes  like wind  by rough  paths over  Linhir and  so to
  Fords  of  Lameduin  (about  150   miles  away).   The  Shadow   Host  is
  seen  to  follow.  He  crosses  Morthond  at  Linhir, passes  into Ringlo
  Vale,  and  sets all  land aflame  for war.  He reaches  Lameduin evening
  of  March  10.  Men  are assembled  there, and  are resisting  an attempt
  of   the   Haradwaith   to  cross   Lebennin  >   NW.  Aragorn   and  the
  Shadow  Host  come  out  of  the  dark  with  the  white star  shining on
  the  banner  and  the  Haradwaith  are  terrified.  Many  drowned  in the
  river  Lameduin.  Aragorn   camps  and   crosses  Lameduin   into  Leben-
  nin  and  marches  on  Pelargir  morn(ing)  of  11  March. The  terror of
  'the  Black  King'  precedes  him, and  the Haradwaith  try to  fly: some
  ships  escape  down  Anduin,   but  Aragorn   comes  up   driving  Harad-
  waith  before  him.   The  Shadow   Host  camps   on  shores   of  Anduin
  before  Pelargir on  evening of  March 11th.  By night  they set  fire in
  guarded  ships,  destroy  the  Haradwaith  and  capture  2   vessels.  On
  morn(ing)   of   12th   they   set   out   up  Anduin,   with  Haradwaith
  captains rowing.                                                         
                                                                          
 The extraordinary thing about this, of course,  is the  site of  Erech. It
 seems  plain  beyond  any  question  from  all  the evidence  presented in
 The  War  of  the  Ring  (see  especially  the  chapter  'Many  Roads Lead
 Eastward (1)') that from  its first  emergence Erech  was in  the southern
 foothills  of  Ered  Nimrais, near  the source  of Morthond:  Erech stands
 self-evidently  in  close  relationship with  the Paths  of the  Dead. Why
 then did my father now  move it,  first (in  a) to  the coast  between the
 mouths  of  Lameduin and  Ethir Anduin,  and then  (in b  and c)  to Cobas
 Haven  (north  of  Dol  Amroth:  see  the  Second  Map,  VIII.434)?  I  am
 unable to propose any explanation.                                        
  The geography of the c-version is  at first  sight hard  to follow.  In a
 Aragorn's route can be understood: all that is said here  is that  he rode
 from  the  head  of Morthond  Vale 'for  the Stone  of Erech';  he reaches
 the Ringlo  Vale, and  then continues  into Lamedon  (which at  this stage
 lay east of the river Lameduin: see VIII.437). The  distance of  275 miles
 from  the  issuing  of  the  Paths  of  the  Dead  to  Erech  'between the
 mouths  of  Lamedui  and  the  Ethir  Anduin  delta'  is however  much too
 great,  and  was  perhaps  an  error  for  175. (On  the form  Lamedui see
 VIII.436.)  In version  c, however,  Aragorn leaves  Erech 'on  the shores
 of  Cobas,  near  the  outflow  of  Morthond',  and  'goes  like  wind  by
 rough  paths  over  Linhir  and  so  to  Fords  of  Lameduin   (about  150
 miles  away)....  He  crosses  Morthond  at  Linhir,  passes  into  Ringlo
 Vale  ...  He  reaches Lameduin.'  As it  stands this  makes no  sense; but
 the  explanation  is  that  his  journey  is described  twice in  the same
 passage.  The  first statement  is comprised  in the  words 'He  goes like
 wind  by  rough  paths over  Linhir, and  so to  Fords of  Lameduin (about
 150  miles  away).'  The  second  statement  is  'He  crosses  Morthond at

                                          
                                                                      
 Linhir, passes into Ringlo Vale  ... He  reaches Lameduin.'  This must
 mean that Linhir is here in  the earlier  position, above  Cobas Haven
 (see VIII.437).                                                       
  It is said in c that the coast road from Erech skirted in a loop 'the
 Hills of Tarnost'. This name is written in pencil against a dot on the
 square Q 12 of the Second Map, at the northern extremity of  the hills
 between the rivers  Lameduin and  Ringlo (see  VIII.434, 437,  where I
 said  that  so far  as I  then knew  the name  Tarnost does  not occur
 elsewhere).                                                           
  Lastly, in the concluding lines of b, which were not overwritten, the
 name Haradrians is given to the Haradwaith.                           

                                       II.                                     
                                                                              
                            THE TOWER OF KIRITH UNGOL.                         
                                                                              
 It  seems  that  my  father  returned  to  the  story  of  Frodo  and  Sam more
 than three years after he had 'got the hero  into such  a fix'  (as he  said in
 a  letter  of  November  1944,  VIII.218)  'that  not  even  an author  will be
 able  to  extricate  him  without  labour  and  difficulty.'  As  one   of  the
 outlines   given   in   the   preceding   chapter   shows,   however,   he  had
 continued  to  give  thought  to  the  question,  and  while  Book V  was still
 in  progress  he  had  discovered  the  essential  element  in Sam's  rescue of
 Frodo:  the   quarrel  of   Shagrat  and   Gorbag  in   the  Tower   of  Kirith
 Ungol,  leading  to  the  mutual  slaughter  of  almost  all  the orcs  both of
 the Tower and of Minas Morgul before Sam arrived (p. 9).                      
  His  first  draft  ('A')  of  the  new chapter  extended as  far as  the point
 where  Sam,  descending  the  path  from  the  Cleft,  sees  the two  orcs shot
 down  as  they  ran  from  the  gateway  of  the  Tower,  and  looking   up  at
 the  masonry of  the walls  on his  left realises  that to  enter in  'the gate
 was  the  only way'  (RK p.  178). In  this draft  the text  of RK  was largely
 achieved,  but not  in all  respects. In  the first  place, the  chapter begins
 thus:  'For  a  while   Sam  stood   stunned  before   the  closed   door.  Far
 within  he  heard  the  sounds of  orc-voices clamouring...'  It is  clear that
 he  was not  physically stunned,  as he  was in  the final  story. On  this see
 pp. 21-2.(1)                                                                     
  Secondly,   when  Sam,   groping  his   way  back   from  the   under-gate  in
 the  tunnel,  wondered  about  his  friends  (RK  p.  173),  'Out in  the world
 it   was  the   dark  before   dawn  on   the  twelfth   of  March   in  Shire-
 reckoning,  the  third  day  since  he  and  Frodo  came  to  the  Cross Roads,
 and  Aragorn  was  drawing  near  to  Anduin  and  the  fleet  of   Umbar,  and
 Merry  was  beginning  the  third  day   of  his   ride  from   Dunharrow,  and
 the  forest  of  Druadan  lay  before  him;  but in  Minas Tirith  Pippin stood
 sleepless  on  the  walls  [?waiting]  for  [the]  Causeway  Forts  had  fallen
 and the enemy was coming.'                                                    
  Thirdly,  the  fortress  of  Kirith  Ungol  was at  first conceived  as rising
 'in  four  great  tier's',  not  three  as  in  RK  (p.  176), and  its strange
 structure,  as  it  were  flowing  down  the  mountain-side,  is   sketched  on
 the  page  of  the  draft  (reproduced  on  p.  19)  beside the  description in
 the  text;  this  description,  originally  in pencil  but overwritten  in ink,
 runs as follows:                                                              
                                                                              
  And in that dreadful light Sam stood aghast;  for now  he could              
 see the Tower of Kirith Ungol in all its strength. The horn that              

 (The Tower of Kirith Ungol.)

                   
                                                                         
  those  could  see  who  came  up  the  pass  from  the  West was  but its
  topmost  turret.  Its  eastern  face stood  up in  four great  tiers from
  a  shelf  in  the  mountain  wall  some  500  feet  below.  Its  back was
  to  the  great  cliff  behind,  and   it  was   built  in   four  pointed
  bastions   of  cunning   masonry,  with   sides  facing   north-east  and
  south-east,  one  above  the  other,  diminishing>   as  they   went  up,
  while  about  the  lowest  tier  was  a  battlemented  wall  enclosing  a
  narrow   courtyard.  Its   gate  open[ed]   on  the   SE  into   a  broad
  road.  The  wall  at  the  [?outward]  ....  was  upon  the  brink  of  a
  precipice.                                                              
     '[The  bottom  one  was  probably  projected  some  50 yards  from the
  cliff, the next 40, the next 30, the top 20 - and on the top [or  tip] of
  it was the turret-tower. Their heights were 50 ft., 40 ft., 30 ft., 20?]
  With  black  blank   eyes  the   windows  stared   over  the   plains  of
  Gorgoroth  and  Lithlad;  some  [?  form(ed)]  a  line of  red-lit holes,
  climbing up. Maybe they marked some stair up to the turret.             
     With   a   sudden  shock   of  perception   Sam  realized   that  this
  stronghold  had  been   built  not   to  keep   people  out   of  Mordor,
  but  to  keep  them  in!  It  was  indeed  in  origin  one  of  the works
  of   Gondor   long   ago:   the  easternmost   outpost  of   the  defence
  of  Ithilien  and  Minas  Ithil,  made  when   after  the   overthrow  of
  Sauron,  in  the  days  of  the  Last  Alliance,  the  Men  of  the  West
  kept  watch  upon  the  evil  land  where  still  his  creatures  lurked.
  But  as  with  the  Towers  of  the  Teeth  that  watch[ed]  over  Kirith
  Gorgor,  Nargos  and ?  [sic](2), so   here  too   the  watch   and  ward
  had   failed   and   treachery   had   yielded  up   the  Tower   to  the
  Ringwraiths.  [?And]  now  for  long  it  had   been  occupied   by  evil
  things.   And  since   his  return   to  Mordor   Sauron  had   found  it
  useful.                                                                 
                                                                         
     The pencilled passage that follows the end of  the overwriting  in ink
  reads as follows:                                                       
                                                                         
  ...  keep  watch   upon  the   evil  land   where  still   his  creatures
  lurked.  But  as  with  the  Towers  of  the  Teeth  upon  Kirith Gorgor,
  so  here  the  watch  and  ward  had  failed  and  treachery  had yielded
  up  the  Tower.  But  Sauron  too  had  found  it  useful.  For   he  had
  few  servants  and  many  slaves.  Still  its  purpose was  as of  old to
  keep people in.                                                         
     Sam   looked   and   he  saw   how  the   tower  commanded   the  main
  road  from  the   pass  behind;   the  road   he  was   on  was   only  a
  narrow   way   that   went   corkscrewing   down   into    the   darkness
  and seemed to join a broad way from the gate to the road.               

        
                                                                          
  This  page  was  removed from  the original  draft text  A on  account of
 the illustration (the only one that my father  ever made  of the  Tower of
 Kirith  Ungol),  which  was  squared  off  with  rough  lines,  and placed
 with the second fair copy manuscript  (E), although  by then  the fortress
 was built in three tiers not four.                                        
                                                                          
  This original draft continues on  to its  end thus,  and in  this appears
 the most important difference from the story of RK (pp. 176-8):           
                                                                          
  There  was  no  doubt  of  the  path  he  must  take,  but   the  longer
 he  looked  the  less  he  liked  it.  He  put  on  the  Ring  again  and
 began  to  go  down.  Now  he  could  hear  the   cries  and   sounds  of
 fighting   again.   He   was  about   halfway  down   when  out   of  the
 dark  gate  into  the  red  glow   came  two   orcs  running.   They  did
 not  turn  his  way  but  were  making  for  the  main  road,  when  they
 fell  and  lay  still.  Apparently  they  had  been  shot down  by others
 from  the  wall  of  the  lower  course  or  from   the  shadow   of  the
 gate.(3) After  that  no  more  came  out.  Sam  went   on.  He   came  now
 [to]   the   point  where   [the]  descending   path  hugged   the  lower
 wall  of  the  tower  as  it  stood  out  from  the  rock  behind.  There
 was  a  narrow  angle  there.  He  stopped  again,  glad  of  the excuse;
 but   he   soon   saw  that   there  was   no  way   in.  There   was  no
 purchase  in  the  smooth  rock  or  [?  jointed]  masonry  and  100 feet
 above the wall hung beetling out. The gate was the only way.              
                                                                          
  Here the first draft stops. Thus  the entire  passage in  RK (p.  177) in
 which Sam is tempted to put  on the  Ring and  claim it  for his  own, his
 mind filling with  grandiose fantasies  (deriving from  those of  Frodo on
 Mount Doom in outlines I and II, pp. 5 - 6), is lacking; but at  the point
 where  the  draft  ends my  father wrote  (dearly at  the same  time): Sam
 must  not  wear  Ring. No  doubt it  was this  perception that  caused him
 to abandon this text.                                                     
  He  began  at  once  on  a  second  draft,  'B', for  most of  its length
 written legibly in ink, with  the number 'LII'(4) and  the title  'The Tower
 of Kirith Ungol'. This opened in the same  way as  did A  (p. 18):  'For a
 while  Sam  stood  stunned  before the  closed door.  Far within  he heard
 the sounds of  orc-voices clamouring...'  In the  fair copy  manuscript of
 'The  Choices  of  Master  Samwise'  it  had  been  said   (following  the
 original draft) that 'Sam hurled himself against it, and fell', changed in
 pencil to 'Sam hurled himself against the bolted plates,  and fell  to the
 ground.' This was repeated in the first typescript  of that  chapter; only
 in  the  second  typescript  was  the  word  'senseless'  introduced.  The
 explanation of this  is that  while writing  the present  draft B  of 'The
 Tower  of  Kirith  Ungol'  my  father  was  struck by  a thought  which he
 noted in the margin of the page, telling himself that he 'must  leave time
 for Frodo  to recover  and to  fight'(5) and  that in  order to  achieve this

                                         
                                                                        
 'Sam must swoon outside the undergate.' It  was no  doubt at  this time
 that he changed the opening of B:                                       
                                                                        
   For  a  while  Sam  stood dumb  before the  closed door.  Then desperate
   and  mad  he  charged  at  the  brazen  door,  and  fell  back  stunned;
   down  into  darkness  he sank.  How long  it lasted  he could  not tell;
   but when he came to himself still all was dark.                       
                                                                        
   Against the passage in the draft A  referring to  other events  in the
 world at that hour  (p. 18)  my father  noted: 'Make  Frodo and  Sam one
 day  more  in  Ephelduath.  So  Frodo  is  captured  night  of  12, when
 Merry was in  Druadan Forest  and Faramir  lay in  fever and  Pippin was
 with the Lord,  but Aragorn  was manning  his fleet.'  In B  the passage
 now becomes:                                                            
                                                                        
   Out  westward  in  the  world  it  was  deep night  upon the  twelfth of
   March  by   Shire-reckoning,  three   days  since   he  and   Frodo  had
   passed  the  peril  of  Minas  Morgul;  and  now  Aragorn   was  manning
   the  black  fleet  on Anduin,  and Merry  in the  Forest of  Druadan was
   listening  to  the  Wild  Man,  while  in Minas  Tirith the  flames were
   roaring  and  [the  great  assault  upon  the  Gates  had  begun  >] the
   Lord sat beside the bed of Faramir in the White Tower.                
                                                                        
 Against  'March'  in  this passage  my father  scribbled in  the margin:
 'Make Hobbit names of months.'                                          
   At  the  point where  Sam at  the crest  of the  pass looked  out over
 Mordor to Orodruin ('the light of it  ... now  glared against  the stark
 rock faces, so that they seemed to be drenched with  blood', RK  p. 176)
 my father halted briefly and wrote the following note across the page:
                                                                        
   Change in the Ring as  it comes  in sight  of the  furnace where  it was
   made.  Sam  feels  large  - and  naked. He  knows that  he must  not use
   the Ring or challenge the Eye; and  he knows  he is  not big  enough for
   that.  The  Ring  is  to  be  a desperate  burden and  no help  from now
   onwards.                                                              
                                                                        
   The Tower of Kirith Ungol is still built in four tiers, not three, and
 the note concerning  the dimensions  of the  bastions was  retained (see
 p. 20), though the dimensions were changed:                             
                                                                        
   [The  bottom  tier  projected  some  40  yards  from the  nearly perpen-
   dicular cliff, the second 30, the third  20, the  topmost 10;  and their
   height diminished similarly, 80 ft.,  70 ft.,  60 ft.,  40 ft.,  and the
   topmost turret some 50 ft. above the top of.... mountain wall.]       
                                                                        
   The road from Minas Morgul over  the Pass  of Morgul  is said  here to
 pass 'through a jagged cleft in the inner ridge out  into the  valley of
 Gorgor  on  its way  to the  Dark Tower';  the name  Morgai had  not yet
 been  devised  (cf.  RK  p.  176).  Gorgor  was  changed,  probably  im-

         
                                                                       
 mediately, to Gorgoroth (cf. VIII.256).  The Towers  of the  Teeth were
 at first not named in this text, but Narchost  and Carchost  was added.
 in subsequently.                                                       
  Following the note on the subject of the Ring  just given,  this draft
 now  effectively  reaches  the  text  of  RK  in  the account  of Sam's
 temptation and his refusal of it,  as far  as the  point where  A ended
 ('The gate was the only way',  RK p.  178). From  this point  B becomes
 rough and is partly in outline form.                                   
                                                                       
 Sam  wonders  how   many  orcs   lived  in   the  Tower   with  Shagrat
 and   how   many   men   Gorbag   had   [marginal   note:   Make   Gor-
 bag's   men   more   numerous  in   last  chapter   of  Book IV](6) and
 what  all  the  fighting was  about. 'Now  for it!'  he cried.  He drew
 Sting and ran  towards the  open gate  - only  to feel  a shock,  as if
 he  had  run  into  some  web  like  Shelob's  but invisible.  He could
 see  no  obstacle,   but  something   too  strong   for  his   will  to
 overcome  barred  the  way.  Then  just  inside  the  gate  he  saw the
 Two  Watchers.  They  were  as  far  as  he  could  see  in  the  gloom
 like  great  figures  sitting  on  chairs, each  had three  bodies, and
 three   heads,   and  their   legs  facing   inward  and   outward  and
 across  the  gateway.  Their  heads  were  like  vulture-faces,  and on
 their   knees   were  laid clawlike hands.(7) They  were   carved  of
 black  stone,  it  seemed,  moveless,  and  yet  they were  aware; some
 dreadful  spirit  of  evil  vigilance  dwelt  in  them.  They  knew  an
 enemy,   and   forbade   his   entry   (or  escape).   Greatly  daring,
 because  there  was  now  nothing  else  to  do,   Sam  drew   out  the
 phial  of  Galadriel. He  seemed to  see a  glitter in  the jet-wrought
 eyes  of  the  Watchers,  but  slowly  he  felt  their  opposition melt
 into fear. He  sprang through,  but even  as he  did so,  as if  it was
 some  signal  given  by  the  Watchers, far  up in  the Tower  he heard
 a shrill cry.                                                          
                                                                       
  In  RK  (p.  179), even  as Sam  sprang through  the gateway,  'he was
 aware, as plainly as if a bar of steel had snapped to behind  him, that
 their vigilance was renewed.  And from  those evil  heads there  came a
 high shrill cry that echoed in the  towering walls  before him.  Far up
 above, like an answering signal, a harsh bell clanged a single stroke.'
 In the margin of the present text, against the foregoing passage,  is a
 note:  'Or  make Watchers  close with  a snap.  Sam is  in a  trap once
 more.'                                                                 
                                                                       
  The courtyard was full of slain orcs. Some lay here and there,        
 hewn down or shot, but many lay still grappling one another, as        
 they  throttled  or  stabbed  their  opponents.  Two  archers  right in

                                    
                                                                         
 the  gateway  -  probably  those   who  shot   down  the   escaping  orcs
 -  lay  pierced  from  behind  with  spears.  [Sting,  Sam  noticed,  was
 only shining faintly.]                                                   
   Sam  rushed  across  the  court,  and  to  his  relief  found  the door
 at  the  base  of  the   Tower  ajar.   He  met   no  one.   Torches  are
 flaring  in  brackets.  A  stair,  opening  on  right,  goes up.  He runs
 up it, and so out into the narrow yard before the second door.           
 'Well!' he said to himself, his spirits rising a little, 'Well!  It looks
 as  if  Shagrat  or  Gorbag  was  on  my  side  and has  done my  job for
 me.  There's  nobody  left  alive!'And  with  that  he  halted,  suddenly
 realizing  the  full  meaning  of  what  he  had  said:  nobody  was left
 alive.  'Frodo!  Frodo!' he  called, forgetful  of all  else, and  ran to
 the second door. An orc leaps out at him [in margin: Two orcs].          
   Sam  kills  the  [>  one]  orc  and  the  other  runs  off  yelling for
 Shagrat.  Sam  climbs  warily.  The  stair  now  rises  at  the  back  of
 the  entrance  passage,  and  climbs   right  up   to  the   Turret  (the
 Brazen  Gate  enters  about  on  a  level   with  the   courtyard?).  Sam
 hears  voices,  and  stalks  them.  The  orc  is  pattering  away  up the
 stairs.  'Shagrat!'  he  calls.  'Here  he  is,   the  other   spy.'  Sam
 follows.  He  overhears  the  orc  reporting   to  Shagrat.   Shagrat  is
 lying  wounded  by   dead  body   of  Gorbag.   All  Gorbag's   men  have
 been killed, but they have killed all Shagrat's but these two.           
                                                                         
   An isolated slip of paper seems very likely to  be the  continuation of
 this outline, and the first sketching of the new story of the escape from
 the  Tower.  The  writing  declines towards  the end  into such  a scrawl
 that many words and phrases are impossible to make out.                  
                                                                         
   Shagrat  has  in  vain  tried  to  get   messages  away   to  Baraddur.
 The   Quarrel   arose   about   the   treasures.   Gorbag   coveted   the
 mithril  coat,  but  pretended  that  they  must  search for  the missing
 spy   first.   He  sent   his  men   to  capture   wall  and   gate,  and
 demanded   mithril   coat.   But   Shagrat   won't   agree.   Frodo   was
 thrust   in   chamber  of   turret  and   stripped.  Shagrat   gives  him
 some  medicine  and  begins   to  question   him.  Shagrat   puts  things
 together  to  send  to   Baraddur  (Lugburz).   Gorbag  tries   to  fight
 way in and slay Frodo.                                                   
   Gorbag and Shagrat fight.                                              
   When  Shagrat  hears  news  (although  orc  says   the  other   spy  is
 not  a  large  warrior)  he  is   frightened,  as   he  is   wounded.  He
 makes  the  treasures  into  a  bundle and  tries to  creep off.  He must
 get  to  Lugburz.  So  when  Sam  leaps  out   with  phial   and  shining
 sword  he  flees.  Sam  pursues;  but  gives  up  for  he  [?hears] Frodo

 [?crying].  He  sees  Shagrat  far  below  rushing  out  of gate  - and
 does  not  at  first  realize  the  misfortune   of  news   getting  to
 Lugburz.  The  orc  left  behind  is  tormenting  Frodo. Sam  rushes in
 and slays him.                                                         
   Scene of yielding up Ring. Frodo has lost his cloak and ....(8)         
 He  has  to  dress  in  the orc's  clothes [or  in orcs'  clothes]. Sam
 does  likewise  but  keeps  cloak   and  Sting.   Frodo  has   to  have
 orc-weapons.  The  sword  is  gone.(9) He  tells  Sam  about  the  fight.
 They make their plans.                                                 
   The  opposition  of  the  Watchers.  The  Tower  seems full  of evil.
 Cry  goes  up  as  they  escape.  And as  if in  answer a  Nazgul comes
 dropping down  out of  the black  sky, [?shining  .... ?with]  a fell
 red,  and  perches  on  the   wall.  Meanwhile   they  dash   down  the
 road, and  as soon  as they  can leave  it and  climb into  the shelter
 of the rocks near bottom of trough. They wonder what to do.            
   Food.(10) Drink. They  had   found  Frodo's   sack  and   .....  [?in
 corner]   rummaged   -   but   orcs  would   not  touch   lembas.  They
 gathered  up  what  was  left  of  it, in  broken fragments.  Orcs must
 drink. [?They see]  [a] well  in the  courtyard. Sam  tastes it  - says
 Frodo  not  to  risk  it.  It seems  all right.  They fill  their water
 bottles.  It  is  now  13th  of  March,  make  it  14th?  They reckoned
 they   have   [?enough]  for   about  a   week  with   care  or   at  a
 desperate pinch ten days. How far is it.                               
   They  climb  to  lower ridge  and find  they dare  not go  across the
 plain at that point - where it is broad and full of enemies.           
   The  Nazgul  [?explores]   Tower  and   sees  there   is  [??trouble]
 and flies off. Frodo  thinks it  best to  go north  to where  the plain
 narrows  -  he  had  seen  sketch  of  Mordor   in  Elrond's   house  -
 and   away  from   Kirith  Ungol   to  which   [??  attention   is  now
 directed].   He   bemoans  fact   that  Shagrat   had  got   away  with
 tokens.                                                                
   Chapter  ends  with  the  Nazgul  shining  red  circling  over  Tower
 [??and  he cries  as] .....  of orcs  begin to  search the  [?pass] and
 the road and lands about.                                              
                                                                       
   I believe that at this stage my father began  the chapter  again, and
 this was the first completed  manuscript ('D').  It was  numbered 'LII'
 but given a new  title 'The  Orc-tower'; the  number was  later changed
 to 'L' (which  I cannot  explain) and  the title  'The Tower  of Kirith
 Ungol' (which it had borne in the draft B) restored.                   
   New initial drafting begins at the point where Sam enters the gate of
 the Tower, but up to this point the final text was  now written  out on
 the  basis  of  the  drafts A  and B  described above,  in a  form only

  differing  in  a  few  minor  points  from  that  in   RK.  The   chapter  now
  opens  exactly  as  it  does  in  the  published  work  (see  p. 22),  and Sam
  now  has  to  climb  back  over  the stone  door leading  into the  passage to
  the under-gate, since  he still  cannot find  the catch  (note 1).  The events
  'out  westward  in  the  world'  are  described  in  the same  words as  in RK
  (with  the  addition,  after  'Pippin  watched  the  madness  growing  in  the
  eyes  of  Denethor',  of  'and  Gandalf  laboured in  the last  defence'); but
  the  date  ('noon  upon  the  fourteenth  day   of  March'   in  RK)   is  now
  'morning   upon   the   thirteenth   day   of   March'.   The    name   Morgai
  appears  as  an  early  addition  to  the  text  (p.  22).  The Tower  now has
  three  tiers,  and  the  note  about  the  dimensions  of the  bastions, still
  present  (see  pp.  20,  22),  was  accommodated  to   this:  the   tiers  now
  projected 40,  30 and  20 yards  from the  cliff, and  their heights  were 80,
  70, and 60 feet,  changed at  the time  of writing  to 100,  75, and  50 feet.
  'The  top  was  25  feet  above  Sam,  and  above  it  was   the  horn-turret,
  another 50 feet.'(11)                                                         
    From  '"That's  done  it!"  said  Sam.  "Now   I've  rung   the  front-door
  bell!"' a draft text ('C') takes up. This is written in a script so difficult
  that  a  good  deal  of  it  would be  barely comprehensible  had it  not been
  closely  followed  in  the  fair  copy D.(12) The final  story was  now reached,
  and there is little to record of these texts.  At the  point in  the narrative
  where  Sam  climbed  up  to  the  roof  of  the  third  (topmost) tier  of the
  Tower  there  is  a  little  diagram  in  D  showing  the  form  of  the  open
  space  (not  clearly  seen  in  the  drawing reproduced  on p.  19): rectangu-
  lar  at the  base but  with the  sides drawing  together to  a point  (cf. the
  'pointed  bastions'  referred  to in  the description  of the  Tower), roughly
  in  the  shape  of  a  haystack.  To  the  statement  that  the  stairhead was
  'covered  by  a  small  domed  chamber  in  the  midst of  the roof,  with low
  doors  facing  east  and  west'  D  adds  'Both were  open': this  was omitted
  in  the  second  manuscript  ('E'),  perhaps  inadvertently.  The name  of the
  sole  surviving  orc  beside  Shagrat  is  Radbug in  both C  and D  (Snaga in
  RK;  see  LR  Appendix  F,  p.  409),  Radbug  being  retained  in  the  final
  story  as  the  name  of  an  orc  whose  eyes  Shagrat   says  that   he  had
  squeezed  out  (RK  p.  182);  in  C  the  orcs  whom  Sam  saw  running  from
  the   gate   and   shot  down   as  they   fled  are   Lughorn  and   Ghash  >
  Mazgash  (Lagduf  and  Muzgash  in   D,  as   in  RK).   Where  in   RK  Snaga
  declares  that  'the  great  fighter'  (Sam)  is  'one of  those bloody-handed
  Elves, or one of the filthy  tarks', and  that his  getting past  the Watchers
  is 'tark's work',(13) C has 'that's  Elvish work'; D has  'one of  these filthy
  wizards  maybe'  and  'that's  wizard's  work'  ('wizard'  being   changed  in
  pencil to 'tark', which appears in the second manuscript E as written).       
    Only  in  one  point  does  the story  as told  in the  draft C  differ from
  that  in  D.  When  Gorbag  rouses  himself  from  among  the  corpses  on the
  roof Sam sees in the latter, as in RK (p.  183), that  he has  in his  hand 'a
  broad-headed  spear  with  a  short  broken  haft';  in  C  on the  other hand
  he  has  'a  red  [?and  shining]  sword.  It was  his own  sword, the  one he

              
                                                                       
 left by Frodo.' With this cf. text B (p. 25 and note 9): 'Frodo  has to
 have orc-weapons. The sword is gone.'                                  
  Sam's  sony  as  he  sat  on  the  stair in  the horn-turret  was much
 worked on.(14) I give it here in the form that it has  in D,  which was
 preceded by rougher but closely similar versions.                      
                                                                       
         I sit upon the stones alone;                                   
            the fire is burning red,                                   
         the tower is tall, the mountains dark;                        
            all living things are dead.                                 
         In western lands the sun may shine,                            
            there flower and tree in spring                           
         is opening, is blossoming;                                     
            and there the finches sing.                                  
                                                                       
         But here I sit alone and think                                 
          of days when grass u as green,                                
         and earth was brown, and I was young:                          
          they might have never been.                                   
         For they are past, for ever lost,                              
          and here the shadows lie                                      
         deep upon my heavy heart,                                      
          and hope and daylight die.                                    
                                                                       
         But still I sit and think of you;                              
          I see you far away                                            
         Walking down the homely roads                                  
          on a bright and windy day.                                    
         It was merry then when I could run                           
          to answer to your call,                                       
         could hear your voice or take your hand;                       
          but now the night must fall.                                 
         And now beyond the world I sit,                                
          and know not where you lie!                                   
         O master dear, will you not hear                              
          my voice before we die?                                       
                                                                       
 The second verse was altered on the manuscript:                        
                                                                       
         For they are gone, for ever lost,                              
          and buried here I lie                                         
         and deep beneath the shadows sink                              
          where hope and daylight die.                                  
                                                                       
 At the same time the last two lines of the song became:                
                                                                       
          0 Master, will you hear my voice                              
          and answer ere we die?                                        

                                                        
                                                                              
   In  this  form  the  song appears  in the  second manuscript  E. At  a later
   stage  it  was  rewritten  on   this  manuscript   to  become   virtually  a
   different  song, but  still retaining  almost unchanged  the second  half of
   the original first verse, which now became the opening lines:                
                                                                              
                    In western lands the Sun may shine;                        
                        there flower and tree in Spring                      
                    are opening, are blossoming,                               
                        and there the finches sing.                             
                                                                              
   Further  correction  of  these lines  on the  manuscript produced  the final
   form (RK p. 185).                                                           
                                                                              
         A  last  point  concerns the  ladder: 'Suddenly  the answer  dawned on
   Sam:  the  topmost  chamber  was  reached  by  a  trap-door  in the  roof of
   the  passage',  RK p.  185. In  my account  of the  fair copy  manuscript of
   'The  Choices  of  Master  Samwise'  I  did  not  describe a  development in
   the  last  words  of  Shagrat  and  Gorbag  that  Sam overheard  before they
   passed  through  the  under-gate  of  the Tower  (TT p.  351). In  the draft
   text, only Shagrat speaks:                                                  
                                                                              
          'Yes,  up  to  the top  chamber,' Shagrat  was saying,  'right at  the top.
         No   way   down   but   by   the   narrow   stair  from,the   Look-out  Room
         below. He'll be safe there.'                                          
                                                                              
   In the fair copy this  was retained,  but Shagrat  begins 'Yes,  that'll do'
   (as  if  the  suggestion  had  come  from  Gorbag),  and  'the  ladder'  was
   substituted for 'the narrow stair'. It is thus seen that this element in the
   story  was  already  present  when  Book  IV  was  completed.   The  further
   development  in  the  conversation  of  the  orcs,  in  which  Gorbag argues
   against  Shagrat's proposal,  and Shagrat  declares that  he does  not trust
   all  of  his  own  'lads',  nor  any  of Gorbag's,  nor Gorbag  himself (and
   does  not  mention  that  the  topmost  chamber  was  reached   by  ladder),
   was  added  to  the  first  typescript  of 'The  Choices of  Master Samwise'
   at this time, as is seen from the fact that rough drafting  for it  is found
   on  a  page  carrying  drafts  for  passages  for  'The  Land   of  Shadow'.
   Curiously,  my  father  wrote  at  the head  of this:  'No way  up but  by a
   ladder, as if this idea had only now emerged.(15)                           
                                                                              
                                      NOTES.                                   
                                                                              
   1.     When Sam came back to  the stone  door of  the orc-passage  'on the
          inner side he found the catch' (whereas in  RK he  could not  find it
          and had to climb over). This was retained in the second draft B.     
   2.     For earlier names of the Towers of the Teeth see  the Index  to The
          War  of  the  Ring,  entries  Naglath  Morn,  Nelig  Myrn.  The  name
          Nargos  here  is a  reversion to  one of  the original  names (Gorgos
          and  Nargos)  of  the  towers  guarding Kirith  Ungol, when  that was

           
                                                                         
     still  the  name  of  the  chief  pass  into  Mordor: see  VII.344 and
     note 41.                                                             
  3. These  two  orcs,  who  survived  into  the final  text (RK  p. 178),
     originally  appeared  in  outline  IV  (p. 9)  as messengers  sent to
     Barad-dur. At that time  there was  no suggestion  that they  did not
     make good their errand.                                              
  4. At  this  stage,  presumably,  'The  Pyre   of  Denethor'   and  'The
     Houses  of  Healing'  constituted  the  two  parts  of  Chapter  XLIX
     (VIII.386),  while  the  remainder of  Book V  was divided  between L
     and  LI  (the  fair  copy  manuscript  of 'The  Black Gate  Opens' is
     numbered LI).                                                        
  5. In the event, of course, Frodo did not  fight, and  no draft  of this
     period suggests that he did. Possibly  at this  stage, before  he had
     come to write the new story  of the  rescue of  Frodo, my  father was
     still thinking in terms of the original plot  in 'The  Story Foreseen
     from Lorien', when Frodo was more active (VII.335 ff.).              
  6. In  the  fair  copy  manuscript  of 'The  Choices of  Master Samwise'
     Sam  asked  himself:  'How   many  are   there?  Thirty,   forty,  or
     more?' The change to 'Thirty of forty  from the  tower at  least, and
     a  lot  more than  that from  down below,  I guess'  (TT p.  344) was
     made on the first typescript of the chapter. - In  outline IV  (p. 9)
     the orcs of the Tower are the more numerous.                         
  7. Cf. the original conception  of the  Sentinels guarding  the entrance
     to  Minas  Morgul  in  'The  Story  Foreseen  from   Lorien'  written
     years  before (VII.340  - 1):  'It was  as if  some will  denying the
     passage was drawn like invisible ropes across his  path. He  felt the
     pressure  of  unseen  eyes....  The  Sentinels  sat  there:  dark and
     still. They did not move their  clawlike hands  laid on  their knees,
     they  did  not  move  their shrouded  heads in  which no  faces could
     be seen ...' See  also the  diagrammatic sketch  of the  Sentinels in
     VII.348.                                                             
  8. The illegible word might possibly be jewel (i.e.  the brooch  of his
     elven-cloak).                                                        
  9. The  sword  is  gone:  this  is  Sam's  sword from  the Barrow-downs;
     cf. 'The Choices of  Master Samwise'  (TT p.  340): '  "If I'm  to go
     on,"  he  said,  "then I  must take  your sword,  by your  leave, Mr.
     Frodo, but I'll put this one to lie by you, as it lay by the old king
     in the barrow..." ' See pp. 26 - 7.                                  
 10. This  passage  concerning  their  provision  of  food  and  water  is
     marked  to  stand  earlier  -  no  doubt after  the words  'They make
     their plans'. The illegible  words in  the sentence  following 'Food.
     Drink.' could conceivably  be read  as stick  thrust, i.e.  'They had
     found Frodo's sack and stick thrust in corner, rummaged.'            
 11. A  few  other  differences of  detail are  worth recording.  Where in
     RK  (p.  176)  the  text reads:  'not even  the black  shadows, lying
     deep  where  the  red  glow could  not reach,  would shield  him long

                    
                                                                         
      from  the  night-eyed  orcs' D  continues: 'that  were moving  to and
      fro.'. This was  taken up  from the  draft B,  and remained  into the
      second  manuscript  of  the  chapter  (E),  where  it was  removed. -
      Sam's rejection of the temptation to claim  the Ring  as his  own was
      expressed thus:  'The one  small garden  of a  free gardener  was all
      his need and due,  not a  garden swollen  to a  realm; his  own hands
      to command,  not the  hands of  others. Service  given with  love was
      his  nature,  not to  command service,  whether by  fear or  in proud
      benevolence.' -  After the  words 'He  was not  really in  any doubt'
      (RK p. 177) there follows in D:  'but he  was lonely  and he  was not
      used to it, or to acting on his own.' To this my  father subsequently
      added, before striking it all out, 'Since  no one  else was  there he
      had to talk to himself.'                                            
  12. Some  passages  are  absent  from  the  draft  C,  but  not  I  think
      because pages are lost: rather D becomes  here the  initial narrative
      composition.  Thus  the  passage  in  RK  p.  181  from  'Up,  up  he
      went' to ' "Curse you, Snaga, you  little maggot"  ' is  missing; and
      here  the  D  text becomes  notably rougher  and full  of corrections
      in  the  act  of  writing.  The  very  rough draft  C stops  near the
      beginning   of  Sam's   conversation  with   Frodo  in   the  topmost
      chamber (RK  p. 187),  and from  that point  there are  only isolated
      passages  of  drafting  extant;  but the  latter part  of D  was much
      corrected in the  act of  writing, and  was probably  now to  a large
      extent the primary composition.                                     
  13. Cf.  LR Appendix  F (RK  p. 409):  in Orkish  Westron 'tark,  "man of
      Gondor",  was  a  debased  form  of  tarkil,  a  Quenya word  used in
      Westron for one of Numenorean descent'.                             
  14. For my father's original ideas  for the  song that  Sam sang  in this
      predicament see VII.333.                                            
  15. When  Frodo  and  Sam  passed  out  through  the  gate  of  the Tower
      Frodo  cried: Alla  elenion ancalima!  Alla was  not changed  to Aiya
      until the book was in type (cf. VIII.223, note 29).                 

                                    III.                                 
                                                                        
                            THE LAND OF SHADOW.                          
                                                                        
 It seems plain that 'The Land of Shadow'  was achieved  swiftly and  in a
 single burst of writing;  the draft  material (here  compendiously called
 'A')  consists  largely  of  very  roughly  written  passages immediately
 transferred to and developed  in the  first continuous  manuscript ('B'),
 which  was  given  the number  'LIII' (see  p. 25)  and the  title 'Mount
 Doom',  subsequently  changed  to  'The Land  of Shadow'.  Only in  a few
 passages  did  my  father  go  momentarily down  an unsuccessful  turn in
 the story.                                                              
  The first of  these concerns  the overhearing  by Sam  and Frodo  of the
 conversation  of  orcs in  the valley  beneath the  Morgai, which  was at
 first conceived very differently from the story in RK (pp. 202 -  3). The
 draft text A is here, as throughout, exceedingly difficult to read.     
                                                                        
 Presently  [three  >]  two  orcs  came  into  view.  They  were  in black
 without   tokens   and   were   armed   with   bows,   a   small   breed,
 black-skinned  with  wide  snuffling  nostrils,  evidently   trackers  of
 some   kind........   they   were  talking   in  some   hideous  unintel-
 ligible  speech;  but  as   they  passed   snuffling  among   the  stones
 scarcely  20  yards  from  where  the  hobbits  lurked  Frodo   saw  that
 one  was  carrying  on  his  arm  a  black mail-shirt  very like  the one
 that  he  had  abandoned.  He sniffed  it as  [he] went  as if  to recall
 its  scent.  All  at  once  lifting his  head he  let out  a cry.  It was
 answered,  and  from  the   other  direction   (from  Kirith   Ungol  now
 some  miles  behind)  ...  large  fighting  orcs  came  up  with  shields
 ....... [?painted] with the Eye.                                        
  A  [?   babble]  of   talk  in   the  common   tongue  now   broke  out.
 'Nar,'  said  the  tracker,  'not  a  trace  further  along. Nor  o' this
 smell,   but   we're  not   [?easy].  Somebody   that  has   no  business
 here  has  been  about.  Different  smell,  but a  bad smell:  we've lost
 that too, it went up into the mountains.'                               
  'A  lot  of  use you  little snufflers  are,' grunted  a bigger  orc. 'I
 reckon  eyes  are  better  than   your  snotty   noses.  Have   you  seen
 anything?'                                                             
  'What's to look for?' grunted the tracker.                             
                                                                        
  Amid  much  further  orcish  dissension in  confused drafting  the final
 story emerges, with  two orcs  only, a  soldier and  a small  tracker: my

                         
                                                                          
  father  had  some  trouble  in deciding  which offensive  remark belonged
  to which speaker.                                                        
                                                                          
     Drafting for  the passage  in which  Sam described  to Frodo  all that
  had happened (RK p. 204) runs thus:                                      
                                                                          
     When  he  had  finished  Frodo  said  nothing   for  some   time,  but
  took  Sam's  hand  and  pressed  it. At  length he  stirred. 'So  this is
  what  comes  of  eavesdropping,  Sam,'   he  said.   'But  I   wonder  if
  you'll  ever  get  back.  Perhaps  it  would  have  been  safer  to  have
  been  turned  into  a  toad   as  Gandalf   threatened.  Do   you  remem-
  ber  that  day,  Sam,'  he  said,  'and  clipping  the  edges  under  the
  window?'                                                                 
     'I  do,  Mr.  Frodo.  And I  bet things  are in  [a] nasty  mess there
  now   with   [?that]    Lobelia   and    her   Cosimo,(1)  begging   your
  pardon. There'll be trouble if ever we get back.'                        
     'I  shouldn't  worry  about  that   if  I   were  you,'   said  Frodo.
  'We've  got  to  go  on  again  now.  East,  East,   Sam,  not   West.  I
  wonder  how  long  it  will  be  before  we  are  caught  and   all  this
  slinking and toiling will be over?'                                      
                                                                          
     It is curious that Sam, speaking darkly of the state of affairs in the
  Shire,  should  ascribe it  to Lobelia  and Cosimo  Sackville-Baggins. In
  the  original  sketch  of  the  Mirror  of Lothlorien,  when it  was King
  Galdaran's  Mirror, and  when it  was Frodo  who saw  the visions  of the
  Shire,  he  was  to see  'Cosimo Sackville-Baggins  very rich,  buying up
  land'; but there is no mention of Cosimo  in the  first narrative  of the
  scene (VII.249, 253).                                                    
     Frodo's entrusting of Sting and the Phial of Galadriel to  Sam entered
  in the first manuscript (B) in this form:                                
                                                                          
     'You  must  keep  the  Lady's  gift  for  me,  Sam,'  he  said,  'I've
  nowhere  to  store  it  now,  except  in  my  hand,  and  I need  both in
  the  dark.  And  you  must  keep  Sting  too,  since  I  have  lost  your
  sword. I have got  an orc-blade,  but I  do not  think it  is my  part to
  strike any blows again.'                                                 
                                                                          
     It was at  this time,  as it  appears, that  my father  came to  a new
  perception of the  lands in  the north-western  extremity of  Mordor, and
  saw  that  the  vale  behind  the  Morannon  was   closed  also   at  the
  southward  end  by  great  spurs  that  thrust out  from Ephel  Duath and
  Ered Lithui. As first written in B,  Frodo told  Sam this  concerning his
  knowledge of Mordor (cf. RK p. 204):                                     
                                                                          
     'No  very  clear  notion,  Sam,'  said Frodo.  'In Rivendell  before I
  set  out  I  saw  old  maps  made   before  the   Dark  Lord   came  back

                    
                                                                         
 here,  and  I  remember  them  vaguely.  I  had  a  little   secret  plan
 with  names  and  distances:  it  was   given  to   me  by   Elrond,  but
 that  has  gone with  all my  other things.  I think  it was  ten leagues
 or  even  a  dozen  from  the  Bridge  to  the  Narrows,  a  point  where
 the  western  and  northern  ranges  send  out  spurs  and  make  a  sort
 of  gate  to  the  deep  valley  that  lies  behind  the   Morannon.  The
 Mountain  stands  out  alone  on  the  plain,  but  nearer  the  northern
 range.  Nearly fifty   miles  I   think  from   the  Narrows,   more,  of
 course,  if  we  have  to  keep to  the edge  of the  hills on  the other
 side.'                                                                   
                                                                         
  In a revised  version of  this Frodo  says: 'I  guess, not  counting our
 wasted  climb,  we've  done  say [twenty  miles >]  six or  seven leagues
 north  from  the  Bridge  since we  started.' The  final version  in this
 manuscript gives seven leagues as the distance they have  traversed, 'ten
 leagues or  so' from  the Bridge  to the  meeting of  the mountain-spurs,
 and still fifty miles from  there to  Mount Doom.  In RK  these distances
 are twelve leagues, not seven; twenty leagues, not ten; and  sixty miles,
 not fifty: see further the Note on Geography at the end of this chapter.
  When  Frodo  and  Sam  at last  set eyes  on the  north-western confines
 of  Mordor  as  seen  from  the  south  (RK  p.  205) the  names Durthang
 and Carach Angren 'the Iron Jaws' appear in the  original draft,  but the
 valley  behind  Carach  Angren  is  named  the Narch.(2) The draft  text is
 here  partly  illegible,  but  enough  can  be  read  to  show  that  the
 landscape was perfectly clear to my father's eyes as  soon as  he reached
 this point in the narrative. In the B text  the name  Isenmouthe appears,
 though the valley behind is still called the deep dark valley of Narch.'(3)
                                                                         
  A notable feature in the original draft of the story is that there is no
 mention  of  Gollum  (see  RK  p. 206).  While Frodo  slept Sam  went off
 by himself and found water, as in  RK, but  then 'the  rest of  that grey
 day  passed  without  incident.  Frodo  slept for  [?hours]. Sam  did not
 wake  him,  but  trusting  once  more to  "luck" slept  for a  long while
 beside him.' Gollum enters in the B text in these words:                 
                                                                         
  At  that  moment  he  thought  he   caught  a   glimpse  of   a  black
 form  or  shadow  flitting  among  the  stones  above, near  to Frodo's
 hiding.  He  was  almost  back  to  his  master  before  he  was  sure.
 There  was  Gollum   indeed!  If   his  will   could  have   given  him
 strength  for  a  great  bound  Sam  would  have  sprung   straight  on
 his  enemy's  back;  but  at  that  moment   Gollum  became   aware  of
 him  and  looked  back.  Sam  had  a  quick  glimpse  of two  pale eyes
 now   filled   with  a   mad  malevolent   light,  and   then  Gollum,
 jumping  from  rock  to  rock with  great agility,  fled away  onto the
 ridge and vanished over its crest.                                       

                                          
                                                                                    
      The end of the chapter, the story of Frodo and Sam being forced to             
  join  the  orc+and  coming down  from Durthang  and their  escape from             
  it  in  the  confusion at  the road-meeting  near the  Isenmouthe, was             
  achieved in all but minor details unhesitatingly.                                  
                                                                                    
                                         NOTES.                                      
                                                                                    
  1.      For Cosimo Sackville-Baggins, later Lotho, see VI.283, VII.32.            
  2.     It  was  while  working  on  the  latter  part  of  'The Land  of Shadow'
         that   my   father  first   mapped   this  new   conception  of   the  north-
         western  extremity  of  Mordor,  on  a  slip  of  paper  that  bears  on the
         reverse  drafting  for  the  story  of  the  forced   march  of   Frodo  and
         Sam   in   the   troop   of  orcs   moving  from   Durthang  to   the  Isen-
         mouthe.   On   this   little   sketch-map  the   closed  vale   between  the
         Morannon   and   the   Isenmouthe   is   named   The   Narch,   subsequently
         overwritten   Udun.   In   my   description   of   the   Second    Map   in
         VIII.438  I  noted  that  the  vale  was  first  marked Gorgoroth,  but that
         this  was  struck  out,  'and  in  its  place  was  pencilled here  the name
         March Udun.' It is in fact clear that Narch alone was first written,
         and that Udun was intended as a replacement.                               
  3.     This  was   changed  later   to  'the   deep  dale   of  Kirith   Gorgor',  and
         then to 'the deep dale of Udun' (see note 2).                               
  4.     A  few  such  details  from  the  earliest  form  of   the  conclusion   of  the
         chapter  may  be  mentioned.  The  orc   'slave-drivers'  are   called  'two
         of the large  fierce uruks,  the fighting-orcs',  and this  seems to  be the
         first  time  that  the  word  was   used  (though   the  name   Uruk-hai  had
         appeared  long  since,  VII.409,  VIII.22,  see  also  p.  436);  and  it is
         said  that  'one  of the  slave-drivers with  night-sighted eyes  spied the
         two  figures  by  the  roadside.'  Where  in  RK  this  orc  says  'All your
         folk   should   have  been   inside  Udun   before  yesterday   evening'  he
         says  here  'inside  the  Narch-line';  and   following  his   words  'Don't
         you  know  we're  at war?'  he adds:  'If the  elvish folk  get the  best of
         it, they won't treat you so kindly.'                                        
                                                                                    
                                 Note on the Geography.                              
                                                                                    
  In  the  first  draft  of  the  chapter,  when  Frodo  and   Sam  climbed   to  the
  crest   of   the   Morgai   and   looking   out  eastwards   saw  Mount   Doom,  it
  was   'still   30  miles   away,  perhaps,   due  East   from  where   the  hobbits
  stood.'  In  the  B  text,  in  the   following  manuscript,   and  in   the  final
  typescript  for  the  printer,  the  distance  became  'seven  leagues   or  more',
  and  was  only altered  to 'forty  miles at  least' (RK  p. 200)  at a  late stage.
  It  is  impossible to  relate '30  miles', still  less 'seven  leagues', to  any of
  the   maps.  On   the  Second   Map  the   distance  due   East  from   the  Morgai
  to   Mount  Doom   (in  its   second,  more   westerly,  position,   see  VIII.438)
  is   just   under   50  miles,   while  on   the  Third   Map  (the   last  general
  small-scale   map   that   my   father   made)   it   became   80  miles.   On  the

                                                    
                                                                           
 large-scale   map   of   Rohan,   Gondor   and   Mordor  the   distance  is
 somewhat  under  60  miles,  as  Mount  Doom  was  first  placed;  but when
 it was moved further to  the west  it became  about 43  miles (under  40 in
 my  redrawing  of  the  map  published  in  The Return  of the  King), with
 which the text of RK agrees.                                               
   The  distance  from  the  Morgai  bridge  below   Kirith  Ungol   to  the
 Isenmouthe  was  roughly  estimated  from  memory  by  Frodo  (p.   33)  as
 'ten leagues or even a dozen' (30 - 36 miles); and  'ten leagues  at least'
 remained into the final typescript before  being changed  to the  figure in
 RK  (p. 204),  'twenty leagues  at least'.  The Second  Map does  not allow
 of  precise  measurement  of  the distance  from the  Morgai bridge  to the
 Isenmouthe, since  the conception  of the  closing of  the vale  behind the
 Morannon  by  spurs  of  Ephel  Duath  and  Ered  Lithui  had   not  arisen
 when  it  was  made, but  it could  be minimally  calculated as  between 30
 and 40 miles; on  the large-scale  map it  becomes 56  miles or  just under
 19 leagues, agreeing with the twenty leagues of RK.                        
   Frodo's  estimation  of  the  distance  from  the  Isenmouthe   to  Mount
 Doom as about fifty  miles likewise  remained through  all the  texts until
 replaced  at  the  very end  by sixty.  This distance  is roughly  50 miles
 on  the  Second  Map,  about  80  on  the   Third  Map,   and  62   on  the
 large-scale  map  as  Mount  Doom  was  first  placed;  when  it  was moved
 further  west  the  distance  from  the  Isenmouthe  became  50  miles. The
 change  of  50 to  60 at  the end  of the  textual history  of RK  is thus,
 strangely, the reverse of the development of the map.                      
                                                                           
   In  the  original  draft   Sam  and   Frodo  joined   the  road   to  the
 Isenmouthe  'after  it  had  already  run  down  some  4  miles   from  the
 orc-hold  of  Durthang  and   turned  away   somewhat  northward   so  that
 the  long  descent  behind  was  hidden  from   them  [?hurrying]   on  the
 stony  road.  They  had  been  going  an  hour  and  had   covered  perhaps
 some  3  miles  without  meeting  any  enemy  when  they  heard  what they
 had all along  dreaded ...'  In B  'they came  at last  to the  road where,
 after  descending  swiftly  from  Durthang,  it became  more level  and ran
 under  the  ridge  towards  the  Isenmouthe,  a  distance  of  perhaps  ten
 miles.' As in A,  they had  only been  on the  road for  an hour  when they
 were overtaken by the orcs, and  it is  added in  B at  this point  'it was
 maybe six  miles yet  before the  road would  leave its  high shelf  and go
 down  into  the  plain.'  In  the  following  manuscript  and in  the final
 typescript for the printer the hobbits still reached the road 'at the point
 where  it  swung  east  towards  the  Isenmouthe  ten  miles away',  and it
 was  still  after  only  an hour  on the  road that  they halted,  and were
 shortly  afterwards  overtaken.  On  the   typescript  my   father  emended
 'ten miles' to  'twenty miles',  and 'an  hour' to  'three hours',  but the
 final  reading  of RK  was 'after  doing some  twelve miles,  they halted.'
 On  the  large-scale  map  the  track  of  Frodo  and  Sam  up  the  valley
 below  the  Morgai  is  marked,  and  the  point  where their  track joined

 the  road  from  Durthang  is  20  miles from  the Isenmouthe;  the change
 in  the  text  was  thus  very  probably  made  to  accommodate it  to the
 map.  The  change  whereby  the  hobbits  had  gone  for  three  hours  or
 twelve  miles  along  the  road  before  being overtaken  clearly followed
 from the  increased distance  to the  Isenmouthe, in  order to  reduce the
 time  that  Frodo  and  Sam had  to submit  to the  punishing pace  set by
 the orcs before they escaped.                                             
                                                                          
                           Note on the Chronology.                         
                                                                          
 Dates are written in the margins of the original texts of this chapter. At
 this stage the  chronology of  the journey  from Kirith  Ungol can  be set
 out thus:                                                                 
                                                                          
    March   14   Dawn:   Frodo   and   Sam   climb   down  into   the  valley
    below  the  Morgai.  Wind  changes   and  the   darkness  begins   to  be
    driven back.                                                           
        Night  of  March  14  -  15:  They  sleep  below  the  crest  of  the
    Morgai; Sam sees a star.                                               
   March   15   They   reach   the   top   of  the   Morgai  and   see  Mount
    Doom;  descend  and  continue  up  the  valley;  overhear  the  two  orcs
    quarrelling.                                                           
        Night  of  March  15  -  16:  They  continue  up  the  valley  north-
    ward.                                                                  
   March 16 They spend the day in hiding in the valley.                    
        Night of March 16 - 1 7: They continue up the valley.              
   March  17  In  hiding.  They   see  Durthang   and  the   road  descending
    from it. Gollum reappears.                                             
        Night  of  March 17  - 1  8: They  take the  road from  Durthang and
    are forced to join the orc-company.                                    
                                                                          
 This  chronology  accords  with the  date March  14 of  the Battle  of the
 Pelennor Fields (see VIII.428 - 9); in both the drafting  A and  the first
 manuscript  B of  the chapter  'It was  the morning  of the  fourteenth of
 March  ...  Theoden  lay  dying  on  the  Pelennor  Fields.'  Here  in  RK
 (p.  196) it  was the  morning of  March 15;  and all  the dates  as given
 above are in the final story one day later.                               

                                     IV.                                   
                                 MOUNT DOOM.                               
                                                                          
 The  original  draft  of  the  chapter  'Mount   Doom'  was   written  con-
 tinuously  with  the  first  completed  manuscript  B   of  'The   Land  of
 Shadow',  which at  this stage  was called  'Mount Doom'  (see p.  31); but
 the division into two chapters was soon made.                             
   The latter part of  the original  single chapter  (which I  will continue
 to  call  'B') is  remarkable in  that the  primary drafting  constitutes a
 completed  text,  with  scarcely  anything  in   the  way   of  preparatory
 sketching of  individual passages,  and while  the text  is rough  and full
 of  corrections  made  at  the  time  of composition  it is  legible almost
 throughout;  moreover  many   passages  underwent   only  the   most  minor
 changes  later.  It  is  possible  that  some  more primitive  material has
 disappeared,  but  it  seems  to  me  far  more  probable  that   the  long
 thought  which  my  father  had  given  to  the  ascent  of Mount  Doom and
 the destruction of the  Ring enabled  him, when  at last  he came  to write
 it,  to  achieve  it  more  quickly  and  surely  than  almost  any earlier
 chapter  in  The  Lord  of  the  Rings.  He  had known  from far  back (see
 p. 3) that when  Frodo (still  called 'Bingo')  came to  the Crack  of Doom
 he  would  be  unable  to  cast  away  the  Ring,  and  that  Gollum  would
 take  it  and  fall  into the  chasm. But  how did  he fall?  In subsequent
 outlines  Sam's  part   was  pondered.   My  father   knew  that   Sam  was
 attacked  by  Gollum  on  the  way  up  the Mountain  and delayed,  so that
 Frodo  made  the  final  ascent  alone; and  he knew  that Gollum  got hold
 of  the Ring  by taking  Frodo's finger  with it.  But for  a long  time he
 thought  that  it  was  Sam  who,  finally  making his  way to  the Chamber
 of  Fire,  pushed  Gollum  with the  Ring into  the abyss.  In none  of the
 later outlines given in Chapter I did he achieve the final  articulation of
 the story; but there seems good reason to  think that  these belong  to the
 period  of  the  writing  of  Book  V, and  if my  chronological deductions
 are correct (see pp. 12 - 13), he had had plenty of time to 'find  out what
 really  happened' before  he came  actually to  describe the  final moments
 of the Quest.                                                             
                                                                          
   As  I  have  said,  the  final  form  of 'Mount  Doom' was  quite largely
 achieved in the first draft  (B), and  I give  the following  brief passage
 (interesting  also  for   another  reason)   as  exemplification   (cf.  RK
 p. 223):                                                                  
                                                                          
   'Master!' he cried. Then Frodo stirred, and spoke with a clear          
 voice, indeed a  voice clearer  and more  powerful than  Sam had          

                         
                                                                         
  ever  heard  him  use,  and  it  rose  above the  throb and  turmoils of
  the chasm of Mount Doom, echoing in the roof and walls.                 
     'I  have  come,'  he  said.  'But  I cannot  do what  I have  come to
  do.  I  will not  do it.  The Ring  is mine.'  And suddenly  he vanished
  from  Sam's  sight.  Sam  gasped,  but  at   that  moment   many  things
  happened.  Something  struck  Sam  violently  in  the  back,   his  legs
  were  knocked  from  under  him   and  he   was  flung   aside  striking
  his head against the stony floor. He lay still.                         
     And   far   away   as   Frodo   put   on  the   Ring  the   Power  in
  Baraddur  was   shaken  and   the  Tower   trembled  from   its  founda-
  tions  to  its  proud  and  bitter  crown.  The  Dark Lord  was suddenly
  aware  of  him,  the  Eye  piercing  all   shadows  looked   across  the
  plain  to  the  door  in  Orodruin,  and  all the  plot [>  devices] was
  laid bare  to it.  Its wrath  blazed like  a sudden  flame and  its fear
  was  like  a  great  black  smoke,  for  it knew  its deadly  peril, the
  thread  upon  which   hung  its   doom.  From   all  its   policies  and
  webs  its  mind  shook free,  and through  all its  realm a  tremor ran,
  its  slaves quailed,  and its  armies halted  and its  captains suddenly
  steerless  bereft  of  will  wavered  and  despaired.  But  its  thought
  was   now   bent   with   all   its   overwhelming   force    upon   the
  Mountain;  and  at  its  summons  wheeling  with  a  ...ing  cry   in  a
  last  desperate  race  there  flew,  faster than  the wind,  the Nazgul,
  the  Ringwraiths,   with  a   storm  of   wings  they   hurtled  towards
  Mount Doom.                                                             
                                                                         
     Frodo's  words  'But  I  cannot  do  what  I  have  come to  do' were
  changed subsequently on the B-text to  'But I  do not  choose now  to do
  what I have come to  do.' I  do not  think that  the difference  is very
  significant, since it was already a central element in the outlines that
  Frodo would choose to keep the Ring  himself; the  change in  his words
  does  no  more  than emphasize  that he  fully willed  his act.  (In the
  second text of the  chapter, the  fair copy  manuscript 'C',(1) Sam cried
  out just before this not merely 'Master!' as in the first text and in RK
  but 'Master! Do it  quick!' -  these words  being bracketed  probably at
  the time of setting them down.)                                         
     This passage  is notable  in showing  the degree  to which  my father
  had come to identify  the Eye  of Barad-dur  with the  mind and  will of
  Sauron, so that he could speak of 'its wrath, its fear, its thought'. In
  the second text C he shifted from 'its' to  'his' as  he wrote  out this
  passage anew.                                                           
                                                                         
     Some other differences in the original text  are worth  recording. On
  the  morning  after  they  escaped  from  the  orc-band marching  to the
  Isenmouthe,  following  Frodo's  words  'I  can manage  it. I  must' (RK
  p. 211) text B at first continued:                                      

                     
                                                                          
  In  the  end  they  decided  to  crawl  in  such  cover  as  they could
 towards  the  north-range  [and  then  turn  south  >)  until  they were
 further from the vigilance on the ramparts, and then turn south.          
  As  they  went  from  hollow  to   hollow  or   along  cracks   in  the
 stony  ground,  keeping  always  if  they  could  some   screen  between
 them  and  the  north,  they  saw that  the most  easterly of  the three
 roads  went  also in  the same  direction. It  was in  fact the  road to
 the Dark Tower, as Frodo guessed.                                         
  He  looked  at  it.  'I  shall  wear  myself  out  in  a  day  of  this
 crawling  and  stooping,' he  said. 'If  we are  to go  on we  must risk
 it. We must take the road.'                                               
                                                                          
  Here my father stopped, struck  this out,  and replaced  it by  a passage
 very close to that in RK, where it is  Sam who  sees that  they can  go no
 further  in  this  fashion  and  must  risk  taking the  road to  the Dark
 Tower.                                                                    
  Another  slight  difference in  the original  text follows  Frodo's words
 to  Sam  on  the  morning on  which they  left the  road and  turned south
 towards  Mount  Doom: 'I  can't manage  it, Sam.  It is  such a  weight to
 carry, such a weight' (RK p. 214).                                        
                                                                          
  Sam   knew   what   he   meant,   but   seeking   for   some   encourage-
 ment   amid   despair   he   answered:   'Well,   Mr   Frodo,    why   not
 lighten  the  load  a  bit. We're  going that  way as  straight as  we can
 make.'   He   pointed   to   the  Mountain.   'No  good   taking  anything
 we're not sure to need.'                                                  
  Like  a  child,  distracted  from  its  trouble  by  some  game  of make-
 believe,   Frodo   considered   his   words   seriously   for   a  moment.
 Then   'Of   course,'  he   said.  'Leave   everything  behind   we  don't
 want.  Travel  light,  that's  the  thing,  Sam!'  He  picked up  his orc-
 shield  and  flung  it  away,  and   threw  his   helmet  after   it;  and
 undoing  his  heavy  belt  cast  it  and  the  sword  and  sheath  with it
 clattering on the ground. Even his grey cloak he threw away.              
  Sam looked at him with pity.                                             
                                                                          
  This  was  struck  out immediately  and replaced  by the  text of  RK, in
 which  Sam  suggests  that  he  should  bear  the  Ring  for a  while. But
 neither in the text B nor in the fair copy C is there mention of the phial
 of Galadriel or of the little box that she gave to Sam.(2)                
  The  height  of  Mount  Doom  was  at  first  differently  conceived: 'It
 was indeed some 3000  feet or  so from  foot to  the.... broken  crater at
 its crown. A third of  that height  now lay  below him  ...' Text  C still
 differs  from  RK (p.  218): 'The  confused and  tumbled shoulders  of its
 great  sprawling  base  rose  for  maybe  three (3) thousand  feet  above the

                          
                                                                           
  plain, and above them was reared, almost  as high  again, its  tall central
  cone,  like  a  vast  oast  or  chimney  capped  by  a  jagged  crater. But
  already  Sam  stood  half  way  up  the base  ...' (where  RK has  'half as
  high  again'  and  'more  than   half  way   up').  My   father's  drawing,
  reproduced in Pictures by J.  R. R.  Tolkien no.  30, and  in this  book on
  p. 42, from a small page that  carries also  a scrap  of drafting  for this
  part of the chapter, seems to show the final conception, with the cone
  'half as high again' in relation to the 'base'; but in  this drawing  the 
  door  of  the  Sammath Naur  is at  the foot  of the  cone, whereas  in all
  versions  of  the  text the  climbing road  came 'high  in the  upper cone,
  but still far from the reeking summit, to a dark entrance'.(4)            
      When  Gollum  fell  upon  Sam  as he  carried Frodo  up the  road, both
  in the original text and in the fair  copy C  Sam not  only tore  the backs
  of  his  hands  as  he  crashed  forward  (RK  p.  220)  but  also  cut his
  forehead  on  the ground.  In B,  against the  words 'But  Sam gave  him no
  more  heed.  He  suddenly  remembered   his  master.   He  looked   up  the
  path  and  could  not  see  him'  (RK  p.  222)  my  father  wrote  in  the
  margin:  'his  head  was  bleeding?'  This  was not  taken up  in C,  but a
  little  earlier,  after the  words 'Sam's  hand wavered.  His mind  was hot
  with wrath  and the  memory of  evil' (RK  p. 221)  C has:  'Blood trickled
  down  his  forehead.'  Both  these  references  to Sam's  bleeding forehead
  were later struck from  C. It  is not  clear to  me what  my father  had in
  mind here. At first sight there might seem to be a connection with        
  Sam s  blindness in  outline V  (p. 11):  Sam feels  a blindness  coming on
  and  wonders  if  it  is  due  to  water  of Mordor  ... Sam  half-blind is
  lagging  behind',  but  that  seems  to  have  been  introduced  to explain
  how  it  was  that  when  Gollum   attacked  Frodo   went  on   unaware  of
  what  had  happened;  whereas  here  the  blood  in  Sam's  eyes   was  the
  result of Gollum's attack, and he himself urged Frodo to go on.           
  Possibly  the  cutting  of  his forehead  was intended  to explain  why Sam
  could  not  see  Frodo  when  he  looked  up  the  path,  and  was  removed
  when my father came to the point when Sam was again felled by             
  Gollum  in  the  Sammath  Naur:   'He  was   dazed,  and   blood  streaming
  from his head dripped in his eyes' (RK p. 223).                           
      When Sam urged Frodo to go on up alone while he dealt with            
  Gollum  Frodo  replied,  both  in  B  and C:  'The Quest  shall now  be all
  fulfilled', where in RK he said: 'This is the end at last.'               
      At the end of the  chapter, after  the words  'Down like  lashing whips
  fell a torrent of black rain' (RK p. 224), the first text moves at once to
  ' "Well, this is the end, Sam," said a voice by his  side.' Here  my father
  wrote in the margin soon after: 'Put in here (or  in next  chapter?) vision
  of  the cloudwrack  out of  Baraddur [?growing]  to shape  of a  vast black
  [?man]  that  stretches  out  a  menacing  unavailing  arm  and   is  blown
  away.'  The  word  'man'  is  very  unclear but  I cannot  see how  else it
  could be read. Later at this point in the manuscript he wrote 'Fall of
  Ringwraiths'  with  a  mark  of insertion,  and the  passage 'And  into the

                     
                                                                         
 heart of the storm, with a cry that pierced all other  sounds...' appears
 in C.                                                                    
  Lastly, Sam's feelings were thus described in B: 'If he felt anything in
 all that ruin of the world, it was perhaps most of all a great joy, to be
 servant once  again, and  know his  master [added:  and surrender  to him
 the leadership].' This was repeated in  C, but  rejected and  replaced by
 the reading of RK. In Frodo's  final words  he did  not, in  the original
 text, speak of forgiving Gollum.(5)                                      

                              NOTES.                                      
                                                                         
  1. The fair copy- manuscript C is entitled 'Mount Doom' and             
     numbered 'LIV' (see pp. 31, 37), the number changed subsequently     
     to 'LII' (see p. 25).                                                
  2. Sam's vain use of the Phial when he entered the Sammath Naur        
     (RK p. 222) appears in B. The addition concerning the Phial and      
     the box was made later to text C.                                    
        The passage in which Sam remembered paddling in the Pool at       
     Bywater with the children of Farmer Cotton (RK p. 216) is also       
     absent from B. This is one of the few passages in this chapter for
     which a separate draft is found (before its introduction into text
     C), and here the names of the Cotton children are seen emerging.     
  3. three was changed in pencil to two on the manuscript (C), but        
     three survived.                                                      
  4. In both B and C, despite the earlier statement (as in RK p. 219)     
     that the road came 'high in the upper cone ... to a dark entrance',
     it is said in the passage corresponding to that in RK p. 222 that the
     road 'with a last course passed across the base of the cone and      
     came to the dark door', where in RK 'with a last eastward course     
     [it] passed in a cutting along the face of the cone and came to the
     dark door'.                                                          
        In B there is a little sketch of Mount Doom which my father       
     struck through, and here the entrance to the Sammath Naur is         
     placed about a third of the way up the cone (which is here shorter
     in relation to the base than in the drawing reproduced on p. 42).
     The road here disappears round the eastern side of the cone, below
     the door, and seems (the drawing is hard to make out) to reappear
     further up, coming from the left (east) and ending at the door.      
  5. A couple of points concerning names in this chapter may be           
     mentioned. In the opening paragraph both B and C have 'He heard      
     the scuffling and cries die down as the troops passed on into the
     Narch', where RK has 'passed on through the Isenmouthe'; see         
     p. 33. The name Sammath Naur does not appear in B, but enters in
     C without any initial hesitation as to its form.                     

                               (Mount Doom.)

                          Note on the Chronology.                       
                                                                       
 The  chronology  was  still  a day  behind that  of RK  (see p.  36). At
 nightfall of the  day on  which they  escaped from  the orc-band  at the
 Isenmouthe my father wrote in the margin of text B  '18 ends';  this was
 March 19  in RK  (in The  Tale of  Years 'Frodo  and Samwise  escape and
 begin their journey along the road to the Barad-dur'). The  reference to
 the passing  of the  Cross Roads  by the  Captains of  the West  and the
 burning of the fields of Imlad Morghul (so spelt) is however  present in
 B at the same point as in RK (p. 212): see VIII.432.                   
  In B, against the words  'There came  at last  a dreadful  evening; and
 even as the Captains of the West drew near the end of the  living lands,
 the two wanderers came to an  hour of  blank despair'  (cf. RK  p. 212),
 my father wrote 'end of 22'. This was the same date as  in RK,  and thus
 there follows  in the  original text  'Five days  had passed  since they
 escaped the orcs' (i.e. March 18 - 22), where RK has 'Four'.           

                                      V.                                    
                                                                           
                            THE FIELD OF KORMALLEN.                         
                                                                           
 In the first draft of this chapter my father again achieved for most  of its
 length an  extraordinarily close  approach to  the final  form, and  this is
 the  more  remarkable  when   one  considers   that  he   had  no   plan  or
 outline  before  him.  There  had  been many  mentions of  a great  feast to
 follow  the  final  victory   (VII.212,  345,   448;  VIII.275,   397),  but
 nothing  had  ever  been said  of it  beyond the  fact that  it was  to take
 place in Minas Tirith.(1) That  this text  ('A') was  indeed the  first setting
 down  on  paper  of   the  story   and  that   nothing  preceded   it  seems
 obvious  from  the  nature  of  the  manuscript  itself,  which has  all the
 marks   of   primary   composition.(2) It was  followed   by  a   fair  copy
 manuscript  ('B'),  bearing  the  number   and  title   'LV  The   Field  of
 Kormallen', which was also pencilled in later on A.                        
  Not until  the end  of the  minstrel's song  of Frodo  of the  Nine Fingers
 and  the  Ring  of  Doom  did  the  first  text A  diverge in  any narrative
 point,  and  little  even  in  expression, from  the form  in RK.  There are
 however several interesting details.                                       
  One  of  these  concerns   the  Eagles.   As  the   passage  (RK   p.  226)
 describing  their  coming  above  the  Morannon was  first written  it read:
                                                                           
  There   came   Gwaihir,   the   Wind-lord,  and   Lhandroval  his         
 brother, greatest of all the eagles of the north, mightiest of the         
 descendants  of  [added:  Great  >  old]  Thorondor who  built his         
 eyries  in  the  immeasurable   peaks  of   Thangorodrim  [changed         
 immediately  to  the   Encircling  Mountains]   when  Middle-earth         
 was young.                                                                 
                                                                           
  In  the  Quenta  $15  (IV.137)  it  is  told  that  after  the   Battle  of
 Unnumbered  Tears  'Thorndor  King  of  Eagles   removed  his   eyries  from
 Thangorodrim  to  the   northward  heights   of  the   Encircling  Mountains
 [about  the  plain  of  Gondolin],  and  there he  kept watch,  sitting upon
 the cairn of King Fingolfin.' In the  Quenta Silmarillion  of 1937  there is
 no  mention  of  the  Eagles  dwelling  on  Thangorodrim,  and  at  the time
 of the fall of  Fingolfin in  his duel  with Morgoth,  before the  Battle of
 Unnumbered  Tears,  Thorondor  came  for  the  rescue  of  the  king's  body
 'from  his  eyrie  among  the  peaks  of  Gochressiel' (i.e.  the Encircling
 Mountains;  V.285,  $147).  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  abandoned  story
 'Of  Tuor  and  the Fall  of Gondolin'  given in  Unfinished Tales,  a story
 that I  believe to  have been  written in  1951, Voronwe  speaks to  Tuor of

  'the  folk  of  Thorondor,  who  dwelt  once  even  on  Thangorodrim ere
  Morgoth  grew  so  mighty,  and  dwell  now in  the Mountains  of Turgon
  since the fall of Fingolfin' (p. 43).                                   
    Gwaihir  the  Windlord  had of  course appeared  often before  this in
  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  (for  long Gwaewar,  but becoming  Gwaihir in
  the course of the writing of 'The White Rider', VII.430). In  the Quenta
  Silmarillion  (see  V.301)  Gwaewar  had  been one  of the  three eagles
  that came to Angband for the rescue of Beren  and Luthien;  the earliest
  form of that passage reads:                                             
                                                                         
    Thorondor  led  them,  and  the  others  were  Lhandroval  (Wide-wing)
  and Gwaewar his vassal.                                                 
                                                                         
  The following text (also belonging to 1937) has:                        
                                                                         
    Thorondor was their leader; and with him were  his mightiest          
  vassals, wide-winged Lhandroval, and Gwaewar lord of the wind.          
                                                                         
  In a revision of  the passage  which can  be dated  to 1951  Gwaewar was
  changed  to  Gwaihir.  As  I  have noticed  in V.301,  the names  of the
  vassals  of  Thorondor  were  suppressed  in the  published Silmarillion
  (p. 182) on account of the present passage in RK, but this was certainly
  mistaken: it is clear that my father deliberately repeated the names. As
  in  so many  other cases  in The  Lord of  the Rings,  he took  the name
  Gwaewar for the great eagle, friend of  Gandalf, from  The Silmarillion,
  and  when  Gwaihir  replaced  Gwaewar  in  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  he
  made the same change to  the eagle's  name in  The Silmarillion.  Now he
  took  also  Lhandroval (3) to  be  the  name  of  Gwaihir's   brother;  and
  added a new name, Meneldor (RK p. 228).                                 
    At  the  fall  of  the  Black Gate  Gandalf said  only: 'The  Realm of
  Sauron is ended';  but to  this my  father added,  probably immediately:
  'So  passes  the  Third  Age  of  the  World.'  This  was  placed within
 brackets, and 'The Ringbearer has  fulfilled his  Quest' written  in the
 margin.                                                                  
    To  Gwaihir  Gandalf  said:  'You  will  not  find  me  a  burden  any
 greater  than  when  you  bore  me  from  Zirakinbar  where  my  old life
 burned  away.'  Zirakinbar  remained  through  all   the  texts   of  the
 chapter  and  was  only  changed to  Zirakzigil on  the galley  proof. On
 these names see VII.174 and 431 with note 6.                             
    Another  difference in  A which  survived long  (into the  final type-
 script  of  the  chapter)  was  the  absence   of  Sam's   expression  of
 astonishment at seeing Gandalf at  his bedside  ('Gandalf! I  thought you
 were dead! But then I thought I was dead myself....', RK p. 230);        
    The date of the Field of Kormallen (as  the name  was spelt  until the
 final typescript) was expressed by Gandalf thus in A:                    
                                                                         
    'Noon?' said Sam, puzzling his brains. 'Noon of what day?'            
    'The  third  day  of  the  New Year,'  said Gandalf,  'or if  you like

                                
                                                                         
 the twenty-eighth day of March in the Shire-reckoning. But in            
 Gondor  the  New  Year  will  always begin  upon the  25th of            
 March when Sauron fell, and when you were brought out  of the            
 fire to the King....'(4)                                                  
                                                                         
    If March  25th was  New Year's  Day, the  28th was  the fourth  day of
 the  New  Year in  Gondor, and  my father  wrote 'fourth'  above 'third',
 without  however  striking  out  'third'.  In  pencil he  wrote 'seventh'
 against this, and 'the last day' above 'the twenty-eighth  day', although
 this would give 31 days to the month.  His reason  for this  is obscurely
 indicated by a note in the margin: 'More  time required  for [?gathering]
 of goods, say' (i.e., 'say the seventh').(5)                             
    In the fair copy B as  written Gandalf  said 'The  Seventh of  the New
 Year; or if you like, the last day of March in the Shire-reckoning'; this
 was changed later  to 'The  Fourteenth of  the New  Year' and  'the sixth
 day  of  April  in  the Shire-reckoning'.  Even allowing  31 days  to the
 month, the sixth of April would be the  thirteenth day  of the  New Year,
 and 'sixth' was afterwards changed to 'seventh', and finally to 'eighth',
 as  in  RK.  I  do  not  know precisely  what considerations  impelled my
 father so greatly  to prolong  the time  during which  Sam and  Frodo lay
 asleep.                                                                  
    Their first conversation with Gandalf ends thus in A:                 
                                                                         
    'What  shall  we  wear?'  said  Sam,  for  all he  could see  were the
 old  and  tattered  clothes  that  they  had  journeyed in,  lying folded
 on the ground beside their beds.                                         
    'The  clothes  that  you  were  found  in,'  said  Gandalf.  'No silks
 and  linen,  nor  any  armour   or  heraldry,   could  be   more  honour-
 able. But afterwards we shall see.'                                      
                                                                         
    This survived through all the texts to the galley, where  'The clothes
 that  you  were  found  in'  was  changed  to   'The  clothes   that  you
 journeyed  in'. It  was not  until the  Second Edition  of 1966  that the
 passage  was  altered  and  extended,  by  changing  Gandalf's  words  to
 'The  clothes that  you wore  on your  way to  Mordor.(6) Even  the orc-rags
 that you bore in the black land, Frodo, shall be  preserved', and  by his
 return of the Phial of Galadriel and  the box  that she  gave to  Sam (RK
 pp. 230 - 1; cf. p. 39 and note 2).                                      
    The  crying  of  praise  as  Frodo  and  Sam  came  to  the  Field  of
 Kormallen  underwent  many  changes.  In  all  the  texts of  the chapter
 Old  English  phrases  cried  by the  Riders of  Rohan were  mingled. The
 form of the 'Praise' in  A runs  thus (with  some punctuation  added from
 the B-text, which is closely similar):                                   
                                                                         
          Long live the balflings! Praise them with great praise! Cuio i
 Pheriannath anann, aglar anann! Praise them with great praise!           

               
                                                                        
 Hale,  hale  cumath, wesath  hale awa  to aldre.  Froda and           
 Samwis! Praise them! Kuivie, kuivie! laurea'esselinen!(7) Praise           
 them!                                                                   
                                                                        
  In  the  fair  copy   B  the   Old  English   words  were   changed  to
 Wilcuman,   wilcuman,   Froda   and  Samwis!   and  the   Quenya  words
 became Laitalle, laitalle, andave laita! In the first typescript the Old
 English Uton herian holbytlan! was added before Laitalle,  laitalle; and
 in the second  (final) typescript  the Quenya  words became  A laituvar,
 laituvar,  andave  laita!  This was  then changed  on the  typescript to
 A laita te, laita te! Andave laituvalme! Thus the form as it  appears on
 the galley proof is:                                                    
                                                                        
  Long  live  the  Halflings!  Praise  them  with  great  praise!  Cuio i
 Pheriannath  anann!  Aglar  anann!  Praise   them  with   great  praise!
 Wilcuman,   wilcuman,    Froda   and    Samwis!   Praise    them!   Uton
 herian  holbytlan!  A  laita  te, laita  te! Andave  laituvalmet! Praise
 them! The Ringbearers, praise them with great praise!                  
                                                                        
  The final text of the 'Praise', as it appears in RK, was typed onto the
 galley proof.                                                           
                                                                        
  From the end of the minstrel's  song (RK  p. 232)  the original  text A
 runs thus:                                                              
                                                                        
 And  then  Aragorn  stood   up  and   all  the   host  rose,   and  they
 passed  to  a  pavilion  made  ready,  there  to   eat  and   drink  and
 make merry.                                                             
  But   as   Sam   and  Frodo   stepped  down   with  Aragorn   from  the
 throne  Sam  caught  sight  of  a  small  man-at-arms  as  it  seemed in
 the  silver  and  sable  of the  guards of  the king:  but he  was small
 and  he  wondered  what  such  a  boy  was  doing   in  such   an  army.
 Then  suddenly   he  exclaimed:   'Why,  look   Mr  Frodo.   Look  here.
 Bless  me  if  it's not  Pippin, Mr  Peregrin Took  I should  say. Bless
 me  but  I can  see there's  more tales  than ours  to hear.  It'll take
 weeks before we get it all right.'                                      
  'Yes,'  said  Frodo.  'I   can  see   myself  locked   up  in   a  room
 somewhere   making   notes   for   days  or   Bilbo  will   be  bitterly
 disappointed.'                                                          
  And  so  they  passed  to  the  feast  and  at  a  sign   from  Aragorn
 Pippin went with them.(8)                                               
                                                                        
  The page  carrying this  text was  rejected; on  the back  of it  is an
 outline  of  the  story to  come (see  p. 51,  'The Story  Foreseen from
 Kormallen').  A  replacement  page  was   substituted,  but   again  the
 development turned out to be unsatisfactory:                            

   But  first  Frodo  and  Sam  were  led  apart  and  taken to  a tent,
 and  there  their  old  raiment  was  taken  off,  but  folded  and set
 aside  with  honour;  and  clean  linen  was   brought  to   them.  But
 Gandalf  came  and  with  him  went   an  esquire,   no  more   than  a
 small  lad  he  seemed,  though  clad in  the silver  and sable  of the
 king's  guard,  and  to  the  wonder  of  Frodo and  Sam they  bore the
 sword  and  the  elven-cloak  and  the   mithril-coat  that   had  been
 taken  from  them;  and  for  Sam  they  brought   a  coat   of  gilded
 mail,  and  on  Frodo's  right   hand  upon   the  middle (9) and  little
 fingers they set small  rings of  mithril set  each with  a gem  like a
 star.  But  the  wonder  of  all  these  things  was  as little  to the
 wonder  on  Sam's  face  as  he  looked  on  the  face  of  the esquire
 and knew him.                                                          
   And  he  cried  out:  'Why  look,  Mr.  Frodo.  Look  here!  Save me,
 if  it isn't  Pippin, Mr.  Peregrin Took,  I should  say. Why  bless us
 all, but I can see there's more tales to tell than  ours. It  will take
 weeks of talk before we get it all sized up.'                          
   'It  will indeed,'  said Pippin.  'But at  present it  is time  for a
 feast,  and  you  must not  keep it  waiting. Later  on, Frodo  must be
 locked  up  in a  tower in  Minas Tirith  till he's  made notes  of all
 our doings, or Bilbo will be dreadfully disappointed.'                 
                                                                       
   This  passage was  at once  reconstructed to  remove Pippin  from the
 scene, and Gandalf comes to the  tent alone,  as in  RK (p.  233). When
 he has set the rings of mithril on Frodo's fingers the feast follows at
 once:                                                                  
                                                                       
 ...  and  on   Frodo's  right   hand,  upon   the  middle   and  little
 fingers, he set fine rings of mithril, slender as  threads of  silk but
 bearing  each  a  small  gem  shining  like  a  star.(10) And  when  they
 were  made  ready,  and  circlets  of  silver   were  set   upon  their
 heads,  they  went  to  the  feast,  and  sat  with Gandalf,  and there
 was  Aragorn  and  King  Eomer  of  Rohan  and  all  the   Captains  of
 the West, and there too were Legolas and Gimli.                        
   [Struck  out  at  once:  'That's  six  of the  Company,' said  Sam to
 Frodo.   'Where   are  the   o(thers)]  But   when  wine   was  brought
 there  came  in  an  esquire  to   serve  the   Kings  of   Gondor  and
 Rohan,  or  so  he  seemed, and  he was  clad in  the silver  and sable
 of  the  guards  of  the  King;  but  he  was  small, and  Sam wondered
 what  such  a  boy  was  doing  in  an  army   of  mighty   men.  [Then
 follows Sam's recognition of Pippin, as above.]                        
   'It  will  indeed,' said  Pippin, 'and  we'll begin  as soon  as this
 feast  is  ended.  In the  meantime you  can try  Gandalf. He's  not as

         
                                                                        
 close  as  he  used  to  be,  though   he  laughs   now  more   than  he
 talks.'                                                                 
  And  so  at  last  the  glad  day  ended;  and  when  the sun  was gone
 and  the  crescent moon (11) rode   slowly  above   the  mist   of  Anduin
 and  flickered  through  the  fluttering  leaves,  Frodo  and   Sam  sat
 amid  the  night-fragrance  of  fair  Ithilien,  and  talked  deep  into
 the night with Pippin and Gandalf and Legolas and Gimli.                
  At  last  Gandalf  rose.  'The  hands   of  the   King  are   hands  of
 healing,  dear  friends,'  he  said.  'But  you  went  near to  the very
 brink  of  death,  and  though  you  have  slept  long   and  blessedly,
 still  it  is  now  time to  rest again.  Not you  only, Frodo  and Sam,
 but  you  Peregrin  also.  For  when  they  lifted  you  from  under the
 slain it is said that even Aragorn despaired of you.'                   
                                                                        
  Probably  at  once,  this  was  emended throughout  to make  Merry also
 present (see note 8), and the last part of it (Gandalf's  parting words)
 was in turn rejected. In very rough further drafting the final  text was
 approached, though  not achieved,  in the  manuscript A.  Gimli's speech
 (RK p. 234) at this time ended thus:                                    
                                                                        
 '...  And  when  I  heaved  that great  carcase off  you, then  I made
 sure  you  were  dead.  I  could  have  torn out  my  beard.  And that
 was but a week ago. To bed now you go. And so shall I.'                 
                                                                        
  From this it is seen that it was 'the seventh day of the New Year': see
 p. 46.(12) The draft continues to its end thus:                            
                                                                        
  'And  I,'  said  Legolas,  'shall  walk  in  the  woods  of  this  fair
 land,  which  is  rest  enough.  And  in  days  to  come,  if  my  Elven
 lord will allow it,  some of  our folk  shall remove  hither, for  it is
 more  lovely  than  any  lands  they have  yet dwelt in;(13) and  then it
 will  be  blessed  for  a  while. But  Anduin is  near and  Anduin leads
 down  to  the  sea.  To  the  sea,  to  the  sea,  and  the  white gulls
 crying,  to  the sea  and the  sea and  the white  foam flying,'  and so
 singing he went away down the hill.                                     
  And   then   the   others   departed   and  Frodo   and  Sam   went  to
 their  beds  and  slept;  and  in  the  morning  the  host  prepared  to
 return  to  Minas  Tirith.  The  ships  had  come  and  they  were lying
 under  Cair  Andros,  and  soon  all  would  be  set  across  the  Great
 River,  and  so  in  peace  and   ease  fare   over  the   green  swards
 of   Anorien   and   to  the   Pelennor  and   the  towers   under  tall
 Mindolluin,   the  city   of  the   men  of   Gondor,  last   memory  of
 Westernesse.                                                            
                                                                        
    Thus the name Kormallen did not enter in the original text of the

 chapter, and  it is  not said  that the  Field was  near to  Henneth Annun;
 but scribbled drafting  put in  later on  the last  page of  the manuscript
 shows the final text emerging:                                             
                                                                           
   And  in   the  morning   they  rose   again  and   spent  many   days  in
 Ithilien,   for   the   Field  of   Kormallen  where   the  host   was  en-
 camped   was   near   to   Henneth   Annun,   and   they    wandered   here
 and  there  visiting  the  scenes  of  their  adventures, but  Sam lingered
 ever  in  some  shadow  of  the  woods   to  find   maybe  some   sight  of
 the  Oliphaunt.  And  when   he  heard   that  in   the  seige   of  Gondor
 there  had  been  fifty  of  them  at  the  least,  but  all were  dead, he
 thought  it  a  great  loss.  And  in  the meanwhile  the host  rested, for
 they   had   laboured   much  and   had  fought   long  and   hard  against
 the   remnant   of  the   Easterlings  and   Southrons;  and   they  waited
 also for those that were to return.                                        
                                                                           
   In the fair copy B the final text of the First Edition was present in all
 but  a  few  points, most  of which  have been  mentioned in  the foregoing
 account  and  in the  notes;(14) but  an important  change in  the description
 of  the  dressing  of  Frodo  and  Sam  before  the feast  (RK p.  233) was
 made  in  the  Second  Edition.  As  the  text stood  in the  First Edition
 (going back unchanged to the fair copy manuscript B) it ran:               
                                                                           
   ... For  Sam he  brought a  coat of  gilded mail,  and his  elven-cloak all
   healed  of  the  soils  and  hurts  that  it  had  suffered;  and  when the
   Hobbits  were  made  ready,  and  circlets  of silver  were set  upon their
   heads,  they  went to  the King's  feast, and  they sat  at his  table with
   Gandalf ...                                                              
                                                                           
 In   the  Second   Edition  the   passage  was   added  in   which  Gandalf
 brought  Sting  and  Sam's  sword,  and  Frodo  had  to  be   persuaded  to
 wear a sword and  to accept  back Sting.  At this  time also  the reference
 was added to 'the Standing Silence' before the feast began.                
                                                                           
                                    NOTES.                                  
                                                                           
  1.  There  had  been  a  suggestion  (VIII.397)  that  the  tale  of the
      passage  of  the Paths  of the  Dead should  be told  at the  'feast of
      victory  in  Minas  Tirith',  but   that  idea   had  of   course  been
      overtaken.                                                            
  2.  It  may be  that the  first draft  of 'The  Field of  Kormallen' was
      written  before   the  fair   copy  manuscript   of  'Mount   Doom'.  A
      pointer to this is the fact that where in  RK (p.  228) 'a  great smoke
      and  steam  belched  from  the  Sammath  Naur'  A  has  'a  great  fire
      belched from the cave': see p. 41 note 5.                             
  3.  The  first  draft  A  has  the spelling  Lhandroval at  all occurrences,
      but the fair copy B has Landroval, as in RK.                          

            
                                                                         
  4. Both in A and B it  is Frodo  who asks  'What king,  and who  is he?'
     On  the first  typescript Sam's  question 'What  shall we  wear?' was
     transferred  to  Frodo,  but in  the final  typescript given  back to
     Sam.                                                                 
  5. Perhaps  to  be  compared  is the  sentence in  'The Steward  and the
     King',  RK  pp.  241-2:  'Merry  was  summoned  [from  Minas  Tirith]
     and  rode  away  with  the  wains  that  took   store  of   goods  to
     Osgiliath and thence by ship to Cair Andros.'                        
  6. Frodo  was  naked  when  Sam  found  him  in  the  Tower   of  Kirith
     Ungol;  he  had  to  dress in  'long hairy  breeches of  some unclean
     beast-fell,   and   a   tunic   of  dirty   leather'  (RK   p.  189).
  7. laurea' esselinen  was  changed  at  the  time   of  writing   to  an-
     kalim' esselinen.                                                     
  8. At this stage, when only a little time had passed  since the  fall of
     Sauron, Merry would still have been in Minas Tirith; cf. note 5.     
  9. My  father  named  the  penultimate  finger  (the 'fourth  finger' or
     'ring-finger')  the  'third  finger';  so  Frodo's 'third  finger was
     missing' (RK p. 229).                                                
 10. The rings of mithril set on Frodo's fingers were retained in the fair
     copy B, where the passage was struck out.                            
 11. The  'crescent  moon'  remained  in  B and  in the  first typescript,
     where it was changed to 'the round moon'.                            
 12. It is strange that in B Gimli said here, not as in RK 'And it is only
     a day  yet since  you were  first up  and abroad  again', but  'a few
     days' (this being corrected on the manuscript).                      
 13. This sentence was retained in B  and the  first typescript,  where it
     was struck out.                                                      
 14. To  these  may  be  added  the retention  of the  name Narch  in 'And
     they   passed   over   the   Narch  and   Gorgoroth'  (RK   p.  228),
     subsequently  emended  to  Udun. At  the  end of  the chapter  it was
     said at  first in  B that  'when the  month of  May was  passed seven
     days the Captains of the West set  out again',  but this  was changed
     to  'when  the  month  of  May  was  drawing near',  and at  the same
     time  the  last sentence  of the  chapter was  changed from  'for the
     King  would  enter  his  gates  with the  rising of  the Sun'  by the
     addition  of  the  words  'it  was  the  Eve  of  May, and  (the King
     would enter...)'.                                                    

                     THE STORY FORESEEN FROM KORMALLEN.                   
                                                                         
 This page (see p. 47) was  scribbled down  in pencil  in my  father's most
 impossible  handwriting.  I  have  not  marked  with  queries a  number of
 words that I think are  probable but  not altogether  certain, and  I have
 expanded  several  names  given only  as initials.  The first  sentence was
 written separately from the rest of the outline, whether before  or after.
                                                                         
  Gimli explains how Pippin was saved.                                    

                                           
                                                                        
  Next scene  - The  Host sets  out from  Cair Andros  and [read  in] the
  ships and passes into Gondor.                                          
 Scene shifts to Merry and to Faramir and Eowyn.                         
 Return  of  King  Elessar.  His  crowning.   His  judgements   .....  of
  Berithil.                                                              
  The hobbits wait. For there is to  be a  wedding. Elrond  and Galadriel
  and Celeborn come and bring Finduilas.                                 
 The wedding of Aragorn and Finduilas.                                   
 Also Faramir and Eowyn.                                                 
 The  end  of  the  Third  Age  is  presaged.  What  the Rings  had done.
  Their power waned. Galadriel and Elrond prepare to depart.             
 The  hobbits  return  with  Eomer  to  the funeral  of Theoden  and then
  on through the Gap of Rohan [? with..... and the Dunedain].            
 They come on Saruman and he is [?pardoned].                             
 They come to  Rivendell and  see Bilbo.  Bilbo gives  him Sting  and the
  coat. But he is getting old.                                           
 They  come  back  to  the  Shire  [added  in margin:  via Bree,  pick up
  pony]  and  drive  out  Cosimo  Sackville-Baggins.  Lobelia  is  dead -
  she had a fit in [?quarrel]. Sam replants the  trees. Frodo  goes back
  to Bag End. All is quiet  for a  year or  two. And  then one  day Frodo
  takes  Sam  for  a walking  [? tour]  to the  Woody End.  And [?behold
  there  go  many] Elves.  Frodo rides  to the  Havens and  says farewell
  to Bilbo. End of the Third Age.                                        
 Sam's Book.                                                             
                                                                        
 It is plain that my father wrote this  outline while  he was  working on
 'The Field of Kormallen', and indeed the precise stage in that  work can
 probably be deduced: for Gimli's  words at  the end  of the  evening, in
 which  he  spoke  of finding  Pippin under  the heap  of slain,  had not
 entered ('Gimli  explains how  Pippin was  saved'). The  precise placing
 of these notes in the history of the composition of  Book VI  gives them
 a particular  interest. Several  features of  the end  of the  story now
 appear  for  the  first  time:  as  the marriage  of Faramir  and Eowyn;
 Bilbo's giving of the mithril-coat and Sting to Frodo  ('forgetting that
 he had already done so', RK p. 265); the time of  peace and  quiet after
 the return of the hobbits to the Shire (but that 'Sam's  casket restores
 Trees'  had  been  known  for a  long time,  VII.286); and  Frodo's walk
 with Sam  to the  Woody End.  But the  death, before  the return  of the
 hobbits, of Lobelia Sackville-Baggins in a fit  (of fury?  - the  word I
 have  given  as  quarrel  is  scarcely  more  than  a  guess)   was  not
 permanent:   she   would  be   resurrected,  survive   her  imprisonment
 during  the  troubles of  the Shire,  and end  her days  in a  much more
 enlightened fashion.                                                    
 This outline is as elliptical as were  so many  of my  father's sketches
 of the further course of the story, concentrating on particular elements
 and ignoring or only  hinting at  others; and  it is  hard to  know what

  narrative idea underlay the  words 'Frodo  rides to  the Havens  and says
  farewell  to  Bilbo'.  Many  years  before (VI.380)  he had  written that
  when  'Bingo'  returned  to  the  Shire  he would  make peace,  and would
  then 'settle down in a little hut on the high green ridge - until one day
  he goes with the Elves  west beyond  the towers'  (cf. also  another note
  of that time, VI.379: 'Island in sea. Take Frodo there  in end').  In the
  outline  'The  Story  Foreseen  from  Moria'  (VII.212) he  had concluded
  his synopsis thus:                                                       
    XXVIII What happens to Shire?                                          
      Last scene. Sailing away of Elves [added: Bilbo with them]...        
    XXIX Sam and Frodo go into a green land by the Sea?                    
  In another note  of that  period (VII.287)  he said:  'When old,  Sam and
  Frodo set sail to island of West... Bilbo  finishes the  story.' Probably
  about the time of the writing of  'The King  of the  Golden Hall'  he had
  written  (VII.451)  that in  old age  Frodo with  Sam had  seen Galadriel
  and Bilbo. On the other hand, in  his letter  to me  of 29  November 1944
  (see VIII.219) he was entirely clear - and accurate - in his prevision:
                                                                          
    But  the  final  scene  will  be  the  passage  of  Bilbo and  Elrond and
    Galadriel  through  the  woods  of  the Shire  on their  way to  the Grey
    Havens. Frodo will  join them  and pass  over the  Sea (linking  with the
    vision he  had of  a far  green country  in the  house of  Tom Bombadil).
                                                                          
  Since this is of course the story in the last chapter of The Lord  of the
  Rings  it  is strange  indeed to  find in  the present  text that  he had
  departed from it - for 'Frodo rides to  the Havens  and says  farewell to
  Bilbo' can obviously be interpreted in no other way. I  suspect therefore
  that there is in fact no mystery: that in notes written at great speed my
  father merely miswrote 'Bilbo' for 'Sam'.                                
                                                                          
    Remarkable  also  is  the  reference  to the  encounter with  Saruman -
  the  word  pardoned  here  is  not  certain,  but  can  hardly   be  read
  otherwise.  That  they  would   meet  Saruman   again  on   the  homeward
  journey  was  an  old  idea  (see  'The   Story  Foreseen   from  Moria',
  VII.212), but then  it had  taken place  at Isengard,  and the  matter of
  that scene had of  course been  removed to  a much  earlier place  in the
  narrative (VII.436). A later  note (VII.287)  says that  'Saruman becomes
  a wandering conjuror and trickster',  but nothing  further has  been told
  of  him  since he  was left  a prisoner  in Orthanc  guarded by  the Ents
  until now.                                                               

                                    VI.                                  
                                                                        
                         THE STEWARD AND THE KING.                       
                                                                        
 My remarks about  'The Field  of Kormallen'  (p. 44)  can be  repeated of
 'The Steward and the King': the preliminary draft ('A') of  this chapter,
 though  written  roughly  and  rapidly,  was  changed very  little after-
 wards. There are nonetheless a number of differences in detail.(1)      
  A  had  no  title,  but  'Faramir  and  Eowyn'  was pencilled  in subse-
 quently.  A  fair  copy  manuscript  'B'  followed,  with   the  chapter-
 number 'LVI' but no title; to this text  the title  'The Watchers  on the
 Walls' was added  in pencil,  and this  was changed  to 'The  Steward and
 the  King'.  In B  the page-numbers  run only  as far  as 'And  she abode
 there  until  King  Eomer  came'  (RK p.  243); at  'All things  were now
 made  ready in  the City',  at the  top of  a new  page, a  new numbering
 from '1' begins.                                                        
  Of  this  chapter  my  father made  a third,  very fine  manuscript 'C',
 numbering  it  'LIV'. Beneath  the title  'The Steward  and the  King' he
 pencilled '(i) The Steward'; but although there is a  large space  in the
 text after  'And she  remained there  until King  Eomer came',  where the
 new page-numbering begins in B, there is no second sub-title.           
                                                                        
  At  the  beginning  of  the chapter  in A  the Warden  of the  Houses of
 Healing, after the words 'He sighed and shook  his head'  (RK p.  237), '
 continues:                                                              
                                                                        
  'It  may  come  thus  to  us  all  yet,'  he  said,  'choosing   or  not
 choosing.   But   in   the   meantime  we   must  endure   with  patience
 the hours of waiting.  It is  not always  the easier  part. But  for you,
 Lady,  you  will  be  the  better  prepared  to face  evil that  may come
 in  your  own  manner,  if  you  do as  the healers  bid, while  there is
 still time.'                                                            
                                                                        
  This  was  rejected  before  the  chapter  had  proceeded  much further,
 for similar words were given to Faramir subsequently in the  initial text
 (RK  p.  238).  And  when  the  Warden  looked  out  from his  window and
 saw Faramir and Eowyn, finding in the sight a lightening of his  care, it
 is said:  'For it  had been  reported to  him that  the Lord  Aragorn had
 said "If she wakes to  despair then  she will  die, unless  other healing
 comes which I cannot give."'                                           
  The  blue  mantle  set  with  stars  which  Faramir  gave to  Eowyn when
 the weather turned cold is in A  said to  have been  made for  his mother
 'Emmeril', changed  in the  act of  writing to  'Rothinel of  Amroth, who

         
                                                                         
 died  untimely'.  This  name  survived into  the following  manuscript B,
 where it was changed to Finduilas (see pp. 58-9).                        
  The words of the Eagle that  bore tidings  to Minas  Tirith of  the fall
 of the Dark Tower were first reported thus:                              
                                                                         
  The realm of Sauron hath ended and the Ring of Doom is no               
 more and the King is victorious, he has passed through the               
 Black Gate in triumph and all his enemies are fled.                      
                                                                         
  The name Kormallen  entered in  this text.  My father  left a  blank for
 the name as he  wrote: 'And  Eowyn did  not go,  though her  brother sent
 word  begging  her  to  come  to  the  field  of [between  Henneth Annun
 and Cair  Andros]' (cf.  RK p.  242 and  p. 50  above), but  he evidently
 wrote the name in the margin at  once, since  it appears  in the  text as
 written a few lines later.                                               
  In  the  conversation  between  Eowyn  and  Faramir  that   follows  she
 said, in A, 'I love or have loved another.' This survived in B, where her
 words were  changed to  'I hoped  to be  loved by  another', and  then at
 once to 'I wished'.                                                      
                                                                         
  Somewhat  later  in  the  chapter  (RK  p.  244)  Ioreth (now  so spelt;
 hitherto Yoreth)  names the  hobbits Periannath  (cf. Ernil i Pheriannath
 in the chapter 'Minas Tirith', RK p. 41,  Ernil a  Pheriannath VIII.287),
 and this survived into the First Edition of LR, changed to Periain in the
 Second.                                                                  
  There  were  substantial  differences  in the  original account  of Ara-
 gorn's  coming  to  Minas  Tirith  and  his  coronation before  the walls
 from  the  story  in  RK  (pp.  244-6).  The  entry of  Aragorn, Gandalf,
 Eomer, Imrahil and the  four hobbits  into the  cleared space  before the
 Gateway was very  briefly described  in A:  there was  no mention  of the
 Dunedain  nor  of  Aragorn's  apparel.  The  casket  in  which  the White
 Crown  was  laid  was  not  described  ('of  black  lebethron  bound with
 silver' B, as in RK; cf. VIII.180). When Faramir, surrendering his office
 as  'the  Last Steward  of Gondor',  gave Aragorn  the white  rod Aragorn
 did not return it to him; he said nothing to Faramir  at this  point, and
 Faramir  at  once  proclaimed:  'Men  of  Gondor,  you  have no  longer a
 Steward,  for  behold one  has returned  to claim  the kingship  at last.
 Here  is  Aragorn  son of  Arathorn ...'  Among Aragorn's  titles Faramir
 names him 'chieftain  of the  Dunedain of  the North'  and does  not name
 him  'bearer of  the Star  of the  North'. After  the description  of the
 crown there follows:                                                     
                                                                         
 And   Aragorn  knelt,   and  Faramir   upon  the   one  hand   and  upon
 the  other  the  Prince  Imrahil  set  the  crown  upon  his  head,  and
 then  Gandalf  laid  his  hand  on  Aragorn's  shoulder  and   bade  him
 arise.  And  when  he  arose  all  that beheld  him gazed  in silence...

                                  
                                                                            
  and a light was about him. And then Faramir said 'Behold the               
  King!' and he broke his white rod.                                         
                                                                            
     Lastly,  when  Aragorn  came  to the  Citadel a  marginal addition  to A
  says  that  'the  banner  of  Tree  Crown  and Stars  was raised  above it'
  ('the banner of the Tree and the Stars' B,  as in  RK); see  VIII.279, 389,
  399.                                                                       
     The reference  to the  Dunedain 'in  silver and  grey' and  the descrip-
  tion  of  Aragorn's  black  mail  and  white  mantle  clasped with  a great
  green stone was added to  B, but  the 'star  upon his  forehead bound  by a
  slender fillet of silver' did not enter until the Second Edition; similarly
  Faramir  still  proclaimed  him 'chieftain  of the  Dunedain of  the North'
  ('of  Arnor', Second  Edition) and  did not  name him  'bearer of  the Star
  of the North' in the First Edition (see VIII.299, 309; 389 and note 10).
     Rough  marginal  additions  to  A  make  Aragorn  return  the  white rod
  to Faramir with the words 'That office is not  yet wholly  at an  end' (cf.
  RK p. 245: 'That office is not ended, and it shall be thine and  thy heirs'
  as long as my line shall last'), and give a first draft of his wish that he
  should  be  crowned  by  those  'by whose  labours and  valour I  have come
  to  my  inheritance'.  Here  the  ceremony takes  this form:  'Gandalf took
  the  crown  and  bade  Frodo  and  Sam lay  their hands  also upon  it, and
  they  set  the  White  Crown  of   Gondor  upon   the  head   of  Aragorn';
  whereas  in  RK,  at  Aragorn's  request,  Frodo   brought  the   crown  to
  Gandalf,  who  then  performed  the  crowning alone.  In B  the text  of RK
  was reached at all points in  this scene  apart from  the words  of Elendil
  repeated  by  Aragorn  when  he  held   up  the crown,(2) which   take  the
  form:  Et  Earello  Endorenna  lendien.   Simane  maruvan,   ar  hildinyar,
  kenn' Iluve-metta! A translation pencilled in later  is virtually  the same
  as  that  in  RK (p.  246): Out  of the  Great Sea  to Middle-earth  have I
  come. Here  will I  abide, and  my heirs,  unto the  ending of  the world.'
  In  the  third manuscript  C the  words remained  the same  as in  B, apart
  from  tenn'  (as  in RK)  for kenn',  but were  subsequently changed  to Et
  Earello   Endorenna   nilendie.   Sinome   nimaruva  yo   hildinyar  tenn'
  Ambar-metta!                                                               
                                                                            
     A  notable  visitor  to  Minas  Tirith  among  the  many  embassies that
  came to the King is found in A:                                            
                                                                            
  ... and the slaves of Mordor he set  free and  gave them  all the          
  lands  about  Lake Nurnen  for their  own. And  last of  all there          
  came  to  him  Ghan-buri-Ghan  of  the  Wild  Woods  and  two  of          
  the headmen, and they were clad  in garments  of green  leaves to          
  do honour to the king, and they laid their foreheads on his feet;          
  but  he bade  them rise  up and  blessed them  and gave  them the          
  Forest  of  Druadan for  their own,  so that  no man  should ever          
  enter it without their leave.                                              

          
                                                                           
  This was  not rejected  on the  manuscript, but  it is  not present  in B.
 For the further history  of the  last encounter  with the  Wild Men  of the
 Woods see pp. 61 - 2, 67 - 8.                                              
  Eowyn's  words  to  Faramir  (RK  p.  248),  saying  that  she   must  now
 return  to Rohan  with Eomer,  but that  after the  funeral of  Theoden she
 will return, are absent from A  (but were  added to  B). The  statements in
 RK  that  the  Riders  of  Rohan  left Minas  Tirith on  the eighth  of May
 and that the sons of Elrond  went with  them are  not found  in any  of the
 texts,  and they  remain absent  in the  First Edition;  on the  other hand
 the  return  of  Elladan  and  Elrohir  to  Minas  Tirith with  the company
 from Rivendell and Lothlorien  (RK p.  250) is  already found  in A.  It is
 told  in  A  that  'the  Companions  of the  Ring lived  with Gandalf  in a
 house in  the Citadel,  and went  to and  fro as  they wished;  but Legolas
 sat  most[ly] on  the walls  and looked  south towards  the sea.'  That the
 house  was  in  the  Citadel  was  not  repeated   in  B,   which  retained
 however   the  words   concerning  Legolas;   these  were   lost,  possibly
 unintentionally, in C.                                                     
  In  the  story  of  the  ascent  of  Mindolluin  by  Gandalf  and  Aragorn
 (RK  pp.  248-50)  there  are  some  differences  from  the  final  form to
 mention. In the original text it is  not said  that they  went up  by night
 and  surveyed  the  lands in  the early  morning, nor  is there  mention of
 the ancient  path to  the hallow  'where only  the kings  had been  wont to
 go';  and  Gandalf in  his words  to Aragorn  does not  speak of  the Three
 Rings, but says:                                                           
                                                                           
 '...   For   though   much  has   been  saved,   much  is   passing  away.
 And  all  these  lands  that  you  see,  and those  that lie  about, shall
 be  dwellings  and  realms  of  Men,  whom  you   must  guide.   For  this
 is   the  beginning   of  the   Dominion  of   Men,  and   other  kindreds
 will depart, dwindle, and fade.'                                           
                                                                           
 B has the final text in all this. In A Aragorn says 'I have still twice the
 span  of  other men';  this was  retained through  the following  texts and
 not changed until the galley proof  to the  reading of  RK (where  there is
 a difference between the First and Second  Editions: in  the First  he says
 'I may have life far longer than other men', but in the Second 'I shall').
  When  Aragorn  saw  the  sapling  at  the edge  of the  snow he  cried, in
 A, En tuvien!,  which in  B becomes  En a  tuvien! This  was retained  in C
 but corrected to En  [?in]tuviet; on  the final  (typescript) text  of the
 chapter  this was  retained, but  then erased  and Ye!  utuvienyes written
 in  its  place.  The  passage  continues  in  A,  in   extremely  difficult
 handwriting:                                                               
                                                                           
 '...  I  have  found  it,  for  here  is  a  scion  of  Nimloth  eldest of
 trees.  And  how  comes  it here,  for it  is not  yet itself  seven years
 old?'                                                                      

   And  Gandalf  said:  'Verily  here  is  a  sapling   of  the   line  of
 Telperion   Ninquelote    that   the    Elves   of    Middle-earth   name
 Nimloth.    Nimloth   the    fair   of    many   names,    Silivros   and
 Celeborn (3) and  Galathilion   of  old.   But  who   shall  say   how  it
 comes  here  in the  hour that  is appointed?  But the  birds of  the air
 are  many,  and  maybe  down   the  ages   as  lord   followed  lord.....
 in  the  City  and  the  tree  withered,  here where  none looked  for it
 the  [?race]   of  Nimloth   has  [?flowered   already]  hidden   on  the
 mountain,  even  as  Elendil's  race  lay  hid  in  the  wastes   of  the
 North.  Yet  the  line  of  Nimloth is  older far  than your  line, lord
 Elessar.'                                                                    
                                                                             
     With the names that appear in this passage cf. the Quenta Silmaril-      
 lion in V.209, $16:                                                          
   Silpion the one  was called  in Valinor,  and Telperion  and Ninquelote
 and   many   names   in   song   beside;   but   the   Gnomes   name  him
 Galathilion.                                                                 
 A footnote to the text (V.210) adds:                                         
   Other  names  of  Silpion  among  the  Gnomes  are  Silivros glimmering
 rain  (which  in  Elvish  form  is  Silmerosse),  Nimloth  pale  blossom,
 Celeborn tree of silver...                                                   
 B has here the text of RK,  in which  Aragorn does  not name  'the Eldest
 of Trees', and Gandalf says: 'Verily  this is  a sapling  of the  line of
 Nimloth the fair;  and that  was a  seedling of  Galathilion, and  that a
 fruit of Telperion of many names, Eldest of  Trees.' In  The Silmarillion
 chapter 5 (p. 59) it is told that Yavanna  made for  the Elves  of Tirion
 ... a tree like to a lesser image of Telperion, save that it did not give
 light  of  its  own  being;  Galathilion  it  was  named in  the Sindarin
 tongue.  This  tree  was  planted in  the courts  beneath the  Mindon and
 there  flourished,  and  its  seedlings  were many  in Eldamar.  Of these
 one  was  afterwards  planted  in  Tol Eressea,  and it  prospered there,
 and  was  named  Celeborn; thence  came in  the fullness  of time,  as is
 elsewhere told, Nimloth, the White Tree of Numenor.(4)                       
   In A the sapling did not 'hold only lightly to the earth', but 'Aragorn
 and Gandalf dug deep.'                                                       
                                                                             
   In the account of the riding from Rivendell  and Lorien  at the  end of
 the chapter it is not said in any of  the texts  that Elrond  brought the
 sceptre  of  Annuminas  and  surrendered  it  to  Aragorn; this  was only
 inserted  on  the  final  proof.  Elrond's  daughter  is  named Finduilas
 (VIII.370,  386,  425;  at   this  stage   Faramir's  mother   was  named   
 Rothinel,  p.  54);  and  in  A  my  father  added, after  'Finduilas his
 daughter', '[and daughter of Celebrian child of Galadriel].' This  is the
 first mention of Celebrian, by this or any name. In the last  sentence of
 the  chapter  in  A  Aragorn  'wedded  Finduilas  Halfelven';  this  name
 survived  into  B,  where  Faramir's  mother  Rothinel  was   changed  to

 Finduilas, and Elrond's daughter Finduilas was changed to Arwen,        
 called Undomiel.(5)                                                     
                                                                        
                                  NOTES.                                 
                                                                        
 1. All names in  RK not  mentioned in  my account  can be  presumed to
    be  present  already  in  A,  with the  exception of  Beregond, which
    was  only  changed  from Berithil  on manuscript  C. Thus  Elfhelm is
    called  'Elfhelm  the  Marshal' (RK  p. 244;  cf. VIII.352);  and the
    last king of  the line  of Anarion  is Earnur,  here first  named (RK
    p. 245; cf. VIII.153).  The rather  puzzling reference  to Min-Rimmon
    (RK p. 245:  'tidings had  gone out  into all  parts of  Gondor, from
    Min-Rimmon even  to Pinnath  Gelin and  the far  coasts of  the sea')
    goes back to A.                                                      
 2. The words of Elendil do not appear in A.                           
 3. In A the name Celeborn is  spelt with  C; so  also Celebrian.  In this
    chapter  and  in  the  next  the  C  spelling  reverted  to K  in the
    finely-written third manuscripts, but on both  it was  then corrected
    back to C.                                                           
 4. Cf. also the Akallabeth  in The  Silmarillion, p.  263, and  Of the
    Rings of Power and the Third Age, ibid. p. 291.                      
 5. Arwen  first  emerged  in  the  fair copy  of the  following chapter,
    'Many Partings': see p. 66.                                          
                                                                        
                         Note on the Chronology                          
                                                                        
 A curious point of chronology that arises in  this chapter  concerns the
 lapse of time between the departure of  the host  from Minas  Tirith and
 the destruction of the Ring.                                            
   At  the  beginning  of  the  chapter,  against  the  words  'When  the
 Captains were but  two days  gone', the  figure '19'  is written  in the
 margin  of  A,  i.e.  March  19.  This  is  the chronology  described in
 VIII.432,  according  to  which  the  march from  Minas Tirith  began on
 the 17th (the 18th in RK).                                              
   When in RK (p. 239) it is said that 'the fifth day came since the Lady
 Eowyn went first to Faramir', and that  was the  day of  the destruction
 of the Ring and the fall of the Dark Tower, the same is  said in  A (and
 subsequent texts); and at the  head of  that page  my father  noted: 'F.
 sees E. on  19. 20,  21, 22,  23, 24,  25.' This  day was  therefore the
 24th of March. But this is strange, since already in the first  draft of
 'The  Field  of  Kormallen'  Gandalf  had declared  that 'in  Gondor the
 New  Year  will  always  begin  on the  25th of  March when  Sauron fell
 ...'  (p.  46). In  A, Eowyn  says that  this day  was 'seven  days since
 [Aragorn]  rode  away'  (RK  p.  240),  which  agrees  with the  date of
 March  24  for  the  destruction  of  the  Ring.  But my  father changed
 'seven', as he wrote, to 'nine',  which would  presumably give  March 26
 as the day of deliverance. He then changed 'nine' to 'eight', giving the

  25th as the day, and 'eight' is the reading in B and C, changed in  C to
  'seven' as in RK: this presumably implies that the date of the departure
  from Minas Tirith had been changed to  the 18th.  - On  the significance
  of  the  date  25  March  see T.  A. Shippey,  The Road  to Middle-Earth
  (1982) pp. 151 - 2.                                                     

                                   VII.                                 
                                                                        
                               MANY PARTINGS.                            
                                                                        
 The  original  draft  of  this chapter  ('A') was  paginated continuously
 with  that  of 'The  Steward and  the King'  and bore  no title.  In com-
 parison  with  its  subsequent form  my father's  initial account  of the
 'many  partings'  was  remarkably  brief  and   spare;  and   though  his
 handwriting is very difficult and here and  there altogether  illegible I
 shall give a substantial part of it in full, for it differs in  very many
 points from the story in RK.                                            
  The  opening,  however,  remained  almost  unchanged  from  first  draft
 to final text (apart from  Queen Finduilas  for Queen  Arwen), as  far as
 '"Then I  beg leave  to depart  soon," said  Frodo.' Then  follows (with
 no mention of the Queen's gift):                                        
                                                                        
  'In  three  days  we  will  go,'  said  Aragorn.  'For  we   shall  ride
 with you great part of the way. We too have errands to do.'             
  And  so  it  was  that  the  King  of  Gondor  and  his  Queen  set  out
 once   more  upon   the  North   Roads,  and   many  knights   rode  with
 them;  and  the  Princes  of  Dol  Amroth  and  of  Ithilien;   and  King
 Eomer  and  his   householdmen  were   also  in   that  riding,   for  he
 had  come  to  the  wedding  of  his  lord  and  brother.  And  with slow
 songs  of  the   Mark  they   brought  from   the  Halls   [probably  for
 Hallows]   and  his   resting  in   Rath  Dinen   King  Theoden   upon  a
 golden  bier;  and  as one  that still  slept deeply  they laid  him upon
 a  great  wain  with  Riders  of  Rohan  all  about  it,  and  his banner
 borne  before.  And  Merry  being  his  esquire,  and  a  Knight  of  the
 Riddermark,  rode  upon  the  wain  and  kept  the   arms  of   the  dead
 king.   But   for   the   other   companions   steeds    were   furnished
 according  to  their  stature,  and  Frodo  and  Sam  rode at  the king's
 side   with   Gandalf   upon   Shadowfax;   and   with  them   also  went
 Legolas and Gimli upon Hasufel (1) who had borne them so far.(2)           
  And   slowly   and   at   peace   they   passed   into    Anorien.   And
 ?...... the Greywood (3) under Amon Din.                                   
                                                                        
  Here  my  father  stopped  and  asked  whether  the  homage of  the Wild
 Men  should be  put here  - referring,  presumably, to  the story  in the
 original  text  of  'The  Steward  and  the  King',  where Ghan-buri-Ghan
 and two of his headmen actually  came to  Minas Tirith  (p. 56).  He then

                              
                                                                      
  wrote: 'and there stood Ghan-buri-Ghan by the eaves of the  trees, and
  did them homage as they passed' (see p. 67). The text continues:     
                                                                      
     And  so  at  last  after   many  days   (15?)  they   brought  King
  Theoden  back  to  his  own  land,  and  they  came  to   Edoras,  and
  there they stayed  and rested;  and never  so fair  and full  of light
  was  the  Golden  Hall,  for  no  king of  the City  of the  South had
  ever  come  thither  before.  And  there  they  held  the  funeral  of
  Theoden,  and  he  was  laid  in  a  house  of  stone  with  many fair
  things,  and  over  him  was  raised  a  great  mound,  the  eighth of
  those  upon  the east  side of  the Barrowfields,  and it  was covered
  with  green  turves  of  grass [and]  of fair  Evermind. And  then the
  Riders  of  the  King's  House  rode  about  it,  and  one  among them
  sang  a  song  of  Theoden  Thengel's  son that  brought light  to the
  eyes of  the folk  of the  Mark and  stirred the  hearts of  all, even
  those  that  knew  not  [that]  speech.  And  Merry  who stood  at the
  foot of the mound wept.(4)                                          
     And  when  the  burial  was  over  and  the  last  song  was  ended
  there  was  a  great  feast in  the hall,  and when  they came  to the
  time  when  all  should  drink  to  the memories  of mighty  men forth
  came  Eowyn  Lady  of  Rohan,  golden   as  the   sun  and   white  as
  snow,  and  she  brought  forth  the   cup  to   Eomer  King   of  the
  Mark,  and  he  drank   to  the   memory  of   Theoden.  And   then  a
  minstrel sang  naming all  the kings  of the  [?Mark] in  their order,
  and  last  King  Eomer;  and  Aragorn  arose  and  [?wished  him] hail
  [and]  drank  to  him.  And  then  Gandalf  arose  and  bid   all  men
  rise, and they rose, and he said: 'Here is a last hail (5) ere  the feast
  endeth.  Last  but  not  least.  For  I  name  now  [one >]  those who
  shall  not  be  forgotten  and  without   whose  valour   nought  else
  that  was  done  would  have  availed;  and  I  name  before  you  all
  Frodo  of  the  Shire  and  Samwise  his  servant.  And the  bards and
  the   minstrels   should   give   them  new   names:  Bronwe  athan
  Harthad   and   Harthad   Uluithiad,   Endurance   beyond   Hope   and
  Hope unquenchable.'(6)                                               
     And  to  those  names  men  drank  in  honour;  but  Sam  went very
  red,   and   murmured   to   Frodo:   'I  don't   know  what   my  Dad
  would  think  of  the  change:  he   was  always   against  outlandish
  names.  "The  gentry  can  do as  they please,"  he said,  "with their
  Roriuses  and  Ronshuses,  but  for   plain  folk   something  shorter
  wears better." But even  if I  could say  the name,  I think  it don't
  suit. My hope ........ low, Mr. Frodo, .........'(7)                 
                                                                      
             The announcement by Eomer of the betrothal of Faramir and

 
                                                                        
 Eowyn  and  the words  of Eowyn  with Aragorn  are particularly  hard to
 read, but the passage does not differ significantly from that in RK (pp.
 255-6). The text then continues:                                        
                                                                        
   And  after  the  feast  those  that  were  to  go  took leave  of King
 Eomer,  and  Faramir  abode  with  him,   for  he   would  not   be  far
 from  Eowyn   any  longer.   And  Finduilas   also  remained   and  took
 leave  of  her  father  and  brethren.  But  Aragorn  rode  on  with the
 companions,   and   they   passed   on   to   Helm's   Deep   and  there
 rested.  And  then  Legolas  repaid  his  vow  to  Gimli  and  went into
 the  Glittering  Caves;  and  when  he  returned he  was silent,  for he
 said  that  only  Gimli  could  find  fit  words.  'And  now,'  said he,
 'we will go to Fangorn', at which Gimli looked little pleased.          
   And  so  they  passed....  to  Isengard  and  saw  how  the  Ents  had
 busied  themselves,  for  all  the  stone  circle  was  removed  and was
 planted  with  trees,  but  in the  midst of  the orchards  Orthanc rose
 up  still,  tall  and  [?  unapproachable].  And  there   was  Treebeard
 and  other  Ents  to  welcome  them,  and  he  praised all  their deeds,
 of  which  it  seemed  he  had  full  tidings.  'But  Ents  played their
 part,'  said  he.  'And  there  would  have  been  no  Golden   Hall  to
 return  to  but  for  Treebeard  and  his  folk. For  we caught  a great
 army  of  those  -  burarum  -   those  orcs   that  were   coming  down
 through   the  Wold   and  we   drove  them   away.  Or   otherwise  the
 king of the grassland would [?have never] ridden far.'                  
   And  Gandalf  praised  his  work,  and  at   last  he   said  farewell
 with   many   long   words,   saying   that  he   had  added   some  new
 lines.  And  when  Merry  and  Pippin  at  last  said  farewell  he ....
 them  and  said  'Well,  my  merry  folk!  Take  a  draught  before  you
 go!' And  they said  'Yes, indeed!  ' And  he looked  at them  over the
 bowl,  and  he  said  'Take  care!  For  you  have  already  grown since
 I  saw  you!'  And  they  laughed,  and  then  he  [?went]  sad,  and he
 said  'And  don't  forget that  if you  ever hear  news of  the Entwives
 you  must  send  word  to  us.'  And  Aragorn   said  'The   East  lands
 now  lie  open.'  But  Treebeard  shook  his  head  and  said   that  it
 was far away.                                                           
   But   Legolas   and   Gimli   here   said   goodbye,  and   went  into
 Fangorn,  and  from  there  they  purposed   [?  to   journey]  together
 to their own  countries. 'Alas,  that our  lands lie  so far  apart! But
 we  will  send   word  to   Rivendell.'  And   Elrond  looked   at  them
 and said: 'Send rather to the Shire.'                                   
   Then  they  rode  to  the  Gap  of  Rohan,  and  Aragorn   took  leave
 of  them  in  that   very  place   where  Pippin   had  looked   in  the
 Palantir.  And  Pippin  said  'I  wish  we  could  have  one to  see all

                                    
                                                                            
   our  friends.'  'But  one   only  now   remains,'  said   Aragorn  .....,
   'and  the  king  must  keep  that.  But  forget  not  that my  realm lies
   now also in the North; and later on I may come again.'                    
        And  so  slowly  they  passed  in[to]  the waste  lands west  of the
   mountains    and    fared    north,   and    summer   wore    away;   and
   Galadriel  and  Celeborn  and   their  folk   passed  over   the  Dimrill
   Stair  and  went  back  to  Lorien.  But  Elrond  and  Gandalf   and  the
   hobbits came back at last to Rivendell.                                   
                                                                            
        The chapter ends in this earliest form with  very rough  sketching of
   the time that the hobbits spent with Bilbo, but most of the  essentials of
   the final form are present. The  chief difference  lies in  Bilbo's gifts:
   'Then  Bilbo gave  Frodo his  coat and  sword, and  he gave  Sam a  lot of
   books  of  lore,  and  he gave  Merry and  Pippin a  lot of  good advice.'
   Bilbo's verse (The Road goes ever on and  on) is  lacking, but  that there
   should  be  a  verse  at  this  point  is  indicated  on  the  manuscript.
   Gandalf's intimation that he would go with  the hobbits  'at least  as far
   as Bree' is lacking; and at  the departure  from Rivendell  Elrond's words
   of farewell to Frodo, though  the same  as in  RK (suggesting  that 'about
   this time of  the year'  he should  'look for  Bilbo in  the woods  of the
   Shire'),  were  heard  also  by  the  others:  'And  they  did  not  fully
   understand  what  he  meant,  and  Gandalf of  course would  not explain.'
   The  text then  runs straight  on into  what would  become the  opening of
   the next chapter, 'Homeward Bound'.                                       
                                                                            
        This first manuscript was greatly  enlarged by  the insertion  of new
   material.  The  story  of  the  visit  to  Isengard  was  elaborated,  and
   Treebeard's  account  of  the   release  of   Saruman  from   Orthanc  now
   enters  -  the  necessary  prelude,  of  course,  to  the  encounter  with
   Saruman  and  Wormtongue  on   the  northward   journey  of   the  remain-
   ing  company.  There  are a  number of  differences from  the text  of RK,
   but  they are minor.(8) The  farewell  speeches  of  Treebeard  with Cele-
   born  and  Galadriel now  appear, differing  from the  final form  only in
   the Quenya phrase: O vanimar vanimalion ontari (see note 16).             
        A long rider takes up at the words  'Then they  rode towards  the Gap
   of  Rohan'  (cf.  RK  p. 260),  and the  departure of  Aragorn is  told in
   almost the same  words as  in RK;  but Galadriel  said to  him: 'Elfstone,
   through  darkness  you  have come  to your  desire. Use  well the  days of
   light', and Celeborn said: 'Kinsman, farewell,  but your  doom is  like to
   mine; for our treasure shall outlast us both' (see pp. 124-5 and note 16).
        The  story  of  the  meeting  with  Saruman,  which  had   been  very
   obliquely  referred  to  in  'The  Story  Foreseen from  Kormallen' ('They
   come  on  Saruman  and he  is [?pardoned]',  p. 52),  was now  fully told,
   but  with  a number  of differences,  one very  notable. No  indication is
   given  of  where  or  when  the  encounter took  place: after  the company
   had  crossed  the  Isen  they  'passed  into  the waste  land west  of the

                 
                                                                          
 mountains,  and  they  turned  north,  and  summer  wore  away.  And  many
 days  afterward  they  overtook  an  old  man leaning  on a  staff...' See
 further p. 69.                                                            
  To  Saruman's  remark  'I  am  seeking a  way out  of his  realm' Gandalf
 at first replies:                                                         
                                                                          
  'Then  you  are   going  the   wrong  way   [bracketed:  as   seems  to
 be  your  doom],  unless  you  wish  to  pass into  the utter  North and
 there  freeze  to  death.  For  from  the  Sea  in  the  West  to Anduin
 and  thence  many  days'  march  east  is  the  realm  of the  King, and
 east ere long it will spread beyond the water of Runaeluin.'(9)           
                                                                          
  Without striking this out my father replaced it by:                      
                                                                          
  'Then  you  have  far  to  go,'  said  Gandalf,  'and  should  be going
 eastward.  Yet  even  so  you  would have  to travel  far, and  find the
 border of his realm ever marching up behind you.'                         
                                                                          
  This was struck through, and the  final text  here is:  ' "Then  you have
 far to go," said Gandalf, "and I see no hope in your journey...." '       
  Wormtongue   still  names   himself  Frana,   not  Grima   (cf.  VII.445,
 VIII.55).  Most  curious  is  my  father's  remarkably  different  initial
 conception  of  Saruman's  response  to  Merry's generosity  (the sentence
 that I have bracketed was presumably rejected):                           
                                                                          
  'Mine,  mine,  yes,  and  dearly  paid  for,'  said   Saruman,  clutch-
 ing  at  the  pouch.  And  then  suddenly  he  seemed touched.  'Well, I
 thank  you,'  he  said.  '[You  do  not  crow,   and  your   kind  looks
 maybe  are  not  feigned.]  You  seem  an   honest  fellow,   and  maybe
 you  did  not  come  to  crow  over  me. I'll  tell you  something. When
 you  come  to  the  Shire  beware   of  Cosimo,   and  make   haste,  or
 you may go short of leaf.'                                                
  'Thankyou,'  said  Merry,  'and  if  you  get  tired  of  wandering  in
 the wild come to the Shire.'                                              
                                                                          
  My  father   knew  that   Saruman  acquired   his  supply   of  pipe-weed
 from the Shire (see VIII.59, note 8). There is no certain  indication that
 he  had  at  this  stage  begun  to  conceive  of  any  more  far-reaching
 relations  between  Saruman  and  Cosimo  Sackville-Baggins,  but  in  the
 original draft of 'The Scouring  of the  Shire' this  idea was  very fully
 present (see p. 84). On the other hand, it  is a  very notable  feature of
 that draft that Saruman was not  present in  person in  the Shire  and did
 not preside over the last stages of its spoliation.                       
  Since  as  will  be  seen  subsequently  the whole  of the  conclusion of
 The  Lord  of  the  Rings  from  'Many  Partings'  to  the  'Epilogue' was
 written in one continuous draft, it seems perfectly possible that all this
 new material was  introduced into  the original  draft of  'Many Partings'

  after the first draft of 'The Scouring of the Shire'  had been  written. If
  this  is  so,  it  was  very  probably  when  writing  and  developing  the
  present passage that my father first  conceived of  Saruman's visit  to the
  Shire (as in the story itself the decision to do so also arose in Saruman's
  mind  at  this  juncture,  RK  p.  298);  possibly it  was in  fact Merry's
  extraordinarily  artless  invitation  (though  immediately   abandoned,  as
  will be seen in a moment) that was the germ of the story.                  
    Precisely  what  my  father  had   in  mind   when  he   wrote  Saruman's
  words  here,  'When  you  come  to   the  Shire   beware  of   Cosimo,  and
  make haste, or you may  go short  of leaf',  I do  not know.  It certainly
  shows   that  Saruman   knew  what   was  going   on  there,   but  equally
  certainly it was  intended to  be taken  as good  advice on  Saruman's part
  to repay Merry for  his gift.  But my  father marked  Merry's reply  with a
  large query, and at once,  on the  same page,  recognising that  the pride,
  bitterness  and  malevolence  of  Saruman  could never  be pierced  by such
  a  gesture  on  the part  of Merry  Brandybuck, he  wrote the  passage that
  stands  in  RK  (p.  262):  'This  is but  a repayment  in token.  You took
  more, I'll be bound...'                                                    
                                                                            
    The  first  draft  A was  followed by  a much-needed  fair copy  'B', and
  that  (as  in  'The  Steward  and  the  King') by  a third  text 'C'  in my
  father's  most  handsome  script.  B  was  subsequently  given  the  number
  and  title  'LVII  Many  Partings'.(10) While  the final  form of  the chapter
  was  very  largely  achieved  in  B,  there  remain   a  number   of  minor
  differences  from  the  text  of  RK;  I  mention  here  some  of  the more
  noteworthy, and collect a few further details in note 16.                  
    It  was  in  B  that  the  name  Arwen  at last  emerged. In  the opening
  paragraph  of  the  chapter  in  this  text  the  Queen was  named Ellonel,
  but this was at once changed  back to  Finduilas, and  she is  Finduilas at
  the  two  following  occurrences  (and Evenstar  in 'But  wear this  now in
  memory   of  Elfstone   and  Evenstar   with  whom   your  life   has  been
  woven,'  RK  p.  253).  It  must  have been  at this  point that  my father
  determined  that her  name was  not Finduilas,  and that  he must  find out
  what  it  was;  for  on  a  page  of  rough drafting  for sentences  in the
  opening  of  the  chapter  he is  seen experimenting  with other  names, as
  Amareth,   Emrahil.  He   wrote  Elrond   Elladan  Elrohir   Emrahil,  Fin-
  duilas  >  Emrahil,  and  beside this  (evidently to  avoid the  clash with
  Imrahil)  Imrahil  >  Ildramir;  but  then,   clearly  and   firmly,  Arwen
  Undomiel.  Immediately  after  this  in  text  B as  written Eomer  says to
  Gimli 'But now I will put Queen Arwen Evenstar first' (RK p. 253).         
    In  a  first  form  of  Arwen's  words to  Frodo she  says: 'Mine  is the
  choice of Luthien, and I have chosen as she at last',  the words  'at last*
  being omitted in a second version of the passage;  and of  her gift  to him
  she says in B:                                                             
                                                                            
  '... But in my stead you shall go, Ringbearer, when the time               
  comes, and if you then desire it: for your wounds  have been               

 grievous and your burden heavy.  But you  shall pass  into the           
 West until all your wounds and  weariness are  healed. [Struck           
 out at once: Take this token and Elrond will not  refuse you.'           
 And she took from her hair a white gem like a star]  Take with           
 you the Phial of Galadriel and Cirdan will not refuse you. But           
 wear this now  in memory  of Elfstone  and Evenstar  with whom           
 your life has been woven!' And she took a white gem...                   
                                                                         
   In the third manuscript C the text of RK was reached.                  
     Merethrond, the Great Hall of Feasts in Minas Tirith (RK p. 253) is
 said in B to be 'in the Citadel' (a statement omitted in C). On a page of
 rough drafting for this passage my father dashed off a little plan of the
 Citadel. This is shown as a circle with seven  small circles  (towers) at
 equal distances within the  circumference, one  of these  standing beside
 the  entrance.  Beyond  the  Court  of  the  Fountain  is marked,  at the
 centre, the White Tower and  Hall of  the Kings,  and beyond  that again,
 on the west side of the Citadel, the King's House.  To the  right (north)
 of  the  White  Tower  is  the  Hall  of  Feasts.  The outlines  of other
 buildings are roughed in between the towers.                             
   When  Aragorn  and  Eomer  came  to  the  Hallows  'they  came  to  the
 tomb that  had been  built in  Rath Dinen'  (where C  has the  reading of
 RK,  'the  tombs  in  Rath  Dinen');  and  returning  with the  bier they
 'passed through the City, where all the people stood in silence;  but the
 knights  of  Rohan  that followed  the bier  sang in  their own  tongue a
 lament for the fallen' (so in A, p. 61, 'with slow  songs of  the Mark').
 This was changed to 'the  knights of  Rohan ...  walked also  in silence,
 for the time for song was not yet come' (cf. RK p. 253).                 
   The  encounter  with  Ghan-buri-Ghan  (see  pp.  61  -  2)  was further
 developed, re-using the original passage in the previous chapter  (p. 56)
 where Ghan-buri-Ghan came to Minas Tirith:                               
                                                                         
 ...  and  they  came  to  the  Grey  Wood  under Amon  Din. And          
 there beside the road in the shadow of the trees stood  Ghan of          
 the Wild  Woods and  two of  his headmen  beside him,  and they          
 were clad all in garments of green leaves to  do honour  to the          
 king. For  Ghan-buri-Ghan said:  'He was  great king;  he drove          
 away dark with  bright iron.  And now  men of  Stonehouses have          
 king, he will not let dark come back.' And  he and  his headmen          
 laid their foreheads upon Aragorn's feet; and he bade them rise          
 up, and he blessed them, and  gave them  the Forest  of Druadan          
 to be their own, so that no  man should  ever enter  it without          
 their leave. Then they bowed and vanished into the trees.                
                                                                         
   This was struck through, and a  version replacing  it is  found written
 on the last page of text B of 'The Steward  and the  King', almost  as in

                                
                                                                          
  RK  (p.  254),  in which  the Wild  Men remain  invisible and  only their
  drums are  heard. In  this version  the heralds  added: 'and  whoso slays
  one of his people slays the king's friends.'                             
     All the names of the Kings of the Mark, recited by the minstrel in the
  Golden  Hall,  are  now  given,  but  my  father  missed  out  Folcwine,
  great-grandfather  of  Theoden:  this  was  a  mere slip,  since Folcwine
  appears in the earliest  list of  the kings  (VIII.408), and  without him
  there are only  seven mounds  on the  east side  of the  Barrowfield. But
  the  omission escaped  notice, and  Folcwine was  not inserted  until the
  Second  Edition.  The  eleventh  king  (Hama  in the  original  list) now
  becomes Leof (changed to Leofa in the Second Edition).(11)               
     In  the  parting  of  Merry  from  Eomer  and Eowyn  (RK p.  256) they
  address  him  as  'Meriadoc  of the  Shire and  of the  Mark' -  the name
  Holdwine  ('of  the  Mark')  was  only introduced  on the  galley proof;
  and Eomer says this of the gift of the horn, which he does  not attribute
  to Eowyn:                                                                
                                                                          
  '... but you will take naught but the arms  that were  given to          
  you. This I suffer, because though  we are  of other  lands and          
  kind, still you are to me a dear kinsman whose love can only be          
  requited with love. But this one gift I beg you now to take...'          
                                                                          
  The horn is described in the same words as in RK; but then follows:      
                                                                          
     'This is an heirloom of our house,' said Eowyn, 'and in the           
  deeps of time it was made for our  forefathers by  the dwarves           
  [struck out: of Dale], and Eorl the Young brought it  from the           
  North.'                                                                  
                                                                          
  The  statement  that  the  horn  'came  from  the  hoard  of  Scatha  the
  Worm' entered on the galley proof.                                       
     The  meeting with  Treebeard reaches  in this  text B  the form  in RK
  at  almost  all  points.  Treebeard's  denunciation  of  the   Orcs  runs
  here:   henulka-morimaite-quingatelko-tingahondo-rakkalepta-sauri-
  kumba.(12) A  curious  point  is  that  Gandalf  says  here  The  Third  Age
  begins',  which  was  repeated in  C but  there emended  to 'The  New Age
  begins'  as  in  RK.  With  this may  be compared  my father's  letter of
  November  1944  (Letters  no.  91,  also VIII.219):  'So ends  the Middle
  Age  and  the  Dominion  of  Men  begins',  and, further  back, Saruman's
  speech  to  Gandalf  in  Isengard  (VII.150): 'The  Elder Days  are gone.
  The  Middle  Days  are  passing.  The  Younger  Days are  beginning'; but
  in  'The Story  Foreseen from  Kormallen' (p.  52) is  found 'The  end of
  the Third Age is presaged' and 'End of the Third Age'.                   
     Gandalf's  response  to  Treebeard's  report   that  he   had  allowed
  Saruman to go free remains as it  was in  A (see  note 8):  Treebeard now
  says  'A snake  without fangs  may crawl  where he  will', but  this does
  not yet prompt Gandalf  to the  observation that  Saruman 'had  still one

                                   
                                                                           
 tooth left... the poison of his voice', which entered in  C. Gimli,  in his
 farewell, still concludes as in A (p. 63): 'Alas! that our lands lie so far
 apart.  But  we  will  send  word  to  Rivendell  when  we  may';  to which
 Elrond now replies: 'Send rather to Gondor, or else to the Shire! '        
  Again  as  in  A  (note 8),  Treebeard does  not say  when the  release of
 Saruman  had  taken place,  and this  remained into  the First  Edition; in
 the  Second  Edition 'Yes,  he is  gone' was  changed to  'Yes, he  is gone
 seven days.'(13)                                                           
  The  actual  encounter  with  Saruman  now differed  virtually not  at all
 from  RK,  but  the  placing  of  it  was somewhat  different in  the First
 Edition  from the  revised version  in the  Second. The  text of  the First
 Edition ran thus (RK pp. 260-1):                                           
                                                                           
     Soon  the  dwindling  company  came  to  the  Isen,  and   crossed  over
  it,  and  came  into  the  waste  lands  beyond,   and  then   they  turned
  northwards,   and   passed   by   the   borders   of   Dunland.   And   the
  Dunlendings  fled  and  hid  themselves,  for  they  were afraid  of Elvish
  folk,   though   few   indeed  ever   came  to   their  country.   But  the
  travellers  did not  heed them,  for they  were still  a great  company and
  were  well  provided  with all  that they  needed; and  they went  on their
  way  at  their  leisure,  setting  up tents  when they  would; and  as they
  went the summer wore away.                                                
     After  they  had  passed  by  Dunland  and  were  come  to  places where
  few  folk  dwelt,  and  even  birds  and  beasts  were  seldom to  be seen,
  they  journeyed  through  a  wood  climbing  down  from  the  hills  at the
  feet  of  the  Misty  Mountains  that  now  marched  on  their  right hand.
  As  they  came  out  again  into  open  country  they  overtook an  old man
  leaning on a staff...                                                     
                                                                           
 As  noted  above,  in  the  Second  Edition  Treebeard  told  Gandalf  that
 Saruman  had  been  gone seven  days; and  in the  revision of  the passage
 just cited the First Edition  text 'After  they had  passed by  Dunland and
 were  come  to  places  where  few folk  dwelt, and  even birds  and beasts
 were  seldom  to  be  seen,  they  journeyed  through   a  wood   ...'  was
 altered  to  'On  the  sixth  day since  their parting  from the  King they
 journeyed  through  a  wood  ...'  By  this  change  the company  was still
 in  Dunland  when  they  came  upon  Saruman,  and  a  little later  in the
 narrative, after 'I fancy he could do some mischief still  in a  small mean
 way'  (RK  p.  263),  my  father  added  in the  Second Edition:  'Next day
 they   went   on   into  northern   Dunland,  where   no  men   now  dwelt,
 though  it  was  a green  and pleasant  country' (northern  Dunland, rather
 than  the  country  north   of  Dunland,   now  becoming   the  uninhabited
 region).                                                                   
  From  this  point,  the   end  of   the  Saruman   episode,  the   text  B
 continues:                                                                 
                                                                           
                  September came in with a golden morning shimmering above

                                      
                                                                              
  silver mists; and looking out they saw away to the east the sun              
  catching three peaks that thrust up through floating cloud into              
  the  sky: Caradhras,  Celebras, and  Fanuiras.(14) They  were near              
  once  more  to  the  Gates  of  Moria.  And  now  came  another              
  parting...                                                                   
                                                                              
  This must mean that it  was on  the first  of September  that they  saw the
  Mountains  of  Moria.  This  was  developed by  a late  emendation to  C to
  the reading of the First Edition:                                            
                                                                              
      September came in with golden days and silver nights. At last            
  a  fair  morning  dawned,  shimmering  above gleaming  mists; and            
  looking from their camp on a low hill the travellers saw  away in            
  the east the Sun catching three peaks that thrust up into the sky            
  through  floating  clouds:  Caradhras,  Celebdil,  and Fanuidhol.            
  They were near to the Gates of Moria.                                        
      Here now for seven  days they  tarried, for  the time  was at            
  hand for another parting...                                                  
                                                                              
      In  the  Second  Edition this  passage (from  'September came  in ...')
  was  extended  by references  to the  Swanfleet river,  the falls,  and the
  ford by which the company crossed.(15)                                       
      In various small points B received further alteration  in the  story of
  the sojourn of the  hobbits in  Rivendell, but  effectively the  final form
  was now reached.(16)                                                         
                                                                              
                                     NOTES.                                    
                                                                              
  1.    Hasufel  was  presumably  no  more  than  a  slip of  memory, though
        it  survived  until  emended  on  the  third  manuscript.  Hasufel  was
        Aragorn's  horse  of  Rohan,  and  the horse  that carried  Legolas and
        Gimli was Arod.                                                        
  2.    Pippin is not mentioned, but in a rejected form of the passage  it is
        said  that  he  'rode  with  the  Prince  of Ithilien,  for he  was the
        esquire of the Steward.'                                               
  3.    the  Greywood:  previously  named  ('Grey  Woods')  only  on   a  small
        map in a draft text of 'The Ride of the Rohirrim', VIII.353.           
  4.    Here there is a  mark of  insertion, probably  referring to  verses that
        would be given  at this  point (although  there are  no verses  here in
        the second and third manuscripts: see note 16).                        
  5.    In  wished him  hail (if  correctly read)  in the  preceding sentence
        hail  means  'health,  happiness,  welfare';  in  Gandalf's  Here  is a
        last hail the word seems to be used elliptically, as if 'Here is a last
        drinking (of) hail'.                                                   
  6.    The word that I give as athan is very unclear and uncertain.            
  7.    Gandalf's  praise  of  Frodo  and  Sam,  and  this engaging  glimpse of

               
                                                                     
 the  Gaffer  amid  the  ceremoniousness  of  Edoras,  had disappeared
 in  the  second  text.  Ronshus  is  evidently  his  clipped  form of
 Gerontius,  the  name  of  the  Old  Took;  and  I  suppose  that  he
 attached the 'learned' or  high-falutin ending  -us to  Rory (Brandy-
 buck).  But  the  Gaffer's  views  were   not  entirely   lost.  When
 discussing  with  Frodo  the  name  of  his  eldest child  ('The Grey
 Havens',  RK  p.  306)  Sam  said: 'I've  heard some  beautiful names
 on my travels, but I suppose they're a bit too  grand for  daily wear
 and tear, as  you might  say. The  Gaffer, he  says: "Make  it short,
 and then you won't have to cut it short before you can  use it."  ' -
 Sam's final remark  is unfortunately  altogether illegible;  the word
 preceding  lou might  possibly be  getting, or  pretty, but  the word
 preceding that is certainly not u as.                                
8.  The two sentinel trees that grew  now where  the gates  of Isengard
 had  stood  do  not  appear.  The  words   of  Aragorn   and  Gandalf
 with  Treebeard  after  his mention  of the  destruction of  the Orcs
 (whom  he  apostrophises  only  in  English  adjectives) in  the Wold
 were  different from  those in  RK (p.  258), though  a part  of this
 dialogue was used a little later in the final text:                  
                                                                     
     'We  know it,'  said Aragorn,  'and never  shall it  be forgotten,
  nor  your  storming  of  Isengard,  and  it  is  our  hope  that your
  forest  may  grow  again  in  peace.  There  is  room  and  to  spare
  west of the mountains.'                                             
     'Forest  may  grow,'  said  Treebeard  sadly;  'woods  may spread,
  but not Ents; there are no Entings now.'                            
     'Never  at  least  while  the  Mark   and  Gondor   remain,'  said
  Gandalf;  'and  that  will  have  to  be  very  long  indeed  to seem
  long  to  Ents.  But  what  of  your  most  important  task, Fangorn?
                                                                     
 Treebeard does not say how long it was since Saruman had gone
 (see p. 69); and Gandalf does not tell him that Saruman had
 found his soft spot and persuaded him by 'the poison of his voice',
 but says merely 'Well, he's gone then, and that is all there is to be
 said' (reminiscent of his resigned 'Well, well, he is gone' when he
 heard from Legolas at the Council of Elrond of Gollum's escape,
 FR p. 269). Quickbeam does not appear in the handing over of
 the keys to Orthanc: ' "It is locked," said Treebeard, "locked by
 Saruman, and here are the keys," and he gave three black keys to
 Aragorn.'
9.   Runaeluin: the last four letters are not perfectly clear, but this
 seems much the most probable interpretation. Can Runaeluin be
 the Sea of Rhun?
10.  The third manuscript C was given the chapter-number 'LV'. This
 reduction of the numbers by two begins with 'The Tower of
 Kirith Ungol' (p. 25).

  11.  In the First Edition, while the eleventh king is named Leo f by the
       minstrel in Edoras in 'Many Partings', in the list of the  Kings of
       the Mark in Appendix A (II) the  eleventh king  is Brytta,  with no
       explanation  given.  In  the  Second  Edition  the  explanation was
       added: 'He was  called by  his people  Leofa, for  he was  loved by
       all; he was openhanded and a help to all the needy.'               
  12.  The English adjectives in B are the same as those in RK: 'evileyed,
       blackhanded,  bowlegged,  flinthearted,  clawfingered, foulbellied,
       bloodthirsty'.  In  C  the  words  quingatelko and  rakkalepta were
       omitted,  and  then  henulka  and  saurikumba  were struck  out and
       tingahondo   changed   to   sincahondo.   Finally   sincahondo  was
       changed on the printer's typescript to sincahonda as in RK.        
  13.  On  a  copy  of  the  First  Edition  that my  father used  to make
       alterations for incorporation in the Second Edition he added to the
       section 'The Chief Days from the Fall of the  Barad-dur to  the End
       of the  Third Age'  in Appendix  B the  entry 'August  15 Treebeard
       releases Saruman', but  this was  not for  some reason  included in
       the Second Edition. See the Note on Chronology below.              
  14.  On the names Celebras and Fanuiras see VII.174, 306.               
  15.  The  course  of  this  river was  marked already  on the  First Map
       (VII.305),  flowing  down  from  the  Misty  Mountains to  join the
       Greyflood above Tharbad. It was not referred to in the text  of the
       First Edition, but was named the  Glanduin in  Appendix A  (I, iii,
       first  paragraph).  The  accidents  or  misunderstandings  that be-
       devilled its  representation on  the map  accompanying The  Lord of
       the Rings are detailed in Unfinished Tales pp. 263 - 5.            
  16.  It is not said in B that the only part of  the hobbits'  story that
       really  interested  Bilbo  was  the  account  of  the  crowning and
       marriage  of  Aragorn;  nor  that  he  had  forgotten  that  he had
       already given Sting  and the  mithril-coat to  Frodo; nor  that his
       books of lore had red backs. All these changes entered in the third
       manuscript  C.  The  books  were  labelled  Translations  from  the
       Elvish,  by  B.  B.  Esquire;  Esquire  was  removed on  the galley
       proof.                                                             
          I record here various other details, mostly concerning names, in
       which B differed from RK.                                          
          The  reference  to  Merry as  'a Knight  of the  Riddermark' was
       retained from A (p. 61) and then  struck out.  On Hasufel  for Arod
       see note 1.                                                        
          The alliterative verses of the song  of the  Riders of  Rohan as
       they  rode  round  Theoden's  barrow  were  only  introduced  on  a
       rider to the fourth text, the typescript for the  printer, together
       with the passage preceding  them in  which the  song of  the Riders
       brought to mind 'the  voice of  Eorl crying  above the  battle upon
       the Field of  Celebrant', and  'the horn  of Helm  was loud  in the
       mountains'.   The  king's   minstrel,  who   made  the   song,  was

                
                                                                          
 Gleowin  in  B,  Gleowine  in  C;  and  the   Barrowfields  of   A  become
 the Barrowfield in B.                                                      
  In  Eomer's  farewell  words  to  Merry   (RK  p.   256)  he   speaks  of
 his   deeds   'upon   the   fields   of   Mundberg',   emended  on   C  to
 Mundburg (see VIII.355 - 6).                                              
  Treebeard's   name   of   Lorien    was   spelt    Laurelindorinan,   and
 this  survived  into  the  First  Edition,  becoming   Laurelindorenan  in
 the  Second.  He  still  says   to  Galadriel   and  Celeborn   O  vanimar
 vanimalion  ontari  (p.  64),  0  being  changed  to  A  on  text   B  and
 ontari  to  nostari  on  C.  The   comma  after   vanimar  was   added  in
 the   Second  Edition.   In  VIII.20   I  mentioned   late  notes   of  my
 father's  on  the  fragments  of  other  languages  found  in The  Lord of
 the  Rings,  which  for  the  greater  part  of  the  book are  so hastily
 written  as  to  be  mostly  unusable.  His  translation  of   O  vanimar,
 vanimalion  nostari  can  however  be  made  out  (in  the  light  of  the
 Quenya  words  themselves):  'fair  ones  begetters  of  fair  ones',  and
 with  this  is  a  note  'nosta  beget';  cf.  the  Etymologies  in Vol.V,
 stems BAN, NO, ONO.                                                       
  Wormtongue's   name   remained   Frana   (p.   65)  in   B  and   C,  but
 was  changed  to  Grima  on  the  final  typescript;  and   Gandalf  still
 calls Butterbur Barnabas (RK p. 265).                                     
                                                                          
                           Note on the Chronology.                         
                                                                          
 In  the  original  draft  A  of  this  chapter  there  were  scarcely  any
 indications  of chronology:  Aragorn tells  Frodo (p.  61) that  they will
 depart from Minas Tirith in  three days'  time, but  this only  relates to
 the end of 'the days of rejoicing',  of indeterminate  length; and  it was
 fifteen days' journey from Minas Tirith to Rohan.                          
 In B Aragorn tells  Frodo that  they will  leave in  seven days,  and that
 'in  three  days  now Eomer  will return  hither to  bear Theoden  back to
 rest in the Mark', as he duly did; and all this is retained in The Lord of
 the Rings, together with the  fifteen days  of the  journey to  Rohan. But
 neither B nor  C give  much more  indication than  did the  original draft
 of  the time  taken over  the. stages  of the  journey from  Edoras to
 Rivendell, and  it may  be that  my father  did not  attend to  the matter
 closely until the final preparation of the book. It is a curious  fact that
 the  chronology  of  'The Chief  Days from  the Fall  of the  Barad-dur to
 the End of the Third Age' in Appendix B (and which is the same  in this
 respect  in  both  editions)  does  not  agree  with  the  text  of  'Many
 Partings' in respect either of Eomer's return in  relation to  the setting
 out for Edoras or of the  time taken  on that  journey. In  the chronology
 of 'The  Chief  Days' Eomer  returned to  Minas Tirith  on July  18, and
 the riding  from  the  City  with King  Theoden's wain  took place  on the
 following day, July 19, not four days  later as  in Many  Partings., while

  the arrival at Edoras is dated August 7, eighteen days later, not fifteen
  as in the text.                                                          
    As  I  have  noted already,  no indication  of date  was given  for the
  meeting of Saruman with the  travellers as  they rode  north even  in the
  First Edition; in the Second Edition the passage was altered to  say that
  the  meeting  took  place on  the sixth  day since  they parted  from the
  King, and they were still in Dunland (see p. 69). But in fact this dating
  was  already  present in  the First  Edition, in  the chronology  of 'The
  Chief Days' in The Tale of Years:                                        
    August  22  They  come  to  Isengard; they  take leave  of the  King of
  the West at sunset.                                                      
    August   28   They   overtake  Saruman;   Saruman  turns   towards  the
  Shire.                                                                   
  As the third text C  was written  it was  still on  September 1  that the
  travellers saw the Mountains of Moria,  but late  emendation (see  p. 70)
  produced, or satisfied, the chronology of 'The Chief Days':              
    September 6 They halt in sight of the Mountains of Moria.              
    September  13  Celeborn  and  Galadriel  depart,  the  others  set  out
  for Rivendell.                                                           
  On  September  21,  the  day  before  Bilbo's  birthday, Gandalf  and the
  hobbits  returned  to  Rivendell,  having  taken  (being mounted)  a much
  shorter time  than they  took to  reach Moria  on their  outward journey,
  nine months before.                                                      

                                   VIII.                                 
                                                                          
                               HOMEWARD BOUND.                             
                                                                          
 The  original  draft A  of 'Many  Partings' continued  on into  the opening
 of  'Homeward  Bound'  (see  p.  64),  but  my  father   drew  a   line  of
 separation, and  began a  new pagination,  probably at  an early  stage. At
 the  same  time  he scribbled  in a  title for  the new  chapter: 'Homecom-
 ing'. This text runs  on with  continuous pagination  right through  to the
 end of The Lord of the Rings, and included the Epilogue.                  
  This last of the first  drafts ends  the work  in style:  if not  the most
 difficult of all the manuscripts of The Lord of the Rings it  certainly has
 few  rivals. As  far as  the Battle  of Bywater  (see p.  93) it  gives the
 impression  of  having   been  written   in  one   long  burst,   and  with
 increasing rapidity. Ideas that appear in earlier reaches  of the  text are
 contradicted  later  without  correction  of  the  former passages.  In the
 part  of  it  that  corresponds to  'Homeward Bound'  and the  beginning of
 'The  Scouring  of  the  Shire',  however,  the   text  does   not  present
 excessive difficulty, chiefly because the final form of  the story  was not
 very  substantially  changed  from  that  in the  original draft,  but also
 because   my   father's   handwriting,   while   very   rough   throughout,
 declined only gradually as the text proceeded.                            
  I  break  the  text here  into three  chapters as  in RK.  Throughout, the
 original draft is of course called 'A'.  Of the  tale of  the visit  to The
 Prancing  Pony  there is  not a  great deal  to record.  It opens  thus (RK
 p. 268):                                                                  
                                                                          
  So  now  they  turned  their  faces for  home; and  though they          
 rode now they rode but slowly. But they were at peace and  in no          
 haste, and if they missed their companions of  their adventures,          
 still they had Gandalf, and  the journey  went well  enough when          
 once  they  passed  beyond  Weathertop.  For  at  the  Fords  of          
 Bruinen  Frodo halted  and was  loth to  ride through,  and from          
 here on to Weathertop he was silent and ill at ease; but Gandalf          
 said nothing.                                                             
  And when they came to the hill he said  'Let us  hasten', and            
 would not look towards it. 'My wound aches,' he said, 'and the            
 memory  of  darkness  is heavy  on me.  Are there  not things,            
 Gandalf, that cannot ever be wholly healed?'                              
  'Alas, it is so,' said Gandalf.                                          
  'It is so I guess with my wounds,' said Frodo....                        

    This page of A (carrying the end of the later  'Many Partings'  and the
  beginning  of  'Homeward Bound')  was replaced,  in all  probability very
  soon, by  a new  page with  a chapter  number, 'LVIII',  and in  this the
  opening passage draws nearer to that in RK: the date  of the  crossing of
  the Fords  of Bruinen  is given  (the sixth  of October,  as in  RK), and
  Frodo  speaks  of  his  pain there,  not below  Weathertop; but  he says:
  'It's my shoulder, my wound aches.  And my  finger too,  the one  that is
  gone, but I  feel pain  in it,  and the  memory of  darkness is  heavy on
  me.'(1)                                                                  
    When  Butterbur  came  to the  door of  The Prancing  Pony he  did not,
  as  in  RK,  misunderstand  Nob's  cry  'They've  come  back'   and  come
  rushing out armed with a club:                                           
                                                                          
    And  out  came  Barnabas  wiping  his hand  on his  apron and          
  looking as bustled as ever, though there seemed few folk about,          
  and  not  much talk  in the  Common Room;  indeed he  looked in          
  the dim lamplight rather more wrinkled and careworn.                     
    'Well, well,' he said, 'I never  expected to  see any  of you          
  folk again and that's a fact: going off into the wild with that          
  Trotter ...'                                                             
                                                                          
    Whatever  response  Butterbur  made  to Gandalf's  request 'And  if you
  have any tobacco we'll bless you. Ours has long  since been  finished' is
  not  reported.  When  Butterbur  objects  (RK  p.  272)  that  he doesn't
  want 'a  whole crowd  of strangers  settling here  and camping  there and
  tearing up the wild country' Gandalf tells him:                          
                                                                          
    '...  There's  room  enough  for  realms  between  Isen and            
  Greyflood, and along the shores between Greyflood and Brandy-            
  wine.  And  many-folk  used  to dwell  north away,  a hundred            
  miles  and  more  from  you,  on  the  North  Down[s]  and by            
  Nenuial or Evendimmer, if you have heard of it. I  should not            
  wonder if the Deadmen's Dike is filled with living men again.            
  Kings' Norbury is its right name in your tongue. One  day the            
  King may come again.'(2)                                                 
                                                                          
    Apart  from  these  passages  the text  of 'Homeward  Bound' in  RK was
  virtually present in  the draft text,(3) though  naturally with  many small
  changes in the dialogue still to come, until the end of the chapter: here
  there  is  a notable  difference in  the story.  The conversation  of the
  hobbits  as  they  left  Bree  is  much  as  in  RK, but  without Merry's
  reference  to  pipe-weed  and  without  Gandalf's  reference  to  Saruman
  and his interest in the Shire:                                           
                                                                          
    'I wonder what he [Butterbur] means,' said Frodo.                      

                          
                                                                        
   'I can  guess some  of it  at any  rate,' said  Sam gloomily.  'What I
 saw  in  the  Mirror.  Trees  cut  down  and  all,  and  the  old gaffer
 tumed out. l ought to have turned back sooner.'                         
   'Whatever  it  is  it'll be  that Cosimo  at the  bottom of  it,' said
 pippin.                                                                 
   'Deep but not at the bottom,' said Gandalf.                           
                                                                        
 This stands near but not at the foot of a page.  Across the  empty space
 my father wrote this note:                                              
                                                                        
   Gandalf  should  stay  at  Bree.  He  should  say:  'You   may  find
 trouble,  but  I  want  you  to settle  it yourselves.  Wizards should
 not  interfere  in  such  things.  Don't  crack  nuts  with  a sledge-
 hammer,   or   you'll  crack   the  kernels.   And  many   times  over
 anyway. I'll be along some time.'                                       
                                                                        
   The empty space  had perhaps  been intended  to mark  a pause;  at any
 rate  this  note was  written in  later (though  not much  later), since
 the text continues on the following page  and Gandalf  has not  left the
 hobbits: he is present at and  plays a  part in  the encounter  with the
 gate-guards  on  the  Brandywine Bridge  (at the  beginning of  the next
 chapter in RK, 'The Scouring of the Shire': pp. 79 - 80).               
                                                                        
   They  passed  the  point  on  the  East  Road  where  they  had  taken
 leave  of  Bombadil,  and  half  they  expected  to  see   him  standing
 there  to  greet  them  as  they  went  by.  But  there  was no  sign of
 him,   and   there   was   a   grey   mist   over   the   Barrow-down[s]
 southward and a deep veil hid the Old Forest far away.                  
   Frodo  halted  and  looked  wistfully  south.  'I  should like  to see
 the old fellow again. I wonder how he's getting on.'                    
   'As  well  as   ever,  you   may  be   sure,'  said   Gandalf.  'Quite
 untroubled,  and  if  I may  say so  not at  all interested  in anything
 that has happened to us. There will  be time  later to  visit him.  If I
 were  you  I  should  press  on  for  home  now,  or  we'll not  come to
 Brandywine Bridge till the gates are locked.'                           
   'But  there  aren't  any  gates,'  said  Merry, 'at  least not  on the
 Road. There's the Buckland Gate of course.'                             
   'There  weren't  any  gates,  you  mean,'   said  Gandalf.   'I  think
 you'll find some now.'                                                  
   They  did.  It  was  long  after  dark  when tired  and wet  they came
 to  the  Brandywine  and  found  the  way  barred  at  both ends  of the
 Bridge...                                                               
                                                                        
       The first draft was followed by a fair copy ('B') of 'Homeward
 Bound' with that title, and then by a fine and elegant manuscript ('C').

                        
                                                                            
  Already in B the final form of the chapter was achieved at almost every
  point.(4)                                                                  
                                                                            
                                     NOTES.                                  
                                                                            
  1.    The reason for  the change  was that  the recurrence  of the  pain of
        Frodo's  wound  should  depend  on the  date, not  on the  place. See
        further p. 112, notes 3 and 4.                                       
  2.    The name Nenuial first occurs  here. The  curious (but  certain) form
        Evendimmer,   I   cannot   explain;   Evendim  (and   Fornost  Erain)
        appear in the second text of the chapter.                            
  3.    The return of Bill the Pony is  recorded by  Butterbur in  almost the
        same  words  as  in  RK (cf.  VII.448, VIII.219).  - Two  other minor
        points  may  be  mentioned  here.  Gandalf's  sword  (RK  p.  272) is
        called Orcrist (the name of  the sword  of Thorin  Oakenshield): this
        was a mere  slip, which  however survived  into the  third manuscript
        of  the  chapter,  where it  was changed  to Glamdring.  The entrance
        into Bree by  the road  from Weathertop  was called  'the East-gate',
        and  only  changed  to  'the  South-gate' on  the typescript  for the
        printer; cf. the plan of Bree, VI.335.                               
  4.    In his parting words  to the  hobbits Gandalf  says in  B: 'I  am not
        coming to the Shire. You must settle its affairs yourselves. To bring
        me in would be using  a sledgehammer  to crack  nuts.' With  the last
        sentence cf. the note, written on text A, given on  p. 77.  - Trotter
        and  Cosimo  survived  into  the  third  manuscript  C and  were only
        then  changed  to  Strider  and  Lotho;  Barnabas  survived  into the
        final typescript and was corrected on that to Barliman.              

                                    IX.                                  
                                                                        
                        THE SCOURING OF THE SHIRE.                       
                                                                        
 As has been seen in the last  chapter, the  long draft  text A  moves on
 into  what  became  'The  Scouring  of  the  Shire' without  break; Gan-
 dalf's  departure  to  seek out  Tom Bombadil,  where the  chapter break
 would  come,  was  not  yet  present.  When the  travellers came  to the
 Brandywine  Bridge  their  reception  was  just  as  in  RK,  but  Sam's
 shouted 'I'll tear your notice down when I find it' is followed by:     
                                                                        
  'Come   along   now!'   said   the   wizard.   'My  name   is  Gandalf.
 And  here  is  a  Brandybuck,  a  Took,  a  Baggins,  and  a  Gamgee, so
 if  you  don't  open  up  quick  there  will  be  more trouble  than you
 bargain for, and long before sunrise.'                                  
  At   that   a   window  slammed,   and  a   crowd  of   hobbits  poured
 out  of  the  house with  lanterns, and  they opened  the far  gate, and
 some  came  over  the  Bridge.  When  they  looked  at   the  travellers
 they seemed more frightened than ever.                                  
  'Come,  come,'  said  Merry,  recognizing  one  of  the   hobbits.  'If
 you don't know me, Hob Hayward, you ought to....'                       
                                                                        
  Before  the  narrative  had  proceeded  much   further  the   text  was
 corrected  and  Gandalf's  words  were  given  to  Frodo:  '"Come  along
 now!"  said  Frodo.  "My  name  is   Frodo  Baggins.   And  here   is  a
 Brandybuck, a Took, and a Gamgee..." '                                  
  The  questioning  of  Hob  Hayward  (RK p.  277) is  a tangle  of names
 and titles. So far as I can see, it ran thus as first written, with some
 changes made immediately:                                               
                                                                        
  'I'm sorry, Mr. Merry, but we have orders.'                            
  'Whose orders?'                                                        
  'The Mayor's, Mr. Merry, and the Chief Shirriff's.'                    
  'Who's the Mayor?' said Frodo.                                         
  'Mr. [Cosimo >] Sackville of Bag-End.'                                 
  'Oh is he, indeed,' said Frodo. 'And who's the Chief Shirriff?'        
  'Mr. [Baggins >] Sackville of Bag-End.'                                
  'Oh, indeed. Well, I'm glad he's dropped the Baggins at least.         
 And he'll leave Bag-End too if I hear any more nonsense.'               
  A  hush  fell  on  the  hobbits  beyond  the  gate.  'It  won't  do  no
 good to talk  that way,'  said Hob.  'He'll get  to hear  of it.  And if
 you make so much noise you'll wake up the Big Man.'                     

   'I'll  wake  him  up  in  a  way  that'll  surprise him,'  said Gandalf.
 'If  you  mean  that  your  precious  Mayor  is  employing   ruffians  out
 of  the   wild,  then   we've  not   come  back   too  soon.'   He  leaped
 from  his  horse  and  put  his  hand  to  the  gate  and tore  the notice
 from it, and threw it on the path in the faces of the hobbits.(1)         
                                                                          
   This  was  the  last  appearance  of  Gandalf  before  the  final leave-
 taking  at  the  Grey  Havens.(2) 'Gandalf'  was  changed here  to 'Frodo',
 and 'horse' to 'pony', and it was presumably at this  point that  the note
 given on p. 77  ('Gandalf should  stay at  Bree ...')  was written  on the
 manuscript. It will be seen in what follows that in this  original version
 of the story  Frodo played  a far  more aggressive  and masterful  part in
 the events than he does in RK, even  to the  slaying of  more than  one of
 the ruffians at Bywater and  their leader  at Bag  End, despite  his words
 to Sam already present in  the first  manuscript of  'The Land  of Shadow'
 (p. 32; RK p. 204): 'I  do not  think it.is  my part  to strike  any blows
 again' (see the added sentence given in note 23).                         
   The account of the  hobbits' lodging  that night  in the  guard-house by
 the  Brandywine  Bridge is  much as  in the  final form,  but lacks  a few
 details  (as  Hob  Hayward's  remark  that  stocks  of pipe-weed  had been
 'going  away  quietly'  even  before  Frodo  and  his companions  left the
 Shire,  and  the  remonstrance  of other  hobbits against  Hob's indiscre-
 tion, RK p. 279). It is  Frodo, not  Merry, who  threatens Bill  Ferny and
 gets rid of him. In the story of their 'arrest' at Frogmorton (3) 'one  of the
 Shirriffs' told them that on the orders of the Chief Shirriff (see note 1)
 they  were  to  be  taken  to  the  Lock-holes in  Michel Delving  (cf. RK
 p. 280), which is where the term first  appears (see  pp. 98-9).  It turns
 out  that,  unlike  the later  story, Robin  Smallburrow was  actually the
 leader of the band of Shirriffs (see p. 95):                              
                                                                          
   To the discomfiture of the Shirriffs Frodo and  his companions          
 all roared with laughter. 'Go on,' said Frodo.  'Robin Smallbur-          
 row, you're Hobbiton-bred. Don't be silly.  But if  you're going          
 our way we'll go with you as quiet as you could wish.'                    
   'Which  way  be  you  going,  Mister  Baggins?'  said Shirriff          
 Smallburrows,(4) a grin appearing  on his  face which  he quickly          
 smoothed away.                                                            
   'Hobbiton, of course,' said Frodo. 'Bag  End. But  you needn't          
 come any further than you wish.'                                          
   'Very well, Mr. Baggins,' said the Shirriff, 'but don't forget          
 we've arrested you.'                                                      
                                                                          
   Sam's conversation with Robin Smallburrows was concluded more           
 abruptly in A (cf. RK pp. 281 - 2):                                       
                                                                          
 '... You know how I went for a Shirriff seven years ago, before           

 
                                                                         
 all  this.  Gave  you  a  chance   of  walking   round  the   Shire  and
 seeing  folk  and  hearing  the  news,  and  keeping   an  eye   on  the
 inns.  But  we  all  has  to swear  to do  as the  Mayor bids.  That was
 all  right  in  the  days   of  old   Flourdumpling.  Do   you  remember
 him?  -  old  Will  Whitfoot  of  Michel  Delving.  But  it's  different
 now. Yet we still has to swear.'                                         
   'You   shouldn't,'   said  Sam,   'you  should   cut  out   the  Shir-
 riffing.'                                                                
   'Not allowed to,' said Robin.                                          
   'If  I  hear  "not  allowed"  much  oftener,'  said  Sam,  'I'm  going
 to get angry.'                                                           
   'Can't  say  I'd  be  sorry  to see  it,' said  Robin, and  he dropped
 his  voice.  'Tell  you  the  truth,  your  coming  back  and  Mr. Frodo
 and  all  is  the  best  that's  happened in  a year.  The Mayor's  in a
 fine taking.'                                                            
   'He'll  be  in  a  fine  getting  before  many  days  are  over,' said
 Sam.                                                                     
                                                                         
   The Shire-house (5) at Frogmorton was as bad as the gate-                  
 houses....                                                               
                                                                         
   It  was Frodo,  not Merry,  who made  the Shirriffs  march in  front on
 the  journey  from Frogmorton,  and there  is no  mention of  his looking
 'rather  sad  and  thoughtful' as  his companions  laughed and  sang. The
 incident of the old 'gaffer'  by the  wayside who  laughed at  the absurd
 scene,  and  Merry's refusal  to allow  the Shirriffs  to molest  him, is
 absent;(6) but when  the  Shirriffs  gave  up  their  forced march  at the
 Three-Farthing  Stone while  Frodo and  his friends  rode on  to Bywater,
 the leader saying  that they  were breaking  arrest and  he could  not be
 answerable,  it  was again  Frodo, not  Pippin, who  said 'We'll  break a
 good many things yet, and not ask you to answer.'                        
   The  horror  especially  of  Frodo and  Sam when  they came  to Bywater
 and saw what had been done there is told in A very much  as in  the final
 form; but from Sam's words  'I want  to find  the Gaffer'  (RK p.  283) I
 give the text in full, for differences now begin to multiply,  and before
 long the story evolves in a way totally unlike that of the final  form of
 the chapter. By this point  my father's  handwriting is  of extraordinary
 difficulty, and gets worse; it has been a struggle to elucidate it even to
 the  extent  that  it  is  printed  here.  I  have  supplied much  of the
 punctuation, and I have silently  entered omitted  words where  these are
 obvious, corrected words given wrong endings, and so forth.              
                                                                         
   'It'll  be  dark, Sam,  before we  can get  there,' said  Frodo. 'We'll
 get   there   in   the   morning.   One   night   now   won't   make  any
 difference.'                                                             

   'I  wish  we'd  turned  down  into Buckland  first,' said  Merry. 'I
 feel  trouble's  ahead. We'd  have heard  all the  news there  and got
 some  help.  Whatever  Cosimo's  been  up  to it  can't have  gone far
 in   Buckland.   Bucklanders   wouldn't   stand  any   dictating  from
 him!'                                                                
   All  the  houses  were  shut  and  no  one  greeted  them.  And they
 wondered  why,  till  coming  to  the  Green  Dragon, almost  the last
 house  on  the  Hobbiton  side,  they  were  astonished  and disturbed
 to  see  four  ill-favoured  men lounging  at the  street-end. Squint-
 eyed fellows like the one  they saw  at Bree.  'And at  Isengard too,'
 muttered  Merry.  They  had  clubs  in  their   hands  and   horns  in
 their belts.  When they  saw the  travellers they  left the  wall they
 had  been  leaning  on  and  walked  into   the  road,   blocking  the
 way.                                                                 
   'Where  do  you  think  you're  going?'  said  one. 'This  ain't the
 road to Michel Delving. And where's the perishing Shirriffs?'        
   'Coming  along  nicely,'   said  Frodo.   'A  bit   footsore  maybe.
 We'll wait for them.'                                                
   'Garn,  I  told  the Boss  [> Big  Sharkey] it  was no  good sending
 the  little  fools.  We  ought  to  have  a'gone,  but  the   Boss  [>
 Sharkey]  says  no,  and  .........  [>  the  Boss  let  him  have his
 way.](7)                                                             
   'And  if  you  had  gone,  what  difference  would  that  have made,
 pray?'  said  Frodo  quietly.  'We are  not used  to footpads  in this
 country, but we know how to deal with them.'                         
   'Footpads, eh,' said the  man, 'so  that's your  tone, is  it? I'll
 learn  you  manners if  you ain't  careful. Don't  you trust  too much
 to the Boss's  kind heart.  [Added in  margin: He's  all right  if you
 treat him right,  but he  won't stand  talk of  that sort.]  He's soft
 enough.  But  he's  only  a  hobbit.  And  this  country  needs  some-
 thing a bit bigger to keep it in order. It'll get it, too,  and before
 the  year's  out,  or  my  name's  not  Sharkey.  Then you'll  learn a
 thing or two, you little rat-folk.'                                  
   'Well,' said Frodo, 'I find  that very  interesting. I  was thinking
 of waiting here and  calling in  the morning,  but now  I think  I had
 better  call  on  the  Boss  at  once,  if  you  mean  my  cousin  Mr.
 Cosimo. He'd like to know what's afoot in good time.'                
   The  squinting  man  laughed.  'Oh,  he  knows  alright   though  he
 pretends  not  to.  When  we've  finished  with bosses  we get  rid of
 them.  And  of  anyone  who  gets   in  our   way,  see?'   [Added  in
 margin,  as  a  replacement  or  variant:  '0,  Cosimo,' he  said, and
 he  laughed  again  and  looked  sidelong  at  his  mates.  'Ah,  Boss

                          
                                                                    
 Cosimo!  [Struck  out:  He  knows all  right, or  he did.]  Don't you
 worry  about  him.  He  sleeps sound,  and I  shouldn't try  and wake
 him  now.  But we're  not going  to let  you pass.  We get  enough of
 ....... in our way.']                                               
  'Yes, I see,' said Frodo. 'I'm beginning  to see  a great  deal. But
 I  fear  you're  behind  the  times  and   the  news   here,  Ruffian
 Sharkey.  Your  day's  over.  You  come   from  Isengard,   I  think.
 Well,  I  have  myself  come  from  the  South,  and  this  news  may
 concern  you.  The  Dark  Tower  has  fallen,  there  is  a  King  in
 Gondor,  Isengard  is  no  more,  and  Saruman  is  a  beggar  in the
 wilderness. You are  the fingers  of a  hand that  has been  cut off,
 and  arm  and  body  too  are  dead.  The  King's messengers  will be
 coming soon up the Greenway, not bullies of Isengard.'              
  The  man  stared  at  him,  taken  aback  for  a  moment.   Then  he
 sneered.  'Swagger  it,  swagger  it,  little  cock-a-whoop  on  your
 pony,'  he  said.  'Big  words and  fat lies  won't scare  us. King's
 messengers?' he said. 'When I see them I'll take notice maybe.'     
  This  was  too  much  for  Pippin.  As  he  thought of  the minstrel
 upon Kormallen and the praise  of all  the fair  host, and  here this
 squint-eyed  rascal  calling  the  Ringbearer   little  cock-a-whoop.
 [sic]                                                               
  He  flashed  out  his  sword  and  rode  forward, casting  aside his
 cloak so that  the silver  and sable  of Gondor  which he  still wore
 could be seen. 'We  are the  King's messengers,'  he said.  '[And I'm
 the  squire  of  Frodo  of the  Nine Fingers,  Knight of  Gondor, and
 down  you  go  in  the road  on your  knees or  we'll deal  with you.
 >] And I am the  esquire of  the Lord  of Minas  Tirith, and  here is
 Frodo  of  the  Nine  Fingers  renowned  among  all  peoples  of  the
 West. You're a fool.  Down on  your knees  in the  road, or  I'll set
 this troll's bane in you.' His sword glinted red in the last  rays of
 the  sun.  Merry  and  Sam  drew   and  rode   up  beside   him;  but
 Frodo made no move.                                                 
  The  man  and  his  fellows  taken  aback  by  the  weapons  and the
 sudden  fierce  speech  gave  way  and  ran  off   up  the   road  to
 Hobbiton, but they blew their horns as they ran.                    
  'Well, we've come back none too soon,' said Merry.                 
  'Not  a  day  too  soon,'  said  Frodo.  'Poor  Cosimo.  I  hope  we
 haven't sealed his doom.'                                           
  'What do you mean, Frodo?' said Pippin. 'Poor Cosimo?              
 I'd seal his doom if I could get at him.'                           
  'I  don't  think  you   understand  it   all  quite,'   said  Frodo.
 'Though  you  should.  You've   been  in   Isengard.  But   I've  had

 Gandalf  to  talk  to,  and  we've  talked  much  on the  long miles.
 Poor  Cosimo!  Well,  yes.  He's  both  wicked  and  silly.  But he's
 caught  in  his  own  net.  Can't  you see?  He started  trading with
 Saruman  and  got  rich  secretly  and  bought  up  this and  that on
 the  quiet,  and  then  he's  [?hired]  these ruffians.  Saruman sent
 them  to  "help"  him,  and  show  him  how  to build  and [??repair]
 ...  all  ...  And  now  of  course  they're  running  things  in his
 name - and not in his  name for  long. He's  a prisoner  [?really] in
 Bag End, I expect.'                                                     
   'Well,  I  am  staggered,'  said Pippin.  'Of all  the ends  to our
 journey this is the last I expected: to fight half-orcs in  the Shire
 itself to rescue Cosimo the Pimple of all people!'(8)                  
   'Fight?' said Merry. 'Well, it looks like it.  But we're  after all
 only  4  hobbits  even  if  we're  armed.  We  don't  know  how  many
 ruffians  there  are  about.  I   think  we   may  really   need  the
 sledgehammer for this nut after all.'(9)                                
   'Well,  we  can't  help  Cousin  Pimple  tonight,' said  Frodo. 'We
 must find cover for the night.'                                         
   'I've  an  idea,  Mr.  Frodo,' said  Sam. 'Let's  go to  old Jeremy
 Cotton's.(10) He used to be a stout fellow, and  he has  a lot  of lads,
 all friends of mine.'                                                   
   'What,  Farmer  Cotton  down  South   Lane?'  said   Frodo.  'We'll
 try it!' They turned and a  few yards  back rode  into the  lane, and
 in a quarter of a mile came  to the  gates. Though  it was  early all
 the   farmhouse   was   dark,   and   not  a   dog  barked.   '  "Not
 allowed",  I  suppose,'  grunted  Sam.  They  knocked  on  the  door,
 twice.  Then  slowly  a  window  was  opened  just  above and  a head
 peered out.                                                             
   'Nay, it's none o' them  ruffians,' whispered  a voice.  'It's only
 hobbits.'                                                               
   'Don't  you  pay  no  heed  anyway,  Jeremy,'  said  a  voice  (the
 farmer's wife by the  sound of  it). 'It'll  only bring  trouble, and
 we've had enough.'                                                      
   'Go  away,  there's  good  fellows,'  said  the   farmer  hoarsely.
 'Not  the  front  door  anyway.  If there's  anything you  want badly
 come round  to the  back first  thing in  the morning  before they're
 about. There's a lot in the street now.'                                
   'We know  that,' said  Frodo. 'But  we've sent  them off.  It's Mr.
 Frodo  Baggins  and  friends  here.  We've  come  back.  But  we want
 shelter for a night. The barn will do.'                                 
   'Mr.  Frodo  Baggins?'  gasped  the  farmer.  'Aye,  and  Sam  with
 him,' added Sam.                                                        

   'All  right!  But  don't  shout,' said  the farmer.  'I'm coming
 down.'                                                            
   The  bolts  were  drawn  back  stealthily  and it  crossed Sam's
 mind that he  had never  known that  door to  be locked  let alone
 bolted  before. Farmer  Cotton put  a head  round and  looked at
 them in the gloaming. His  eyes grew  round as  he looked  at them
 and then grave. 'Well,' he said,  'voices sound  all right,  but I
 wouldn't  a'  knowed you.  Come in.'  There was  dim light  in the
 passage, and he scanned  their faces  closely. 'Right  enough,' he
 said,  and  laughed  with  relief.  'Mr. Baggins  and Sam  and Mr.
 Merry   and   Mr.   Pippin.  Well,   you're  welcome,   more  than
 welcome.  But  it's  a  sorry  homecoming.  You've  been  away too
 long.'                                                            
   'What's come of my gaffer?' said Sam anxiously.                 
   'Not too well, but not too  bad,' said  Farmer Cotton.  'He's in
 one  of [?they  new] Shire-houses,  but he  comes to  my backdoor
 and I sees he's better fed than some of the poor things.  He's not
 too bad.'                                                         
   Sam drew a breath of relief. 'Shire-houses,' he said. 'I'll burn
 the lot down yet.'                                                
   They  went  into the  kitchen and  sat down  by the  fire, which
 the farmer blew up to a blaze. 'We  go to  bed early  these days,'
 he  said.  'Lights  o'night bring  unwelcome questions.  And these
 ruffians,  they  lurk  about  at  night and  lie abed  late. Early
 morning's our best time.'                                         
   They talked for  a while  and learned  that Frodo's  guesses had
 been  near  the mark.  There were  some twenty  ruffians quartered
 in  Hobbiton,  and  Cosimo  was  up  at  Bag  End;  but  was never
 seen outside of it.  'His ma,  they took  her and  put her  in the
 Lockholes  at  Michel  Delving  three  [?  months] ago,'  said the
 farmer. 'I'm less  sorry for  her than  I am  for some  as they've
 took. But she did  stand up  to them  proper, there's  no denying.
 Ordered them out of the house, and so they took her.'             
   'Hm,'  said  Frodo.  'Then  I  am  afraid  .we've   brought  you
 trouble.  For we've  threatened four  of them  and sent  them off.
 The  chief of  them is  one Sharkey  by his  own naming.  I feared
 there were more. They blew horns and went off.'                   
   'Ah, I heard 'em,' said the  farmer. 'That's  why we  shut down.
 They'll be after you soon  enough, unless  you've scared  'em more
 than I guess. Not but what I  think they'd  run quick  enough from
 anything of their own size. We'd clear 'em out  of the  country if
 only we'd get together.'                                          

 'Have they got any weapons?'                                        
 'They  don't  show  'em,  no  more  than  whips, clubs,  and knives,
 enough  for  their  dirty work,'  said the  farmer. 'But  maybe they
 have.   Some   have  got   bows  and   arrows,  anyhow,   and  shoot
 [?pretty quick] and straight. They've shot three in this district to
 my knowledge.' Sam ground his teeth.                                
                                                                    
 There  came  a  great  bang  at  the  front  door.  The  farmer went
 quietly  down  the  passage  putting  out the  light and  the others
 followed  him.  There  was  a  second  louder  bang.  'Open  up  you
 old rat, or we'll burn you out,' shouted a hoarse voice outside.
 'I am coming,'  said the  farmer, all  of a  [?quake.] 'Slip  up and
 see how  many there  is,' said  Sam. And  he [?rattled  the chains]
 and....... ed the bolts as the farmer ran up the stairs and back.
 'I should say a dozen at the least, but  all the  lot, I  guess,' he
 said.                                                               
 'All the better,' said Frodo. 'Now for it.'                         
 The  four  hobbits  stood  back  to  the  wall  towards   which  the
 door  swung.  The  farmer  [?unbolted] the  bolts, turned  the key,
 and  then  [?  slipped  back]  up  the stairs.  The door  swung open
 and  in  [?peered]  the  head  and  shoulders  of Sharkey.  They let
 him  come  in;  and  then  quickly  Frodo  drove  the  point  of his
 sword  into  his  neck.  He  fell,  and  there  was  a howl  of rage
 outside. 'Burn them, burn them,'  voices cried,  'go and  get fuel.'
 'Nar, dig them out,'  said two,  and thrust  into the  passage. They
 had  swords  in  their  hands,  but  Frodo   now  behind   the  door
 swung it suddenly  in the  face of  the rear  one, while...  Sam ran
 Sting  through  the  other.(11) Then  the  hobbits  leaped   out.  The
 ruffian who had been down  on his  face was  [? leaning  against the
 doorpost].  He  fled,  blood  pouring from  his nose.  The farmer...
 took  the  sword  from  the fallen  ruffian and  stood guard  at the
 door.  The  hobbits  ranged  about the  yards stealthily.  They came
 on  two  ruffians  bringing  wood  from  the  woodpile  and  ....  ed
 and killed them before they knew they were attacked.  'It is  like a
 rat hunt,' said Sam. 'But  that's only  four and  one with  a broken
 nose.'                                                              
 At  that  moment  they   heard  Merry   shouting,  'Gondor   to  the
 Mark', and they ran  and found  him in  a corner  of the  stack yard
 with  four  ruffians  [?pressing]  on him,  but held  at bay  by his
 sword.  They  had  only  knives  and  clubs.  Frodo  and   Sam  came
 running  from  one  side  and  Pippin  from  another.  The  ruffians
 fled  blowing  horns,  but  one  more fell  to Frodo's  sword before
 he could escape.                                                    

       
                                                                  
  They heard the  farmer calling.  They ran  back. 'One  less,' said
 Farmer Cotton. 'I got him as  he ran.  The rest  have run  off down
 the lane blowing like a hunt.'                                    
  'That's  six  altogether,'  said  Frodo. 'But  no doubt  the horns
 will bring more. How many are there in the neighbourhood?'        
  'Not  many,'  said  the  farmer.  'They  mostly  bide  here  or at
 Michel  Delving,  and  go  anywhere's  there's  any dirty  work. No
 more of [? them's] come in since last spring. I... say  there's not
 much  [more  than]  a  hundred  in  the  whole  Shire. If  we could
 only join together.'                                              
  'Then let's start tonight,' said  Frodo. 'Rouse  up the  folk. Put
 lights  in  the houses.  Get out  all the  lads and  grown hobbits.
 Block the road south and send out scouts round the place.'        
  It was  not long  before all  Bywater was  alive and  awake again.
 Lights  shining in  windows and  people at  their doors.  And there
 were even cheers  for Mr.  Frodo. Some  lit a  bonfire at  the Road
 Bend (12) and danced round it.  It was  after all  not more  than [the]
 six[th  of]  October (13) on  a  fair  evening  of late  autumn. Others
 went off to spy the land round about.                             
  Those  that  went  up  Hobbiton way  said that  there was  quite a
 hubbub  there.  News of  Mr. Frodo's  return had  come in  and folk
 were  coming  out.  The  ruffians  seemed  to  have  left the place
 clear.  'Bolted  towards  Michel  Delving  where  they've  made the
 Lockholes into a fortress, that's what they've  a' done,  I guess,'
 said  Farmer  Cotton.  'But  they'll  come  back.  There's  no  way
 from  the  West.(14) They  don  t  go   down  the   Tuckborough  way.
 They've  never  given  in  there.  And  they've  [?beaten]  up more
 than  one  ruffian  in  the Took-house.(15) There is  a kind  o' siege
 going on.'                                                        
  'We'll send word to them. Who'll go?' No answer.                 
  'I'll  go  of  course,'  said  Pippin. 'It's  my own  country. I'm
 proud of it. It's not more than 14 miles, as the  crow flies  or as
 Took  goes  who  knows all  the ways,  from here  where I  stand to
 the  Long  Smial  of  [?Tuckborough]  where  I  was born.(16) Anyone
 come  with me?  Well, never  mind. I'll  be bringing  some [?stout]
 Tooklanders this way in the morning.'                             
  Frodo  sent out  other messengers  to all  hamlets and  farms near
 enough for folk to be willing to run to them.                     
  Nothing more that night.                                         
  In  the  morning  from  Hobbiton  and  Bywater  and   round  about
 there  were  about  100  fullgrown  hobbits gathered  together with
 sticks,  staves,  knives,  pitchforks  and  mattocks  and  axes and

 scythes.  Messages  came  in  to  say  that  a  dozen or  more ruffians
 had  been  seen  going  west  to  Michel  Delving  the  evening before.
 Then  a  hobbit  ran  in  to  say  that  about  fifty  Tooklanders  had
 come  in  on  ponies  to  the  East  Road  junction  and  a  couple  of
 hundred  were  marching  up  behind.  'Whole   country's  up,   like  a
 fire,'  he said.  'It's grand!  Right glad  we are  you came  back, Mr.
 Frodo. That's what we needed.'                                         
                                                                       
   Frodo  now  had  forces   enough.  He   had  [?the]   block.....  the
 East.....(17) and  put  a  lot  of  them  behind the  hedge on  each side
 of  the  way.  They  were  under  Pippin's   command.  'I   don't  know
 what  you  think,'  he  said  to  Merry and  Sam. 'But  it seems  to me
 that either  the ruffians  are all  going to  gather in  Michel Delving
 and-fight it out  there: in  that case  we'll have  to raise  the Shire
 and go  and dig  them out;  or more  likely they'll  come back  in full
 force this way to their precious Boss. It's forty miles if it's  a foot
 to  Michel  Delving.  Unless  they  get  ponies  (which  wouldn't  help
 much)  or  have  got  horses  they  can't  come  back  for  a   day  or
 two.'                                                                  
   'They'll  send  a  messenger,'  said  Sam,  'and wait  somewhere till
 their friends arrive; that'll speed things up  a bit.  Even so  I don't
 see how they can do it till the day after tomorrow at quickest.'       
   'Well  then,'  said  Frodo,  'we'd best  spend the  time by  going to
 Hobbiton and have a word with Cousin Cosimo.'                          
   'Right  you  are,  Mr.  Frodo,'  said  Sam,  'and  I'll  look  up the
 gaffer.'                                                               
   So  leaving  Pippin  in  charge  on  the   Road  and   Farmer  Cotton
 in  Bywater,  Frodo,  Sam  and  Merry  rode  on  to  Hobbiton.  It  was
 one  of the  saddest days  of their  lives. The  great chimney  rose up
 before  them,  and  as  they  came  in  sight of  the village  they saw
 that  the  old  mill  was  gone   and  a   great  red   brick  building
 straddled  the  stream.  All  along  the  Bywater  road every  tree was
 felled, and little  ugly houses  with no  gardens in  [?desert]..... of
 ash  or  gravel.  As  they  looked  up  the hill  they gasped.  The old
 farm  on  the  right  had  been  turned  into  a  [?long   ?big]  work-
 shop   or   [?  building]   with  many   new  windows.   The  chestnuts
 were  gone.  Bagshot  Row  was   a  yawning   sand-pit,  and   Bag  End
 up beyond could not be seen for a row of sheds and ugly huts.(18)      
   [The   following  was   struck  out   and  replaced   immediately:  A
 [?surly   dirty]   ill-favoured   hobbit  was   lounging  at   the  new
 mill-door.   He   was   [?smut]-faced  and   [?chewing].  'As   good  a
 small model of Bill Ferny as I've seen,' said Sam.                     

   Ted  Sandyman  did  not  seem  to  recognize  them  but  stared  at
 them with a leer until they had nearly passed.                        
   'Going to see the Boss?' he said. 'It's a bit early. But you'll see
 the  notice on  the gate.  Are you  the folks  that have  been making
 all the row  down at  Bywater? If  you are,  I shouldn't  [?try] the
 Boss.  He's  angry.  Take  my  advice  and  sheer  off.   You're  not
 wanted.  We've  got  work  to  do  in  the  Shire  now  and  we don't
 want noisy riffraff.'                                                
   'You  don't  always  get  what  you   want,  Ted   Sandyman,'  said
 Sam.  'And I  can tell  you what's  coming to  you, whether  you like
 it  or  no:  a  bath.'  He  jumped  from  his  pony  and  before  the
 astonished  Ted  knew  what  was  coming  Sam   hit  him   square  on
 the  nose,  and  lifting  him  with  an  effort  threw  him  over the
 bridge with a splash.]                                               
   A  dirty  surly-looking  hobbit  was  lounging  on  the  bridge  by
 the   mill.   He   was   grimy-faced   and   grimy-handed,   and  was
 chewing.  'As  good  a  small  copy of  Bill Ferny  as you  could ask
 for!' said  Sam. 'So  that's what  Ted Sandyman  admires, is  it. I'm
 not surprised.'                                                      
   Ted  looked at  him and  spat. 'Going  to see  the Boss?'  he said.
 'If you are you're too early. He don't see  no visitors  till eleven,
 not  even  them  as  thinks  themselves  high  and  mighty.   And  he
 won't  see  you  anyway.   You're  for   the  Lockholes,   where  you
 belong.  Take  my  advice  and sheer  off before  they come  for you.
 We don't want you. We've work to do in the Shire now.'               
   'So  I  see,'  said  Sam.  'No  time  for  a  bath,  but  time  for
 wall-propping.   Well,   never   you  mind,   Ted,  we'll   find  you
 something  to  do  before  this  year's  much   older.  And   in  the
 meantime  keep  your  mouth  shut.  I've  a  score  to  pay  in  this
 village,  and  don't  you  make it  any longer  with your  sneers, or
 you'll foot a bill too big for you to pay.'                          
   Ted  laughed.  'You're  out  o'  date,   Mr.  Samwise,   with  your
 elves  and  your  dragons.  If I  were you  I'd go  and catch  one of
 them  ships  that [are]  [?always] sailing,  according to  your tale.
 Go  back  to  Babyland  and rock  your cradle,  and don't  bother us.
 We're  going  to  make  a  big  town  here   with  twenty   mills.  A
 hundred  new  houses  next  year.  Big  stuff  coming  up   from  the
 South.  Chaps  who  can  work  metals,  and  make  big  holes  in the
 ground.  There'll  be  forges  a-humming  and  [?  steamwhistles] and
 wheels going round. Elves can't do things like that.'                
   Sam  looked at  him, and  his retorts  died on  his lips.  He shook
 his head.                                                            

                                                
                                                                    
   'Don't   worry,   Sam,'  said   Frodo.  'He's   day-dreaming,  poor
 wretch.  And  he's  right  behind  the  times. Let  him be.  But what
 we  shall do  with [him]  is a  bit of  a worry.  I hope  there's not
 many caught the disease.'                                           
   'If I had  known all  the mischief  Saruman had  been up  to,' said
 Merry, 'I'd have stuffed my pouch down his throat.'                 
   They  went  sadly  up the  winding road  to Bag  End. The  Field of
 the Party was all hillocks, as if moles had  gone mad  in it,  but by
 some  miracle the  tree was  still standing,  now forlorn  and nearly
 leafless.(19) They came  at last  to the  door. The  bell-chain dangled
 loose.  No  bell could  be rung,  no knocking  was answered.  At last
 they  pushed  and  the  door   opened.  They   went  in.   The  place
 stank, it was full of filth and disorder,  but it  did not  appear to
 have  been  lived  in  for  some  time.  'Where  is   that  miserable
 Cosimo  hiding?'  they  said. There  was nothing  living to  be found
 in any room save mice and rats.                                     
   'This  is  worse  than   Mordor,'  said   Frodo.  'Much   worse  in
 some  ways.'  'Ah,'  said  Sam, 'it  goes home  as they  say, because
 this  is home,  and it's  all so,  so mean,  dirty [and]  shabby. I'm
 very sorry, Mr. Frodo. But  I'm glad  I didn't  know before.  All the
 time in the bad  places we've  been in  I've had  the Shire  in mind,
 and  that's what  I've rested  on, if  you take  my meaning.  I'd not
 have had a hope if I'd known all this.'                             
   'I  understand,'  said  Frodo.  'I  said much  the same  to Gandalf
 long ago.(20) Never mind,  Sam.  It's  our  task to  put it  all right
 again.  Hard  work,  but  we'll  not  mind.  Your  box  will  come in
 useful.'                                                            
   'My  box?'  said  Sam.  'Glory  and  sunshine,  Mr.  Frodo,  but of
 course.  She  knew,  of  course  she  knew.  Showed me  a bit  in the
 Mirror. Bless her. I'd well-nigh  forgotten it.  But let's  find that
 Boss first.'                                                        
   'Hi  you,  what're  you  doing?  Come  out  of  it!'  A  loud voice
 rang  out.  They  ran to  the door  and saw  a large  man, bowlegged,
 squinteyed,   [?painfully   ??bent]   coming   up   the   field  from
 one  of  the  sheds.  'What  in  Mordor  do  you  mean  by   it?'  he
 shouted.  'Come  out  of  it.  Come  here,  you Shire-rats.  I [?saw]
 you.'                                                               
   They  came  out  and  went  to  meet  him.  When  they   drew  near
 enough  for  him  to  see  them he  stopped and  looked at  them, and
 to Frodo it seemed  that he  was.... [?and]  a little  afraid. 'We're
 looking for the Boss,'  he said,  'or so  I think  you call  him. Mr.
 Cosimo of Bag End. I'm his cousin. I used to live here.'            

         
                                                                     
  'Hi  lads,  hi,  [?come  here],'  shouted the  man. 'Here  they are.
 We've got 'em.'                                                      
  But there was no answer.                                            
  Frodo  smiled.  'I  think,  Ruffian  Sharkey,  [?  we]   should  cry
 "We've  got  him"?  If  you're  calling for  your other  ruffians I'm
 afraid  they've  made off.  To Michel  Delving, I'm  told. I  am told
 you  sleep  sound.(21) Well,  what  about  it  now. The  hobbits drew
 their  swords  and  pressed  near  him;  but  he  backed  away.  Very
 orc-like  all  his  movements  were,  and  he  stooped  now  with his
 hands nearly touching  the ground.  'Blast and  grind the  fools,' he
 said. 'Why didn't they warn me?'                                     
  'They  thought  of  themselves  first, I  expect,' said  Frodo, 'and
 anyway  you've  given  strict  orders that  your sleep  is not  to be
 disturbed.  It  s  on every  notice. Come.  I want  to see  the Boss.
 Where is he?'                                                        
  The  man  looked  puzzled.  Then  he  laughed.  'You're  looking  at
 him,' he said. 'I'm the Boss. I'm Sharkey all right.'                
  'Then where is Mr. Cosimo of Bag End?'                              
  'Don't  ask  me,'  said  the  man.  'He  saw  what  was  coming, and
 he legged it one night. Poor booby. But  it saved  us the  trouble of
 wringing  his  neck.  We'd  had  enough  of  him.  And  we've  got on
 better without him. He hadn't the guts of his ma.'                   
  'I  see,'  said  Frodo.  'So  you ruffians  from Isengard  have been
 bullying  this country  for a  year, and  [??pretending] to  be Mayor
 and  Shirriff  and  what  not,  and  eating  most  of  the  food  and
 ... ing folk and setting up your filthy hutches. What for?'          
  'Who  are  you,'  said the  man, 'to  "what for"  me? I'm  the Boss.
 And I do what I like. These  little swine  have got  to learn  how to
 work  and  I'm  here  to  learn  'em.  Saruman  wants  goods  and  he
 wants  provisions,  and he  wants a  lot of  things lying  idle here.
 And he'll get them, or we'll screw the necks of  all you  little rats
 and take the land for ourselves.'                                    
  'Isengard  is  a  ruin  and  Saruman  walks   as  a   beggar,'  said
 Frodo.  'You've  outlived  your  time,  Ruffian  Sharkey.   The  Dark
 Tower  has  fallen and  there is  a King  in Gondor,  and there  is a
 King also  in the  North. We  come from  the King.  I give  you three
 days. After that you are outlaw, and  if you're  found in  this Shire
 you shall be killed, as you killed  the [?wretch]  Cosimo. I  see in
 your eye that  you lie,  and in  your hands  that you  strangled him.
 Your way leads downhill and [to] the East. Quick now!'               
  The  orc-man  looked  at them  with such  a leer  of hatred  as they
 had not seen even in all their adventures. '... you're liars like all

 your kind. Elf-friends and.......  ... And four to one, which makes
 you so bold.'                                                     
   'Very well,' said Frodo, 'one to  one.' He  took off  his cloak.
 Suddenly he shone, a small gallant figure clad in mithril  like an
 elf-prince.  Sting  was in  his hand;(22) but he  was not  much more
 than half Sharkey's  stature'. Sharkey  had a  sword, and  he drew
 it,  and in  a [?fury]  hewed double-handed  at Frodo.  But Frodo
 using  the  advantage  of  his  size and  [?courage] ran  in close
 holding his cloak as a shield and slashed his leg above  the knee.
 And  then  as  with  a groan  and a  curse the  orc-man [?toppled]
 over  him  he  stabbed  upwards,  and  Sting passed  clean through
 his body.                                                         
   So died Sharkey  the Boss  [?on the]  .... where  Bilbo's garden
 had  been.  Frodo  [??crawling] from  under him  looked at  him as
 he wiped Sting on the grass. 'Well,' he said, 'if ever Bilbo hears
 of this he'll believe the world has  really changed!  When Gandalf
 and I sat here long ago, I think that at least  one thing  I could
 never have guessed would  be that  the last  stroke of  the battle
 would be at this door.'(23)                                       
   'Why  not?'  said  Sam.  'Very  right and  proper. And  I'm glad
 that it was yours, Mr. Frodo. But if I may say so, though it was a
 grand day at Kormallen,  and the  happiest I  have known,  I never
 have felt that you got as much praise as you deserve.'            
   'Of  course  not,  Sam,'  said  Frodo.  'I'm  a hobbit.  But why
 grumble?  You've  been  far   more  neglected   yourself.  There's
 never only one hero in any true tale, Sam, and  all the  good folk
 are in others' debt. But if one had  to choose  one and  one only,
 I'd choose Samwise.'                                              
   'Then  you'd  be  wrong,  Mr.  Frodo,'  said  Sam.  'For without
 you  I'm  nothing.  But  you  and  me  together, Mr.  Frodo: well,
 that's more than either alone.'                                   
   'It's more than anything I've heard of,' said Merry. 'But as for
 the last stroke of battle, I'm  not so  sure. You've  finished the
 beastly Boss, while I only looked on. I've a [?feeling]  from the
 horns in the distance you'll find that Pippin  and the  Tooks have
 had the last word. Thank heaven my..... is Took Brandybuck.'      
   It was as he said.  While they  had dealt  with the  Boss things
 had flared up in  Bywater. The  ruffians were  no fools.  They had
 sent a man on a  horse to  [?within) horn  cry of  Michel Delving
 (for  they  had  many  horn-signals).  By  midnight  they  had all
 assembled  at  Waymoot,(24) 18 miles  west   of  the   Bywater  Road
 [?crossing].  They  had  [?horses  of  their  own]  on  the  White

 Downs  and  rode  like  the  fire.  They  charged  the   road-barrier  at
 10   a.m.  but   fifty  were   slain.  The   others  had   scattered  and
 escaped. Pippin had killed [?five] and was wounded himself.               
     So ended  the [??  fierce] battle  of Bywater,  the only  battle ever
 fought in the Shire. And it has at least a chapter all  to itself  in all
 standard histories.                                                      
     It  was  some  time  before  the  last  ruffians  were   hunted  out.
 And  oddly   enough,  little   though  the   hobbits  were   inclined  to
 believe it, quite a number turned out to be far from incurable.          
                                                                         
     This ends a page, and with  it the  now fearsomely  difficult writing
 comes to an end: for the next page is perfectly legible, and  this better
 script continues to the end of the draft, which  is also  the end  of The
 Lord  of  the  Rings.  The  pagination  is  continuous, however,  and the
 . likeliest explanation  seems to  be that  there was  simply a  break in
 composition at this point.                                               
   The  division  between  'The  Scouring  of  the  Shire'  and  'The Grey
 Havens' occurs at a point  in RK  that has  nothing corresponding  in the
 original draft, but  it is  convenient to  make a  break here,  after one
 further paragraph concerning the fate of the 'ruffians', and to  give the
 further continuation of the draft in the following chapters.             
                                                                         
   If  they  gave  themselves  up  they  were  kindly  treated,  and  fed
 (for  they  were  usually  half-starved  after  hiding  in  the  woods),
 and  then  shown  to  the  borders.  This  sort  were   Dunlanders,  not
 orc-men/halfbreeds,  who   had    originally   come    because   their
 own  land  was   wretched,  and   Saruman  had   told  them   there  was
 a  good  country  with  plenty  to  eat  away  North.  It  is  said that
 they  found  their  own  country  very  much  better  in  the   days  of
 the  King  and  were  glad  to  return; but  certainly the  reports that
 they  spread  (enlarged  for  the  covering  of  their  own   shame)  of
 the  numerous  and  warlike,  not  to  say  ferocious,  hobbits  of  the
 Shire   did   something   to   preserve   the   hobbits   from   further
 trouble.                                                                 
                                                                         
   It is very striking that here, virtually at the end of The Lord  of the
 Rings  and  in  an  element  in  the  whole  that  my  father   had  long
 meditated,  the story  when he first wrote  it down  should have  been so
 different from its final form (or that he so signally failed to see 'what
 really happened'!). And this is not only because the original  story took
 a wrong direction, as it turned out,  when all  four of  the 'travellers'
 went to Farmer Cotton's house, nor because  he did  not perceive  that it
 was  Saruman  who  was the  real 'Boss',  Sharkey, at  Bag End,  but most
 of all because Frodo is  portrayed here  at every  stage as  an energetic
 and  commanding  intelligence, warlike  and resolute  in action;  and the

  final  text  of  the  chapter  had  been  very  largely achieved  when the
  changed  conception  of  Frodo's  part  in  the   Scouring  of   the  Shire
  entered.                                                                   
    It is  perhaps a  minor question,  to try  to resolve  how my  father was
  developing the idea of 'Sharkey' as he wrote this text, but it is certainly
  not easy to do so. The statements made are as follows:                     
     The chief of the orcish men at  Bywater said  (p. 82)  that he  had told
  the  Boss  that it  was no  good sending  hobbits, and  that the  men ought
  to  have gone,  but the  Boss had  said no.  This was  changed to  make the
  man  say  that  he  had  given this  advice to  'Big Sharkey',  but Sharkey
  had said no, and 'the Boss let him have his way'.                          
     Later in the same conversation, this man  says: 'It'll  get it  too, and
  before  the  year's  out,  or  my  name's  not  Sharkey.' Then  Frodo calls
  him (p. 83) 'Ruffian Sharkey'.                                             
     When  the  ruffians  came  to  Farmer  Cotton's  house it  was 'Sharkey'
  who peered in at the door,"and Frodo slew him with his sword.              
     The  man  who  accosted  the   hobbits  at   Bag  End   (whose  orc-like
  character  is  much  emphasised)  is  called  by  Frodo  'Ruffian  Sharkey'
  (p. 91).                                                                   
     Frodo  tells  this  man  that  he  wants to  see the  Boss; to  which he
  replies: 'I'm the Boss. I'm Sharkey all right.'                            
     Subsequently  Frodo  again  calls  him 'Ruffian  Sharkey'; and  he slays
  him with Sting in single combat.                                           
    As  the  text  stands  there  can  be no  solution to  this unless  it is
  supposed  that  my  father  changed  his  conception  as  he  wrote without
  altering  the  earlier  passages. This  would probably  mean that  the name
  'Sharkey',  whatever  its  basis  as  a  name,  was  transferred  from  the
  squint-eyed  rascal  at  Bywater  when  my  father  saw  that   'the  Boss'
  (Cosimo  Sackville-Baggins)  was  being  used   now  purely   nominally  by
  some  more  ruthless   and  sinister   presence  at   Bag  End:   this  was
  Sharkey'.(25) Then,  suddenly,  after  the  present  draft was  completed, my
  father   saw  who   it  really   was  that   had  supplanted   Cosimo,  and
  Saruman took over the name Sharkey'.(26)                                   
    At  any  rate, it  is altogether  certain that  Saruman only  entered the
  Shire  in  person  in  the  course  of  the  development  of   the  present
  chapter.  On  the  other  hand,  his  previous  baleful   association  with
  Cosimo  Sackville-Baggins was  present in  the original  draft, as  is seen
  from  Frodo's  remarks  at  Bywater  (p.  84)  and   Merry's  at   Bag  End
  (p.  90:  If I  had known  all the  mischief Saruman  had been  up to,  I d
  have stuffed my pouch down his throat').                                   
                                                                            
    It required much further work to  attain the  story as  it stands  in The
  Return of the  King,  and  the  vehicle  of  this  development   was  the
  complicated  second  manuscript  'B',  which  was  numbered  'LIX'  and  at
  first given the title 'The Mending of  the Shire'.  It seems  very probable
  that  Saruman's  presence   at  Bag   End  had   already  arisen   when  my

               
                                                                         
 father began writing this text, and the references to 'Sharkey' are  as in
 RK;  but  while  in  detail  and in  wording it  advances far  towards the
 final form he was still  following A  in certain  features, and  the major
 shift  in  the  plot  (whereby  the  fight  at  Farmer Cotton's  house was
 removed) took place in the course of the writing of the manuscript.      
 Before that point  in the  story is  reached the  most notable  feature is
 that  Frodo  retains  his  dominance  and  his  resolute   captaincy.  The
 incident of the old 'gaffer' who jeered at the band of Shirriffs  on their
 forced  march  from  Frogmorton  entered  in  B,  but  it  was  Frodo, not
 Merry,  who  sharply  ordered  their  leader  to  leave  him   alone.  The
 leader  was  still,  and  explicitly, Robin  Smallburrow ('"Smallburrow!"
 said Frodo.  "Order your  fellows back  to their  places at  once"'); but
 his  displacement  by  the officious  and anonymous  leader took  place in
 the course of the writing of this manuscript.(27)                        
 There  was  a  notable  development   in  B   of  Frodo's   exposition  to
 Pippin  concerning  Cosimo  and  Saruman  and  the   pass  to   which  the
 Shire  has  been  brought  (see  pp.  83 -  4). This  was removed  (cf. RK
 p. 285) when, on  a rider  inserted into  B, it  became Farmer  Cotton who
 recounted  from  personal  knowledge  the recent  history; but  Cotton, of
 course,  did  not  know  who  Sharkey  was,   and  presumably   would  not
 have been much enlightened to learn that he was Saruman.                 
                                                                         
 'I   don't   think  you   understand  it   quite,'  said   Frodo.  'Though
 :  you  were  at  Isengard, and  have heard  all that  I have  since. Yes,
 Poor  Cosimo!  He  has  been  a  wicked  fool.  But  he's  caught  in  his
 own   net  now.   Don't  you   see?  Saruman   became  interested   in  us
 and  in  the  Shire  a  good  while  ago,  and  began  spying.  [Added: So
 Gandalf  said.]  A  good  many  of   the  strange   folk  that   had  been
 prowling   about  for   a  long   while  before   we  started   must  have
 been  sent  by  him.  I  suppose  he  got  into  touch  with  Cosimo  that
 way.  Cosimo  was  rich   enough,  but   he  always   did  want   more.  I
 expect   he   started   trading   with   Saruman,   and   getting   richer
 secretly,   and  buying   up  this   and  that   on  the   quiet.  [Added:
 Saruman needed supplies for his war.]'                                   
 'Ah!'   said   Sam,  'tobacco,   a  weakness   of  Saruman's.   [>  'Yes!'
 said   Pippin.   'And  tobacco   for  himself   and  his   favourites!]  I
 suppose  that  Cosimo  must  have  got  his  hands  on  most  of  it.  And
 on the South-farthing fields, too, I shouldn't wonder.'                  
 'I  expect  so,'  said  Frodo.  'But  he  soon   got  bigger   ideas  than
 that.  He  began  hiring  [>  He  seems  to   have  hired]   ruffians;  or
 Saruman   sent   them   to   him,   to   "help   him".   Chimneys,   tree-
 hacking,  all  those  shoddy  little  houses.  They  look  like imitations
 of   Saruman's   notions   of   "improvement".   But   now,   of   course,
 the ruffians are on top...'                                              

   The text then becomes  that of  RK; but  after Frodo's  admonition on
 the subject of killing  (RK p.  285) it  continues thus,  following and
 expanding A (p. 84):                                                   
                                                                       
   'It depends on how many of these ruffians there are,' said '         
 Merry. 'If there are a lot, then it will certainly mean fighting,      
 Frodo. And it isn't going to be as easy after this. It may prove a     
 nut tough enough for Gandalf's sledgehammer. After all we're           
 only four hobbits, even if we're armed.'                               
   'Well, we can't help Cousin Pimple tonight,' said Pippin; 'we        
 need to find more out. You heard that horn-blowing? There's            
 evidently more ruffians near at hand. We ought to get under            
 cover soon. Tonight will be dangerous.'                                
   'I've an idea,' said Sam. 'Let's go to old Cotton's. He always       
 was a stout fellow, and he's a lot of lads that were all friends of
 mine.'                                                                 
   'D'you mean Farmer Cotton down South Lane?' said Frodo.              
 'We'll try him! '                                                      
   They turned, and a few yards back came on South Lane -               
 leading out of the main road; in about a quarter of a mile it          
 brought them to the farmer's gates.                                    
                                                                       
   In the story of their arrival at  the farm,  their welcome  there and
 conversation with  Farmer Cotton,  my father  followed A  (pp. 84  - 6)
 closely,  with  some  minor  expansion  but no  movement away  from the
 draft  narrative (except  that the  imprisonment of  Lobelia Sackville-
 Baggins  is  made longer:  '"They took  his ma  six months  ago," said
 Cotton, "end o' last April" '). But from the bang on the front door the
 story changes:                                                         
                                                                       
   There  came  at  that  moment  a  loud  bang  on  the   door.  Farmer
 Cotton  went  softly  down  the  passage,  putting  out the  light. The
 others followed. There was a second louder bang.                       
   'Open  up,  you  old  rat,  or  we'll  burn  you  out!  '  shouted  a
 hoarse  voice  outside.  Mrs.  Cotton  in  a  nearby  room   stifled  a
 scream.  Down  the  stairs  that  led  into  the  kitchen   five  young
 hobbits  came  clattering  from   the  two   upper  rooms   where  they
 slept. They had thick sticks, but nothing more.                        
   'I'm   coming,'  shouted   the  farmer,   rattling  the   chains  and
 making   a   to-do   with   the   bolts.  'How   many  is   there?'  he
 whispered  to  his  sons.  'A  dozen  at  least,'  said Young  Tom, the
 eldest, 'maybe all the lot.'                                           
   'All  the better,'  said Frodo.  'Now for  it! Open  up and  then get
 back. Don't join in, unless we need help badly.'                       

   The  four  hobbits  with  swords  drawn  stood  back to  the wall
 against  which  the  door  swung. There  came a  great blow  on the
 lock,  but  at  that  moment  the  farmer drew  the last  bolt, and
 slipped  back with  his sons  some paces  down the  passage [added:
 and round  the corner  out of  sight]. The  door opened  slowly and
 in  peered  the head  of the  ruffian they  had already  met. He
 stepped  forward,  stooping,  holding  a  sword  in  his  hand.  As
 soon  as  he  was  well inside,  the hobbits,  who were  now behind
 the opened door, flung it back  with a  crash. While  Frodo slipped
 a bolt back, the three others  leaped on  the ruffian  from behind,
 threw him down on his face and  sat on  him. He  felt a  cold blade
 of steel at his neck.                                              
    'Keep  still and  quiet! '  said Sam.  'Cotton! '  called Merry.
 'Rope! We've got one. Tie him up!'                              
   But the ruffians outside began attacking  the door  again, while
 some  were smashing  the windows  with stones.  'Prisoner!' said
 Frodo.  'You seem  a leader.  Stop your  men, or  you will  pay for
 the damage!'                                                       
    They dragged him close to the door.  'Go home,  you fools!  ' he
 shouted. 'They've got  me, and  they'll do  for me,  if you  go on.
 Clear out! Tell Sharkey! '                                         
    'What  for?'  a  voice  answered  from  outside.  'We  know what
 Sharkey  wants.  Come  on,  lads!  Burn   the  whole   lot  inside!
 Sharkey  won't  miss  that  boob;  he's  no use  for them  as makes
 mistakes. Burn the lot! Look alive and get the fuel! '             
    'Try again!' said Sam grimly.                                   
    The  prisoner  now  desperately  frightened  screamed  out:  Hi,
 lads!  No  burnings!  No  more  burnings,  Sharkey  said.   Send  a
 messenger.  You  might  find  it  was  you as  had made  a mistake.
 Hi! D'you hear?'                                                   
    'All right, lads!' said the other voice. 'Two  of you  ride back
 quick. Two go for fuel. The rest make a ring round the place!'
                                                                   
 'Well,  what's  the  next  move?'  said  Farmer  Cotton.  'At least
 they  won't  start  burning  until  they've  ridden to  Bag-end and
 back:  say  half  an hour,  allowing for  some talk.  The murdering
 villains! Never  thought they'd  start burning.  They burned  a lot
 of folk out earlier, but they've not done [any] for a long while.
 We understood  the Boss  had stopped  it. But  see here!  I've got
 the wife and my daughter Rosie to think of.'                       
    'There's only two things  to be  done,' said  Frodo. 'One  of us
 has got to slip out and  get help:  rouse the  folk. There  must be

 200 grown hobbits not far away. Or else we've got to burst out          
 in a pack with your wife and daughter in a  huddle, and  do it          
 quick, while two are away and before more come.'                        
   'Too much risk for the one [that]  slips out,'  said Cotton.          
 'Burst out together, that's the ticket, and make a dash up the          
 lane.'                                                                  
                                                                        
   The concluding passage,  from 'There's  only two  things to  be done,'
 was written in a rapidly degenerating scribble, and the text  ends here,
 not at the foot of a page. The story of the attack on the  farmhouse had
 already shifted strongly away from that in the original draft  (in which
 Frodo and  Sam slew  two of  the marauders  at the  front door  and four
 others were killed in the yard before the remainder  fled); and  at this
 point my father decided that he had  taken a  wrong turning.  Perhaps he
 could not see any  credible way  in which  they could  burst out  of the
 house  (with  the  young  Cottons  and  their mother  in the  midst) and
 through the ring of men unscathed. At any rate, the  whole of  this part
 of  the  B  text, from  ' "D'you  mean Farmer  Cotton down  South Lane?"
 said Frodo' (p. 96),  was removed  from the  manuscript and  replaced by
 a new start, with Frodo's saying  in response  to Sam's  suggestion that
 they  all  go  to  Farmer  Cotton's:  'No! It's  no good  getting "under
 cover" ', as in RK (p. 286), where however it is Merry who says this. It
 is  Frodo  also,  not Merry,  who answers  Pippin's question  'Do what?'
 with 'Raise the Shire! Now! Wake all our people!',  and tells  Sam that
 he can make  a dash  for Cotton's  farm if  he wants  to; he  ends 'Now,
 Merry, you have a horn of the Mark. Let us hear it!'                    
   The story of the return of the four hobbits to the middle  of Bywater,
 Merry's horn-call, Sam's meeting with  Farmer Cotton  and his  sons, his
 visit to Mrs. Cotton and Rose, and the  fire made  by the  villagers, is
 told  in virtually  the same  words as  in RK  (pp. 286  - 8),  the only
 difference being that it was on the orders of Frodo, not of  Merry, that
 barriers  were  set  up across  the road  at each  end of  Bywater. When
 Farmer Cotton tells that the Boss (as  he is  still named  throughout B,
 though emended later to 'the Chief')  has not  been seen  for a  week or
 two  B  diverges  a  little  from  RK,  for   Tom  Cotton   the  younger
 interrupts his father at this point:                                    
                                                                        
   'They took his ma, that Lobelia,' put in Young  Tom. 'That'd          
 be six months back, when they started putting up sheds  at Bag          
 End without her leave. She ordered 'em off. So they  took her.          
 Put her in the Lock-holes.  They've took  others that  we miss          
 more; but there's no denying she stood up  to 'em  bolder than          
 most.'                                                                  
   'That's where most of them are,' said  the farmer,  'over at          
 Michel Delving. They've made the old Lock-holes into a regular          

                                                            
                                                                          
  fort, we hear, and they go from there roaming round, "gather-     
  ing". Still I guess that there's no more than a couple of hundred        
  the Shire all told. We can master '*em, if we stick together.'            
  'Have they got any weapons?' asked Merry.                                
                                                                          
    This perhaps  implies that  the Lock-holes  were a  prison in  the days
  before  any  'ruffian'  came  to  the  Shire.  Subsequently  Young  Tom's
  story of  Lobelia was  removed from  this part  of the  narrative, and
  replaced by Pippin's question 'Hobbiton's not their only place,  is it?',
  which leads into Farmer Cotton's account of  where else  the 'ruffians'
  hung out beside Hobbiton,  as in  RK (p.  288), and  a different  idea of
  the origin of the Lock-holes: 'some old tunnels at Michel Delving'.       
    Merry's  question  'Have they  got any  weapons?' leads,  as in  RK, to
  Farmer  Cotton's  account  of the  resistance of  the Tooks,  but without
  his  reference  to  Pippin's father  (Paladin Took),  the Thain,  and his
  refusal to have anything to do  with the  pretensions of  Lotho (Cosimo):
                                                                          
   'There you are, Frodo! ' said Merry. 'I knew we'd have to     
 fight. Well, they started it.'     
   'Not exactly,' said Farmer Cotton, 'leastways not the shoot-     
 ing. Tooks started that. You see, the Tooks have got those deep     
 holes in the Green Hills, the Smiles (28) as they call 'em, and the     
 ruffians can't come at 'em...'     
                                                                          
   With Frodo still firmly in the saddle at Bywater, Merry rode off with     
 Pippin to Tuckborough (as he does not in RK). After they had gone,     
 Frodo  reiterated  his injunction  against any  killing that  could be
 avoided (as in RK, p. 289),  but then  continued: 'We  shall be  having a
 visit from the Hobbiton gang very soon. It's over an  hour since  we sent
 the four ruffians off from here. Do nothing, until I give the word. Let
 them come on!' In RK it is Merry who gives the warning that the men     
 from  Hobbiton  will  soon  be  coming  to  Bywater,  and   he  concludes
 'Now I've got  a plan';  to which  Frodo merely  replies 'Very  good. You
 make  the  arrangements.' The  arrival of  the men,  and the  trapping of
 them beside the fire where  Farmer Cotton  was standing  apparently all
 alone, follows exactly as in the final story, except that it is of course
 Frodo, not  Merry, who  accosts the  leader; and  when this  encounter is
 over,  and  the  men  bundled  off  into  one of  their own  huts, Farmer
 Cotton says 'You came back in the nick, Mr. Frodo.'                      
    Then follows Cotton's account  to Sam  of the  condition of  the Gaffer
 ('he's in one of  them new  Shire-houses, Boss-houses  I call  'em'), and
 Sam's departure to fetch him, virtually as  in RK  (p. 291).  Once again,
 it is Frodo not Merry who  posts look-outs  and guards,  and he  goes off
 alone with Farmer Cotton to his  house: 'He  sat with  the family  in the
 kitchen,  and  they  asked  a  few  polite questions,  but were  far more
 concerned with events in the Shire. In the  middle of  the talk  in burst

                         
                                                                           
  Sam,  with the  Gaffer.' The  farmer's account  of the  'troubles', ending
  with Young Tom's story of  the carting  off of  Lobelia to  the Lock-holes
  (RK p. 291 - 3), was inserted into B  on a  long rider;  and at  this time
  Frodo's earlier  suppositions about  how it  all began  (p. 95)  and Young
  Tom's earlier remarks about Lobelia (p. 98) were removed.(29)             
      The incursion of the Gaffer into the  Cottons' kitchen  is told  as in
  RK (pp. 293 - 4); but then follows in B:                                  
                                                                           
      In the morning early they heard the ringing call of Merry's           
  horn,  and  in  marched  nearly  a hundred  of Tooks  and other           
  hobbits from  Tuckborough and  the Green  Hills. The  Shire was           
  all  alight,  they said,  and the  ruffians that  prowled round           
  Tookland had fled; east  to the  Erandywine mostly,  pursued by           
  other Tooks.                                                              
      There were now enough forces for a strong guard on the East           
  Road  from  Michel  Delving  to  Brandywine,  and  for  another           
  guard in Bywater. When all that had been settled and put in the           
  charge  of  Pippin,  Frodo  and  Sam  and  Merry   with  Farmer           
  Cotton and an escort of fifty set out for Hobbiton.                       
                                                                           
      The text then continues  with the  story of  their coming  to Hobbiton
  and  meeting  with  Ted  Sandyman,  and  their  entry into  Bag  End, told
  almost  word  for  word  as  in  RK  (pp. 296-7);(30) and ends  with the
  advent  of  Saruman  and  his  murder  by  Wormtongue  (on  which  see pp.
  102-3). The  text B  ends just  as does  the chapter  in RK,  with Merry's
  saying 'And the very last end of the War, I hope', Frodo's calling it 'the
  very last stroke', and Sam's saying 'I shan't call it the end,  till we've
  cleared up the mess.' But there is thus no Battle of Bywater!             
      The  Battle  is  found  on  inserted  pages   that  are   numbered  as
  additional ('19a, 19b')  to the  consecutive pagination  of the  text just
  described.  If this  pagination means  that these  pages were  written and
  inserted subsequently, and it is hard to see what else  it could  mean, it
  might seem that my father (still following the  story in  A, in  which the
  visit to Hobbiton preceded the battle,  p. 92)  had driven  on to  the end
  of the Bag End episode without realising that the story  of the  Battle of
  Bywater had yet to be  told. But  this seems  incredible. Far  more likely
  he saw, as he wrote the story of the visit to Hobbiton, that the  order of
  the  narration  in  A  must  be reversed,  so that  the chapter  would end
  with the last stroke of the  War 'at  the very  door of  Bag End';  but he
  postponed the battle, and inserted it subsequently  into the  text already
  continuously paginated.                                                   
      Whenever this was done, the existing text  (in which  the dispositions
  for  defence  next  morning  were  followed  at  once  by  the   visit  to
  Hobbiton)  was  altered  to  that  of  RK  (p. 294),  and the  approach of
  the  men  along  the   road  from   Waymoot  and   their  ambush   on  the
  high-banked road to Bywater was  told almost  as in  the final  story: the

 few differences in this passage are chiefly caused by Merry's having
 gone to  Tuckborough  with  Pippin.  The  messenger from  the Tookland
 does not refer to the Thain (see p. 99), and tells that 'Mr. Peregrin and
 Mr. Merry are coming on  with all  the folk  we can  spare'; it  was Nick
   Cotton, not Merry, who had been out all night and reported the       
   approach  of  the men,  whom he  estimated to  number 'fifty  or more'
   (close on a  hundred', RK);  and when  the Tooks  came in  'the ringing
   call  of Merry's  horn was  heard.' But  from the  point where  the way
   back out of the ambush was blocked  against the  ruffian men,  when the
   hobbits  pushed  out  more  carts onto  the road,  the B  text diverges
   remarkably from the story told in RK:                                  
                                                                         
   A  voice  spoke  to  them   from  above.   'Well,'  said   Frodo,  'you
 have  walked  into   a  trap.   Your  fellows   from  Hobbiton   did  the
 same,  and  are  all  prisoners   now.  Lay   down  your   weapons!  Then
 go  back  twenty  paces  and  sit  down.  Any  who   try  to   break  out
 will be shot.'                                                           
   Many   of   the   men,   in  spite   of  the   curses  of   their  more
 villainous  mates,  at  once  obeyed.  But  more  than  a   score  turned
 about  and  charged  back  down   the  lane.   Hobbit  archers   at  gaps
 in  the  hedges  shot  down   six  before   they  reached   the  waggons.
 Some   of   them   gave   up,  but   ten  or   more  burst   through  and
 dashed  off,  and  scattered   across  country   making  for   the  Woody
 End it seemed.                                                           
   Merry   blew   a   loud   horn-call.   There   were   answering   calls
 from  a  distance.  'They  won't get  far!' he  said. 'All  that country
 is now alive with hunters.'                                              
   The  dead  ruffians   were  laden   on  waggons   and  taken   off  and
 buried  in  an  old  gravel-pit  nearby,  the  Battle  Pits as  they were
 called   ever   afterwards.   The   others  were   marched  off   to  the
 village to join their fellows.                                           
   So  ended  the  Battle  of  Bywater,  1419,  the  [only >]  last battle
 fought  in  the  Shire,  and  the  only  battle  since  the  Greenfields,
 1137,(31) away   up   in   the   North   Farthing.    In   consequence,
 although  it  only  cost  six  ruffian  lives  and  no  hobbits it  has a
 chapter  to  itself  in  all  the  standard histories,  and the  names of
 all  those  who  took  part  were  made  into  a  Roll  and   learned  by
 heart.  The  very  considerable  rise  in  the fame  and fortunes  of the
 Cottons dates from this time.                                            
                                                                         
    The  connection  with  the  visit to  Hobbiton was  made in  these words:
                                                                         
    When all was settled, and a late midday meal had been eaten,         
 Merry said: 'Well now, Frodo, it's time to deal with the Chief.'

 Farmer  Cotton  collected  an  escort  of  some  fifty  sturdy hobbits,
 and  then  they  set  out  on  foot  for  Bag  End:  Frodo,  Sam, Merry
 and Pippin led the way.                                                 
                                                                        
   The words 'When all was settled' are used now to  refer to  the ending
 of  the  battle  and  the disposal  of the  dead and  captured ruffians;
 previously  (p.  100)  they  had  referred to  the arrangements  made to
 meet the approaching enemy.                                             
                                                                        
   The  story of  the meeting  with Saruman  at Bag  End was  written out
 twice in B, the first form soon declining into a scribble when my father
 thought better of the opening of the episode. The  first opening  I give
 here:                                                                   
                                                                        
   'No  doubt,  no  doubt.  But  you  did  not,  and  so  I  am  able  to
 welcome  you   home!'  There   standing  at   the  door   was  Saruman,
 looking  well-fed  and  a  great  deal  less  wretched than  before; his
 eyes gleamed with malice and amusement.                                 
   A  sudden  light  broke  on  Frodo.   'Sharkey!'  he   said.  Saruman
 laughed.  'So  you've  heard  that,  have  you?  I  believe  all  my men
 used  to  call  me  that  in  the  better times.  They were  so devoted.
 And  so  it  has  followed  me  up  here,  has  it?  Really I  find that
 quite cheering.'                                                        
   'I  cannot  imagine  why,'  said  Frodo.  'And  what  are   you  doing
 here  anyway?   Just  a   little  shabby   mischief?  Gandalf   said  he
 thought you were still capable of that.'                                
   [Struck   out:   'Need  you   ask?'  said   Saruman.]  'You   make  me
 laugh,  you  hobbit  lordlings,'  said   Saruman.  'Riding   along  with
 all  these  great  people  so  secure  and  so pleased  with yourselves;
 thinking   you  have   done  great   things  and   can  now   just  come
 back  and  laze  in  the   country.  Saruman's   home  can   be  ruined,
 and  he  can  be  turned  out.  But  not  Mr.  Baggins.  Oh,   no!  He's
 really important.                                                       
   'But  Mr.  Baggins  is  a  fool  all  the  same.  And can't  even mind
 his  own  affairs,  always  minding  other  people's.  To   be  expected
 of  a  pupil  of  Gandalf.  He  must  dawdle  on   the  way,   and  ride
 twice as  far as  he need.  The Shire  would be  all right.  Well, after
 our  little  meeting  I  thought  I  might  get ahead  of you  and learn
 you  a  lesson.  It  would  have  been  a  sharper  lesson  if  only you
 had  dawdled longer.  Still I  have done  a little  that you'll  find it
 hard  to  mend  in  your  time.  It'll  be  a  warning  to you  to leave
 other  folk  alone,  and  not to  be so  cocksure. And  it will  give me
 something  quite  pleasant  to  think  about,.to  set  against   my  own
 injuries.*                                                              

   The second version of the episode in B is virtually  as in  RK, except
 that it entirely lacks any reference to the  dreadful corpse  of Saruman
 and the mist that rose above it and loomed 'as  a pale  shrouded figure'
 over  the Hill  of Hobbiton;  and this  passage did  not enter  until my
 father wrote it in on the page proofs of The Return of the King.        
   A note that he pencilled against the episode  in a  copy of  the First
 Edition is interesting:                                                 
                                                                        
   Saruman   turned   back   into Dunland (32) on   Aug.   28.   He   then
 made  for   the  old   South  Road   and  then   went  north   over  the
 Greyflood   at  Tharbad,   and  thence   NW.  to   Sarn  Ford,   and  so
 into  the  Shire  and  to  Hobbiton  on  Sept.  22:  a journey  of about
 460  [miles]  in  25  days.  He  thus averaged  about 18  miles a  day -
 evidently  hastening  as  well  as  he  could.  He  had  thus   only  38
 days  in  which  to  work  his  mischief in  the Shire;  but much  of it
 had  already  been  done  by  the  ruffians  according  to his  orders -
 already planned and issued before the sack of Isengard.                 
                                                                        
   September 22 is  the date  given in  The Tale  of Years  for Saruman's
 coming to the Shire, and October 30 for the  coming of  the 'travellers'
 to the Brandywine Bridge.                                               
                                                                        
   At a late stage of work on the B text (but before the insertion of the
 long rider  in which  Farmer Cotton  recounts the  history of  the Shire
 since Frodo and his companions left, see p. 100 and  note 29)  my father
 perceived  that  Frodo's  experience  had so  changed him,  so withdrawn
 him, as to render him incapable of any such role in the Scouring  of the
 Shire as had  been portrayed.  The text  as it  stood required  no large
 recasting; the entirely different picture of Frodo's part in  the events
 was brought  about by  many small  alterations (often  by doing  no more
 than changing 'Frodo' to 'Merry') and a  few brief  additions. Virtually
 all of these have been noticed in the foregoing account.                
   A third, very fine manuscript ('C') followed B, and  here the  text of
 RK was  reached in  all but  a few  passages, most  of these  being very
 minor  matters.  It  was  on  this  manuscript  that  Cosimo  Sackville-
 Baggins  became  Lotho,  and  the  references to  the Thain  were intro-
 duced (see pp. 99,  101). The  number of  men at  the Battle  of Bywater
 had been  enlarged to  'more than  seventy', and  the battle  had become
 much fiercer, with the  trapped men  climbing the  banks above  the road
 and attacking  the hobbits,  already as  C was  first written;  by later
 emendation  the  numbers  of  the  men and  of the  slain on  both sides
 were further increased. The original  reading of  C 'Merry  himself slew
 the largest of the ruffians'  was altered  to '...  the leader,  a great
 squint-eyed brute like a huge orc'; with this cf. the description of the
 orc-man 'Sharkey' at Bag End in the A version,  pp. 90  - 1.  Lastly, an
 important  addition  was  made to  C concerning  Frodo: 'Frodo  had been

                                                        
                                                                        
 in the battle, but he had not drawn sword,  and his  chief part  had been
 to prevent the hobbits in their wrath at their losses from  slaying those
 of their enemies who threw down their weapons' (RK pp. 295 - 6).        
   There  lacked  now  only the  passage describing  the departure  of the
 spirit of Saruman, and his corpse.                                      

                             NOTES.                                      
                                                                        
  1. Subsequently  the  passage  was  corrected  in  pencil.  The question
     'Who's  the  Mayor?'  was  given  to  Merry,  and  the  answer became
     'The  Boss  at  Bag  End';  Frodo's 'And  who's the  Chief Shirriff?'
     received  the  same  answer.  Then  follows:  'Boss?  Boss?  You mean
     Mr.  Cosimo,  I suppose.'  'I suppose  so, Mr.  Baggins, but  we have
     to say just The Boss nowadays.'                                     
       Further on, where in RK (p. 279) it is said that 'The new        
     "Chief" evidently  had  means  of  getting  news,  A  has   the  New
     Mayor [?or] Chief Shirriff';  but this  was changed  to 'the  Boss or
     Chief  Shirriff'.  When  'arrested'  at  Frogmorton  Frodo   and  his
     companions  are  told  that  'It's [Mayor's  >] the  Chief Shirriff's
     orders', where RK (p. 280) has 'It's the Chief's orders'.           
  2. But see p. 111.                                                     
  3. The  village  was  named  Frogbarn,  with  Frogmorton  written  above
     as  an  alternative (and  Frogmorton occurs  in the  text subsequent-
     ly);  and  the  date  of their  ride from  the Brandywine  Bridge was
     'the fifth of November in the Shire-reckoning', with '1st'  (the date
     in  RK)  written  above.  The village  was 'about  25 miles  from the
     Bridge' ('about twenty-two miles' in RK).                           
  4. The  name  Smallburrow  was  written  so,  as  in  RK,  at  the first
     occurrence, but thereafter Smallburrows.                           
  5. 'Shire-house'  is  used  in A  for 'Shirriff-house'  in RK.  Sam asks
     what  the  term  means,  and   Robin  Smallburrows   replies:  'Well,
     you  ought  to  know, Sam.  You were  in one  last night,  and didn't
     find it to your liking, we hear.'                                   
  6. See p. 95.                                                          
  7. The text here is very difficult. Above '(I told) the Boss'  my father
     first wrote 'Long  Tom' before  changing this  to 'Big  Sharkey'. The
     end of the ruffian's remarks as  first written  cannot be  read: 'but
     the Boss says  no, and  [?Long Tom].....  way' (just  possibly 'goes
     his way').                                                          
  8. There is a note  on the  manuscript here  which is  partly illegible:
     '.......  only  Cosimo.......  What  happened  to  Otho?'  In  'Three
     is  Company'  (The  Fellowship of  the Ring  p. 75)  it is  said that
     Otho  Sackville-Baggins  'had  died  some years  before, at  the ripe
     but disappointed age of 102', and this goes back  to an  early stage.
  9. See the note given on p. 77 ('Gandalf should stay at Bree...').     

  10.  In RK Farmer Cotton is named Tom.                                    
  11.  Sting  had  been  given  to  Sam  by  Frodo in  'The Land  of Shadow'
       (p. 32;  RK p.  204); but  Frodo wields  Sting in  his combat  at Bag
       End with the chief  of the  orc-men (p.  92). In  a passage  that was
       introduced  in the  Second Edition  Frodo was  induced to  receive it
       back    at    the    Field    of     Cormallen    (see     p.    50).
  12.  the  Road  Bend:  the  westward  turn  in  the  road  to  Hobbiton at
       Bywater Pool. On  the large-scale  map of  the Shire  that I  made in
       1943  (VI.107)  the  bend  is  more  marked and  more nearly  a right
       angle than it is on the small map in The Fellowship of the Ring.     
  13.  October is a slip for November: see note 3.                          
  14.  By  'There's  no  way  from   the  West'   Farmer  Cotton   meant,  I
       suppose,  that  there  was  no  other  way  back from  Michel Delving
       but by taking the East Road, since  the ruffians  could not  or would
       not pass through the Tookland.                                       
  15.  There  are  a  couple  of  pages  of  roughly  pencilled  text  which
       repeat, with minor alterations  and extensions,  this section  of the
       chapter  in  A,  made  perhaps  because  my  father   recognised  the
       near-illegibility  of  the  original, and  these pages  have provided
       help in elucidating it here and there (characteristically,  the words
       or phrases that defy elucidation in the  original text  are expressed
       differently in the  second). At  this point  the pencilled  text has:
       'They've caught  a ruffian  or two  and thrashed  'em in  the Tookus'
       (Tookus < Took-house, as workhouse became workus).                   
  16.  I  do  not know  whether the  Long Smial  is to  be equated  with the
       Took-house.  -  This  is  the  first  appearance  of the  word smial,
       which  seems  clearly  to  be  written thus,  although in  the second
       text of 'The Scouring of the Shire' it is written  Smiles (see  p. 99
       and note 28). Since Pippin was  born in  the Long  Smial, it  must be
       the  forerunner  of  the  Great  Smials.  These  were  at Tuckborough
       (Pippin speaks in Fangorn  Forest of  'the Great  Place of  the Tooks
       away  back  in  the  Smials  at  Tuckborough',  TT  p.  64),  but the
       name  as  written  here  is not  in fact  Tuckborough: it  looks more
       like  Tuckbery  (not  Tuckbury).  However,   there  are   many  words
       wrongly written in this  manuscript (in  the next  line of  the text,
       for instance, the word I have given as '[?stout]' can really only be
       interpreted as 'stood').                                             
  17.  The text could conceivably  be interpreted  as 'he  had the  block on
       the  East  [Road]  strengthened',  although  no  road-block   on  the
       East  Road has  been mentioned.  The second,  pencilled text  of this
       part of the chapter  (see note  15) has  here: 'He  had a  block made
       on  the  Road  at  the  waymeet.'  This  text gives  out a  few lines
       beyond this point.                                                   
  18.  It is interesting to look back at early references to the destruction
       in  the  Shire.  In  a  note probably  belonging to  the time  of the
       outline  'The  Story  Foreseen  from   Moria'  (VII.216)   my  father

       wrote:  'Cosimo  has  industrialised  it.  Factories  and  smoke. The
       Sandymans  have  a  biscuit  factory.  Iron  is  found';  and  in the
       earliest  reference  to  the Mirror  in Lothlorien  Frodo was  to see
       'Trees being  felled and  a tall  building being  made where  the old
       mill  was.  Gaffer  Gamgee  turned  out.  Open  trouble,  almost war,
       between  Marish  and  Buckland  on   one  hand   -  and   'the  West.
       Cosimo  Sackville-Baggins very  rich, buying  up land'  (VII.249; cf.
       also VII.253, where there is a  reference to  the tall  chimney being
       built on the site of the old mill).                                  
          In 'The old farm on the right' one should possibly read 'left' for
       'right'; cf. my father's painting of Hobbiton, and  the words  of the
       final  text of  'The Scouring  of the  Shire' (RK  p. 296):  'The Old
       Grange  on  the  west  side  had  been  knocked  down, and  its place
       taken by rows of tarred sheds.'                                      
  19.  Later in this manuscript (p.  108) the  Tree in  the Party  Field had
       been cut down and burned.                                            
  20.  The reference is to  'The Shadow  of the  Past' (FR  p. 71):  'I feel
       that as long as the Shire lies behind, safe and comfortable,  I shall
       find   wandering  more   bearable:  I   shall  know   that  somewhere
       there is a firm foothold, even if my feet cannot stand there again.'
  21.  I  am  told  you  sleep  sound:  cf.  the  words  of  the  orc-man at
       Bywater, speaking of Cosimo  (an addition  to the  text, p.  83): 'He
       sleeps sound, and I shouldn't try and wake him now.'                 
  22.  Earlier in this narrative Sam wielded Sting: p. 86 and note 11.      
  23.  At  the  top  of the  page on  which Frodo's  words appear  my father
       wrote:  'Ah,  and  you  said  in  Mordor  you'd never  strike another
       blow,' said Sam. 'Just shows you never know.' See p. 80.             
  24.  Waymoot:  Waymeet  in  RK.  My  original   large-scale  map   of  the
       Shire  made  in  1943  (VI.107)  has  Waymoot,  as  also   that  pub-
       lished  in  The  Fellowship of  the Ring;  but the  second manuscript
       of  'The  Scouring  of   the  Shire'   has  Waymeet.   Presumably  my
       father changed his mind about the form but neglected the map.        
  25.  It is not  explained how  Frodo knew  that this  person, when  he met
       him at Bag End, was called 'Sharkey'.                                
  26.  Cf. Saruman's words at the end of  the chapter  (p. 102):  'I believe
       all my men used to call me  that in  the better  times. They  were so
       devoted' (RK: 'All  my people  used to  call me  that in  Isengard, I
       believe. A sign of affection, possibly'). The footnote to the text in
       RK  p.  298  'It  was  probably  Orkish  in  origin:  Sharku  [Second
       Edition Sharku], "old  man" '  was not  added until  the book  was in
       page proof.                                                          
  27.  A  rewritten  account  of   the  arrest   at  Frogmorton   and  Sam's
       conversation  with   Robin  Smallburrow   was  inserted   into  manu-
       script B. This is almost as in RK, but as first written Robin's reply
       to Sam's question  'So that's  how the  news of  us reached  you, was
       it?' was different:                                                  

       'Not  directly.  A  message  came   down  from   the  Chief   at  Bag
       End,  about  two  hours  ago,  that  you  were  to  be   arrested.  I
       reckon  someone   must  have   slipped  down   from  the   Bridge  to
       Stock,  where  there's  a  small  gang  of  his  Men.   Someone  went
       through Frogmorton on a big horse last night.'                       
       This  was  changed  at  once to  the text  of RK  (p. 282),  but with
       'One  [runner]  came  in  from  Bamfurlong  last  night'.  Bamfurlong
       was the reading of the First Edition here. In  the Second  Edition it
       was  changed  to  Whitfurrows  (which  though  shown  on  the  map of
       the Shire  was never  mentioned in  the text  of the  First Edition),
       and  the  name  Bamfurlong  was given  to Maggot's  farm in  'A Short
       Cut  to  Mushrooms'  (FR  p.  100):  'We are  on old  Farmer Maggot's
       land' of the  First Edition  became 'This  is Bamfurlong;  old Farmer
       Maggot's land.'                                                      
  28.  Cf. the Long Smial in A (note 16).  A draft  for the  present passage
       has: 'those deep places the Old Smiles in the  Green Hills'.  I would
       guess  that my  father introduced  Smiles as  being the  most natural
       spelling  if  the  old  word  had survived  into Modern  English, but
       then  abandoned  it  (it was  changed to  Smials on  the B  text) as
       being  capable  of  an  absurd  interpretation.  Cf. Appendix  F (II,
       'On Translation'): 'smial (or smile)  "burrow" is  a likely  form for
       a descendant of smygel'.                                             
  29.  This  rider  was  inserted  at  a  late  stage,  for  as in  RK Merry
       interrupts  Farmer  Cotton  with  a  question  ('Who  is  this  Shar-
       key?');  thus  he  was  no  longer away  in Tuckborough  with Pippin,
       but  had  assumed  his  role  as  commander  of  the   operations  at
       Bywater.                                                             
  30.  The  only  differences  worth  noting  are  that  the trees  had been
       felled along the Bywater Road 'for fuel for the  engine'; and  that a
       few  men  were  still  present  in  the huts  at Hobbiton,  who 'when
       they saw the force that approached fled away over the fields.'       
  31.  It is said in the Prologue to The Lord of the Rings that 'before this
       story  opens' 'the  only [battle]  that had  ever been  fought within
       the borders  of the  Shire was  beyond living  memory: the  Battle of
       Greenfields,   S.R.1147,   in   which   Bandobras   Took   routed  an
       invasion  of  Orcs.'  The  date  1137  was corrected  to 1147  on the
       text C. - See p. 119.                                                
  32.  In the First Edition the meeting  with Saruman  took place  after the
       company had left Dunland: see p. 69.                                 

                                      X.                                    
                                                                           
                               THE GREY HAVENS.                             
                                                                           
 The original writing down  of the  last chapter  of The  Lord of  the Rings
 was  the  continuation  of  the  long uninterrupted  draft text  ('A') that
 extends  back   through  'The   Scouring  of   the  Shire'   and  'Homeward
 Bound' (see pp. 75,  79), and  which I  left at  the end  of the  Battle of
 Bywater on p. 93. That text continues:                                     
                                                                           
  And  so  the  year  drew  to  its  end.  Even  Sam  could  find  no  fault
 with   Frodo's   fame   and   honour   in  his   own  country.   The  Tooks
 were  too  secure  in  their  traditional  position -  and after  all their
 folkland  was  the  only  one  that  had  never  given  in to  the ruffians
 -  and  also  too  generous to  be really  jealous; yet  it was  plain that
 the    name    of    Baggins    would   become    the   most    famous   in
 Hobbit-history.                                                            
                                                                           
  From  this  point  the text  of A,  rough but  now fully  legible, differs
 chiefly from the final form of  the chapter  not in  what is  actually told
 nor in how it is told but in  the absence  of several  significant features
 and a good deal  of detail  that were  added in  later. For  example, while
 the  rescue  of  Lobelia  Sackville-Baggins  from  the Lockholes  in Michel
 Delving  and  the  disposition  of  her  property  is told  much as  in RK,
 there  is  no  mention  of  Fredegar  Bolger;  and nothing  is said  of the
 hunting out of the gangs of  men in  the south  of the  Shire by  Merry and
 Pippin.  Frodo  became  the  Mayor,  not  the  Deputy  Mayor,  although the
 difference was  only one  of title,  since he  made it  a condition  of his
 acceptance  that  Will  Whitfoot  should  become  Mayor  again 'as  soon as
 the mess is cleared up'; and his inactivity in the office is not mentioned.
 As my father first set  it down  the account  in RK  (pp. 302  - 4)  of the
 work of restoration and repair, of Sam's  planting of  young trees,  of the
 fruitfulness  of  the  year  1420,(1) and  of Sam's  marriage to  Rose Cotton
 was very largely reached. In this text there is no reference  to 'Sharkey's
 Men',  and  the  jocular  name  given  in Bywater  to the  restored Bagshot
 Row  was  'Ruffians'  End'.  The seed  in Galadriel's  box is  described as
 'like a nut or a dried berry', its colour golden-yellow; Sam planted  it in
 the Party Field 'where the tree had been burned' (see p. 90).              
  There is in A  no reference  to Frodo's  first illness  in March  of 1420,
 when  in  Sam's  absence  Farmer  Cotton  found him  on his  bed 'clutching
 a  white  gem  that hung  on a  chain about  his neck'  (the gift  of Arwen
 recorded  in  'Many  Partings').  The  passage  in  RK (p.  305) describing

                  
                                                                          
 the  finery  and  magnificence  of Merry  and Pippin,  in contrast  to the
 'ordinary  attire'  of  Frodo  and  Sam,  is lacking,  and so  the further
 reference  to  the  white  jewel that  Frodo always  wore is  also absent.
 Since  my father  had written  a couple  of pages  earlier that  'Even Sam
 could find no  fault with  Frodo's fame  and honour  in his  own country',
 the  sharply  contrasting  picture  in  RK  is  of course  lacking: 'Frodo
 dropped quietly out of all the  doings of  the Shire,  and Sam  was pained
 to  notice  how  little  honour  he  had  in his  own country.  Few people
 knew or wanted to know about his deeds and adventures...'                 
  Frodo's illness on  the sixth  of October  1420, the  date of  the attack
 of  the  Ringwraiths  at  Weathertop  two years  before, is  recorded, but
 not  that  in  March  1421.  The  naming of  Sam's eldest  daughter Elanor
 ('born on 25  March as  Sam duly  noted') on  Frodo's suggestion  is told,
 and the big book  with red  leather covers  is described,  without however
 any mention of the title page and the sequence of Bilbo's rejected titles;
 the  writing  in  the  book  ended  at  Chapter   77  (the   number  being
 marked with a query).(2)                                                  
  The  last  part  of  the  chapter  was  set  down  with  great  sureness,
 though not all elements in the  final story  were immediately  present. At
 the  meeting  of  Frodo  and Sam  with the  Elves in  the Woody  End there
 is  no  mention  of  the  Great   Rings  of   Elrond  and Galadriel;(3) at
 Mithlond Cirdan  the Shipwright  does not  appear (but  enters in  a later
 marginal  addition),  nor  is  Gandalf said  to bear  the Third  Ring; and
 Frodo's sight of the 'far green country under a  swift sunrise'  is absent
 (though  this  also  is  roughed  in  marginally;  the linking  of Frodo's
 passage over the Sea 'with the vision  he had  of a  far green  country in
 the house of  Tom Bombadil'  had been  referred to  in my  father's letter
 of  November  1944,  see  p.  53).  I  give here  the text  of A  from the
 coming of the company to Mithlond:                                        
                                                                          
  And when they had passed the Shire by the  south skirts  of the          
 White  Downs  they  came  to the  Far Downs  and the  Towers and          
 looked on the Sea; and rode down  at last  to Mithlond  the Grey          
 Havens in the long firth of Lune. And there was a ship  lying at          
 the haven, and upon the quays stood one robed also in  white. It          
 was  Gandalf,  and  he  welcomed  them; and  they were  glad for          
 then they knew that he also would take ship with them.                    
  But Sam was now  sad at  heart, and  it seemed  to him  that if          
 the parting would be bitter, even worse would be the lonely ride          
 home.  But  even  as  they  stood  there  and  were ready  to go          
 aboard, up rode Merry and Pippin  in great  haste. And  amid his          
 tears Pippin laughed. 'You tried to give us the slip once before          
 and failed, Frodo, and this time  you have  nearly done  it, but          
 you've failed again.' 'It  was not  Sam this  time who  gave you          
 away,' said Merry, 'but Gandalf himself.'                                 

   'Yes,'  said  Gandalf.  'It  will   be  better   to  ride   back  three
 together  than  one  alone.  Well,  here  at last,  dear friends,  on the
 shores  of  the  Sea  comes  an   end  of   our  fellowship   in  Middle-
 earth.  Go  in  peace;  and  I will  not say,  do not  weep, for  not all
 tears are an evil.'                                                      
   Then  Frodo  kissed  Merry  and  Pippin  and  last  of  all   Sam, and
 went  aboard,  and  the  sails  were  drawn  up,   and  the   wind  blew,
 and  slowly  the  ship  sailed  away  down  the  [?pale]  Gulf  of  Lune.
 And  it  was  night  again;  and  Sam  looked  on  the  grey sea  and saw
 a  shadow  on  the  waters  that  was  lost  in  the  West. And  he stood
 a  while  hearing  the  sigh  and  murmur  of  the  waves  on  the shores
 of  Middle-earth,  and  the  sound  of  it  remained  in  his  heart  for
 ever,  though  he  never  spoke  of  it.  And  Merry  and   Pippin  stood
 silent beside him.                                                       
                                                                         
   The long ride back to the Shire is told in almost the same words  as in
 The  Return  of  the  King. And  thus the  Third Age  was brought  to its
 final end, in  this most  memorable of  partings, without  hesitation and
 with  assured  simplicity;   the  unmistakeable   voices  of   Merry  and
 Pippin, the still more unmistakeable voice of Gandalf  in his  last words
 on  Middle-earth,  and  the  beginning  of  the  voyage that  was bearing
 away  into  the  True  West  the  hobbits, Bilbo  and Frodo,  leaving Sam
 behind.                                                                  
                                                                         
   A  manuscript  of  the  chapter  as a  separate entity  ('B') followed,
 subsequently  numbered  'LX'  and  entitled  'The  Grey  Havens'.  It was
 written before the changed view of  Frodo's reputation  in the  Shire had
 entered, but with  emendations and  additions it  reached the  final form
 in almost all the features in which A differed from it. My father did not
 yet realise, however, that  Fredegar Bolger  languished in  the Lockholes
 along  with  Will   Whitfoot  and   Lobelia  Sackville-Baggins;   and  of
 Lobelia it was said in a first draft of the  passage concerning  her that
 'She  never  got  over the  news of  poor Cosimo's  murder, and  she said
 that it was not his fault; he was led astray by  that wicked  Sharkey and
 never meant any harm.'                                                   
   Frodo's first illness was still absent as B was originally written, and
 when it was introduced it was in these words:                            
                                                                         
   Sam  was  away  on  his  forestry   work  in   March,  and   Frodo  was
 glad,  for he  had been  feeling ill,  and it  would have  been difficult
 to  conceal  from  Sam.  On  the  twelfth  of  March (4) he  was   in  pain
 and  weighed  down  with  a  great  sense  of  darkness,  and   could  do
 little  more  than  walk  about  clasping  the  jewel  of   Queen  Arwen.
 But after a while the fit passed.                                        

   An idea that was never carried further appears in a  hastily scribbled
 passage  on this  manuscript, apparently  intended for  inclusion before
 'Little Elanor was nearly six  months old,  and 1421  had passed  to its
 autumn' (RK p. 306):                                                    
                                                                        
   At   midsummer   Gandalf   appeared  suddenly,   and  his   visit  was
 long  remembered  for  the  astonishing  things  that  happened  to  all
 the   bonfires   (which   hobbit   [?children]   light   on  midsummer's
 eve).  The  whole  Shire  was  lit  with  lights  of many  colours until
 the  dawn  came,  and  it  seemed  that  the fire  [??ran wild  for him]
 over  all  the  land  so  that  the  grass  was kindled  with glittering
 jewels,  and  the  trees  were  hung  with  red  and  gold  blossom  all
 through  the  night,  and the  Shire was  full of  light and  song until
 the dawn came.                                                          
                                                                        
   No other trace  of this  idea is  found. Perhaps  my father  felt that
 when Gandalf declared that his time was over he meant no less.(5)       
   The title page of the Red Book of Westmarch first  appears in  B, with
 Bilbo's titles written one above the other and all struck through (which
 was the meaning  of the  word 'so'  in 'crossed  out one  after another,
 so.', RK p. 307):                                                       
                                                                        
   Memoirs of An Amateur Burglar                                         
   My Unexpected Journey                                                 
   There and Back Again and What Happened After                          
   Adventures of Five Hobbits                                            
   The Case of the Great Ring (compiled from the records                 
   and notes of B. Baggins and others)                                   
   What the Bagginses Did in the War of the Ring                         
   (here Bilbo's hand ended and Frodo had written:)                      
                                    The                                  
                                 Downfall                                
                                    of                                   
                           The Lord of the Rings                         
                                    and                                  
                          The Return of the King                         
     (as seen by B. and F. Baggins, S. Gamgee, M. Brandybuck, P. Took,
             supplemented by information provided by the Wise)           
                                                                        
 In the typescript that followed B the following was added:              
                                                                        
            Together with certain excerpts from Books of Lore            
                  translated by B. Baggins in Rivendell (6)              
                                                                        
   In B appeared the Three Rings  of the  Elves on  the fingers  of their
 bearers, but they were not yet named. It was not until the book  was in
 galley  proof  that 'Vilya,  mightiest of  the Three'  was added  to the
 description  of  Elrond's  Ring,  Gandalf's  Ring  was named  'Narya the

 Great',  and  that  of  Galadriel  became  'Nenya,  the  ring   wrought  of
 mithril'.                                                                  
   Lastly, both in A  and in  B my  father set  within square  brackets, his
 usual  sign  of  doubt,  certain  of  Frodo's  words  to  Sam in  the Woody
 End,  thus:  'No,  Sam.  Not  yet  anyway,  not  further  than  the Havens.
 [Though  you  too  were  a  Ringbearer, if  only for  a little  while: your
 time may come.]'                                                           
                                                                           
                                    NOTES.                                  
                                                                           
 1. Absent from the account of  the year  1420 is  the sentence  in RK,
    p. 303: 'All the children born or  begotten in  that year,  and there
    were  many,  were fair  to see  and strong,  and most  of them  had a
    rich  golden  hair  that had  before been  rare among  hobbits.' This
    entered in the first typescript text. See p. 134, note 12.              
 2. In the following text the last, unfinished chapter in the  Red Book
    was numbered '72', and on the  first typescript  this was  changed to
    '80', as in RK.                                                         
 3. The chant to Elbereth began thus:                                        
                        O Elbereth Gilthoniel                               
                        Silivren pennar oriel!                              
                        Gilthoniel O Elbereth...                            
    Cf. VI.394. This was repeated  in the  second text  of the  chapter, but
    oriel  was emended  to iriel.  This in  turn was  repeated on  the first
    typescript, and then the opening was changed to its form in RK:         
                        A! Elbereth Gilthoniel                              
                        silivren penna miriel                               
                        o menel aglar elenath...                            
      To Bilbo's question (RK p. 309) 'Are you coming?' Frodo replies
    here:  'Yes,  I   am  coming,   before  the   wound  returns.   And  the
    Ringbearers   should   go   together.'   Frodo   was  speaking   of  the
    sickness that had come  on him  on October  the sixth,  the date  of his
    wounding  at  Weathertop,  in  each  of  the  following  years.  It  was
    now  22  September  (Bilbo's  birthday);  on  the  twenty-ninth  of  the
    month   the   ship   sailed  from   the  Grey   Havens.  On   the  third
    anniversary  of  the  attack  at  Weathertop  The  Lord  of.  the  Rings
    ends, for  it was  on that  day, according  to The  Tale of  Years, that
    Sam returned to Bag End.                                                
 4. The date was corrected  to the  thirteenth of  March on  the following
    typescript text. This  in the  final chronology  was the  anniversary of
    the  poisoning  of  Frodo  by  Shelob, as  noted in  The Tale  of Years.
    Frodo's third illness, in  the following  year, also  fell on  March 13,
    according to The Tale of Years.                                         
 5. But  he had  perhaps intended  that a  final visit  by Gandalf  to the
    Shire  should  be  recorded;  as Gandalf  said when  he parted  from the

 
                                                                     
  hobbits  in the  note on  the draft  manuscript of  'Homeward Bound'
  (p. 77): 'I'll be along some time.'                                 
6.  In the two typescript texts of the chapter the  crossings-out were
  omitted, and  Bilbo's first  title 'Memoirs  of an  Amateur Burglar'
  was  replaced  by  'My  Diary'.  'What  Happened  After'  was  still
  shown  as  an  addition,  and  the  words  'and friends'  were added
  after 'Bagginses' in  Bilbo's final  title; in  the margins  of both
  typescripts my father noted that the corrections were to  be printed
  as such, representing the original title-page. The final form of the
  page was introduced on the galley proof.                            

                                   XI.                                 
                                                                      
                              THE EPILOGUE.                            
                                                                      
 The  words  that  end The  Lord of  the Rings,  '"Well, I'm  back," he
 said', were not intended  to do  so when  my father  wrote them  in the
 long  draft  manuscript  A  which  has  been  followed in  the previous
 chapters. It is obvious from the manuscript that the text  continued on
 without break;(1) and there  is in  fact no  indication that  my father
 thought  of  what  he  was  writing  as  markedly  separate  from  what
 preceded. I' give  now this  last part  of A:  very rough,  but legible
 throughout. The  ages of  Sam's children  were added,  almost certainly
 at  the  time  of  writing:  Elanor  15,  Frodo 13,  Rose 11,  Merry 9,
 Pippin 7.                                                             
                                                                      
  And   one   evening   in   March   [added:   1436](2) Master   Samwise.
 Gamgee  was  taking  his  ease  by  a  fire  in   his  study,   and  the
 children  were  all  gathered  about  him,  as was  not at  all unusual,
 though it was always supposed to be a special treat.                  
  He had been reading aloud (as was usual) from a big Red              
 Book  on  a  stand,  and  on  a  stool  beside him  sat Elanor,  and she
 was  a  beautiful  child  more   fair-skinned  than   most  hobbit-maids
 and  more  slender,  and  she  was  now  running  up  into  her  'teens;
 and  there  was  Frodo-lad  on  the heathrug,  in spite  of his  name as
 good a copy of Sam as you could wish, and Rose, Merry, and            
 Pippin  were  sitting  in  chairs  much  too  big  for  them. Goldilocks
 had  gone to  bed, for  in this  Frodo's foretelling  had made  a slight
 error and she came after Pippin, and was still only five and the      
 Red  Book  rather  too  much  for  her   yet.  But   she  was   not  the
 last of the line, for Sam and Rose seemed likely to rival old         
 Gerontius  Took  in  the  number  of  their  children   as  successfully
 as Bilbo had passed his age. There was little Ham, and there was      
 Daisie in her cradle.                                                 
                                                                      
       'Well dear,' said Sam, 'it grew there once, because I saw it
 with my own eyes.'                                                    
  'Does it grow there still, daddy?'                                   
  'I  don't  see  why  it  shouldn't,  Ellie.  I've  never  been   on  my
 travels  again,  as  you  know,  having  all  you young  folk to  mind -

                 
                                                                    
 regular  ragtag  and  bobtail  old  Saruman  would  have  called it.
 But  Mr.  Merry  and  Mr.  Pippin,  they've  been  south  more  than
 once, for they sort of belong there too now.'                       
  'And  haven't  they  grown  big?'  said  Merry.  'I  wish  I  could
 grow  big  like  Mr.   Meriadoc  of   Buckland.  He's   the  biggest
 hobbit that ever was: bigger than Bandobras.'                       
  'Not  bigger  than  Mr.  Peregrin  of  Tuckborough,'  said  Pippin,
 'and  he's  got  hair that's  almost golden.  Is he  Prince Peregrin
 away down in the Stone City, dad?'                                  
  'Well,  he's never  said so,'  said Sam,  'but he's  highly thought
 of, that I know. But now where were [we] getting to?'               
  'Nowhere,'  said  Frodo-lad.  'I  want  to  hear  about  the Spider
 again. I like the parts best where you come in, dad.'               
  'But  dad,  you  were  talking  about  Lorien,'  said  Elanor, 'and
 whether my flower still grows there.'                               
  'I expect it does, Ellie dear. For as I was  saying, Mr.  Merry, he
 says that though the Lady has gone the Elves still live there.'     
  'When  can I  go and  see? I  want to  see Elves,  dad, and  I want
 to see my own flower.'                                              
  'If you look in a glass you'll see one that is sweeter,'  said Sam,
 'though I should not be  telling you,  for you'll  find it  out soon
 enough for yourself.'                                               
  'But that isn't the  same. I  want to  see the  green hill  and the
 white flowers and the golden and hear the Elves sing.'              
  'Then  maybe  you  will  one  day,'  said  Sam.  'I  said  the same
 when  I  was  your age,  and long  after, and  there didn't  seem no
 hope, and yet it came true.'                                        
  'But  the  Elves  are  sailing  away still,  aren't they,  and soon
 there'll be none, will there, dad?' said Rose; 'and then all will be
 just places, and very nice, but, but...'                            
  'But what, Rosie-lass?'                                            
  'But not like in stories.'                                         
  'Well, it would be so if they all was  to sail,'  said Sam.  'But I
 am  told  they  aren't  sailing  any  more.  The  Ring has  left the
 Havens,  and  those  that  made up  their mind  to stay  when Master
 Elrond left are staying.  And so  there'll be  Elves still  for many
 and many a day.'                                                    
  'Still  I  think  it  was   very  sad   when  Master   Elrond  left
 Rivendell  and  the  Lady  left  Lorien,'  said  Elanor.  'What hap-
 pened to Celeborn? Is he very sad?'                                 
  'I  expect  so, dear.  Elves are  sad; and  that's what  makes them
 so beautiful, and why we can't  see much  of them.  He lives  in his

 own  land  as  he always  has done,'  said Sam.  'Lorien is  his land,
 and he loves trees.'                                                 
   'No  one  else  in  the  world hasn't  got a  Mallorn like  we have,
 have they? said Merry. Only us and Lord Keleborn.'(3)                
   'So  I  believe,'  said  Sam. Secretly  it was  one of  the greatest
 prides of  his life.  'Well, Keleborn  lives among  the Trees,  and he
 is  happy  in  his  Elvish  way,  I  don't doubt.  They can  afford to
 wait,  Elves  can. His  time is  not come  yet. The  Lady came  to his
 land  and  now  she  is  gone;(4) and  he  has the  land still.  When he
 tires  of  it  he  can leave  it. So  with Legolas,  he came  with his
 people and they live in the land  across the  River, Ithilien,  if you
 can  say  that,  and  they've made  it very  lovely, according  to Mr.
 Pippin. But he'll go  to Sea  one day,  I don't  doubt. But  not while
 Gimli's still alive.'                                                
   'What's  happened  to   Gimli?'  said   Frodo-lad.  'I   liked  him.
 Please can I have an axe soon, dad? Are there any orcs left?'        
   'I  daresay  there  are  if  you  know  where  to  look,'  said Sam.
 'But  not  in  the  Shire,  and  you  won't have  an axe  for chopping
 off  heads,  Frodo-lad.  We  don't  make  them.  But  Gimli,  he  came
 down  to  work  for  the  King  in  the  City,  and  he  and  his folk
 worked  so  long they  got used  to it  and proud  of their  work, and
 in  the  end  they settled  up in  the mountains  up away  west behind
 the  City,  and  there  they  are  still.  And  Gimli goes  once every
 other year to see the Glittering Caves.'                             
   'And does Legolas go to see Treebeard?' asked Elanor.              
   'I can't say, dear,' said Sam. 'I've  never heard  of anyone  as has
 ever  seen  an  Ent  since  those  days.  If Mr.  Merry or  Mr. Pippin
 have they keep it secret. Very close are Ents.'                      
   'And have they never found the Entwives?'                          
   'Well, we've seen none here, have we?' said Sam.                   
   'No,'  said  Rosie-lass;  'but  I  look  for  them  when  I go  in a
 wood. I would like the Entwives to be found.'                        
   'So would I,'  said Sam,  'but I'm  afraid that  is an  old trouble,
 too  old  and  too  deep  for  folks  like  us to  mend, my  dear. But
 now no more questions tonight, at least not till after supper.'      
   'But  that  won't  be  fair,'  said  both  Merry  and   Pippin,  who
 were not in their teens. 'We shall have to go directly to bed.'      
   'Don't talk like that to me,' said  Sam sternly.  'If it  ain't fair
 for Ellie and Fro to sit up after supper it ain't fair for them  to be
 born  sooner,  and  it ain't  fair that  I'm your  dad and  you're not
 mine.  So  no more  of that,  take your  turn and  what's due  in your
 time, or I'll tell the King.'                                        

                  
                                                                   
  They  had  heard  this  threat  before,  but  something  in  Sam's
 voice  made  it  sound more  serious on  this occasion.  'When will
 you see the King?' said Frodo-lad.                                 
  'Sooner than you think,' said Sam. 'Well now, let's be  fair. I'll
 tell  you  all, stay-uppers  and go-to-bedders,  a big  secret. But
 don't  you  go  whispering and  waking up  the youngsters.  Keep it
 till tomorrow.'                                                    
  A  dead  hush  of  expectancy  fell  on  all  the  children:  they
 watched  him  as  hobbit-children  of other  times had  watched the
 wizard Gandalf.                                                    
  'The King's coming here,' said Sam solemnly.                      
  'Coming to Bag End!' cried the children.                         
  'No,'  said  Sam.  'But  he's  coming  north.  He won't  come into
 the  Shire because  he has  given orders  that no  Big Folk  are to
 enter this land again after those  Ruffians; and  he will  not come
 himself just to show he means it. But he will  come to  the Bridge.
 And  -  '  Sam  paused. 'He  has issued  a very  special invitation
 to every one of you. Yes, by name! '                               
  Sam  went  to  a  drawer  and  took  out  a  large scroll.  It was
 black and written in letters of silver.                            
  'When did that come, dad?' said Merry.                            
  'It  came  with the  Southfarthing post  three days  ago [turitten
 above: on Wednesday],' said Elanor. 'I  saw it.  It was  wrapped in
 silk and sealed with big seals.'                                   
  'Quite  right, my  bright eyes,'  said Sam.'Now  look.'He unrolled
 it. 'It is written in Elvish and in Plain Language,' said Sam. 'And
 it  says:  Elessar  Aragorn  Arathornsson  the  Elfstone   King  of
 Gondor  and  Lord  of  the  Westlands will  approach the  Bridge of
 Baranduin on the first day of Spring, or in the  Shire-reckoning the
 twenty-fifth day of March next, and desires there to greet  all his
 friends. In especial he desires to see Master Samwise Mayor o f the
 Shire,  and  Rose  his  wife,  and  Elanor,  Rose,  Goldilocks  and
 Daisie his daughters,  and Frodo,  Merry, and  Pippin and  Ham fast
 his sons. There you are, there are all your names.'                
  'But they aren't the same in both lists,'  said Elanor,  who could
 read.                                                              
  'Ah,' said Sam, 'that's because the first  list is  Elvish. You*re
 the same, Ellie, in both, because  your name  is Elvish;  but Frodo
 is  Iorhail,  and  Rose is  Beril, and  Merry is  Riben [>  R..el >
 Gelir], and Pippin is  Cordof, and  Goldilocks is  Glorfinniel, and
 Hamfast is  Marthanc, and  Daisy [so  spelt] is  Arien. So  now you
 know.'                                                             

   'Well  that's  splendid,'  said  Frodo,  'now  we  all  have  Elvish
 names, but what is yours, dad?'                                        
   'Well, that's rather peculiar,' said Sam, 'for  in the  Elvish part,
 if  you  must  know,  what  the  King  says  is  Master   Perhail  who
 should  rather  be  called  Lanhail,  and   that  means,   I  believe,
 "Samwise  or  Halfwise  who  should  rather  be   called  Plain-wise".
 So  now  you  know   what  the   King  thinks   of  your   dad  you'll
 maybe give more heed to what he says.'                                  
   'And ask him lots more questions,' said Frodo.                        
   'When  is  March  the  25th?'  said  Pippin,   to  whom   days  were
 still the longest measures of time that could  really be  grasped. 'Is
 it soon?'                                                               
   'It's a week today,' said Elanor. 'When shall we start?'              
   'And what shall we wear?' said Rose.                                  
   'Ah,'  said  Sam.  'Mistress  Rose  will  have  a  say in  that. But
 you'll  be  surprised,  my  dears.  We  have  had  warning  of  this a
 long  time  and  we've  prepared  for  the  day.  You're going  in the
 most  lovely  clothes  you've  ever  seen,  and  we're  riding   in  a
 coach.  And  if you're  all very  good and  look as  lovely as  you do
 now I shouldn't be at all surprised  if the  King does  not ask  us to
 go  with  him  to his  house up  by the  Lake. And  the Queen  will be
 there.'                                                                 
   'And  shall  we  stay  up  to  supper?'  said  Rose,  to   whom  the
 nearness of promotion made this an ever-present concern.                
   'We  shall stay  for weeks,  until the  hay-harvest at  least,' said
 Sam.  'And  we shall  do what  the King  says. But  as for  staying up
 to  supper,  no  doubt  the  Queen  will  have  a  word.  And  now  if
 you  haven't  enough  to  whisper  about  for  hours,  and   to  dream
 about till  the sun  rises, then  I don't  know what  more I  can tell
 you.'                                                                   
                                                                        
   The stars were shining in a clear sky: it was the  first day  of the
 clear bright spell that came every  year to  the Shire  at the  end of
 March,  and  was  every  year  welcomed   and  praised   as  something
 surprising for the time of the year.                                    
   All  the  children  were  in  bed. Lights  were glimmering  still in
 Hobbiton   and   in   many   houses   dotted   about   the   darkening
 countryside.  Sam  stood  at  the  door  and  looked   away  eastward.
 He  drew  Mistress  Rose  to  him  and  held  her  close to  his side.  ]
 'March  18th  [>  25th]',(5) he  said. 'This  time seventeen  years ago,
 Rose wife, I did not think I should ever  see thee  again. But  I kept
 on hoping.'                                                             

                     
                                                                          
  ['And  I  never  hoped  at  all, Sam,'  she said,  'until that  very day;
 and  then  suddenly  I  did.  In  the  middle  of  the  morning   I  began
 singing,  and  father  said  "Quiet  lass,  or  the  Ruffians  will come,"
 and  I  said  "Let  them  come.  Their   time  will   soon  be   over.  My
 Sam's coming back." And he came.'](6)                                     
  'And you came back,' said Rose.                                          
  'I  did,'  said  Sam;  'to  the   most  belovedest   place  in   all  the
 world.  I  was  torn in  two  then,  lass,  but  now I  am all  whole. And
 all that I have, and all that I have had I still have.'                   
                                                                          
  Here  the  text  as  it was  written ends,  but subsequently  my father
 added to it the following:                                                
                                                                          
  They went in and shut the  door. But  even as  he did  so Sam            
 heard suddenly the sigh and murmur of the sea on the shores of            
 Middle-earth.                                                             
                                                                          
   It cannot be doubted that this was how he intended at that time that
 The Lord of the Rings should end.                                         
                                                                          
  A  fair  copy  ('B') followed,  and this  was headed  'Epilogue', without
 chapter-number;  subsequently  'Epilogue'  was  altered  to  'The  End  of
 the  Book',  again  without  number.  The  changes  made  to  the original
 draft   were  remarkably   few:  very   minor  adjustments   and  improve-
 ments  in  the  flow  of the  conversation between  Sam and  his children,
 and the alteration or enlargement of certain details.                     
  Merry  Gamgee  now  knows  that  Bandobras   Took  'killed   the  goblin-
 king,  the  reference  is  to  An  Unexpected Party  in The  Hobbit, where
 it is told that the Bullroarer 'charged the ranks of the goblins  of Mount
 Gram in the Battle of  the Green  Fields, and  knocked their  king Golfim-
 bul's head clean off  with a  wooden club.'  Of the  sailing of  the Elves
 Sam now says,  not that  'they aren't  sailing any  more', but  that 'they
 are not sailing often now', and  he continues:  'Those that  stayed behind
 when Elrond left are mostly going to  stay for  good, or  for a  very long
 time. But they are more  and more  difficult to  find or  to talk  to.' Of
 Ents he observes that  they are  'very close,  very secret-like,  and they
 don't  like  people  very  much';  and  of  the  Dwarves  who   came  from
 Erebor to Minas Tirith with Gimli he says  'I hear  they've settled  up in
 the  White  Mountains  not  very  far  from the  City', while  'Gimli goes
 once a year to see the Glittering Caves' (in Appendix A III, at end, it is
 said that Gimli 'became Lord of the Glittering Caves').                   
  The   King's  letter   now  begins   Aragorn  Arathornsson   Elessar  the
 Elfstone;  and  the  date  of  his  coming  to  the Brandywine  Bridge was
 now 'the eighth day of  Spring, or  in the  Shire-reckoning the  second of
 April', since my father  had decided,  already while  writing A  (see note
 5),  that  the  25th of  March was  not the  day on  which the  King would

  came  to the  Bridge, but  the day  on which  The Lord  of the  Rings came
  to an end.(7)                                                             
    Daisie  Gamgee's  name  is now  Erien (Arien  in A);  and in  the King's
  letter  he  calls  Sam  Master  Perhail  who   should  rather   be  called
  Panthail,  which  Sam  interprets  as  'Master  Samwise  who  ought  to be
  called Fullwise'.                                                         
    Other  changes  were  made  to  B later,  and these  were taken  up into
  the  third  and  final  text  'C'  of  this version  of the  'Epilogue', a
  typescript. To this my father gave the revised title of B, 'The End of the
  Book',  with  a  chapter-number  'LVIII',(8) but  he  then  struck  out both
  title and number and reverted to 'Epilogue.' The text now opens thus:     
                                                                           
  One   evening   in   the   March   of    1436   Master    Samwise   Gamgee
  was  taking  his ease  by the  fire in  his study,  and his  children were
  gathered  round  him,  as  was  not   at  all   unusual.  Though   it  was
  always  supposed  to  be  a   special  occasion,   a  Royal   Command,  it
  was   one   more   often   commanded   by   the   subjects  than   by  the
  King.                                                                     
    This   day,   however,   really   was  a   special  occasion.   For  one
  thing  it  was  Elanor  s  birthday;(9) for  another,  Sam  had  been read-
  ing  aloud  from  a  big  Red  Book,  and  he  had just  come to  the very
  end,  after  a  slow  progress   through  its   many  chapters   that  had
  taken many months. On a stool beside him sat Elanor...                    
                                                                           
    Sam  now  says  of  the  Entwives:  'I  think  maybe the  Entwives don't
  want  to  be  found';  and  after  his  words 'But  now no  more questions
  tonight' the following passage was introduced:                            
                                                                           
    'Just one more, please! '  begged Merry.  'I've wanted  to ask          
  before, but Ellie and Fro get in so many questions there's never          
  any room for mine.'                                                       
    'Well then, just one more,' said Sam.                                   
    'About horses,' said Merry.  'How many  horses did  the Riders          
  lose in  the battle,  and have  they grown  lots more?  And what          
  happened  to  Legolas's  horse?  And  what  did Gandalf  do with          
  Shadowfax?  And  can  I  have  a  pony  soon?' he  ended breath-          
  lessly.                                                                   
    'That's  a  lot  more  than  one  question: you're  worse than          
  Gollum,' said Sam. 'You're going to have  a pony  next birthday,          
  as I've told you before. Legolas let his horse run back  free to          
  Rohan  from  Isengard;  and  the  Riders  have more  horses than          
  ever,  because  nobody  steals  them  any longer;  and Shadowfax          
  went  in  the  White  Ship  with  Gandalf:  of   course  Gandalf          
  couldn't have a' left  him behind.  Now that'll  have to  do. No          
  more questions. At least not till after supper.'                          

                    
                                                                         
  The  letter  of  the  King  now  begins Aragorn  Tarantar (at  which Sam
 explains  'that's  Trotter')  Aranthornsson &c.  Tarantar was  altered on
 the typescript to Telcontar ('that's Strider'): see VIII.390 and note 14.
 Rose's  name  in  Elvish  becomes  Meril   (for  Beril),   and  Hamfast's
 Baravorn  (for  Marthanc);  the  Elvish  name  of Daisy  (so spelt  in C)
 reverts to Arien (for Erien), the form in A.                             
                                                                         
  Though never published, of course, this  version of  the Epilogue  is, I
 believe,  quite  well  known,  from   copies  made   from  the   text  at
 Marquette  University.  My  father  would  never  in fact  have published
 it, even had he decided  in the  end to  conclude The  Lord of  the Rings
 with an epilogue, for it  was superseded  by a  second version,  in which
 while  much  of  Sam's  news  from  beyond  the  Shire  was  retained its
 framework  and  presentation  were  radically  changed.(10) Of  this  there
 are two texts.  The first  is a  good clear  manuscript with  few correc-
 tions;  it  has  neither  title  nor  chapter-number.  The  second  is  a
 typescript,  which  though  made  by  my  father followed  the manuscript
 very closely indeed; this is entitled 'Epilogue', with the chapter-number
 'X' (i.e. of Book Six). I give here the text of the typescript in full.
                                                                         
                    The second version of the Epilogue.                   
                                                                         
                                 EPILOGUE.                                
                                                                         
 One   evening   in   the   March   of   1436   Master    Samwise   Gamgee
 was  in  his  study  at  Bag  End. He  was sitting  at the  old well-worn
 l,  desk,  and  with  many  pauses  for  thought  he  was writing  in his
 slow  round  hand  on  sheets  of  loose  paper.  Propped  up on  a stand
 at his side was a large red book in manuscript.                          
  Not  long   before  he   had  been   reading  aloud   from  it   to  his
 family.  For  the  day   was  a   special  one:   the  birthday   of  his
 daughter   Elanor.   That   evening   before  supper   he  had   come  at
 last  to  the  very  end  of  the  Book.  The  long progress  through its
 many   chapters,   even    with   omissions    that   he    had   thought
 advisable,  had  taken   some  months,   for  he   only  read   aloud  on
 great  days.  At   the  birthday   reading,  besides   Elanor,  Frodo-lad
 had  been  present,  and   Rosie-lass,  and   young  Merry   and  Pippin;
 but  the  other  children  had  not   been  there.   The  Red   Book  was
 not  for  them  yet,  and  they  were  safely  in  bed.   Goldilocks  was
 only  five  years  old,  for  in  this  Frodo's  foretelling  had  made a
 slight  error,  and  she  came  after Pippin.  But she  was not  the last
 of  the  line,  for  Samwise  and  Rose  seemed   likely  to   rival  old
 Gerontius  Took  as  successfully  in  the   number  of   their  children
 as  Bilbo  had  in  the  number  of  his  years.  There  was  little Ham,

 [and there was  Daisy still  in her  cradle >]  and Daisy,  and there
 was Primrose still in her cradle.(11)                               
   Now  Sam  was  'having  a  bit  of  quiet'.  Supper was  over. Only
 Elanor  was  with  him,  still up  because it  was her  birthday. She
 sat  without  a  sound,  staring  at  the  fire,  and  now  and again
 glancing at her father. She was a beautiful girl,  more fair  of skin
 than  most  hobbit-maidens,  and  more  slender,  and  the  firelight
 glinted in her red-gold hair. To her, by gift if not  by inheritance,
 a memory of elven-grace had descended.(12)                          
   'What  are  you  doing,  Sam-dad (13) dear?'  she  said at  last. 'You
 said you were going to rest, and I hoped you would talk to me.'     
   'Just  a  moment,  Elanorelle,  said  Sam,(14) as she  came  and set
 her arms about him and peered over his shoulder.                    
   'It looks like Questions and Answers,' she said.                  
   'And so it is,' said Sam.  'Mr. Frodo,  he left  the last  pages of
 the Book to me, but I have never  yet durst  to put  hand to  them. I
 am  still  making notes,  as old  Mr. Bilbo  would have  said. Here's
 all  the  many  questions  Mother  Rose  and  you  and  the  children
 have  asked,  and  I  am  writing  out  the  answers,  when   I  know
 them.  Most  of  the  questions  are  yours,  because  only  you  has
 heard all the Book more than once.'                                 
   'Three  times,'  said  Elanor,  looking  at  the  carefully written
 page that lay under Sam's hand.                                     
                                                                    
   Q. Dwarves,  @c.  Frodo-lad  says  he  likes  them  best.  What
      happened   to   Gimli?   Have   the    Mines   of    Moria   been
      opened again? Are there any Orcs left?                         
   A. Gimli:  he  came  back to  work for  the King,  as he  said, and
      he  brought  many  of  his   folk  from   the  North,   and  they
      worked  in  Gondor  so  long  that  they  got  used  to  it,  and
      they  settled  there,  up  in  the White  Mountains not  far from
      the  City.  Gimli  goes  once  a  year  to the  Glittering Caves.
      How   do   I   know?   Information   from   Mr.   Peregrin,   who
      often  goes  back  to  Minas  Tirith,  where  he  is  very highly
      thought of.                                                    
      Moria:  I  have  heard  no  news.  Maybe  the  foretelling  about
      Durin  is not  for our  time.(15) Dark  places still  need a  lot of
      cleaning up. I guess it  will take  a lot  of trouble  and daring
      deeds  yet  to  root  out the  evil creatures  from the  halls of
      Moria.  For  there  are  certainly  plenty of  Orcs left  in such
      places. It is  not likely  that we  shall ever  get quite  rid of
      them.                                                          

                                                             
                                                                         
  Q.  Legolas. Did he go back to the King? Will he stay there?         
  A.  Yes,  he  did.  He  came  south  with  Gimli,  and   he  brought
      many   of   his   people   from   Greenwood   the  Great   (so  they
      call  it  now).  They  say  it   was  a   wonderful  sight   to  see
      companies   of   Dwarves   and   Elves   journeying   together.  The
      Elves   have   made   the   City,   and   the   land   where  Prince
      Faramir  lives,  more  beautiful  than   ever.  Yes,   Legolas  will
      stay  there,  at any  rate as  long as  Gimli does;  but I  think he
      will  go  to  the  Sea  one  day.  Mr.  Meriadoc  told me  all this,
      for he has visited the Lady Eowyn in her white house.               
                                                                         
  Q.  Horses. Merry is interested in these;  very anxious  for a       
      pony  of  his own.  How many  horses did  the Riders  lose in       
      the  battles,  and  have  they  got   some  more   now?  What       
      happened  to  Legolas's  horse?  What  did  Gandalf  do  with       
      Shadowfax?                                                          
  A.  Shadowfax  went  in  the  White  Ship  with  Gandalf,  of       
      course. I saw that myself. I also saw  Legolas let  his horse       
      run  free  back  to  Rohan from  Isengard. Mr.  Meriadoc says       
      he  does  not  know  how  many  horses  were lost;  but there       
      are  more  than  ever  in  Rohan now,  because no  one steals       
      them  any  longer.   The  Riders   also  have   many  ponies,       
      especially  in  Harrowdale:  white,  brown,  and  grey.  Next       
      year  when  he  comes  back  from  a visit  to King  Eomer he       
      means to bring one for his namesake.                                
                                                                         
  Q.  Ents. Elanor would like to hear more about them. What            
      did Legolas see in Fangorn; and does he ever see                    
      Treebeard  now?  Rosie-lass  very  anxious   about  Entwives.       
                                                                         
      She looks for them whenever she goes in a wood. Will                
      they ever be found? She would like them to be.                      
  A.  Legolas and Gimli have not told what they saw, so far as I          
      have heard. I have not heard of any one that has seen an            
      Ent since those days. Ents are very secret, and they do not         
      like people much, big or little. I should like the Entwives         
      to be found, too; but I am afraid that trouble is too old           
      and deep for Shire-folk to mend. I think, maybe, Entwives           
      do not want to be found; and maybe Ents are now tired of            
      looking.                                                            
                                                                         
  'Well dear,' said Sam, 'this top page, this is only today's             
 batch.' He sighed. 'It isn't fit to go in the Book like that. It isn't a
 bit  like the  story as  Mr. Frodo  wrote it.  But I  shall have  to make

 a  chapter  or  two in  proper style,  somehow. Mr.  Meriadoc might
 help  me.  He's  clever  at  writing,  and  he's making  a splendid
 book all about plants.'                                                
   'Don't  write  any  more  tonight.  Talk to  me, Sam-dad!  ' said
 Elanor, and drew him to a seat by the fire.                            
   'Tell me,' she said,  as they  sat close  together with  the soft
 golden  light  on  their  faces,  'tell  me  about Lorien.  Does my
 flower grow there still, Sam-dad?'                                     
   'Well dear, Celeborn still lives  there among  his trees  and his
 Elves,  and there  I don't  doubt your  flower grows  still. Though
 now I have got you to look at, I don't hanker after it so much.'       
   'But I don't  want to  look at  myself, Sam-dad.  I want  to look
 at other things. I want to see the  hill of  Amroth where  the King
 met Arwen, and the silver  trees, and  the little  white niphredil,
 and the golden  elanor in  the grass  that is  always green.  And I
 want to hear Elves singing.'                                           
   'Then, maybe,  you will  one day,  Elanor. I  said the  same when
 I was your age, and long after it, and there didn't  seem to  be no
 hope. And yet I saw them, and I heard them.'                           
   'I  was afraid  they were  all sailing  away, Sam-dad.  Then soon
 there  would  be  none  here;  and  then  everywhere would  be just
 places, and'                                                           
   'And what, Elanorelle?'                                              
   'And the light would have faded.'                                    
      I-:-8 ?.                                                         
 won't go out yet. It won't ever go quite out, I think now, since I     
 have had you to talk to. For it seems to me now that people can ]      
 remember it who have never seen it. And yet,' he sighed, 'even         
 that is not the same as really seeing it, like I did.'                 
   'Like really being in a story?' said Elanor. 'A story is quite       
 different, even when it is about what happened. I wish I could         
 go back to old days!'                                                  
   'Folk of our sort often wish that,' said Sam. 'You came at the       
 end of a great Age, Elanorelle; but though it's over, as we say,       
 things don't really end sharp like that. It's more like a winter       
 sunset. The High Elves have nearly all gone now with Elrond.           
 But not quite all; and those that didn't go will wait now for a        
 while. And the others, the ones that belong here, will last even       
 longer. There are still things for you to see, and maybe you'll see
 them sooner than you hope.'                                            
                                                                       
   Elanor was silent for some time before she spoke again. 'I did       
 not understand at first what Celeborn meant when he said               
                                                                      

 goodbye to  the King,'  she said.  'But I  think I  do now.  He knew
 that  Lady  Arwen  would  stay,  but  that  Galadriel   would  leave
 him.(16) I think  it  was  very  sad  for  him.  And  for  you,  dear
 Sam-dad.' Her  hand felt  for his,  and his  brown hand  clasped her
 slender fingers. 'For your  treasure went  too. I  am glad  Frodo of
 the Ring saw me, but I wish I could remember seeing him.'           
   'It was sad, Elanorelle,' said Sam, kissing her hair. 'It was, but
 [it] isn't now. For why?  Well, for  one thing,  Mr. Frodo  has gone
 where  the  elven-light isn't  fading; and  he deserved  his reward.
 But I have  had mine,  too. I  have had  lots of  treasures. I  am a
 very  rich  hobbit. And  there is  one other  reason, which  I shall
 whisper to you, a secret I  have never  told before  to no  one, nor
 put in the Book  yet. Before  he went  Mr. Frodo  said that  my time
 maybe  would  come.  I  can  wait.  I  think  maybe we  haven't said
 farewell for good. But I  can wait.  I have  learned that  much from
 the Elves at  any rate.  They are  not so  troubled about  time. And
 so I think Celeborn is  still happy  among his  trees, in  an Elvish
 way.  His time  hasn't come,  and he  isn't tired  of his  land yet.
 When he is tired he can go.'                                        
   'And  when  you're tired,  you will  go, Sam-dad.  You will  go to
 the Havens with the Elves. Then  I shall  go with  you. I  shall not
 part with you, like Arwen did with Elrond.'                         
   'Maybe,  maybe,'  said   Sam  kissing   her  gently.   'And  maybe
 not.   The   choice   of   Luthien   and   Arwen   comes   to  many,
 Elanorelle,  or  something  like  it;  and it  isn't wise  to choose
 before the time.                                                    
   'And  now,  my  dearest, I  think that  it's time  even a  lass of
 fifteen  spring-times  should go  to her  bed. And  I have  words to
 say to Mother Rose.'                                                
                                                                    
   Elanor  stood  up,  and  passed  her  hand  lightly  through Sam's
 curling  brown  hair,  already  flecked  with  grey.   'Good  night,
 Sam-dad. But'                                                       
   'I don't want good night but,' said Sam.                          
   'But won't you show it me first? I was going to say.'             
   'Show you what, dear?'                                            
   'The  King's  letter, of  course. You  have had  it now  more than
 a week.'                                                            
   Sam  sat  up.  'Good gracious!'  he said.  'How stories  do repeat
 themselves!  And  you  get  paid  back  in  your  own coin  and all.
 How  we  spied  on  poor  Mr.  Frodo!  And  now our  own spy  on us,
 meaning  no  more  harm  than  we  did,  I  hope.  But  how  do  you
 know about it?'                                                     

   'There was  no need  for spying,'  said Elanor.  'If you  wanted it
 kept  secret,  you were  not nearly  careful enough.  It came  by the
 Southfarthing  post  early  on  Wednesday  last   week.  I   saw  you
 take it in. All wrapped  in white  silk and  sealed with  great black
 seals:  any  one  who  had  heard  the  Book  would  have  guessed at
 once  that  it  came  from  the  King.  Is  it  good news?  Won't you
 show it me, Sam-dad?'                                                
   'Well, as you're so deep in, you'd better be  right in,'  said Sam.
 'But  no  conspiracies  now.  If  I  show  you,  you join  the grown-
 ups' side and must play fair. I'll tell  the others  in my  own time.
 The King is coming.'                                                 
   'He's coming here?' Elanor cried. 'To Bag End?'                   
   'No,  dear,'  said  Sam.  'But  he's  coming  north  again,  as  he
 hasn't  done  since  you was a mite.(17) But now  his house  is ready.
 He  won't  come into  the Shire,  because he's  given orders  that no
 Big Folk are to enter  the land  again after  those Ruffians,  and he
 won't  break  his  own rules.  But he  will ride  to the  Bridge. And
 he's sent a very special  invitation to  every one  of us,  every one
 by name.'                                                            
   Sam  went to  a drawer,  unlocked it,  and took  out a  scroll, and
 slipped off its case. It was written in two columns with  fair silver
 letters upon black. He unrolled  it, and  set a  candle beside  it on
 the desk, so that Elanor could see it.                               
   'How splendid!' she  cried. 'I  can read  the Plain  Language, but
 what  does  the  other side  say? I  think it  is Elvish,  but you've
 taught me so few Elvish words yet.'                                  
   'Yes,  it's written  in a  kind of  Elvish that  the great  folk of
 Gondor use,' said Sam. 'I have  made it  out, enough  at least  to be
 sure that it says much the  same, only  it turns  all our  names into
 Elvish.  Yours  is  the  same  on  both  sides, Elanor,  because your
 name  is  Elvish.  But  Frodo  is  Iorhael,  and  Rose is  Meril, and
 Merry   is   Gelir,  and   Pippin  is   Cordof,  and   Goldilocks  is
 Glorfinniel,  and  Hamfast  is  Baravorn,  and  Daisy  is  Eirien. So
 now you know.'                                                       
   'How  wonderful!'   she  said.   'Now  we   have  all   got  Elvish
 names.  What  a  splendid  end  to  my  birthday!  But  what  is your
 name, Sam-dad? You didn't mention it.'                               
   'Well, it's rather peculiar,' said Sam. 'For in the Elvish part, if
 you  must  know,  the  King  says:  "Master  Perhael  who  should  be
 called  Panthael".  And  that   means:  Samwise   who  ought   to  be
 called  Fullwise.  So  now  you  know  what the  King thinks  of your
 old father.'                                                         

                                  
                                                                    
    Not  a  bit  more  than  I  do, Sam-dad,  Perhael-adar (18) dearest,'
 said  Elanor.  'But  it  says  the  second  of  April,  only  a week
 today!(19) When shall  we  start?  We  ought  to  be   getting  ready.
 What shall we wear?'                                                
    'You must  ask Mother  Rose about  all that,'  said Sam.  'But we
 have  been  getting  ready. We  had a  warning of  this a  long time
 ago;  and  we've  said  naught  about  it,  only  because  we didn't
 want you all to lose your sleep of  nights, not  just yet.  You have
 all  got  to look  your best  and beautifullest.  You will  all have
 beautiful clothes, and we shall drive in a coach.'                  
    'Shall I make three curtsies, or only one?' said Elanor.         
    'One will do, one each  for the  King and  the Queen,'  said Sam.
 'For though it doesn't say so in the letter, Elanorelle, I think the
 Queen  will  be there.  And when  you've seen  her, my  dear, you'll
 know what a lady  of the  Elves looks  like, save  that none  are so
 beautiful. And there's more to  it even  than that.  For I  shall be
 surprised if the  King doesn't  bid us  to his  great house  by Lake
 Evendim. And there will be Elladan  and Elrohir,  who still  live in
 Rivendell  -  and  with  them  will be  Elves, Elanorelle,  and they
 will sing  by the  water in  the twilight.  That is  why I  said you
 might see them sooner than you guessed.'                            
    Elanor  said  nothing,  but stood  looking at  the fire,  and her
 eyes shone like stars.  At last  she sighed  and stirred.  'How long
 shall  we  stay?'  she  asked.  'I  suppose  we  shall have  to come
 back?'                                                              
    'Yes, and we shall want to, in a  way,' said  Sam. 'But  we might
 stay  until  hay-harvest,  when  I  must be  back here.  Good night,
 Elanorelle. Sleep now till  the sun  rises. You'll  have no  need of
 dreams.'                                                            
    'Good  night,  Sam-dad.  And  don't  work  any  more. For  I know
 what  your  chapter  should  be.  Write  down  our  talk  together -
 but  not  to-night.' She  kissed him,  and passed  out of  the room;
 and it seemed to Sam that the fire burned low at her going.         
                                                                    
   The stars were  shining in  a clear  dark sky.  It was  the second
 day of the bright and cloudless spell  that came  every year  to the
 Shire  towards  the  end  of  March,  and  was  every  year welcomed
 and  praised  as  something  surprising  for  the  season.  All  the
 children were now in bed.  It was  late, but  here and  there lights
 were  still  glimmering  in  Hobbiton,  and  in houses  dotted about
 the night-folded countryside.                                       
   Master  Samwise  stood  at   the  door   and  looked   away  east-
 ward.  He drew  Mistress Rose  to him,  and set  his arm  about her.

   'March  the  twenty-fifth!'   he  said.   'This  day   seventeen  years
 ago,  Rose  wife, I  didn't think  I should  ever see  thee again.  But I
 kept on hoping.'                                                         
   'I  never  hoped  at all,  Sam,' she  said, 'not  until that  very day;
 and  then  suddenly  I  did.  About  noon  it  was,  and  I felt  so glad
 that  I   began  singing.   And  mother   said:  "Quiet,   lass!  There's
 ruffians  about."  And  I  said:   "Let  them   come!  Their   time  will
 soon be over. Sam's coming back." And you came.'                         
   'I  did,'  said  Sam.  'To  the  most  belovedest  place  in   all  the
 world. To my Rose and my garden.'                                        
   They  went  in,  and  Sam  shut the  door. But  even as  he did  so, he
 heard  suddenly,  deep  and  unstilled,  the  sigh  and  murmur   of  the
 Sea upon the shores of Middle-earth.                                     
                                                                         
   In  this  second  Epilogue  Sam  does  not read  out the  King's letter
 (since Elanor could read), but associated with  it (as  is seen  from the
 name-forms  Eirien,  Perhael,  Panthael)  are  three 'facsimiles'  of the
 letter, written in tengwar in two columns.                               
   The first of these ('I') is reproduced on p. 130. It is  accompanied by
 a  transliteration  into  'plain  letters'  of both  the English  and the
 Sindarin. The transliteration of the English  does not  precisely corres-
 pond  to  the  tengwar  text,  for  the  former  omits  Aratbornsson, and
 adds day where the tengwar text has 'the  thirty-first of  the Stirring'.
 The  words  and  Arnor, ar  Arnor were  added  in  to  both  the  tengwar
 texts and are lacking in the  transliterations. As  my father  wrote them
 they read as follows:                                                    
                                                                         
 Aragorn Strider The Elfstone, King of Gondor and Lord of                 
 the Westlands, will approach the Bridge of Baranduin on the              
 eighth day of Spring, or in the Shire-reckoning the second               
 day of April. And he desires to greet there all his friends.             
 In especial he desires to see Master Samwise, Mayor of the               
 Shire, and Rose his wife; and Elanor, Rose, Goldilocks, and              
 Daisy his daughters; and Frodo, Merry, Pippin and Ham fast               
   his sons.                                                              
                                                                         
   To Samwise and Rose the King's greeting from Minas                     
   Tirith, the thirty-first day of the Stirring, being                    
   the twenty-third of February in their reckoning.                       
                                 A ?E ?                                 
                                                                         
 Elessar Telcontar: Aragorn Arathornion Edhelharn, aran                   

 Gondor ar Hir i Mbair Annui, anglennatha i Varanduiniant                  
 erin dolothen Ethuil, egor ben genediad Drannail erin                     
 Gwirith edwen. Ar e anira ennas suilannad mhellyn in                      
 phain: edregol e anira tirad i Cherdir Perhael (i sennui                  
 Panthael estathar aen) Condir i Drann, ar Meril bess din,                 
 ar Elanor, Meril, Glorfinniel, ar Eirien sellath din; ar                  
 Iorhael, Gelir, Cordof, ar Baravorn, ionnath din.                         
   A Pherhael ar am Meril suilad uin aran o Minas                          
   Tirith nelchaenen uin Echuir.                                           
                                  A ?E ?                                 
                                                                          
 The  change  of  pen after  ar Elanor  was no  doubt made  in order  to fit
 the Sindarin text onto the page.                                          
   The  second  'facsimile'  ('II'),  not  accompanied by  a transliteration
 and  not  reproduced here,  is very  similar to  I, but  and Arnor,  ar Arnor
 is part of the texts as written, there is no variation  in the  boldness of
 the  lettering,  and  the texts  end at  the words  his sons,  ionnath din,
 followed by the initials A ?E, so  that there  is here  no mention  of the
 date and place of the letter.                                             
   The third of these pages ('III'), preserved with  the typescript  text of
 the  second  Epilogue  and  accompanied  by  a  transliteration,  is repro-
 duced  on  p.  131.  In  this case  the use  of vowel-tehtar  above conson-
 nants in the Sindarin text greatly reduced its length. The English  text is
 the  same  as in  I, but  the note  of the.date  is different:  'From Minas
 Tirith,  the twenty-third  of February  6341' [=  1436]. The  Sindarin text
 differs from that of I and II in the word order:                          
     Aragorn  Arathornion     Edhelharn     anglennatha  iVaranduiniant
 erin   dolothen   Ethuil   (egor   ben   genediad  Drannail   erin  Gwirith
 edwen) ar ennas anira i aran Gondor ar Arnor ar Hir iMbair                 
     Annui [written Anui](20) suilannad mhellyn in phain...                    
 The   note   of   date   at   the   end   of   the  Sindarin   text  reads:
 a   Pherhael   ar   am   Meril   suilad   uin    aran   o    Minas   Tirith
 nelchaenen ned Echuir: 61.(21)                                            
                                                                          
   It  emerges  from  the  account  of his  works that  my father  wrote for
 Milton  Waldman  in  1951  that  the  second  version  of the  Epilogue was
 written at a very late stage. In this  account he  included what  he called
 'a long and yet bald resume' of the story of  The Lord  of the  Rings; this
 was omitted in Letters (no. 131), and I give here its closing passages.
                                                                          
   The 'Scouring of the Shire' ending in  the last  battle ever  fought there
   occupies  a  chapter.  It  is followed  by a  second spring,  a marvellous
   restoration   and   enhancement   of  beauty,   chiefly  wrought   by  Sam
   (with  the  help  of  gifts  given  him  in Lorien).  But Frodo  cannot be
   healed.  For  the  preservation of  the Shire  he has  sacrificed himself,
   even  in  health,  and  has  no  heart  to  enjoy  it.  Sam has  to choose

             (First copy of the King's letter.)

              (Third copy of the King's letter.)

  between love  of master  and of  wife. In  the end  he goes  with Frodo
  on a last journey. At night  in the  woods, where  Sam first  met Elves
  on  the  outward  journey,   they  meet   the  twilit   cavalcade  from
  Rivendell.  The  Elves  and  the  Three  Rings,  and  Gandalf (Guardian
  of the Third Age) are going to  the Grey  Havens, to  set sail  for the
  West,  never to  return. Bilbo  is with  them. To  Bilbo and  Frodo the
  special  grace  is  granted  to  go  with  the  Elves  they loved  - an
  Arthurian  ending,  in  which  it  is,  of  course,  not  made explicit
  whether  this  is  an 'allegory'  of death,  or a  mode of  healing and
  restoration leading  to a  return. They  ride to  the Grey  Havens, and
  take  ship:  Gandalf  with  the Red  Ring, Elrond  (with the  Blue) and
  the greater part of  his household,  and Galadriel  of Lorien  with the
  White Ring, and with them  depart Bilbo  and Frodo.  It is  hinted that
  they  come  to Eressea.  But Sam  standing stricken  on the  stone quay
  sees only the white ship slip down the grey estuary  and fade  into the
  darkling West. He stays  long unmoving  listening to  the sound  of the
  Sea on the shores of the world.                                        
    Then he rides home; his wife welcomes  him to  the firelight  and his
  first  child,  and he  says simply  Well, I've come back.'(22) There  is a
  brief epilogue in  which we  see Sam  among his  children, a  glance at
  his love for Elanor (the Elvish name of a flower in Lorien) his eldest,
  who by a strange gift has  the looks  and beauty  of an  elven-maid; in
  her all his love and longing for Elves is resolved and satisfied. He is
  busy,  contented,  many  times mayor  of the  Shire, and  struggling to
  finish  off  the  Red  Book,  begun  by Bilbo  and nearly  completed by
  Frodo, in which all the events  (told in  The Hobbit  and The  Lord [of
  the  Rings])  are  recorded.  The  whole  ends  with  Sam and  his wife
  standing outside Bag-end, as the  children are  asleep, looking  at the
  stars in  the cool  spring sky.  Sam tells  his wife  of his  bliss and
  content, and goes in, but as he closes the door he hears the sighing of
  the Sea on the shores of the world.                                    
                                                                        
 It is  clear from  the words  'we see  Sam among  his children'  that my
 father was referring to the first version of the Epilogue.              
  He  was  persuaded  by others  to omit  the Epilogue  from The  Lord of
 the Rings. In a letter to Naomi Mitchison of 25 April 1954  (Letters no.
 144) he wrote:                                                          
                                                                        
  Hobbit-children  were  delightful,  but  I  am  afraid  that  the  only
  glimpses of them in this book  are found  at the  beginning of  vol. I.
  An epilogue giving a further  glimpse (though  of a  rather exceptional
  family) has been so universally condemned that I  shall not  insert it.
  One must stop somewhere.                                               
                                                                        
 He seems  both to  have accepted  and to  have regretted  that decision.
 On  24 October  1955, a  few days  after the  publication of  The Return
 of the King, he wrote to Katherine Farrer (Letters no. 173):            

    I still  feel the  picture incomplete  without something  on Samwise
    and Elanor,  but I  could not  devise anything  that would  not have
    destroyed the ending, more than the  hints (possibly  sufficient) in
    the appendices.                                                     
                                                                       
                              NOTES.                                    
                                                                       
 1. The 'Epilogue' text begins at the head of a page, but this is merely
    because the words ' "Well, I'm back," he said' stand at the  foot of
    the preceding one.                                                  
 2. '1436'  was pencilled  in subsequently.  Apparently my  father first
    wrote  'And  one  evening  Master Samwise...',  but changed  this at
    once  to  'And  one  evening  in  March  Master  Samwise  ...'  This
    does not suggest the passage of many years since the sailing  of the
    ship  from  Mithlond,  but  that  such was  the case  is immediately
    plain  in  the  same opening  sentence ('and  the children  were all
    gathered about him'); the absence  of a  date in  the text  as first
    written must therefore be casual and without significance.          
 3. Keleborn:  immediately  above  the  name  was spelt  Celeborn; here,
    the K was changed from C in the act of writing the letter.          
 4. On  the development  of the  legends of  Galadriel and  Celeborn see
    The  History  of Galadriel  and Celeborn  in Unfinished  Tales, Part
    Two $IV.                                                            
 5. March 18th [> 25th]: the  King had  declared in  his letter  that he
    would  be  coming  to  the  Brandywine  Bridge  on March  25; Elanor
    had said that that was 'a week today'; and as  my father  wrote this
    concluding  passage  Sam  said  to  Rose  at  the  door  of  Bag End
    'March  18th'.  On  the   change  to   the  25th,   apparently  made
    immediately, see note 7.                                            
 6. The brackets are in the original.                                   
 7. The change in the  King's letter  from March  25 to  April 2  was in
    fact, and at first sight  very oddly,  an emendation  made on  the B
    text.  This  question  of  the  dates  is  minor,  complicated,  and
    explicable. When my father wrote  the text  A the  great day  of the
    King's coming  north to  the Brandywine  Bridge was  to be  the 25th
    of  March,  the  date  of  the  destruction  of  the  Ring  and  the
    downfall of Sauron (see pp. 59 - 60); and Elanor said (p.  118) that
    that was 'a week  today', so  that the  occasion of  Sam's conversa-
    tion  with  his  children  recorded  in the  Epilogue was  March 18.
    When  Sam  and  Rose  stood  outside  Bag End  that night  Sam said:
    'March  18th.  Seventeen  years  ago  ...'   (p.  118).   My  father
    changed  '18'  to  '25'  on the  manuscript A  (and probably  at the
    same  time added  in the  words 'This  time (seventeen  years ago)')
    because he decided, just at that point, that the end of The  Lord of
    the Rings (in its Epilogue) should fall on that date  (possibly also
    because  he recalled  that it  was Elanor's  birthday, which  had of

                                                
                                                                             
       course   been  chosen   for  the   same  reason);   but  he   failed  to
       postpone the date in the King's letter earlier in A (p. 117).          
           Writing  out  the  fair  copy  B,  in  which  he  followed   A  very
       closely,  he  momentarily  forgot  this   decision,  and   repeated  the
       date   in   A  of   the  King's   coming  to   the  Bridge,   March  25.
       Subsequently,  while  writing  B,   he  realised   that  this   was  now
       erroneous,  and changed  it to  April 2;  so at  the end  of B  Sam says
       (as  he  had  in  A):  'March  the  twenty-fifth!  This  time  seventeen
       years ago...'                                                          
           Elanor's  answer  to  Pippin's  question  'When  is  the  second  of
       April?'  was  changed  subsequently  on  B  from  'a  week today'  to 'a
       week  tomorrow',  which  is  the  reading  in  the  typescript  C. This,
       however,  was  erroneous,   since  it   gives  March   thirty-one  days;
       'a  week  today' was  restored in  the second  version of  the Epilogue,
       p. 127.                                                                
                                                                             
  8.   Chapter-number  'LVIII':  the   basis  of   the  revised   numbering  of
       the  chapters  of  Book  Six  is  not  clear  to  me.  The  sequence ran
       from LII 'The Tower of Kirith Ungol' (p. 25) to LX 'The Grey           
       Havens'  (p.  110),  but  on   some  of   the  chapters   these  numbers
       were reduced by two; here the reduction is by three.                   
  9.   Elanor's  birth  on  25  March  (1421)  was  mentioned  in  the original
       draft of 'The Grey Havens', p. 109.                                    
 10.   In  this  second  version  Sam  is  making  notes,  which are  cited and
       which are an  essential part  of the  Epilogue, for  the filling  of the
       empty  pages at  the end  of the  Red Book;  and it  seems odd  that the
       title  'The  End  of  the  Book',  so  suitable  to the  second version,
       should have  been used,  and rejected,  on texts  B and  C of  the first
       (pp. 119 - 20).                                                        
 11.   This emendation was made on the typescript only. In 'The               
       Longfather-tree of Master Samwise' in Appendix C Daisy                 
       Gamgee  was  born   in  1433   and  Primrose   in  1435;   Bilbo  Gamgee
       was  born  in  the  year  of  the  Epilogue, 1436,  and was  followed by
       three further children, making thirteen in all.                        
 12.   A footnote to the record of the birth of Elanor in The Tale of         
       Years  states:  'She  became  known  as  "the   Fair"  because   of  her
       beauty;  many  said  that  she  looked  more  like  an  elf-maid  than a
       hobbit. She had golden hair, which had been very rare in the           
       Shire;  but  two  others  of  Samwise's  daughters  were   also  golden-
       haired,  and  so  were  many  of the  children born  at this  time.' Cf.
       the  reference  in  'The  Grey  Havens'  to  the  golden-haired children
       born in the Shire in the year 1420 (RK p. 303; see p. 112, note 1).
 13.   Sam-dad:  this  address  to Sam  by his  children entered  in text  B of
       the first version.                                                     
 14.   In  the  manuscript  'said  Sam'  is  followed  by  'sucking   his  pen-
       holder';  this  was  probably  omitted  inadvertently,  as   were  other
       phrases afterwards picked up and reinserted in the typescript.         

                     
                                                                        
  15. Sam was no  doubt thinking  of the  end of  Gimli's song  in Moria,
      by which he was greatly struck (FR p. 330):                        
               There lies his crown in water deep,                       
               Till Durin wakes again from sleep.                        
      Or  else  of  Gimli's  words  when  Frodo and  Sam looked  with him
      into  Mirrormere: 'O  Kheled-zaram fair  and wonderful!  There lies
      the  crown  of Durin  till he  wakes.' '"What  did you  see?" said
      Pippin  to Sam,  but Sam  was too  deep in  thought to  answer' (FR
      p. 348).                                                           
  16. Elanor's  words  refer  to  RK  p.  260  ('Many   Partings'):  'But
      Celeborn  said:  "Kinsman,  farewell!  May   your  doom   be  other
      than mine, and your  treasure remain  with you  to the  end!"' For
      the original form of Celeborn's farewell to Aragorn see p. 64.     
  17. I do not know of any other  reference to  this northern  journey of
      Aragorn in the early years of his reign.                           
  18. In  the  manuscript  (which  had  ai forms,  later emended,  in the
      names Iorhail, Perhail, Panthail) Elanor calls her father Panthail-
      adar.                                                              
  19. only a week today: see note 7, at end.                             
  20. My father's transliteration  has ar  ennas i  aran Gondor  ar Arnor
      ar Hir iMbair Annui anira...                                       
  21. 61 =  16, i.e.  year 16  of the  Fourth Age,  which means  that the
      Fourth  Age  began  in  1421  (see Appendix  D to  The Lord  of the
      Rings, at end).                                                    
  22. In all the texts of 'The Grey Havens' from  the earliest  draft Sam
      said to Rose when  he returned  to Bag  End Well,  I m  back. Well,
      I've come back' does not mean the same thing.                      

                                  APPENDIX.                                
                                                                          
                      Drawings of Orthanc and Dunharrow.                   
                                                                          
 When I wrote Volume VIII, The War of the Ring, it entirely and most       
 regrettably escaped my memory that there are several unpublished          
 drawings of Orthanc and Dunharrow in the Bodleian Library. As             
 these are of much interest I reproduce them belatedly here, as a final
 appendix to the history of The Lord of the Rings.                         
  The upper drawing on the page called here 'Orthanc I' shows a            
 conception essentially similar to that of the little sketch 'Orthanc 3' '
 reproduced in VIII.33 and described in the first manuscript of the        
 chapter 'The Voice of Saruman', VIII.61. In this, the tower was           
 founded on a huge arch spanning the great cleft in the rock; flights of
 stairs led up on two sides to a narrow platform beneath the arch,         
 whence further stairs ran up 'to dark doors on either side, opening in
 the shadow of the arch's feet'. But in the present drawing the rock of
 Orthanc is enormously much greater in relation to the tower than in       
 'Orthanc 3'; the tower has only three tiers (seven in 'Orthanc 3' and in
 the description associated with it, VIII.32 - 3); and the horns at the
 summit are very much smaller.                                             
  In the lower drawing on this page, showing the Circle of Isengard        
 in Nan Gurunir between the mountains' arms, is seen the feature           
 described in the original drafting of the chapter 'The Road to Isengard'
 but rejected from the first completed manuscript (VIII.43, note 23):      
 the western side of the Circle was formed by the mountain-wall itself.
 The dark letter C was a change made later to the faintly pencilled        
 name of the Wizard's Vale, Nan Gurunir becoming Nan Curunir.              
  The page 'Orthanc II' carries two designs for 'Orthanc's roof'; and      
 on 'Orthanc III' the final conception is seen emerging, in which the      
 'rock' of Orthanc becomes itself the 'tower'. The drawing on the right
 has in fact been previously published: it was used in The Lord of the     
 Rings Calendar 1977, and so appears in Pictures by J. R. R. Tolkien,      
 no. 27 (see VIII.44, note 26).                                            
                                                                          
  The  two  pages  of  drawings of  Dunharrow are  not easy  to interpret,
 more  especially  'Dunharrow  I'  (for the  early conceptions  of Dunhar-
 row and the first sketches see VIII.235 ff.). Of 'Dunharrow I' it  can at
 least  be  said that  this idea  of the  approach to  the Hold  was never
 described  in  words.  Apparently, the  path winding  up from  the valley
 passed  near  the  top  of  the  cliff  through  the  great  door  in the
 foreground  and  entered  a  steeply  ascending  tunnel,  climbing  up by

 
                                                                         
 stairs inside the cliff, the head  of which  can be  seen emerging  from a
 large opening or hole in  the flat  land above.  The single  menhir, first
 mentioned  in  the  text  F  of  the  original  work  on the  chapter 'The
 Muster of Rohan' (VIII.246) as standing  in the  rock-ringed floor  of the
 Hold, is seen; but since there is no sign of the lines of  standing stones
 across  the upland  (nor of  the Pukel-men  at the  turns in  the climbing
 path) I would be inclined to place this drawing after the  earliest drafts
 of the chapter and the little sketches reproduced  in VIII.239  but before
 the writing of the text F.                                               
  A  very  puzzling  feature of  this drawing  is the  wavy line  at bottom
 left, hiding one of the bends in the climbing path.                      
  The   upper  drawing   on  the   page  'Dunharrow   II'  has   a  general
 likeness  in  the  lie  of  the  mountain  side  to  the  coloured drawing
 reproduced  as  the  first frontispiece  (but which  should have  been the
 second)  to The  War of  the Ring,  but there  the resemblance  ceases. In
 that  other  picture a  double line  of huge  standing stones  crosses the
 upland  from  the brink  of the  cliff to  a dark  cleft in  the mountain,
 where  the  road  so  marked  out disappears;  and I  suggested (VIII.250)
 that the dark cleft is '"the gate of  the Hold",  the "Hold"  itself, the
 "recess"  or  "amphitheatre"  with  doors  and  windows  in  the  cliff at
 the rear, being in  this picture  invisible.' In  the present  drawing the
 Pukel-men are seen at the turns  of the  path coming  up from  the valley;
 at the top of the cliff the road continues to wind, but the turns  are now
 marked by  pointed stones.  There is  then a  straight stretch  across the
 upland  field,  unmarked  by  stones;  and  the road  passing (apparently)
 between  two stones  or pillars  leads into  the Hold,  in which  the door
 into the cliff  behind can  be seen.  In the  left-hand lower  drawing the
 Pukel-men  reappear,  and  in  the  right-hand  drawing  a double  line of
 cone-shaped  stones  leads across  the upland  and into  the Hold,  with a
 single stone standing in the middle of the 'amphitheatre'.               
  My guess is that the  upper drawing  on this  page shows  a stage  in the
 development   of   the   conception  of   Dunharrow  when   the  Pukel-men
 had emerged, but not  the double  line of  stones: these  are seen  at the
 moment of their emergence in  one of  the lower  sketches. In  relation to
 the  manuscript  evidence,  'Dunharrow  I'  would  then  belong  with, but
 actually  precede, the  text F  of 'The  Muster of  Rohan', in  which both
 the Pukel-men  (then called  the Hoker-men)  and the  lines of  stones are
 present.                                                                 

                        (Orthanc I.)

                             (Orthanc II.)

                         (Orthanc III.)

                          (Dunharrow I.)

                         (Dunharrow II.)
