                           PART TWO.
               
                        THE NOTION CLUB
                            PAPERS.    

                           THE NOTION CLUB PAPERS.                          
                                                                           
                                Introduction.                               
                                                                           
 On  18  December  1944,  when  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  had  reached  the
 end  of  what  would  become  The  Two   Towers  (and   a  few   pages  had
 been  written  of  'Minas  Tirith'  and  'The  Muster  of  Rohan'   at  the
 beginning  of  Book V),  my father  wrote to  me (Letters  no. 92)  that he
 had seen C. S. Lewis that day: 'His  fourth (or  fifth?) novel  is brewing,
 and seems likely  to clash  with mine  (my dimly  projected third).  I have
 been  getting  a  lot  of new  ideas about  Prehistory lately  (via Beowulf
 and  other  sources  of  which  I  may  have  written)  and  want  to  work
 them  into  the  long  shelved  time-travel  story  I  began.  C. S.  L. is
 planning  a  story  about  the  descendants  of Seth  and Cain.'  His words
 are  tantalizingly  difficult  to interpret;  but by  'clash with  mine' he
 surely meant that the themes of their books ran rather close.(1)           
  Whatever lies behind this, it is  seen that  he was  at this  time turning
 his  thoughts  to  a  renewed  attempt  on  the 'time-travel  story', which
 would  issue  a year  later in  The Notion  Club Papers.  In his  letter to
 Stanley Unwin  of 21  July 1946  (Letters no.  105) he  said that  he hoped
 very  shortly  'actually to  - write',  to turn  again to  The Lord  of the
 Rings where he had left it, more than a year  and a  half before:  'I shall
 now have  to study  my own  work in  order to  get back  to it,'  he wrote.
 But later in that same letter he said:                                     
                                                                           
  I  have  in   a  fortnight   of  comparative   leisure  round   about  last
  Christmas  written  three  parts  of   another  book,   taking  up   in  an
  entirely  different  frame and  setting what  little had  any value  in the
  inchoate  Lost  Road  (which  I  had  once  the  impudence  to show  you: I
  hope it is forgotten), and other things beside. I hoped  to finish  this in
  a  rush,  but  my  health  gave  way  after  Christmas.  Rather   silly  to
  mention it, till it is finished. But I am  putting The  Lord of  the Rings,
  the  Hobbit  sequel, before  all else,  save duties  that I  cannot wriggle
  out of.                                                                   
                                                                           
 So far as I have been able to discover there is no  other reference  to The
 Notion Club Papers anywhere in my father's writings.                       
                                                                           
  But  the  quantity  of  writing  constituting  The  Notion   Club  Papers,
 and  the  quantity  of  writing  associated  with   them,  cannot   by  any
 manner  of  means  have  been  the  work  of  a fortnight.  To substantiate
 this, and since  this is  a convenient  place to  give this  very necessary
 information, I set out here the essential facts of the textual relations of
 all this material, together with some brief indication of their content.

    As the development of The Notion Club Papers progressed my               
  father divided it into two parts, the second of which was never            
  completed, and although he ultimately rejected this division (2) I have        
  found it in every way desirable to preserve it in this book. Part One      
  was 'The Ramblings of Michael Ramer: Out of the Talkative Planet', "       
  and this consists of a report in direct speech of the discussions at two
  successive meetings (3) of 'the Notion Club' at Oxford far in the future       
  at the time of writing. On the first of these occasions the conversation
  turned on the problem of the vehicle, the machine or device, by which      
  'space-travellers' are transported to their destination, especially in     
  respect of its literary credibility in itself and its effect on the story
  contained within the journeys; on the second, of which the report is..     
  much longer, one of the members, Michael Ramer, expounded his              
  ideas concerning 'true dreams' and his experiences of 'space-travel' in
  dream.                                                                     
    The earliest manuscript, here called 'A', is a complete text of Part     
  One. It is roughly written and hastily expressed, there is no title or     
  explanatory 'scene-setting', and there are no dates; but while the text
  would undergo much expansion and improvement, the essential                
  structure and movement of the dialogue was already largely present.       
    The second manuscript, 'B', is also a complete text of Part One,         
  but is much fuller than A, and (with many changes and additions)           
  advances far towards the final form. Here also the two meetings, as the
  text was first written, have no dates, and the numbers given to the        
  meetings imply a much longer history of the Club than is suggested for     
  it subsequently. For the elaborate title or prolegomenon to this version
  see pp. 148 - 9.                                                           
    The third manuscript, 'C', is written in a fine script, but is not quite
  complete: it extends to Ramer's words 'So there does appear to be at       
  least one other star with attendant planets' (p. 207), and it is clear that
  no more was written of this text (which, incidentally, it would have       
  taken days to write).                                                      
    A typescript 'D', made by my father, is the final form of Part One. In
  one section of the text, however, D seems to have preceded C, since it-
  has some B readings which were then changed to those of C; but the         
  final form of the text is scarcely ever in doubt, and even where it is the
  differences are entirely trivial. Where C ends, the typescript follows B,
  the place of transition being marked on the B manuscript. (A second        
  typescript - not, I think, made by my father - was begun, but              
  abandoned after only a few pages; this has no independent value.)          
                                                                            
    Part   Two,   'The   Strange   Case  of   Arundel  Lowdham',   records  a
  number  of  further  meetings  of  the Notion  Club, continuous  with those
  of Part One. This second Part is largely  devoted to  the intrusion  of the
  Matter  of  Numenor  into  the  discussions  of  the  Notion  Club,  but of
  this there are only two texts, a manuscript ('E')  and a  typescript ('F').

                 
                                                                             
 .  goth  end  at  the  same  point,  with  the  next  meeting  of   the  Club
 arranged and dated, but never written.                                       
   The  typescript  F  is a  complex document,  in that  my father  rejected a
 substantial section of it ('F 1') as  soon as  he had  typed it,  replaced it
 ('F 2'),  and  then  continued  on  to the  end, the  structure of  the text
 being thus F 1, F 1 > F 2, F 2 (see p. 237 and note 37).                     
   For  both  Parts,  but  especially  for Part  Two, there  is a  quantity of
 rough, discontinuous drafting, often scarcely legible.                       
                                                                             
  While  Part  Two   was  being   further  developed   (that  is,   after  the
 completion  of  the  manuscript   E  so   far  as   it  went)   the  Adunaic *
 language  emerged  (as  it   appears),  with   an  abandoned   but  elaborate
 account   of   the   phonology,  and   pari  passu   with  The   Notion  Club
 Papers my father not  only wrote  a first  draft of  an entirely  new version
 of  the story  of Numenor  but developed  it through  further texts:  this is
 The Drowning of Anadune, in which all the names are in Adunaic.              
  How  is  all  this  to  be  equated  with  his  statement  in the  letter to
 Stanley  Unwin  in  July 1946  that 'three  parts' of  the work  were written
 in  a fortnight  at the  end of  1945? Obviously  it cannot  be, not  even on
 the  supposition  that  when  he  said  'a  fortnight' he  greatly underesti-
 mated   the   time.   Though   not   demonstrable,   an   extremely  probable
 explanation, as it  seems to  me, is  that at  the end  of that  fortnight he
 stopped  work  in  the  middle  of  writing  the manuscript  E, at  the point
 where  The  Notion  Club  Papers  end,   and  at   which  time   Adunaic  had
 not  yet  arisen.  Very  probably  Part  One   was  at   the  stage   of  the
 manuscript B.(4) On   this  view,   the  further   development  of   what  had
 then  been  achieved  of  Part  One,   and  more   especially  of   Part  Two
 (closely  associated  with  that  of  the  Adunaic  language and  the writing
 of  The  Drowning   of  Anadune),   belongs  to   the  following   year,  the
 earlier part of 1946. Against this, of course, is the fact that the letter to
 Stanley  Unwin  in  which  my  father  referred  to  the  Papers  was written
 in  July 1946,  but that  letter gives  no impression  of further  work after
 'my  health  gave  way  after  Christmas'. But  it is  to be  remembered that
 The  Lord  of  the  Rings  had been  at a  halt for  more than  a year  and a
 half,   and  it   may  well   be  that   he  was   deeply  torn  between  the
 burgeoning   of   Adunaic   and   Anadune   and   the   oppression   of   the
 abandoned  Lord  of  the  Rings.  He  did not  need to  spell out  to Stanley
 Unwin  what he  had in  fact been  doing! But  he said  that he  was 'putting
 The  Lord  of  the  Rings  before  all  else',  which  no  doubt meant  'I am
 now going  to put  it before  all else',  and that  included Adunaic.  To the
 interrupted Notion Club Papers he never returned.                            
  The  diverse  and  shifting  elements  in  all  this  work,  not  least  the
 complex  but  essential  linguistic  material,  have  made  the  construction
                                                                             
 (* Adunaic is always so spelt at this time (not  Adunaic), and  I write  it so
 throughout.)                                                                 

                           
                                                                            
  of  a  readily  comprehensible edition  extremely difficult,  requiring much
  experimentation   among   possible   forms   of   presentation.   Since  The
  Notion  Club  Papers  are  now  published  for  the  first  time,  the final
  typescripts  D  of  Part  One  and  F  of  Part  Two  must obviously  be the
  text printed,  and this  makes for  difficulties of  presentation (it  is of
  course very much easier to begin  with an  original draft  and to  relate it
  by  consecutive  steps  to  a  final form  that is  already known).  The two
  Parts  are separated,  with notes  following each  Part. Following  the text
  of the Papers  I give  important sections  that were  rejected from  or sig-
  nificantly  changed in  the final  text, earlier  forms of  the 'Numenorean'
  fragments   that   'came   through'   to   Arundel   Lowdham   and   of  the
  Old  English  text  written  by  his  father,   and  reproductions   of  the
  'facsimiles' of that text with analysis of the tengwar.                   
      Although  the  final  text  of  Part Two  of the  Papers and  The Drown-
  ing  of  Anadune  were  intimately  connected,(5) especially  in  respect  of
  Adunaic,  any  attempt  to  combine  them  in  a  single  presentation makes
  for inextricable confusion; the latter is therefore treated  entirely separ-
  ately  in  the  third  part  of  this  book,  and in  my commentary  on Part
  Two  of  the  Papers  I  have  not  thought  it  useful  to  make  continual
  reference   forward  to   The  Drowning   of  Anadune:   the  interrelations
  between  the  two  works  emerge more  clearly when  the latter  is reached.
                                                                            
      There  are  some  aspects  of  the  framework  of  the  Papers, provided
  by  the  Foreword  of  the  Editor,  Mr.  Howard  Green,  and  the  list  of
  members  of  the  Notion  Club,  which  are  better  discussed here  than in
  the commentary.                                                            
                                                                            
                                  The Foreword.                              
                                                                            
      The  original  manuscript  A  of Part  One, as  already noticed,  has no
  title  or  introductory statement  of any  kind, but  begins with  the words
  'When Ramer  had finished  reading his  latest story...'  The first  page of
  B begins thus:                                                             
                                                                            
                                  Beyond Lewis                               
                                      or                                   
                          Out of the Talkative Planet.                       
                                                                            
           Being a fragment of an apocryphal Inklings' Saga, made            
           by some imitator at some time in the 1980s.                       
                                                                            
                              Preface to the Inklings.                       
                                                                            
           While listening to this fantasia (if  you do),  I beg  of the     
           present  company  not  to look  for their  own faces  in this     
           mirror.  For  the  mirror  is  cracked, and  at the  best you     
           will  only  see  your  countenances  distorted,  and  adorned     
           maybe  with  noses  (and  other features)  that are  not your     

 own, but belong to other members of the company -                        
 if to anybody.                                                           
                                                                         
                                Night 251.                                
 When Michael Ramer had finished reading his latest story...              
                                                                         
 This was heavily emended and then struck through, and was replaced     
 by a new, separate title-page (made when B had been completed):          
                                                                         
                            Beyond Probability (6)                        
                                    or                                    
                       Out of the Talkative Planet.                       
                                                                         
                          The Ramblings of Ramer                          
 being Nights 251 and 252 of The Notion Club Papers.                      
                                                                         
 [Little  is  known  about  this  rare  book,  except  that               
 it  appears  to  have  been  written  after  1989,  as  an               
 apocryphal  imitation  of  the  Inklings'  Saga  Book. The               
 author identifies himseif with the character called in the               
 narrative  Nicholas  Guildford;  but  Titmouse  has  shown               
 that this is a pseudonym,  and is  taken from  a mediaeval               
 dialogue, at one time read in the  Schools of  Oxford. His               
 real identity remains unknown.]                                          
                                                                         
 An aside to the audience. While listening to this hotch-                 
 potch (if you do), I beg of the  present company  not to                 
 look for their own faces in my mirror. For the mirror is                 
 cracked...                                                               
                                                                         
 This is followed by a list of  the persons  who appear  (see p.  151). It
 seems clear that at the stage  when the  text B  was written  my father's
 idea was far less  elaborate than  it became;  intending perhaps,  so far
 as  the  form  was  concerned,  no  more  than  a  jeu  d'esprit  for the
 entertainment of the Inklings - while the titles  seem to  emphasise that
 it was to be, in patt, the vehicle of criticism and discussion of aspects
 of Lewis's 'planetary' novels. Perhaps he  called to  mind the  witty and
 ingenious method  that Lewis  had devised  for his  criticism of  The Lay
 of Leithian in 1930 (see The Lays of Beleriand, p.  151). -  So far  as I
 can see, there is no indication that at this stage he envisaged  the form
 that Part Two  of the  Papers would  take, and  definite evidence  to the
 contrary (see pp. 281 - 2).                                              
 There  are  several  drafts  for  a  more  circumstantial account  of the
 Papers and of how they  came to  light, preceding  the elaborate  form in
 the final  text that  follows. They  were found  at the  University Press
 waiting to be pulped, but no one  knew how  they had  got there;  or they
 were found 'at Messrs. Whitburn and Thoms' publishing house'.(7)        

    The mediaeval dialogue from which the name Nicholas Guildford           
  is derived is The Owl and the Nightingale, a debate in verse written      
  between 1189 and 1216. To the Owl's question, who shall decide             
  between them, the Nightingale replies that Maister Nichole of Gulde-     
  forde is the obvious choice, since he is prudent, virtuous, and wise, and
  an excellent judge of song.                                                
                                                                            
                              The List of Members.                           
                                                                            
    At the top of a page that preceded the manuscript A and is almost        
  certainly the first setting down of the opening passage of Night 60 of ',
  the Papers (see p. 211, note 7) my father wrote these names:               
    Ramer Latimer Franks Loudham Dolbear                                     
  Beneath Ramer he wrote 'Self', but struck it out, then 'CSL' and 'To',     
  these also being struck out. Beneath Latimer he wrote 'T', beneath         
  Franks 'CSL', beneath Loudham 'HVD' (Hugo Dyson), and beneath              
  Dolbear 'Havard'.                                                          
    This is the only actual identification of members of the Notion Club     
  with members of the Inklings that is found. The name Latimer (for          
  Guildford) remained that of the Club's 'reporter' in manuscript A; it is
  derived from Old French latinier ('Latiner', speaker of Latin), meaning
  an interpreter. Loudham (so spelt in A and B, and initially in the         
  manuscript E of Part Two) would obviously be Dyson even without            
  'HVD' written beneath (see Humphrey Carpenter, The Inklings, pp.           
  212 - 13); and since Franks (only becoming Frankley in the third text      
  C) is here Lewis, I suppose that my father felt that the name was          
  appropriate to his character. The other two names were presumably          
  'significant', but I do not know what the significance was. Dolbear is     
  an uncommon surname, but there was a chemist's shop in Oxford              
  called Dolbear & Goodall, and I recollect that my father found this        
  particularly engaging; it may be that he simply found in Dolbear the       
  chemist a comic appropriateness to Havard, or to Havard as he was          
  going to present him. Ramer is very puzzling; and here there is no         
  certain identification with one of the Inklings in the list. The various
  dictionaries of English surnames that I have consulted do not give the     
  name. The only suggestion that I can make is that my father derived it     
  from the dialectal verb rame, with these meanings given in the Oxford     
  English Dictionary: 'to shout, cry aloud, scream; keep up the same         
  cry, continue repeating the same thing; obtain by persistent asking;       
  repeat, run over'; cf. also the English Dialect Dictionary, ed. Joseph     
  Wright (with which he was very familiar: he called it 'indispensable',     
  Letters no. 6), ream verb 3, also raim, rame, etc., which gives similar
  meanings, and also 'to talk nonsense, rave'. But this seems far-fetched.
    At any rate, this list is interesting as suggesting that my father       
  started out with the idea of a series of definite 'equivalences', distorted
  no doubt but recognisable. But I think that this plan very quickly         
  dissolved, because he found that it would not suit his purpose; and not

          
                                                                         
 even in the earliest text does there seem to  be any  clearer association
 with individual Inklings than there is in  the final  form of  the Papers,
 with  the  possible  exception  of  Lowdham.  In  A his  interventions are
 limited to jocular facetiousness, and the interest that in the  later form
 of part One (pp. 199 - 201) he shows in 'Old Solar'  and in  Ramer's names
 of other worlds is in A given to Dolbear (and then in B to Guildford).
  It  would  not suit  my father's  purpose, because  in 'The  Ramblings of
 Ramer'  he wished  to allow  his own  ideas the  scope, in  the form  of a
 discussion and argument, that they  would never  have had  in fact,  in an
 actual   meeting  of   the  Inklings.   The  professional   knowledge  and
 intellectual interests of the members of the  Notion Club  are such  as to
 make  this  symposium  possible.  On  p.  149  I  have  given  the  second
 version  of  a  title-page,  in  which  after the  author's 'aside  to the
 audience',  warning  them  'not  to  look  for  their  own  faces   in  my
 mirror', there follows a list of the members  of the  Club. At  this stage
 only  six  members were  listed (plus  Cameron); and  of these  six, Ramer
 is  Professor  of  Finno-Ugric,  Guildford  is a  Comparative Philologist,
 and  Loudham  has  'special  interests  in  Icelandic   and  Anglo-Saxon',
 while  the  chemist  Dolbear  'concerns  himself  with  psychoanalysis and
 related aspects  of language'.  At this  stage Frankley  is a  lecturer in
 French,  changed  to  the  Clarendon Reader  in English  Literature, 'with
 a taste for the Romance literatures and a  distaste for  things Germanic',
 while the statement of Jeremy's position and interests is  much as  in the
 final list. Ramer, Jeremy, Guildford and  Frankley all  have 'a  taste for
 romances of travel in Space and Time.'                                   
  The enlarged list of members in the final form  (pp. 159  - 60),  most of
 whom  do  not  have  even walk-on  parts, served  the purpose,  I suppose,
 of  creating  an  impression  of  a more  amorphous group  surrounding the
 principals.   The   polymathy   of   the   monk   Dom   Jonathan  Markison
 extends  to  some  very  recondite  knowledge  of Germanic  origins, while
 Ranulph Stainer appears in  Part Two  as a  sceptical and  rather superior
 onlooker  at  the  strange  proceedings.  The  surname  of  the apparently
 speechless  undergraduate  John  Jethro  Rashbold  is  a   translation  of
 Tolkien  (Toll-kuhn:  see  Letters  no.  165  and  note  1).  In  Part Two
 appears   'old   Professor   Rashbold   at   Pembroke',   the  Anglo-Saxon
 scholar  described by  Lowdham as  'a grumpy  old bear'  (p. 256  and note
 72).  There  are  no  doubt other  hidden puns  and jokes  in the  list of
 members.                                                                 
  In my view it would be useless  to seek  even any  'intellectual equival-
 ence' with historical persons, let alone portraiture (for a list  of those
 who came often - but not all at the same  period -  to the  Inklings, with
 brief  biographies,  see  Humphrey   Carpenter,  The   Inklings,  Appendix
 A). The fact  that Lowdham  is 'loud'  and makes  jokes often  at inappro-
 priate  moments  derives  from  Dyson  (but  he  was  wittier  than  Lowd-
 ham), yet Lowdham  is the  very antithesis  of Dyson  in his  learning and
 interests;  no  doubt  Frankley's  horror  borealis  is a  reminiscence of

                              
                                                                          
  Dyson  also,   though  it   is  profoundly   un-Dysonian  to   have  read
  mediaeval works on Saint Brendan (p. 265). In earlier drafts of  the list
  of  members  Dolbear  has  no position  in the  University, and  with his
  red hair and beard and his nickname in the Club (see  Letters no.  56) he
  can  be  seen  as  a  sort  of  parody  of Havard.  But these  things are
  marginal  to  the  ideas  expounded  and  debated  in the  Papers; essen-
  tially, the  members of  the Notion  Club are  fictions, and  become more
  obviously so in Part Two.                                                
                                                                          
     Scarcely  a  sentence  remained  entirely  unchanged  between  text  A
  and text D of Part One, but in my notes all  this development  is largely
  ignored when (as for the most part it is) it is  a matter  of improvement
  in the expression  or of  amplification of  the argument.  Similarly, the
  ascription  of  speeches  to  speakers  underwent  many  changes  in  the
  earlier texts, but in general I do not record them.                      
     I do not enter in this book into any critical discussion of the topics
  and issues raised in  'The Ramblings  of Michael  Ramer'. This  is partly
  because I am not well qualified to  discuss them,  but also  because they
  fall  somewhat  outside  the  scope  and  aim of  The History  of Middle-
  earth, which is above all  to present  accurate texts  accurately ordered
  (so far as I am  able) and  to elucidate  them comparatively,  within the
  context of 'Middle-earth' and the lands  of the  West. With  very limited
  time at my disposal  for this  book I  have thought  that I  could better
  devote  it  in  any  case  to  clarification of  the complexities  of the
  'Numenorean'  material.  The  notes  are  therefore  very  restricted  in
  scope and are often trivial in relation to the content of the discussion,
  being mostly concerned  with the  elucidation of  references that  may be
  obscure  and  not  easily  tracked  down,  with  comparison   of  earlier
  forms of  certain passages,  and with  citation of  other writings  of my
  father's.  I  do  not  suppose  that many  readers of  this book  will be
  unacquainted with the novels of  C. S.  Lewis, Out  of the  Silent Planet
  (1938),  Perelandra  (1943),  and  That  Hideous  Strength (1945),  but I
  have provided a few explanations and references.                         
                                                                          
     Why  my  father  abandoned  The  Notion  Club  Papers  I do  not know.
  It may be that he felt that the work had lost all unity,  that 'Atlantis'
  had broken apart the frame in which it had been  set (see  pp. 281  - 2).
  But I think also that having forced himself to return to The Lord  of the
  Rings, and having brought it to its end, he was  then deflected  into the
  very  elaborate  further  work  on  the  legends of  the Elder  Days that
  preceded the  actual publication  of The  Lord of  the Rings.  However it
  was, the Notion  Club was  abandoned, and  with it  his final  attempt to
  embody  the  riddle  of AElfwine  and Eadwine  in a  'tale of  time'. But
  from  its  forgotten  Papers and  the strange  figure of  Arundel Lowdham
  there   emerged   a   new   conception  of   the  Downfall   of  Numenor,
  embodied  in  a  different tradition,  which would  come to  constitute a
  major element in the Akallabeth many years later.                        

                              NOTES.                                      
                                                                         
  1. In a note to  this passage  in my  father's letter  Humphrey Carpenter
     remarks:   'Lewis's   next   published   novel   after   That  Hideous
     Strength  and  The  Great  Divorce  was  The Lion,  the Witch  and the
     Wardrobe.  Tolkien  is,  however, almost  certainly referring  to some
     other  book  of  Lewis's   that  was   never  completed.'   The  Great
     Divorce  was  published  in  1946;  Lewis  was  reading  it  aloud  in
     April and May 1944 (Letters no. 60, 69, 72).                         
       It  may be  mentioned here  that my  father had  evidently discussed
     with  Lewis  the  matter  of  'true dreams':  an important  element in
     the  plot of  That Hideous  Strength is  Jane Studdock's  'tendency to
     dream  real  things',  in  the  words  of  Miss  Ironwood  (Chapter 3,
     $iii), and this can  hardly be  a mere  coincidence. It  is presumably
     not coincidental either  that there  should be  so many  references to
     'Numinor'  in  That   Hideous  Strength   (published  in   1945);  see
     p. 303 and note 15.                                                  
  2. On the final text D of Part One the heading of  the first  page (after
     Leaves  from  the  Notion Club  Papers ):  Part I  / The  Ramblings of
     Michael  Ramer  / Out  of the  Talkative Planet'  was struck  out. The
     final text F of Part Two has no heading at the beginning.  A pencilled
     title  page  apparently  accompanying  the  manuscript  E  has 'Leaves
     from  the  Notion  Club  Papers  / II  / The  Strange Case  of Arundel
     Lowdham'.                                                            
  3. A very brief  report of  an earlier  meeting was  added at  the begin-
     ning of the text in the course of the development of Part One.       
  4. A pointer to this is  the fact  that in  B the  name is  spelt Loudham
     throughout;  in  E  it  begins  as  Loudham  but  becomes  Lowdham  in
     the  course  of  the writing  of the  manuscript; in  C it  is Lowdham
     from the first. See further p. 282.                                  
  5. Cf. the close  relation of  the manuscript  of The  Lost Road  and the
     original text of The Fall of Numenor, V.9.                           
  6. Beyond  Probability  is  a  pun on  the title  of Lewis's  book Beyond
     Personality, which had been published in 1944.                       
  7. That  Whitburn  (and  Thoms)  is a  play on  the name  Blackwell, the
     Oxford  bookseller  and  publisher,  is  seen from  the fact  that the
     firm was originally Basil Blackwell and Mott.                        

                            Leaves from                           
                                                                  
                       THE NOTION CLUB PAPERS.                     
                                                                  
                              FOREWORD.                            
                                                                  
 These  Papers  have  a  rather puzzling  history. They  were found
 after  the  Summer  Examinations  of  2012  on the  top of  one of
 a  number  of  sacks  of  waste  paper  in  the  basement  of  the
 Examination  Schools  at  Oxford  by   the  present   editor,  Mr.
 Howard  Green,  the  Clerk  of  the  Schools.   They  were   in  a
 disordered bundle, loosely tied with red string. The  outer sheet,
 inscribed in large Lombardic capitals:                            
                                                                  
                      NOTION  CLUB PAPERS,                      
                                                                  
 attracted  the  notice  of  Mr.  Green,   who  removed   them  and
 scrutinized them.  Discovering them  to contain  much that  was to
 him  curious  and  interesting,  he  made all  possible enquiries,
 without result.                                                   
  The  Papers,  from  internal evidence,  clearly had  no connexion
 with  any  examinations  held  or  lectures  given in  the Schools
 during  Mr.  Green's  many  years  of  office.  Neither  did  they
 belong to any of the libraries housed in the  building. Advertise-
 ment  has failed  to find  any claimant  to ownership.  It remains
 unknown  how  the   Papers  reached   the  waste-paper   sack.  It
 seems  probable  that  they  had  at some  time been  prepared for
 publication, since they are  in many  places provided  with notes;
 yet  in  form  they  are  nothing more  than an  elaborate minute-
 book  of  a  club,  devoted  to  conversation,  debate,   and  the
 discussion of 'papers', in verse or prose, written and read by its
 members, and many of the entries have  no particular  interest for
 non-members.                                                      
  The  minutes,  or  reports,  covered  probably  about  100  meet-
 ings or 'nights' during the years  of last  century, approximately
 1980 to 1990. It  is, however,  not the  least curious  fact about
 these  Papers  that  no such  club appears  ever to  have existed.
 Though  certain  resemblances  are inevitable  between a  group of
 imaginary  academic  persons  and  their  real  contemporaries, no
 such persons as those here  depicted, either  with such  names, or

 such offices, or such tastes and habits, can be traced in the           
 Oxford of the last generation, or of the present time.                  
   The author appears in one or two passages, and in the                 
 occasional notes, to identify himself with the character called in -':
 the dialogues Nicholas Guildford. But Mr. J. R. Titmass, the            
 well-known historian of twentieth-century Oxford, who has               
 given all possible assistance to the present editor, has shown that     
 this is certainly a fictitious name and derived from a mediaeval        
 dialogue at one time read in the Schools of Oxford.                     
                                                                        
   On   examination   the   bundle   was    found   to    contain   205
 foolscap pages,  all written  by one  hand, in  a careful  and usually
 legible  script.  The   leaves  were   disarranged  but   mostly  num-
 bered.  The  bundle  contains  the entries  for Nights  51 to  75, but
 they  are  defective  and  several  leaves appear  to have  been lost;
 some  of  the  longer  entries  are  incomplete.  It is  probable that
 three other bundles, containing  Nights 1  - 25,  26 -  50, 76  - 100,
 once  existed.  Of  the   missing  sections,   however,  only   a  few
 scattered sheets were  found in  the sack,  and these,  so far  as can
 be  discerned,  belonged  originally  to  the  entries  1 -  25. Among
 them  was  a  crumpled  and  much  corrected  sheet,  of  a  different
 paper, containing a list of members.                                    
   The   total   on   this   scale   would  have   made  a   volume  of
 considerable bulk,  but its  size will  be overestimated,  if calcula-
 tion  is  based  on  the  length  of the  extracts here  printed. Many
 Nights are represented only by a few  lines, or  by short  entries, of
 which  Nights  54  and  64  have  been   included  as   specimens.  As
 a  rule  these  short  items  have  been  omitted,  unless  they  bear
 closely  on  the  longer  reports  here  selected  and   presented  to
 those interested in literary curiosities.                               
                                                                        
                       Note to the Second Edition.                       
                                                                        
   Mr.  W.  W.   Wormald  of   the  School   of  Bibliopoly,   and  Mr.
 D.  N.  Borrow  of  the  Institute  of  Occidental   Languages,  found
 their  curiosity  aroused  by  the published  extracts, and  asked Mr.
 Green  for  permission  to  examine  the  manuscript  of  the  Papers.
 They   have  now   sent  in   a  joint   report,  which   raises  some
 interesting points.                                                     
   'Paper of this kind,' they write, 'is, of course, very  difficult to
 trace or to date. The sheets  submitted to  us are  of a  poor quality
 much  inferior  to the  paper now  in general  use for  such purposes.
 Without  venturing  on  a  definite  opinion,   we  record   our  sus-

 picion  that  these  sheets  are  much  older  than  the dates  of the
 supposed  meetings  of  the  Club,  perhaps  40  to  50  years  older,
 belonging,  that  is,  to  the  period  during or  just after  the Six
 Years'  War.  This  suspicion  is  supported   by  various   items  of
 internal  evidence,  notably  the  idiom  of  the dialogues,  which is
 old-fashioned   and  does   not  represent   with  any   fidelity  the
 colloquial  language  either  of  the  nineteen-eighties  or   of  the
 present  time.  We  conclude,  then,  that  The  Notion   Club  Papers
 were written sixty years ago, or more.                               
   'It  remains,  nonetheless,  on  this  hypothesis  a  puzzling  fact
 that  the  Great  Explosion  of  1975  is referred  to, and  even more
 precisely,  the  Great  Storm,  which actually  occurred on  the night
 of   Thursday,   June   12th,   1987;(1) though   certain  inaccuracies
 appear  in  the  account  given  of  the progress  and effects  of the
 latter  event.  Mr.  Green  has  proposed  to  us  a  curious explana-
 tion of this difficulty, evidently  suggested to  him by  the contents
 of  the  Papers:  the future  events were,  he thinks,  "foreseen". In
 our  opinion  a  less  romantic  but more  probable solution  is this:
 the  paper  is  part  of  a  stock  purchased  by  a  man  resident in
 Oxford  about  1940.  He  used  the  paper  for  his  minutes (whether
 fictitious or founded  on fact),  but he  did not  use all  his stock.
 Much  later  (after 1987)  he copied  out his  matter again,  using up
 the  old  paper;  and  though he  did not  make any  general revision,
 he  moved  the  dates  forward  and  inserted  the  genuine references
 to the Explosion and the Storm.'                                     
   Mr.  Green  rejoins:  'This  is  one  of  the most  fantastic "prob-
 able  solutions" I  have yet  met, quite  apart from  the unlikelihood
 of  an  inferior paper  being stored  for about  fifty years  and then
 used  for  the  same purpose  again. The  writer was  not, I  think, a
 very  young  man;  but  the handwriting  is certainly  not that  of an
 old  man.  Yet  if  the writer  was not  young in  1940, he  must have
 been old, very old, in  2000. For  it is  to that  date, not  to 1987,
 that  we  must  look. There  is a  point that  has escaped  the notice
 of   Messrs.   Wormald   and   Borrow:   the   old   house,   no.  100
 Banbury  Road,  the  last  private  dwelling  house  in   that  block,
 was  in  fact  the  scene  of  "hauntings",*  a remarkable  display of
 poltergeist  activity,  between  the  years   2000  and   2003,  which
 only  ended  when  the  house  was  demolished  and  a  new  building,
 attached  to  the  Institute  of  National  Nutrition, erected  on the
 site.  In  the  year  2003  a  person  possessed  of  the  paper,  the
                                                                     
 (* See Night 61, p. 179.)                                           

 pen-habits,* and the idiom of the period of the Six Years' War          
 would have been an oddity that no pseudonym could conceal               
 from us.                                                                
   'In any case, the Storm is integral to all the entries from Night
 63 to Night, [sic] and is not just "inserted". Messrs. Wormald          
 and Borrow must either neglect their own evidence and place             
 the whole composition after 1987, or else stick to their own           
 well-founded suspicions of the paper, the hand,* and the idiom,         
 and admit that some person or persons in the nineteen-forties           
 possessed a power of "prevision".                                       
   'Mr. Titmass informs me that he cannot find any record in the         
 nineteen-forties of the names given in the list. If therefore, any      
 such club existed at that earlier period, the names remain              
 pseudonyms. The forward dating might have been adopted as               
 an additional screen. But I am now convinced that the Papers -'.        
 are a work of fiction; and it may well be that the predictions          
 (notably of the Storm), though genuine and not coincidences,            
 were unconscious: giving one more glimpse of the strange                
 processes of so-called literary "invention", with which the             
 Papers are largely concerned.'                                          
                                                                        
                        MEMBERS OF THE NOTION CLUB.                      
                                                                        
 The   Notion   Club,  as   depicted,  was   informal  and   vague  in
 outline.  A  number  of  characters  appear  in  the  dialogues, some
 rarely  or  fitfully.  For  the  convenience of  readers the  List of
 Members   found   among   the   Papers   is   here   printed,  though
 several  of  the  persons  named  do  not  appear in  this selection.
 The  order  is  not  alphabetical  and  seems  intended  to represent
 some  kind of  seniority: the  first six  names were  written earlier
 and larger; the rest  were added  at various  times and  in different
 inks, but in the  same hand.  There are  also later  entries inserted
 after  some  of  the  names,  recording  details  of their  tastes or
 history.  A  few  further  details,  gleaned  from  the  Papers them-
 selves, have been added in brackets.                                    
                                                                        
 (* Mr.  Wormald  himself,  something  of an  expert in  such matters,
 before he proposed his 'probable solution', ventured the opinion that
 the  handwriting of  the Papers  in general  character went  with the
 old-fashioned idiom and belonged to the same period. The use of a pen
 rather than a typewriter would indeed, in  itself, already  have been
 most unusual for a man of 1990, whatever his age.)                      

        
                                                                     
  MICHAEL GEORGE RAMER. Jesus College. Born    1929
 (in  Hungary).  Professor  of   Finno-Ugric  Philology;   but  better
 known  as  a  writer  of  romances. His  parents returned  to England
 when  he  was  four;  but he  spent a  good deal  of time  in Finland
 and  Hungary  between  1956   and  68.   [Among  his   interests  are
 Celtic languages and antiquities.]                                   
                                                                     
  RUPERT    DOLBEAR.    Wadham.    Born    1929.     Research    Chem-
 ist.  Has  many  other  interests,  notably  philosophy, psychoanaly-
 sis,  and  gardening.  [A  close  friend  of  Ramer. He  is redhaired
 and redbearded, and known to the Club as Ruthless Rufus.]            
                                                                     
  NICHOLAS     GUILDFORD.     Lincoln.     Born     1937.    Archaeol-
 ogist.  The  Club  reporter;  because  he likes  it and  knows short-
 hand.  [He  is  seldom  recorded  as  reading  anything to  the Club,
 and  it  is  then  not  reported;  but  he  appears  to  have written
 several novels.]                                                     
                                                                     
  ALWIN     ARUNDEL    LOWDHAM.     B.N.C.    Born     1938.    Lec-
 turer  in  English  Language.  Chiefly  interested  in Anglo-Saxon,
 Icelandic,   and   Comparative   Philology.   Occasionally   writes
 comic or satirical verse. [Known as Arry.]                           
                                                                     
  PHILIP    FRANKLEY.    Queen's.    Born    1932.   A    poet,   once
 well-known  as  a  leader  of  the  Queer  Metre  movement;  but  now
 just a  poet, still  publishing volumes  of collected  verse; suffers
 from horror borealis (as he calls it) and is intolerant of all things
 Northern  or  Germanic.  [He  is,  all  the same,  a close  friend of
 Lowdham.]                                                            
                                                                     
                 WILFRID TREWIN JEREMY. Corpus Christi. Born 1942.
 University  Lecturer  in  English  Literature.  He  specializes  in
 Escapism,  and  has  written books  on the  history and  criticism of
 Ghost-stories, Time-travel, and Imaginary Lands.                     
                                                                     
  James  Jones.  Born  1927.  Has  been  a  schoolmaster,  journalist,
 and playwright. Is  now retired,  living in  Oxford, and  divides his
 time  between  producing  plays  and his  hobby of  private printing.
 A  very  silent  man,  but  assists the  Reporter with  his retentive
 memory.                                                              
  Dr.   Abel   Pitt.   Trinity.  Born   1928.  Formerly   Chaplain  of
 Trinity   College;   now   Bishop   of  Buckingham.   Scholar,  occa-
 sional poet.                                                         
  Colombo  Arditi.  St.  John's.   Born  1940.   Tempestosa  Professor
 of  Italian.  Is  fond  of  (and not  unskilled in)  singing (basso),
 swimming, and the game of bowls. Collects books and cats.            

   Dom Jonathan Markison, O.S.B.(2) New College, Master of St.       
 Cuthbert's Hall. [Polymath.]                                     
   Sir Gerard Manface. All Souls. Lawyer. Mountaineer; much       
 travelled. Has many children, for whom he wrote many (unpub-     
 lished) books and tales. [Seldom appears. A special friend of
 Frankley, but not resident in Oxford.]                           
   Ranulph Stainer. University College. Born 1936. Profes-       
 sionally an expert in banking and economics; privately devoted
 to the history and practice of music, and has composed several
 works, major and minor, including one (moderately successful)
 opera: Midas.                                                    
   Alexander Cameron. Exeter. Born 1935. Modern historian,        
 specially interested in Spanish and South American history.     
 Collects coins and stamps. Plays a pianola. [No one remembers
 his being invited to join the Club, or knows why he comes; but
 he appears from time to time.]                                   
   John Jethro Rashbold. Magdalen. Born 1965. Undergradu-         
 ate. Classical scholar; apprentice poet. [Introduced by Frankley,
 to whom he is much attached.]                                    
                                                                 
   Note. It is represented as the habit of the Club for all -     
 members to initial the record of any meeting at which they were
 present, whether they are reported as speaking or not. Presum-
 ably the initialling, which in the extant Papers is in the same
 hand as the text, took place after N.G.'s report has been seen
 and passed, and before the fair copy was made. Mr. Cameron's
 initials never appear.                                           

                                Leaves from                        
                                    The                            
                            NOTION CLUB PAPERS.                    
                                                                  
                                [PART ONE](3)                      
                                                                  
 Night 54. Thursday, November 16th, 1986.(4)                     
                                                                  
    A wet night. Only Frankley and Dolbear arrived (Dolbear's
 house). Dolbear reports that Philip never said a word worth
 recording, but read him an unintelligible poem about a Mech-
 anical Nightingale (or he thought that was the subject). Frankley
 reports that Rufus was drowsy and kept on chuckling to
 himself. The only clearly audible remark that he made was
 going off the deep end, I think. This was in reply to an enquiry
 about Michael Ramer, and whether D. had seen him lately.
 After F. had read a poem (later read again) called The Canticle
 of Artegall they parted. R.D. P.F.(5)
                                                                  
   [One  or  two  minor  entries,  defectively  preserved,  are here
  omitted.]                                                     
                                                                  
  Night  60.  Thursday,  February  20th, 1987.(6) [Defective  at  the
  beginning. Ramer's story is lost.]                               
                                                                  
   [When  Michael  Ramer  had  finished] reading  his story,  we sat
  in silence for a while. He  had not  read us  anything for  a long
  time; in fact he had  seldom appeared  at meetings  for a  year or
  more.  His  excuses  for  absence,  when  he  gave  any,  had been
  vague  and  evasive.  On  this  occasion   the  Club   was  better
  attended  than  usual,  and no  more easy  to please.  That hardly
  accounted  for  Ramer's  nervousness.  He  is  one  of  our oldest
  members,  and  was  at  one   time  one   of  our   most  frequent
  performers;  but  to-night  he read  hastily, boggling  and stumb-
  ling. So much  so that  Frankley made  him read  several sentences
  over  again,  though  these  interruptions,  which only  made mat-
  ters worse, are omitted above. Now he was fidgetting.            
   'Well?' he said at last. 'What do you think of it? Will it do?'
   A few of us stirred, but nobody spoke.                          
   'Oh,  come  on!  I may  as well  get the  worst over  first. What
  have you got to say?' he urged, turning to  Guildford in  the next
  chair.                                                           
   'I  don't  know,'  Guildford  answered  reluctantly.   'You  know
  how I dislike criticizing...'                                    

 'I've never noticed it before,' said Frankley.                        
 'Go on, Nicholas!' laughed Lowdham. 'You dislike it about             
 as much as Philip dislikes interrupting.'                             
 'At any rate I don't criticize unfinished sentences,' said            
 Guildford. 'If I'd not been interrupted, I was going to say I         
 dislike criticizing off-hand, and still in the heat of listening.'
 'In the chill's your more usual temperature,' said Lowdham.(7)        
 'Most unfair! I'm a voracious reader, and I like stories.'            
 A chorus of incredulous shouts followed, but Guildford could          
 just be heard amending his words, first to I read a good many         
 tales and like most of them, and finally to I do like some stories,
 including one or two of Ramer's. 'But it's much more difficult,'      
 he went on at last, 'to say anything about the liking, especially     
 so soon. Liking is often much more complex than dislike. And          
 it's less necessary to say anything about it in a hurry. The feeling
 of liking has a very lasting flavour; it can wait, it's often better
 for being stored for a bit. But defects stick out all hard and        
 painful, while one's still close at hand.'                            
 'For those who have the knack of seeing them in every literary        
 landscape,' Ramer interposed.                                         
 'There are minor ones,' Guildford went on unperturbed, 'that          
 may, of course, get forgotten, or be overlooked by familiarity;       
 but they are better removed while fresh.'                             
 'The sort that Philip corrects at once while you are reading?'        
 said Ramer.                                                           
 'Yes,' said Guildford. 'But there are more serious faults than        
 his anacolutha and split infinitives that may also get passed, if     
 the thing's allowed to harden. It may be painful for the author       
 to have the blindness of paternal love removed, but it seems the      
 most useful thing to do on the spot. What's the good of sitting       
 here, hearing things before they're in print, if all we're to do is to
 pat the father's back and murmur: Any child of yours is'..            
 welcome, Mr. Ramer. Your fiftieth, is it? Well, well! How they        
 do all take after their dear father, don't they?'                     
 Lowdham laughed. 'And what you're longing to say, I                   
 suppose, is: Why don't you wipe the brat's nose, and get its hair     
 cut?'                                                                 
 'Or strangle it!' said Ramer impatiently.                             
 'No, seriously,' Guildford protested, 'I only objected to parts,      
 not to the whole of your latest infant, Michael. Only to the first
 chapter and the end of the last one, really. But there! I suppose     
 no one has ever solved the difficulty of arriving, of getting to      
 another planet, no more in literature than in life. Because the       

                                                                    
                                                                     
 difficulty is in fact insoluble, I think. The barrier cannot  and will
 not   ever   be   passed   in  mortal   flesh.  Anyway,   the  opening
 chapters,  the  journey,  of  space-travel  tales  seem  to  me always
 the weakest. Scientifiction, as a rule: and that is a base  alloy. Yes
 it  is,  Master  Frankley,  so don't  interrupt! Just  as much  as the
 word  is  an  ill-made  portmanteau:   rotten  for   travelling  with.
 And  that  goes  for  your  machine,  too, Ramer.  Though it's  one of
 the better failures, perhaps.'                                       
   'Thank you for  that!'  Ramer  growled.  'But  it's  just  like you,
 Nicholas,  to  pick  on  the  frame,  which  is  an  awkward necessity
 of  pictures,  and  easy  to  change  anyway,  and  say  nothing about
 what's  inside  it.  I  suppose  you  must  have  seen   something  to
 praise  inside:  we  know  how  painful  you  find  praising anything.
 Isn't that the real reason why you postpone it?'                     
   'Nonsense!'  said  Guildford.  'I  thought   what  was   inside  was
 very  good,  if  you   must  have   it.  Though   I  felt   there  was
 something very odd about it.'                                        
   'I'm sure you did! '                                               
   'I  mean  odd  coming  from  you.  And  in  its  setting.   For  you
 won't  get  away  with  that  framed  excuse.  A picture-frame  is not
 a parallel. An author's way of getting to  Mars (say)  is part  of his
 story of his  Mars; and  of his  universe, as  far as  that particular
 tale' goes. It's part of the picture, even if it's only in  a marginal
 position; and it may seriously affect all that's inside.'            
   'Why should it?' said Frankley.                                    
   'Well, if there are space-ships  at all  in your  imagined universe,
 you'll fail to sell it to me, for one thing,' said Guildford.        
   'That's   carrying   your   anti-machine   mania   too   far,'  said
 Lowdham.   'Surely  poor   writers  can   include  things   you  don't
 like in their stories?'                                              
   'I'm   not  talking   about  dislike   at  the   moment,'  Guildford
 returned.  'I'm  talking  about  credibility.  I  don't   like  heroic
 warriors, but I can  bear stories  about them.  I believe  they exist,
 or  could.  I don't  think space-ships  do, or  could. And  anyway, if
 you  pretend  that they  do, and  use them  for space-journeys  in the
 flesh, they'll land you in  space-ship sort  of adventures.  If you're
 spaceship-minded  and  scientifictitious,  or  even  if  you  let your
 characters be so, it's likely enough that you'll  find things  of that
 order  in  your  new  world,  or  only see  sights that  interest such
 folk.'                                                               
   'But that isn't  true,' Frankley  objected. 'It's  not true  of this
 story of Ramer's.'                                                   
   'It's generally true, all too ghastly  true.' said  Guildford. 'But

 of  course  there  is  a  way of  escape: into  inconsistency, discord.
 Ramer  takes  that  way,  like  Lindsay,(8) or Lewis,  and   the  better
 post-Lewis  writers  of this  sort of  thing. You  can land  on another
 world  in  a  space-ship  and then  drop that  nonsense, if  you've got
 something  better  to  do  there  than  most  of  the  earlier  writers
 had.  But  personally  I  dislike  that  acutely.  It makes  the scien-
 tifictitious  bunkum  all  the  worse  by contrast.  Crystal torpedoes,
 and  "back-rays",  and  levers  for   full  speed-ahead   (faster  than
 light,  mark  you),  are  bad  enough  inside  one  of   those  hideous
 magazines  -  Dead   Sea  fruit   with  gaudy   rinds;  but   in,  say,
 A  Voyage  to  Arcturus * they  are  simply  shocking.  All   the  more
 so  for  being  unnecessary.  David  Lindsay  had  at  least  two other
 better  methods   up  his   sleeve:  the   seance  connexion;   or  the
 suggestion  of  the  dark  tower  at  the  end.  Thank  goodness, there
 was at any rate no return by crystal torpedo in that tale!'(9)        
   'But  the  trick  in  Out  of  the  Silent  Planet, getting  the hero
 kidnapped   by   space-ship  villains,   so  as   to  explain   how  an
 interesting  man  ever  got inside  one, was  not bad,'  said Frankley.
 'And  the  stupid  villainy  of  the  space-ship  folk  was  essential.
 They  behaved  as  such  people   would,  and   the  plot   depends  on
 that.'                                                                
   'Not bad, I  agree,' said  Guildford. 'Still  it was,  as you  say, a
 trick. And not first rate, not if you want sheer  literary credibility,
 the  pure  thing,  rather  than  an  alloy  with  allegory  and satire.
 Ramer is not  after any  such Lewisite  alloy; and  I think  his device
 of letting an intelligent artist  get into  a contraption  by accident,
 not knowing  what it  is, is  a mere  trick. But  what I  really object
 to,  in  any  such  tale, however  tinged, is  the pretence  that these
 contraptions  could  exist  or  function  at all.  They're indefinitely
 less  probable  -  as   the  carriers   of  living,   undamaged,  human
 bodies  and  minds  -  than  the  wilder  things in  fairy-stories; but
 they   pretend   to  be   probable  on   a  more   material  mechanical
 level. It's like having to take Heath-Robinsons seriously.'           
   'But  you've  got   to  have   some  kind   of  removal   van,'  said
 Frankley,  'or else  do without  this kind  of story.  They may  not be
                                                                      
 (* This  book  had  recently  been rescued  from oblivion  by Jeremy's
 book on Imaginary Lands. See the account of his  reading parts  of this
 to the Club,  above, Nights  30, 33,  40 [not  preserved]. Most  of the
 members are fairly well-read  in twentieth-century  books of  travel in
 Space and Time. N.G.)                                                 

 your  sweetmeat,  Nicholas,  but  I've  got  a  tooth for  them; and
 I'm not going to be done out of them by you.'                      
   'You  can wallow  in Scientifiction  mags, for  all I  care,' said
 Guildford;  'but  I've  got to  have literary  belief in  my removal
 van, or I won't put my furniture into it.  I have  never met  one of
 these  vehicles  yet  that suspended  my disbelief  an inch  off the
 floor.'                                                            
   'Well,  your  disbelief  evidently  needs  a   power-crane,'  said
 Frankley.  'You   should  look   at  some   of  the   forgotten  Old
 Masters,  like  Wells, if  you've ever  heard of  him. I  admit that
 what  his  first  men  found  in  the  Moon was  a bathos  after the
 journey.  But the  machine and  the journey  were splendid.  I don't
 of  course, believe  in a  gravitation-insulator outside  the story,
 but  inside  the  story  it  worked,  and  Wells  made  damned  good
 use of it. And voyages can  end in  grubby, vulgar,  little harbours
 and yet be very much worth while.'                                 
   'It  wouldn't  be  easy  to  miss  the name  of Wells  with Jeremy
 always  about,'  said  Guildford.  'And  I have  read The  First Men
 in  the  Moon,  and The  Time Machine.  I confess  that in  The Time
 Machine  the  landfall  was   so  marvellous   that  I   could  have
 forgiven  an even  more ridiculous  transport -  though it  would be
 difficult  to  think  of  one!  All  the  same,  the  machine  was a
 blemish;  and I'm  quite unconvinced  that it  was a  necessary one.
 And  if  it  had  been  removed  -  the effect  on the  whole thing!
 Enormous enhancement even of that remarkable tale.                 
   'No doubt  authors are  in as  great a  hurry to  get there  as we
 are;  but  eagerness  doesn't   excuse  carelessness.   And  anyway,
 we're  older.  We  may  allow  the  primitives  their ingenuousness:
 we can't imitate it. Isn't it always  so? What  might do  once won't
 do  any longer.  I used  to read  with gusto  romances in  which the
 hero  just pushed  off into  the Blue,  over mountains  and deserts,
 without  water  supplies.  But   now  I   feel  that   procedure  is
 slipshoddy.'                                                       
   'There's no such word,' said Frankley.                           
   'Shut up! ' said Lowdham.                                        
   'I want my man  to have  his adventures  in the  Blue, as  much as
 ever, but I want to be made to feel  that the  author has  faced the
 difficulties and not ignored them, or fudged them. It's  usually all
 the better for the tale in the long run.                           
   'Certainly  I'll  admit  that  if  I  allow Wells  his "cavorite",(10)
 then he makes good use of it. If I'd been  a boy  when the  tale was
 new, I should have allowed it and enjoyed it. But  I can't  allow it

                            
                                                                         
  now.  I'm  post-Wells.  And  we're  not   criticizing  him   but  Ramer,
  for  using at  this much  later date  a rather  similar device.  Any one
  who   touches  space-travel   now  has   got  to   be  much   more  con-
  vincing:  if  indeed  a  convincing  machine  is  at  present  possible.
  Command    of    power    has    prodigiously    increased,    but   the
  problems   have   become   more   complex,   and  not   simpler.  Scien-
  tists  can't  destroy  simple  faith  and  hope  still  to  keep  it for
  themselves.  A   gravitation-insulator  won't   do.  Gravity   can't  be
  treated  like  that.  It's   fundamental.  It's   a  statement   by  the
  Universe  of  where  you  are   in  the   Universe,  and   the  Universe
  can't  be  tricked  by  a  surname  with ite  stuck on  the end,  nor by
  any such abracadabra.                                                   
     'And  what  of  the  effect  on  a  man  of being  hurled out  of one
  gravitational   field   through   zero   into   another?   Even   on  so
  elementary a journey as one to the Moon?'                               
     'Oh! difficulties  of that  sort will  be got  over all  right,' said
  Frankley.  'At  least  that  is  what  most  of  the scientists  say who
  are concerned with space-projects.'                                     
     'Scientists  are  as  prone  to  wishful  thinking  (and  talking) as
  other  men,  especially  when   they  are   thinking  about   their  own
  romantic  hopes  and  not  yours,'  said   Guildford.  'And   they  like
  opening  vague,  vast,  vistas  before  gapers,   when  they   are  per-
  forming as public soothsayers.'                                         
     'I'm  not  talking  about  that  kind,'  said  Frankley.  'There  are
  quiet  unpublicized  people,  quite  scientific  medicos,  for instance,
  who'll  tell  you  that  your  heart  and  digestive  arrangements,  and
  all that, would function all right, even at, say, zero gravity.'        
     'I  dare  say they  will,' said  Guildford. 'Though  I still  find it
  difficult  to  believe  that  a  machine  like our  body, made  to func-
  tion  under  definite  earth-conditions,  would in  fact run  on merrily
  when  those  were  greatly   changed  -   and  for   a  long   time,  or
  permanently.  Look  how  quickly  we  wilt,  even  on  this   globe,  if
  we're  transferred  to   unusual  heights   or  temperatures.   And  the
  effect  on  you  of  greatly  increased  gravity  is  rather  hushed up,
  isn't it? * Yet after all that is what you'd  be most  likely to  get at
  the other end of your journey.'                                         
     'That's  so,'  said  Lowdham.  'But  people  of this  blessed century
  think  primarily  of  travelling  and  speed,  not  of  destination,  or
                                                                         
   (*  Not, of course, in Scientifiction. There it is usually exorcized by
  mere abracadabra in bogus 'scientific' form. N.G.)                      

 settling. It's better to travel "scientifically", in fact, than  to get
 anywhere; or the vehicle justifies the journey.'                       
   'Yes,  and  it  is  speed  that really  bothers me,'  said Guildford,
 'more  than  these other  difficulties. I  don't doubt  the possibility
 of   sending   a   rocket   to   the   Moon.   The   preparations  were
 knocked  back   by  the   Great  Explosion,(11) but  they   say  they're
 under  way  again.  I'll  even  admit   the  eventual   possibility  of
 landing   undamaged   human   goods   on   the   lunar    landscape   -
 though  what  they'll  do  there  is  dubious.  But  the  Moon  is very
 parochial.  Rockets  are  so  slow.  Can  you  hope  to  go as  fast as
 light, anything like as fast?'                                       
   'I  don't  know,'  said   Frankley.  'It   doesn't  seem   likely  at
 present,  but  I  don't  think  that  all  the  scientists  or mathema-
 ticians would answer that question with a definite no.'               
   'No,  they're  very  romantic  on this  topic,' said  Guildford. 'But
 even  the  speed  of  light  will  only  be  moderately  useful. Unless
 you  adopt  a  Shavian attitude  and regard  all these  light-years and
 light-centuries  as  lies,  the  magnitude of  which is  inartistic. If
 not,  you'll  have  to  plan  for  a  speed  greater  than  light; much
 greater,  if  you're  to  have  a  practical  range  outside  the Solar
 System.  Otherwise  you   will  have   very  few   destinations.  Who's
 going to book a passage for a  distant place,  if he's  sure to  die of
 old age on the way?'                                                  
   'They still take tickets on the State Railways,' said Lowdham.      
   'But there's  still at  least a  chance of  arriving before  death by
 coach  or  train,'  said  Guildford.  'I  don't  ask  for  any  greater
 degree  of  probability  from  my  author:   just  a   possibility  not
 wholly at variance with what we know.'                                
   'Or think we know,' Frankley murmured.                              
   'Quite  so,'  Guildford  agreed.   'And  the   speed  of   light,  or
 certainly  anything  exceeding  it,  is   on  that   basis  incredible:
 if  you're  going  to  be  "scientific",  or  more   properly  speaking
 "mechanical".  At  any  rate  for  anyone  writing  now.  I  admit  the
 criteria  of  credibility  may  change;  though  as far  as I  can see,
 genuine  Science,   as  distinct   from  mechanical   romance,  narrows
 the possibilities rather than  expands them.  But 1  still stick  to my
 original   point:   the  "machine"   used  sets   the  tone.   I  found
 space-ships  sufficiently credible  for a  raw taste,  until I  grew up
 and   wanted   to  find   something   more   useful   on    Mars   than
 ray-guns  and  faster  vehicles.  Space-ships  will  take  you  to that
 kind  of  country,  no doubt.  But I  don't want  to go  there. There's
 no need now to travel to find it.'                                    

                         
                                                                       
     'No, but there is an attraction in its being far away, even if it's
  nasty  and  stupid,'  said  Frankley.  'Even  if  it's  the  same! You
  could make a  good story  - inevitably  satirical in  effect, perhaps,
  but not really primarily so - out of a  journey to  find a  replica of
  Earth and its denizens.'                                              
     'I  daresay!  But  aren't we  getting a  bit mixed?'  said Lowdham.
  'Nick's  real  point,  which  he seems  to have  forgotten as  well as
  the  rest  of us,  was incoherence  - discord.  That was  really quite
  distinct from his dislike,  or his  disbelief in  mechanical vehicles;
  though  actually  he  dislikes  them,  credible  or  not. But  then he
  began confusing scientific probability with literary credibility.'
     'No, I didn't and I don't,'  said Guildford.  'Scientific probabil-
  ity  need not  be concerned  at all.  But it  has to  be, if  you make
  your  vehicle  mechanical.  You  cannot  make   a  piece   of  mechan-
  ism even sufficiently  credible in  a tale,  if it  seems outrageously
  incredible  as  a  machine  to  your  contemporaries  -   those  whose
  critical  faculties  are  not  stunned  by  the  mere  mention   of  a
  machine.'                                                             
     'All right, all right,' said Lowdham.  'But let's  get back  to the
  incoherence. It's  the discord  between the  objects and  the findings
  of  the  better  tales  and  their  machines  that  upsets you.  And I
  think  you  have  something  there.  Lewis,   for  instance,   used  a
  space-ship,  but  he kept  it for  his villains,  and packed  his hero
  the second time in a crystal coffin without machinery.'               
     'Half-hearted,'  said  Guildford.  'Personally,  I  found  the com-
  promise  very  unconvincing.  It was  wilfully inefficient,  too: poor
  Ransom (12) got  half  toasted,  for no  sound reason  that I could see.
  The  power  that  could  hurl  the  coffin to  Venus could  (one would
  have  thought)  have  devised  a  material that  let in  light without
  excessive  heat.  I  found  the  coffin  much  less credible  than the
  Eldils,(13) and  granted  the  Eldils,  unnecessary.  There  was  a page
  or  two  of  smoke-screen  about  the  outward  journey   to  Perelan-
  dra,  but  it  was  not  thick  enough  to  hide  the  fact  that this
  semi-transparent  coffin  was  after  all  only  a  material  packing-
  case,  a  special   one-man  space-ship   of  unknown   motive  power.
  It was necessary  to the  tale, of  course, to  have safe  delivery of
  Ransom's  living  terrestrial  body  in  Venus:  but  this  impossible
  sort  of  parcel-post  did  not  appeal  to  me as  a solution  of the
  problem.  As  I say,  I doubt  if there  is a  solution. But  I should
  prefer  an  old-fashioned  wave  of  a  wizard's  wand.  Or a  word of
  power  in  Old  Solar (14) from  an  Eldil.  Nothing less  would suffice:
  a miracle.'                                                           

    'Why  have  anything  at  all?'  little  Jeremy  asked  suddenly.  So
 far  he  had sat  curled up  on the  floor, as  near to  the fire  as he
 could  get,  and  he  had  said  nothing,  though  his   black  birdlike
 eyes  had  hopped  to  and  fro  from  speaker  to  speaker.  'The  best
 stories  I  know  about  imaginary  times  and  lands  are  just stories
 about  them.  Why  a  wizard?  At  least,  why  a  wizard,  outside  the
 real  story,  just  to  waft  you  into  it?  Why  not  apply  the Once-
 upon-a-time  method   to  Space?   Do  you   need  more   than  author's
 magic?  Even  old  Nick  won't   deny  authors   the  power   of  seeing
 more  than  their  eyes can.  In his  novels he  lets himself  look into
 other  people's  heads.  Why  not  into  distant  parts  of  Space? It's
 what the author has really got to do, so why conceal it?'               
    'No,  of  course  I  don't  deny  authors  their right  of invention,
 seeing, if you like to call it that,' said Guildford.                   
                                                                        
    At  that  point  Dolbear  stirred  and  seemed  about  to   wake  up;
 but  he  only  settled  more comfortably  into his  chair, and  his loud
 breathing  went  on,  as  it  had  since  the  early  part   of  Ramer's
 story.                                                                  
                                                                        
    'But  that's  a  different  kind of  story, Jeremy,'  objected Frank-
 ley.  'Quite  good  in  its  way.  But  I  want to  travel in  Space and
 ' Time myself; and  so, failing  that, I  want people  in stories  to do
 it.  I  want contact  of worlds,  confrontation of  the alien.  You say,
 Nick,  that  people  cannot  leave  this  world and  live, at  least not
 beyond the orbit of the Moon?'                                          
    'Yes, I believe they could not, cannot, and never will.'             
    'Very  well  then,  all  the  more  reason  for having  stories about
 they  could  or  they  will.  Anybody  would   think  you'd   gone  back
 to  all  that  old-fashioned  stuff  about  escapism.  Do you  object to
 fairy-tales? '                                                          
    'No,  I  don't.  But  they  make  their  own  worlds, with  their own
 laws.'                                                                  
    'Then  why  can't  I  make  mine,  and  let  its  laws  allow  space-
 ships?'                                                                 
    'Because  it  won't  then  be  your private  world, of  course,' said
 Guildford. 'Surely that  is the  main point  of that  kind of  story, at
 an  intelligent  level?  The  Mars  in such  a story  is Mars:  the Mars
 that is. And the story  is (as  you've just  admitted) a  substitute for
 satisfaction  of  our  insatiable  curiosity  about  the Universe  as it
 is.  So a  space-travel story  ought to  be made  to fit,  as far  as we
 can see, the Universe as it is. If it doesn't or doesn't try to, then it

 does  become  a  fairy-story  -  of a  debased kind.  But there  is no
 need  to  travel  by rocket  to find  Faerie. It  can be  anywhere, or
 nowhere.'                                                             
   'But  supposing  you  did  travel,  and  did find  Fairyland?' asked
 Ramer,  suddenly.  For  some  time  now  he  had  been staring  at the
 fire, and had seemed to take very little interest  in the  battle that
 had  been  going  on  about  him.  Jeremy  gaped  at  him,  and jumped
 to his feet.                                                          
   'But  not  by  space-ship  surely!'  he  cried.  'That  would  be as
 depressingly vulgar  as the  other way  about: like  an awful  story I
 came  across  once,  about  some  men  who  used  a  magic  carpet for
 cheap power to drive a bus.'                                          
   'I'm  glad  to  get  you  as  an  ally!'  laughed   Guildford.  'For
 you're a  hardened sinner:  you read  that bastard  stuff, scientific-
 tion, not as a casual vice, but actually as a professional interest.'
   'The  stuff  is  extremely  interesting,'  said  Jeremy.  'Seldom as
 art. Its art level is as a rule very  low. But  literature may  have a
 pathological  side  -  still  you've  heard  me  on  all   that  often
 enough.  On  this  point  I'm  with  you.  Real   fairy-stories  don't
 pretend   to   produce   impossible   mechanical   effects   by  bogus
 machines.'                                                            
   'No.   And   if   Frankley   wants   fairy-tales   with   mechanized
 dragons,   and   quack   formulas   for  producing   power-swords,  or
 anti-dragon  gas, or  scientifictitious explanations  of invisibility,
 well,  he  can  have  'em  and  keep  'em.  No! For  landing on  a new
 planet,  you've  got  your  choice:  miracle;  magic;  or  sticking to
 normal  probability,  the  only  known  or  likely  way  in  which any
 one has ever landed on a world.'                                      
   'Oh!  So  you've  got  a  private  recipe all  the time,  have you?'
 said Ramer sharply.                                                   
   'No, it's not private, though I've used it once.'                   
   'Well? Come on! What is it?'                                        
   'Incarnation. By being born, said Guildford.(15)                    
   At  that  point  Dolbear  woke  up.  He  yawned  loudly,  lifted his
 heavy  lids,  and  his  blue-bright  eyes  opened  wide under  his red
 brows.  He  had  been  audibly  sleeping  for  a  long while,*  but we
                                                                      
  (* He often slept loudly, during a long reading or discussion. But he
 would rouse up in the middle of  a debate,  and show  that he  had the
 odd faculty of  both sleeping  and listening.  He said  that it  was a
 time-saving habit that long membership of the Club  had forced  him to
 acquire. N.G.)                                                        

 were  used to  the noise,  and it  disturbed us  no more  than the
 sound of a kettle simmering on the fire.                         
   'What have you got to  say to  that, Ramer?'  he asked.  He shot
 a  sharp  glance  at  him,  but  Ramer  made  no   reply.  Dolbear
 yawned again.  'I'm rather  on Nick's  side,' he  said. 'Certainly
 about the first chapter in this case.'                           
   'Well, that was read at the beginning,  before you  settled down
 for your nap,' said Lowdham.                                     
   Dolbear grinned. 'But  it was  not that  chapter in  itself that
 interested me,' he said. 'I think most of the discussion  has been
 off the point, off the immediately interesting point.  The hottest
 trail  that  Nicholas  got  on  to  was the  discord, as  you said
 yourself,  Arry.(16) That's  what  you  should  follow  up   now.  I
 should feel it strongly, even if  space-ships were  as regrettably
 possible  as  the  Transatlantic  Bus-service. Michael!  Your real
 story is wholly out  of keeping  with what  you called  the frame.
 And that's odd in you. I've never felt such a  jar before,  not in
 any of your work. I find it hard to believe  that the  machine and
 the tale were made by  the same  man. Indeed,  I don't  think they
 were.  You  wrote the  first chapter,  the space-voyage,  and also
 the  homecoming  (rather  slipshod  that,  and  my  attention wan-
 dered): you made it up, as they say. And as you've not  tried your
 hand  at that  sort of  thing before,  it was  not much  above the
 average. But I don't think you  wrote the  story inside.  I wonder
 what you've been up to?'                                         
   'What are you driving at?'  said Jeremy.  'It was  typical Ramer
 all through, nearly every  sentence was  hall-marked. And  even if
 he  wanted  to  put  us off  with borrowed  goods, where  could he
 get them from?'                                                  
   'You know his itch  to re-write  other people's  bungled tales,'
 said  Lowdham.  'Though  certainly  he's  never  tried  one  on us
 before, without telling us.'                                     
   'I know all that,' said Jeremy, hopping about angrily.  'I mean:
 where could he get this  tale from?  If he  has found  any printed
 space-travel story that I don't  know, then  he's been  doing some
 pretty hot research. I've never met anything like it at all.'
   'You're  missing  my  point,'  said  Dolbear. 'I  shouldn't have
 said wrote. I should have said made up, invented.  I say  again: I
 wonder what you've been up to, Ramer?'                           
   'Telling a story,' answered Ramer glumly, staring at the fire.
   'Yes,' said Dolbear. 'But don't try  to do  that in  the nursery
 sense, or we'll have to  roast you.'  He got  up and  looked round

 at us  all. His  eyes looked  very bright  under bristling  brows. He
 turned  them  sharply  on  Ramer.  'Come!'  he  said.   'Come  clean!
 Where's this place? And how did you get there?'                     
   'I don't know where it is,'  said Ramer  quietly, still  staring at
 the fire. 'But you're quite right. I went there. At least...  well, I
 don't think our language fits the case.  But there  is such  a world,
 and I saw it - once.' He sighed.                                    
                                                                    
   We looked at him  for a  long while.  All of  us -  except Dolbear,
 I  think  - felt  some alarm,  and pity.  And on  the surface  of our
 minds blank incredulity, of  course. Yet  it was  not quite  that: we
 did  not  feel  the  underlying  emotion  of incredulity.  For appar-
 ently  all  of us,  in some  degree, had  sensed something  odd about
 that  story,  and  now  recognized  that  it  differed from  the norm
 like  seeing  does  from  imagining.  I  felt  that  it was  like the
 difference  between  a  bright  glimpse   of  a   distant  landscape:
 threadlike  waters  really  falling;  wind  ruffling the  small green
 leaves  and  blowing up  the feathers  of birds  on the  branches, as
 that  can  be  seen  through  a  telescope:  limited  but  clear  and
 coloured;  flattened  and  remote,  but  moving  and  real  - between
 that  and  any  picture.  Not,  it  seemed  to  me,  an effect  to be
 explained  simply  by  art.  And  yet -  the explanation  offered was
 nonsense  outside  the  pages  of  a  romance;  or  so  I  found that
 most of us felt at that moment.                                     
   We  tried  a  few  'more  questions,  but Ramer  would not  say any
 more  that  night.  He  seemed  disgruntled,  or  tired;   though  we
 had not scoffed. To  relieve the  tension, Frankley  read us  a short
 poem he had  recently written.  It was  generous of  him, for  it was
 a good piece; but  inevitably it  fell rather  flat. It  is, however,
 pretty  well-known  now,  as  it  appeared  as  the  opening  poem of
 his 1989 volume: Experiments in Pterodactylics.                     
   We broke up soon after he had read it.                            
   'Ramer,'  I  said  at  the  door,  'we  must  hear some  more about
 this, if you can bear it. Can't you come next week?'                
   'Well, I don't know,' he began.                                   
   '0  don't  go   off  to   New  Erewhon   again  just   yet!'  cried
 Lowdham,  a  bit  too  jocularly.  [I  don't  think  so.  A.A.L.] 'We
 want more News from Nowhere.'(17)                                   
   'I did  not say  it was  Nowhere,' said  Ramer gravely.  'Only that
 it was Somewhere. Well, yes, I'll come.'                            
                                                                    
   I  walked  part  of  the way  home with  him. We  did not  talk. It
 was  a  starry  night.  He  stopped  several times  and looked  up at

    
                                                                      
 the sky. His  face, pale  in the  night, had  a curious  expression, I
 thought: like a  man in  a strange  country trying  to get  the points
 of the compass, and wondering which way his home lies.                
  In  the  Turl (18) we  parted.  I think  what the  Club really  needs is
 not more stories - yet,' I said.  'They need,  I specially  want, some
 description  of  the  method,  if  you  could  manage it.'  Ramer said
 nothing.  'Well,  good  night!'  I  said.  'This has  been one  of the
 great   Club   evenings,   indeed!   Who'd   have   thought   that  in
 starting  up  that  literary  hare  about  the  most  credible  way of
 opening  a  space-tale  I'd  blunder  on  the  lair  of a  real winged
 dragon, a veritable way of travelling!'                               
  'Then  you  do  believe  me?'  said  Ramer.  'I  thought that  all of
 you  but  Dolbear  thought  I  was  spoofing,  or  else  going  batty.
 You in particular, Nick.'                                             
  'Certainly  not  spoof,  Michael.  As  for  battiness:  well,   in  a
 sense, your claim is a batty one, even if genuine, isn't it? At least,
 it is, if I've any inkling of  it. Though  I've nothing  to go  on but
 impressions,  and  such  hints  as I've  managed to  get out  of Rufus
 about  your  recent  doings. He's  the only  one of  us that  has seen
 much  of  you  for  quite  a  time; but  I rather  fancy that  even he
 does not know a great deal?'                                          
  Ramer  laughed   quietly.  'You're   a  hound,   I  mean   a  sleuth-
 hound,  by  nature,  Nicholas.  But  I am  not going  to lay  down any
 more  trail  tonight.  Wait  till  next  week!  You  can  then  have a
 look at my belfry and count all the bats. I'm tired.'                 
  'Sleep well! ' I said.                                               
  'I do,' said Ramer. 'Very well indeed. Good night! '                 
                                                                      
  MGR. NG. AAL. PF. WTJ. RD. JJ.                                       
                                                                      
 Night 61. Thursday, February 27th, 1987.(19)                          
                                                                      
  A  week  later  we  were  all  together  again,  in  Frankley's rooms
 this  time;  and  even  Cameron  had  come.  As   will  be   seen,  he
 actually  made  a  remark  on  this  occasion,  more  than  his  stock
 'Thanks  for  a   very  enterrtaining   evening.'  It   was  generally
 understood   that  Ramer   was  going   to  read   a  paper   on  Real
 Space-travel.                                                         
  He  was  the  last  to arrive,  and we  were pleasantly  surprised to
 see  that  he  looked  quite  well,  quite  normal,  and had  not even
 the  rather  haggard  look  he  used  to have  after writing  a paper.
 He spends a  frightful lot  of late  hours on  such things,  and burns
 more paper than he keeps.                                             

   Arry  Lowdham (20) tapped  him   all  over   and  pretended   to  be
 disappointed by the  result. 'No  models!' he  cried. 'No  plans of
 cylinders,  spheres,  or  anything!  Not even  a Skidbladnir  for a
 pocket-handkerchief!'(21)                                         
   'Now,  none  of  that  Nordic  stuff, please!'  groaned Frankley,
 who  regards  knowledge  of   his  own   language  at   any  period
 before  the  Battle  of Bosworth  as a  misdemeanour, and  Norse as
 a felony.(22)                                                      
   'No, not even a paper,' said Ramer.                              
   'Why not?' we all cried.                                         
   'Because I haven't written one.'                                 
   'Oh  I  say!  '  we protested.  'Then you  were spoofing  all the
 time?' said Lowdham.                                               
   'No,' said Ramer. 'But I'm not going  to read  a paper.  I didn't
 write  one,  because  it  would  have  been  a  great sweat;  and I
 wasn't sure that you'ld really want to hear any more about  it all.
 But if you do, I'm ready to talk.'                                 
   'Come  on!'  we  said.  Frankley  shoved him  down into  a chair,
 and gave him a tankard  of beer,  and a  box of  matches -  for him
 to strike, hold over a dead pipe, and throw away, as usual.        
                                                                   
   'Well,' he said after a short silence. 'It begins some  way back.
 And  the  threads  may  seem  a  bit  disconnected  at  first.  The
 origins were literary, of  course, like  the discussion  last week.
 I've  always wanted  to try  a space-travel  story, and  have never
 dared. It was one of my earliest ambitions, ever  since Out  of the
 Silent  Planet  appeared,  when  I was  a small  boy. That  puts it
 back a bit.'                                                       
   'Yes,  1938,'  said  Cameron,(23) whose  memory  is  like   that.  I
 doubt  if  he  has  ever  read  the  book.  The  memoirs  of  minor
 modern diplomats  are more  in his  line. The  remark was  his sole
 contribution.                                                      
   'I  never  did  write  one,'  said Ramer,  'because I  was always
 bothered  by  the  machinery,  in  a  literary  sense:  the  way of
 getting there. I didn't necessarily object to machines; but I never
 met and couldn't think of any credible vehicle  for the  purpose. I
 really agree very much with Nicholas on that point.'               
   'Well, you tried a pretty ordinary machine on  us in  that tale,'
 said Frankley.                                                     
   'And  seemed  pretty disgruntled  with me  for objecting  to it,'
 said Guildford.                                                    
   'I  was  not  really disgruntled,'  said Ramer.  'A bit  put out,

                                                                 
                                                                   
 perhaps,  as  one  is when  one's disguise  is pierced  too quickly.
 Actually I was interested in the way  you all  felt the  discord: no
 more than I did myself. But I felt that I had to tell that  story to
 somebody,  to  communicate  it.  I wanted  to get  it out.  And yet,
 and yet now  I'm rather  sorry. Anyway,  I put  it in  that quickly-
 made  cheap  frame,  because  I  didn't  want to  discuss the  way I
 came by it - at least not yet.  But Ruthless  Rufus with  his <third
 degree" has landed me here.'                                       
   'Yes, he has!' said Dolbear. 'So get on with your confession!'
                                                                   
   Ramer  paused  and  considered.  'Well,  thinking   about  methods
 of getting across Space, I was  later rather  attracted by  what you
 may call the telepathic  notion -  merely as  a literary  device, to
 begin with. I expect  I got  the idea  from that  old book  you lent
 me,  Jeremy:  Last  Men  in  London, or some name  like  that.(24) I
 thought  it  worked  pretty  well,  though  it  was too  vague about
 the  how.  If  I  remember rightly,  the Neptunians  could lie  in a
 trance  and  let their  minds travel.  Very good,  but how  does the
 mind  travel  through  Space  or  Time,  while  the body  is static?
 And  there  was another  weakness, as  far as  I was  concerned: the
 method  seemed  to  need  rational  creatures  with  minds   at  the
 other end. But I  did not  myself particularly  want to  see -  or I
 should  say  at  that  stage,  perhaps,  write  about  -  what Lewis
 called  hnau.(25) I wanted  to  see  things  and  places  on  a  grand
 scale. That was one thread.                                        
   'Another  thread  was  dreams.  And  that  had a  literary origin,
 too,  partly.  Because  Rufus  and  I have  long been  interested in
 dreams,  especially  in their  story-and-scene-making, and  in their
 relation  to  waking  fiction.  But  as  far as  I could  judge such
 things, it did seem  to me  that a  pretty good  case had  been made
 out  for the  view that  in dream  a mind  can, and  sometimes does,
 move  in  Time:  I  mean,  can  observe  a  time  other   than  that
 occupied by the sleeping body during the dream.'                   
   'But of course it can, and without  sleeping,' said  Frankley. 'If
 we were confined to the present, we couldn't think  at all,  even if
 we could perceive or feel.'                                        
   'But  I  mean  moving  not  by  memory, or  by calculation,  or by
 invention,  as  the  waking  mind  can  be  said to  move; but  as a
 perceiver of the external, of something new that is  not yet  in the
 mind.  For  if  you  can  see,  in  other  times  than  the  time of
 dreaming, what you never saw in waking life,  so that  it is  not in
 your memory  - seeing  the future,  for instance,  would be  a clear

  case,  and  it  cannot  reasonably  be  doubted  that  that   occurs  -
  then  obviously there  is a  possibility of  real first-hand  seeing of
  what is "not there", not where your body is.'                          
    'Not even your eyes?' said Frankley.                                 
    'Ah,'  said  Ramer,  'that  is  of course  a point.  I shall  come to
  that later. It is probably a case  of "translation";  but leave  it for
  a  bit.  I was  thinking of  dreaming chiefly,  though I  don't suppose
  the possibility is really limited to that state. Only, if you live in a
  never-ending   racket   of   sense-impressions,   other   more  distant
  noises  have  to  be  very  loud  to  be heard.  And this  movement, or
  transference  of  observation:  it  is  clearly  not  limited  to Other
  Time;  it  can  occur  in Other  Space, or  in both.  A dreamer  is not
  confined to the events of Other Time occurring in his bedroom.'        
    'But  wouldn't  you  expect  to  be  limited  to  the   places  where
  you  yourself  have   been,  or   will  be,   in  Other   Time?'  asked
  Guildford.                                                             
    'That's  not  the  general  human  tradition  about   visions,'  said
  Ramer.  'Nor  is  it  borne  out  by  authenticated  modern  instances.
  And  it  is  not  my  experience,  as  you  will  see. But  naturally I
  thought about  that point.  I think,  actually, that  it is  clear that
  the  mind  can  be  in  two  places  at  one  time:  two or  more; once
  you  have  made  it more  than one,  the figure  is, perhaps,  not very
  important.  For  I  suppose, as  far as  the mind  goes, you  can't get
  nearer  to  saying  where it  is than  to say  where its  attention is.
  And  that,  of  course,  may  be  decided  by various  causes, internal
  and external.                                                          
    'You can get a sort of literary parallel. I think  it is  a pertinent
  one,  actually;  for  I don't  think literary  invention, or  fancy, is
  mixed  up  in  all  this  by accident.  When you  are writing  a story,
  for  instance, you  can (if  you're a  vivid visualizer,  as I  am, and
  are  clearly  visualizing  a  scene) see  two places  at once.  You can
  see  (say)  a  field  with  a tree  and sheep  sheltering from  the sun
  under  it,  and  be  looking  round  your room.  You are  really seeing
  both  scenes,  because  you  can  recollect  details later.  Details of
  the  waking  scene  not  attended  to,  because  you  were  abstracted:
  there's no doubt of that.  I should  as certainly  add: details  of the
  inner scene, blurred because you were to some extent distracted.       
    'As  far  as  my  own  visualizing  goes,  I've  always  been impres-
  sed  by  how  often  it  seems  independent  of  my  will  or  planning
  mind  (at  the  moment).  Often  there  is  no  trace  of  composing  a
  scene  or  building  it  up.  It  comes  before the  mind's eye,  as we
  say,  in  a  way  that  is  very similar  to opening  closed eyes  on a

 complete   waking   view.* (26) I  find   it  difficult,   usually  quite
 impossible,  to  alter  these  pictures  to  suit  myself,  that   is  my
 waking  purpose.  As  a  rule  I  find  it  better, and  in the  end more
 right, to alter the story I'm  trying to  tell to  suit the  pictures. If
 the  two  really  belong  together  -  they  don't  always,   of  course.
 But  in  any  case,  on  such  occasions  you  are really  seeing double,
 or  simultaneously.  You  tend   to  associate   the  two   views,  inner
 and  outer,  though  the  juxtaposition  of  them  may  be,  usually  is,
 their  only  connexion.  I  still  associate  a  view  of  a  study  I no
 longer   possess   and   a   pile   of    blue-and-yellow-covered   exam-
 scripts  (long  burnt,  I  hope)  with  the  opening  scene  of a  book I
 wrote  years  ago:  a  great  morain   high  up   in  the   barren  moun-
 tains.'                                                                  
   'I  know',  said  Jeremy,  'the  foot  of  the  Glacier  in  The Stone-
 eaters.'(27)                                                             
   'I   think  a   connexion  could   be  made   out  between   those  two
 scenes,' said Frankley.                                                  
    'It's  very  difficult  to  find  any  two  things  that   the  story-
 making  faculty  cannot  connect,'   said  Ramer.   'But  in   this  case
 the  story-scene came  into my  head, as  it is  called, long  before the
 examination  reality.  The  two   are  connected   only  because   I  was
 re-visualizing,   revisiting,   the   Glacier-foot  very   strongly  that
 day.'                                                                    
   'That   doesn't   quite   get   rid  of   some  connexion   other  than
 coinciding in time,' said Frankley.                                      
   'Well,  never  mind.  They  did  coincide,'   said  Ramer.   'And  that
 is  my  point  at  the  moment.  The  mind  can  be  in  more   than  one
 place at a  given time;  but it  is more  properly said  to be  where its
 attention  is.  And  that,  I  suppose, is  in one  place only:  for most
 human minds, or at any rate for my mind.                                 
   'But  I'm  afraid  this  is  a  digression.  To go  back to  dreams. Of
 course,   the  memory   of  such   true  dreams,   or  free   dreams,  is
 notoriously  rarish  and  chancy,  and  also  scrappy as  a rule.  But it
 is  not  legitimate,  it  is pretty  plainly wrong,  to assume  that what
 is   ordinarily  remembered   by  ordinary   people  of   their  dreaming
 is  either  most of  the total,  or the  most important  part of  it. And
 the  will  to  remember  can   be  strengthened,   and  the   memory  can
                                                                         
  (* Ramer said later: 'It is still more like re-viewing in memory a place
 that one has really been to; it is like memory in its quality as compared
 with sightseeing, but on the first occasion of its arising in the mind it
 does not seem to be "remembering".' N.G.)                                 

 be  enlarged.  Rufus  has  had a  good deal  of experience  in that
 direction, and he has helped me from time to time.'                   
   Dolbear stirred and opened his  eyes. 'So  his suspicion  was not
 due to pure literary criticism of discords?' said Frankley.           
   'Well, I haven't the faintest idea of what Michael is driving at,
 yet  -  if  that's  what  you  mean,' said  Dolbear. 'Or  rather, I
 understand what he's saying  and more  or less  agree with  it, but
 what it has to do with that vision of, of what was it?'               
   'Emberu,' said Ramer. 'I don't yet see,' Dolbear ended.(28)         
                                                                      
   'Well,  here  is  a  third  thread,'  Ramer went  on. 'I  had the
 notion,  as  others  probably  have  too,  that  for   movement  or
 travelling  the  mind  (when  abstracted from  the flood  of sense)
 might  use  the memory  of the  past and  the foreshadowing  of the
 future that reside in all  things, including  what we  call "inani-
 mate matter". Those are not the  right words,  but they'll  have to
 do: I  mean, perhaps,  the causal  descent from  the past,  and the
 casual probability in the present, that are implicit in everything.
 At any rate, I thought that might be one of the mind's vehicles.(29)  
 But an incarnate mind seemed rather a problem to me.'                 
   'Not a very new one! ' said Guildford.                              
   Ramer  laughed.  'Don't be  too hard  on me,'  he said.  'I'm not
 at  all  original.  And  anyway  my  problem  was  practical rather  i
 than  philosophical.  I  was  puzzled about  jumping. I  didn't see
 how it  could be  done. I'm  not a  philosopher, but  an experimen-
 ter, a man driven by desires - if not very fleshly ones, still very
 incarnate  ones.  Being  an  incarnate  mind,  I am  conditioned by
 Time and  Space, even  in my  curiosities; though  being a  mind, I
 want  to  get  beyond  the  range  of  my  own  body's  senses  and
 history.                                                              
   'Of  course,  you  might  imagine  the  mind,  by   some  special
 effort  of  its  own,  doing  something  analogous  to  the  body's
 leaping from place to place, especially in a less  trammelled state
 like sleep, or trance. But I thought the  analogy probably  false -
 for a  living man,  anchored even  in trance  to the  body, however
 long  and  thin  the  rope.  The mind  may be  neither in  Time nor
 Space, except in so far as it is specially associated with  a body;
 but  while  you're  alive  the  bond  holds, I  thought. Mind-body:
 they jump together, or neither jumps at all.                          
   'I  hardly  need to  say again  that by  jump I  do not  mean the
 movement  of  thought  to  objects  already in  its grasp,  or mem-
 ory: shifting instantaneously from,  say, considering  the peculiar

  
                                                                    
 configuration  of  Rufus's  face  to   thinking  of   Table  Mountain
 (which  I  once  saw).  I  wanted to  observe new  things far  off in
 Time and Space beyond the compass of a terrestrial animal.'         
 'And  so,'  said  Lowdham,  'like  the  Pig   on  the   Ruined  Pump,
 day  and  night   you  made   your  moan,   because  you   could  not
 jump?'(30)                                                          
 'Exactly,'  said  Ramer; 'for  of course  by this  time I  was really
 thinking  more  about  travelling  myself  than  writing   a  travel-
 story. But I didn't want to die. And I  thought that  all I  could do
 was  to  refine  my  observation  of  other  things  that  have moved
 and  will  move:  to  inspect  the  history  of  things  whose  paths
 have,  at  some  point  of  time and  space, crossed  the path  of my
 body.                                                               
 'The  mind  uses  the  memory  of  its  body.  Could  it   use  other
 memories,  or  rather,  records?   What  kind   of  record   of  past
 events  and  forms  could   there  be?   In  the   time-sequence  the
 disintegration  of  a  form  destroys  the  memory  - or  the special
 record - of the history of that form, unless it has  got into  a mind
 first.  The fragments,  right down  to the  smallest units,  no doubt
 preserve  the  record  of  their  own  particular  history,  and that
 may  include   some  of   the  history   of  the   combinations  that
 they've entered into. But take a haunted house, for instance.'      
 'Take a house! ' interrupted Jeremy. 'All houses are haunted.'      
 'I  agree,'  said  Ramer.  'But  I'm  using  the  words,  as  they're
 commonly  used,  to  mean  a  house  where  some   particular  detail
 of  the  haunting  has  become  specially  perceptible;  how  or  why
 that occurs is another question.'                                   
 'But   haunting,   and   atmosphere   (which   I   suppose   is  what
 Jeremy  means),  are  something  added   by  accident   of  history,'
 objected  Frankley.  'They're  not  part  of  the  house  itself, qua
 house.'                                                             
 'I'm  not  sure  I  understand  you,'  said  Ramer.  'But  I'm  quite
 sure that I personally am  not interested  in 'housiness'  in itself,
 but in this or that thing which  you may  class as  a house,  part of
 which (the most interesting part to me) is its history. If I  say No.
 100  Banbury  Road,(31) I  mean  the  shape  which  you   call  house
 and all that you call the  accidents of  its history:  what it  is at
 present.  So  do  you.  And  if  you  destroy  an  actual  house  qua
 house, you also  destroy, or  dissipate, the  special haunting.  If a
 haunted  house   were  pulled   to  pieces,   it  would   stop  being
 haunted, even if it were built  up as  accurately as  possible again.
 Or  so  I  think, and  so-called 'psychical'  research seems  to bear

 me  out.  In  a  way  analogous to  life in  a body.  If all  the king's
 horses  and  all  his  men  had  put   Humpty  Dumpty   together  again,
 they'ld have got, well, an egg-shell.'                                 
   'But  you  can  go  a   long  way,   short  of   destruction,  without
 wholly   banishing   atmosphere   or   quite   laying    ghosts,'   said
 Jeremy.   'Bricking   up  windows,   changing  staircases,   and  things
 like that.'                                                            
   'Quite   right,'   said  Lowdham.   'There  was   one  poor   ghost  I
 heard   of,  and   when  they   raised  the   floor  of   his  favourite
 corridor,  he  went  on  walking  on  the  old level.  So people  in the
 passage  below  could  see   the  old   fellow's  feet   trudging  along
 under  the  ceiling.  That's  how they  discovered he  had holes  in his
 soles.  Don't  laugh!'  he  said indignantly.  'It's a  most melancholy
 case, and well authenticated.'                                         
   'I  dare  say!'  said  Ramer.  'But  quite  apart  from  such forlorn
 ghosts,  and  Arry's  authorities  (whoever  they  may  be),   I  expect
 there  are in  fact lots  of neglected  chances of  historical research,
 with   proper  training;   especially  among   old  houses   and  things
 more  or  less shaped  by man.  But that  was not  my chief  interest. I
 wanted to travel a long way.                                           
   'So  I  tried  various  experiments,  on  myself;  various   forms  of
 training. It's difficult to concentrate, chiefly because  it's difficult
 to  get  quiet  enough.  The  body  makes  such  a  noise  itself, quite
 apart  from  the  din  of  sensations  coming  from  outside.  I  wanted
 to  discover  if   my  mind   had  any   power,  any   trainable  latent
 power,  to  inspect   and  become   aware  of   the  memory   or  record
 in  other  things,  that  would  be   in  them   anyway,  even   if  not
 inspectable  by  me.  For,  I  suppose,  what  we  call   memory,  human
 memory,  is   both  the   power  to   inspect  and   be  aware   of  the
 record  within  us,  and  the  record  that   would  be   there  anyway.
 The  power  of  inspection  and  awareness  is  always  there;   and  so
 is  the  material  and  record,  I  suppose,  unless  it is  smashed up.
 Though   the   inspector   cannot   always  get   at  the   records.  We
 aren't  in full  control of  ourselves, even,  so obviously  it wouldn't
 be easy to deal with other things.'                                    
   'But  the  mind  seems  also  to  have  its  own storehouses,  as well
 as keys  of inspection,  doesn't it?'  said Guildford.  'I mean,  it can
 remember past inspections, and retains what it has noted.'             
   'Yes,  I  think  so,'  said Ramer;  'but it  is difficult,  of course,
 when  you're  dealing  with  a  mind-body,   an  association   in  which
 neither   can   do   anything   without  having   some  effect   on  the
 other. I don't  think an  incarnate mind  ever gets  really free  of its

 body,  wherever  it strays,  until a  man dies,  if then.  However, I
 went on trying to  train myself  for this  kind of,  well, historical
 inspection and awareness.  I don't  think I  have any  special talent
 for it. I don't know, for so few people seem to have tried it.  But I
 fancy  that  Jeremy,  for  instance,  has  more  of  a  bent  in this
 direction than I have.                                              
   'It is difficult,  and it's  also frightfully  slow. Less  slow, of
 course, with  things that  have organic  life, or  any kind  of human
 associations: but they don't carry you very far. It's slow,  and it's
 faint.  In  inorganic  things  too  faint  to  surmount the  blare of
 waking sense, even with eyes shut and ears stopped.                 
   'But  here  the  threads  begin  to  join.  Remember,  I  was  also
 training  my  memory  on  dreams  at  the  same  time.  And  that  is
 how  I  discovered   that  the   other  experiments   affected  them.
 Though  they  were  blurred,  blurred  by  the  waking  senses beyond
 recognition,  I  found   that  these   other  perceptions   were  not
 wholly  unnoted;  they  were like  things that  are passed  over when
 one  is abstracted  or distracted,  but that  are really  "taken in".
 And,  asleep,  the mind,  rootling about,  as it  does, in  the day's
 leavings  (or the  week's), would  inspect them  again with  far less
 distraction, and all the force of its original desire. I dare  say it
 enjoyed it.                                                         
   'But  it  couldn't  make  much  of it.  By which  I suppose  I mean
 that  I  couldn't  remember  much  about  such  inspections, although
 I  was  now  becoming  pretty  good  at  remembering  large  passages
 of  more  vivid  and  pictorial  dreams.  And  that  means  I suppose
 also,  that  my  mind  was  not  able  (at  least  not  without  more
 practice)  to  translate  the  notes  into  the  terms of  the senses
 which  I  can  handle  when awake.  All the  same, I  used to  get at
 that  time  very  extraordinary   geometric  patterns   presented  to
 me,  shifting  kaleidoscopically  but  not  blurred;  and  queer webs
 and  tissues,  too.  And  other  non-visual  impressions  also,  very
 difficult  to  describe; some  like rhythms,  almost like  music; and
 throbs and stresses.                                                
   'But  all  the  time, of  course, I  wanted to  get off  the Earth.
 That's  how  I got  the notion  of studying  a meteorite,  instead of
 mooning  about  with houses,  ruins, trees,  boulders, and  all sorts
 of  other  things.  There  is  a  very  large  meteorite  in  a park,
 Gunthorpe  Park  in  Matfield,(32) where I lived  as  a boy,  after we
 came  back  from  abroad;  even  then  it  had a  strange fascination
 for  me.  I  wondered  if  it  could  have  come  from  Malacandra. I
 took  to  hobnobbing  with  it  again,  in the  vacs. Indeed,  I made

 myself  ridiculous  and  an  object  of  suspicion.  I wanted  to visit
 the  stone  alone  at night  - to  lessen the  distractions; but  I was
 not  allowed  to:  closing  hours were  closing hours.  So I  gave that
 up. It seemed to be quite without results.'                           
   'So the poor old stone was left all alone?' said Lowdham.           
   'Yes,'  said  Ramer.  'It  was.  It is  a very  long way  indeed from
 home, and it is very lonely. That is,  there is  a great  loneliness in
 it, for a perceiver to perceive. And  I got  a very  heavy dose  of it.
 In  fact  I  can't  bear  to  look  at  such things  now. For  I found,
 about the end of the long  vac. two  years ago,  after my  final visit,
 that  there  had  been  results. It  had evidently  taken some  time to
 digest  them,  and even  partially translate  them. But  that is  how I
 first  got  away,  out  beyond  the  sphere  of  the  Moon,   and  very
 much further.'                                                        
   'Travelling  on  a  dream-meteor!'  said  Frankley.  'Hm!  So  that's
 your method, is it?'                                                  
   'No,'  said  Ramer.  'Not  if  you  mean  how  I  got  the   news  of
 Emberu  that  I  put  into  my  tale.(33) But I did  work back  into the
 meteorite's  history, I  think; though  that sort  of vehicle  does not
 readily  give  any  place  or time  references that  can be  related to
 our waking point. I did get, all the rest of that term, and I  still do
 get   occasionally,   some  very   odd  dreams   or  sleep-experiences:
 painful  often,  and  alarming.  Some   were  quite   unpictorial,  and
 those  were  the  worst.  Weight,  for   instance.  Just   Weight  with
 a  capital  W:  very  horrible.  But  it  was  not  a  weight  that was
 pressing  on  me,  you  understand;   it  was   a  perception   of,  or
 sympathy  in,  an   experience  of   almost  illimitable   weight.(34) And
 Speed  too.  Heavens!  waking  up  from  that  one  was like  hitting a
 wall,  though  only  a  wall  of  light  and  air in  my bedroom,  at a
 hundred miles a second - or rather, like knowing about it.            
   'And  Fire!  I  can't describe  that. Elemental  Fire: fire  that is,
 and  does  not  consume,  but  is  a  mode  or  condition  of  physical
 being. But I caught  sight of  blazing fire,  too: some  real pictures.
 One,  I  think,  must  have  been  a glimpse  of the  meteorite hitting
 our  air.  A  mountain  corroded  into a  boulder in  a few  seconds of
 agonizing  flame.  But  above,  or  between,  or  perhaps  through  all
 the   rest,   I   knew  endlessness.   That's  perhaps   emotional  and
 inaccurate.  I  mean  Length  with  a  capital  L,  applied   to  Time;
 unendurable  length  to  mortal  flesh.  In  that  kind  of  dream  you
 can know about the feeling of aeons of constricted waiting.           
   'Being  part  of  the  foundations  of  a  continent,  and  upholding
 immeasurable  tons  of  rock  for  countless   ages,  waiting   for  an

                                                                   
                                                                    
 explosion   or   a   world-shattering  shock,   is  quite   a  common
 situation in parts of this universe. In many regions there  is little
 or no "free  will" as  we conceive  it. Also,  though they  are large
 and  terrific,  events  may  be  relatively simple  in plan,  so that
 catastrophes  (as  we  might call  them), sudden  changes as  the end
 of  long  repeated  series  of small  motions, are  "inevitable": the
 present  holds  the   future  more   completely.  A   perceiving  but
 passive  mind   could  see   a  collapse   coming  from   an  immense
 distance of time.                                                   
   'I found it all very  disturbing. Not  what I  wanted, or  at least
 not what  I had  hoped for.  I saw,  anyway, that  it would  take far
 too  much  of  a  mortal  human  life  to get  so accustomed  to this
 kind of vehicle that one could  use it  properly, or  selectively, at
 will.  I  gave  it  up.  No  doubt,  when any  degree of  control was
 achieved,  my  mind  would  no  longer  have  been  limited  to  that
 particular  vehicle  or  chunk  of  matter.  The  waking mind  is not
 confined  to the  memories, heredity,  or senses,  of its  own normal
 vehicle,  its  body:  it can  use that  as a  platform to  survey the
 surroundings  from.  So,  probably,  it  could,  if it  ever mastered
 another  vehicle:  it  could  survey, in  some fashion,  other things
 where  the  meteorite (say)  came from,  or things  it had  passed in
 its  historical  journey.  But that  second transference  of observa-
 tion  would  certainly  be much  more difficult  than the  first, and
 much more uncertain and inefficient.                                
   'So  I turned  more than  ever to  dream-inspection, trying  to get
 "deeper  down".  I  attended  to  dreams  in  general,  but  more and
 more  to  those  least  connected with  the immediate  irritations of
 the body's senses. Of  course, I  had at  times experienced,  as most
 people  have,  parts  of  more or  less rationally  connected dreams,
 and  even  one  or two  serial or  repeating dreams.  And I  have had
 also   the   not   uncommon   experience  of   remembering  fragments
 of  dreams  that  seemed  to  possess  a  "significance"  or  emotion
 that  the   waking  mind   could  not   discern  in   the  remembered
 scene.(35) I  was  not  at  all  convinced  that this  significance> was
 due  to  obscured  symbols,  or  mythical   values,  in   the  dream-
 scenes; or at least I didn't  and don't  think that  that is  true of
 most   of   such   dream-passages.   Many   of   these   "significant
 patches"  seemed  to  me  much  more  like   random  pages   torn out
 of a book.'                                                         
   'But  you  didn't  wriggle out  of Rufus's  clutches that  way, did
 you?'  said  Guildford.  'He'll  analyse a  whole book  as cheerfully
 as a page.'                                                         

   'It  depends  on  the contents,'  said Ramer.  'But I'll  come back
 to  that.  For  at about  that time  something decisive  happened. It
 seemed  to  sweep  away  all  other  trials  and  experiments;  but I
 don't think they were really  wasted. I  think they  had a  good deal
 to do with precipitating the, well, catastrophe.'                   
   'Come  on,  come  on!  What  was  it?'  said  Dolbear.  He  stopped
 snoring and sat up.                                                 
   'It  was  most  like  a  violent  awakening,'  said  Ramer.  He was
 silent for almost a minute, staring at the ceiling as he lay  back in
 his chair.                                                          
                                                                    
   At  last  he  went  on.  'Imagine  an  enormously long,  vivid, and
 absorbing  dream  being  shattered  -   say,  simultaneously   by  an
 explosion  in  the  house,  a  blow  on  your  body,  and  the sudden
 flinging back of  dark curtains,  letting in  a dazzling  light: with
 the  result  that  you come  back with  a rush  to your  waking life,
 and  have  to  recapture  it  and  its  connexions, feeling  for some
 time  a  shock  and the  colour of  dream-emotions: like  falling out
 of  one  world  into  another  where  you  had  once  been   but  had
 forgotten  it.  Well,  that  was what  it was  like in  reverse; only
 recapturing the connexions was slower.                              
   'I  was  awake  in bed,  and I  fell wide  asleep: as  suddenly and
 violently  as  the  waker in  my illustration.  I dived  slap through
 several levels  and a  whirl of  shapes and  scenes into  a connected
 and  remembered  sequence.  I  could  remember   all  the   dreams  I
 had ever had, of that  sequence. At  least, I  remember that  I could
 remember  them  while  I  was  still  "there",  better  than   I  can
 "here"  remember  a  long  sequence  of  events  in waking  life. And
 the  memory  did  not  vanish  when   I  woke   up,  and   it  hasn't
 vanished.  It  has  dimmed  down  to  normal,   to  about   the  same
 degree  as  memory  of  waking life:  it's edited:  blanks indicating
 lack of  interest, some  transitions cut,  and so  on. But  my dream-
 memories  are  no longer  fragments, no  longer like  pictures, about
 the size  of my  circle of  vision with  fixed eyes,  surrounded with
 dark,  as they  used to  be, nearly  always. They  are wide  and long
 and  deep.  I have  visited many  other sequences  since then,  and I
 can  now  remember  a  very  great number  of serious,  free, dreams,
 my deep dreams, since I first had any.'                             
   'What a lumber-room! ' said Lowdham.                              
   'I  said  my  serious  dreams,'  said Ramer.  'Of course,  I can't,
 don't  want  to,  and  haven't tried  to remember  all the  jumble of
 marginal  stuff  -  the  rubbish  the  analysts  mostly   muck  about

 with, because it's practically all they've  got -  no more  than you
 try to  recollect all  the scribbling  on blotting-paper,  the small
 talk, or the idle fancies of your days.'                           
   'How far have you gone back?' Lowdham asked.                     
   'To the beginning,' Ramer answered.                              
   'When was that?'                                                 
   'Ah!  That  depends  on  what  you  mean  by  when,'  said  Ramer.
 'There  are  seldom  any  data  for  cross-timing as  between waking
 and  dreaming.  Many  dreams   are  in,   or  are   concerned  with,
 times  remote  from  the  standpoint  of  the  body.  One  of  those
 dreams might be said to occur before it started;  or after.  I've no
 idea  how  far  I've  gone  back  in  that  sense,  backward  in the
 history  of  the  universe,  you  might  say.  But  sticking  to the
 waking  time,  then  I suppose  I cannot  have begun  dreaming until
 I had begun to be: that is, until the creation of my mind,  or soul.
 But  I doubt  if any  ordinary time-reference  has any  real meaning
 with  regard  to  that  event  considered  in  itself; and  the word
 dreaming  ought  to  be  limited  to  the  ...  er  ...  spare-time,
 off-duty,  activities  of  an  incarnate  mind. So  I should  say my
 dreaming  began  with  the  entry  of  my mind  into body  and time:
 somewhere in the year  1929. But  that fifty-odd  years of  our time
 could contain various  indefinite lengths  of experience,  or opera-
 tion,  or  journeying.  My earlier  experiments were  not necessary,
 except perhaps to help in the  precipitation of  memory, as  I said.
 My  mind  "asleep"  had  long  done  that  sort  of thing  very much
 better.'                                                           
                                                                   
   He  paused,  and  we  looked  at him,  some of  us a  bit queerly.
 He  laughed.  'Don't  imagine  me  walking  about  "in a  dream", as
 people  say.  The two  modes are  no more  confused than  before. If
 you  had  two homes  in quite  different places,  say in  Africa and
 Norway,  you'ld  not  usually  be  in  doubt  which  one   you  were
 staying in at any given  time, even  if you  could not  remember the
 transition. No, at the worst  my situation  is only  like that  of a
 man  who  has been  reading a  deeply interesting  book, and  has it
 "on his  mind", as  he goes  about his  affairs. But  the impression
 can pass off, or be put aside, as in the case of a book. I  need not
 think about  my dreams,  if I  don't wish  to, no  more than  I need
 think about any book or re-read it.'                               
   'You  say  re-read.  Can  you  will,  now when  awake, to  go back
 to  any particular  dream, to  repeat it  or go  on with  it?' asked
 Frankley.  'And  can  you  remember  your  waking  life  while  in a
 dream?'                                                            

   'As to the last question,' Ramer replied, 'the  answer is:  in a
 sense  yes.  As clearly  as you  can remember  it while  writing a
 story, or deeply engrossed in a book. Only  you can't  give direct
 attention to it. If you do, you wake up, of course.              
   'The  other  question's more  difficult. Dreams  are no  more all
 of one sort than the experiences of waking life; less so  in fact.
 They  contain  sensations  as  different  as  tasting  butter  and
 understanding a logical argument; stories  as different  in length
 and quality as one of Arry's  lower anecdotes  and the  Iliad; and
 pictures  as  unlike  as  a  study  of  a  flower-petal  and those
 photographs  of  the explosion  in the  Atomic Reservation  in the
 seventies,(36) which blew  the  Black  Hole  in  the  States. Dreams
 happen,  or  are made,  in all  sorts of  ways. Those  that people
 mostly  remember,  and  remember  most of,  are marginal  ones, of
 course, or on the upper levels...'                               
   'Margins?  Upper  levels?  What  d'you  mean?' snapped Jones,(37)
 breaking  in,  to  our surprise.  'Just now  you spoke  of diving.
 When do we get to the bottom?'                                   
   'Never,'  Ramer  laughed.  'Don't take  my words  too literally,
 at any rate no more literally than I suppose you  take the  sub in
 subconscious.  I'm  afraid  I haven't  thought out  my terminology
 very carefully, James; but then I didn't mean to talk  about these
 things to you, not yet. I've been put on the mat. I think  I meant
 deep as in deeply interested; and down, lower, upper, and  all the
 rest  have  crept  in  afterwards, and  are misleading.  Of course
 there  isn't  any  distance  between  dreams  and  waking,  or one
 kind  of  dream  and  another;  only  an  increase or  decrease of
 abstraction  and  concentration.  In some  dreams there's  no dis-
 traction  at  all, some  are confused  by distractions,  some just
 are  distractions.  You  can  lie "deep"  and sodden  in body-made
 dreams, and receive clear  visions in  "light" sleep  (which might
 seem on the  very margin  of waking).  But if  I use  "deep" again
 you'll  know  that  I  mean  dreams  as  remote  as  may  be  from
 disturbance, dreams in which the mind is seriously engaged.      
   'By  the  marginal  ones I  meant those  that are  produced when
 the mind is playing, idling, or fooling, as  it often  is, mooning
 aimlessly about among the memories  of the  senses -  because it's
 tired, or  bored, or  out of  mental sorts,  or worried  by sense-
 messages when its desires or attention are elsewhere;  the devil's
 tattoo  of  dreaming  as  compared  with  the  piano-playing. Some
 minds, perhaps, are hardly capable of  anything else,  sleeping or
 waking.                                                          

                
                                                                       
    'And  the  machinery  may  go  on  ticking   over,  even   when  the
    mind  is  not  attending.  You  know  how  you've  only  got  to  do
    something  steadily  for hours  - like  picking blackberries,  say -
    and  even  before  you're  asleep   the  manufacture   of  intricate
    trellises of briars and berries goes on in the  dark, even  if you're
    thinking  of  something  else.  When  you  begin  to  dream  you  may
    start  by  using  some  of  those  patterns.  I  should   call  that
    "marginal".  And  anything  else  that  is  largely  due to  what is
    actually  going  on,  in  and  around  the  body:  distraction  com-
    plexes  in  which  such things  as "noises  off", indigestion,  or a
    leaking hot-water-bottle play a part.                               
    'Asking if you can re-visit that stuff is  like asking  me if  I can
    will  to  see  (not  make)  rain tomorrow,  or will  to be  waked up
    again  by  two  black  cats  fighting  on  the  lawn. But  if you're
    talking about serious dreams, or visions, then it's like asking if I
    shall  walk  back up  the road  again last  Tuesday. The  dreams are
    for  your  mind  events.  You  can,  or  might  - waking  desire has
    some  effect,  but  not  much  - go  back to  the same  "places" and
    "times",  as  a  spectator;  but the  spectator will  be the  you of
    now, a later you, still anchored  as you  are, however  remotely, to
    your  body  time-clock  here. But  there are  various complications:
    you  can  re-inspect  your  memories  of  previous  inspections, for
    one  thing; and  that is  as near  to dreaming  the same  dream over
    again as you can get (the closest parallel is reading  a book  for a
    second  time).  For  another  thing,  thought  and  "invention" goes
    on in dreams, a lot of it; and  of course  you can  go back  to your
    own work and take  it up  again -  go on  with the  story-making, if
    that is what you were doing.'                                       
    'What  a  busy  time  we  all  seem  to  have  been  having  without
    knowing  it,'  said  Lowdham.  'Even  old  Rufus  may  not  be quite
    such  a sloth  as he  looks. Anyway  you've given  him a  jolly good
    excuse to fall back on.  "Goodbye all!  I'm off  to my  dream-lab to
    see if the retorts are bubbling," says he, and  he's snoring  in two
    ticks.'                                                             
    'I leave the  bubbling retorts  to you,'  said Dolbear,  opening his
    eyes. 'I am afraid  I've not  yet got  down to  such high  levels as
    Michael,  and  I muck  about still  with the  marginal stuff,  as he
    calls it. Tonight at any rate I've been having a bit of a  dream: in
    the  rootling stage,  I suppose,  owing to  the distraction  of this
    discussion  going  on  round  my  body.  I got  a picture  of Ramer,
    equipped  with  Frankley's  long  nose,  trying  to  extract whiskey
    out of a bottle; he couldn't pour it out,  as he  had no  arms, only

 a pair of black wings, like a devil in a stuffed M.A. gown.'        
   'The  whiskey-bottle  was  not  derived  from  the  sense-data  in
 this room,' said Lowdham.                                           
   'Now  I  can  sympathize  with  the  psychoanalysts,'  said Frank-
 ley,  rising  and  getting  a  bottle  out  of  the  cupboard.  'The
 difficulty  they  must  have   in  sorting   out  dreams   from  the
 malicious inventions of the patient's waking mind!'                 
   'No  difficulty  with  Rufus,'   said  Lowdham.   'The  drink-urge
 explains  most  of  him.  And  I  don't  think  he's  got  a Censor,
 sleeping or waking.'                                                
   'Hm!   I'm   glad   I'm  so   transparent,'  said   Dolbear.  'Not
 everyone  is  so  simple,  Arry.  You walk  in disguises,  even when
 awake. But they'll slip, my lad, one day. I  shouldn't wonder  if it
 was fairly soon.'(38)                                               
   'Lor!'  said  Lowdham.  'Have  I  come  out in  a false  beard and
 forgotten  it,  or  something?'  But  at  that  moment  he  caught a
 glint in Dolbear's eye, and stopped suddenly.                       
   'Go  on,  Michael,  and  don't  take  any  notice  of  them!' said
 Jeremy.                                                             
   'Shall  I?'  he  asked, absentmindedly  drinking the  whiskey that
 Frankley had put at Dolbear's elbow.                                
   'Of course!' we said. 'We are fortified now.'                    
                                                                    
   'Well, seriously,' he went on, 'I don't  think the  marginal stuff
 is very interesting  in normal  people: it's  so ravelled,  and more
 bother to unravel than it's worth. It's very much like  the idleness
 and foolery of the waking mind. The chief  distinction is,  I think,
 that  when  a  man's  awake  he's  attending  more  to  the foolery;
 and when he's asleep his  attention is  probably already  far away:
 so the foolery is less good of its kind. But as  for his  mind being
 busy,  Arry:  I only  said, if  you remember,  that your  life could
 contain a  lot of  dream-work or  events. I  don't think  it usually
 does.  Minds  can  be  lazy  on  their  own  account.  Even  for the
 energetic ones sleep is largely a rest.  But of  course, for  a mind
 rest is not oblivion, which is impossible for it. The nearest it can
 get  to  that is  passivity: the  mind can  be very  nearly passive,
 contemplating  something  worthy  of  it,  or  what   seems  worthy-
 Or  it  can  take  the  kind of  holiday we  call "a  change", doing
 something  different  to  the  work  imposed  on  it  by   needs  or
 duties  when it  is awake.  If it  has by  nature, or  has acquired,
 some   dominant   interest   -    like   history,    or   languages,
 mathematics  -  it  may  at times  work away  at such  things, while

   
                                                                   
 the old body is recuperating. It  can then  construct dreams,  by no
 means always pictorial. It can plan and calculate.                 
 'My  mind,  like  many  others,  I   imagine,  makes   up  stories,
 composes  verse,  or  designs  pictures  out  of  what  it  has got
 already, when  for some  reason it  hasn't at  the moment  a thirst
 to acquire more.  I fancy  that all  waking art  draws a  good deal
 on  this sort of activity.(39) Those scenes  that come  up complete
 and fixed that I spoke of  before, for  instance; though  some of
 them, I believe, are visions of real places.                       
 'And  that  strong  feeling  of  hidden significance  in remembered
 fragments: my experience now,  though it  is still  very imperfect,
 certainly  bears  out  my guess,  as far  as my  own dreams  go. My
 significant  fragments were  actually often  pages out  of stories,
 made  up  in  quieter  dream-levels,  and  by  some  chance  remem-
 bered. Occasionally they were bits  of long  visions of  things not
 invented.                                                          
 'If long ago you'd  either read  or written  a story  and forgotten
 it, and then in an old drawer you came on  a few  torn pages  of it,
 containing  a  passage  that  had  some  special  function  in  the
 whole, even if it had no obvious point in isolation, I think you'ld
 get very  similar feelings:  of hidden  significance, of  lost con-
 nexions eluding you, and often of regret.'                         
 'Could you give us any examples?' asked Jeremy.                    
 Ramer  thought  for  a  moment.  'Well,'  he  said,  'I  could have
 done  so.  I've  placed  several  of my  fragments in  their proper
 setting now. But the difficulty is  that when  once you've  got the
 whole story, you  tend very  soon to  forget which  part of  it was
 the  bit  you  used to  remember torn out. But  there are  a couple
 that I still remember, for I only placed them recently; and I still
 remember  my  disappointment.  The  whole  stories  are  often  not
 particularly  good  or  interesting,  you  know;  and the  charm of
 the fragments is often  largely in  being unfinished,  as sometimes
 happens  in  waking  art.  The  sleeping mind  is no  cleverer than
 itself; only it can be less distracted and more collected, more set
 on using what it has.                                              
 'Here's one case: it's only interesting as an illustration.        
 A  row  of  dark  houses  on the  right, going  up a  slight slope.
 Their  backs  had  little  gardens  or  yards  fenced  with hedges,
 and  a  narrow  path  behind  them.  It  was  miserably   dark  and
 gloomy.  Not  a  light  in  the  houses,  not a  star, no  moon. He
 was  going  up  the  path  for  no  particular  reason, in  a heavy
 aimless  mood.  Near  the  top  of the  slope he  heard a  noise: a

 door had opened at the back of one  of the  houses, or  it had         
 closed. He was startled and apprehensive. He stood still. End,         
 of fragment.                                                           
 What would you expect the emotion to be that this aroused?'            
 'Like going round to the back-door after closing-time and              
 hearing that just being shut as well?' suggested Lowdham.              
 'It sounds reasonable enough,' agreed Ramer with a laugh.              
 'Actually it was a happiness that brings tears, like the thrill of
 the sudden turn for good in a dangerous tale; and a kind of dew        
 of happiness was distilled that spilled over into waking, lasted       
 for hours, and for years was renewed (though diminishingly) on         
 recollection.                                                          
 'All my waking mind could make of it was that the picture              
 was sombre. It did rather remind me of - or rather, I identified       
 it, in spite of some misfit, with a row of cottages near where I       
 lived as a small boy. But that did not explain the joy. And, by        
 the way, if it had really been a picture of that row, there should     
 have been a pump just at the top of the slope. I put it in. I see it
 now in dark silhouette. But it was not there in my earliest            
 recollection, not in the original version. Also, I was only the he     
 of the scene in the way one does (or I do) identify oneself            
 variably with this or that character in a tale, especially with        
 regard to the point of vision. The scene was observed more or          
 less from his point of view, though I (the producer) was just          
 behind (and a little above) him - until he stopped. At the             
 emotion-point I took his place.                                        
   'The story that scene came out of is known to me now; and              
 it's not very interesting. Apparently it's one I made up years         
 ago,(40) somewhere in the fifties, at a time when, while awake, I          
 wrote lots of things of the sort. I won't bother you with it all: it
 had a long and complicated plot,(41) mainly dealing with the Six         
 Years' War; but it wasn't very original, nor very good of its          
 kind. All that matters at the moment is that this scene came just      
 before a lovers' reunion, beyond the hope of either the man or         
 the woman. On hearing the noise he halted, with a premonition          
 that something was going to happen. The woman came out of              
 the door, but he did not recognize her till she spoke to him at the
 gate. If he hadn't halted, they would have missed one another,         
 probably for ever. The plot, of course, explained how they both        
 came to be there, where neither of them had been before; but           
 that doesn't matter now. The interesting thing is that the             
 remembered fragment, for some reason, ended with the sound             

                                 
                                                                    
 of the door and the halting; but the  emotion left  over was  due to
 part  of  the  story  immediately  following,  which was  not remem-
 bered pictorially at all. But there was no trace of the  emotions of
 still later parts of the story, which did not finally have a happy
                                                          : ending.
    'Well, there it is. Not very exciting, but suggestive, perhaps.
 Do you want the other case?'
    Dolbear gave a loud snore. 'Hark at him!' said Lowdham. 'I
 expect he's analysed you enough already, and doesn't want any
 more of your juvenilia to interrupt his slumber.'
   'Oh go on, Ramer!' said Jeremy. 'Let's have it!'
   'It's your evening, and we asked for it,' said Guildford. 'Carry
 on!'
   'Well, here's another picture,' said Ramer.
   A pleasant small room: a pre, a lot of books, a large desk; a
   golden light from a lamp. He is sitting at the desk. The
   dreamer's attention, from slightly above his head, is concen-
   trated on the circle of light, but is vaguely aware of dim
   figures away in front, moving about, taking books from
   shelves, reading in corners. He is looking at an open book at
   his left hand, and making notes on a paper. General air of
   cheerfulness and quiet. He pauses and looks up as if thinking,
   knocking his pipe-stem between his teeth. He turns a leaf of
   the book - and sees a new light, makes a discovery; but the
   fragment ends.
 What do you make of that?'
   'He'd solved the acrostic with the aid of a dictionary?' said
 Frankley.
   'Emotion: Jack-Hornerism, quiet bibliophilous gloating?'
 said Lowdham.
   'No!' said Ramer. 'Though you're getting warm, Arry. But
 the emotion associated was worry, with a heavy hang-over into
 waking hours of a dull sense of loss, as heavy as anything you
 felt in childhood when something precious was broken or lost.'
   'Well, New Readers now go back to Chapter One,' said
 Lowdham. 'What is it?'
   'Rather more unusual than the first case, so I'll tell it more
 fully,' said Ramer. 'He was the librarian in a small university.
 The room was his office-study: quite comfortable, but it had a
 glass wall on one side, through which he could overlook the
 main hall of the library. He was feeling cheerful, for a few years
 back a local magnate had left the university a splendid book-

 collection, and most of his money for the enlargement and        
 upkeep of the library. The library had become important; so        
 had he, and his salary as curator of the endowed collection was
 generous. And after a lot of delay a new wing had been built,      
 and the books transferred. For some time he'd been carefully       
 re-examining the more interesting items. The book to his left      
 was a volume made up of various manuscript-fragments bound       
 together, probably in the sixteenth century, by some collector or
 pilferer.                                                          
   'In the remembered bit of the dream I knew I had been able to
 read the page before he turned over, and that it was not English;
 but I could remember no more than that - except that I was        
 delighted, or he was. Actually it was a leaf, a unique fragment of
 a MS. in very early Welsh, before Geoffrey,(42) about the death of
 Arthur.                                                            
   'He turned to look at the back of the leaf - and he found,      
 stuck between it and the next, a document. It turned out to be a
 will made by the Donor. This book of fragments was one of the 
 last things the magnate had acquired, just before his death. The
 will was later than the proved and executed will by nearly two 
 years. It was in form, and witnessed, and it did not mention the
 university, but directed that the books should be dispersed and
 sold, and the proceeds should go to found a Chair of Basic         
 English in London; while the rest of the estate should go to a     
 nephew, previously passed over.                                    
   'The librarian had known the magnate, and had often been to 
 his house: he had helped in cataloguing his collection. He saw
 that the witnesses were two old servants that had died soon      
 after their master. The emotions are easy to understand: the       
 librarian was proud of his library, a scholar, a lover of real     
 English, and the father of a family; but he was also an honest     
 man. He knew that the Donor had disliked the new Vice-             
 Chancellor very much; also that the nephew was the Donor's         
 next of kin, and poor.'                                            
   'Well, what did he do with the will?' said Jeremy.               
   'On second thoughts he thought it best to stuff it in the old
 oak chest?' said Lowdham.                                          
   'I don't know,' said Ramer. 'Of course it would have been        
 easy and probably quite safe to suppress the will. But I found I
 had never finished the tale properly, though plenty of sequels     
 could be invented. I found one or two ideas, not worked out,       
 floating at the end. One was that the librarian went to the        

   
                                                                    
 Vice-Chancellor,  who  begged  him  to  keep  his  discovery  quiet;
 he  gave  way,  and  was  later  blackmailed by  the Vice-Chancellor
 himself. But evidently that hadn't seemed satisfactory, or  I'd lost
 interest in the whole thing beyond the recorded situation. I  left a
 good many such yarns incomplete at that time.                       
 'There's little  merit in  these stories,  as you  see. But  they do
 illustrate  one  or  two  points   about  fragmentary   memory,  and
 about dream-storywriting. For it is not, of  course, writing,  but a
 sort of realized drama.'                                            
 'Elvish Drama,'(43) Jeremy   interposed;   'there's   something  ab-
 out  it  ...'  But we  had heard  him on  that topic  before. 'Ramer
 has the floor! ' we cried.                                          
 'Well  anyway,'  Ramer  went  on:  'the  whole story  as it  is told
 becomes  visible  and  audible,  and  the  composer  is inside  it -
 though  he  can take  his stand  in some  odd positions  (often high
 up), unless he puts himself into the play, as he can at  any moment.
 The scenes look real, but are  feigned; and  the composition  is not
 complete like a "slice of life": it can be given in selected scenes,
 and  compressed   (like  a   drama).  Also   it  can,   when  you're
 working over it  again or  merely re-inspecting  it, be  reviewed in
 any  order  and at  varying speeds  (like re-reading  or reconsider-
 ing a book). I think that is one,  though only  one, of  the reasons
 why  the memory  of such  dreams, when  any survives  at all,  is so
 often  dissolving  or  jumbled.  The  dreamer  is aware,  of course,
 that he is author  and producer,  at any  rate while  he is  at work
 asleep;  but  he  can  get  far  more  absorbed by  his work  than a
 waking man  is by  any book  or play  that he  is either  writing or
 reading; and he can feel  the emotions  very strongly  - excessively
 sometimes,  because  they  are  heightened  by  the   excitement  of
 combining  authorship  with  an  acting  part;  and  in  memory they
 may   be   exaggerated  still   more  through   getting  dislocated,
 abstracted from the sounds and scenes that would explain them.      
 'The  cases  I've  cited  are  without  any  symbolism.  Just  plain
 emotional   situations.  I   can't  say   much  about   symbolic  or
 mythical  significances.  Of  course  they exist.  And really  I can
 only  put  them  back  one  stage.  For  the  dreamer  can  work  on
 myth, and on fairy-tale, quite  as much  as on  novelette. I  did. I
 do.  And  with  a  more complete  text, so  to speak,  the excerpted
 scenes are often  much easier  to understand,  and the  functions of
 the symbols are plainer - but their final solution recedes.         
 'There   are   good  dreams,   apparently  of   the  sort   I  mean,
 quoted  in  books.  My  own were  not so  good: the  ones I  used to

  remember   when   awake,   that   is;   they   were   only  significant
  fragments,   more   statically   pictorial,   seldom    dramatic,   and
  usually   without  figures of humane shape.(44) Though   I  sometimes
  retained  the  memory  of  significant   words  or   sentences  without
  any  scenery:  such  as  I   am  full   of  sovereign   remedies.  That
  seemed  a  wise  and  satisfactory  utterance. I  have never  yet found
  out why.                                                               
    'Here  are  some  of  my  fragments  of  this  kind.  There   is  the
  empty  throne  on  the  top  of  a  mountain.  There  is a  Green Wave,
  whitecrested,   fluted   and   scallop-shaped   but    vast,   towering
  above  green  fields,  often  with  a  wood  of  trees,  too;  that has
  constantly  appeared.(45) I saw  several  times  a   scene  in   which  a
  wide plain  lay before  the feet  of a  steep ridge  on which  I stood;
  the  opposing  sky  was  immense,  rising  as  a  vertical   wall,  not
  bending  to  a  vault,  ablaze  with  stars  strewn   almost  regularly
  over  all  its  expanse.  That is  an omen  or presage  of catastrophe.
  A  dark  shape  sometimes  passes   across  the   sky,  only   seen  by
  blotting  out  the  stars as  it goes.  Then there  is the  tall, grey,
  round  tower  on  the  sheer  end  of  the  land.  The  Sea  cannot  be
  seen, for it is  too far  below, too  immeasurably far;  but it  can be
  smelt.  And  over  and  over  again,  in  many  stages  of  growth  and
  many  different  lights and  shadows, three  tall trees,  slender, foot
  to  foot  on  a  green  mound,  and  crowned  with  an  embracing  halo
  of blue and gold.'                                                     
    'And what do you think they all mean?' asked Frankley.               
    'It  took  me  quite  a  time,  far  too  long,  to explain  the very
  minor  story  of  the  librarian,'  said  Ramer.  'I  could  not embark
  tonight  on  even  one  of  the  immense   and  ramified   legends  and
  cosmogonies that these belong to.'                                     
    'Not   even   on   the   Green   Wave?'   said Lowdham;(46) but  Ramer
  did not answer him.                                                    
    'Are the Blessed Trees religious symbolism?' asked Jeremy.           
    'No,  not  more  than  all  things  mythical  are; not  directly. But
  one  does  sometimes  see  and  use  symbols  directly  religious,  and
  more  than  symbols.  One  can  pray  in  dreams, or  adore. I  think I
  do  sometimes,  but  there is  no memory  of such  states or  acts, one
  does  not  revisit  such  things.  They're  not really  dreams. They're
  a   third   thing.   They   belong   somewhere   else,  to   the  other
  anchorage,  which  is  not  to  the  Body,   and  differ   from  dreams
  more than Dream from Waking.                                           
    'Dreaming  is  not  Death.  The  mind  is still,  as I  say, anchored
  to the body. It is all the time inhabiting the body, so far as it is in

 anywhere. And it is therefore in Time and Space: attending to
 them. It is meant to be so. But most of you will agree that there
 has probably been a change of plan; and it looks as  if the  cure is
 to  give  us a  dose of  something higher  and more  difficult. Mind
 you,  I'm  only  talking  of  the  seeing and  learning side,  not for
 instance of morality.  But it  would feel  terribly loose  without the
 anchor.  Maybe  with  the  support  of  the  stronger  and   wiser  it
 could  be  celestial;  but  without  them  it  could  be  bitter,  and
 lonely.  A  spiritual meteorite  in the  dark looking  for a  world to
 land on.  I daresay  many of  us are  in for  some lonely  Cold before
 we get back.                                                          
    'But  out  of  some  place  beyond  the region  of dreams,  now and
 again  there  comes  a  blessedness,  and  it  soaks  through  all the
 levels,  and  illumines  all  the  scenes   through  which   the  mind
 passes  out back  into waking,  and so  it flows  out into  this life.
 There  it  lasts  long, but  not for  ever in  this world,  and memory
 cannot reach  its source.  Often we  ascribe it  to the  pictures seen
 on the margin  radiant in  its light,  as we  pass by  and out.  But a
 mountain  far  in  the  North  caught  in  a  slow  sunset is  not the
 Sun.                                                                  
    'But, as I said, it is largely a rest-time, Sleep. As often  as not
 the mind is inactive,  not making  things up  (for instance).  It then
 just inspects what is  presented to  it, from  various sources  - with
 very  varying  degrees  of  interest,  I  may  say.  It's  not  really
 frightfully interested in the digestion and sex items  sent in  by the
 body.'                                                                
    'What  is  presented  to  it,  you  say?'  said  Frankley.  'Do you
 mean  that   some  of   the  presentments   come  from   outside,  are
 shown to it?'                                                         
    'Yes.  For instance:  in a  halting kind  of way  I had  managed to
 get  on  to other  vehicles; and  in dream  I did  it better  and more
 often.  So  other  minds  do  that occasionally  to me.  Their resting
 on me need  not be  noticed, I  think, or  hardly at  all; I  mean, it
 need not affect me  or interfere  with me  at all;  but when  they are
 doing  so,  and  are  in  contact,  then  my  mind  can use  them. The
 two minds don't tell  stories to  one another,  even if  they're aware
 of  the  contact.  They  just  are  in contact  and can learn.*(47) After
                                                                      
 (* See the further  discussion of  this point  on the  following Night
 62.  N.G.  [Only  a  fragment of  that meeting  is preserved,  and the
 only part that could correspond to this note is as follows. ' "How can
 the dreamer distinguish them?" said Ramer. "Well, it seems to  me that)

 all, a wandering mind (if it's at all like mine) will be much more '        
 interested in having a look at what the other knows than in                 
 trying to explain to the stranger the things that are familiar to           
 itself.'                                                                    
    'Evidently if the Notion Club could all meet in sleep, they'ld           
 find things pretty topsy-turvy,' said Lowdham.                              
    'What kind of minds visit you?' asked Jeremy. 'Ghosts?'                  
    'Well, yes of course, ghosts,' said Ramer. 'Not departed                 
 human spirits, though; not in my case, as far as I can tell..'."            
 Beyond that what shall I say? Except that some of them seem to              
 know about things a very long way indeed from here. It is not a             
 common experience with me, at least my awareness of any                     
 contact is not.'                                                            
    'Aren't some of the visitors malicious?' said Jeremy. 'Don't             
 evil minds attack you ever in sleep?'                                       
    'I expect so,' said Ramer. 'They're always on the watch,                 
 asleep or awake. But they work more by deceit than attack. I                
 don't think they are specially active in sleep. Less so, probably.          
 I fancy they find it easier to get at us awake, distracted and not          
 so aware. The body's a wonderful lever for an indirect influence            
 on the mind, and deep dreams can be very remote from its                    
 disturbance. Anyway, I've very little experience of that kind -             
 thank God! But there does come sometimes a frightening... a                 
 sort of knocking at the door: it doesn't describe it, but that'll           
                                                                            
 (the  chief  divisions   are  Perceiving   (free  dreams),   Composing  and
 Working, and Reading.  Each has  a distinctive  quality, and  confusion is
 not as a rule likely to occur,  while it  is going  on; though  the waking
 mind  may  make   mistakes  about   disjointed  memories.   The  divisions
 can  be subdivided,  of course.  Perceiving can  be, for  instance, either
 inspections and visits to real scenes;  or apparitions,  in which  one may
 be  deliberately  visited  by  another  mind  or  spirit.  Reading  can be
 simply going over the  records of  any experiences,  messing about  in the
 mind's  library;  or it  can be  perceiving at  second hand,  using minds,
 inspecting their records.  There's a  danger there,  of course.  You might
 inspect a mind and think you were  looking at  a record  (true in  its own
 terms  of  things  external to  you both),  when it  was really  the other
 mind's  composition,  fiction. There's  lying in  the universe,  some very
 clever lying. I mean, some very  potent fiction  is specially  composed to
 be inspected by others and to deceive, to pass as record;  but it  is made
 for the malefit of Men. If men already lean to lies, or have  thrust aside
 the guardians, they may  read some  very maleficial  stuff. It  seems that
 they do." '])                                                               

 have to do. I think that is one of the ways  in which  that horrible
 sense of fear  arises: a  fear that  doesn't seem  to reside  in the
 remembered dream-situation at all, or wildly exceeds it.             
    'I'm not  much better  off than  anyone else  on this  point, for
 when  that  fear  comes,  it  usually  produces  a  kind  of  dream-
 concussion,  and  a  passage  is erased  round the  true fear-point.
 But  there  are  some  dreams  that can't  be fully  translated into
 sight  and  sound. I  can only  describe them  as resembling  such a
 situation  as  this:  working  alone,   late  at   night,  withdrawn
 wholly into yourself; a noise, or even a nothing  sensible, startles
 - you;  you get  prickles all  over, become  acutely self-conscious,
 uneasy,  aware  of  isolation: how  thin the  walls are  between you
 and the Night.                                                       
    'That  situation  may  have  various  explanations here.  But out
 (or  down)  there  sometimes  the  mind   is  suddenly   aware  that
  ' there is a Night outside, and enemies walk in it: one is trying to
  get in. But there are no walls,' said Ramer  sombrely. 'The  soul is
  dreadfully naked when it  notices it,  when that  is pointed  out to
  it by  something alien.  It has  no armour  on it,  it has  only its
  being. But there is a guardian.                                     
    'He  seems  to  command  precipitate  retreat.  You could,  if you
  were  a  fool,  disobey,  I suppose.  You could  push him  away. You
  could  have got  into a  state in  which you  were attracted  by the
  Fear.  But  I  can't imagine  it. I'ld  rather talk  about something
  else.'                                                              
                                                                     
  'Oh!'  said  Jeremy. 'Don't  stop there!  It's been  mostly digres-
 sions since the meteorite. My fault largely. Won't you go on?'       
  'I should like to, if the Club can bear it. A little longer. I only
 meant: I'ld rather get back to the visions  and the  journeys. Well,
 apart  from  such  dangers  -  which I've  not experienced  often or
 thought much about -  I think  that what  one calls  "interests" are
 sometimes  actually  stimulated,  or  even  implanted  by  contacts.
 As  you  might  get  a  special  interest  in  China,  through being
 visited  by  a  Chinaman,  especially  if  you got  to know  him and
 something of his mind.'                                              
  'Have  you  gone  to  any  Celestial  China?'  asked  Frankley. 'Or
 anywhere  more  interesting  than  your  invented  tales:  something
 more like Emberu?'                                                  
  'I've  never  gone  anywhere,'  said  Ramer,  'as  I've   tried  to
 explain. But I suppose I  could say  that I've  been in  places, and
 I'm  still  busy trying  to sort  out my  observations. If  you mean

 places off the Earth, other heavenly bodies: yes, I've seen several        
 besides Emberu, either through other minds, or by vehicles and ':         
 records; possibly by using light.* Yes, I've been to several               
 strange places.                                                            
   'The one I told you about, Green Emberu,(48) where there was                
 a kind of organic life, rich but wholesome and longeval: that was          
 where I landed when I first fell wide asleep. It seems a long while        
 ago now. It is still very vivid to me, or was until last week.' He         
 sighed.                                                                    
   'I cannot remember the original again now, somehow; not                  
 when awake. I've an idea that writing these memories up,                   
 re-telling them in waking life and terms, blurs or erases them in -        
 waking memory; overlays them into palimpsests. One can't                   
 have it both ways. Either one must bear the pains of not '.                
 communicating what one greatly desires to share, or one must,              
 remain content with the translation. I wrote that account for              
 you, and all I'll have now is that, and stirrings and faint traces of      
 what lies beneath: the vision of Emberu!                                  
   'It's the same with Ellor. Ellor!' he murmured. 'Ellor Eshur-            
 izel! I drew it once in words as best I could, and now it is words.        
 That immense plain with its silver floor all delicately patterned;         
 the shapely cliffs and convoluted hills. The whole world was               
 designed with such loveliness, not of one thought, but of many:            
 in harmony; though in all its shapes there was nowhere any to              
 recall what we call organic life. There "inanimate nature" was             
 orderly, symmetrical, unconfused, yet intricate, beyond my                 
 mind's unravelling, in its flowing modulations and recollections:          
 a garden, a paradise of water, metal, stone, like the interwoven           
 variations of vast natural orders of flowers. Eshurizel! Blue,             
 white, silver, grey, blushing to rich purples were its themes, in          
 which a glint of red was like an apocalyptic vision of essential           
 Redness, and a gleam of gold was like the glory of the Sun. And            
 there was music, too. For there were many streams, water abun-             
 dant - or some fairer counterpart, less wayward, more skilled in           
                                                                           
  (* Jones says that Ramer explained: 'I think that as  the seeing  in free
 dream is not done with eyes, it is not subject to optical laws.  But light
 can be used,  like any  other mode  of being.  The mind  can, as  it were,
 travel back up-stream, as it  can go  back into  the historical  record of
 other things. But it seems tiring: it requires a great energy  and desire.
 One can't do it often; nor can one go  to an  indefinite distance  of Time
 and Space.' N.G.)                                                          

 the  enchantment  of  light   and  in   the  making   of  innumerable
 sounds. There the great  waterfall of  Oshul-kullosh fell  down its
 three hundred steps  in a  sequence of  notes and  chords of  which I
 can  only  hear  faint  echoes  now.  I  think  the  En-keladim dwell
 there.'(49)                                                         
   'The En-keladim?' asked Jeremy softly. 'Who are they?'            
   Ramer  did  not  answer.  He  was  staring  at  the  fire.  After a
 pause  he  went  on.  'And  there  was  another world,  further away,
 that I came to later. I won't say  very much.  I hope  to look  on it
 again,  and  longer:  on  Minal-zidar  the golden,  absolutely silent
 and  quiescent,  a  whole  small  world of  one single  perfect form,
 complete,  imperishable  in  Time,  finished,  at  peace, a  jewel, a
 visible  word,  a  realization  in  material  form  of  contemplation
 and adoration, made by what adoring mind I cannot tell.'            
   'Where is Minal-zidar?' asked Jeremy quietly.                     
   Ramer   looked   up.   'I   don't   know   where   or   when,'   he
 answered.  'The  travelling  mind  does not  seem very  interested in
 such points, or  forgets to  try and  find out  in the  absorption of
 beholding. So I have very little to go on. I did not look at  the sky
 of  Minal-zidar.  You  know,  if  you  were  looking  at the  face of
 somebody  radiant  with  the  contemplation  of a  great beauty  or a
 holiness, you'ld be held by the face for  a very  long time,  even if
 you   were  great   enough  (or   presumptuous  enough)   to  suppose
 that  you  could see  for yourself.  Reflected beauty  like reflected
 light  has  a  special loveliness  of its  own -  or we  shouldn't, I
 suppose, have been created.                                         
   'But  in  Ellor  there  seemed  to be  lights in  the sky,  what we
 should  call  stars,  not  suns  or  moons,  and  yet many  were much
 larger and brighter than any  star is  here. I  am no  astronomer, so
 I  don't  know  what   that  may   imply.  But   I  suppose   it  was
 somewhere far away, beyond the Fields of Arbol.'(50)                
   'Fields  of  Arbol?'  said  Lowdham.  'I  seem  to have  heard that
 before.  Where  do  you   get  these   names  from?   Whose  language
 are  they?   Now  that   would  really   interest  me,   rather  than
 geometry  and  landscape.  I  should use  my chances,  if ever  I got
 into such a state, for language-history.'(51)                        
   'Arbol  is  "Old  Solar"  for  the  Sun,'  said  Jeremy.(52) 'Do  you
 mean,  Ramer,  that  you  can  get  back  to  Old  Solar,   and  that
 Lewis' did not merely invent those words?'                          
                                                                    
  {* Referring to Out of the  Silent Planet  and Perelandra,  which we
 had all read some time ago, under pressure from Jeremy (while  he was}

   'Old  Solar?'  said   Ramer.  'Well,   no.  But   of  course   I  was
 quoting  Lewis,  in  saying  Fields of  Arbol. As  to the  other names,
 that's  another  matter.   They're  as   firmly  associated   with  the
 places  and  visions  in  my  mind  as  bread  is  with  Bread  in your
 minds,  and  mine.  But  I  think  they're  my  names  in  a  sense  in
 which bread is not.*                                                   
   'I  daresay  it  depends   on  personal   tastes  and   talents,  but
 although  I'm  a philologist,  I think  I should  find it  difficult to
 learn  strange  languages  in  a free  dream or  vision. You  can learn
 in dreams, of course; but in  the case  of real  visions of  new things
 you  don't  talk,  or  don't  need  to:  you get  the meaning  of minds
 (if  you  meet any)  more directly.  If I  had a  vision of  some alien
 people,  even  if  I  heard them  talking, their  sense would  drown or
 blur  my  reception  of  their  sounds;  and  when  I  woke  up,  if  I
 remembered  what  had  been  said,  and  tried to  relate it,  it would
 come out in English.'                                                  
   'But  that  wouldn't  apply  to  pure  names,  proper   nouns,  would
 it?' said Lowdham.                                                     
   'Yes,  it  would,'  said  Ramer. 'The  voice might  say Ellor,  but I
 should  get  a  glimpse  of  the  other  mind's  vision  of  the place.
 Even  if  a  voice  said  bread  or  water,  using  <common  nouns>,  I
 should  be  likely  to get,  as the  core of  a vague  cloud (including
 tastes and  smells), some  particular glimpse  of a  shaped loaf,  or a
 running spring, or a glass filled with transparent liquid.             
   'I  daresay   that  you,   Arry,  are   more  phonetical,   and  more
 sound-sensitive  than  I  am,  but  I  think  even  you  would  find it
 difficult  to  keep  your  ear-memory  of  the  alien  words  unblurred
                                                                       
 {writing his book on Imaginary  Lands). See  note to  Night 60,  p. 164.
 Jeremy was an admirer  of the  Public-house School  (as he  himself had
 dubbed them), and soon after he became a Lecturer he  gave a  series of
 lectures with that  title. Old  Professor Jonathan  Gow had  puffed and
 boggled at the title; and J.  had offered  to change  it to  Lewis and
 Carolus,  or  the  Oxford  Looking-glass,  or  Jack and  the Beanstalk;
 which did not  smooth matters.  Outside the  Club J.  had not  had much
 success in reviving interest in these people; though the little book of
 anonymous  memoirs  In the  Thirsty Forties,  or the  Inns and  Outs of
 Oxford attracted some notice when it came out in 1980. N.G.}            
                                                                       
 (* Lowdham  says  that  Ramer  told  him  after  the  meeting  that  he
 thought  Minal-zidar  meant  Poise  in  Heaven;  but Emberu  and Ellor
 were just names. Eshurizel was a title, signifying in an untranslatable
 way  some  blend  or  scheme  of  colours;  but   Oshul-kullosh  meant
 simply Falling Water. N.G.)                                            

 by  the impact  of the  direct meaning  in such  dreams. If  you did,
 then  very  likely  it would  be only  the sounds  and not  the sense
 that you'ld remember.                                               
   'And  yet...  especially  far  away outside  this world  of Speech,
 where  no  voices  are  heard,  and  other  naming  has  not  reached
 ...  I seem  to hear  fragments of  language and  names that  are not
 of this country.'                                                   
   'Yes,  yes,'  said  Lowdham.  'That's  just  what  I  want  to hear
 about. What language is it? You say not Old Solar?'                 
   'No,'  said  Ramer,  'because  there  isn't  any  such  tongue. I'm
 sorry  to  disagree  with your  authorities, Jeremy;  but that  is my
 opinion. And  by the  way, speaking  as a  philologist, I  should say
 that  the  treatment  of  language,  intercommunication, in  tales of
 travel through Space  or Time  is a  worse blemish,  as a  rule, than
 the cheap vehicles  that we  were discussing  last week.  Very little
 thought or attention is ever  given to it.(53) I think Arry  will agree
 with me there.'                                                     
   'I do,' said Lowdham,  'and that's  why I'm  still waiting  to hear
 where and how you got your names.'                                  
   'Well,  if  you really  want to  know what  these names  are,' said
 Ramer, 'I think they're my native language.'                        
   'But  that  is   English,  surely?'   said  Lowdham.   'Though  you
 were born in Madagascar, or some strange place.'                    
   'No,  you  ass!  Magyarorszag,  that   is  Hungary,'   said  Ramer.
 'But  anyway,  English  is   not  my   native  language.   Nor  yours
 either.  We  each  have  a  native  language  of our  own -  at least
 potentially.  In  working-dreams   people  who   have  a   bent  that
 way  may  work  on  it,  develop  it.  Some,  many  more  than you'ld
 think, try to  do the  same in  waking hours  - with  varying degrees
 of  awareness. It  may be  no more  than giving  a personal  twist to
 the  shape  of  old  words;  it  may  be the  invention of  new words
 (on  received models,  as a  rule); or  it may  come to  the elabora-
 tion  of  beautiful  languages of  their own  in private:  in private
 only because other people are naturally not very interested.        
   'But  the  inherited,  first-learned,  language  - what  is usually
 mis-called "native" - bites in early and deep. It is  hardly possible
 to  escape  from  its  influence.  And  later-learned  languages also
 affect the  natural style,  colouring a  man's linguistic  taste; the
 earlier  learned  the  more  so.  As  Magyar  does  mine,  strongly -
 but  all  the  more strongly,  I think,  because it  is in  many ways
 closer  to  my  own   native  predilections   than  English   is.  In
 language-invention,  though  you  may  seem  to  build  only  out  of

 material taken  from other  acquired tongues,  it is  those elements  ]
 most near to your native style that you select.                        
   'In  such  rare  dreams  as  I  was  thinking  about, far  away by
 oneself  in  voiceless  countries,  then  your  own  native language
 bubbles up, and makes new names for strange new things.'               
   'Voiceless  countries?'  said  Jeremy.  'You  mean  regions  where
 there is nothing like our human language?'                             
   'Yes,'  said  Ramer.  'Language  properly  so  called, as  we know
 it on Earth - token (perceived by sense) plus significance  (for the
 mind)  -  that  is  peculiar  to  an  embodied  mind;  an  essential
 characteristic, the prime characteristic of  the fusion  of incarna-
 tion.  Only  hnau,  to  use  Jeremy's  Lewisian  word  again,  would
 have  language.   The  irrational   couldn't,  and   the  unembodied
 couldn't or wouldn't.'                                                 
   'But spirits are often recorded as speaking,' said Frankley.         
   'I know,'  Ramer answered.  'But I  wonder if  they really  do, or
 if they  make you  hear them,  just as  they can  also make  you see
 them  in  some  appropriate  form,  by  producing a  direct impress-
 ion on  the mind.  The clothing  of this  naked impression  in terms
 intelligible to your  incarnate mind  is, I  imagine, often  left to
 you,  the  receiver.  Though  no doubt  they can  cause you  to hear
 words and to see shapes  of their  own choosing,  if they  will. But
 in any case the  process would  be the  reverse of  the normal  in a
 way,  outwards,  a  translation  from   meaning  into   symbol.  The
 audible  and visible  results might  be hardly  distinguishable from
 the  normal,  even  so,  except  for  some  inner   emotion;  though
 there is, in fact, sometimes a perceptible difference of sequence.'
   'I  don't  know  what  spirits  can  do,'  said  Lowdham;  'but  I
 don't see  why they  cannot make  actual sounds  (like the  Eldil in
 Perelandra): cause the air to vibrate  appropriately, if  they wish.
 They seem able to affect "matter" directly.'                           
   'I dare say  they can,'  said Ramer.  'But I  doubt if  they would
 wish  to,  for  such  a  purpose.  Communication  with  another mind
 is  simpler  otherwise.  And  the  direct  attack  seems  to  me  to
 account  better for  the feelings  human beings  often have  on such
 occasions. There is often a shock, a sense of  being touched  in the
 quick.  There  is  movement  from  within  outwards,  even   if  one
 feels that the cause  is outside,  something other,  not you.  It is
 quite  different  in quality  from the  reception of  sound inwards,
 even  though  it  may  well  happen  that  the   thing  communicated
 directly is not strange or alarming, while many  things said  in the
 ordinary incarnate fashion are tremendous.'                            

                               
                                                                     
   'You  speak  as  if  you  knew,'  said  Jeremy.  'How  do  you know
 all this?'                                                           
   'No,  I  don't  claim  to  know  anything  about  such  things, and
 I'm not laying down the law. But I feel it. I  have been  visited, or
 spoken  to,'  Ramer  said gravely.  'Then, I  think, the  meaning was
 direct,   immediate,  and   the  imperfect   translation  perceptibly
 later: but it was audible. In many  accounts of  other such  events I
 seem to recognize experiences similar, even when far greater.'       
   'You make it all sound like hallucination,' said Frankley.         
   'But  of  course,'  said  Ramer. 'They  work in  a similar  way. If
 you  are  thinking  of  diseased  conditions,  then  you  may believe
 that  the  cause  is  nothing  external; and  all the  same something
 (even  if  it  is  only  some  department  of   the  body)   must  be
 affecting  the  mind  and  making  it  translate  outwards.   If  you
 believe in possession or the attack of evil spirits, then there is no
 difference  in  process,  only  the  difference  between  malice  and
 good-will,  lying  and  truth.  There  is  Disease  and Lying  in the
 world, and not only among men.'                                      
                                                                     
   There  was  a  pause.  'We've  got  rather  away  from  Old  Solar,
 haven't we?' said Guildford at last.                                 
   'No,  I  think  what  has  been said  is very  much to  the point,'
 said  Ramer.  'Anyway,  if  there  is,  or even  was, any  Old Solar,
 then  either Lewis  or I  or both  of us  are wrong  about it.  For I
 don't get any such names as Arbol or Perelandra or Glund.(54)        
 I  get  names  much  more  consonant  with  the  forms  I  devise, if
 I make up words or names for a story composed when awake.            
   'I  think  there  might  be  an  Old Human,  or Primitive  Adamic -
 certainly  was  one,  though  it's  not  so  certain  that   all  our
 languages   derive  from   it  in   unbroken  continuity;   the  only
 undoubted   common   inheritance   is   the   aptitude   for   making
 words,  the  compelling  need  to  make  them.  But  the   Old  Human
 could  not  possibly  be  the  same  as the  Prime Language  of other
 differently   constituted   rational   animals,   such   as   Lewis's
 Hrossa.(55) Because   those   two   embodiments,   Men    and   Hrossa,
 are quite  different, and  the physical  basis, which  conditions the
 symbol-forms,   would   be  ab   origine  different.   The  mind-body
 blends   would   have  quite   different  expressive   flavours.  The
 expression  might  not  take  vocal,  or  even  audible form  at all.
 Without   symbols  you   have  no   language;  and   language  begins
 only with incarnation and not before  it. But,  of course,  if you're
 going  to  confuse  language  with  forms  of  thought, then  you can

 perhaps  talk  about Old  Solar. But  why not  Old Universal  in that
 case?(56)                                                           
   'However,  I  don't  think  the  question  of  Old Solar  arises. I
 don't  think  there are  any other  hnau but  ourselves in  the whole
 solar system.'                                                      
   'How can you possibly know that?' asked Frankley.                
   'I  think  I  know  it by  looking,' Ramer  answered. 'I  only once
 anywhere saw what I took  to be  traces of  such creatures,  but I'll
 tell you about that in a minute.                                    
   'I'll grant you that there is a chance of error. I have  never been
 very interested in people. That's why  when I  first began  to write,
 and  tried  to  write  about people  (because that  seemed to  be the
 thing  done,  and  the  only thing  that was  much read),  my efforts
 were  so  footling, as  you see,  even in  dream. I'm  now abnormally
 little  interested  in  people  in  general, though  I can  be deeply
 interested in this or  that unique  individual; and  the fewer  I see
 the  better  I'm  pleased.  I  haven't  scoured  the Fields  of Arbol
 seeking  for  them!  I  suppose  in  dream  I  might have  ignored or
 overlooked them.  But I  don't think  it's at  all likely.  Because I
 like  solitude  in a  forest and  trees not  manhandled, it  does not
 follow  that  I  shall  overlook  the  evidence  of  men's work  in a
 wood, or never notice any men I meet there. Much the reverse!       
   'It's  true  that  I've  not  seen  the  solar  planets  often, nor
 explored   them   thoroughly:   that's   hardly  necessary   in  most
 cases, if  you're looking  for any  conceivable organic  life resemb-
 ling  what  we  know.  But  what I  have seen  convinces me  that the
 whole  system,  save  Earth,  is  altogether  barren (in  our sense).
 Mars  is  a  horrible  network  of  deserts   and  chasms;   Venus  a
 boiling  whirl  of  wind  and  steam  above  a   storm-racked  twilit
 core.  But  if you  want to  know what  it looks  and sounds  like: a
 smoking  black  Sea,  rising like  Everest, raging  in the  dusk over
 dim   drowned   mountains,   and   sucking  back   with  a   roar  of
 cataracts like the  end of  Atlantis -  then go  there! It  is magni-
 ficent, but it isn't  Peace. To  me indeed  very refreshing  - though
 that's  too  small  a word.  I can't  describe the  invigoration, the
 acceleration of intellectual interest, in getting away from  all this
 tangle of ant-hill  history! I  am not  a misanthrope.  To me  it's a
 more  inspiring  and  exacting,  a  much more  responsible, perilous,
 lonely  venture:  that  Men  are  in  fact  alone in  EN. In EN.(57) For
 that is the name to me  of this  sunlit archipelago  in the  midst of
 the Great Seas.                                                     
   'We  can  cast  our own  shadows out  on to  the other  islands, if

 we  like.  It's  a   good  and   lawful  form   of  invention;   but  an
 invention  it  is  and  proceeds  out  of  Earth, the  Talkative Planet.
 The  only  hnau  ever  to  dwell  in  red  Gormok  or   in  cloud-bright
 Zingil (58) will be put there by us.'                                        
   'What  reason  have  you  for  thinking  that  you've  seen   them  at
 all, and not other places in remoter Space? asked Frankley.(59)         
   'Well,   I  went   to  them   in  a   more  questioning   mood,'  said
 Ramer,  'and  I  looked  for  such  signs  as  I could  understand. They
 were  planets.  They  went  round the  Sun, or  a sun,  in more  or less
 the  ways  and  times  the books  say, so  far as  I could  observe. And
 the  further  heavens  had  much  the  same   pattern,  just   the  same
 to  my  little   knowledge,  as   they  have   here.  And   old  Enekol,
 Saturn,(60) is   unmistakable,.  though   I  suppose   it  is   not  quite
 impossible that he has his counterpart elsewhere.'                      
   'Won't   you   describe   what   you   saw   there?'   said  Frankley.
 'I  once  tried  to  describe  a  Saturnian landscape  myself,*(61) and I
 should like to know if you support me.'                                 
   'I  do,  more  or  less,' said  Ramer. 'I  thought so  at once  when I
 landed  there,  and  I  wondered  if  you  had  been  there too,  or had
 heard   some  reliable   news  -   though  you   may  not   remember  it
 when  awake. But  it is  getting late.  I am  tired, and  I am  sure you
 all are.'                                                               
   'Well,   something   to   wind   up   with!'   Jeremy   begged.   'You
 haven't really told us very much news yourself yet.'                    
                                                                        
   'I'll  try,'  said  Ramer.  'Give  me  another drink,  and I'll  do my
 best.  As  I  haven't  had  time,  when  awake,  either  to  name  or to
 translate  half  of  the  shapes  and sensations,  it is  impossible for
 me  to  do  more  than  suggest  the thing.  But I'll  try and  tell you
 about  one  adventure  among  my   deep  dreams:   or  high   ones,  for
 this  occurred  on  one  of  the longest  journeys I  have ever  had the
 opportunity  or  the  courage  for.   It  illustrates   several  curious
 things about this sort of venture.                                      
   'Remember    that    dream-sequences    dealing    with   astronomical
 exploration  or  space-travel  are  not  very  frequent  in  my  collec-
 tion.  Nor  in  any  one's,  I  should  think.  The  chances  of  making
 such  voyages  are  not  frequent;  and  they're...  well,  they  take a
 bit  of  daring.  I  should  guess  that  most  people  never   get  the
 chance  and  never  dare.  It  is  related  in  some  way to  desire, no
                                                                        
 (* In  The  Cronic  Star.  This  appeared  in  his  volume Feet  of Lead
 (1980). One of the critics said that this title, taken with the author's
 name, said all that was necessary. N.G.)                                

 doubt;  though  which comes  first, chance  or wish,  is hard  to say
 - if there's any real question of priority in such matters.  I mean:
 my  ancient  attraction  to  waking  stories about  space-travel, was
 it a sign  that I  was really  already engaged  on exploration,  or a
 cause of it?                                                            
   'In any case  I have  only made  a few  journeys, as  far as  I yet
 know;  few,  that  is,  compared  with  other  activities.   My  mind
 "adream"  is  perhaps  not  daring  enough  to fit waking  desire; or
 perhaps  the interests  I'm most  conscious of  awake are  not really
 fundamentally  so  dominant.  My  mind   actually  seems   fonder  of
 mythical romances,  its own  and others'.  I could  tell you  a great
 deal about Atlantis, for  instance; though  that is  not its  name to
 me.'                                                                    
   'What  is  its  name?'  asked  Lowdham  sharply,   leaning  forward
 with   a   curious   eagerness;   but  Ramer   did  not   answer  the
 question.                                                               
   'It's  connected  with  that  Fluted  Wave,'(62) he said.,  'and  with
 another  symbol:  the  Great  Door,  shaped  like  a  Greek  TT  with
 sloping sides.(63) And I've  seen   the  En-keladim,   my  En-keladim,
 playing  one  of  their  Keladian  plays:  the  Drama  of  the Silver
 Tree:(64) sitting round in a circle  and singing  in that  strange, long,
 long,  but  never-wearying,  uncloying  music,   endlessly  unfolding
 out of  itself, while  the song  takes visible  life among  them. The
 Green  Sea  flowers  in foam,  and the  Isle rises  and opens  like a
 rose in the midst of it. There the Tree opens  the starred  turf like
 a  silver  spear,  and  grows,  and  there  is a  New Light;  and the
 leaves  unfold  and  there  is Full  Light; and  the leaves  fall and
 there  is a  Rain of  Light. Then  the Door  opens -  but no!  I have
 no words for that Fear.'                                                
   He stopped suddenly.  'That's the  only thing  I've ever  seen,' he
 said,  'that  I'm not  sure whether  it's invented or not.(65) I expect
 it's a composition  - out  of desire,  fancy, waking  experience, and
 "reading"  (asleep  and  awake).  But  there  is  another ingredient.
 Somewhere,  in  some  place  or  places,  something  like  it  really
 happens, and I have seen it, far off perhaps or faintly.                
   'My  En-keladim   I  see   in  humane   forms  of   surpassing  and
 marvellously varied beauty.  But I  guess that  their true  types, if
 such  there  be,  are  invisible,  unless  they embody  themselves by
 their  own  will,  entering  into  their own  works because  of their
 love for  them. That  is, they  are elvish.  But very  different from
 Men's  garbled  tales of  them; for  they are  not lofty  indeed, yet
 they are not fallen.'                                                  i

   'But   wouldn't   you   reckon   them   as   hnau?'   asked   Jeremy.
 'Don't they have language?'                                           
   'Yes,   I   suppose   so.   Many   tongues,'   said  Ramer.   'I  had
 forgotten  them.  But  they  are  not  hnau;  they are  not bound  to a
 given  body,  but  make  their  own,  or  take   their  own,   or  walk
 silent  and  unclad  without  sense  of   nakedness.  And   their  lan-
 guages  shift  and  change  as  light  on  the  water  or  wind  in the
 trees.  But  yes,  perhaps  Ellor  Eshurizel  -  its  meaning  I cannot
 seize, so swift and fleeting is it - perhaps that is  an echo  of their
 voices.  Yes,  I  think  Ellor  is  one  of  their  worlds:  where  the
 governance,  the  making  and  ordering,  is  wholly  in the  charge of
 minds,  relatively  small,  that  are  not  embodied  in  it,  but  are
 devoted  to  what  we  call  matter,  and  especially  to  its  beauty.
 Even  here  on  Earth  they  may  have  had,   may  have   still,  some
 habitation and some work to do.                                       
   'But  I'm  still  wandering.  I must  go back  to the  adventure that
 I  promised  to  tell.  Among  my  few  travel-sequences  I  recall one
 that  seemed  to  be  a  long  inspection (on  several occasions)  of a
 different  solar  system.  So  there  does  appear to  be at  least one
 other  star  with  attendant  planets.(66) I thought  that as  I wandered
 there I came to a  little world,  of our  Earth's size  more or  less -
 though, as you'll see, size is very difficult to judge; and it  was lit
 by  a  sun,  rather  larger  than  ours,  but  dimmed.  The  stars  too
 were  faint,  but  they seemed  to be  quite differently  arranged; and
 there  was  a  cloud  or white  whorl in  the sky  with small  stars in
 its  folds:  a  nebula perhaps,  but much  larger than  the one  we can
 see in Andromeda. Tekel-Mirim (67) it was, a land of crystals.             
   'Whether  the  crystals  were  really  of  such  great  size   -  the
 greatest  were  like  the  Egyptian  pyramids  -  it  is  hard  to say.
 Once  away  from  Earth   it  is   not  easy   to  judge   such  things
 without at least your  body to  refer to.  For there  is no  scale; and
 what  you  do,  I  suppose,  is to  focus your  attention, up  or down,
 according  to  what  aspect  you  wish  to  note.  And  so  it  is with
 speed.   Anyway,   there   on   Tekel-Mirim   it   was   the  inanimate
 matter,  as  we  should  say,  that  was   moving  and   growing:  into
 countless  crystalline  formations.  Whether  what   I  took   for  the
 air of the planet was really  air, or  water, or  some other  liquid, I
 am  not  able  to  say;  though   perhaps  the   dimming  of   sun  and
 stars suggests that it was not air.  I may  have been  on the  floor of
 a  wide  shallow  sea,  cool  and  still.  And  there  I  could observe
 what was going on: to me absorbingly interesting.                     
   'Pyramids   and    polyhedrons   of    manifold   forms    and   sym-

                                     
                                                                      
 metries  were  growing  like  ...  like  geometric  mushrooms,  and
 growing  from   simplicity  to   complexity;  from   single  beauty
 amalgamating  into  architectural  harmonies  of  countless  facets
 and reflected lights. And the  speed of  growth seemed  very swift.
 On  the  summit  of  some  tower  of   conjoined  solids   a  great
 steeple, like a spike of greenish ice, would shoot out: it  was not
 there and then it was there; and hardly  was it  set before  it was
 encrusted with spikelets in bristling lines  of many  pale colours.
 In  places  forms  were  achieved  like  snowflakes under  a micro-
 scope, but enormously  larger: tall  as trees  some were.  In other
 places there were forms severe, majestic, vast and simple.            
  'For  a  time  I  could  not  count  I  watched  the  "matter"  on  'j
 Tekel-Mirim  working  out  its  harmonies  of inherent  design with
 speed and  precision, spreading,  interlocking, towering,  on facet
 and angle building frets and arabesques  and frosted  laces, jewels
 on  which arrows  of pale  fire glanced  and splintered.  But there
 was  a  limit  to  growth,  to  building  and  annexation. Suddenly
 disintegration would set in - no,  not that,  but reversal:  it was
 not  ugly  or  regrettable.  A  whole  epic  of  construction would
 recede, going back through shapeliness, by  stages as  beautiful as
 those through which  it had  grown, but  wholly different,  till it
 ceased.  Indeed it  was difficult  to choose  whether to  fix one's
 attention   on   some  marvellous   evolution,  or   some  graceful
 devolving into - nothing visible.                                     
  'Only  part  of  the  matter  on   Tekel-Mirim  was   doing  these
 things (for "doing" seems our only  word for  it): the  matter that
 was  specially  endowed;  a  scientist would  say (I  suppose) that
 was  of  a  certain  chemical  nature  and  condition.  There  were
 floors, and walls, and mighty circles of smooth cliff,  valleys and
 vast  abysses,  that  did  not  change their  shape nor  move. Time
 stood still for them, and for the crystals waxed and waned.           
  'I  don't  know  why  I visited  this strange  scene, for  awake I
 have  never  studied  crystallography, not  even though  the vision
 of  Tekel-Mirim  has  often  suggested   that  I   should.  Whether
 things go in Tekel-Mirim  exactly as  they do  here, I  cannot say.
 All the same I wonder still what on  earth or  in the  universe can
 be  meant  by  saying,  as  was  said  a  hundred  years   ago  (by
 Huxley, I believe)  that a  crystal is  a "symmetrical  solid shape
 assumed  spontaneously  by  lifeless  matter".(68) The free will of
 the lifeless is a dark saying. But  it may  have some  meaning: who
 can tell? For we have little understanding of either term.  I leave
 it there. I merely record, or try to record, the events I  saw, and

  they   were   too   marvellous   while   I  could   see  them   in  far
  Tekel-Mirim   for   speculation.   I'm   afraid   I've  given   you  no
  glimpse of them.                                                       
    'It  was  on  one  occasion,  returning  -  or  should  I  say "back-
  dreaming"?  -  from  Tekel-Mirim,  that  I   had  the   adventure  that
  I'll close with. Speed, as I said, like size is very difficult to judge
  with  no  measure  but  vague  memories   of  earth-events   far  away.
  Maybe  I  had   been  speeding   up,  that   is  moving   quickly  down
  Time  in  Tekel-Mirim, so  as to  get as  long a  story or  sequence as
  I  could.  In  Tekel-Mirim  I  must  have  been  not  only far  away in
  Space  but  in  a  time  somewhat  before  my  earth-time, or  I should
  have   overrun   the   point   for   my  withdrawal.   For  I   had  to
  withdraw  on  that  visit   earlier  than   my  body   usually  summons
  me.  A  determination  of  my  own will,  set before  I went  to sleep,
  had  fixed  a  time  of  waking,  for  an  appointment.  And  the  hour
  was coming near.                                                       
    'It  is  no  good  harking  back,  when  you  do  not want  to repeat
  but  to  see  on;  and  so  I withdrew,  with my  mind still  so filled
  with  the  wonder  of  Tekel-Mirim  that  I  could  not   even  adream,
  and  still  less  awake,  recall  the  transitions  or  the   modes  of
  travelling,  until  my  attention  was   loosened  from   my  recollec-
  tions  and  I  found  that  I  was  looking  at  a twinkling  sphere. I
  knew that I  had seen  it, or  something like  it, on  one of  my other
  journeys;  and  I  was  tempted  to  examine  it  again.  But  time was
  running  on,  and  dimly,  like  a  remote  shred  of  a dream  (to one
  awake)  I  was  aware  of  my  body  beginning  to   stir  unwillingly,
  feeling  the  returning  will.  So  there  and  then  I  "harked  back"
  suddenly  with  as  great  an  effort  as  I could  manage; and  at the
  same time I closed in to look for a while at this strange ball.        
    'I   found  a   horrible  disorderly   shifting  scene:   a  shocking
  contrast  to  Tekel-Mirim,  and  after   Emberu  and   Ellor  intoler-
  able.  Dark  and  light  flickered  to  and  fro  over  it.  Winds were
  whirling   and   eddying,   and   vapours   were   rising,   gathering,
  flashing  by  and  vanishing  too  quick for  anything to  be discerned
  but a  general ragged  swirl. The  land, if  that is  what it  was, was
  shifting  too,  like  sands  in  a  tide,  crumbling and  expanding, as
  the  sea  galloped  in  and  out  among  the  unsteady  edges   of  the
  coast.  There  were  wild   growths,  woods   you  could   hardly  say;
  trees   springing   up   like   mushrooms,   and  crashing   and  dying
  before  you  could  determine  their  shapes.  Everything  was   in  an
  abominable flux.                                                       
    'I  came  still  closer.  The  effort to  attend carefully  seemed to

                                           
                                                                    
 steady  things.  The  flicker   of  light   and  dark   became  much
 slower;  and  I  saw something  that was  definitely a  small river,
 though  it  waggled  a  little,  and  broadened  and  narrowed  as I
 looked at it. The trees and woods  in its  valley held  their shapes
 now for some time. Then "Hnau  at last!"  I said  to myself;  for in
 the  vale,  down  by  the  river  among  the  trees  I  saw  shapes,
 unmistakable  shapes  of  houses. At first I  had thought  that they
 were  some  kind  of  quick-growing  fungus,  until  I  looked  more
 steadily.  But  now  I  saw  that  they  were  buildings,  but still
 fungus-buildings,  appearing  and  then falling  to pieces;  and yet
 their agglomeration was spreading.                                  
  'I was still rather high above it all, higher than a man in  a very
 tall tower; but I could see that  the place  was crawling  or rather
 boiling  with  hnau  of  some  sort -  if they  were not  very large
 ant-creatures,   endowed   with   amazing   speed:   darting  about,
 alone  or  in  bunches,  bewilderingly;  always  more  and  more  of
 them. Often  they went  shooting in  or out  like bullets  along the
 tracks  that  led  to  the horrible,  crumbling, outgrowing  sore of
 house-shapes.                                                       
  ' "This really is frightful!" I thought. "Is this a diseased world,
 or is  it a  planet really  inhabited by  may-fly men  in a  sort of
 tumultuous  mess?  What's  come  to  the land?  It's losing  most of
 its  hair,  going bald,  and the  house-ringworm goes  on spreading,
 and starting up in fresh patches. There's no  design, or  reason, or
 pattern in it." And yet, even as I said this, I began  to see,  as I
 looked still more  carefully, that  there were  in fact  some shapes
 that  did  suggest crude  design, and  a few  now held  together for
 quite a long while.                                                 
  'Soon  I  noticed  down  by  the  river,  near  the  heart  of  the
 agglomeration,   where   I  had   observed  it   beginning,  several
 constructions  that  endured.  Two  or  three  had  some  real form,
 not  without  an  echo  of  beauty  even  to  one fresh  from Tekel-
 Mirim.  They  continued  standing,  while   the  ringworm   ate  its
 way further and further around them.                                
  ' "I must have a really close look," I thought;  "for if  there are
 hnau  here,  it  is  important,  however  nasty they  may be;  and I
 must take some notes.  Just a  look, and  then I  must be  off. Now,
 what  is  that  thing  like  a  great  fluted  mushroom with  an odd
 top?  It  hasn't  been  here  as long  as some  of the  other larger
 things." With that I came right down.                               
  'Of course, if one really  concentrates on  things -  especially to
 observe their static forms, not their changes, as I'd been  doing in

 Tekel-Mirim - then they tend to halt, as it were. The speed  is in
 you, when you're not tied to a time-clock of a body. So as  I bent
 my attention, I lost all the acceleration  that the  excitement of
 Tekel-Mirim  had  induced.  Things  stood  still  for   a  moment,
 rock-hard.                                                       
   'I  was  gazing at  the Camera.(69) I was  about thirty  feet above
 the ground  in Radcliffe  Square. I  suppose I  had at  first been
 seeing the Thames Valley, at a  huge speed;  and then,  slower and
 slower, Oxford since  I don't  know when,  since the  beginning of
 the University probably.                                         
   'The clock on Saint Mary's struck  7 a.m.  - and  I woke  up for
 my appointment. To go to  Mass. It  was the  morning of  the feast
 of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, June 29th  1986, by  our reckoning.
 That's all for tonight! I must go to bed.'                       
   'Well, I  must be  off too,'  said Cameron.  'Thanks for  a very
 enterrtaining evening!'                                          
                                                                 
   MGR. NC. PF. AAL. RD. WTJ. RS. JJ. JJR.                        

                               NOTES.                                      
                                                                          
  1. The  Great  Storm  of  June  12th,  1987:  my father's  'prevision' was
     only  out  by  four  months.  The  greatest  storm  in   living  memory
     struck  southern  England,  causing  vast  damage,  on   October  16th,
     1987. It is curious in the light of  this to  read Mr.  Green's remarks
     (p.  158):  'it  may  well  be  that  the  predictions (notably  of the
     Storm),  though  genuine  and   not  coincidences,   were  unconscious:
     giving  one  more  glimpse  of  the  strange  processes   of  so-called
     literary  "invention",  with   which  the   Papers  are   largely  con-
     cerned.'                                                              
  2. O.S.B.: 'Order of Saint Benedict'.                                    
  3. For the title as typed in the final text D, but  subsequently rejected,
     see p. 153 note 2.                                                    
  4. In  A  and  B  the  report  of  Night  54  is  absent (cf.  Mr. Green's
     Foreword,  p.  156:  Many  Nights  are  represented   only  by   a  few
     lines,  or  by  short  entries,  of which  Nights 54  and 64  have been
     included as specimens').                                              
  5. I  cannot  explain  The   Canticle  of   Artegall.  Irish   arteagal  =
     'article';  and  an  isolated  note  of  my  father's   reads:  'My/The
     Canticle of  Night in  Ale', 'Artegall',  'article Artegall'.  But this
     does not help very much.                                              
  6. In B Night 60 is Night 251, without date (see p. 149).                
  7. I  have mentioned  (p. 150)  a page  that preceded  text A  and carries
     the  identifications  of  members  of  the  Notion  Club  with  members
     of  the  Inklings.  On  this  page  are  found  two   brief,  abandoned

     openings  for  The  Notion  Club  Papers.  In  the  first  Ramer asks
     Latimer  (predecessor  of Guildford)  for his  opinion of  his story.
     With ' "Yes, I  suppose it'll  do," I  answered' this  opening breaks
     off, and is followed by:                                             
       When  I had  finished reading  my story,  we sat  in silence  for a
     while.  'Well?'  I  said.  'What  do you  think of  it? Will  it do?'
     Nobody  answered,  and  I  felt  the  air  charged  with disapproval,
     as it often is in our circle,  though on  this occasion  the critical
     interruptions  had  been  fewer  than  usual.  'Oh,  come   on.  What
     have you got  to say?  I may  as well  get the  worst over,'  I urged
     turning to Latimer. He is not a flatterer.                           
           'Oh yes, it'll do, I suppose so,' he answered reluctantly. 'But
     why  pick  on  me?  You  know  I hate  criticizing offhand  and still
     in the heat of listening - or the chill.'                            
     Here  this  second  opening  was  abandoned. It  is presumably  to be
     connected  with  the  word  'Self'  written under  Ramer at  the head
     of the page (p. 150).                                                
  8. David  Lindsay,  author  of  A  Voyage  to  Arcturus,   published  in
     1920, to which Guildford refers subsequently (see note 9).           
  9. Cf.  my  father's  letter  to   Stanley  Unwin   of  4   March  1938,
     concerning Out of the Silent Planet (Letters no. 26):                
       I  read 'Voyage  to Arcturus'  with avidity  - the  most comparable
     work,  though  it  is  both  more  powerful  and  more  mythical (and
     less  rational,  and also  less of  a story  - no  one could  read it
     merely  as  a thriller  and without  interest in  philosophy religion
     and morals).                                                         
 10. Cavorite was  the substance  'opaque to  gravitation' devised  by the
     scientist  Cavor  in  H.  G.  Wells's  The  First  Men  in  the  Moon
     (1901).                                                              
 11. For  'the  Great  Explosion' see  Mr. Green's  Foreword, p.  157, and
     p. 186.                                                              
 12. Ransom:  Dr.  Elwin   Ransom  was   the  Cambridge   philologist  who
     in  Out  of the  Silent Planet  went under  duress to  Mars (Malacan-
     dra),  and  in  Perelandra  went  to  Venus by  the mediation  of the
     Oyarsa of Malacandra (see next note).                                
 13. At the beginning of Perelandra the Eldils are described thus:        
     For  Ransom  had  met  other  things  in  Mars  besides   the  Mar-
     tians. He had  met the  creatures called  eldila, and  specially that
     great  eldil  who  is  the  ruler of  Mars or,  in their  speech, the
     Oyarsa  of  Malacandra.  The  eldila  are  very  different  from  any
     planatary  creatures.  Their  physical organism,  if organism  it can
     be called,  is quite  unlike either  the human  or the  Martian. They
     do not  eat, breed,  breathe, or  suffer natural  death, and  to that
     extent   resemble   thinking   minerals   more  than   they  resemble
     anything   we   should   recognise   as   an   animal.   Though  they
     appear  on  planets  and  may  even   seem  to   our  senses   to  be

      sometimes resident in them,  the precise  spatial location  of an
      eldil  at  any  moment presents  great problems.  They themselves
      regard space (or 'Deep Heaven')  as their  true habitat,  and the
      planets  are  to  them  not  closed  but  merely moving  points -
      perhaps  even  interruptions  -  in  what  we  know as  the Solar
      System and they as the Field of Arbol.                           
                                                                      
  14. Old Solar: cf. Perelandra Chapter 2, in which Ransom speaks to
      Lewis before his journey to Venus begins:
      '... I rather fancy I am being sent because those two black-
      guards who kidnapped me and took me to Malacandra, did
      something which they never intended: namely, gave a human
      being a chance to learn that language.'
        'What language do you mean?'
        'Hressa-Hlab, of course. The language I learned in Mala-
      candra.'
        'But surely you don't imagine they will speak the same
      language on Venus?'
        'Didn't I tell you about that?' said Ransom... 'I'm surprised
      I didn't, for I found out two or three months ago, and
      scientifically it is one of the most interesting things about the
      whole affair. It appears we were quite mistaken in thinking
      Hressa-Hlab the peculiar speech of Mars. It is really what may
      be called Old Solar, Hlab-Eribol-ef-Cordi.'
        'What on earth do you mean?'
        'I mean that there was originally a common speech for all
      rational creatures inhabiting the planets of our system: those
      that were ever inhabited, I mean - what the eldils call the Low
      Worlds.... That original speech was lost on Thulcandra, our
      own world, when our whole tragedy took place. No human
      language now known in the world is descended from it.'
      For Ramer's observations on this subject see p. 203 and note 55.
  15.  In the original text A (still followed in B) Dolbear, waking up,
     says with reference to these words of Guildford's ('Incarnation.
     By being born'): 'Then try reincarnation, or perhaps transcarna-
     tion without loss of memory. What do you say, Ramer?'
  16. Arry, for Arundel, became the name by which Lowdham was
      known in text C; in the earliest lists of members of the Notion
      Club he was simply Harry Loudham. For the significance of this
      see pp. 233 - 4, 281 - 2.
  17. New Erewhon: Erewhon (= 'Nowhere') is the title of a satire by
      Samuel Butler (1872). News from Nowhere: a fantasy of the
      future by William Morris (1890).
  18. Turl Street or the Turl is a narrow street running between High
      Street and Broad Street in Oxford, onto which open the gates of
      Ramer's college Jesus, Guildford's college Lincoln, and Exeter
                                                             College.

                                                            
                                                                        
  19. In B Night 61 is Night 252, without date (see p. 149).             
  20. B has Harry Loudham: see note 16.
  21. In  the  'Prose  Edda'  the  Icelander  Snorri  Sturluson  tells  of
      Skidbladnir:                                                       
         'Skihblahnir is the best of ships and made  with great  skill ...
      Certain  dwarves,  the  sons  of Ivaldi,  made Skihblahnir  and gave
      the ship to Freyr; it is so large that all the AEsir [gods]  can man
      it  with  their  weapons  and  equipment  of  war,  and  it   has  a
      favourable wind so soon as the sail  is set,  wherever it  is bound;
      but when it is not going to sea  it is  made of  so many  pieces and
      with  such great  cunning that  it can  be folded  up like  a napkin
      and kept in one's pouch' (Snorra Edda, Gylfaginning $42).          
  22. The  Battle  of  Bosworth Field  (1485), in  which King  Richard III
      was  defeated  and  slain  by Henry  Tudor (Henry  VII). A  has here
      'at  any  period  before  the  accession of  Richard II'  (1377). On
      Frankley's horror borealis see pp. 151 - 2, 159.                   
  23. 'Yes,  1938,'  said  Cameron:  in  A  this  observation is  given to
      Loudham,  and  rather  surprisingly  Latimer's  comment  is  much as
      Guildford's in the final text: 'whose memory is  like that.  I doubt
      if  he  ever  read the  book. Memoirs  of the  courts of  minor 18th
      century  monarchs  are  his  natural  browsing-ground.' Yet  at this
      earliest  stage  Loudham's  interest  in  Norse was  perhaps already
      present,  since  it  is  he  who  makes  the joke  about Skidbladnir
      immediately  before.  As  B  was  written   the  remark   was  still
      attributed  to   Loudham,  and   Guildford's  comment   remains  the
      same  as  in A;  later Loudham  was changed  to Franks  (the earlier
      name of Frankley) and then to Cameron. See pp. 281 - 2.            
  24. Last  Men in London by Olaf Stapledon (1932).
  25. hnau: rational embodied beings.                                    
  26. I  have  added  the  footnote  from  the  third  manuscript   C;  it
      is  not  in  the  final typescript  D, but  was perhaps  omitted in-
      advertently.                                                       
  27. In A there is no reference  to the  Glacier or  any mention  of what
      the scene in the book was; but a later addition in the  margin runs:
      and  the  chief  difference  (since  both  were  now inner)  is that
      the  one  is  tinged with  sadness for  it is  past, but  the other,
      the Glacier,  is not  so tinged,  has only  its own  proper flavour,
      because it is not past or present with reference to the world.     
  28. In A Dolbear  does not  speak at  this point;  Ramer says:  'And the
      will  to  remember  can  be strengthened;  and the  memory enlarged.
      (Dolbear  helped me  in that:  I suppose  that is  what made  him so
      suspicious.)   Now   here  comes   another  thread.'   Thus  neither
      Emberu  nor  any  other  name appear  here in  A; in  8 the  name is
      Gyonyoru, changed subsequently to Emberu.                          
  29. Following this, the text of Ramer's remarks in A and B  is different
      from that in the final form. I give the B version:                 

       
                                                                        
      A living body  can move  in space,  but not  without an  effort (as
      in a leap), or  a vehicle.  A mind  can move  more freely  and very
      much quicker  than a  living body,  but not  without effort  of its
      own  kind,  or  without a  vehicle. [Added:  This is  distinct from
      the instantaneous  movement of  thought to  objects already  in its
      grasp  as  memory.]  And  Space  and  Time  do exist  as conditions
      for it, especially while it is  incarnate, and  certainly if  it is
      (largely for  that reason)  interested in  them and  studying them.
      How  and  how  far  in  either  dimension  can  it jump,  without a
      vehicle?  I  asked  myself.  It  probably  cannot  travel  in empty
      Space,  or  eventless  Time  (which  is   the  duration   of  empty
      Space): it would not be aware  of it,  if it  did, anyway.  How far
      can it jump over it? How can it jump at all?                       
      The mind uses the memory of its body...                            
  30. For  the  source of  Lowdham's allusion  to the  Pig on  the Ruined
      Pump see the Foreword.                                             
  31. The Banbury Road  leads north  out of  the centre  of Oxford.  I do
      not think that there was any special reason for the choice  of this
      particular late Victorian house (the reference to it only enters in
      C,  where  my  father first  wrote 'No.  x Banbury  Road', changing
      this subsequently to 'No. 100'). Mr. Green, the putative  editor of
      the Papers refers in his Foreword (p. 157) to  poltergeist activity
      at this house in the early years of the twenty-first century.      
  32. Gunthorpe Park in Matfield:  so far  as I  car. discover,  the only
      Matfield in England is in Kent, but there is  no Gunthorpe  Park in
      its vicinity.                                                      
  33. Emberu: A has here: 'Not if  you mean  for getting  such news  as I
      put into that tale you've heard', and  no name  appears; 8  has, as
      at the previous occurrence (note 28) Cyonyoru ) Emberu.            
  34. My father once described to me his  dream of  'pure Weight',  but I
      do not remember when that was: probably before this time.          
  35. Of this experience also my father spoke to me, suggesting,  as does
      Ramer here, that  the significance  did not  lie in  the remembered
      passage itself. See Ramer's subsequent remarks  on this  topic, pp.
      189 ff.                                                            
  36. See pp. 157, 167. A has here: 'pictures as unlike as seeing a small
      flower growing and  a whole  world shattered';  B places  the great
      explosion 'in the sixties'.                                        
  37. The intervention of James Jones (see  p. 159)  first appears  in C.
      In  B  Ramer's  explanation  of  what  he meant  by deep  dreams is
      given in a footnote by Guildford ('Ramer said later...').          
  38. In B Dolbear replies differently to  Lowdham ('If  I was  to reveal
      some  of  the  situations  I've seen  you in,  Harry my  lad'). His
      pregnant  remarks  'You  walk  in disguises,  even when  awake. But
      they'll slip, my lad, one day. I shouldn't wonder if it  was fairly
      soon' entered in the C text.                                       

  39.  A. continues  from  this   point:
       on   this  sort   of  activity   -  the   best  bits   and  passages,
       especially,  those  that  seem to  come suddenly  when you're  in the
       heat  of  making.  They  sometimes  fit with  an odd  perfection; and
       sometimes good in themselves don't really fit.                       
       B. has  here:
       ... on  this sort  of activity.  Those scenes  that come  up complete
       and fixed, that I spoke of before, for instance.  I think  that those
       really  good  passages  that  arise,  as   it  were,   suddenly  when
       you're  abstracted,  in  the   heat  of   making,  are   often  long-
       prepared impromptus.
  40.  it's one I made up years ago: i.e., made up in dream.                
  41.  In  A,  and  (at  first)  in B,  Ramer interpreted  the first  of his
       'fragments'  far  more  elaborately,  giving the  entire plot  of the
       story. This is, as Ramer admitted, 'not very  interesting'; and  as B
       was  first  written  Loudham  says  (in  answer  to  Ramer's  'Do you
       want another case?') 'Not particularly, unless  it's better  than the
       last, which I don't expect.'                                         
  42.  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth  (died  in  1155),  author  of The  History of
       the  Kings  of  Britain,  a  chief  contribution  to  the popularity,
       outside  the  Celtic  lands,  of  King  Arthur  and  'the  Matter  of
       Britain'.  Such  a  manuscript  leaf  as   this  in   Ramer's  dream-
       narrative  would be  of superlative  importance in  the study  of the
       Arthurian legend.                                                    
  43.  Elvish Drama.  In A  it is  Ramer himself  who speaks  of 'elf-drama'
       ('it is not writing but elf-drama'), and again in B, which has:      
         '... For it is not of course writing, but a sort of realized drama.
       The Elvish Drama that Lewis speaks of somewhere.'                    
           'Not Lewis,  said Jeremy.  'It comes  in one  of those  essays of
       the circle, but it was by one of the minor members.'                 
       The  passage  in  question  comes  from  the essay  On Fairy-Stories,
       which my father had  delivered at  the University  of St.  Andrews in
       1939,  but  which  was  not  published  until  two  years  after  the
       writing  of  The  Notion   Club  Papers,   in  the   memorial  volume
       Essays  Presented  to  Charles  Williams  (Oxford  1947).   The  pas-
       sage is interesting in  relation to  Ramer's discourse  and I  cite a
       part of it:                                                          
           Now   'Faerian   Drama'   -  those   plays  which   according  to
       abundant  records  the  elves  have  often  presented  to  men  - can
       produce   Fantasy   with   a   realism   and  immediacy   beyond  the
       compass   of   any  human   mechanism.  As   a  result   their  usual
       effect (upon a  man) is  to go  beyond Secondary  Belief. If  you are
       present  at  a  Faerian  drama you  yourself are,  or think  that you
       are,  bodily  inside  its  Secondary  World.  The  experience  may be
       very  similar  to  Dreaming  and  has   (it  would   seem)  sometimes
       (by  men)  been  confounded  with  it.  But  in  Faerian   drama  you

      are  in  a  dream  that  some  other  mind   is  weaving,   and  the
      knowledge  of  that  alarming  fact  may   slip  from   your  grasp.
      To  experience  directly  a  Secondary  World:  the  potion  is  too
      strong,  and  you  give  to  it  Primary Belief,  however marvellous
      the  events.  You are  deluded -  whether that  is the  intention of
      the  elves  (always or  at any  time) is  another question.  They at
      any rate are  not themselves  deluded. This  is for  them a  form of
      Art, and distinct from Wizardry or Magic, properly so called.       
                                                                         
      J. R. R. Tolkien, The Monsters and the Critics and Other Essays,
      1983, p.  142; cf.  also p.  116 in  that edition  of the  essay ('In
      dreams   strange   powers   of   the   mind  may   be  unlocked...').
  44. of humane shape: texts B, C, and D all have humane; cf. p. 206      
      ('humane forms') and note 55 below.                                 
  45. Cf. my father's letter to W. H. Auden of 7 June 1955 (Letters no.
      163):                                                                
      ... the terrible recurrent dream (beginning with memory) of the     
      Great  Wave,  towering  up,  and  coming  in  ineluctably   over  the
      trees and green fields. (I bequeathed it to Faramir.) I don't think
      I  have  had  it  since  I  wrote  the 'Downfall  of Numenor'  as the
      last of the legends of the First and Second Age.                    
      By  'beginning  with  memory'  I  believe that  my father  meant that
      the recurrence  of the  dream went  as far  back in  his life  as his
      memory  reached.  -  Faramir  told  Eowyn of  his recurrent  dream of
      the  Great  Wave   coming  upon   Numenor  as   they  stood   on  the
      walls  of  Minas  Tirith when  the Ring  was destroyed  ('The Steward
      and the King', in The Return of the King, p. 240).                  
  46. This remark of  Lowdham's is  absent from  B and  first enters  in C;
      cf. note 38.                                                        
  47. In B the footnote at this point does not derive as in the  final text
      largely  from  Mr.  Green  but  entirely  from   Nicholas  Guildford,
      citing  Ramer: 'Later  Ramer enlarged  on this  point, in  the course
      of a discussion  of the  various kinds  of "deep  dreams", and  how '
      the  dreamer  could  distinguish  them.  He  divided  them  ...' What
      follows is closely similar to the later version of  the note,  but it
      ends thus: ' "Made for the  Malefit of  Men," he  said. "To  judge by
      the   ideas  men   propagate  now,   their  curious   unanimity,  and
      obsession, I should say that a terrible lot of men have  thrust aside
      the Guardians, and are reading very maleficial stuff." N.G.'        
      There was thus at this stage no reference to 'Night  62' (see  p. 222
      and note 2).                                                        
      The   word   maleficial  is   occasionally  recorded,   but  malefit,
      occuring  in  both  versions  of  this  note,  is  a  coinage echoing
      benefit, as if ultimately derived from Latin malefactum  'evil deed,
      injury'.                                                            
  48. The  world  Emberu  has  not  been  named  in A  (see notes  28, 33),
      but at this point Ramer says in A: 'The one I told you about,       

                                        
                                                                     
 Menelkemen'  (Quenya,   'Sky-earth').  In   this  original   text  the
 description  of  Menelkemen  is  (though  briefer)  that given  in the
 final text of Ellor Eshurizel, 'that immense plain  with its  floor of
 silver', ending with the account of the  great waterfall,  here called
 Dalud   dimran  (or   perhaps  dimron),   with  Eshil   dimzor  written
 above and Eshil  kulu ()  kulo) in  the margin.  There is  no mention
 here of  the En-keladim.  At the  end of  the description  of Menelke-
 men  Jeremy asks  'Where is  it, do  you think?',  which in  the final
 text  he  asks  after   Ramer's  description   of  the   third  world,
 Minal-zidar (p. 199).                                                
  In  B  (as  originally  written)  Ramer  says  'The  one  I  told you
 about, Emberu the  golden', and  here the  description of  Emberu is
 that of Minal-zidar in the final version:                            
  '... I wrote  that account  (not the  frame) some  time ago,  and all
 I'll have now is that,  and stirrings  and faint  traces of  what lies
 beneath:  the  first  vision  of  Emberu:  golden,  absolutely  silent
 and  quiescent,  a  whole  small  world  of  perfect  form,  imperish-
 able in Time...'                                                     
 This  description  of  Emberu ends,  as does  that of  Minal-zidar in
 the  final  text,  with  'made by  what adoring  mind I  cannot tell';
 then follows: 'And there was Menel-kemen.'                           
  At  this  point  in  B  my  father  stopped, struck  out what  he had
 written about 'the first vision of Emberu',  and wrote  instead: 'the
 first vision of Emberu: that immense plain with  its silver  Hoor all
 delicately patterned...' - which in the final text is  the description
 of Ellor  Eshurizel. Here  the great  waterfall is  called Oshul-kulo,
 and  Ramer  says:  I  think  the  Enkeladim  dwell  there.  My  father
 then inserted in B,  after 'the  first vision  of Emberu',  the words
 '"It  is  the  same with  Ellor. Ellor!"  he murmured.  "Ellor Eshur-
 izel! I drew it once in words as best I  could, and  now it  is words.
 That  immense  plain  with  its  silver  floor  ...';  and  (all these
 changes  being  made  at the  time of  composition) introduced  at the
 end  of the  description of  Ellor the  third world,  'Minal-zidar the
 golden'.                                                             
  Thus  the  images   were  developed   and  separated   into  distinct
 'world-entities'  in  rapid succession.  In A  Menelkemen is  the only
 world  that  Ramer  describes,  the  world  of the  story that  he had
 read  to  the  Notion  Club,  the   inorganic,  harmonious   world  of
 metal, stone,  and water,  with the  great waterfall.  In B  the world
 that  Ramer  described  in  his  story  is Emberu  (replacing Gyonyoru
 of the earlier parts of  the manuscript),  the silent  'golden' world;
 but  this   was  changed   immediately  (reverting   to  A)   to  make
 Emberu  'that  immense  plain  with  its   silver  floor',   and  then
 changed  again  to  make  this  description  that  of a  second world,
 Ellor  Eshurizel,  while  the  'golden' world  becomes a  third scene,
 Minal-zidar.  The  final  stage  was  to  call  the first  world Green

       Emberu,  'where  there  was  a  kind  of   organic  life,   rich  but
       wholesome and longeval.'                                             
  49.  On  the  En-keladim  see  p.  206  and  notes  64,  65, and  pp. 397,
       400.                                                                 
  50.  the Fields of Arbol:  the Solar  System in  Lewis's novels  (see note
       13).                                                                 
  51.  In A it is  Dolbear, not  Loudham, who  asks: 'Where  do you  get all
       these  names  from?  Who  told  you  them?  That [would]  interest me
       more  really than  the geometry  and landscape.  I should,  of course
       as  you  know,  use  my  chance  if  I  got  into  such  a  state for
       language-research.' In B this was still said  by Dolbear,  changed to
       Guildford and then to Loudham. See p. 151.                           
  52.  At  this point  both A  and B  continue with  an account  of Jeremy's
       attempt  to  arouse  interest  in  the works  of Lewis  and Williams,
       which in the final text is put into a footnote of Guildford's here. I
       give the  text of  B, which  follows that  of A  very closely  but is
       clearer.                                                             
            'Arbol  is  "Old  Solar"  for  the  Sun,'  said Jeremy.  'Do you
       mean  that  you  can  get  back  to  Old Solar,  [struck out:  or Old
       Universal,] and that Lewis was right?'                               
            Jeremy   was  our   Lewis-expert,  and   knew  all   his  works,
       almost  by  heart.  Many  in  Oxford  will  still  remember   how  he
       had,  a  year  or  two  before,  given  some  remarkable  lectures on
       Lewis  and  Williams.  People  had  laughed  at  the  title,  because
       Lewis  and  all that  circle had  dropped badly  out of  fashion. Old
       Bell-Tinker,  who  was  still  Chairman  of  the English  Board then,
       had boggled and puffed at  it. 'If  you must  touch such  a subject,'
       he snorted, 'call it Lewis and cut it Short.'                        
            Jeremy had retorted by offering  to change  the title  to 'Lewis
       and  Carolus  or  the  Oxford  Looking-glass'.  'Or  "Jack   and  the
       Beanstalk", if  you like,'  he added,  but that  was too  recondite a
       joke  for  the  English  Board.  I believe,  before Jeremy  spoke up,
       few  even  of  the  Twentieth  Century   experts  could   have  named
       any  work  of  Williams,  except  perhaps   The  Octopus.   That  was
       still  occasionally  played,  because  of the  great revival  of mis-
       sionary  interest after  the Far-eastern  martyrdoms in  the sixties.
       The  Allegory  of  Love  was  all  of  Lewis  that  the  academicians
       ever  mentioned  (as  a  rule  unread  and  slightingly).  The  other
       minor  lights  were  only  known  by  the  few  who  read  old  C. R.
       Tolkien's  little  books  of  memoirs:  In  the Roaring  Forties, and
       The  Inns  and  Outs  of  Oxford.  But  Jeremy   had  made   most  of
       our  club  read  some  of  those people  (the Public-house  School as
       it  was  called);  though  beside  Jeremy  only  Ramer   and  Dolbear
       bothered with Tolkien pere and all the elvish stuff.                 
            ' "Old Solar"?' said Ramer. 'Well, no....                       
       'Old Bell-Tinker' derives  his name  from a  book of  translations of

       Anglo-Saxon literature by Bell and Tinker. His  very bad  joke 'call
       it Lewis and cut it Short' refers to the  Latin Dictionary  by Lewis
       and Short. The title of Jeremy's  lectures, which  aroused laughter,
       is omitted, but was presumably the same  as in  the final  text, The
       Public-house  School  (because  the  Inklings  met  in  pubs).  'Few
       bothered with Tolkien pere and all the  elvish stuff'  was doubtless
       no more than a self-deprecating joke - but implies that  the 'elvish
       stuff' had at least been published! (cf. p. 303 and note 14). In the
       Roaring  Forties  is  a  pun  on  the  name  of  the regions  of the
       southern  oceans,  between  forty  and  fifty  degrees  south, where
       there are great winds.                                              
  53.  Since  Ramer's  criticism  of the  standard of  linguistic invention
       characteristic  of  tales  of  space-travel and  time-travel follows
       immediately  on his  denial that  there could  be any  such language
       as Old Solar, he  appears to  be including  Lewis in  his criticism.
       Some  years  before,  however,  in  his letter  to Stanley  Unwin of
       4 March 1938 (Letters  no. 26),  my father  had said  of Out  of the
       Silent Planet:                                                      
         The  author holds  to items  of linguistic  invention that  do not
       appeal to me ...;  but this  is a  matter of  taste. After  all your
       reader  found  my   invented  names,   made  with   cherished  care,
       eye-splitting. But the  linguistic inventions  and the  philology on
       the  whole  are  more  than   good  enough.   All  the   part  about
       language  and  poetry  -  the  glimpses  of its  Malacandrian nature
       and  form  -  is  very  well  done,  and extremely  interesting, far
       superior to  what one  usually gets  from travellers  in untravelled
       regions. The  language difficulty  is usually  slid over  or fudged.
       Here it not only  has verisimilitude,  but also  underlying thought.
  54.  Glund: the name of Jupiter in Old Solar (also Glundandra).          
  55.  I  think  there might  be an  Old Human,  or Primitive  Adamic...: A
       has  here:  'But  I  think  there  might be,  certainly was,  an Old
       Humane  or Adamic.  But it  could not  possibly be  the same  as the
       Prime  Language  of  Hrossa,  Hressa-hlab.' This  was retained  in B
       (with  Old  Human  for  Old  Humane:  see   note  44).   The  Hrossa
       were  one  of  the  three totally  distinct kinds  of hnau  found on
       Malacandra;  the  language  of  the  Hrossa  was  Hressa-hlab, which
       is 'Old Solar': see note 14.                                        
  56.  Old Universal: see the beginning of the passage given in note 52.
  57.  En:  this  name  appears  already in  A, with  various predecessors,
       An, Nor, El, all struck out immediately.                            
  58.  Gormok,  Zingil:  in  A  Ramer's name  for Mars  is the  Elvish word
       Karan   ('red');  Venus   was  Zingil   in  A,   though  immediately
       replacing another name that cannot be read.                         
  59.  In A it is  Jeremy who  speaks at  this point,  asking: 'How  do you
       know you've been there?' And Ramer  replies: 'I  don't: I  have seen
       the places, not been there. My body's never  travelled. I  have seen

       the  places  either indirectly  through other  records, as  you could
       say  you'd  seen  Hongkong  if  you'd  looked  at many  long accurate
       coloured films of  it; or  directly by  using light.  But how  I know
       what the places are is another matter.'                              
  60.  Saturn is not mentioned  in A.  B has:  'And Gyuruchill,  Saturn, is
       unmistakable'.  Gyuruchill  was  changed  to  Shomori, and  then to
       old Enekol.                                                          
  61.  The  Cronic  Star  (in  the  footnote  by  Guildford at  this point):
       Saturn  (in  astrology  the  leaden planet).  Cronic is  derived from
       Kronos,  the  Greek  god (father  of Zeus)  identified by  the Romans
       with  Saturn;  wholly distinct  etymologically from  chronic, derived
       from Greek chronos 'time'.                                           
  62.  On the 'Fluted Wave' see p. 194.                                     
  63.  In  A  Ramer  says  here: 'I  could tell  you about  Atlantis (though
       that's not its name to me, nor  Numenor): it  is connected  with that
       Fluted  Wave.  And  the  Door  TT  [which   is  connected   with  the
       Meg(alithic) >] of the Megalithic is too.' In B he  speaks as  in the
       final text, but says again  'though that's  not its  name to  me, nor
       Numenor'  -  the  last  two  words being  later strongly  struck out,
       and  Loudham's  question  (asked  with  'a curious  eagerness') 'What
       is  its  name?' inserted  (when the  peculiar association  of Lowdham
       with Numenor had entered: see  notes 38,  46). In  the final  text of
       the  Papers  the  emergence   of  the   name  Numenor   is  postponed
       until Part Two (p. 231).                                             
  64.  A  has  here:  'But  I've  seen  my Marim  [changed probably  at once
       to  Albarim]  playing  one  of  their Albar-plays:  the drama  of the
       Silver Tree.' In A  the name  En-keladim has  not occurred  (see note
       48). With 'the Drama of  the Silver  Tree' cf.  the citation  from On
       Fairy-Stories given in note 43.                                      
  65.  In  A  Ramer  says:  'I  don't  think  that's  invented:  not  by  me
       anyway. It seems to take place  on this  earth in  some time  or mode
       or [?place].' In A he goes straight on from  'Atlantis' to  his final
       story.                                                               
          In B Ramer comments  on the  Drama of  the Silver  Tree as  in the
       final text, as far as 'something like it really  happens, and  I have
       seen it, far off perhaps or faintly.' Then follows:                  
          I guess that the true types of my Enkeladim are  invisible, unless
       they  turn  their  attention  to you.  That is,  they are  Eldilic in
       Lewis's  terms,  in  some  lesser  rank   [added:  or   perhaps  like
       Tolkien's Unfallen Elves, only they were embodied].                  
       All this was struck out, and replaced on a rider  by the  final text,
       as far as 'entering as it were into their own works because  of their
       love for them.' Then follows: 'that is, that they are of a kind other
       than Lewis's Eldila (even of lesser rank);  and yet  not the  same as
       Tolkien's Unfallen Elves, for those were embodied.'                  
          The original B text continues with  'I think  [Emberu >]  Ellor is

  one of their worlds ...', as in the  final form.  Against Ellor  is a
  footnote:                                                            
       Ramer said that it was queer how the syllable cropped up: first
  in Tolkien's Eldar, Eldalie, then in Lewis's Eldil,  and then  in his
  Ellor.  He  thought it  might be  an 'elvish'  or Keladian  word. The
  Enkeladim are language-makers. NG.                                   
66.  Here the fair copy manuscript C  ends, and  the typescript  D from
  here on follows B (see p. 146).                                      
67.  In  A  the  name  was  Tekel-Ishtar, becoming  Tekel-Mirim before
  the manuscript was completed.                                        
68.  Thomas  Huxley,   Physiography,  1877,   cited  in   the  Oxford
  English Dictionary.                                                  
69.  The  Radcliffe Camera,  a great  circular domed  building standing
  in  Radcliffe  Square,  Oxford,  on  the south  side of  which stands
  St.  Mary's  church  and  on  the  north  side the  Bodleian Library.
  Camera  is  used  in  the  Latin  sense  'arched  or vaulted  roof or
  chamber' (Latin camera ) French chambre, English chamber).           

                            [PART TWO].(1)                         
                                                                  
 Night  62.(2) Thursday,  March  6th,  1987.  [Of  this  meeting only
 half a torn sheet is preserved. The relevant part will be  found in
 the note to Night 61, p. 195. There appears  to have  been further
 discussion of Ramer's views and adventures.]                      
                                                                  
 Night  63.  Thursday,  March 13th,  1987. [Only  the last  page of
 the record of this meeting is preserved.  The discussion  seems to
 have  proceeded  to  legendary  voyages  of discovery  in general.
 For the reference to the imram see Night (69).](3)                
                                                                  
 [Good] night Frankley!'                                           
  Lowdham  seemed  to  feel  a  bit guilty  about his  ragging; and
 when the  meeting finally  broke up,  he walked  up the  High with
 Ramer and myself. We turned into Radcliffe Square.(4)             
  'Played  the  ass  as  usual,  Ramer,'  said  Lowdham.  'Sorry! I
 felt all strung up: wanted a  fight, or  a carouse,  or something.
 But really I was very interested, especially about the imram.(5)  
 Underneath  we  Nordics (6) have  some  feelings,  as  long   as  the
 Dago-fanciers will only be reasonably polite.' He hesitated. 'I've
 had  some  rather  odd  experiences  -  well,  perhaps  we'll talk
 about it some other time. It's late. But in the vac. perhaps?'

    
                                                                  
  'I shall be going away,' said Ramer, a trifle coldly, 'till after
 Easter.'                                                          
  'Oh  well.  But  do  come  to  the meetings  next term!  You must
 have lots more to tell us. I'll try and be good.'                 
                                                                  
  It was a cool clear night after a windy day. It was starry in the
 west,  but  the  moon  was  already   climbing.  At   B.N.C.(7) gate
 Lowdham  turned.  The  Camera  looked  vast  and dark  against the
 moonlit  sky.  Wisps  of  long  white  cloud  were  passing  on an
 easterly  breeze.  For a  moment one  of them  seemed to  take the
 shape of a plume of smoke issuing from the lantern of the dome.
  Lowdham  looked  up,  and  his  face  altered. His  tall powerful
 figure  appeared  taller and  broader as  he stood  there, gazing,
 with  his  dark  brows  drawn  down.  His  face  seemed  pale  and
 angry, and his eyes glittered.                                    
  'Curse  him!  May  the  Darkness  take  him!'  he  said bitterly.
 'May  the  earth  open  -  ' The  cloud passed  away. He  drew his
 hand over his brow. 'I was going to say,' he said. 'Well,  I don't
 remember.   Something   about   the   Camera,  I   think.  Doesn't
 matter.  Good  night, chaps!'  He knocked,  and passed  in through
 the door.                                                         
                                                                  
  We turned up along the lane. 'Very odd!' I  said. 'What  a queer
 fellow he is sometimes! A strange mixture.'                       
  'He is,' said Ramer. 'Most of  what we  see is  a tortoise-shell:
 armourplate.  He  doesn't  talk  much about  what he  really cares
 for.'                                                             
  'For some  reason the  last two  or three  meetings seem  to have
 stirred him up, unsettled him,' I said. 'I can't think why.'      
  'I wonder,' said  Ramer. 'Well,  good night,  Nick. I'll  see you
 again next term. I hope  to start  attending regularly  again.' We
 parted at the Turl end of the lane.                               
                                                                  
      PF. RD. AAL. MGR. WTJ. JJR. NG.                              
                                                                  
   Night 64. Thursday, March 27th, 1987.(8)                        
                                                                  
  There  was  only  one  meeting   in  the   vacation.  Guildford's
 rooms.  Neither  Ramer  nor  Lowdham  were   present  (it   was  a
 quiet evening). Guildford read  a paper  on Jutland  in antiquity;
 but there  was not  much discussion.  [No record  of the  paper is
 found in the minutes.]                                            
                                                                  
  PF. WTJ. JM. RS. JJ. RD. NG.                                     

                     
                                                                    
  Night 65. Thursday, May 8th, 1987.(9)                              
                                                                    
      This  was  the  first  meeting  of  Trinity  term.  We  met  in
 Frankley's  rooms  in  Queen's. Jeremy  and Guildford  arrived first
 (in time); others arrived one by one at intervals (late).  There was
 nothing  definite  on  for  the  evening,  though  we had  hoped for
 some  more  talk  from  Ramer;  but  he  seemed  disinclined  to say
 anything  further.  Conversation  hopped  about  during   the  first
 hour, but was not notable.                                          
      Lowdham  was  restless, and  would not  sit down;  at intervals
 he  burst  into  a  song  (with which  he had,  in fact,  entered at
 about half past nine). It began:                                    
                                                                    
                        I've got a very Briny Notion                 
                          To drink myself to sleep.                  
           It seldom progressed further, and never got beyond:       
                                                                    
                           Bring me my bowl, my magic potion!       
                           Tonight I'm diving deep.                  
                             down! down! down!                    
  Down where the dream-fish go.                                      
  It  was  not  well  received, least  of all  by Ramer.  But Lowdham
  subsided eventually, into a moody silence - for a while.           
                                                                    
      About  ten  o'clock the  talk turned  to neologisms;  and Lowd-
  ham  re-entered  in  their  defence,  chiefly because  Frankley was
  taking the other side. (No. Pure love of truth and justice. AAL)
      Lowdham  to  Frankley: 'You  say you  object to  panting, which
  all the younger people use now for desire or wish?'                
      'Yes, I do. And especially to having a great pant for anything;
  ' or worse having great pants for it.'                             
      'Well,  I  don't  think you've  got any  good grounds  for your
  objection:  nothing  better  than  novelty  or  unfamiliarity.  New
  words are always objected to, like new art.'                       
      'Nonsense!  Double  nonsense,  Arry!'  said Ramer.(10) 'Frankley
  is complaining  precisely because  new words  are not  objected to.
  And anyway, I personally object to lots  of old  words, but  I have
  to  go  on  using 'em,  because they're  current, and  people won't
  accept my substitutes. I dislike many products of  old art.  I like
  many  new  things  but not  all. There  is such  a thing  as merit,
  without reference  to age  or to  familiarity. I  took to  doink at
  once: a very good onomatopoeia for some purposes.'                 
      'Yes, doink has come on a lot lately,' said Lowdham.  'But it's
  not brand-new, of course. I think it's first recorded, in the Third

             
                                                                    
 Supplement  to  the  N.E.D.,(11) in the fifties,  in the  form doing:
 seems to have started in the Air Force in the Six Years' War.'(12)  
 'And  it's  an   onomatopoeia,  mark   you,'  said   Frankley.  'It's
 easy to appraise the merits of that kind of word, if you can  call it
 a real word. Anyway, adopting that is not  at all  on all  fours with
 misusing  an  established   word,  robbing   Peter  to   relieve  the
 poverty  of  Paul:  lexicographical  socialism,  which  would  end by
 reducing  the  whole  vocabulary  to  one  flat  drab  Unmeaning,  if
 there were no reactionaries.'                                       
 'And  won't  anybody  give   poor  Peter   his  pants   back?'  Lowd-
 ham  laughed.  'He's  got  some  more pairs  in the  cupboard, you'll
 see.  He'll  just  have  to  take  to  wearing  modern  whaffing  and
 whooshing.  And  why  not?  Do  you  object  to  Language,  root  and
 branch, Pip? I'm surprised at you, and you a poet and all.'         
 'Of course I don't! But I object to ruining it.'                    
 'But  are  you  ruining  it?  Is  it  any  worse  off  with  panting:
 whaffing  than  with  longing:  panting?  This  is  not only  the way
 language  is  changed,  it  is  how  it  was  made.   Essentially  it
 consists  in  the  contemplation  of  a  relationship  "sound: sense;
 symbol:  meaning". It's  not only  when this  is new  (to you  at any
 rate)  that  you  can  appraise  it.  At  inspired  moments  you  can
 catch it, get the thrill of it, in  familiar words.  I grant  that an
 onomatopoeia is a  relatively simple  case: whaff. But "to  pant for
 equals  to  long  for"  contains  the  same  element:   new  phonetic
 form  for  a  meaning.  Only  here  a  second  thing  comes  in:  the
 interest, pleasure,  excitement, what  you will,  of the  relation of
 old  sense  to  new. Both  are illumined,  for a  time, at  any rate.
 Language  could  never  have  come  into  existence  without  the one
 process,  and  never  have  extended  its  grasp  without  the other.
 Both must go on! They will, too.'                                   
 'Well, I don't  like this  example of  the activity,'  said Frankley.
 'And  I  detest  it,  when  philologues talk  about Language  (with a
 capital  L)  with  that  peculiarly  odious unction  usually reserved
 for  capitalized  Life.  That  we  are  told  "must  go  on" -  if we
 complain  of  any  debased  manifestations,  such  as  Arry   in  his
 cups. He talks about  Language as  if it  was not  only a  Jungle but
 a  Sacred  Jungle,  a  beastly  grove  dedicated to Vita Fera,(13) in
 which   nothing   must   be  touched   by  impious   hands.  Cankers,
 fungi, parasites: let 'em alone!                                    
 'Languages   are   not   jungles.   They   are   gardens,   in  which
 sounds  selected  from  the  savage  wilderness  of  Brute  Noise are
 turned  into  words,  grown,  trained,  and  endued  with  the scents

 of  significance.  You talk  as if  I could  not pull  up a  weed that
 stinks!'                                                            
   'I  do  not!'  said  Lowdham.  'But,  first  of  all,  you  have  to
 remember  that  it's  not  your  garden  -  if  you  must   have  this
 groggy allegory: it  belongs to  a lot  of other  people as  well, and
 to  them  your  stinking  weed  may  be  an  object  of  delight. More
 important:  your  allegory  is  misapplied.  What  you  are  objecting
 to  is  not  a  weed,  but the  soil, and  also any  manifestations of
 growth  and  spread.  All  the  other  words  in  your  refined garden
 have  come  into  being  (and  got  their  scent)  in  the  same  way.
 You're  like  a  man  who  is fond  of flowers  and fruit,  but thinks
 loam  is  dirty,  and  dung  disgusting;  and  the  uprising  and  the
 withering  just  too,  too  sad.  You  want  a  sterilized  garden  of
 immortelles,  no,  paper-flowers.  In  fact,  to  leave  allegory, you
 won't  learn  anything  about  the  history  of  your   own  language,
 and hate to be reminded that it has one.'(14)                        
   'Slay  me  with  pontifical  thunder-bolts!'  cried  Frankley.  'But
 I'll die saying I don't like pants for longings.'                    
   'That's  the  stuff!'   laughed  Lowdham.   'And  you're   right  of
 course,  Pip.  Both  are  right: the  Thunder and  the Rebel.  For the
 One  Speaker, all  alone, is  the final  court of  doom for  words, to
 bless  or  to  condemn.  It's  the  agreement  only  of  the  separate
 judges that seems  to make  the laws.  If your  distaste is  shared by
 an  effective  number  of  the  others,  then  pants  will  prove  - a
 weed, and be thrust in the oven.                                     
   'Though,   of   course,   many   people   -   more   and   more,   I
 sometimes  feel,  as  Time  goes  on  and  even  language stales  - do
 not  judge  any  longer,  they  only echo.  Their native  language, as
 Ramer would call it, dies almost at their birth.                     
   'It's  not  so with  you, Philip  my lad;  you're ignorant,  but you
 have a heart. I dare say pants just doesn't fit your native  style. So
 it  has  always  been  with  full  men:  they  have had  their hatreds
 among the words, and their loves.'                                   
   'You  talk  almost  as  if you'd  seen or  heard Language  since its
 beginning,  Arry,'  said  Ramer,  looking  at   him  with   some  sur-
 prise.  It  was  a  long  time  since  Lowdham had  let himself  go at
 such length.                                                         
   'No!  Not  since  its  beginning,'  said  Lowdham,  while  a strange
 expression  came  over  his  face.  'Only  since -  but ...  Oh well!'
 He  broke  off  and  went  to  the window.  It was  dark but  clear as
 glass in the sky, and there were many white stars.                   
                                                                     
         The conversation drifted again. Starting from the beginnings

 of  Language,  we  began  to  talk  about   legends  of   origins  and
 cultural   myths.   Guildford   and   Markison   began   to   have  an
 argument  about  Corn-gods  and   the  coming   of  divine   kings  or
 heroes  over  the  sea,  in spite  of various  frivolous interjections
 from  Lowdham,  who  seemed  curiously  averse  to  the  turn  of  the
 talk.                                                                 
   'The  Sheaf  personified,'*  said Guild[ford.  Here  unfortunately
 one leaf is missing.)......                                           
                                                                      
   [Jeremy].... 'as you said. But  I don't  think one  can be  so sure.
 Sometimes  I have  a queer  feeling that,  if one  could go  back, one
 would  find  not  myth  dissolving  into   history,  but   rather  the
 reverse:  real  history  becoming  more   mythical  -   more  shapely,
 simple,  discernibly significant,  even seen  at close  quarters. More
 poetical, and less prosaic, if you like.                              
   'In  any  case, these  ancient accounts,  legends, myths,  about the
 far  Past,  about  the  origins  of kings,  laws, and  the fundamental
 crafts,  are  not  all  made  of  the  same  ingredients.  They're not
 wholly  inventions.  And  even  what  is  invented  is  different from
 mere fiction; it has more roots.'                                     
   'Roots in what?' said Frankley.                                     
   'In  Being,  I  think  I  should  say,'  Jeremy  answered;  'and  in
 human  Being;  and  coming  down   the  scale,   in  the   springs  of
 History  and  in  the  designs  of Geography  - I  mean, well,  in the
 pattern of our world as it uniquely  is, and  of the  events in  it as
 seen from a distance. A sort  of parallel  to the  fact that  from far
 away  the  Earth  would  be  seen  as  a  revolving sunlit  globe; and
 that  is  a  remote  truth of  enormous effect  on us  and all  we do,
 though  not   immediately  discernible   on  earth,   where  practical
 men  are  quite   right  in   regarding  the   surface  as   flat  and
 immovable for practical purposes.                                     
   'Of  course,  the  pictures   presented  by   the  legends   may  be
 partly  symbolical,  they  may  be  arranged  in  designs   that  com-
 press,  expand,  foreshorten, combine,  and are  not at  all realistic
 or  photographic,  yet  they  may  tell you  something true  about the
 Past.                                                                 
   'And  mind  you,  there  are  also  real  details,  what  are called
 facts,  accidents  of  land-shape  and  sea-shape,  of  individual men
 and  their  actions,  that  are  caught  up: the  grains on  which the
 stories  crystallize  like   snowflakes.  There   was  a   man  called
 Arthur at the centre of the cycle.'                                   
                                                                      
  (* [See Night 66, p. 236.])                                          

                        
                                                                   
    'Perhaps!'  said Frankley.  'But that  doesn't make  such things
 as  the  Arthurian  romances  real  in  the same  way as  true past
 events are real.'                                                  
    'I  didn't  say  in  the  same  way,'  said  Jeremy.  'There are
 secondary planes or degrees.'                                      
    'And  what  do  you  know  about  "true  past  events", Philip?'
 asked  Ramer.  'Have  you  ever seen  one, when  once it  was past?
 They are all stories or tales now, aren't they, if you try to bring
 them  back  into  the  present?  Even  your  idea  of what  you did
 yesterday - if you try  to share  it with  anyone else?  Unless, of
 course, you can go back, or at least see back.'                    
    'Well, I  think there's  a difference  between what  really hap-
 pened at  our meetings  and Nicholas's  record,' said  Frankley. 'I
 don't think  his reports  erase the  true history,  whether they're
 true in their fashion to the events  or not.  And didn't  you claim
 to  be  able  sometimes  to re-view  the past  as a  present thing?
 Could you go back into Guildford's minutes?'                       
    'Hmm,'  Ramer  muttered,  considering.  'Yes  and no,'  he said.
 'Nicholas could, especially into the scenes  that he's  pictured or
 re-pictured  fairly  solidly  and  put  some  mental work  into. We
 could, if we did the same. People of the future, if they  only knew
 the records and  studied them,  and let  their imagination  work on
 them, till the Notion  Club became  a sort  of secondary  world set
 in the Past: they could.'                                          
    'Yes, Frankley,' said Jeremy, 'you've got to make  a distinction
 between  lies,  or  casual  fiction,  or the  mere verbal  trick of
 projecting  sentences  back  by  putting  the  verbs into  the past
 tense, between all that and construction.  Especially of  the major
 kind  that  has acquired  a secondary  life of  its own  and passes
 from mind to mind.'                                                
    'Quite  so!' said  Ramer. 'I  don't think  you realize,  I don't
 think  any  of  us  realize,  the  force,  the daimonic  force that
 the  great  myths  and  legends  have.   From  the   profundity  of
 the  emotions  and  perceptions  that  begot  them,  and  from  the
 multiplication  of  them  in  many  minds  -  and  each  mind, mark
 you,  an  engine  of  obscured  but  unmeasured  energy.  They  are
 like an explosive: it may slowly  yield a  steady warmth  to living
 minds, but if suddenly  detonated, it  might go  off with  a crash:
 yes: might produce a disturbance in the real primary world.'       
    'What sort of thing are you thinking of?' said  Dolbear, lifting
 his  beard off  his chest,  and opening  his eyes  with a  gleam of
 passing interest.                                                  

   'I wasn't thinking of any particular legend,' said  Ramer. 'But,
 well, for  instance, think  of the  emotional force  generated all
 down the west rim of Europe by the men  that came  at last  to the
 end, and looked  on the  Shoreless Sea,  unharvested, untraversed,
 unplumbed!  And   against  that   background  what   a  prodigious
 stature other events  would acquire!  Say, the  coming, apparently
 out of  that Sea,  riding a  storm, [of]  strange men  of superior
 knowledge, steering yet unimagined ships. And  if they  bore tales
 of catastrophe far away: battles, burned  cities, or  the whelming
 of lands in some tumult of the earth -  it shakes  me to  think of
 such things in such terms, even now.'                            
   'Yes, I'm moved  by that,'  said Frankley.  'But it's  large and
 vague.  I'm  still  stuck  a  good deal  nearer home,  in Jeremy's
 casual  reference  to  King  Arthur.  There  you  have  a  sort of
 legendary land, but it's quite unreal.'                          
   'But you'll allow, won't you,' said Ramer, 'that the  Britain of
 Arthur,  as  now  imagined, even  in a  debased when-knights-were-
 bold sort of form, has some kind of force and life?'             
   'Some kind of  literary attraction,'  said Frankley.  'But could
 you go  back to  King Arthur's  Camelot, even  on your  system? Of
 which, by  the way,  I'm not  yet convinced:  I mean,  what you've
 told us  seems to  me very  likely no  more than  an exceptionally
 elaborate,   and  exceptionally   well-remembered  form   of  what
 I   call   "dreaming"  simply:   picture-and-story-spinning  while
 asleep.'                                                         
   'And  anyway:  if  legend  (significant  on  its own  plane) has
 gathered  about  history  (with its  own importance),  which would
 you  go back  to? Which  would you  see, if  you saw  back?' asked
 Guildford.                                                       
   'It  depends  on what  you yourself  are like,  and on  what you
 are  looking  for,  I  imagine,'  Ramer  answered.  'If  you  were
 seeking  the  story  that  has  most  power  and  significance for
 human minds, then probably that is the version that you'ld find.
   'Anyway,  I  think  you  could  -  I  think I  could go  back to
 Camelot, if the conditions of my  mind and  the chances  of travel
 were favourable. The chances  are not,  as I  told you,  more than
 very  slightly  affected by  waking desire.  An adventure  of that
 sort would not be the same  thing as  re-viewing what  you'ld call
 Fifth-century Britain. Neither would  it be  like making  a dream-
 drama of my own. It would  be more  like the  first, but  it would
 be more active. It would  be much  less free  than the  second. It
 would probably be more difficult than either. I fancy it  might be

 the sort of thing best done by one or two people in concert.'       
   'I don't see how that would help,' said Frankley.                 
   'Because  different  people  have  different  views, or  have indi-
 vidual  contributions  to  make:  is  that  what  you   mean?'  asked
 Guildford. 'But that  would be  just as  true of  historical research
 or "backsight".'                                                    
   'No,  it  wouldn't,'  said  Jeremy.  'You're  mixing up  history in
 the  sense  of  a  story made  up out  of the  intelligible surviving
 evidence (which is not necessarily  truer to  the facts  than legend)
 and "the true story", the real Past. If  you really  had a  look back
 at the Past as  it was,  then everything  would be  there to  see, if
 you  had  eyes  for  it,  or  time  to  observe it  in. And  the most
 difficult thing to see would be, as  it always  is "at  present", the
 pattern, the significance, yes, the moral of it all, if you  like. At
 least that would be the case,  the nearer  you come  to our  time. As
 I  said before,  I'm not  so sure  about that,  as you  pass backward
 to the beginnings. But in  such a  thing as  a great  story-cycle the
 situation  would  be  different: much  would be  vividly real  and at
 the  same  time  ...  er...  portentous;  but  there might  be, would
 be,  uncompleted  passages,  weak  joints,   gaps.  You'ld   have  to
 consolidate. You might need help.'                                  
   'You  might  indeed!'  said  Frankley.  'Riding  down   from  Came-
 lot  (when  you had  discovered just  where that  was) to  most other
 places  on  the  legendary map,  you'ld find  the road  pretty vague.
 Most  of  the time  you'ld be  lost in  a fog!  And you'ld  meet some
 pretty sketchy characters about the court, too.'                    
   'Of  course!  And  so  you  would  about  the present  court,' said
 Markison,   'or   in   any   Oxford   quadrangle.  Why   should  that
 worry  you?  Sketchy  characters  are  more true  to life  than fully
 studied ones. There are  precious few  people in  real life  that you
 know as well as a good writer knows his heroes and villains.'       
   'Riding   down  to   Camelot.  Riding   out  from   Camelot,'  mur-
 mured  Lowdham.  'And  there  was  a  dark  shadow  over   that  too.
 I  wonder, I  wonder. But  it is  still only  a tale  to me.  Not all
 legends  are  like  that.  No,  unfortunately.  Some  seem   to  have
 come to life on their own, and they will not rest.  I should  hate to
 be  cast  back  into  some  of those  lands. It  would be  worse than
 the vision of poor Norman Keeps.'                                   
   'What on earth is he talking about now?' said Guildford.          
   'The  cork's  coming  out  pretty soon,  I think,'  grunted Dolbear
 without opening his eyes.                                           
   Oh,  Norman  Keeps  is  our  barber,'(15) said Frankley.  At  least

                                                              
                                                                
 that's what Arry and I call him: no idea what  his real  name is.
 Quite a nice and moderately  intelligent little  man: but  to him
 everything beyond a certain vague  distance back  is a  vast dark
 barren  but  utterly fixed  and determined  land and  time called
 The  Dark  Ages.  There  are  only  four  features in  it: Norman
 Keeps  (by  which  he  means baronial  castles, and  possibly the
 house  of  any man  markedly richer  than himself);  Them Jameses
 (meaning  roughly  I  suppose  the  kings   One  and   Two);  The
 Squires (a curious kind of bogey-folk);  and The  People. Nothing
 ever  happened  in  that land  but Them  Jameses shutting  up The
 People in  the Keeps  (with the  help of  The Squires)  and there
 torturing  them  and  robbing  them,  though  they  don't  appear
 ever  to  have  possessed  anything  to  be  robbed of.  Rather a
 gloomy legend. But it's a  great deal  more fixed  in a  lot more
 heads than is the Battle of Camlan!'(16)                       
   'I  know, I  know,' said  Lowdham loudly  and angrily.  'It's a
 shame!  Norman  Keeps  is a  very decent  chap, and  would rather
 learn truth than lies. But Zigur (17) pays  special attention  to the
 type. Curse him!'                                               
   Conversation  stopped,  and  there  was  a  silence.  Ramer and
 Guildford  exchanged  glances.  Dolbear  opened his  eyes quietly
 without moving his head.                                        
   'Zigur?'  said  Jeremy,  looking  at  Lowdham. 'Zigur?  Who is
 he?'                                                            
   'No idea, no idea!' said Lowdham. 'Is this  a new  game, Jerry?
 Owlamoo,(18) who's  he?'  He  strode  to the  window and  flung it
 open.                                                           
   The  early  summer  night  was  still  and  glimmering,  warmer
 than  usual  for  the  time of  year. Lowdham  leant out,  and we
 turned  and stared  at his  back. The  large window  looked west,
 and the two towers of All Souls' stuck up like dim  horns against
 the stars.                                                      
   Suddenly  Lowdham  spoke   in  a   changed  voice,   clear  and
 ominous,   words  in   an  unknown   tongue;  and   then  turning
 fiercely upon us he cried aloud:                                
   Behold the Eagles of  the Lords  of the  West! They  are coming
 over Numenor!(19)                                               
   We were  all startled.  Several of  us went  to the  window and
 stood  behind  Lowdham,  looking  out.  A  great   cloud,  coming
 up  slowly  out  of  the  West, was  eating up  the stars.  As it
 approached it opened two  vast sable  wings, spreading  north and
 south.                                                          

    Suddenly    Lowdham    pulled    away,    slammed    the   window
 down,  and  drew  the  curtains. He  slumped into  a chair  and shut
 his eyes.                                                            
                                                                     
    We  returned  to  our  seats  and  sat  there   uncomfortably  for
 some time without a sound. At last Ramer spoke.                      
    'Numenor?  Numenor?'  he  said  quietly.   'Where  did   you  find
 that name, Arundel Lowdham?'                                         
    'Oh,  I  don't   know,'  Lowdham   answered,  opening   his  eyes,
 and  looking  round  with  a  rather dazed  expression. 'It  comes to
 me,  now  and  again.  Just  on  the  edge   of  things,   you  know.
 Eludes  the  grasp.  Like  coming  round  after  gas.  But  it's been
 turning  up  more often  than usual  this spring.  I'm sorry.  Have I
 been  behaving   oddly  or   something,  not   quite  my   old  quiet
 friendly self? Give me a drink!'                                     
    'I  asked,'  said  Ramer,   'because  Numenor   is  my   name  for
 Atlantis.'(20)                                                       
    'Now that is odd!' began Jeremy.                                  
    'Ah!'  said  Lowdham.  'I  wondered if  it might  be. I  asked you
 what  your  name   was  that   night  last   term;  but   you  didn't
 answer.'                                                             
    'Well,  here's  a   new  development!'   said  Dolbear,   who  was
 now  wide  awake.  'If  Arry  Lowdham  is  going  to  dive  where the
 dreams  go  and  find  the  same  fish  as  Ramer,  we shall  have to
 look into the pool.'                                                 
    'We shall,'  said Jeremy;  'for it's  not only  Ramer and  Arry. I
 come  into it  too. I  knew I  had heard  that name  as soon  as Arry
 said it.(21) But I  can't for  the life  of me  remember where  or when
 at  the  moment.  It'll  bother  me now,  like a  thorn in  the foot,
 until I get it out.'                                                 
    'Very queer,' said Dolbear.                                       
    'What do you propose to do?' said Ramer.                          
    'Take your advice,' said Jeremy.  'Get your  help, if  you'll give
 it.'                                                                 
    'Go   into   memory-training   on   the  Rufus-Ramer   system  and
 see  what we  can fish  up,' said  Lowdham. 'I  feel as  if something
 wants to get out, and I should be glad to get it out - or forget it.'
    'I'm  a  bit  lost  in  all  this,'  said  Markison.  'I've missed
 something  evidently.  Philip  has  told  me  a  bit about  the Ramer
 revelations last term, but I'm still rather at sea. Couldn't you tell
 us something, Lowdham, to make things a little clearer?'             
    'No, really, I'm  feeling frightfully  tired,' said  Lowdham. 'You
 had  better  read  up  the  records,  if  Nick  has written  them out

 yet.(22) I expect he has. He's pretty regular, and pretty  accurate, if
 a  bit  hard  on  me.  And  come  along  to  the next  meeting. And
 we'd  better  make that  in a  fortnight's time,  I think.  You can
 have my room, if you think you can all  get in.  We'll see  what we
 have got by then. I've nothing much to tell yet.'                 
                                                                  
   The  conversation  then  dropped  back  uncertainly  towards  the
 normal, and nothing further occurred worth noting.                
                                                                  
   As we went  out Lowdham  said to  Ramer: 'D'you  think I        
 could come round and talk to you, and to Rufus,  some time        
 soon?'                                                            
   'Yes,' said Ramer. 'The sooner the better. You come too,        
 Jeremy.'                                                          
                                                                  
   MGR. PF. RD. JM. JJ. RS. AAL. WTJ. NG.                          
                                                                  
 Night 66. Thursday, May 22nd, 1987.                               
                                                                  
   A  crowded  evening.  Lowdham's  rather  small  room  was  pretty
 packed.  The  idea  of  Arry   'seeing  things'   was  sufficiently
 astonishing  to attract  every member  who was  in Oxford.  (Also I
 am  supposed  to  keep  more  bottles  in  my  cupboard  than  some
 that I could name. AAL)                                           
   Lowdham  seemed  in  a  bright  and  rather  noisy   mood  again;
 reluctant  to  do anything  but sing.  Eventually he  was quietened
 and got into a chair.                                             
   'Well now,' said Markison, 'I've  read the  records. I  can't say
 I've made my mind up  about them  yet; but  I'm very  interested to
 hear how  you come  into such  business, Arry.  It doesn't  seem in
 your line.'                                                       
   'Well,  I'm  a  philologist,'  said   Lowdham,  'which   means  a
 misunderstood man. But where I come in  is, I  think, at  the point
 you've  mentioned:  at  Arry.  The  name  Arry,  which some  of you
 are pleased to attach to me,  is not  just a  tribute to  my vulgar
 noisiness,  as seems  assumed by  the more  ignorant among  you: it
 is short not for Henry or Harold,  but for  Arundel. In  full Alwin
 Arundel Lowdham your humble jester, at your service.'             
   'Well, what has that got to do with it?' said several voices.
   'I'm not quite  sure yet,'  said Lowdham.  'But my  father's name
 was Edwin.'(23)                                                   
   'Illuminating indeed! ' said Frankley.                          
   'Not  very,  I  think,'  said  Lowdham.  'Not  illuminating,  but
 puzzling.  My  father  was  an  odd  sort  of  man,  as  far  as  I

 remember. Large, tall, powerful, dark.  Don't stare  at me!  I'm a
 reduced  copy.  He  was  wealthy,  and  combined  a   passion  for
 the sea with learning  of a  sort, linguistic  and archaeological.
 He  must   have  studied   Anglo-Saxon  and   other  North-western
 tongues; for I inherited his library and some of his tastes.     
   'We  lived  in  Pembrokeshire,  near Penian:(24) more or  less, for
 we  were  away  a  large  part  of  the  year;  and my  father was
 always going off at a moment's notice:  he spent  a great  deal of
 his  time sailing  about Norway,  Scotland, Ireland,  Iceland, and
 sometimes  southward  to  the  Azores and  so on.  I did  not know
 him well,  though I  loved him  as much  as a  small boy  can, and
 used to dream of the time when I  could go  sailing with  him. But
 he disappeared when I was only nine.'                            
   'Disappeared?'  said  Frankley.  'I  thought  you  told  me once
 that he was lost at sea.'                                        
   'He  disappeared,'  said  Lowdham. 'A  strange story.  No storm.
 His ship just vanished into the Atlantic. That  was in  1947, just
 forty years ago next month. No signals (he wouldn't  use wireless,
 anyway).  No  trace.  No  news.  She was  called The Earendel.(25) An
 odd business.'                                                   
   'The  seas  were still  pretty dangerous  at that  time, weren't
 they?' said Stainer. 'Mines all over the place?'                 
   'Not a spar at  any rate  was ever  found,' said  Lowdham. 'That
 was  the  end  of The  Earendel: a  queer name,  and a  queer end.
 But my  father had  some queer  fancies about  names. I  am called
 Alwin  Arundel,  a  mouthful  enough,  out  of  deference  to pru-
 dence  and  my  mother,  I  believe.  The  names  he   chose  were
 AElfwine Earendel.                                                
   'One  of  the  few  conversations  I  remember  having  with him
 was just before he went off for the last time. I had begged  to go
 with him, and he had said NO, of course. "When can I go?" I said.
   '"Not yet, AElfwine," he  said. "Not  yet. Some  time, perhaps.
 Or you may have to follow me."                                   
   'It was  then that  it came  out about  my names.  "I modernized
 'em,"  he  said, "to  save trouble.  But my  ship bears  the truer
 name.  It does  not look  to Sussex,(26) but to  shores a  great deal
 further  off.  Very  far  away   indeed  now.   A  man   has  more
 freedom in naming his ship  than his  own son  in these  days. And
 it's few men that have either to name."                          
   'He went off next day.  He was  mad to  be at  sea again,  as he
 had been kept ashore all through  the Six  Years' War,(27) from the
 summer  of  1939  onward,  except  I believe  just at  the Dunkirk

 time  in  1940.  Too  old  -  he  was  fifty when  the war  broke out,
 and I  was only  a year;  for he  had married  late -  too old,  and I
 fancy  a  good  deal  too free  and unbiddable  to get  any particular
 job,  and  he  had  become  fiercely  restless.  He  only  took  three
 sailors  with him,(28) I think,  but  of  course  I  don't know  how he
 found  them,  or  how  they  ever managed  to get  off, in  those days
 of  tyranny.  I  fancy  they  just  cleared  out  illegally,  somehow.
 Whither,  I  wonder?  I  don't  think  they  meant  to  return. Anyway
 I never saw him again.'                                              
   'I  can't  see  the  connexion  of  this  thread  at all  yet,' said
 Guildford.                                                           
   'Wait  a  bit!'  said  Ramer.  'There  is a  connexion, or  we think
 so. We've discussed it. You'd better let Arundel have his say.'      
   'Well  -  as  soon  as he'd  gone... I  was only  nine at  the time,
 as  I  said,  and I  had never  bothered much  about books,  let alone
 languages,  naturally  at that  age. I  could read,  of course,  but I
 seldom  did  ...  as  soon  as  my  father  had  gone,  and   we  knew
 that  it  was  for  good,  I   began  to   take  up   with  languages,
 especially  making them  up (as  I thought).  After a  time I  used to
 stray into his study, left for years it was, just as it had  been when
 he was alive.                                                        
   'There I  learned a  lot of  odd things  in a  desultory way,  and I
 came  across  some  sort  of a  diary or  notes in  a queer  script. I
 don't  know  what  happened  to  it  when  my  mother  died.   I  only
 found  one  loose  leaf  of  it  among  the  papers  that came  to me.
 I've kept it for years, and often tried and failed to read it;  but it
 is mislaid at  present. I  was about  fourteen or  fifteen when  I got
 specially  taken  with  Anglo-Saxon,  for  some  reason.  I  liked its
 word-style,  I think.  It wasn't  so much  what was  written in  it as
 the  flavour  of  the  words  that   suited  me.   But  I   was  first
 introduced  to  it  by  trying  to find  out more  about the  names. I
 didn't get much light on them.                                       
   'Eadwine  friend  of  fortune? AElfwine  elf-friend?  That   at  any
 rate  is  what  their  more  or  less  literal  translation  comes to.
 Though,  as  most  of  you  will  know  (except  poor  Philip),  these
 two-part  names  are  pretty  conventional,  and  not  too   much  can
 be built on their literal meaning.'                                  
   'But  they  must  originally  have  been  made  to have  a meaning,'
 said  Ramer.  'The  habit  of  joining,  apparently  at   random,  any
 two  of  a  list  of  beginners  and  enders,  giving  you Spear-peace
 and  Peace-wolf  and  that  sort  of  thing,  must  have been  a later
 development,  a  kind  of  dried-up  verbal  heraldry.  AElfwine  any-

 way  is one  of the  old combinations.  It occurs  outside England,
 doesn't it?'                                                      
   'Yes,'  said  Lowdham.  'And  so  does Eadwine.  But I  could not
 see  that any  of the  many recorded AElfwines were  very suitable:
 AElfwine, grandson of King Alfred,  for instance,  who fell  in the
 great victory of 937;  or AElfwine  who fell  in the  famous defeat
 of  Maldon,  and  many  others;  not even  AElfwine of  Italy, that
 is  Albuin  son  of  Auduin,  the  grim  Langobard  of   the  sixth
 century.'(29)                                                     
   'Don't  forget  the  connexion  of   the  Langobards   with  King
 Sheaf,'(30) put  in  Markison,  who  was  beginning  to show  signs of
 interest.                                                         
   'I  don't,'  said  Lowdham.  'But  I was  talking of  my earliest
 investigations as a boy.'                                         
   'Nor  the  repetition  of  the  sequence:  Albuin son  of Auduin;
 AElfwine son of Eadwine; Alwin son of Edwin,' said Ramer.(31)    
   'Probably  deliberately  imitated  from  the well-known  story of
 Rosamund,'(32) objected  Philip  Frankley.  'Arry's  father  must have
 known it. And that's quite  enough to  explain Alwin  and AElfwine,
 when you're dealing with a family of Nordic philologues.'         
   'Perhaps,  O Horsefriend  of Macedon!'(33) said   Lowdham.  'But
 it doesn't take in Earendel. There's little to  be found  out about
 that  in  Anglo-Saxon,  though the  name is  there all  right. Some
 guess that it was really a star-name for Orion, or for Rigel.(34) A
 ray, a brilliance, the light of dawn: so run the glosses.(35)     
               Eala Earendel engla beorhtost
               ofer middangeard monnum sended!'
 he  chanted.  '"Hail  Earendel,  brightest  of  angels,  above  the
 middle-earth  sent  unto  men!"  When I  came across  that citation
 in the  dictionary I  felt a  curious thrill,  as if  something had
 stirred  in  me,  half  wakened  from  sleep.  There  was something
 very  remote and  strange and  beautiful behind  those words,  if I
 could grasp it, far beyond ancient English.                       
   'I  know  more  now,  of  course.  The  quotation comes  from the
 Crist,. though exactly what the author meant is not so certain.(36)
 It is beautiful enough in its place. But  I don't  think it  is any
 irreverence to say that it may derive its curiously  moving quality
 from some older world.'                                           
   'Why  irreverent?'  said Markison.  'Even if  the words  do refer
 to  Christ,  of  course  they are  all derived  from an  older pre-
 christian world, like all the rest of the language.'              
   'That's  so,'  said  Lowdham;  'but  Earendel   seems  to   me  a

 special word.  It is  not Anglo-Saxon;(37) or rather, it is not only
 Anglo-Saxon, but also something else much older.                  
   'I think it is a  remarkable case  of linguistic  coincidence, or
 congruence.  Such  things  do  occur,  of  course.  1 mean,  in two
 different  languages,  quite  unconnected,  and  where  no  borrow-
 ing  from  one  to  the  other  is possible,  you will  come across
 words  very similar  in both  sound and  meaning. They  are usually
 dismissed as accidents; and  I daresay  some of  the cases  are not
 significant. But I fancy that they may sometimes  be the  result of
 a  hidden  symbol-making  process  working out  to similar  ends by
 different routes. Especially when the result  is beautiful  and the
 meaning poetical, as is the case with Earendel.'                  
   'If I follow all this,' said Markison, 'I suppose you  are trying
 to say that you've discovered  Earendel, or  something like  it, in
 some  other  unconnected  language,  and  are  dismissing  all  the
 other  forms  of the  name that  are found  in the  older languages
 related   to  English.   Though  one   of  them,   Auriwandalo,  is
 actually  recorded as  a Langobardic  name, I  think. It's  odd how
 the Langobards keep cropping up.'                                 
   'It is,' said Lowdham, 'but I am  not interested  in that  at the
 moment. For I  do mean  that: I  have often  heard earendel,  or to
 be exact earendil, e-a-r-e-n-d-i-l, in  another language,  where it
 actually  means  Great  Mariner,  or literally  Friend of  the Sea;
 though it also has, I think, some connexion with the stars.'      
   'What  language  is  that?'  said  Markison, knitting  his brows.
 'Not one I've ever  come across,  I think.'  (He has  'come across'
 or dabbled in about a hundred in his time.)                       
   'No, I don't  suppose you've  ever met  it,' said  Lowdham. 'It's
 an unknown language. But I had better try and explain.            
   'From  the  time  of  my  father's  departure  I  began  to  have
 curious  experiences,  and  I  have  gone on  having them  down the
 years, slowly  increasing in  clearness: visitations  of linguistic
 ghosts, you might say. Yes, just that. I am not a seer. I  have, of
 course,  pictorial  dreams  like  other folk,  but only  what Ramer
 would call marginal stuff, and few and fleeting  at that:  which at
 any rate means  that if  I see  things I  don't remember  them. But
 ever  since  I  was  about ten  I have  had words,  even occasional
 phrases,  ringing in  my ears;  both in  dream and  waking abstrac-
 tion.  They  come  into  my  mind  unbidden,  or  I  wake  to  hear
 myself repeating them. Sometimes  they seem  to be  quite isolated,
 just  words  or  names.  Sometimes  something  seems  to  "break my
 dream"(38) as my mother used to say: the names  seem   to  be

 connected  strangely  with  things  seen  in  waking  life,  suddenly,
 in  some  fleeting  posture or  passing light  which transports  me to
 some  quite  different  region  of  thought  or imagination.  Like the
 Camera that night in March, Ramer, if you remember it.               
   'Looking  at  a  picture  once  of  a  cone-shaped  mountain  rising
 out  of  wooded  uplands,  I  heard  myself  crying out:  "Desolate is
 Minul-Tarik,  the  Pillar  of  Heaven  is forsaken!"  and I  knew that
 it  was  a  dreadful thing.  But most  ominous of  all are  the Eagles
 of  the  Lords  of  the West.  They shake  me badly  when I  see them.
 I could, I could - I feel I could tell some great tale of Numenor.
   'But I'm getting on  too fast.  It was  a long  time before  I began
 to  piece  the  fragments  together  at  all.  Most  of  these "ghost-
 words"  are,  and  always were,  to all  appearance casual,  as casual
 as  the  words  caught  by  the  eye  from   a  lexicon   when  you're
 looking  for  something  else.  They  began  to  come  through,  as  I
 said, when  I was  about ten;  and almost  at once  I started  to note
 them  down.  Clumsily,  of  course,  at  first.  Even   grown-up  folk
 make  a poor  shot, as  a rule,  at spelling  the simplest  words that
 they've  never  seen,  unless   they  have   some  sort   of  phonetic
 knowledge.  But  I've  still  got  some  of  the  grubby  little note-
 books  I  used  as  a small  boy. An  unsystematic jumble,  of course;
 for  it was  only now  and again  that I  bothered about  such things.
 But  later  on,  when I  was older  and had  a little  more linguistic
 experience,  I  began  to pay  serious attention  to my  "ghosts", and
 saw  that  they  were  something  quite  different  from  the  game of
 trying to make up private languages.                                 
   'As  soon  as  I  started  looking out  for them,  so to  speak, the
 ghosts  began  to  come  oftener  and clearer;  and when  I had  got a
 lot  of  them  noted  down,  I  saw  that  they  were  not all  of one
 kind: they had different phonetic  styles, styles  as unlike  as, well
 -  Latin and  Hebrew. I  am sorry,  if this  seems a  bit complicated.
 I can't help it: and if this stuff  is worth  your bothering  about at
 all, we'd better get it right.                                       
   'Well, first of all I  recognized that  a lot  of these  ghosts were
 Anglo-Saxon,  or  related  stuff.  What  was  left  I arranged  in two
 lists, A and B, according to their style, with a third rag-bag  list C
 for  odd  things  that  didn't  seem to  fit in  anywhere. But  it was
 language A that really attracted me; it just suited  me. I  still like
 it best.'                                                            
   'In  that  case  you ought  to have  got it  pretty well  worked out
 by  now,'  said  Stainer.  'Haven't  you  got  a  Grammar  and Lexicon
 of   Lowdham's   Language   A   that   you   could   pass   round?   I

 wouldn't  mind  a  look at  it, if  it isn't  in some  hideous phonetic
 script.                                                               
   Lowdham   stared   at   him,   but   repressed  the   explosion  that
 seemed  imminent.  'Are  you  deliberately   missing  the   point?'  he
 said. 'I've been painfully  trying to  indicate that  I do  not believe
 that this stuff is "invented", not by me at any rate.                 
   'Take  the  Anglo-Saxon  first.  It  is   the  only   known  language
 that comes  through at  all in  this way,  and that  in itself  is odd.
 And it  began to  come through  before I  knew it.  I recognized  it as
 Anglo-Saxon  only  after  I  began  to  learn it  from books,  and then
 I  had  the  curious  experience  of  finding  that  I  already  knew a
 good  many  of  the  words.  Why,   there  are   a  number   of  ghost-
 words  noted  in  the  very first  of my  childish note-books  that are
 plainly  a  beginner's  efforts  at  putting  down  spoken  Old English
 words  in  modern  letters.  There's  wook,   woak,  woof   =  crooked,
 for  instance,  that  is  evidently  a   first  attempt   at  recording
 Anglo-Saxon woh.                                                     
   'And as for the  other stuff:  A, the  language I  like best,  is the
 shortest  list.  How  I  wish  I  could get  more of  it! But  it's not
 under  my  control, Stainer.  It's not  one of  my invented  lingoes. I
 have  made  up  two  or  three,  and  they're  as  complete  as they're
 ever  likely  to  be;  but  that's  quite   a  different   matter.  But
 evidently  I'd  better  cut  out  the   autobiography  and   jump  down
 to the present.                                                       
   'It's  now  clear  to  me that  the two  languages A  and B  have got
 nothing  to  do  with  any  language  I've ever  heard, or  come across
 in  books  in  the  ordinary  way. Nothing.  As far  as it  is possible
 for  any  language,  built  out  of about  two dozen  sounds, as  A is,
 to   avoid   occasional   resemblances   to   other   quite   unrelated
 tongues:   nothing.   And   they   have   nothing   to   do   with   my
 inventions  either.  Language  B   is  quite   unlike  my   own  style.
 Language  A  is  very  agreeable  to my  taste (it  may have  helped to
 form  it),  but it  is independent  of me;  I can't  "work it  out", as
 you put it.                                                          
   'Any   one   who   has   ever   spent   (or   wasted)  any   time  on
 composing   a   language   will    understand   me.    Others   perhaps
 won't.  But  in making  up a  language you  are free:  too free.  It is
 difficult  to  fit  meaning  to  any  given  sound-pattern,   and  even
 more  difficult  to fit  a sound-pattern  to any  given meaning.  I say
 fit.  I  don't   mean  that   you  can't   assign  forms   or  meanings
 arbitrarily, as you  will. Say,  you want  a word  for sky.  Well, call
 it  jibberjabber,  or  anything   else  that   comes  into   your  head

 without the exercise  of any  linguistic taste  or art.  But that's
 code-making,  not  language-building.  It  is quite  another matter
 to find a relationship, sound plus sense,  that satisfies,  that is
 when  made  durable. When  you're just  inventing, the  pleasure or
 fun  is  in  the moment  of invention;  but as  you are  the master
 your  whim  is  law,  and you  may want  to have  the fun  all over
 again,  fresh.  You're liable  to be  for ever  niggling, altering,
 refining,  wavering,  according  to  your  linguistic  mood  and to
 your changes of taste.                                             
   'It  is  not  in the  least like that  with my  ghost-words. They
 came  through  made:  sound  and  sense  already  conjoined.  I can
 no more niggle with them than I can  alter the  sound or  the sense
 of  the  word  polis  in Greek.  Many of  my ghost-words  have been
 repeated,  over  and over  again, down  the years.  Nothing changes
 but,  occasionally, my  spelling. They  don't change.  They endure,
 unaltered,  unalterable  by  me.  In  other  words  they  have  the
 effect  and  taste  of  real  languages.  But  one  can  have one's
 preferences among real languages, and as I say, I like A best.     
   'Both  A  and  B  I  associate   in  some   way  with   the  name
 Numenor. The rag-bag list  has got  pretty long  as the  years have
 gone on, and I  can now  see that,  among some  unidentified stuff,
 it contains  a lot  of echoes  of later  forms of  language derived
 from  A  and  B.  The  Numenorean  tongues  are old,  old, archaic;
 they taste of  an Elder  World to  me. The  other things  are worn,
 altered, touched with the loss  and bitterness  of these  shores of
 exile.' These last words he spoke in a strange tone, as  if talking
 to himself. Then his voice trailed off into silence.               
   'I find this rather hard to follow, or to swallow,' said Stainer.
 'Couldn't you  give us  something a  bit clearer,  something better
 to bite on than this algebra of A and B?'                          
                                                                   
   Lowdham  looked  up  again.  'Yes,  I could,'  he said.  'I won't
 bother  you with  the later  echoes. I  find them  moving, somehow,
 and instructive  technically: I  am beginning  to discern  the laws
 or  lines  of  their  change  as  the  world  grew older;  but that
 wouldn't  be  clear  even to  a philologist  except in  writing and
 with long parallel lists.                                          
   'But  take  the  name  Numenore  or   Numenor  (both   occur)  to
 start  with.  That  belongs  to Language  A. It  means Westernesse,
 and  is  composed  of  nume  "west" and  nore "folk"  or "country".
 But  the  B name  is Anadune,  and the  people are  called Adunaim,
 from the B word  adun "west".  The same  land, or  so I  think, has

 another  name:  in  A  Andore  and  in B  Yozayan,(39) and  both mean
 "Land of Gift".                                                   
   'There  seems  to  be  no  connexion  between  the  two languages
 there. But there are some words that are the  same or  very similar
 in  both.  The  word  for  "sky"  or  "the  heavens"  is  menel  in
 Language  A and  minil in  B: a  form of  it occurs  in Minul-tarik
 "Pillar  of  Heaven"  that I  mentioned just  now. And  there seems
 to  be  some  connexion  between  the  A  word  Valar,  which seems
 to  mean  something  like  "The  Powers",   we  might   say  "gods"
 perhaps,  and  the B  plural Avaloim  and the  place-name Avalloni.
 Although that is a  B name,  it is  with it,  oddly enough,  that I
 associate Language A; so if  you want  to get  rid of  algebra, you
 can call A Avallonian, and B Adunaic. I do myself.                
   'The  name  Earendil,  by  the  way,  belongs to  Avallonian, and
 contains eare "the open sea" and the  stem ndil  "love, devotion":
 that may look a bit  odd, but  lots of  the Avallonian  stems begin
 with  nd,  mb, ng,  which lose  their d,  b, or  g when  they stand
 alone.   The   corresponding   Adunaic  name,   apparently  meaning
 just the same, is Azrubel.  A large  number of  names seem  to have
 double  forms  like  this,  almost  as  if  one  people  spoke  two
 languages.  If  that  is  so,  I  suppose  the  situation  could be
 paralleled  by  the use  of, say,  Chinese in  Japan, or  indeed of
 Latin  in Europe.  As if  a man  could be  called Godwin,  and also
 Theophilus  or  Amadeus.  But  even so  two different  peoples must
 come into the story somewhere.                                    
   'Well there you are. I hope you are not all  bored. I  could give
 you  long lists  of other  words. Words,  words, mostly  just that.
 For the most part  significant nouns,  like Isil  and Nilu  for the
 Moon;  fewer  adjectives,  still fewer  verbs, and  only occasional
 connected phrases.  I love  these languages,  though they  are only
 fragments  out  of  some  forgotten  book.  I  find  both curiously
 attractive,  though  Avallonian  is  nearest  to my  heart. Adunaic
 with its, well, faintly Semitic flavour belongs more nearly  to our
 world, somehow. But Avallonian is  to me  beautiful, in  its simple
 and  euphonious  style.  And  it  seems  to  me  more  august, more
 ancient, and, well, sacred and liturgical.  I used  to call  it the
 Elven-Latin. The echoes of it carry  one far  away. Very  far away.
 Away  from  Middle-earth  altogether,  I expect.'  He paused  as if
 he was listening.  'But I  could not  explain just  what I  mean by
 that,' he ended.                                                  
   There  was  a  short  silence,  and  then  Markison  spoke.  'Why
 did you call it Elven-Latin?'(40) he asked. 'Why Elven?'              

   'I   don't   quite   know,'  Lowdham   answered.  'It   seems  the
 nearest  English  word  for  the  purpose.  But  certainly  I didn't
 mean  elf  in   any  debased   post-Shakespearean  sort   of  sense.
 Something  far  more  potent  and  majestic.  I  am not  quite clear
 what. In fact it's one of the things that I  most want  to discover.
 What is the real reference of the aelf in my name?                 
   'You   remember   that   I   said   Anglo-Saxon   used   to   come
 through mixed up  with this  other queer  stuff, as  if it  had some
 special  connexion  with  it?  Well,  I  got  hold   of  Anglo-Saxon
 through the ordinary books later on:  I began  to learn  it properly
 before I was fifteen, and that confused the issue. Yet it is  an odd
 fact  that,  though  I  found  most  of  these words  already there,
 waiting  for  me,  in  the  printed  vocabularies  and dictionaries,
 there  were  some  - and  they still  come through  now and  again -
 that are not there at all.  Tiwas,(41) for instance,  apparently used
 as  an  equivalent   of  the Avallonian  Valar; and Nowendaland (42)
 for Numenore. And other compound names too, like Freafiras,(43)    
 Regeneard,(44) and Midswipen.(45) Some  were in  very   archaic  form:
 like hebaensuil "pillar of  heaven", or  frumaeldi; or  very antique
 indeed like Wihawinia.'(46)                                        
   'This  is  dreadful,'  sighed  Frankley.   'Though  I   suppose  I
 should be grateful  at least  that Valhalla  and Valkyries  have not
 made  their  appearance  yet.  But  you'd  better be  careful, Arry!
 We're all friends here, and  we won't  give you  away. But  you will
 be getting into trouble, if you let  your archaic  cats out  of your
 private  bag  among  your  quarrelsome philological  rivals. Unless,
 of course, you back up their theories.'(47)                         
   'You  needn't  worry,'  said  Lowdham.   'I've  no   intention  of
 publishing  the  stuff.  And  I  haven't  come across  anything very
 controversial  anyway.   After  all   Anglo-Saxon  is   pretty  near
 home,  in  place  and time,  and it's  been closely  worked: there's
 not  much  margin  for  wide  errors,  not  even  in  pronunciation.
 What  I  hear  is  more  or  less what  the received  doctrine would
 lead me to  expect. Except  in one  point: it  is so  slow! Compared
 with  us  urban  chirrupers  the  farmers and  mariners of  the past
 simply  mouthed,  savoured  words  like  meat  and  wine  and  honey
 on  their  tongues.   Especially  when   declaiming.  They   made  a
 scrap  of  verse  majestically  sonorous: like  thunder moving  on a
 slow  wind,  or  the tramp  of mourners  at the  funeral of  a king.
 We just gabble the stuff. But even that is no news  to philologists,
 in  theory;  though  the  realization  of it  in sound  is something
 mere  theory  hardly  prepares   you  for.   And,  of   course,  the

 philologists  would  be  very  interested  in  my  echoes   of  very
 archaic  English,  even early  Germanic -  if they  could be  got to
 believe that they were genuine.                                     
   'Here's a bit  that might  intrigue them.  It's very  primitive in
 form, though I use a less horrific notation than  is usual.  But you
 had  better  see  this.'  He  brought  out  from his  pocket several
 scraps      of      paper      and      passed      them      round;
 westra lage wegas rehtas, wraikwas nu isti.                        
   'That  came  through  years  ago,(48) long before I  could interpret
 it, and it has constantly been repeated in various forms:           
                                                                    
            westra lage wegas rehtas, wraikwas nu isti.              
            westweg waes rihtweg, woh is nupa                         
                                                                    
 and  so  on  and  on  and  on,  in  many snatches  and dream-echoes,
 down   from   what  looks   like  very   ancient  Germanic   to  Old
 English.                                                            
 a straight way lay westward, now it is bent.                        
 It seems the key to something, but I can't  fit it  yet. But  it was
 while  I  was  rummaging   in  an  Onomasticon,(49) and poring  over
 the  list  of AElfwines, that  I got,  seemed to  hear and  see, the
 longest  snatch  that  has  ever come  through in  that way,  Yes, I
 said  I  wasn't  a  seer;  but  Anglo-Saxon  is sometimes  an excep-
 tion. I don't see pictures, but I see letters: some of the words and
 especially some of the scraps  of verse  seem to  be present  to the
 mind's  eye as  well as  to the  ear, as  if sometime,  somewhere, I
 had  seen  them written  and could  almost recall  the page.  If you
 turn over the slips I gave you, you'll see the thing written out. It
 came  through when  I was  only sixteen,  before I  had read  any of
 the old verse; but the lines stuck, and I put them  down as  well as
 I could. The archaic  forms interest  me now  as a  philologist, but
 that's  how  they   came  through,   and  how   they  stand   in  my
 note-book  under  the  date  October  1st 1954.  A windy  evening: I
 remember  it  howling  round  the  house, and  the distant  sound of
 the sea.                                                            
          Monath modaes lust mith merifloda
          forth ti foeran thaet ic feorr hionan
          obaer gaarseggaes grimmae bolmas
          aelbuuina eard uut gisoecae.                                        
          Nis me ti hearpun hygi ni ti hringthegi
          ni ti wibae wyn ni ti weoruldi hyct
          ni ymb oowict ellaes nebnae ymb ytha giwalc.                       

 It sounds to me now almost like my own father speaking across     
 grey seas of world and time:                                      
                                                                  
         My soul's desire over the sea-torrents                    
         forth bids me fare, that I afar should seek               
         over the ancient water's awful mountains                  
         Elf-friends' island in the Outer-world.                   
         For no harp have I heart, no hand for gold,               
         in no wife delight, in the world no hope:                 
         one wish only, for the waves' tumult.                     
                                                                  
   'I know now, of course, that these  lines very  closely resemble
 some of the verses in the middle of The Seafarer, as  that strange
 old poem of longing is usually called. But they are not  the same.
 In the text preserved in manuscript it  runs elpeodigra  eard 'the
 land of aliens', not aelbuuina or aelfwina (as  it would  have been
 spelt later) 'of the AElfwines, the Elven-friends'. I think mine is
 probably the older and better text - it  is in  a much  older form
 and spelling anyway - but I daresay I should get into  trouble, as
 Pip suggests, if I put it into a "serious journal".(50)           
   'It was not until quite recently that I picked up echoes of some
 other  lines  that  are  not  found  at  all  among  the preserved
 fragments of the oldest English verses.(51)                       
                                                                  
           Pus cwaed AElfwine Widlast Eadwines sunu:               
           Fela bid on Westwegum werum uncudra,                    
           wundra and wihta, wlitescene land,                      
           eardgeard aelfa and esa bliss.                          
           Lyt aenig wat hwylc his langod sie                     
           pam pe eftsides eldo getwaefed.                          
                                                                  
    'Thus spake AElfwine the Fartravelled son of Eadwine:
      There is many a thing in the west of the world unknown to
      men; marvels and strange beings, [a land lovely to look on,]
      the dwelling place of the Elves and the bliss of the Gods.
      Little doth any man know what longing is his whom old
      age cutteth off from return.
    'I think my father went before Eld should cut him off. But
 what of Eadwine's son?
    'Well, now I've had my say for the present. There may be
 more later. I am working at the stuff - as hard as time and my
 duties allow, and things may happen. Certainly I'll let you
 know, if they do. For now you have endured so much, I expect
 you will want some more news, if anything interesting turns up.

 If it's any comfort to you, Philip, I think we shall get away from
 Anglo-Saxon sooner or later.'                                      
   'If it's any comfort to you, Arry,' said Frankley, 'for the first
 time in your long life as a preacher you've made me faintly        
 interested in it.'                                                 
   'Good Heavens!' said Lowdham. 'Then there must be some-          
 thing very queer going on! Lor bless me! Give me a drink and I     
 will sing, as the minstrels used to say.                           
               Fil me a cuppe of ful gode ale,                      
               for longe I have spelled tale!                       
               Nu wil I drinken or I ende                           
               that Frenche men to helle wende!'(52)                
   The song was interrupted by Frankley. Eventually a sem-          
 blance of peace was restored, only one chair being a casualty.     
 Nothing toward or untoward occurred for the remainder of the       
 evening.                                                           
                                                                   
   AAL. MGR. WTJ. JM. RD. RS. PF. JJ. JJR. NG.                      
                                                                   
 Night 67. Thursday, June 12th, 1987.(53)                           
                                                                   
   We  met  in  Ramer's  rooms  in Jesus  College. There  were eight
 of  us  present,  including  Stainer  and  Cameron,  and   all  the
 regulars  except  Lowdham.  It  was  very  hot  and sultry,  and we
 sat  near  the window  looking into  the inner  quadrangle, talking
 of  this  and  that,  and  listening  for  the noises  of Lowdham's
 approach; but an hour passed and there was still no sign of him.
   'Have  you  seen  anything  of  Arry  lately?'  said  Frankley to
 Jeremy.  'I  haven't.  I wonder  if he's  going to  turn up  at all
 tonight?'                                                         
   'I couldn't say,' said Jeremy. 'Ramer and  I saw  a good  deal of
 him in the first few days after our last meeting, but I haven't set
 eyes on him for some time now.'                                    
   'I wonder what he's  up to?  They say  he cancelled  his lectures
 last week. I hope he's not ill.'                                   
   'I don't think you need fret about your little  Elf-friend,' said
 Dolbear.  'He's  got a  body and  a constitution  that would  put a
 steamroller back  a bit,  if it  bumped into  him. And  don't worry
 about his mind! He's  getting something  off it,  and that  will do
 him no harm, I think. At least whatever  it does,  it will  do less
 harm  than  trying  to cork  it up  any longer.  But what  on earth
 it all is  - well,  I'm still  about as  much at  sea as  old Edwin
 Lowdham himself.'                                                  

   'Sunk, in fact,' said Stainer. 'I should say it was a  bad attack
 of repressed linguistic invention,  and that  the sooner  he brings
 out an Adunaic Grammar the better for all.'                        
   'Perhaps,'  said  Ramer.  'But  he  may  bring  out  a  lot  more
 besides. I wish he would come!'                                   
                                                                   
   At  that  moment  there was  the sound  of loud  footsteps, heavy
 and quick, on  the wooden  stairs below.  There was  a bang  on the
 door, and in strode Lowdham.                                       
   'I've   got  something   new!'  he   shouted.  'More   than  mere
 words.  Verbs!  Syntax  at  last!'  He  sat  down  and  mopped  his
 face.                                                              
   'Verbs,  syntax!  Hooray!'  mocked  Frankley.  'Now   isn't  that
 thrilling! '                                                       
   'Don't   try   and   start  a   row,  O Lover  of Horses (54) and
 Horseplay!' said Lowdham. 'It's too hot. Listen!                   
   'It's been very stuffy and  thundery lately,  and I  haven't been
 able to sleep, a troublesome novelty for  me; and  I began  to have
 a splitting headache. So I cleared off for a few  days to  the west
 coast, to Pembroke. But  the Eagles  came up  out of  the Atlantic,
 and  I  fled.  I  still  couldn't sleep  when I  came back,  and my
 headache got  worse. And  then last  night I  fell suddenly  into a
 deep dark sleep - and I  got this.'  He waved  a handful  of papers
 at us. 'I didn't come round until nearly  twelve this  morning, and
 my  head  was ringing  with words.  They began  to fade  quickly as
 soon as I woke; but I jotted down at once all I could.             
   'I have been working on the  stuff every  minute since,  and I've
 made six copies. For I think you'll  find it  well worth  a glance;
 but  you  fellows  would  never  follow  it  without  something  to
 look at. Here it is! '                                             
   He  passed  round  several   sheets  of   paper.  On   them  were
 inscribed strange words in a big bold  hand, done  with one  of the
 great  thick-nibbed  pens  Lowdham  is  fond  of.  Under   most  of
 the words were glosses in red ink.(55)                             
                                                                   
                                  I.                                
                                                                   
   (A) O sauron       tule nukumna ... lantaner turkildi            
     and    ?       came humbled ... fell        ?      
                                                                   
     nuhuinenna     ... tar-kalion ohtakare valannar                
                                                                   
      under shadow ...        ? war made on Powers ...              
                                                                   
      nimeheruvi arda sakkante leneme iluvataren                    
      Lords-of-West Earth rent with leave of ?                      

                                                                   
                                                                   
 eari ullier ikilyanna ... numenore ataltane                        
 seas should flow into chasm ... Numenor fell down                  
                                                                   
        (B) Kado zigurun zabathan unakkha ... eruhinim              
                and so ? humbled he-came ... ?                      
                                                                   
 dubdam ugru-dalad ... ar-pharazonun azaggara                       
 fell ?shadow under ... ?         was warring
                                                                   
 avaloiyada ... barim an-adun  yurahtam daira                       
 against Powers ... Lords of-West broke Earth                       
                                                                   
 saibeth-ma  eruvo  ...  azriya   du-phursa  akhasada               
 assent-with ?-from ... seas so-as-to-gush into chasm               
                                                                   
 ...  anadune  ziran   hikallaba  ...   bawtba  dulgi               
 ... Numenor  beloved she-fell  down ...  winds black               
                                                                   
  ... balik hazad an-nimruzir         azulada                       
  ... ships   seven      of ?         eastward                      
                                                                   
      (B) Agannalo buroda nenud ...   zaira nenud
        Death-shadow heavy on-us ...  longing (is) on-us
                                                                   
         ... adun izindi batan taido   ayadda: ido         
             west straight road once   went now         
                                                                   
  katha batina lokhi                                                
  all roads crooked                                                 
                                                                   
  (A) Vahaiya sin And ore                                           
  far away now (is) Land of Gift                                    
                                                                   
  (B) Ephalak idon Yozayan                                          
  far away now (is) Land of Gift                                    
                                                                   
  (B) Ephal ephalak idon hi-Akallabeth                              
  far far away now (is) She-that-hath-fallen                        
                                                                   
 (A) Haiya vahaiya sin atalante.                      
  far far away now (is) the Downfallen.(56)                         
                                                                   
 'There  are   two  languages   here,'  said   Lowdham,  'Avallonian
 and  Adunaic:  I  have labelled  them A  and B.  Of course,  I have
 put  them down  in a  spelling of  my own.  Avallonian has  a clear
 simple phonetic structure and in my ear it rings like a bell, but I

 seemed  to  feel as  I wrote  this stuff  down that  it was  not really
 spelt like this. I have  never had  the same  feeling before,  but this
 morning  I   half  glimpsed   quite  a   different  script,   though  I
 couldn't  visualize it  clearly. I  fancy Adunaic  used a  very similar
 script too.                                                          
   '"I  believe  these  are  passages  out  of  some  book," I  said to
 myself.  And  then  suddenly  I  remembered   the  curious   script  in
 my  father's  manuscript.  But  that  can wait.  I've brought  the leaf
 along.                                                                
   'These  are  only  fragmentary  sentences,  of  course,  and  not  by
 any means all that I heard; but  they are  all that  I could  seize and
 get  written  down.  Text  I   is  bilingual,   though  they   are  not
 identical, and the B version is  a little  longer. That's  only because
 I  could  remember  a  bit  more  of  it.  They  correspond  so closely
 because  I  heard  the  A version,  a sentence  at a  time, with  the B
 version  immediately  following:  in  the  same  voice,  as  if someone
 was  reading  out  of an  ancient book  and translating  it bit  by bit
 for  his  audience.  Then  there  came a  long dark  gap, or  a picture
 of  confusion  and  darkness  in  which   the  word-echoes   were  lost
 in a noise of winds and waves.                                        
   'And  then  I  got  a  kind  of  lamentation  or  chant,  of  which I
 have  put  down  all  that  I  can  now  remember.  You'll  notice  the
 order  is  altered  at  the  end.  There  were  two  voices  here,  one
 singing  A  and  the  other  singing  B,  and  the  chant  always ended
 up  as  I  have  set  it  out:  A  B  B  A.  The  last word  was always
 Atalante.  I  can  give  you  no idea  of how  moving it  was, horribly
 moving. I still feel the weight of a great loss myself,  as if  I shall
 never be really happy on these shores again.                          
   'I  don't think  there are  any really  new words  here. There  are a
 lot  of  very  interesting  grammatical  details;  but  I  won't bother
 you  with  those, interesting  as they  are to  me -  and they  seem to
 have  touched  off  something  in  my  memory  too,   so  that   I  now
 know  more  than  is  actually  contained  in  the   fragments.  You'll
 see  a  lot of  query marks,  but I  think the  context (and  often the
 grammar) indicates that these are all names or titles.                
   'Tar-kalion, for instance: I think that  is a  king's name,  for I've
 often come  across the  prefix tar  in names  of the  great, and  ar in
 the   corresponding   Adunaic   name   (on  the   system  I   told  you
 about)  is  the  stem  of  the  word  for  "king".  On  the  other hand
 turkildi  and  eruhinim,  though   evidently  equivalent,   don't  mean
 the  same  thing.  The  one  means,  I  think,  'lordly  men',  and the
 other  is  rather  more startling,  for it  appears to  be the  name of

                                                                   
                                                                    
 God  the  Omnipotent  with a  patronymic ending:  in fact,  unless I
 am  quite  wrong,  "Children  of  God".  Indeed,  I  need  not  have
 queried  the  words  eruvo  and  iluvataren:  there can't  really be
 any  doubt  that  eruvo  is  the  sacred  name  Eru with  a suffixed
 element  meaning  "from",  and   that  therefore   iluvataren  means
 the same thing.                                                     
   'There is  one point  that may  interest you,  after what  we were
 saying about linguistic  coincidence. Well,  it seems  to me  a fair
 guess  that  we  are  dealing  with  a  record, or  a legend,  of an
 Atlantis catastrophe.'                                              
   'Why  or?'  said  Jeremy.  'I  mean, it  might be  a record  and a
 legend.  You  never  really  tackled  the  question I  propounded at
 our  first  meeting  this  term.  If  you went  back would  you find
 myth  dissolving  into  history  or  history  into   myth?  Somebody
 once said, I forget who,  that the  distinction between  history and
 myth might be meaningless  outside the  Earth. I  think it  might at
 least  get  a  great  deal less  sharp on  the Earth,  further back.
 Perhaps the Atlantis catastrophe was the dividing line?'            
   'We may be able to  deal with  your question  a great  deal better
 when we've got to the  bottom of  all this,'  said Lowdham.  'In the
 meantime  the  point  I was  going to  bring up  is worth  noting. I
 said  "Atlantis"  because  Ramer  told  us  that  he  associated the
 word  Numenor  with  the  Greek  name.  Well,  look!  here  we learn
 that  Numenor  was  destroyed;  and  we  end  with  a  lament:  far,
 far au ay, now  is Atalante.  Atalante is  plainly another  name for
 Numenor-Atlantis.  But  only  after  its  downfall.  For  in Avallo-
 nian  atalante  is  a  word  formed  normally  from  a  common  base
 talat "topple over, slip down": it occurs in Text  I in  an emphatic
 verbal form ataltane "slid down  in ruin",  to be  precise. Atalante
 means  "She  that  has  fallen   down",  So   the  two   names  have
 approached  one  another,  have  reached  a  very  similar  shape by
 quite  unconnected  routes.  At  least,  I  suppose  the  routes are
 unconnected.  I  mean,  whatever traditions  may lie  behind Plato's
 Timaeus,(57) the name  that  he  uses,  Atlantis,  must  be  just  the
 same  old  "daughter  of  Atlas"  that was  applied to  Calypso. But
 even  that  connects  the  land  with  a  mountain  regarded  as the
 pillar of heaven. Minul-Tarik, Minul-Tarik! Very interesting.'      
   He got up and stretched. 'At least I hope you  all think  so! But,
 good lord, how hot and stuffy it is  getting! Not  an evening  for a
 lecture!  But  anyway,  I  can't  make  much more  out of  this with
 only words, and without more words. And I need some pictures.       
   'I wish I could see a little, as well as hear, like you, Ramer. Or

 like Jerry. He's had a few glimpses of  strange things,  while we
 worked  together;  but  he  can't  hear. My  words seem  to waken
 his sight, but it's not at all clear yet. Ships with  dark sails.
 Towers on sea-washed shores. Battles: swords that glint,  but are
 silent. A great domed temple.(58) I wish  I could  see as  much. But
 I've  done what  I can.  Sauron. Zigurun,  Zigur. I  can't fathom
 those names. But the key is there, I think. Zigur.'             
                                                                
   'Zigur!' said Jeremy in a strange voice.(59) We  stared at  him: he
 was sitting with his eyes closed, and he looked very  pale; beads
 of sweat were on his face.                                      
   'I say, what's the  matter, Jerry?'  cried Frankley.  'Open the
 other  window,  Ramer,  and  let's  have some  more air!  I think
 there's a storm brewing.'                                       
   'Zigur!' cried Jeremy again, in a  remote strained  voice. 'You
 spoke of him yourself  not long  ago, cursing  the name.  Can you
 have forgotten him, Nimruzir?'(60)                              
   'I  had  forgotten,'  Lowdham  answered.  'But  now I  begin to
 remember!  '  He  stood still  and clenched  his fists.  His brow
 lowered,  and  his  eyes  glittered.  There  was  a   glimmer  of
 lightning  far  away through  the darkening  window. Away  in the
 west over the roofs the sky was  going dead  black. There  came a
 distant rumour of thunder.                                      
   Jeremy groaned and laid his head back.                        
   Frankley  and  Ramer went  to him,  and bent  over him;  but he
 did not seem to notice  them. 'It's  the thunder,  perhaps,' said
 Frankley in a low voice. 'He seemed all right a few  minutes ago;
 but he looks pretty ghastly now.'                               
   'Leave  him  alone,'  growled  Dolbear.  'You'll  do   no  good
 hovering over him.'                                             
   'Would  you  like  to  lie  down  on my  bed?' said  Ramer. 'Or
 shall I get the car out and run you home?'                      
   'Are you feeling ill, old man?' said Frankley.                
   'Yes,'  groaned  Jeremy  without  moving.  'Deathly.  But don't
 trouble me! Don't touch  me! Ba kitabdahe!(61) Sit down.  I shall
 speak in a moment.'                                             
   There was a silence  that seemed  long and  heavy. It  was then
 nearly  ten  o'clock,  and the  pale sky  of summer  twilight was
 pricked by a few faint  stars; but  the blackness  crawled slowly
 onwards  from  the  West.  Great  wings  of shadow  stretched out
 ominously over the town. The curtains stirred  as with  a presage
 of wind, and then hung still. There was a long mutter  of thunder
 ending in a crack.                                              

   Lowdham  was  standing  erect  in  the   middle  of   the  floor,
 looking out of the window with staring eyes. Suddenly:            
   'Narika  'nBari  'nAdun  yanakhim,'(62) he  shouted,   lifting  up
 both his arms. 'The Eagles of the Lords of the West are at  hand! '
                                                                  
   Then all at once Jeremy  began to  speak. 'Now  I see!'  he said.
 'I see it all. The ships have set sail  at last.  Woe to  the time!
 Behold, the mountain smokes and the earth trembles!'              
   He  paused,  and  we sat  staring, oppressed  as by  the oncoming
 of  doom.  The  voices  of  the  storm  drew  nearer.  Then  Jeremy
 began again.                                                      
   'Woe  to  this  time  and the  fell counsels  of Zigur!  The King
 hath set forth his might against the Lords of the West.  The fleets
 of the Numenoreans are  like a  land of  many islands;  their masts
 are like the stems of a forest; their sails  are golden  and black.
 Night  is  coming.  They  have  gone  against  Avalloni  with naked
 swords.  All  the  world  waiteth.  Why  do the  Lords of  the West
 make no sign?'(63)                                                
   There was a dazzle of lightning and a deafening crash.          
   'Behold!  Now  the  black  wrath  is  come  upon  us  out  of the
 West.  The  Eagles  of  the  Powers  of  the  World have  arisen in
 anger. The Lords  have spoken  to Eru,  and the  fate of  the World
 is changed!'(64)                                                  
   'Do you not hear the  wind coming  and the  roaring of  the sea?'
 said Lowdham.                                                     
   'Do you not  see the  wings of  the Eagles,  and their  eyes like
 thunderbolts  and  their claws  like forks  of fire?'  said Jeremy.
 'See! The abyss openeth. The  sea falls.  The mountains  lean over.
 Urid yakalubim!' He got up unsteadily,  and  Lowdham  took  his
 hand, and  drew him  towards him,  as if  to protect  him. Together
 they went to the  window and  stood there  peering out,  talking to
 one another in  a strange  tongue. Irresistibly  I was  reminded of
 two people hanging over the  side of  a ship.  But suddenly  with a
 cry they turned away, and knelt down covering their eyes.         
   'The  glory  hath  fallen  into  the  deep  waters,'  said Jeremy
 weeping.                                                          
   'Still the eagles  pursue us,'  said Lowdham.  'The wind  is like
 the end  of the  world, and  the waves  are like  mountains moving.
 We go into darkness.'(65)                                         
                                                                  
   There was a roar of thunder and a blaze of lightning: flashes
 north, south, and west. Ramer's room flared into a blistering     
 light  and  rocked  back  into  darkness.  The  electric  light had

 failed.  At  a  distance  there  was  a  murmur  as  of  a  great  wind
 coming.                                                                
   'All hath passed away. The light hath gone out!' said Jeremy.        
   With  a  vast   rush  and   slash  rain   came  down   suddenly  like
 waterfalls  out  of  the  sky,  and  a  wind swept  the city  with wild
 wings  of  fury;  its  shriek  rose  to  a  deafening  tumult.  Near at
 hand  I  heard,  or  I thought  I heard,  a great  weight like  a tower
 falling  heavily,  clattering  to  ruin.  Before  we  could  close  the
 windows  with  the  strength  of  all  hands  present  and   heave  the
 shutters  after  them,  the  curtains  were   blown  across   the  room
 and the floor was flooded.                                             
   In  the  midst  of  all  the  confusion,  while  Ramer was  trying to
 find  and  light  a  candle,  Lowdham  went  up  to  Jeremy,   who  was
 cowering against the wall, and he took his hands.                      
   'Come,  Abrazan!'(66) he said. 'There  is  work  to  do.  Let  us look
 to our folk and see to our courses, before it is too late!'            
   'It  is  too  late,  Nimruzir,'  said  Jeremy.  'The  Valar  hate us.
 Only darkness awaits us.'                                              
   'A  little  light  may  yet  lie  beyond  it,  Come!'  said  Lowdham,
 and  he  drew  Jeremy  to  his  feet.  In the  light of  the flickering
 candle  that  Ramer  now   held  in   a  shaking   hand,  we   saw  him
 drag  Jeremy  to  the  door,  and  push  him  out   of  the   room.  We
 heard their feet stumbling and clattering down the stairs.             
   'They'll  be  drowned!'  said  Frankley,  taking a  few steps,  as if
 to follow them. 'What on earth has come over them?'                    
   'The  fear  of  the Lords  of the  West,' said  Ramer, and  his voice
 shook.  'It  is  no  good trying  to follow  them. But  I think  it was
 their  part  in  this  story  to  escape  from the  very edge  of Doom.
 Let them escape!'                                                     
                                                                       
   And  there  this  meeting  would  have  ended,   but  for   the  fact
 that the rest of us could not face the night and dared not go.         
   For  three  hours  we  sat  huddled  up  in  dim  candle-light, while
 the  greatest  storm  in  the  memory  of  any  living man  roared over
 us:  the  terrible  storm  of  June 12th 1987,(67) that  slew  more men,
 felled  more  trees,  and  cast  down  more  towers, bridges  and other
 works of Man than a hundred years of wild weather.*                    
                                                                       
 (*  The  centre of  its greatest  fury seems  to have  been out  in the
 Atlantic, but its whole  course and  progress has  been something  of a
 puzzle to meteorologists - as far as can be discovered from accounts it
 seems  to  have  proceeded more  like blasts  of an  explosion, rushing
 eastward and slowly diminishing in force as it went. N.G.)             

 When  at  last  it  had  abated  in  the  small  hours,  and  through the
 rags  of  its  wild retreat  the sky  was already  growing pale  again in
 the  East,  the  company  parted  and  crept  away,  tired   and  shaken,
 to  wade  the   flooded  streets   and  discover   if  their   homes  and
 colleges   were   still   standing.   Cameron  made   no  remark.   I  am
 afraid he had not found the evening entertaining.                        
   I  was  the  last  to go.  As I  stood by  the door,  I saw  Ramer pick
 up  a  sheet  of  paper,  closely covered  with writing.  He put  it into
 a drawer.(68)                                                            
   'Good   night   -   or   good   morning!'   I   said.  'We   should  be
 thankful  at  any  rate  that  we  were  not  struck  by   lightning,  or
 caught in the ruin of the college.'                                      
   'We should indeed!' said Ramer. 'I wonder.'                           
   'What do you wonder? ' I said.                                         
   'Well,  I  have  an  odd  feeling,  Nick,  or  suspicion,  that  we may
 all  have  been  helping to  stir something  up. If  not out  of history,
 at  any  rate  out  of  a   very  powerful   world  of   imagination  and
 memory.  Jeremy  would   say  "perhaps   out  of   both".  I   wonder  if
 we may not find ourselves in other and worse dangers.'                   
   'I  don't  understand  you,'  I  said.  'But  at  any  rate,  I suppose
 you   mean   that   you   wonder   whether   they   ought   to   go   on.
 Oughtn't we to stop them?'                                               
   'Stop   Lowdham   and   Jeremy?'   said  Ramer.   'We  can't   do  that
 now.'                                                                    
   MGR. RD. PF. RS. JM. NG. Added later AAL. WTJ.                         
                                                                         
 Night 68. June 26th, 1987.                                               
                                                                         
   Frankley's rooms. A  small attendance:  Frankley, Dolbear,             
 Stainer, Guildford.                                                      
   There is not much to record. Most of the Club,  present or             
 absent, were in one way or another involved in examinations,             
 and tired, and more bothered than is usual at  this season.*             
                                                                         
 (* The  extraordinary  system  of holding  the principal  examinations of
 the  year  in  the  summer,  which  must  have  been  responsible  for an
 incalculable amount of misery, was still in force.  During the  period of
 'reforms' in the forties there was talk of altering this arrangement, but
 it  was  never  carried  out,  though it  was one  of the  few thoroughly
 desirable minor reforms proposed at the time.  It was  the events  of the
 summer of 1987 that  finally brought  things to  a head,  as most  of the
 examinations  had  that year  to be  transferred to  the winter,  or held
 again after the autumn term. N.G.)                                       

 Things  had been  rather shaken  up by  the storm.  It had  come in
 the seventh week, right in  the middle  of the  final examinations;
 and  amongst  a  lot  of  other  damage,  the  Examination  Schools
 had been struck and the East School wrecked.                      
   'What  a time  we've been  having, ever  since old  Ramer started
 to  attend  again!'  said  Frankley.  'Notion  Club! More  like the
 Commotion Club! Is there any news of the Commoters?'              
   'D'you   mean   Lowdham   and   Jeremy?'   said   Stainer.  'Pro-
 moters,  I should  say! I've  never seen  anything better  staged -
 and  with  Michael Ramer,  as a  kind of  conniving chorus.  It was
 wonderfully well done!'                                           
   'Wonderfully!'  said  Dolbear.  'I am  lost in  admiration. Think
 of  their  meteorological  information!  Superb!   Foreseeing  like
 that  a  storm  not  foretold,  apparently, by  any station  in the
 world. And timing it  so beautifully,  too, to  fit in  neatly with
 their prepared parts. It makes you  think, doesn't  it? -  as those
 say,  who  have  never  experienced  the  process.  And  Ramer says
 flatly  that  he  was  bowled over,  altogether taken  by surprise.
 Whatever  you may  think of  his views,  it would  be very  rash to
 assume that he was lying.  He takes  this affair  rather seriously.
 "Those  two  are  probably  dangerous,"  he  said  to  me;  and  he
 wasn't thinking merely of spoofing the Club, Stainer.'            
   'Hm. I spoke too hastily, evidently,' said Stainer,  stroking his
 chin.  'Hm.  But  what  then?  If  not  arranged,  it  was  a  very
 remarkable coincidence.'                                          
   'Truly  remarkable!' said  Dolbear. 'But  we'll leave  that ques-
 tion open for  a bit,  I think;  coincidence or  connexion. They're
 both  pretty  difficult to  accept; but  they're the  only choices.
 Pre-arrangement  is  impossible  -  or rather  it's a  damned sight
 more  improbable,  and  even  more   alarming.  What   about  these
 two fellows, though? Has anything been heard of them?'            
   'Yes,' said Guildford.  'They're alive,  and neither  drowned nor
 blasted. They've written me a joint letter to lay before  the Club.
 This is what they say:                                            
                                                                  
   Dear Nick,                                                      
      We  hope every  one is  safe and  sound. We  are. We  were cast
   up far away when the wind fell, but  we're dry  again at  last; so
   now we're off, more  or less  in the  words of  the old  song, 'on
   some  jolly little  jaunts to  the happy,  happy haunts  where the
   beer flows wild and free'. In due course (if  ever) we'll  let our
   colleges have our addresses. A.A.L.                             

                                                                
                                                                   
 That is the end of Arry's great big fist. Jeremy adds:             
                                                                   
   We  are  researching.  More  stuff  may  come  through,  I think.
   What  about  a  vacation  meeting?  Just  before  the  racket  of
   term.  What  about  Sept.  25th?  You  can  have  my  rooms. Yrs.
   W.T.J.'                                                          
                                                                   
   'What  about  the  racket  of  the  vacation!  '  said  Frankley.
 They  re  damned  lucky  not  to be  in the  schools (69) this  year, or
 they'ld  have  to  come  back,  wherever  the  wind may  have blown
 them. Any idea where that was, Nick?'                              
   'No,'  said Guildford.  'The postmark  is illegible,(70) and there's
 no  address  inside.  But  what  about  the  proposed   meeting?  I
 suppose most of us will be about again by then.'                   
   September   25th   was   agreed  to.   At  that   moment  Michael
 Ramer   came  in.   'We've  heard   from  them!'   Frankley  cried.
 'Nicholas has had a letter. They're all right, and they're off on a
 holiday somewhere: no address.'                                    
   'Good!'  said  Ramer.  'Or  I hope  so. I  hope they  won't wreck
 the British Isles before they've finished.'                        
   'My  dear  Ramer!  '  Steiner  protested.  'What  do   you  mean?
 What  can   you  mean?   Dolbear  has   been  preaching   the  open
 mind  to  my  incredulity.  He had  better talk  to you.  The other
 extreme is just as bad.'                                           
   'But I haven't  any fixed  opinions,' said  Ramer. 'I  was merely
 expressing a doubt, or a wild guess. But actually  I am  not really
 very much  afraid of  any more  explosions now.  I fancy  that that
 force has been  spent, for  the present,  for a  long time  to come
 perhaps.                                                           
   'But I am  a little  anxious about  Arry and  Wilfrid themselves.
 They may quite well get into some  danger. Still  we can  only wait
 and  see.  Even if  we could  find them  we could  do no  more. You
 can't  stop  a strong  horse with  the bit  between its  teeth. You
 certainly  could not  rein Arry  in now,  and Wilfrid  is evidently
 nearly as deeply in it as Arry is.                                 
   'In  the  meantime  I  have  got  something  to  show  you.  Arry
 dropped a leaf of paper in my room that  night. I  think it  is the
 leaf of his father's manuscript that he told us about. Well  - I've
 deciphered it.'                                                    
   'Good  work!  '  said  Guildford.  'I  didn't  know  you  were  a
 cryptographer.'                                                    
   'I'm  not,'  Ramer  laughed,  'but I  have my  methods. No,  no -
 nothing  dreamy  this time.  I just  made a  lucky shot  and landed

 on  the  mark.  I  don't  know  whether  Arry  had solved  it himself
 before  he  dropped it,  but I  think not;  for if  he had,  he would
 have included it in the  stuff he  showed us.  It's quite  plain what
 held  him  up:  it  was  too  easy.  He  was  looking  for  something
 remote and difficult, while all the  time the  solution was  right on
 his  own  doorstep.  He  thought  it  was  Numenorean,  I  guess; but
 actually it is Old English, Anglo-Saxon, his own stuff!             
    The  script  is,  I suppose, Numenorean,(71) as Arry  thought. But
 it  has  been  applied  by  someone  to  ancient English.  The proper
 names,  when  they're  not  Old  English  translations,  are  in  the
 same script, but  the letters  are then  quite differently  used, and
 I  shouldn't  have  been  able  to  read  them  without  the  help of
 Arry s texts.                                                       
    'I  wonder  who  had  the  idea  of  writing  Anglo-Saxon  in this
 odd  way?  Old  Edwin  Lowdham  seems  at first  a likely  guess; but
 I'm not so  sure. The  thing is  evidently made  up of  excerpts from
 a longish book or chronicle.'                                       
    'Well,  come  on!'  cried  Frankley.  'How  you   philologists  do
 niggle! Let's see it, and tell us what it says!'                    
    'Here it is!' said Ramer, taking  three sheets  out of  his pocket
 and  handing  them  to  Frankley. 'Pass  it round!  I've got  a copy.
 The  original is  only a  small octavo  page as  you see,  written on
 both sides in a large hand in this rather beautiful script.         
    'Now, I said to myself: "If this is in one of Arry's  languages, I
 can't  do  anything  with  it; no  one but  he can  solve it,  But he
 failed, so probably it isn't. In that case, what language is  it most
 likely   to  be,   remembering  what   Arry  told   us?  Anglo-Saxon.
 Well,  that's  not   one  of   my  languages,   though  I   know  the
 elements. So when I'd  made a  preliminary list  of all  the separate
 letters that I could distinguish,  I trotted  round to  old Professor
 Rashbold at Pembroke,(72) though I didn't  know   him  personally.
 A  grumpy  old  bear  Arry  has  always  called  him;  but  evidently
 Arry has never given him the right sort of buns.                    
    'He  liked  mine.  He didn't  care tuppence  about what  the stuff
 said,  but  it amused  him to  try and  solve the  puzzle, especially
 when  he  heard  that  it  had  defeated   Arry.  "Oh!   Young  Lowd-
 ham!"  he  said.  "A  clever  fellow  under  that   pothouse  manner.
 But  too  fly-away;  always  after   some  butterfly   theory.  Won't
 stick  to his  texts. Now  if I  had had  him as  my pupil,  I should
 have  put  some  stiffening  into  him." Well,  starting out  with my
 guess  that  the  stuff  might  be  Anglo-Saxon, old  Rashbold didn't
 take  long. I  don't know  his workings.  All he  said before  I left

                    
                                                                   
 was: "Never seen  this script  before; but  I should  say it  was a
 consonantal  alphabet,  and all  these diacritics  are vowel-signs.
 I'll have a look at it." He sent it back to me this morning, with a
 long  commentary  on  the  forms  and  spellings,  which  I  am not
 inflicting on you, except his concluding remarks.                  
  '"To  sum  up:  it  is  in  Old  English  of  a  strongly  Mercian
 (West-Midland)  colour,  ninth  century I  should say.(73) There are
 no  new  words,  except  possibly to-sprengdon. There  are several
 words,  probably  names  and  not  Old  English,  that  I  have not
 succeeded  in getting  out; but  you will  excuse me  from spending
 more  time  on  them.  My  time  is  not  unlimited.  Whoever  made
 the thing knew  Old English  tolerably well,  though the  style has
 the  air  of a  translation. If  he wanted  to forge  a bit  of Old
 English, why did not he choose an interesting subject?"            
  'Well,  I solved  the names,  as I  told you;  and there  you have
 the  text as  old Rashbold  sent it  back, with  the names  put in.
 Only as my typewriter has no funny letters I have  used th  for the
 old thorn-letter. The translation is Rashbold's too.               
                                                                   
  Hi  alle  sae on  weorulde  oferliodon, sohton  hi nyston  hwet; ah
  aefre walde heara  heorte  westward....  forthon  hit  swe  gefyrn
  arkdde   se  AElmihtiga   thaet  hi   sceoldan   steorfan   7  thas
  weoruld   ofgeofan....   hi   ongunnon   murcnian....   hit  gelomp
  seoththan  thaet se  fula  deofles thegn   se  the  AElfwina  folc
  (Zigur)   nemneth   weox   swithe  on   middangearde  7   he  geas-
  code  Westwearena  meht   7  wuldor   ....  walde   healecran  stol
  habban  thonne   Earendeles  eafera   seolf  ahte......   Tha  cwom
  he,  (Tarcalion)  se  cyning   up  on   middangeardes  oran   7  he
  sende  sona  his  erendwracan  to  (Zigure):  heht  hine  on  ofste
  cuman  to  thes  cyninges  manraedenne  to  buganne.  7  he  (Zigur)
  lytigende  ge-eadmedde  hine  thaet he  cwom,  wes  thaeh  inwitful
  under,   facnes   hogde  Westfearena   theode  .....   swe  adwalde
  he   fornean   alle   tha   (Numenor)iscan   mid   wundrum   7  mid
  tacnum   ....   7    hi   gewarhton    micelne   alh    on   middan
  (Arminaleth)(75) there   cestre   on   thaem  hean   munte   the aer
  unawidlod  wes  7  wearth  nu   to haethenum  herge,  7  hi  ther
  onsegdon   unase[c]gendlic   lac  on   unhalgum  weofode   ...  Swe
  cwom   deathscua   on   Westfearena   land   7  Godes   bearn under
  sceadu  feollon  ....  Thes  ofer  feola   gera  hit   gelomp thaet
  (Tarcalione)  wearth  aeldo  onsaege,  thy   wearth  he   hreow  on
  mode  7  tha   walde  he   be  (Zigures)   onbryrdingum  (Avalloni)
  mid   ferde   gefaran.    Weron   Westfearena    scipferde   sweswe

 unarimedlic  egland  on  there  sae ....  ah   tha  Westfregan
 gebedon hi to thaem AElmihtigan 7 be his leafe  tosprengdon hi
 tha eorthan thaet alle sae nither gutan on efgrynde, 7 alle tha
 sceopu forwurdan, forthon  seo  eorthe  togan   on  middum
 garsecge  ....  swearte  windas  asteogon  7  AElfwines seofon
 sceopu eastweard adraefdon.                                       
   Nu  sitte  we  on  elelonde  7 forsittath  tha blisse  7 tha
 eadignesse the iu wes 7 nu  sceal eft  cuman naefre. Us swithe
 onsiteth deathscua.  Us swithe  longath..... On aerran melum
 west leg reht weg, nu earon alle weogas wo. Feor nu  is leanes
 lond.  Feor  nu is Neowollond (76) thaet geneotherade. Feor nu is
 Dreames lond thaet gedrorene.                                     
                                                                 
   All the seas in the world they sailed, seeking they knew not 
 what; but their hearts were ever  westward.... because  so had
 the Almighty ordained it of old that they should die and leave
 this  world.... they  began to  murmur.... It  afterwards came
 to pass that the foul servant of the devil, whom the people of
 the ?AElfwines  name (Zigur),  grew mightily  in middle-earth,
 and  he  learned  of  the  power  and  glory  of  the Westware
 (Dwellers in the West) .... desired a higher throne  than even
 the  descendant  of  Earendel possessed  ...... Then  he, King
 (Tarcalion) landed on the shores of middle-earth, and  at once
 he sent his messengers to (Zigur), commanding  him to  come in
 haste to do  homage to  the king;  and he  (Zigur) dissembling
 humbled himself and came, but was  filled with  secret malice,
 purposing treachery against the people of  the Westfarers.....
 Thus he led astray wellnigh all  the (Numenore)ans  with signs
 and wonders.... and they built a great temple in the  midst of
 the town (of  Arminaleth) on  the high  hill which  before was
 undefiled  but  now  became  a  heathen  fane, and  they there
 sacrificed unspeakable offerings on an  unholy altar  ... Thus
 came death-shade  into the  land of  the Westfarers  and God's
 children fell under the shadow .... Many  years later  it came
 to  pass  that  old  age  assailed  (Tarcalion);  wherefore he
 became gloomy in heart, and at the  instigation of  (Zigur) he
 wished to conquer (Avalloni)  with a  host. The  ship-hosts of
 the Westfarers were like countless islands in the sea .... But
 the West-lords prayed to the Almighty, and by his  leave split
 asunder the earth so that all  seas should  pour down  into an
 abyss and the ships should perish; for the earth gaped open in
 the midst of the ocean....  black winds  arose and  drove away
 AElfwine's seven ships.                                          

    Now we sit in the land of exile, and dwell cut off from the         
 bliss and the blessedness that once was  and shall  never come         
 again. The death-shade lies heavy on us; longing is on us.....         
 In  former  days west  lay a  straight way,  now are  all ways         
 crooked. Far now is the land of gift. Far now is the?prostrate         
 land that is cast down. Far now is the land  of Mirth  that is         
 fallen.                                                                
                                                                       
 'Well,  old  Rashbold  may  not  have   found  that   interesting.  But
 it  depends  what  you're  looking  for.  You people  at any  rate will
 find it interesting, I think, after the events of that night.  You will
 notice  that  the  original  text  is  written  continuously  in  bold-
 stroke  hand  (I   don't  doubt   that  the   actual  penman   was  old
 Edwin),  but  there are  dividing dots  at intervals.  What we  have is
 really a  series of  fragmentary extracts,  separated, I  should guess,
 by  very  various   intervals  of   omission,  extremely   like  Arry's
 snatches  of  Avallonian  and  Adunaic.   Indeed  this   stuff  corres-
 ponds closely to his (which in itself is very interesting): it includes
 all that he gave  us, but  gives a  good deal  more, especially  at the
 beginning.  You  notice  that there  is a  long gap  at the  same point
 as the break between his Text I and II.                                
 'Of  course,  when  old  Rashbold  said  "the  style has  the air  of a
 translation",  he  simply  meant  that  the  fabricator  had  not  been
 quite  successful  in  making  the  stuff  sound  like  natural  Anglo-
 Saxon.  I  can't  judge that.  But I  daresay he  is right,  though his
 implied  explanation  may  be   wrong.  This   probably  is   a  trans-
 lation  out  of  some  other  language  into  Anglo-Saxon.  But  not, I
 think,  by  the  man  who  penned  the  page.  He  was  in a  hurry, or
 like  Arry  trying  to  catch  the evanescent,  and if  he had  had any
 time  for  translation  he  would  have  done  it into  modern English.
 I  can't  see  any  point  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  unless  what  he "saw"
 was already in it.                                                     
 'I  say  "saw".  For this  stuff looks  to me  like the  work of  a man
 copying out all he had time to see, or  all he  found still  intact and
 legible in some book.'                                                 
 'Or  all  he  could  get  down  of  some  strongly  visualized  dream,'
 said  Dolbear.  'And  even  so,  I  should  guess  that  the  hand that
 penned  this  stuff  was  already  familiar  with  the  strange script.
 It's written freely and  doesn't look  at all  like the  work of  a man
 trying   to   copy   something   quite   unknown.   On   your   theory,
 Ramer, he wouldn't have had time, anyway.'                             
 'Yes,  it's  a  pretty  puzzle,'  said Frankley.  'But I  don't suppose
 we  shall  get  much  forrarder (77) without  Arry's  help.  So  we must

 wait in patience till September, and  hope for  a light  beyond the
 sea of Scripts. I must go. The scripts that are waiting for  me are
 much longer and hardly more legible.'                             
   'And probably more  puzzling,' said  Stainer. 'Surely  there's no
 great mystery here,  in spite  of Ramer's  attempts to  create one.
 Here   we   have   a   specimen  of   old  Edwin   Lowdham's  queer
 hobby: the  fabrication of  mythical texts;  and the  direct source
 of all Arry's stuff. He seems to  have taken  after his  father, in
 more  senses  than  one;  though   he's  probably   more  inventive
 linguistically.'                                                  
   'Really  you're  unteachable,  Stainer,'  said  Dolbear.  'Why do
 you always prefer  a theory  that cannot  be true,  unless somebody
 is lying?'                                                        
   'Who am I accusing of lying?'                                   
   'Well,  wait  until  September,  and  then  say what  you've just
 said slowly and carefully to Arry, and you'll soon  discover,' said
 Dolbear. 'If you've forgotten everything he  said, I  haven't. Good
 night!'                                                          
                                                                  
   RD. PF. RS. MGR. NG.                                            
                                                                  
 Night 69. Thursday, 25 September, 1987.                           
                                                                  
   There  was  a  large  meeting  in  Jeremy's  rooms.   Jeremy  and
 Lowdham   had   reappeared   in   Oxford   only  the   day  before,
 looking  as if  they had  spent all  the vacation  examining rather
 than  holidaymaking.  There  were eight  other people  present, and
 Cameron came in late.                                             
                                                                  
   After  the  experiences  of  June 12th  most of  the Club  felt a
 trifle apprehensive, and  conversation began  by being  jocular, in
 consequence.  But  Lowdham  took  no  part in  the jesting;  he was
 unusually quiet.                                                  
   'Well, Jerry,' said Frankley at last, 'you're the host.  Have you
 arranged any entertainment  for us?  If not,  after so  many weeks,
 I daresay several of us have got things in our pockets.'          
   'That  means  that  you have  at any  rate,' said  Jeremy. 'Let's
 have it! We want, or at least I want, some time  to tell  you about
 what we've been doing, but there's no hurry.'                     
   'That  depends  on  how  long  your  account  of   yourselves  is
 going to take,'  said Stainer.  'Did you  do anything  except drink
 and dawdle about the countryside?'                                
   'We  did,'  said  Lowdham.  'But  there's  no  special  reason to
 suppose that you'ld be interested to hear about it, Stainer.'     

   'Well,  I'm  here,  and that  indicates at  least a  faint interest,'
 said Stainer.                                                         
   'All right! But if the Club  really wants  to hear  us, then  it's in
 for  one  or  two  meetings in  which we  shall take  up all  the time.
 Pip will burst, I can see, if he has to wait so long.  Let him  let his
 steam off first. What's it about, Horsey?'                            
   'It'll explain itself, if  the Club  really wants  to hear  it,' said
 Frankley.                                                             
   'Go on! Let's have it! ' we said.                                   
   Frankley took a piece of paper out of his pocket and began.         
                                                                      
 The Death At last out of the deep seas he passed,                     
               and mist rolled on the shore;                           
            under clouded moon the waves were loud,                    
               as the laden ship him bore                             4
            to Ireland, back to wood and mire,                         
               to the tower tall and grey,                             
            where the knell of Cluain-ferta's bell (79)                
               tolled in green Galway.                                8
            Where Shannon down to Lough Derg ran                       
               under a rainclad sky                                    
            Saint Brendan came to his journey's end                    
               to await his hour to die.                            12
                                                                      
            '0! tell me, father, for I loved you well,                 
               if still you have words for me,                         
            of things strange in the remembering                       
               in the long and lonely sea,                          16
            of islands by deep spells beguiled                         
               where dwell the Elven-kind:                             
            in seven long years the road to Heaven                     
               or the Living Land did you find?'                    20
                                                                      
            'The things I have seen, the many things,                  
              have long now faded far;                                 
            only three come clear now back to me:                      
              a Cloud, a Tree, a Star.                              24
            We sailed for a year and a day and hailed                  
              no field nor coast of men;                               
            no boat nor bird saw we ever afloat                        
              for forty days and ten.                               28
            We saw no sun at set or dawn,                              
              but a dun cloud lay ahead,                               

 and a drumming there was like thunder coming        
   and a gleam of fiery red.                       32                     
                                                    
 Upreared from sea to cloud then sheer               
   a shoreless mountain stood;                       
 its sides were black from the sullen tide           
   to the red lining of its hood.                  36
 No cloak of cloud, no lowering smoke,               
   no looming storm of thunder                       
 in the world of men saw I ever unfurled             
   like the pall that we passed under.             40
 We turned away, and we left astern                  
   the rumbling and the gloom;                       
 then the smoking cloud asunder broke,               
   and we saw that Tower of Doom:                  44
 on its ashen head was a crown of red,               
   where fires flamed and fell.                      
 Tall as a column in High Heaven's hall,             
   its feet were deep as Hell;                     48
 grounded in chasms the waters drowned               
   and buried long ago,                              
 it stands, I ween, in forgotten lands               
   where the kings of kings lie low.               52
                                                    
 We sailed then on, till the wind had failed,        
   and we toiled then with the oar,                  
 and hunger and thirst us sorely wrung,              
   and we sang our psalms no more.                 56
 A land at last with a silver strand                 
   at the end of strength we found;                  
 the waves were singing in pillared caves            
   and pearls lay on the ground;                   60
 and steep the shores went upward leaping            
   to slopes of green and gold,                      
 and a stream out of the rich land teeming           
   through a coomb of shadow rolled.               64
                                                    
 Through gates of stone we rowed in haste,           
   and passed, and left the sea;                     
 and silence like dew fell in that isle,             
   and holy it seemed to be.                       68

 As a green cup, deep in a brim of green,           
   that with wine the white sun fills               
 was the land we found, and we saw there stand      
   on a laund between the hills                   72
 a tree more fair than ever I deemed                
   might climb in Paradise:                         
 its foot was like a great tower's root,            
   it height beyond men's eyes;                   76
 so wide its branches, the least could hide         
   in shade an acre long,                           
 and they rose as steep as mountain-snows           
   those boughs so broad and strong;              80
 for white as a winter to my sight                  
   the leaves of that tree were,                    
 they grew more close than swan-wing plumes,        
   all long and soft and fair.                    84
                                                   
 We deemed then, maybe, as in a dream,              
   that time had passed away                        
 and our journey ended; for no return               
   we hoped, but there to stay.                   88
 In the silence of that hollow isle,                
   in the stillness, then we sang -                 
 softly us seemed, but the sound aloft              
   like a pealing organ rang.                     92
 Then trembled the tree from crown to stem;         
   from the limbs the leaves in air                 
 as white birds fled in wheeling flight,            
   and left the branches bare.                    96
 From the sky came dropping down on high            
   a music not of bird,                             
 not voice of man, nor angel's voice;               
   but maybe there is a third                    100
 fair kindred in the world yet lingers              
   beyond the foundered land.                       
 Yet steep are the seas and the waters deep         
   beyond the White-tree Strand.'                104
                                                   
 '0! stay now, father! There's more to say.         
   But two things you have told:                    
 The Tree, the Cloud; but you spoke of three.       
   The Star in mind do you hold?'                108

  'The Star? Yes, I saw it, high and far,                        
    at the parting of the ways,                                  
  a light on the edge of the Outer Night (80)                    
    like silver set ablaze,                               112
  where the round world plunges steeply down,                    
    but on the old road goes,                                    
  as an unseen bridge that on arches runs                        
    to coasts than no man knows.'                         116
                                                                
    'But  men  say, father,  that ere  the end                   
    you went where none have been.                               
    I  would  hear you  tell me,  father dear,                   
    of the last land you have seen.'                      120
                                                                
                                                                
                                                                
  'In my mind the Star I still can find,                         
     and the parting of the seas,                                
  and the breath as sweet and keen as death                      
     that was borne upon the breeze.                      124
  But where they bloom those flowers fair,                       
     in what air or land they grow,                              
  what words beyond the world I heard,                           
     if you would seek to know,                           128
  in a boat then, brother, far afloat                            
     you must labour in the sea,                                 
  and find for yourself things out of mind:                      
     you will learn no more of me.'                       132
                                                                
  In Ireland, over wood and mire,                                
     in the tower tall and grey,                                 
  the knell of Cluain-ferta's bell                               
     was tolling in green Galway.                         136
  Saint Brendan had come to his life's end                       
     under a rainclad sky,                                       
  and journeyed whence no ship returns,                          
     and his bones in Ireland lie.                        140
                                                                
 When Frankley stopped there was  a silence.  If he  had hoped
 for critical comments, adverse or favourable, he got none.      
 'Very  odd  indeed! Very  odd!' said  Lowdham at  last. 'Have
 you been in touch with our minds on the Ramer-system, Philip?
 Anyway, when did you write that, and why?'                      
 'There  have  been  many  more  minds  than  yours,  Arundel,
 working on this theme, as has been pointed out  before,' said
 Ramer. 'Tell us about it, Philip!'                              

   'There's  nothing  much  to  tell,'  said  Frankley. 'I  woke up
 about four days ago  with the  thing largely  fixed, and  the name
 Brendan running in  my head.  The first  dozen lines  were already
 made (or were still  remembered), and  some of  the rest  was too.
 The pictures were quite clear for  a while.  I read  the Navigatio
 Sancti Brendani, of course, once upon a time,  years ago,  as well
 as that early Anglo-French  thing, Benedeit's  Vita. But  I've not
 looked  at them  again -  though perhaps  if I  did, I  might find
 them less dull and disappointing than I remember them.'          
   'I  don't  think  you  would,'  said  Lowdham;  'they're  rather
 dismal.  Whatever  merits  they  may  have,   any  glimmer   of  a
 perception of  what they  are talking  about is  not one  of them,
 trundling  the  magnificent  theme  to  market  like   bunches  of
 neatly cut and dried  flowers. The  Old French  thing may  be very
 interesting  linguistically, but  you won't  learn much  about the
 West from that.                                                  
   'Still that  seems to  be where  you got  your Volcano  and Tree
 from. But you've given  them a  twist that's  not in  your source.
 You've put them in  a different  order, I  think, making  the Tree
 further  west;  and  your  Volcano  is  not  a   hell-smithy,  but
 apparently a last peak  of some  Atlantis.(81) And the Tree in St.
 Brendan  was  covered with  white birds  that were  fallen angels.
 The one really  interesting idea  in the  whole thing,  I thought:
 they were angels that lived in a kind of limbo, because  they were
 only  lesser  spirits  that  followed Satan  only as  their feudal
 overlord, and had no real part, by  will or  design, in  the Great
 Rebellion. But you make them a third fair race.'                 
   'And  that  bit  about the  "round world"  and the  "old road",'
 said Jeremy, 'where did you get that from?'                      
   'I don't know,' said Frankley. 'It came in the writing. I  got a
 fleeting picture, but it's faded now.'                           
   'The  Parting  of  the  Ways!'  muttered  Lowdham. 'What  do you
 know of that?'                                                   
   'Oh, nothing. But, well - well,  but you  cannot really  find or
 see Paradise by ship, you know.'(82)                             
   'No,'  said  Lowdham.  'Not in  the High  Legends, not  in those
 that  have  power.  No  longer.  And   it  was   seldom  permitted
 anyway, even before.' He said no more, and we all sat still  for a
 while.                                                           
                                                                 
   The silence was finally broken by Markison.  'Well,' he  said, 'I
 hope  you're not  going to  take the  line of  St. Brendan  to the

 monk:  "you  will  learn  no  more  of  me."  Have you  two nothing
 more to say? '                                                    
   'Yes indeed!' said Jeremy. 'But we've not been to Paradise.'
   'Where have you been then?'                                     
   'We  ended  up  at  Porlock (83) on the  13th, that's  last Saturday
 week,' said Jeremy.                                               
   'Why Porlock? Not a very exciting place, is it?'                
   'Not  now,  maybe,'  Lowdham  answered.  'You'll  see  a  sort of
 reason for it, though. But if you  mean: did  we wittingly  pick on
 Porlock? the answer is no.'                                       
   'We  started  off  down  in Cornwall,  Land's End,'  said Jeremy.
 'That was just before the end of June.'                           
   'Started off?' said Guildford. 'I got your  letter on  June 25th,
 but that still leaves a bit of a gap. We last saw you on  the night
 of June 12th: not a date we're likely  to forget  in a  hurry. What
 happened during the next ten days?'                               
   'Was it as long as that?' said Lowdham  blankly. 'I  don't really
 know.  We  landed  in  a  cove.  I  seem   to  remember   the  boat
 grinding  on  rocks and  then being  flung up  on the  shingles. We
 were  damned  lucky.  She  was  holed  and  sinking,  and  we ought
 to have been drowned. Or  did I  dream it?'  He knitted  his brows.
 'Bless me, if I'm sure. D'you remember, Trewyn?'(84)               
   'No,' said Jeremy, thinking. 'No, I don't. The first thing  I can
 remember  is  your saying:  "We'd better  let Nick  have a  line to
 know  that  we  haven't  been  drowned." Yes,  yes of  course: we'd
 been caught at sea in a  storm of  wind and  lightning, and  as you
 all  knew  we   had  gone   sailing,  we   thought  you   might  be
 anxious.'                                                         
   'Don't  you  remember  the  night up  in my  rooms, the  night of
 the great storm?' said Ramer.                                     
   'Yes,  I  remember  bringing  some  texts  round,'  said Lowdham.
 'And  I  remember  the  Eagles.  But surely  the storm  came after-
 wards, after we had started on our research tour?'                
   'All  right,'  said  Dolbear.  'Don't bother  with all  that now;
 there will be plenty of time to talk  about it  later. Get  on with
 your own tale.'                                                   
                                                                  
   'Well,' said  Jeremy, 'we  stuck to  the west  coasts as  much as
 we  could,  staying  by  the  sea,  and  walking as  near to  it as
 possible,  when we  did not  go by  boat. Arry  is an  able seaman,
 and  you  can  still  get  small  sailing  craft  in the  West, and
 sometimes  an  old  sailor  to  help  who can  still handle  a boat

 without petrol. But after our wreck we  did not  sail again  till we
 got  round  to  North  Devon.  We  actually  crossed  by  boat  from
 Bideford  to  South  Wales  in  July,  and  then   we  went   on  to
 Ireland, right up the west coast of it by stages.                  
   'We  took  a look  at Scotland,  but no  further north  than Mull.
 There seemed nothing for us there, no feel in the air at all.  So we
 went  back  to  Hibernia.(85) The  great  storm  had  left  more traces
 there  than  anywhere,  and not  only in  visible damage.  There was
 a good deal of that, but  much less  than you  would expect,  and it
 did not interest us  so much  as the  effect on  the people  and the
 stories that  we found  going about.  People in  Galway -  well, for
 the   matter   of  that,   from  Brandon   Hill  to   Slieve (86) League
 seemed  to  have  been  pretty  well  shaken by  it, and  were still
 scared  for  weeks  afterwards. If  the wind  got up  at all,  as of
 course it  did from  time to  time, they  huddled indoors;  and some
 would begin to trek inland.                                        
   'We  both  heard  many  tales of  the huge  waves "high  as hills"
 coming  in  on  the  Black  Night.  And  curiously  enough,  many of
 the  tale-tellers  agreed that  the greatest  waves were  like phan-
 toms,  or  only  half  real:  "like  shadows  of  mountains  of dark
 black  wicked  water".  Some rolled  far inland  and yet  did little
 damage  before,  well,  disappearing,  melting  away.  We  were told
 of one that  had rolled  clean over  the Aran  Isles (87) and  passed up
 Galway  Bay,  and  so  on  like  a  cloud,  drowning  the land  in a
 ghostly flood like rippling mist, almost as far as Clonfert.       
   'And  we  came  across  one  old  man,  a  queer old  fellow whose
 English  was  hardly  intelligible,  on  the   road  not   far  from
 Loughrea.(88) He was   wild   and  ragged,   but  tall   and  rather
 impressive.  He kept  pointing westward,  and saying,  as far  as we
 could gather: "It was  out of  the Sea  they came,  as they  came in
 the days before the days". He  said that  he had  seen a  tall black
 ship  high  on  the crest  of the  great wave,  with its  masts down
 and the rags of black  and yellow  sails flapping  on the  deck, and
 great  tall  men standing  on the  high poop  and wailing,  like the
 ghosts  they  were;  and  they  were  borne  far  inland,  and came,
 well, not a soul knows where they came.                            
   'We  could  get  no  more  out  of  him, and  he went  on westward
 and  vanished into  the twilight,  and who  he was  or where  he was
 going  we  did  not  discover  either.  Apart  from  such  tales and
 rumours  we  had  no  real  adventures.  The  weather  was  not  too
 bad  generally,  and  we  walked  a  lot, and  slept pretty  well. A
 good  many  dreams  came,  especially  in  Ireland,  but  they  were

 very  slippery; we  couldn't catch  them. Arry  got whole  lists of
 ghost-words,  and  I had  some fleeting  pictures, but  they seldom
 fitted together.  And then,  when we  thought our  time was  up, we
 came to Porlock.                                                  
   'As  we  crossed  over  the  Severn (89) Sea  earlier in  the summer,
 Arry had looked back, along the coast to the  south, at  the shores
 of  Somerset,  and  he had  said something  that I  couldn't catch.
 It was ancient English,  I think,  but he  didn't know  himself: it
 faded  from  him  almost  as soon  as he  had spoken.  But I  had a
 sudden  feeling  that  there  was  something important  waiting for
 us  there,  and  I  made  up  my  mind  to take  him back  that way
 before the end of our journey, if there was time. So I did.       
   'We  arrived  in  a  small  boat  at  Porlock  Weir  on Saturday,
 September 13th. We put up at The  Ship, up  in Porlock  itself; but
 we felt drawn  back shorewards,  and as  soon as  we had  fixed our
 rooms  we  went  out  and  turned  westward,  going  up   onto  the
 cliffs  and along  as far  as Culbone  and beyond.  We saw  the sun
 set, dull, hazy, and rather grim, about half past six, and  then we
 turned back for supper.                                           
   'The  twilight  deepened   quickly,  and   I  remember   that  it
 seemed  suddenly  to  grow  very  chilly;  a  cold  wind  sprang up
 from  the  land  and  blew  out  westward  towards  the  dying sun;
 the sea was leaden. We both felt  tired and  anxious, for  no clear
 reason: we had been feeling rather  cheery. It  was then  that Arry
 turned  away  from  the  sea  and took  my arm,  and he  said quite
 clearly,  and  I  heard  him  and understood  him: Uton  efstan nu,
 Treowine!  Me  ofthyncth  thisses  windes.  Mycel  wen  is Deniscra
 manna  to niht.(90) And that seemed  to  break  my dreams.  I began
 to  remember,  and  piece  together  a  whole lot  of things  as we
 walked back to the  town; and  that night  I had  a long  series of
 dreams and remembered a good deal of them.'                       
   'Yes,'  said  Lowdham,  'and  something  happened  to me  at that
 moment, too. I began to see as well as to  hear. Treowine,  that is
 Wilfrid  Trewyn  Jeremy, and  I seemed  to have  got into  the same
 dream  together,  even  before  we  were asleep.  The faces  in the
 hotel looked pale and thin, and the walls  and furniture  only half
 real:  other  things  and  faces  were  vaguely moving  behind them
 all.  We  were  approaching  the  climax  of  some change  that had
 begun last May, when we started to research together.             
   'Anyway,  we  went  to  bed,   and  we   both  dreamed;   and  we
 woke  up  and  immediately  compared  notes;  and  we  slept  again
 and woke and did  the same.  And so  it went  on for  several days,

 until we were quite exhausted. So at  last we  decided to  go home;
 we  made  up  our  minds  to  come  back  to  Oxford the  next day,
 Thursday.   That  night,   Wednesday,  September   17th,  something
 happened:  the  dreams  coalesced,  took shape,  and came  into the
 open, as you might  say. It  seemed impossible  to believe  when it
 was  over that  years had  not slipped  by, and  that it  was still
 Thursday,  September  18th,  1987,  and  we  could  actually return
 here  as  we had  planned. I  remember staring  incredulously round
 the  dining-room,  that  seemed  to  have  grown   strangely  solid
 again,  half  wondering  if it  was not  some new  dream-trick. And
 we  went  into  the  post-office  and a  bank to  make sure  of the
 date! Then  we crept  back here  secretly, a  week ago,  and stayed
 in retreat until yesterday, conferring and putting together  all we
 had got before we came  out of  hiding. I  think I'll  leave Trewyn
 to do the telling. He's better at it than  I am;  and he  saw more,
 after the earlier scenes.'                                        
   'No!' said Jeremy. 'Alwin had better begin.  The earlier  part is
 his,  more  than  mine.  He  remembers  more  of  what was  said by
 me than I do myself. Go on now, Arry!'                           
                                                                  
   'Well', said Lowdham, 'it  seemed to  me like  this. I  woke with
 a start.(91) Evidently I had been dozing  on a  bench near  the fire.
 The voices seemed to pour over me like a stream. I felt that  I had
 been  dreaming,  something  very  odd  and vivid,  but I  could not
 catch it; and for a minute or two  the familiar  scene in  the hall
 seemed  strange,  and  the  English speech  about me  sounded alien
 and remote, although the voices were  for the  most part  using the
 soft speech of western Wessex that I knew so  well. Here  and there
 I  caught  the  tones  of  the  Marchers  from  up  beyond  Severn-
 mouth;  and  I  heard  a  few   speaking  queerly,   using  uncouth
 words after the manner of those from the eastern shires.          
   'I  looked  down  the  hall,  hoping  to  see my  friend Treowine
 Ceolwulf's  son.  There  was  a  great  crowd  in  hall,  for  King
 Eadweard  was  there.  The  Danish  ships were  in the  Severn Sea,
 and  all  the  south  shores were  in arms.  The heathen  earls had
 been  defeated  away  up in  the west  marches at  Archenfield, but
 the pirates were still at large off the Welsh coast, trying  to get
 food  and  supplies,  and  the  Devenish  men  and  Somersets (92) were
 on guard. There had been a bitter  affray at  Watchet a  few nights
 before,  but the  Danish men  had been  driven off.  Porlock's turn
 might come.                                                       
   'I  looked round  at the  faces of  the men:  some old  and worn,

 some  still   young  and   keen;  but   they  seemed   dim,  almost
 dreamlike in the wavering torches.  The candles  on the  high table
 were  guttering.  A  wind  was  blowing  outside  the  great wooden
 hall, surging round the house; the timbers  creaked. I  felt tired.
 Not  only  because  Treowine  and  I  had  had  a  long   spell  of
 coastguard  duty,  and  had  had  little  sleep  since the  raid on
 Watchet;  but I  was tired  of this  woeful and  dishevelled world,
 slipping  slowly  back into  decay, as  it seemed  to me,  with its
 petty but cruel wars, and all the ruin of the good and  fair things
 there had been in  my grandsires'  days. The  hangings on  the wall
 behind  the  dais  were  faded  and  worn, and  on the  table there
 were but few vessels or candlesticks of gold and  silver smithcraft
 that had survived the pillage of the heathen.                     
   'The  sound  of  the  wind disturbed  me and  brought back  to me
 old longings that I thought I had buried.  I found  myself thinking
 of my  father, old  Eadwine Oswine's son,(93) and the  strange tales
 he had told me when  I was  a small  lad and  he a  grizzled seaman
 of  more  than fifty  winters: tales  of the  west coasts,  and far
 islands, and of the deep sea,  and of  a land  there was  far away,
 where  there  was  peace and  fruitfulness among  a fair  folk that
 did not wither.                                                   
   'But Eadwine had taken his ship, Earendel, out into the deep
 sea  long  ago,  and  he  never returned.  What haven  received him
 no  man  under heaven  could tell.  That was  in the  black winter,
 when  Alfred  went  into  hiding (94) and  so  many  men   of  Somerset
 fled  over  sea.  My  mother  fled  to her  kindred among  the West
 Welsh (95) for  a  while, and  I had  seen only  nine winters  in this
 world, for I  was born  just before  the holy  Eadmund was  done to
 death  by  the  heathen.(96) I learned  the  Welsh  tongue  and  much
 craft upon  the wild  waters, before  I came  back in  full manhood
 to Somerset and the service of the good king in his last wars.(97)
   'I had been  in Iraland  more than  once; and  wherever I  went I
 sought  tales  of  the  Great  Sea  and  what lay  out upon  it, or
 beyond, if haply it had  any further  shore. Folk  had not  much to
 tell  for  certain,. but  there was  talk of  one Maelduin (98) who had
 sailed  to  new  lands,  and of  the holy  Brendan and  others. And
 some  there  were  who  said  that  there  had been  a land  of Men
 away west in long  days of  yore, but  that it  had been  cast down
 and  those  that  escaped  had  come  to   Eriu (99) (so   they  called
 Iraland) in their ships, and their descendants lived on  there, and
 in  other  lands  about the  shores of  Garsecg. But  they dwindled
 and forgot, and nought now was left of  them but  a wild  strain in

                                                    
                                                                    
 the  blood  of  men  of  the  West.  "And  you  will know  those that
 have it by the sea-longing that is on them," they  said,. <and  it is
 many  that  it  draws  out  west  to  their  death  or to  come never
 back among living men>.                                             
   'And  I  thought  that  maybe  the  blood  of  such  men ran  in my
 father's  veins and  my own,  for our  kin had  long been  settled at
 Glastonbury,  where  there  was  rumour  of  strange  comers  out  of
 the  sea in  days of  old. And  the sound  of the  winds and  seas on
 the west beaches was  ever a  restless music  to me,  at once  a pain
 and  a desire;  and the  pain was  keener in  Spring, and  the desire
 stronger  in  Autumn.  And  now  it  was   Autumn,  and   the  desire
 was  scarcely  to  be  borne;  for I  was growing  old. And  the seas
 were  wide.  So  I  mused,  forgetting  once again  where I  was, but
 not sleeping.                                                       
   'I heard  the crash  of waves  on the  black cliffs,  and sea-birds
 wailing;  snow  fell.  Then  the  sea  opened  before  me,  pale  and
 boundless.  And  now  the  sun  shone  above  me,  and  the  land and
 the sound of it and the  smell of  it fell  far behind.  Treowine was
 beside  me,  and  we  were  alone,  going  west.  And  the  sun  came
 down  and  sank  towards  the  sea  before  us,  and still  we sailed
 west,  on  towards  the  setting  sun,  and the  longing in  my heart
 drew  me  on  against  my  fear  and  land-bound   will.  And   so  I
 passed into night  in the  midst of  the deep  waters, and  I thought
 that a sweet fragrance was borne on the air.                        
   'And  suddenly  I  was  brought  back  to Porlock  and the  hall of
 the  king's  thegn Odda.  Men were  calling out  for a  minstrel, and
 a  minstrel  I  was,  when  the  mood  was on  me. The  king himself,
 stern  Eadweard  Alfred's  son  - tired  before old  age he  looked -
 sent  to me,  bidding me  sing or  speak. He  was a  stern man,  as I
 say, but like his  father in  having an  ear, when  he had  the time,
 for the sound of the old  measures. I  rose and  walked to  the steps
 of the dais, and bowed.                                             
   '"Westu  hal,  AElfwine!"  said  the  king.   "Sing  me  nu hwaet-
 wegu: sum eald leoth, gif thu wilt."                               
   ' "Ic can lyt on leothcraeft, hlaford," I said; "ac  this geworht'ic
 unfyrn the to weorthmynde."                                         
   'And  then  I  began,  and  let  my  voice roll  out; but  my mouth
 did not speak the words that I  had purposed:  of all  that I  had so
 carefully  devised  against  the  event,  in  the  night  watches  or
 pacing on the cold cliffs, not a stave came out.                    
         Hwaet! Eadweard cyning AElfredes sunu                         
         beorna beaggifa on Brytenrice                               

     aet Ircenfelda (100) ealdorlangne tir                                      
     geslog aet saecce sweorda ecgum *                                      
 and  all  the rest,  of such  sort as  kings look  for: not  a word  of it.
 Instead I said this: (101)                                                   
     Monath modes lust mid mereflode
     forth  to feran, thaet ic feor heonan
     ofer garsecges grimme holmas                                               
     AElfwina eard ut gesece.                                               
     Nis me to hearpan hyge ne to hringthege,
     ne to wife wynn, ne to worulde hyht,
     ne ymb owiht elles, nefne ymb ytha gewealc.                              
 Then   I   stopped   suddenly,   and   stood   confused.  There   was  some
 laughter,   from   those   not   under   the   king's   eye,   and   a  few
 mocking  calls.  There  were  many  folk   in  hall   who  knew   me  well,
 and  they  had  long  been  pleased  to  make  a  jest  of  my talk  of the
 Great  Sea;  and  it  now  pleased  them  to  pretend  that  I  had  spoken
 of AElfwines eard, as if I had a realm of my own out westward.             
  '"If  England   is  not   good  enough,   let  him   go  find   a  better
 land!"  they  cried.  "He  need  go   no  further   than  Iraland,   if  he
 longs  for  elves  and  uncouth  wights,  God  save  him!  Or  he   can  go
 with  the  heathen  to  the   Land  of   Ice  that   they  say   they  have
 found."                                                                    
  '  "If  he has  no mind  to sing  for the  raising of  our hearts,  let us
 find a scop who will."                                                     
  '   "We   have   had   enough   of   the   sea,"   shouted   one   of  the
 Marchers.   "A   spell   of   Dane-hunting   round   the   rim   of   Wales
 would cure him."                                                           
  'But  the  king  sat  gravely  and  did  not   smile,  and   many  besides
 were  silent.  I  could  see  in  his  eyes  that  the  words  had  touched
 him,  though  I  doubt   not,  he   had  heard   others  like   them  often
 before.                                                                    
  '"Peace!"   said   old   Odda   of   Portloca,   master   of   the   hall.
 "AElfwine  here  has  sailed  more  seas  than  you  have  heard   of,  and
                                                                           
 (*  Lowdham  provides  the  following  translations 'for  Philip's benefit'.
  'Greetings,  AElfwine,'  said  the  king.  'Recite  me something,  some old
 poem if you like.' 'I have little skill in poetry, my lord,' I said, 'but I
 composed this in your honour a little while ago.'                          
  'Lo!  Eadweard  the  king,   Alfred's  scion,   brave  men's   patron,  in
 Britain's  island at  Archenfield undying  fame in  battle reaped  him with
 reddened blades.'                                                          
  For the translation of the next verses see Night 66, p. 244. N.G.)        

 the lands of the Welsh and Irish are not strange  to him.  With the
 king's leave let him say what his mood bids him. It  is no  harm to
 turn from  these  sorry  shores for  a while  and speak  of marvels
 and  strange lands,  as the  old verse-makers  often did.  Will you
 not speak us something by the elder poets, AElfwine?"             
   '"Not  now,  lord,"  I  said; for  I was  abashed and  weary, and
 I  felt  as  a  man  in  a dream  who finds  himself unclad  in the
 market-place.  "There  are  others in  hall. Men  of the  Marches I
 hear  by  their  speech;  and  they  were  used  to boast  of their
 songcraft,  before the  Danes came.  With the  king's leave  I will
 sit."                                                             
   'At that a  man from  among the  Marchers leapt  to his  feet and
 got leave to speak;  and lo!  I saw  it was  my friend  Treowine. A
 small  dark  man he  was, but  he had  a good  voice, if  a strange
 way  with  his  words. His  father Ceolwulf,  I had  heard, claimed
 to come of the  kin of  the kings  that sat  at Tamworth (102) of old;
 but  Treowine  had  come  south  many  years  before.  Ere   I  had
 found a seat, he had a foot on the step and had begun.            
   'His verse was in the old style, indeed it was  the work  of some
 old  poet,  maybe,  though  I  had  not heard  it before,  and many
 words  were  dark  to  us  of  later  times; but  he gave  them out
 strong  and  true,  now  loud,  now  soft,  as  the   theme  asked,
 without help of  harp. Thus  he began,  and soon  all the  hall was
 stone-still:                                                      
              Hwaet! we on  geardagum of Garsecge
              fyrn gefrugnon of feorwegum
              to Longbeardna londgemaerum
              tha hi aer heoldon, iglond micel
              on North-theodum, nacan bundenne
              scirtimbredne scrithan gangan...                                  
   'But if it was  dark to  some of  our younger  men of  Wessex, it
 will  be as  night to  you, who  have passed  so much  further down
 the streams of time, since the old poets sang in Angel of  the grey
 North-seas; so I have cast it into the  speech of  your age.  And I
 have done so, for by  chance, or  more than  chance, this  song had
 a part in what  befell after,  and its  theme was  knit up  with my
 own thoughts, and it whetted my longing the more.                 
                                                                  
                          King Sheave.(103)                        
                                                                  
   In days of yore out of deep Ocean to the Longobards, in the     
 land dwelling that of old they held in the isles of the North,
 a  ship  came  sailing,  shining-timbered,  without  oar  or  mast,

 eastward  floating.  The  sun  behind   it  sinking   westward  with
 flame  kindled  the  fallow  water.  Wind  was  wakened.   Over  the
 world's  margin   clouds  grey-helmed   climbed  slowly   up,  wings
 unfolding  wide  and  looming,  as   mighty  eagles   moving  onward
 to eastern Earth, omens bearing.                                   
   Men  there marvelled,  in the  mist standing  of the  dark islands
 in the  deeps of  time: laughter  they knew  not, light  nor wisdom;
 shadow   was  upon   them,  and   sheer  mountains   stalked  behind
 them, stern and lifeless, evil-haunted. The East was dark.         
   The  ship  came  shining  to  the  shore  driven, and  strode upon
 the strand, till its stern rested on sand and shingle. The  sun went
 down.  The   clouds  overcame   the  cold   heavens.  In   fear  and
 wonder  to  the  fallow  water  sad-hearted  men  swiftly  hastened,
 to  the  broken  beaches,  the  boat  seeking  gleaming-timbered  in
 the grey twilight.  They looked  within, and  there laid  sleeping a
 boy they saw breathing softly: his face was  fair, his  form lovely;
 his  limbs  were  white,  his locks  raven golden-braided.  Gilt and
 carven  with  wondrous  work  was  the  wood  about  him.  In golden
 vessel  gleaming  water  stood  beside  him;  strung  with  silver a
 harp  of  gold  beneath  his  hand  rested;  his  sleeping  head was
 softly  pillowed  on  a  sheaf  of  corn  shimmering palely,  as the
 fallow  gold  doth  from  far  countries   west  of   Angol.  Wonder
 filled them.                                                       
                                                                   
   The  boat  they  hauled,  and on  the beach  moored it  high above
 the  breakers, then  with hands  lifted from  the bosom  its burden.
 The  boy  slumbered.  On  his  bed  they  bore  him  to  their bleak
 dwellings,  dark-walled  and   drear,  in   a  dim   region  between
 waste  and  sea.  There  of  wood  builded  high  above  the  houses
 was a hall standing, forlorn  and empty.  Long had  it stood  so, no
 noise  knowing,  night  nor  morning,  no  light  seeing.  They laid
 him  there,  under  lock  left  him  lonely  sleeping in  the hollow
 darkness.   They   held   the   doors.   Night   wore    away.   New
 awakened,  as  ever  on  earth,  early  morning;  day   came  dimly.
 Doors  were  opened.   Men  strode   within,  then   amazed  halted;
 fear  and  wonder  filled  the  watchmen. The  house was  bare, hall
 deserted;  no  form  found  they  on  the  floor  lying, but  by bed
 forsaken  the  bright  vessel dry  and empty  in the  dust standing.
 The guest was gone.                                                
   Grief  o'ercame  them.  In sorrow  they sought  him, till  the sun
 rising  over the  hills of  heaven to  the homes  of men  light came
 bearing.  They  looked  upward,  and  high  upon  a  hill  hoar  and
 treeless  gold  was glimmering.  Their guest  stood there  with head

                            
                                                                  
 uplifted,  hair  unbraided;  harpstrings  they  heard in  his hand
 ringing, at his feet they saw the fallow-golden  corn-sheaf lying.
 Then  clear his  voice a  song began,  sweet, unearthly,  words in
 music woven  strangely in  a tongue  unknown. Trees  stood silent,
 and men unmoving marvelling harkened.                             
   Middle-earth  had  known   for  many   ages  neither   song  nor
 singer; no sight so fair had eyes of mortal,  since the  earth was
 young,  seen when  waking in  that sad  country long  forsaken. No
 lord they  had, no  king, nor  counsel, but  the cold  terror that
 dwelt in the desert, the dark  shadow that  haunted the  hills and
 the hoar forest:  Dread was  their master.  Dark and  silent, long
 years  forlorn  lonely waited  the hall  of kings,  house forsaken
 without fire or food.                                             
                                                                  
   Forth   men  hastened   from  their   dim  houses.   Doors  were
 opened, and  gates unbarred.  Gladness wakened.  To the  hill they
 thronged, and their heads lifting on their guest they gazed. Grey-
 bearded  men  bowed  before  him  and  blessed  his  coming  their
 years to  heal; youths  and maidens,  wives and  children, welcome
 gave him. His  song ended.  Silent standing  he looked  upon them.
 Lord  they called  him; king  they made  him, crowned  with golden
 wheaten garland: white his raiment, his harp  his sceptre.  In his
 house  was  fire,  food  and  wisdom:  there  fear  came  not.  To
 manhood he grew, might and glory.                                 
   Sheave  they  called  him, whom  the ship  brought them,  a name
 renowned in the North-countries ever since in  song; but  a secret
 hidden  his  true name  was in  tongue unknown  of a  far country,
 where the falling  seas wash  western shores,  beyond the  ways of
 men  since  the  world  worsened.  The word  is forgotten  and the
 name perished.                                                    
   Their  need  he   healed,  and   laws  renewed   long  forsaken.
 Words  he taught  them wise  and lovely:  their tongue  ripened in
 the time of Sheave  to song  and music.  Secrets he  opened, runes
 revealing.  Riches  he  gave  them, reward  of labour,  wealth and
 comfort  from  the  earth  calling,  acres  ploughing,  sowing  in
 season seed of plenty, hoarding in garner  golden harvest  for the
 help of men. The hoar forest  in his  days drew  back to  the dark
 mountains;  the  shadow lifted,  and shining  corn, white  ears of
 wheat,  whispered  in  the  breezes  where  waste  had  been.  The
 woods blossomed.                                                  
   Halls and houses hewn of  timber, strong  towers of  stone steep
 and  lofty,  golden-gabled, in  his guarded  city they  raised and
 roofed. In his royal dwelling of wood  well-carven the  walls were

 wrought; fair-hued figures  filled with  silver, gold,  and scarlet,
 gleaming  hung  there,  stories  boding  of strange  countries, were
 one wise in wit the  woven legends  to thread  with thought.  At his
 throne   men  found   counsel  and   comfort  and   care's  healing,
 justice  in  judgement.  Generous-handed  his  gifts he  gave. Glory
 was  uplifted.  Far  sprang  his  fame  over  fallow  water; through
 Northern  lands  the  renown  echoed  of  the  shining  king, Sheave
 the mighty.                                                         
                                                                    
   'When  he  ended  there  was  loud applause  - loudest  from those
 who  understood  least,  so  that  men  should  perceive   how  well
 they  could  thread  the  old  songs;  and  they  passed  a  horn to
 Treowine's hand. But  ere he  drank, I  rose up,  and there  where I
 stood I finished his song for him:                                  
                                                                    
   Seven  sons  he  begat,  sire (104) of princes,  men  great  of mood,
 mighty-handed   and   high-hearted.  From   his  house   cometh  the
 seed of kings, as songs tells us, fathers of the fathers, who before
 the  change  in  the  Elder  Years  the  earth   governed,  Northern
 kingdoms  named  and  founded,  shields  of  their   people:  Sheave
 begat   them:   Sea-danes   and   Goths,   Swedes    and   Northmen,
 Franks  and  Frisians,  folk  of the  islands, Swordmen  and Saxons,
 Swabians,  Angles,  and   the  Longobards,   who  long   ago  beyond
 Mircwudu  a  mighty  realm  and  wealth  won   them  in   the  Welsh
 countries,  where  AElfwine, Eadwine's  son in  Italy was  king. All
 that has passed!                                                    
                                                                    
   'And  with  that, while  men still  stared -  for there  were many
 that  knew  my  name  and  my  father's  -  I beckoned  to Treowine,
 and we strode from the hall into the darkness and the wind.         
                                                                    
   'And  there  I  think  I  must  end  for  tonight,'  said Lowdham,
 with  a  sudden  change  of  tone  and  voice  that startled  us: we
 jumped  like  men  waked  suddenly  from  a dream.  It seemed  as if
 one  man  had  vanished  and  another  had sprung  up in  his place,
 so  vividly  had  he  presented AElfwine  to us  as he  spoke. Quite
 plainly I had  seen him  standing there,  a man  very like  Arry but
 not the same - rather taller and less thick,  and looking  older and
 greyer, though by his account he was  just Arry's  age it  seemed; I
 had seen the glittering of his eyes  as he  looked round  and strode
 out.  The  hall  and  the  faces  I saw  in a  blur behind  him, and
 Treowine  was  only  a  dim  shadow  against  the  flicker   of  far
 candles  as  he  spoke  of  King  Sheave;  but  I  heard   the  wind
 rushing above all the words.                                        

   'Next  meeting  Treowine  and   I  will   go  on   again,  if   you  want
 any   more   of   this,'   said   Lowdham.   'AElfwine's  tale   is  nearly
 done;  and  after  that  we  shall  flit  more quickly,  for we  shall pass
 further  and  further   from  what   Stainer  would   call  History   -  in
 which  old  AElfwine  really  walked,  at  least  for  the  most   part,  I
 guess.                                                                     
   'If  you  haven't  got  a  horn,  fill  me a  mug! For  I have  done both
 AElfwine's   part   and   Treowine's,   and   it   is   thirsty   work,   a
 minstrel's.'                                                               
   Markison   handed   him   a   pewter  tankard   full.  'Beo   thu  blithe
 aet thisse  beorthege!'(105) he  said,   for  ancient   English  is   only  one
 of the innumerable things he knows.                                        
   Lowdham   drained  the   tankard  at   a  draught.   And  so   ended  the
 sixty-ninth  night  of  the  Notion  Club.  It  was  agreed  to  meet again
 in  only  one  week's  time,  on  October  2nd,  lest  the  onset  of  term
 should hinder the further tales of AElfwine and Treowine.                  
                                                                           
   WTJ. AAL MGR. RD. PF. RS. JM. JJR. NG.                                   
                                                                           
 Night 70. Thursday, 2 October, 1987.                                       
                                                                           
   Here the typescript text ends, not at the foot  of a  page; and  here the
 manuscript  ends  also,  without  the  date-heading  for the  next meeting.
 It is certain that  my father  wrote nothing  further. There  are, however,
 two brief texts, written  very fast  in pencil  but fortunately  just about
 legible,  which  give  a  glimpse  of  what  he  had  in mind.  Though both
 obviously  belong to  the same  time, it  is not  clear which  preceded the
 other; the one that I give first was written on the back of a draft for the
 passage  in  E  beginning  'It  was  then  that Arry  turned away  from the
 sea' (p. 268).                                                             
                                                                           
   The Danes attack Porlock that night. They are driven off and             
 take refuge  by swimming  out to  the ships  and so  to 'Broad             
 Relic'.(106) A small 'cnearr' (107) is captured.                                    
   It is not well guarded. AElfwine tells Treowine that  he has             
 stores laid up. They move the boat and stock it  the following             
 night and set sail West.                                                   
   The wind is from the East, and they sail on and on, and come             
 to no land; they are exhausted, and a dreamlike death seems to             
 be coming over them. They  smell [?  the] fragrance.  Swete is             
 blostma braep begeondan sae (108) says  AElfwine, and  struggles to             
 rise. But the wind changes: great clouds come out of the West.             
 'Behold  the  Eagles  of  the  Lords of  the West  coming over             
 Numenor' said AElfwine, and fell back as one dead.                         

   Treowine  sees  the   round  world   [?curve]  below,   and  straight
 ahead  a  shining  land,  before  the  wind  seizes  them   and  drives
 them  away. In  the gathering  dark [or  dusk] he  sees a  bright star,
 shining  in  a  rent  in  the cloud  in the  West. Eala  Earendel engla
 beorhtast. Then he remembers no more.                                  
   'Whether  what  follows  is  my  direct  dream,'  said   Jeremy,  'or
 the  dreams  of  Treowine  and  AElfwine  in  the  deeps  of the  sea I
 cannot say.'                                                           
   I woke to find myself                                                
                                                                       
   Here  this  sketch  tantalisingly breaks  off. On  the same  page and
 fairly certainly written at the same time stands this note:            
                                                                       
   The   theory   is   that   the   sight  and   memory  goes   on  with
 descendants  of  Elendil  and   Voronwe  (=   Treowine)  but   not  re-
 incarnation;  they  are different  people even  if they  still resemble
 one  another  in  some  ways  even  after  a  lapse  of   many  genera-
 tions.                                                                 
                                                                       
   The second sketch  is at  first fuller  (and may  for that  reason be
 thought to have followed the other), but then passes into an outline of
 headings and brief statements.                                         
                                                                       
   Danes  attack   that  night   but  are   driven  off.   AElfwine  and
 Treowine  are  among  those  who   capture  a   small  ship   that  had
 ventured  close  inshore  and   stuck.  The   rest  escape   to  'Broad
 Relic'.                                                                
   It  is grey  dawn ere  all is  over. 'Going  to rest?'  said Treowine
 to AElfwine. 'Yes, I hope so,' said  AElfwine, 'but  not in  this land,
 Treowine!  I  am  going  -  to  seek  a land,  whence King  Sheaf came,
 maybe;  or  to  find  Death,  if  that  be  not the  name for  the same
 place.'                                                                
   'What do you mean?'                                                  
   'I  am  sailing,'  said  AElfwine.  'The  wind  blows  westward.  And
 here's a ship that  knows the  sea. The  king himself  has given  it to
 me.   I   have   handled  many   such  before.   Will  you   come?  Two
 could make shift to sail her.'                                         
   'We should need more; and what of water and victual?'                
   'I  have all  prepared,' said  AElfwine, 'for  this venture  has long
 been  brewing  in  my  mind,  and  now  at last  chance and  desire are
 matched.  There  is  provision  down  in  my  house  by  the  weir, and
 we'll  find  a  couple  of  lusty   men  of   Somerset  whom   I  know.
 They'll go as far as Ireland at the least, and then we'll see.'        

   'Yes,  you'll  find  madmen  enough  there,'  said  Treowine,  'but
 I'll go with you so far at the least.'                                 
   When  it  was  dark  on  the   following  night   AElfwine  brought
 along  Ceola  (of  Somerset)  and  Geraint  (of  West  Wales)  and we
 stowed  her,  and thrust  her off.  The east  wind freshened,  and we
 set  sail and  drove out  into the  dark waters.  There's no  need to
 make  long  tale  of  it:  we  bent  our  course  past  the  horns of
 Pembrokeshire  and  so  out  to  sea.  And  then we  had a  change of
 weather,  for  a  wild  wind from  the South-west  drove us  back and
 northward,  and  we  hardly  made  haven  upon  a  long firth  in the
 South-west  of  Ireland.  I'd  never  been  there  before, for  I was
 younger  than  AElfwine.  We  sat  out  the  storm  there,   and  got
 fresh  supplies,  and  then  AElfwine  spoke of  his desire  to Ceola
 and Geraint.                                                           
                                                                       
              Treowine sees the straight road and the world plunging
 down. AElfwine's vessel seems to be taking the straight road and       
 falls [sic] in a swoon of fear and exhaustion.                         
   AElfwine gets view of the Book of Stories; and writes down           
 what he can remember.                                                  
   Later fleeting visions.                                              
   Beleriand tale.                                                      
   Sojourn in Numenor before and during the fall ends with              
 Elendil and Voronwe fleeing on a hill of water into the dark          
 with Eagles and lightning pursuing them. Elendil has a book            
 which he has written.                                                  
   His descendants get glimpses of it.                                  
   AElfwine has one.                                                    
                                                                       
   On  the  same slip  of paper  and written  at the  same time  as this
 second  text  is a  note saying  that Edwin  Lowdham's page  'should be
 in  Anglo-Saxon  straight,  without  some  scraps  of  Numenorean', and
 that  'the  Anglo-Saxon should  not be  written in  Numenorean script'.
 Finally there stands this  last note:  'At end  Lowdham and  Jeremy can
 revisualize some more fragments, but  it is  hardly needed,  as Lowdham
 and Jeremy have a vivid dream of the Fall of Numenor.'                 
                                                                       
   From  the  beginning  of this  history, the  story of  the Englishman
 AElfwine,  called  also  Eriol,  who  links by  his strange  voyage the
 vanished world of the Elves with the lives of later men, has constantly
 appeared. So in the last words of the Quenta Noldorinwa (IV.165)  it is
 said:                                                                  
                                                                       
   To Men of the  race of  Earendel have  they [the  tales of  the Quenta]
   at times been told,  and most  to Eriol,  who alone  of the  mortals of

  later days, and yet  now long  ago, sailed  to the  Lonely Isle,  and came
  back  to  the  land  of  Leithien  [Britain]  where  he lived,  and remem-
  bered things that he had heard in fair  Cortirion, the  city of  the Elves
  in Tol Eressea.                                                          
                                                                          
 He  is  seen  in  Tavrobel  of  Tol  Eressea  translating  The  Annals  of
 Valinor  and  The  Annals  of  Beleriand  from  the  work of  Pengolod the
 Wise  of  Gondolin,  and  parts  of  his  Anglo-Saxon  text  are preserved
 (IV.263, 281 ff.);  the Ainulindale  was spoken  to him  by Rumil  of Tun
 (V.156);  the  Lhammas  of  Pengolod  was  seen   by  AElfwine   'when  he
 came  into  the  West'  (V.167). To  the Quenta  Silmarillion his  note is
 appended  (V.203):  'The  work  of  Pengolod  I  learned  much  by  heart,
 and  turned  into  my  tongue,  some during  my sojourn  in the  West, but
 most  after  my  return  to  Britain';  after  which  follow the  lines of
 AElfwine  Widlast  that  Arundel  Lowdham  heard,  as  Alboin   Errol  had
 heard   them:   Fela  bid   on  Westwegum   werum  uncudra,   wundra  ond
 wihta, wlitescyne lond...                                                
  Crossing  this  theme,  and  going  back  to  one form  of the  old story
 AElfwine of  England (II.322  and note  42), was  the story  that AElfwine
 never set foot on the Lonely Isle. So  in my  father's sketches  for those
 further reaches of  The Lost  Road that  he never  wrote, AElfwine  on the
 one  hand  (V.78) awakes  on the  beach of  the Lonely  Isle 'to  find the
 ship being drawn by people  walking in  the water',  and there  in Eressea
 he 'is told the Lost Tales'; but in other notes of that time (V.SO), after
 'the  vision  of  Eressea',  the  'west  wind blows  them back',  and they
 come to shore in Ireland. In the  note to  the final  version of  the poem
 The  Song  of AElfwine  (a version  which I  suggested was  'probably from
 the  years after  The Lord  of the  Rings, though  it might  be associated
 with the Notion Club Papers of 1945', V.100) it is told (V.103):          
                                                                          
  AElfwine  (Elf-friend)  was  a  seaman  of  England  of  old   who,  being
  driven out to sea  from the  coast of  Erin, passed  into the  deep waters
  of  the  West,  and  according  to  legend  by  some  strange   chance  or
  grace  found the  'straight road'  of the  Elvenfolk and  came at  last to
  the  Isle  of  Eressea  in  Elvenhome.  Or  maybe, as  some say,  alone in
  the waters, hungry  and athirst,  he fell  into a  trance and  was granted
  a vision of  that isle  as it  once had  been, ere  a West-wind  arose and
  drove him back to Middle-earth.                                          
                                                                          
  In the first  of the  sketches just  given AElfwine  and Treowine  are in
 sight of the 'shining land' when  the wind  drives them  away; but  in the
 second my father once more  sees AElfwine  in the  Lonely Isle  looking at
 'the  Book  of  Stories'.  But the  whole conception  has now  developed a
 disturbing  complexity:  the  Downfall  of  Numenor,  the   Straight  Road
 into  the  West,  the  ancient  histories  in  unknown  language  and  un-
 known  script  preserved  in  Eressea,  the  mysterious  voyage  of  Edwin
 Lowdham in his  ship The  Earendel and  the single  preserved page  of his

 book in Anglo-Saxon, the 're-emergence' in  his son  Arundel (Earendel)
 and  his  friend Wilfrid  Trewin Jeremy  of 'the  sight and  memory' of
 their  forebears  in  distant  ages  communicated  in  dreams,  and the
 violent  irruption  of the  Numenorean legend  into the  late twentieth
 century - all framed within an elaborate foreseeing of the  future (not
 without comic and ironic elements).                                   
                                                                      
   There  is  a  slip  of  paper on  which my  father sketched  out very
 rapidly  ideas  for what  would become  'Part Two'  of The  Notion Club
 Papers; this was  undoubtedly written  before he  began the  writing of
 the manuscript E, but it is most conveniently given here.             
                                                                      
   Do    the    Atlantis    story    and   abandon    Eriol-Saga,   with
 Loudham, Jeremy, Guildford and Ramer taking part.                     
   After   night 62.(109) Loudham,    walking   home    with   Guildford
 and  Ramer,   apologizes  for   appearing  to   scoff.  They   halt  in
 Radcliffe  Square  and  Loudham  looks   up  at   the  Camera.   It  is
 starry,  but  a  black  cloud  is coming  up out  of the  West [changed
 at  once  to  (but)  caught  like  smoke in  the moon  a wisp  of cloud
 seemed  to  be  issuing  from  the  lantern   of  the   dome].  Loudham
 halts  and  looks  up,  passing [his]  hand over  his forehead.  'I was
 going  to  say,'  he  says,  'that  -  I  don't  know.  I  wonder.'  He
 hopped into college and said no more.                                 
   Night  65.  Truncated.  It  begins  after  lacuna.  Conversation  had
 been   about   myths,   but   Loudham   had   been   restless,  walking
 about   twisting   his  handkerchief   and  making   some  unsuccessful
 jests.                                                                
   Suddenly  he  went  to  the  window.  It  was  a  summer   night  and
 he  looked  out,  then  spoke  in  a  loud  solemn  voice.  'Behold the
 Eagles   of  the   Lords  of   the  West   coming  over   Numenor.'  We
 were  startled.  Some  of  us  went  and  looked  out.  A  great  cloud
 was  eating  up  the  stars,  spreading  two  vast  dark   wings  south
 and north.                                                            
   Loudham    drew    away.    They    discuss     Numenor?    Loudham's
 ancestry?                                                             
                                                                      
   The words with which this sketch begins, 'Do  the Atlantis  story and
 abandon Eriol-Saga ...', are remarkable. In the first place,  they seem
 to support the  analysis of  the way  in which  The Notion  Club Papers
 developed that I have  suggested at  various points,  and which  I will
 state here in a more coherent form.                                   
   'Part One' of the Papers (not at this  time conceived  to be  so) had
 reached the stage of the completed manuscript  B (see  p. 147  and note
 4),  and  at  this  stage Harry  Loudham was  not seen  as contributing
 greatly to the discussions of  the Notion  Club: a  maker of  jokes and

                                                             
                                                                                  
  interjections.  Above  all,  he  had  no  especial  interest  in the  question of
  Atlantis   or   in   names   from   unknown   worlds.   Examples  of   this  have
  been pointed out in the notes to Part One.(110)                                  
       Only  when  the  manuscript  B  was  completed  (and   the  text   of  'Part
  One'  of  the  Papers  very  largely  achieved)  did   the  thought   enter:  'Do
  the   Atlantis   story.'   With   Loudham's   standing   beneath   the  Radcliffe
  Camera  and  staring  up  at  the  sky  the  whole  course  of  the   Papers  was
  changed.   Adjustments   and   additions   were   subsequently   made   to  'Part
  One',  hinting  at  his  peculiar  'affinity'  with  the  legend of  the downfall
  of  the  island  empire,  and  changing   the  nature   of  his   interests:  for
  whereas  in  B  Guildford  could  say  of  him  (p.  214  note  23):  Memoirs  of
  the  courts  of   minor  18th   century  monarchs   are  his   natural  browsing-
  ground',  in  the  list  of  members  of  the   Club  given   on  p.   151  (made
  when  B  had   been  completed)(111) he  has   'special  interests   in  Icelandic
  and  Anglo-Saxon'.  And  as  the  writing  of  'Part   Two'  in   the  manuscript
  E   proceeded   he   ceased   to   be   Harry  and   became  Arry,   for  Arundel
  (Earendel).                                                                      
       But  when  my  father  wrote  'Do  the  Atlantis  story'  he also  said that
  the  'Eriol-Saga'  should  be  abandoned,  although  there   is  no   mention  of
  any  such  matter  in  the  text  of  'Part  One'.  The  only explanation  that I
  can  see  is  that  the  'Eriol-Saga'  had  been,  up  to  this  time,   what  my
  father  had  in  mind  for  the  further  course  of the  meetings of  the Notion
  Club, but was now rejecting in favour of 'Atlantis'.                             
       In  the  event  he  did  not do  so; he  found himself  drawn back  into the
  ideas  that  he  had  sketched  for  The  Lost  Road  (see  V.77  -  8),  but now
  in  a  conception  so  intricate  that  one  need  perhaps  look  no  further for
  an   answer   to   the   question,    why   were    The   Notion    Club   Papers
  abandoned?                                                                       
                                                                                  
                                        NOTES.                                     
                                                                                  
        1.   Pencilled at the head of the first page of  the sole  manuscript ('E')
             of  'Part  Two'  is  'The  Strange  [Investigation  >]  Case  of Arundel
             Loudham',  and  the  same  title  together   with  the   number  '[Part]
             II'  is  found  on a  separate title-page  that seems  to belong  with E
             (p.  153 note  2). The  second text  of this  Part, the  typescript 'F',
             while  distinct  from  the  typescript  D  of  Part   One  and   with  a
             separate  pagination,  has  no  title  or  heading  before  'Night  62'.
             -  Loudham  is  spelt  thus  in  E  at  first,  but  becomes  Lowdham in
             the course of the writing of the manuscript (p. 153 note 4).          
        2.   In  E there  is no  Night 62:  see p.  195 (Guildford's  footnote) and
             note 47.                                                              

                                
                                                                       
  3. In E there is no head-note to Night 63 except the word             
     'defective', and thus no reference to 'the imram'. In the final
     text, the typescript F, the number of the night to which the       
     mention of the imram is referred was left blank; I have added      
     '69', since on that night Frankley read his poem on Saint          
     Brendan (pp. 261 ff.). - The bracketed opening word 'Good',        
     supposed to be absent in the original, was added by the editor.
  4. the High: High Street; Radcliffe Square, see p. 222 note 69.       
  5. For 'especially about the imram' E has 'especially about the       
     Enkeladim', changed soon to 'the Imram'. For references to the     
     Enkeladim (En-keladim) in Part One see pp. 199, 206 - 7, 221       
     note 65; and for the imrama (tales of seavoyaging) see V.81 - 2.
  6. Nordics: E has 'philologists' (but Ramer himself was a philol-     
     ogist).                                                            
  7. B.N.C.: the common abbreviation of Brasenose College, whose        
     gate is in Radcliffe Square. The 'lane' along which Ramer and      
     Guildford walked after Lowdham had left them is Brasenose          
     Lane, leading from Radcliffe Square to Turl Street (p. 213 note
     18). - For The Camera in the following sentence see p. 222         
     note 69.                                                           
  8. On the inclusion of Night 64 see the Editor's Foreword, p. 156.
  9. In E as originally written the entire opening of Night 65 had      
     been lost, and the text only takes up with '[Jeremy] ... "as you
     said...." ' - which is where in F the text takes up again after
     the loss of a page in the middle of the record of the meeting      
     (p. 227). Thus in E the conversation concerning neologisms was     
     at first lacking; it was added in to the manuscript subsequently.
 10. In E it was Dolbear, not Ramer, who objected thus to Lowd-         
     ham's remark. Arry (for Harry) entered in the course of the        
     writing of E; see p. 213 note 16.                                  
 11. N.E.D.: A New English Dictionary, the actual title of the          
     Oxford English Dictionary or O.E.D.                                
 12. The expression the Six Years' War is used in the Foreword and      
     several times in the text. In E my father called it here the Second
     German War.                                                        
 13. Vita Fera: literally 'savage life' (ferus 'wild, untamed, savage,
     fierce').                                                          
 14. Cf. p. 174: Frankley, according to Guildford, 'regards knowl-      
     edge of his own language at any period before the Battle of        
     Bosworth as a misdemeanour'.                                       
 15. Norman Keeps was an historical person, who expounded to my         
     father the view of English history here recounted by Philip        
     Frankley while plying his trade at the barbering establishment of
     Weston and Cheal in the Turl Street.                               
 16. Battle of Camlan: the battle in which King Arthur and his          
     nephew Modred fell.                                                

  17.  Zigur:  the  Adunaic  name  of  Sauron,  which  is  the  name that
       Lowdham uses in E here.                                           
  18.  Owlamoo:  This  was  in  fact  the  name of  a bogey  conceived by
       my  brother  Michael  (and  of  which  my  father made  a picture,
       dated  1928,  now  in  the  Bodleian   Library);  but   of  course
       Lowdham  intended  no  more  than  any  old absurd  name: in  E he
       says 'Wallamaloo, who's he?'                                      
  19.  Numenor: so F at all occurrences here  (the long  mark over  the o
       being added subsequently); E has Numenor.                         
  20.  Numenor is my name for Atlantis: see p. 221 note 63.              
  21.  I knew I had heard  that name  as soon  as Arry  said it:  see pp.
       306-7.                                                            
  22.  A footnote to the text in E at this point reads: 'The records were
       supposed  to be  written up  and presented  for correction  at the
       end of each term. Before being passed they were initialled  by all
       persons  mentioned  in  them.  N.G. Cf.  the Note  to the  list of
       members of the Notion Club in F, p. 160.                          
  23.  My father's name was Edwin: in initial drafting (and in E as first
       written)  Lowdham's  father  was  called  Oswin Ellendel  (a 'mod-
       ernisation' of  Elendil) and  he himself  was Alboin  Arundel (cf.
       Oswin  Errol  father  of  Alboin  in  The  Lost  Road,  V.36 ff.).
       Oswin  Loudham  was  at  first  to  be  a  sailor  by  profession,
       or  else  the  somewhat  absentee  Professor  of   Anglo-Saxon  at
       Cambridge  ('I  believe  he  did   know  some   Anglo-Saxon'  said
       his son).                                                         
  24.  I  have  not  been  able  to  discover  a  place  named  Penian in
       Pembrokeshire.                                                    
  25.  The Earendel: in E the ship was named Earendel Star.              
  26.  It does not look to Sussex:  Arundel in  Sussex (explained  as Old
       English  harhun-dell,  'hoarhound  valley', the  name of  a plant)
       has of  course no  connection whatsoever  with Earendel,  merely a
       likeness of sound.                                                
  27.  E     has    'the     War    of     1939'    (see     note    12).
  28.  three  sailors:  E  has  only  'And he'd  had great  difficulty in
       collecting  any  sort  of  crew.'  Cf.  the  three   mariners  who
       accompanied  Earendel  and  Elwing  on  the  voyage to  Valinor in
       the Quenta Silmarillion (V.324, 327).                             
  29.  With  this  passage  cf.  V.37  - 8  and my  commentary V.53  - 5.
  30.  the  connexion  of  the Langobards  with King  Sheaf: see  p. 227,
       and V.92 ff.                                                      
  31.  In E Ramer says: 'Nor the repetition of  the sequence:  Alboin son
       of Audoin = Alwin son  of Edwin.'  The addition  in F  of AElfwine
       son  of  Eadwine  is  curious,  since  no  actual AElfwine  son of
       Eadwine  has  been  mentioned  (merely  the  Old English  forms of
       Alwin  and  Edwin). Possibly  it should  be understood  that Ramer
       in  his  discussion  with  Lowdham  before  the   present  meeting

       (p.  235)  had  learnt  of  the verses  ascribed to  AElfwine Widlast
       Eadwines sunu (p. 244).                                              
  32.  Rosamund: see V.54.                                                  
  33.  O   Horsefriend   of   Macedon!   A   Lowdham   joke   on  Frankley's
       first   name   (of   which  one   is  reminded   immediately  above),
       referring  to  King  Philip  of  Macedon,  father  of  Alexander  the
       Great (Greek  phil-ippos 'horse-loving').
  34.  a  star-name  for  Orion,  or  for  Rigel:  see  p.  301 and  note 6.
  35.  the  glosses:  translations  into  Anglo-Saxon  of  individual  words
       in  Latin  manuscripts.  See  my father's  (draft) letter  written in
       August   1967   to   a   correspondent   known   only  as   Mr.  Rang
       (Letters  no.  297),  in  which  he  gave  a  long  account   of  the
       relation  between  Anglo-Saxon  Earendel  and  the  Earendil  of  his
       mythology. The relevant part of this letter  is reprinted  in II.266,
       but   without   the   footnote  to   the  words   'To  my   mind  the
       Anglo-Saxon  uses  seem  plainly  to  indicate  that  it  was  a star
       presaging the dawn (at any rate in English tradition)':              
          Its earliest recorded A-S form is earendil (oer-), later earendel,
       eorendel.  Mostly  in  glosses  on  jubar  =  leoma; also  on aurora.
       But  also  in  Blickling  Homilies  163,  se  niwa  eorendel  applied
       to  St  John  the  Baptist;  and  most   notably  Crist   104,  eala!
       earendel   engla   beorhtast   ofer   middangeard    monnum   sended.
       Often  supposed  to  refer  to  Christ  (or  Mary),   but  comparison
       with  Blickling  Homilies  suggests  that it  refers to  the Baptist.
       The  lines  refer  to  a  herald, and  divine messenger,  clearly not
       the sodfaesta sunnan leoma = Christ.                               
       The  last words  of this  note refer  to the  following lines  in the
       poem Crist:                                                          
                     Eala Earendel engla beorhtast
                     ofer middangeard monnum sended,
                     ond sodfaesta sunnan leoma,
                     torht ofer tunglas - pu tida gehwane.
                     of sylfum pe symle inlihtes.                                         
       '... and true radiance of the sun, bright above the  stars -  thou of
       thy  very self  illuminest for  ever every  season.' -  The Blickling
       Homilies  are  a  collection of  Old English  sermons preserved  in a
       manuscript at Blickling Hall in Norfolk.                             
  36.  E  has  'what  Cynewulf  meant'.  Of  Cynewulf,  author of  the Crist
       and  other  poems,  nothing  is  certainly  known  beyond  his  name,
       which he preserved  by setting  the runic  letters composing  it into
       short  passages  in  the  body  of  his  poems,  so  that  the actual
       names  of  the  runes (as  for example  the W-rune  was called  wynn
       'joy') have a meaning in the context.                                
  37.  From  this  point  to  the  end  of Night  66 there  are not  two but
       three texts to be  considered (as  already noted,  p. 147),  for this
       part  of  the  typescript  F  was  rejected  and  replaced  by  a new

       version, while both typescript versions differ  radically from  E in
       respect  of  Lowdham's   linguistic  discoveries.   The  divergences
       have  many  notable  features,  and  the  superseded   versions  are
       given separately, pp. 299 ff.                                      
  38.  'That  breaks  my  dream'   was  an   expression  of   my  mother's,
       meaning  that  something  in  waking  life  had   suddenly  reminded
       her of a passage in a  dream. In  the original  version of  Night 66
       (p.  303)  Jeremy  says  'That  breaks  my  dream!'  when  Lowdham's
       words suddenly recall to  his mind  the place  where, in  his dream,
       he  had  found  the  reference  to  Numenor.  -  The  Oxford English
       Dictionary does not  give the  expression, and  the only  place that
       I have found it  is in  the English  Dialect Dictionary,  ed. Joseph
       Wright, Break 27 (3), with a reference to West Yorkshire.          
  39.  Yozayan:  this  Adunaic   name  occurs   in  Aldarion   and  Erendis
       (Unfinished Tales p. 184): 'Do you not love the Yozayan?'          
  40.  The  term  Elf-latin  (also  Elven-latin)  occurs frequently  in The
       Lost  Road  and  The  Lhammas:  see  the  Index  to   Vol.V.  Alboin
       Errol called the  first language  ('Eressean') that  'came through'
       to him Elf-latin, but it is not explained why he did so.           
  41.  Tiwas:  Tiw  was  the  name  in  Old  English  of  the  Germanic god
       equated   with   Mars   (whence   Tuesday,   based  on   Latin  dies
       Martis;  French  Mardi),  and  known  in  Old  Norse  as   Tyr.  The
       name  is  generally  derived  from an  earlier * Tiwaz,  cognate with
       Latin  deus (<  'deiwos), and  so meaning  originally 'god';  in Old
       Norse  the  plural  Twar  'gods'  is  found,  of  which   Tiwas  (=
       'Valar')  is  the  unrecorded  Old  English  equivalent  that  'came
       through' to Lowdham.                                               
  42.  Nowendaland:   derived   from   the   recorded   Old   English  word
       nowend   'shipmaster,   mariner'.   For   another    occurrence   of
       Nowendaland see p. 317.                                            
  43.  Freafiras: this word is  found elsewhere  (see p.  317) as  a trans-
       lation  of  the  word  turkildi  in Lowdham's  Fragment I  (p. 246),
       which  he  translated  'lordly  men'  (p.  248):  Old  English  frea
       'lord',  often found  also as  the first  element of  compounds, and
       firas 'men', a word  used in  Old English  poetry (cf.  IV.206, 208,
                                                                         
       211-12).                                                         
                                                                         
  44.  Regeneard:  this  was  no  doubt  used in  reference to  Valinor. In
       Old  English  the  element  regn-  occurs   in  compounds   with  an
       intensive  force  ('greatness,  power'),  and  also in  proper names
       (as  Regenweald,  revived  as  Reginald).   In  the   ancient  Norse
       poems  Regin,  plural,  meant  the  gods, the  rulers of  the world,
       and  occurs  in  Ragna-rok  'the  doom  of  the   gods'  (mistakenly
       transformed into 'the twilight of  the gods'  by confusion  with the
       word rokr 'twilight').  Old English  eard 'land,  country, dwelling,
       home'; thus Regeneard 'God-home', Valinor.                         
  45.  Midswipen:   a   word   midja-sweipains   is   found    in   Gothic,

       apparently  meaning  'cataclysm,  flood  of  the  middle(-earth)',
       midja  being  a  reduced  form  of  midjun-  as in  Gothic midjun-
       gards  (the  inhabited  world  of  men,  'Middle-earth').  This is
       clearly  the  basis  of  Lowdham's  unrecorded  Old  English  Mid-
       swipen.                                                           
  46.  hebaensuil: in later spelling heofonsyl; cf. the Old  English text
       given  on  p.  314.  frumaeldi:  'First  Age'. I  cannot certainly
       interpret Wihawinia.                                              
  47.  In  The Lost  Road (V.43)  Oswin Errol  tells Alboin:  'But you'll
       get into trouble, if you let your cats  out of  the bag  among the
       philologists - unless, of course, they  back up  the authorities.'
       Like  Edwin  Lowdham,   Oswin  Errol   had  studied   Old  English
       (V.44).                                                           
  48.  westra  lage  wegas  rehtas,  wraikwas  nu  isti:  the  line 'came
       through'  also  to  Alboin  Errol  in  The  Lost Road  (V.43), but
       ending nu isti sa wraithas; see p. 304.                           
  49.  Onomasticon:  alphabetic  list  of  proper  names,  especially  of
       persons.                                                          
  50.  In The Lost Road AElfwine  chanted a  form of  these lines  in the
       hall  before  King  Edward the  Elder (V.84),  where they  are not
       given in an archaic form but in the spelling of the  manuscript of
       The Seafarer (see V.85):                                          
                  Monad modes lust mid mereflode
                  ford to feran, paet ic feor heonan
                  ofer hean holmas, ofer hwaeles edel
                  elpeodigra eard gesece.                                           
                  Nis me to hearpan hyge ne to hringpege
                  ne to wife wyn ne to worulde hyht
                  ne ymb owiht elles nefne ymb yda gewealc.                         
       A  prose  translation  is given  (whereas Lowdham  translates into
       alliterative verse): 'The desire of my spirit urges me  to journey
       forth over the flowing  sea, that  far hence  across the  hills of
       water and the whale's country I  may seek  the land  of strangers.
       No mind have I for harp, nor gift of ring,  nor delight  in women,
       nor joy in the world, nor concern with aught else save the rolling
       of the waves.'                                                    
          In   The   Seafarer   the    text   is    somewhat   different:
                    monad modes lust maela  gehwylce
                    ferd to feran, paet ic feor heonan
                    elpeodigra eard gesece
       (which  is  then  followed  by  five  lines omitted  in AElfwine's
       version); maela gehwylce 'on every occasion', ferd  (ferhd) 'heart,
       spirit', i.e. literally 'the desire of my spirit urges my heart on
       every occasion to  journey'. These  alterations reappear  in Lowd-
       ham's version here,  and they  depend, I  imagine, on  my father's
       judgement  that  the preserved  text of  The Seafarer  is corrupt.

       The  third  line  in  The  Lost  Road text,  ofer hean  holmas, ofer
       hwaeles  edel,  not  found  in  The Seafarer,  is replaced  in Lowd-
       ham's  version  by  the  less  banal  ofer  garsecges  grimme holmas
       (writing it in later spelling), 'over the grim waves of Garsecg (the
       ocean)'; for Garsecg see the references given in V.82.              
          The fourth line of Lowdham's version differs,  as he  points out,
       from that in The  Seafarer in  the reading  aelbuuina eard  (= later
       aelfwina eard) 'land of the Elf-friends'  for elpeodigra  eard 'land
       of strangers, aliens'; the substitution  of aelfwina  for elpeodigra
       requires the presence  of the  word uut  (ut) for  metrical reasons.
       The text of The Lost Road follows The Seafarer.                     
          In  The  Notion  Club  Papers  AElfwine's  chant before  the king
       (p. 272) is exactly as Lowdham's  version here,  but given  in later
       spelling; see also p. 304.                                          
  51.  These lines  Alboin Errol  recited to  his father  in The  Lost Road
       (V.44)  in  precisely  the same  form, except  that AElfwine  is not
       there called Eadwines sunu.  For other  appearances of  these lines
       see V.55. In the translation the words  'a land  lovely to  look on'
       (wlitescene land)  have been  added from  the first  typescript (see
       note 37): they were inadvertently omitted in the second.            
  52.  Lowdham  concludes  his lecture  in the  manner of  the ending  of a
       medieval  minstrel's romance,  and with  a swipe  at Frankley.  or I
       ende: 'before I end.'                                                
  53.  From  Night  67  onwards  there  are  again  only  the  manuscript E
       and  the  typescript  F, the  latter being  the continuation  of the
       revised typescript (see p. 147 and note 37 above).                  
  54.  0 Lover of Horses: see note 33.                                     
  55.  Lowdham's   'fragments'   are  inserted   into  the   typescript  on
       separate  sheets.  They  are  in  two  forms: a  typescript, printed
       here,  and  a  manuscript  of  two  pages,  reproduced  as  frontis-
       pieces  to  this  book,  representing  Lowdham's  copies  'in  a big
       bold  hand,   done  with   one  of   the  great   thick-nibbed  pens
       Lowdham  is  fond  of',  with  'glosses in  red ink':  for unglossed
       words  there  are  however   (unlike  what   Lowdham  said   of  his
       copies,  p.  248)  no  query marks.  In the  typescript text  of the
       fragments  the  Avallonian  and  Adunaic  words  are  given  all  in
       capital  letters,  but  I  print them  here in  italic, capitalising
       according to the manuscript version.                                
  56.  Comparison  of  the typescript  text of  the fragments  printed here
       with  the  manuscript  version  reproduced  as   frontispieces  will
       show  that  the  only  differences  in  actual word-forms  are manu-
       script  hikalba  'she  fell'  in  I  (B),  where the  typescript has
       hikallaba; manuscript katha 'all'  in II,  where the  typescript has
       katha;  and manuscript  ido 'now'  at all  three occurrences  in II,
       but idon at  the last  two in  the typescript,  with the  gloss 'now
       (is)'. There are many minor differences in Lowdham's glosses.       

        The  typescript  text  of  the  fragments  was  no  doubt  made  to
       accompany the final typescript  F of  the narrative,  but it  is not
       clear  to  me  whether  it  preceded  or  followed   the  manuscript
       pages. Earlier forms of these pages are given on pp.  311 -  12. For
       the form of the fragments in E see p. 309.                          
 57.   Plato's dialogue Timaeus is  the source  (together with  the long
       unfinished dialogue Critias) of  the legend  of Atlantis,  the great
       island  empire  in  the western  ocean which,  expanding aggressive-
       ly against the  peoples of  the Mediterranean,  was defeated  by the
       Athenians,  and  was swallowed  up 'in  a single  day and  night' by
       the  sea,  leaving  a  vast shoal  of mud  that rendered  the waters
       impassable  in  the  region  where Atlantis  had been.  According to
       Plato,  the  story  was  told  (about  the  beginning  of  the sixth
       century B.C.) by an Egyptian priest  to Solon  the Athenian,  and it
       came down thence by  several intermediaries  to Critias,  a relative
       of Plato's, who tells the story in the two dialogues. In the Critias
       a long and extremely detailed account of Atlantis  is given,  of its
       great city, the temple of Poseidon with its  colossal statue  of the
       god, the wealth of the land in all  resources of  minerals, animals,
       timber, flowers  and fruits,  the horse-racing,  the bull-sacrifice,
       the  laws  governing  the  realm.  At  the end  of this  account the
       narrator tells that the men of Atlantis fell away from  the justice,
       wisdom   and  virtue   of  earlier   generations,  and   that  Zeus,
       perceiving  their   debasement  and   corruption,  and   wishing  to
       punish them, called all  the gods  together and  spoke to  them; but
       at this point the Critias breaks  off unfinished.  The story  of the
       war  with  the Greeks  and the  downfall of  Atlantis is  told, very
       briefly, in the other dialogue, the Timaeus.                        
        The  eldest  child  of  Poseidon  (tutelary god  of Atlantis)  by a
       mortal  woman  became  the  first  king,  and  Poseidon   named  him
       Atlas,  'and  after  him  the  whole  island  and ocean  were called
       Atlantis.'                                                          
        Ultimately  the  name  Atlas  is  that  of  the  Titan  who  upheld
       the  heavens  on  his  head and  his hands,  according to  Hesiod in
       the  far  western regions  of the  earth, near  the dwelling  of the
       Hesperides.  He  was  the  father  of  the  Pleiades,  and  also, in
       Homer,   of   Calypso,   on   whose   island  Ogygia   Odysseus  was
       shipwrecked.                                                        
 58.   Cf.  The  Lost  Road,  where  Audoin  Errol,  son  of  Alboin,  speaks
       to himself of his dreams (V.52):  'Just pictures,  but not  a sound,
       not a  word. Ships  coming to  land. Towers  on the  shore. Battles,
       with  swords  glinting  but  silent.  And  there  is   that  ominous
       picture:  the  great  temple  on  the   mountain,  smoking   like  a
       volcano.'                                                           
 59.   E has  here: '  "... But  I've done  what I  can. Sauron  and nahamna
       remain to be  solved." "Sauron!"  said Jeremy  in a  strange voice.'

       Lowdham  refers  only   to  unknown   Quenya  words   because,  as
       will be seen more fully later, in E there  was no  Adunaic element
       in  the  fragments   he  received.   The  word   nahamna  preceded
       nukumna  'humbled'  of  the  later  text  of  the  Quenya fragment
       (p.  246), and  was uninterpretable  also by  Alboin Errol  in The
       Lost Road (V.47).                                                 
  60.  The  name  Nimruzir  appears in  Fragment I  (8), 'seven  ships of
       Nimruzir  eastward'.  In  E  Jeremy  addresses  Lowdham  as Earen-
       dil, changed subsequently to Elendil.                             
  61.  The Adunaic words Ba kitabdahe! are absent in E (see note 59).
  62.  In E Lowdham cries out: 'Es sorni  heruion an!  The Eagles  of the
       Lords are at hand!' This was changed later to  'The Eagles  of the
       Powers of the West are at hand!  Sorni Numevalion  anner! '  In an
       earlier,  rejected version  of the  passage Lowdham's  words were:
       'Soroni numeheruen ettuler!'                                      
  63.  In  E  Jeremy speaks  of 'the  fell counsels  of Sauron',  not 'of
       Zigur'. He says that 'Tarkalion has set forth his might',  where F
       has 'the King', and the sails of the Numenorean ships are 'scarlet
       and  black'  ('golden and  black', F).  He ends  in E:  'The world
       waits  in  fear.  The  Numenoreans  have  encompassed  Avallon  as
       with  a  cloud.  The  Eldar  mourn  and  are  afraid.  Why  do the
       Lords of the West make no sign?'                                 
  64.  For 'The Lords have spoken to Eru, and  the fate  of the  World is
       changed'  E  has  'The  Lords  have  spoken  to  Iluvatar  [>  the
       Maker],  and  the  counsel  of  the Almighty  is changed,  and the
       fate of the world is overturned.'                                 
  65.  For the passage in F beginning 'See! The  abyss openeth...'  E (as
       first  written: the  wording was  changed in  detail subsequently)
       has:                                                              
          'Ah! Look! There  is a  chasm in  the midst  of the  Great Seas
       and the waters rush  down into  it in  great confusion.  The ships
       of  the  Numenoreans  are  drowned  in  the  abyss. They  are lost
       for   ever.   See  now   the  eagles   of  the   Lords  overshadow
       Numenor.   The   mountain  goes   up  to   heaven  in   flame  and
       vapour; the hills totter, slide, and  crumble: the  land founders.
       The  glory  has  gone  down  into  the  deep  waters.  Dark ships,
       dark  ships  flying into  darkness! The  eagles pursue  them. Wind
       drives  them,  waves  like  hills  moving.  All  has  passed away.
       Light has departed! '                                             
            There was a roar of thunder and a blaze of lightning...      
       Thus  there  is  no  mention  in  E of  Lowdham and  Jeremy moving
       to the window and 'talking to one another in a strange tongue.'
  66.  For Abrazan E has Voronwe, 'Steadfast', 'Faithful'; this  was the
       name  of the  Elf who  guided Tuor  to Gondolin,  Unfinished Tales
       pp. 30 ff. Cf. Jeremy's second name, Trewin (see note 84).        
  67.  On 'the Great Storm' see p. 157 and note 1.                       

  68.  The  statement  that  Ramer  picked  up  a  piece of  paper covered
       with writing and put it in a drawer is present in E as written. See
       note                                                            70.
  69.  in  the  schools: acting  as examiners  in the  final examinations,
       held at the end  of the  summer term  (cf. Guildford's  footnote on
       p. 253).                                                           
  70.  In  E the  letter was  postmarked in  London. -  As E  was written,
       the  record  of  the meeting  of Night  68 ended  immediately after
       Guildford had read  the letter  aloud, with  the words:  'We agreed
       to Thursday  25th of  September', and  is followed  by Night  69 on
       that  date.  Thus,  although  at  the end  of Night  67 Guildford's
       statement  that  he   saw  Ramer   pick  up   the  leaf   of  Edwin
       Lowdham's  manuscript  and  put  it in  a drawer  was present  in E
       as  originally  written,  on  Night  68 Ramer  does not  appear and
       the  paper  is not  mentioned (which  is why  the account  of Night
       68 begins with  the words  'There is  not much  to record'  - words
       that should have been  removed). In  E Night  69 (the  last meeting
       recorded  in  The Notion  Club Papers)  proceeds essentially  as in
       F  (pp.  260  -  77).  The  matter  of  'Edwin  Lowdham's  page' on
       Night  68  was  inserted  into E,  but the  structure of  the manu-
       script  and  its  pagination show  clearly that  this was  not done
       until the text of Night 69 had been completed.                     
  71.  In  E  Ramer's  remarks  about  'Edwin  Lowdham's  page'   and  his
       discovery  that  the  language was  Old English  are very  much the
       same as in F, but he gives an opinion about  the dialect  and date:
       'He thought it was  Numenorean, I  guess. But  actually it  is just
       Old English - latish West Saxon, I  think, but  I'm no  expert. The
       script is,  I think,  plainly Numenorean...'  See further  notes 72
       and 74.                                                            
  72.  Rashbold is a translation of Tolkien: see p.  151. Pembroke  is the
       college  to  which  the professorship  of Anglo-Saxon  is attached,
       its  holder  being  ex  officio  a fellow  of the  college. -  In E
       Professor  Rashbold  does  not  appear,  and  it  is  Ramer himself
       who  deciphered,  transcribed,  and   translated  the   page  ('And
       here's  the  transcription,  with  such  a  translation as  I could
       make').                                                            
  73.  Cf. the  third Old  English version  of The  Annals of  Valinor, of
       which I noted (IV.290) that the language  is that  of ninth-century
       Mercia. There are several references in my father's letters  to his
       particular  liking for  and sense  of affinity  with the  West Mid-
       lands of England and  its early  language. In  January 1945  he had
       said  to  me  (Letters  no.  95): 'For  barring the  Tolkien (which
       must  long  ago  have  become  a  pretty  thin  strand)  you  are a
       Mercian  or  Hwiccian  (of  Wychwood)  on  both  sides.'   In  June
       1955  he  wrote  to  W.  H.  Auden  (Letters  no.  163):  'I  am  a
       West-midlander   by   blood   (and   took  to   early  west-midland

       Middle English as a known tongue  as soon  as I  set eyes  on it)';
       and in another letter of this time (Letters no. 165): '... it is, I
       believe,  as  much  due to  descent as  to opportunity  that Anglo-
       Saxon  and  Western  Middle  English  and  alliterative  verse have
       been  both  a  childhood  attraction   and  my   main  professional
       sphere.'                                                           
  74.  The Old English version (not in the Mercian  dialect, see  note 71)
       written to accompany the manuscript  E is  given on  pp. 313  - 14,
       and  the  representation  of  the  original  form  of  it  in Edwin
       Lowdham's  tengwar  on  pp.  319  -  20.  Of  the   subsequent  Old
       English (Mercian)  version, printed  here from  F, my  father began
       a text in tengwar but  abandoned it  after a  single page;  this is
       reproduced on p. 321.                                              
  75.  Arminaleth:  Adunaic  name   of  the   City  of   the  Numenoreans,
       found  also  in   The  Drowning   of  Anadune.   In  The   Fall  of
       Numenor  ($2)  it  was  named  Numenos  (V.25,  and in  this book
       p. 333). On the site of the temple see p. 384.                     
  76.  Neowollond: in Professor  Rashbold's translation  (p. 259)  this is
       rendered 'the? prostrate land'; in the earlier Old  English version
       accompanying  E,  which  was  translated  by  Michael  Ramer  (note
       72), the name (in the form  Niwelland) is  rendered 'the  Land that
       is fallen low' (pp.  314 -  15). Old  English neowol  (neol, niwol)
       'prostrate,  prone;  deep,  profound';  cf.  the  early  names  for
       Helm's    Deep,    Neolnearu,    Neolnerwet,   VIII.23    note   6.
  77.  forrarder:'further forward'.                                       
  78.  On the texts and titles of this poem see the note on  pp. 295  - 6,
       where also the published version is given.                         
  79.  Cluain-ferta:  Clonfert,  near  the   river  Shannon   above  Lough
       Derg.  The  monastery  was  founded  by  Saint  Brendan   Abbot  of
       Clonfert,   called   the   Navigator,    about   the    year   559.
  80.  a  light  on  the  edge  of  the  Outer   Night:  cf.   the  Quenta
       Silmarillion (V.327): 'But [the Valar] took  Vingelot [the  ship of
       Earendel],  and they  hallowed it,  and they  bore it  away through
       Valinor to  the uttermost  rim of  the world,  and there  it passed
       through  the  Door  of  Night  and  was  lifted  up  even  into the
       oceans of heaven.'  The following  line in  the present  text, like
       silver  set  ablaze,  is  replaced in  the final  form of  the poem
       (p. 298, line 104) by beyond the Door of Days.                     
  81.  The passage Lowdham refers to  is lines  33 -  52, where  when 'the
       smoking  cloud  asunder  broke'  they  'saw  that  Tower  of Doom':
       in  the  earliest  text  of  the  poem  the  mariners  'looked upon
       Mount Doom' (p. 295).                                              
  82.  Cf.  the  outline  for  The  Lost  Road  in  V.80,  where 'AElfwine
       objects that Paradise cannot be got to by ship  - there  are deeper
       waters  between  us  than  Garsecg.  Roads   are  bent:   you  come
       back in the end. No escape by ship.'                               

                         
                                                                      
  83. Porlock: on the north coast of Somerset.                         
  84. Trewyn:  Jeremy's  second  name is  spelt Trewin  in the  lists of
      members   of   the   Notion   Club.  The   Old  English   name  is
      Treowine  (which  Lowdham  uses   subsequently,  p.   268),  'true
      friend';  cf.  the  Elvish  name  Voronwe' 'Steadfast'  by which
      Lowdham names him in the text E (note 66).                       
  85. Hibernia: Ireland (see note 99).                                 
  86. Slieve  League  is  a mountain  on the  coast of  Donegal, Brandon
      Hill  on  the coast  of Kerry;  thus Lowdham  means 'all  down the
      west coast of Ireland'.                                          
  87. The Aran Isles lie across the entrance to Galway Bay.            
  88. Loughrea:   a   town   and   lake   to   the   east   of   Galway.
  89. the Severn Sea: the mouth of the Severn.                         
  90. 'Let us hasten now, Treowine! I do not like this wind. There  is a
      great likelihood of Danes tonight.'                              
  91. The opening of  Lowdham's story  is closely  based on  the account
      in  The  Lost  Road  (V.83),  although  there  AElfwine's  part is
      reported by the narrator, and it is his son Eadwine that  he looks
      for in the hall, not his friend Treowine. For  a brief  account of
      the historical setting in the years of King Edward the  Elder (son
      of  King  Alfred),  the  defeat  of  the  Danes at  Archenfield in
      Herefordshire,  and  the  raids  on   Watchet  and   Porlock,  see
      V.80 - 1.                                                        
  92. Devenish  men  and  Somersets:  Devenish  is Old  English Defenisc
      'of  Devon';  Defnas,  Defenas  'men  of Devon'  is the  origin of
      the  name  Devon.  Somersets  is   from  Old   English  Sumorsaete
      'men  of Somerset'  with the  later plural  ending added;  as with
      Defnas  >  Devon,  Sumorsaete  became  the  name  of   the  region
      Somerset.                                                        
  93. Edwin  Lowdham's father  has not  been mentioned,  but as  is seen
      here he was Oswin Lowdham.                                       
  94. Alfred went into hiding: in the Isle of  Athelney in  Somerset, in
      878.                                                              
  95. the  West  Welsh:  the  people  of  Cornwall  (Old  English  Corn-
      wealas  'the Welsh  in Cornwall'  became the  name of  the region,
      Cornwall).  On  AElfwine's  mother,  who  came  'from  the  West',
      see II.313, V.85.                                                
  96. Saint  Edmund,  King  of East  Anglia, was  defeated by  the Danes
      in  869  and (according  to the  tenth century  life of  the king)
      murdered by them:  he was  tied to  a tree  and shot  through with
      many arrows. The Danish  raids in  the region  of the  Severn took
      place in 914, and thus 'AElfwine' was about 45  years old  at this
      time (see V.80, 85), since he was born 'just before' the  death of
      Saint  Edmund.  Arry  Lowdham  was  born  in  1938,  and  was  now
      48 or 49. Subsequently Guildford says (p. 276) that in  his vision
      of  AElfwine  in  the  hall at  Porlock he  had looked  older than

       Lowdham,  'though  by  his  account he  was just  of Arry's  age it
       seemed'.                                                           
  97.  the good king in his last wars: King Alfred (died 899).            
  98.  Maelduin: see V.81 - 2.                                            
  99.  Eriu:  the  Old  Celtic  name  * Iveriu  (whence   Latin  Hibernia)
       became Irish  Eriu (accusative  case Eirinn,  Erin). From  the same
       source is Old English Iras, Iraland.
 100.  aet  Ircenfelda: Archenfield  in Herefordshire;  see V.SO  (the Old
       English Ircingafeld given there is an earlier form).               
 101.  Monath modes lust...: on these verses see note 50.                 
 102.  Tamworth:  in  Staffordshire:  the chief  residence of  the Mercian
       kings.                                                             
 103.  King Sheave: for discussion of the legend of  'Sheaf' and  notes on
       the text of the poem see V.91 - 6.                                 
         Among  the  manuscripts  of  The  Lost  Road  material  (see V.85
       ff.) there are two texts of the poem,  the one  (which I  will here
       call 'V') written out in verse  lines, the  other ('P')  written as
       prose. In The Lost Road I printed  V only,  since the  two versions
       differ only in a few minor details. In V there is a short narrative
       opening, in which it is told that AElfwine chanted  the poem;  in P
       there is only a title, King Sheave.                                
         In  the  manuscript  E  of  The  Notion  Club  Papers  it  is not
       Treowine who recites the poem, as it is the typescript F:          
           At that one of the Marchers leaped  to his  feet and  got leave
       to  speak.  Even  before  I  had  found  a  seat  beside  Treowine,
       whom I  espied far  down the  hall, the  fellow had  a foot  on the
       step  and  had  begun.  He  had  a  good  voice,  if a  strange way
       with  his  words. Ceolwulf,  as I  heard later,  was his  name, and
       he  claimed  to  come  of  the  blood  of their  kings that  sat at
       Tamworth of old. His verse was in the old style...                 
       This was changed  in pencil  to the  later account.  In E  there is
       only  a  direction  'Here follows  the Lay  of King  Sheave', which
       stands  at  the  bottom  of  page  42 in  the manuscript.  The text
       continues  on  another  page  with  'When he  ended there  was loud
       applause...  and they  passed a  horn of  ale to  Ceolwulf's hand.'
       When I edited The Lost Road  I did  not observe  that this  page is
       numbered  46,  while  the  manuscript  P of  King Sheave  (in which
       the poem is written out as prose) is  numbered 43  to 45.  Thus the
       manuscripts  V  and  P,  which  I  took  to  be  'obviously closely
       contemporary'  (V.87),  were  in  fact  separated  by   some  eight
       years:  a  misjudgement  based  on  the  fact  of  the  texts being
       placed together in my father's archive and their  close similarity,
       although the evidence of the pagination is perfectly clear.        
         The  manuscript  P, then,  was written  in 1945  on the  basis of
       the much earlier V, and was the  text from  which the  typescript F
       given  here  was  taken  (with  a  few  further  changes);  and all

 
                                                                          
      differences  between  the  text  given on  pp. 273  ff. in  this book
      and that on pp. 87 ff. in The Lost Road belong to 1945.              
         The  last  eight  lines  of  the  supplementary  part of  the poem
      (The  Lost  Road  p.  91, lines  146 -  53, beginning  'Sea-danes and
      Goths  ...'),  which  do  not  appear  in  the  manuscript   V,  also
      belong apparently to the time of The Notion Club Papers.             
 104. The text P has  sires, but  both V  and the  typescript F  of the
      Papers have sire.                                                    
 105. aet thisse beorthege: Old English beordegu 'beer-drinking'.           
 106. I cannot explain the reference of 'Broad Relic'.                      
 107. cnearr:  'ship',  a  very  rare  Old  English  word   probably  taken
      from Norse, since it is only applied to vessels of the Vikings.      
 108. 'Sweet is the breath of flowers beyond the sea.'                      
 109. After night 62: this is the later Night 63.                           
 110.  See p.  214 note  23; p.  194 and  note 46;  p. 199  and note  51; p.
      206 and note 63.                                                     
 111. That  this list,  following the  revised title-page  given on  p. 149,
      was  made  after  the  completion of  manuscript B  is seen  from the
      name Frankley for earlier Franks (p. 150).                           
                                                                          
                   Note on 'The Death of Saint Brendan'                    
                with the text of the published form 'Imram'.                
                                                                          
 A  great  deal  of  work  went   into  this   poem,  with   its  elaborate
 versification: there are no  less than  fourteen closely-written  pages of
 initial  working,  and  there  follow   four  finished   manuscript  texts
 preceding  the  typescript  text  printed  on  pp. 261  - 4.  Much further
 work on it followed later.  It is  notable, however,  that already  in the
 earliest  text  the  final  form  reached  in The  Notion Club  Papers was
 very closely approached: there is in fact  only one  passage that  shows a
 significant  difference  (and  this  was  corrected  already on  the first
 manuscript to the  later form).  This concerns  lines 43  - 53,  where the
 earliest text reads:                                                      
                   then the smoking cloud asunder broke                    
                       and we looked upon Mount Doom:                      
               tall as a column in high Heaven's hall,                     
                  than all mortal mountains higher,                        
               the tower-top of a foundered power,                         
                  with crown of redgold fire.                              
                                                                          
               We sailed then on...                                        
                                                                          
   The first text bears the title The  Ballad of  St. Brendan's  Death. The
 second  text,  which  as  the  pagination  shows  belongs  with  the manu-
 script  E  of  The  Notion  Club  Papers,  is  entitled  The Death  of St.
 Brendan. The third (with this title)  and the  fourth (without  title) are
 finely written manuscripts, and the fifth (with the title The Death of St.

  Brendan pencilled in as shown  on p.  261) is  part of  the typescript  F of
  The Notion Club Papers.                                                    
    The   poem,  entitled   Imram  (Irish:   'sailing,  voyaging')   was  once
  previously  printed,  in  the  issue  of  the periodical  Time and  Tide for
  3  December  1955  (where  it  was  illustrated  by   a  woodcut   of  Saint
  Brendan  and  the  great  fishes  by  Robert  Gibbings, originally  made for
  Helen  Waddell's  book  of  translations  Beasts  and  Saints,  1934). Three
  further typescripts, all with the title Imram, clearly  belong to  the later
  time. I print here in its entirety the text as it was published in  Time and
  Tide,  for  that  is  now  scarcely  obtainable,  and  although  the opening
  and   concluding  verses   underwent  very   little  alteration   my  father
  greatly  changed  most  of  the  poem  from  its  form  in  The  Notion Club
  Papers.                                                                    
                                                                            
                                   IMRAM                                     
                                                                            
         At last out of the deep sea he passed,                              
           and mist rolled on the shore;                                     
         under clouded moon the waves were loud,                             
           as the laden ship him bore                                4       
         to Ireland, back to wood and mire                                   
           and the tower tall and grey,                                      
         where the knell of Cluain-ferta's bell                              
           tolled in green Galway.                                   8       
         Where Shannon down to Lough Derg ran                                
           under a rain-clad sky                                             
         Saint Brendan came to his journey's end                             
           to find the grace to die.                              12         
                                                                            
         '0 tell me, father, for I loved you well,                           
           if still you have words for me,                                   
         of things strange in the remembering                                
           in the long and lonely sea,                              16       
         of islands by deep spells beguiled                                  
           where dwell the Elvenkind:                                        
         in seven long years the road to Heaven                              
           or the Living Land did you find?'                        20       
                                                                            
         'The things I have seen, the many things,                           
           have long now faded far;                                          
         only three come clear now back to me:                               
           a Cloud, a Tree, a Star.                                 24       
                                                                            
         'We sailed for a year and a day and hailed                          
           no field nor coast of men;                                        
         no boat nor bird saw we ever afloat                                 
           for forty days and ten.                                  28       

 Then a drumming we heard as of thunder coming,           
   and a Cloud above us spread;                           
 we saw no sun at set or dawn,                            
   yet ever the west was red.                         32
                                                         
 'Upreared from sea to cloud then sheer                   
   a shoreless mountain stood;                            
 its sides were black from the sullen tide                
   up to its smoking hood,                            36
 but its spire was lit with a living fire                 
   that ever rose and fell:                               
 tall as a column in High Heaven's hall,                  
   its roots were deep as Hell;                        40
 grounded in chasms the waters drowned                    
   and swallowed long ago                                 
 it stands, I guess, on the foundered land                
   where the kings of kings lie low.                   44
                                                         
 'We sailed then on till all winds failed,                
   and we toiled then with the oar;                       
 we burned with thirst and in hunger yearned,             
   and we sang our psalms no more.                     48
 At last beyond the Cloud we passed                       
   and came to a starlit strand;                          
 the waves were sighing in pillared caves,                
   grinding gems to sand.                              52
 And here they would grind our bones we feared            
   until the end of time;                                 
 for steep those shores went upward leaping               
   to cliffs no man could climb.                       56
 But round by west a firth we found                       
   that clove the mountain-wall;                          
 there lay a water shadow-grey                            
   between the mountains tall.                         60
 Through gates of stone we rowed in haste,                
   and passed, and left the sea;                          
 and silence like dew fell in that isle,                  
   and holy it seemed to be.                           64
                                                         
 'To a dale we came like a silver grail                   
   with carven hills for rim.                             
 In that hidden land we saw there stand                   
   under a moonlight dim                               68
 a Tree more fair than ever I deemed                      
   in Paradise might grow:                                
 its foot was like a great tower's root,                  
   its height no man could know;                       72

 and white as winter to my sight                       
   the leaves of that Tree were;                       
 they grew more close than swan-wing plumes,           
   long and soft and fair.                           76
                                                      
 'It seemed to us then as in a dream                   
   that time had passed away,                          
 and our journey ended; for no return                  
   we hoped, but there to stay.                      80
 In the silence of that hollow isle                    
   half sadly then we sang:                            
 softly we thought, but the sound aloft                
   like sudden trumpets rang.                        84
 The Tree then shook, and flying free                  
   from its limbs the leaves in air                    
 as white birds rose in wheeling flight,               
   and the lifting boughs were bare.                 88
 On high we heard in the starlit sky                   
   a song, but not of bird:                            
 neither noise of man nor angel's voice,               
   but maybe there is a third                        92
 fair kindred in the world yet lingers                 
   beyond the foundered land.                          
 But steep are the seas and the waters deep            
   beyond the White-tree Strand! '                  96
                                                      
 '0 stay now, father! There is more to say.            
   But two things you have told:                       
 the Tree, the Cloud; but you spoke of three.          
   The Star in mind do you hold?'                 100
                                                      
 'The Star? Why, I saw it high and far                 
   at the parting of the ways,                         
 a light on the edge of the Outer Night                
   beyond the Door of Days,                         104
 where the round world plunges steeply down,           
   but on the old road goes,                           
 as an unseen bridge that on arches runs               
   to coasts that no man knows.'                    108
                                                      
   'But men say, father, that ere the end              
   you went where none have been.                      
 I would hear you tell me, father dear,                
   of the last land you have seen.'                 112
                                                      
   'In my mind the Star I still can find,              
   and the parting of the seas,                        

   and the breath as sweet and keen as death                               
     that was borne upon the breeze.                                116
   But where they bloom, those flowers fair,                               
     in what air or land they grow,                                        
   what words beyond this world I heard,                                   
     if you would seek to know,                                     120
   in a boat then, brother, far afloat                                     
     you must labour in the sea,                                           
   and find for yourself things out of mind:                               
     you will learn no more of me.'                                 124
                                                                          
   In Ireland over wood and mire                                           
     in the tower tall and grey                                            
   the knell of Cluain-ferta's bell                                        
     was tolling in green Galway.                                   128
   Saint Brendan had come to his life's end                                
     under a rain-clad sky,                                                
   journeying whence no ship returns;                                      
     and his bones in Ireland lie.                                  132
                                                                          
                  MAJOR DIVERGENCES IN EARLIER VERSIONS OF                 
                      THE NOTION CLUB PAPERS (PART TWO).                   
                                                                          
                    (i) The earlier versions of Night 66.                  
                                                                          
 I   have  mentioned   previously  that   from  Lowdham's   words  'Earendel
 seems to me a special word. It  is not  Anglo-Saxon' (see  p. 237  and note
 37) there is a third text to be considered: for the part of  the typescript
 F  that  follows  from  this  point  and  extends  to the  end of  Night 66
 (p. 245) was rejected and  replaced by  another version.  I shall  refer to
 the rejected portion as  'F 1',  and its  replacement as  'F 2'.  That this
 rewriting  was  carried out  while the  typescript was  being made  is seen
 from the fact that  at the  end of  the rewritten  section it  is F  2 that
 continues to the end of the Papers.                                       
 For  some  distance  the  original  manuscript  E  was followed  closely in
 F 1 and for this part it is only necessary to give the text of the latter.
                                                                          
  In   any   case,    said   Lowdham,    Earendel   is    not   Anglo-Saxon.
 Or rather, it is and it isn't. I  think it  is one  of those  curious cases
 of   linguistic   coincidence"  that   have  long   puzzled  me.   I  some-
 times  think  that   they  are   too  easily   dismissed  as   "mere  acci-
 dent".  You  know   the  sort   of  thing   that  you   can  find   in  any
 dictionary   of   a   strange   language,   and   which   so   excites  the
 amateur   philologists,  itching   to  derive   one  tongue   from  another

 that  they  know  better:  a  word that  is nearly  the same  in form
 and  meaning  as  the  corresponding  word in  English, or  Latin, or
 Hebrew,  or  what  not.  Like  mare  'male'   in  the   New  Hebrides
 and  Latin  maris, marem.(1) Or  the  example that  used to  be given
 as  a  frightful  warning  in  the old  text-books: that  popol means
 'people'  or  'popular  assembly'  in  Tamil,  but  has  no connexion
 whatever with  populus and  its derivatives,  and is  really derived,
 they  say,  from  a  Tamil  word  for  a mat  for the  councillors to
 squat on.                                                           
   'I  dare say  some of  these things  are mere  chance, or  at least
 not  very  significant.  Yet  I think  it also  happens that  a word-
 form  may  be  arrived  at  by  different  routes,  in  far separated
 times  and  places,  and  yet  the  result  may be  the product  of a
 hidden  symbol-making  process  working  out  to  a  similar  end. Or
 in  any case  the "accident"  may touch  off, as  it were,  deeper or
 sleeping  mind-echoes,  so  that  the  similar  form   thus  acquires
 similar  significance  or  emotional  content.  Every   language  has
 words  in  which  its  genius  seems  to  come to  flash-point, words
 whose  form,  though it  remains within  the general  style, achieves
 a brilliance or a beauty of universal virtue.'                      
   'If I follow all this, and I'm  not at  all sure  that I  do,' said
 Markison,  'I  suppose  you  are  trying  to  say  that  you've  dis-
 covered  Earendel  or  something  like it  in some  strange language.
 Is that so?'                                                        
   'I  think  I  come  in  for a  moment here,'  said Jeremy,  who had
 been as restless as a bird  on a  twig ever  since the  word Earendel
 had  cropped  up.  'We've  been  trying  to strengthen  our recollec-
 tions  under  tuition; but  I've not  had much  success yet.  Still I
 have  succeeded  in   connecting  Numenor   a  little   more  clearly
 with  a  library,(2) with  something  I  came across  once when  I was
 working  on  Ghost-stories.  I  can't  get  it   more  exact,   or  I
 couldn't. But a result of  the effort  to remember  has been  to drag
 up  a  good  many   vague  dream-scenes   of  that   rather  troubled
 searching-for-something-missing    variety:   wandering    about   in
 libraries looking for a lost book, getting dusty and worried.       
   'Then  two  nights  ago I  got a  dream of  which I  still remember
 one  fairly  clear  passage.  I took  down a  folder, or  a cardboard
 case, from a high shelf, and in it I  found a  manuscript. It  was in
 an  ornamental  and  rather  archaic  hand,  yet  I seem  to remember
 that I knew that it was not really old (by the paper, or the  ink, or
 something),  but  belonged  to  this  century.  Here  and  there were
 passages in an unknown character.'                                  

                                                     
                                                                      
  'I've  found  that  missing  leaf  of  my father's  book,' interposed
 Lowdham.(3) 'I've  shown  it  to  Jeremy, and  he's quite  certain that
 the   character   is  the   same.  Though   we've  not   succeeded  in
 deciphering it. It's not any alphabet known to the books.'            
  'And  what  is  more  peculiar',  said Jeremy,  'there is  nothing at
 all   to   connect   my   dream-vision   or    dream-manuscript   with
 Edwin  Lowdham:  the  style   of  the   hands  is   wholly  different,
 though  the  letter-forms  are  the  same.  Old  Edwin's  is  a large,
 black,   broad-stroke  round   hand;  mine   was  more   delicate  and
 pointed.                                                              
  'Well,  unfortunately  I  don't  recollect  anything  very  clear  or
 connected  about  the  contents  of  my dream-manuscript  - I  call it
 that because I  begin to  wonder if  this dream  is really  founded on
 any  waking  experience  at  all  -  but it  contained, I  think, some
 kind  of  legendary  history,(4) full  of strange  names all  seeming to
 belong  to  the  same  language.   This  much   I  do   remember:  the
 name   Numenor   or   Numenore   was   frequent;   and   so   was  the
 name  Earendil.  Very  nearly   the  same,   you  see,   but  actually
 spelt: e-a-r-e-n-d-i-l, Earendil.                                     
  'So  I  think  Arry  must  be  right.  It  is  a  case  of linguistic
 coincidence  or  congruence,  and  the  key  is  not  to  be  found in
 Anglo-Saxon.   We   need   not   bother   with   the   connexions   of
 English  Earendel  in  the  other related  languages, like  the proper
 names Orendel, and Aurvendill, or Saxo's Horwendillus.'(5)            
  'But   is   not   Auriwandalo   actually  recorded   as  a   name  in
 Langobardic?'  said  Markison,  who  has  a  finger  in  most  pies of
 learning. 'Odd how the Langobards crop up.'                           
  'It is,' said Lowdham.                                               
  'Hm,  yes,  and  there  is  a  connexion  between  these   names  and
 the  stars,'  said  Jeremy.  'Didn't  Thor  throw  Aurvendil's  toe up
 into  the  sky,  Arry?(6) And  Earendil   certainly  had   a  connexion
 with a star in the strange tongue. Somehow I feel sure of that.'(7)   
  'Yes,  that's  so,'  said  Lowdham;  'but  in  the  unknown  language
 it was  only a  legendary connexion,  not a  linguistic one,  I think.
 Earendil  meant  Sea-friend.(8) I am  quite  sure  of that,  because -
 well, perhaps I'd better go on where I left off.                      
  'From the time of my father's departure...                           
                                                                      
  The following passage in E / F 1  was retained  in the  revised type-
 script F 2 (p. 237 - 8) as far as 'some great tale of  Numenor' almost
 without change, and there is no need to repeat it. The only difference
 between the texts is in the  name of  the 'cone-shaped  mountain', and
 this is a difference very important in determining the relation of the

  texts  of  The  Drowning  of  Anadune  to  those  of  The   Notion  Club
  Papers. Where F 2  has 'Desolate  is Minul-Tarik,  the Pillar  of Heaven
  is  forsaken!  '  the  name  in E  is Menelminda,  changed in  pencil to
  Meneltyula, while in F 1 it is Menel-tubel, changed to Menel-tubil.     
    From 'some great tale of  Numenor', however,  all three  texts diverge
  among  themselves,  and  the  major  divergence  is  between  the  manu-
  script E and the first typescript F 1. I continue now therefore with the
  text of E (cf. pp. 238 ff.).                                            
                                                                         
    'But  most  of  the  word-recollections  are, as  it were,  casual; as
  casual  as  the  words  caught  by  the  eye  from  a  lexicon  when one
  is  looking  for  something  else.  It was  a long  time before  I began
  to   note   them   down,   and  use   them  for   the  language   I  was
  amusing  myself  by  "making  up".  They  did  not  fit, or  rather they
  took  control  and  bent  that  language  to  their  own style.  In fact
  it  became  difficult  to  tell  which  were   my  invented   words  and
  which   the  ghost-words;   indeed  I've   a  notion   that  "invention"
  gradually   played   a  smaller   and  smaller   part.  But   there  was
  always a large residue that would not work in.                          
    'I  soon  found,  as  I   got  to   know  more,   that  some   of  the
  ingredients   were   Anglo-Saxon,   and   other   things:   which   I'll
  mention  in  a  minute.  But  when  I  weeded them  out there  was still
  a  large  amount  of  words  left  over,  and in  worrying over  these I
  made   a   discovery.   They   belonged   to   another   ghost-language,
  and  to  one that  was related  to the  other. I  could perceive  a good
  many  of  the  laws  or  rules  of  change:  for  the  Numenorean  style
  was  in  most  points  the  older,  more  archaic,  while the  other had
  been  altered (as  if by  contact with  our western  shores) to  a style
  much more like that of the older north-western tongues.'                
    'I  don't  follow  all  this,'  said  Stainer. 'Nor  do I,'  said both
  Markison  and   Guildford.  'Give   them  some   of  the   examples  you
  gave me, Arry,' said Ramer.                                             
    'Well,'  said  Lowdham  hesitating,   'if  I   can  remember   any  of
  the  examples  where  the  relationship  is  clear  to  lay folk  (it is
  often  rather  complex).  Yes,  lome  is  'night'  (but  not 'darkness')
  and lomelinde is 'a nightingale':  I feel  sure of  that. In  the second
  language  it  is  dumh,  later  du;  and  duilin.  I  refer  them  to  a
  Primitive  Western  domi,  domilinde.  Alda  means  a  'tree'  -  it was
  one  of  the  earliest  certain  words  I  got -  and orne  when smaller
  and  more  slender  like  a  birch or  rowan; in  the second  language I
  find  galad, and  orn (plural  yrn): I  refer them  to galada,  and orne
  (plural  ornei).  Sometimes  the  forms  are   more  similar:   the  Sun
  and  Moon,  for  instance,  appear  as  Anar,  Isil beside  Anaur (later

 Anor) and Ithil.  I liked  first the  one language  and then  the other
 in  different  linguistic  moods,(9) but  the  older  seemed  always  the
 more  august,  somehow,  the  more,  I   don't  know   ...  liturgical,
 monumental:  I  used  to  call  it  the  Elven-latin;  and   the  other
 seemed  more  resonant  with  the loss  and regret  of these  shores of
 exile' - he paused - 'but I don't know why I say that.'               
   'But why Elven-latin?' asked Markison.                              
   'I  don't  quite  know,'  said  Lowdham.  'I  certainly   don't  mean
 Elves  in  any  of   the  more   debased  post-Shakespearean   sort  of
 ways.  Actually  the  language  is  associated  in  my  mind  with  the
 name Eresse': an island, I think. I often call it Eressean.(10) But  it is
 also  associated  with  names  like  Eldar,   Eldalie  which   seem  to
 refer to, well, something like Ramer's Enkeladim.'(11)                
   'That  breaks  my  dream!'   cried  Jeremy.(12) 'Of  course!   Now  I
 know.  It  wasn't  a  library.  It  was  a  folder  containing  a manu-
 script,  on  a  high  shelf  in  Whitburn's  second-hand room,(13) that
 funny  dark  place  where  all  sorts  of  unsaleable things  drift. No
 wonder  my  dreams  were  full  of  dust  and  anxiety!  It  must  have
 been  fifteen  years  ago  since  I  found  the  thing   there:  Quenta
 Eldalien,  being  the  History  of  the  Elves,  by John  Arthurson (14)-
 in  a  manuscript  much  as  I've  described  it. I  took an  eager but
 hasty  glance.  But  I  had  no  time to  spare that  day, and  I could
 find no one in  the shop  to answer  any enquiries,  so I  hurried off.
 I  meant  to  come  back,  but I  didn't, not  for almost  a fortnight.
 And  -  then  the  manuscript  had  vanished!  They  had  no  record of
 it,  and  neither  old  Whitburn  nor  anyone  else   there  remembered
 ever  seeing  any  such  thing.  I  recall  now  what a  catastrophe it
 seemed  to  me  at  the  time;  but I  was very  busy with  other work,
 and soon forgot all about it.'                                        
   'It  certainly  looks  as  if  more  than one  mind had  been working
 back  along  similar  lines,'  said Ramer.  'Several minds  indeed; for
 our  expert  is  at  fault  for  once.  Lewis  also  mentions  the name
 somewhere.'                                                           
   'So  he  does!'  cried  Jeremy.  'In a  preface, was  it? But  he was
 quoting  from  someone,  I  think,  from  a  source  that  hasn't  been
 traced.  And  he  used  the  form  numinor.   All  the   other  sources
 have numenor, or numenore' - that's so, isn't it, Arry?'(15)          
   'Yes,'  said  Lowdham.  'nume  is  West,  and  nore  is  kindred,  or
 land.   The  ancient   English  was   Westfolde,  Hesperia.(16) But  you
 wanted  to  know  why  Elven.  Well,  I  got  that  from  another line,
 too.  You  remember  I   mentioned  that   Anglo-Saxon  used   to  come
 through  mixed  up  with  this  other  queer  stuff?  Well, I  got hold

 of Anglo-Saxon through the ordinary books, of course, fairly                 
 early, and that confused the issue; though some words and                    
 names came through to me that are not in the dictionaries...'                
                                                                             
   From  here  to  the  end  of  Night  66  the  version  in  the  original
 manuscript E is very close to the final form  (pp. 242  - 5),  though some
 elements  are  lacking,  notably  Lowdham's  description  of  the  ancient
 slowness  and  sonorousness  of  diction  (p.  242):  following Frankley's
 'Unless, of course, you back  up their  theories' Lowdham  goes on:  'As a
 matter of fact, I think they do. At least, here is a bit that came through
 very early, long before I  could interpret  it; and  it has  been repeated
 over and over again in various forms:                                        
             Westra lage wegas rehtas wraithas nu isti...'(17)              
   The  Old  English  lines  beginning  Monad  modes  lust  are   in  later
 spelling,  but  have  the same  form as  that in  F 2  (see pp.  243-4 and
 note 50,  and p.  272). There  is no  reference in  E to  the date  of the
 'coming  through' of  these lines,  nor to  its being  an evening  of high
 wind.                                                                        
   The  remarkable  feature  of  this  original version  is of  course that
 Lowdham's   two   'ghost-languages'   were   Quenya   and   Sindarin   (or
 rather,  the  language  that  would  come  to  be called  Sindarin). Lowd-
 ham's account  in this  version thus  maintains the  linguistic experience
 of Alboin Errol in The Lost Road (cf. note 9): 'Eressean as he  called it
 as a boy ... was getting  pretty complete.  He had  a lot  of Beleriandic,
 too, and was beginning  to understand  it, and  its relation  to Eressean'
 (V.45).                                                                      
                                                                             
   The  first  typescript  version  F  1  follows the  manuscript E  at the  
 beginning  of  the  section  just   given  ('But   most  of   these  word-
 recollections  ...',  p.  302),  in  Lowdham's  description  of   how  the
 'ghost-words'  'soon  took  control  and  bent  my [invented]  language to
 their own style'; but when he comes to tell that as  he sifted  the 'large
 residue  [of  words]  that would  not work  in' he  made a  discovery, his
 discovery is totally different  from that  in the  original text.  This is
 where  Adunaic first  appeared. It  may be  that my  father had  been long
 cogitating this new language; but even if this is so,  it would  seem that
 it  had  not  reached  a  form  sufficiently developed  to enter  as Lowd-
 ham's 'second language' in manuscript E. In fact, I doubt  that it  is so.
 It  seems  to  me  to  be  overwhelmingly  probable that  Adunaic actually
 arose at this time (see further p. 147).                                     
   I give here the text  of F  1 from  this point  (corresponding to  the E
 text on p. 302 and the final text F 2 on p. 238).                            
                                                                             
   'I found, when I got to know more, that some of the                        
 ingredients were Anglo-Saxon and other related things: I'll deal             
 with that in a minute; it was not a large part. Working over the             

 rest, collecting and sifting it, I made a discovery.  I had  got two
 ghost-languages:  Numenorean  A  and  B.  Most  of  what  I  had got
 at  an  early  period was  B; later  A became  more frequent,  but B
 remained   the   most  common   language,  especially   in  anything
 like  connected  passages;  A  was chiefly  limited to  single words
 and names, though I think that  a lot  of it  is incorporated  in my
 invented language.                                                  
   'As far  as I  could or  can see,  these languages  are unrelated,
 though  they  have  some  words  in  common.  But  in   addition  to
 these  tongues  there  remains  a  residue,  and I  now see  that it
 consists of some echoes of other later tongues  that are  later than
 Numenorean  A  and  B,  but  are  derived  from  them or  from their
 blending. I can discern some  of the  laws or  lines of  change that
 they  show.  For  the Numenorean  tongues, I  feel, are  archaic and
 of  an  elder  world,  but  the  others  are  altered and  belong to
 Middle-earth.'                                                      
   'I don't follow all this,' said Stainer. Most of us felt the same,
 and said so.                                                        
   'Couldn't  you  give  them  some  of  the  examples that  you gave
 to  me,  Arry?'  said  Ramer. 'Some  of the  important names,  and a
 word  or  two; it  would be  clearer with  something definite  to go
 on.'                                                                
   Lowdham hesitated. 'I'll try,' he said. 'But I  shan't be  able to
 give  many  examples  of  the  later  changed  forms;  the relations
 would  seldom  be   clear,  even   to  philologists,   without  many
 instances side by side in writing.                                  
   'Well,  take  the  name  Numenor  or  Numenore.  That  belongs  to
 language  A.  It  means  Westernesse,  and   is  composed   of  nume
 "west"  and  nore   "folk"  or   "country";  but   the  B   name  is
 Anadun,  and  the  people  are  called  Adunai.  And  the  land  had
 another  name:  in  A  Andore,  and  in  B  Athanati; and  both mean
 land  of   gift>.  There   seems  no   connexion  between   the  two
 languages  here;  but  in  both  menel   means  "the   heavens".  It
 occurs  in  the  B  name  Menel-tubil  that  I  mentioned  just now.
 And  there  seems  to  be   some  connexion   between  the   A  word
 Valar,  which  appears  to  mean  something like  "gods", and  the B
 plural Avaloi and the place-name Avalloni.                          
   'The  name  Earendil,  by  the  way,  belongs  to language  A, and
 contains eare "the open sea"  and the  stem ndil  "love, devotion".
 The  corresponding  B  name  is  Pharazir,  made  of pharaz  and the
 stem iri- [changed in  ink on  the typescript  to: Azrubel,  made of
 azar "sea" and  the stem  bel-]. A  large number  of the  names seem

 to  have  double  forms  like  this,  almost  as   if  one   people  spoke
 two  languages.  If  that  is  so,  I  suppose  the  situation   could  be
 paralleled  by  the  use  of,  say,  Chinese  in   Japan,  or   indeed  of
 Latin  in  Europe.  As  if  a  man  could  be   called  Godwin   and  also
 Theophilus   or   Amadeus.   But   even   so,   two    different   peoples
 must come into the story somewhere.                                       
   'I  don't  know  if  you  want   any  more   examples;  but   the  words
 for  the  Sun  and  Moon  in  A  are  Anar  and Isil  (or in  their oldest
 form  Anar  and  Ithil);  and   in  B   they  are   Uri  and  Nilu.  These
 words   survive   in   not  much   changed  shapes   in  the   later  lan-
 guages  that  I  spoke  of:  Anor  (Anaur)  and  Ithil,  beside   Uir,  Yr
 and  Nil,  Njul.  Again  the  A   and  B   forms  seem   unconnected;  but
 there  is  a  word  that  often  occurs and  is nearly  the same  in both:
 lome  in  A,  and  lomi  in  B.  That  means  "night",  but  as  it  comes
 through  to me  I feel  that it  has no  evil connotations;  it is  a word
 of  peace  and  beauty  and  has  none  of  the  associations  of  fear or
 groping  that,  say,  "dark"  has  for  us. For  the evil  sense I  do not
 know  the  A  word.  In  B  and  its  derivatives  there  are  many  words
 or stems, such as dolgu, ugru, nulu.                                      
   'Well,  there  you  are.  I hope  you are  not all  bored. I  love these
 languages.  I  call  them  Avallonian  and  Adunaic.(18) I find  first  the
 one  and  then  the  other  more   attractive,  in   different  linguistic
 moods;  but  A,  the  Avallonian,   is  the   more  beautiful,   with  the
 simpler  and  more  euphonious  phonetic  style.  And   it  seems   to  me
 the  more   august,  somehow,   the  more   ancient,  and,   well,  sacred
 and liturgical. I  used to  call it  the Elven-latin.  But the  Adunaic is
 more  resonant   with  the   loss  and   regret  of   Middle-earth,  these
 shores  of  exile.'  He  paused,  as  if  he  heard  echoes  from  a great
 distance. 'But I do not know why I say that,' he ended.                   
   There   was   a   short   silence,   and   then  Markison   spoke.  'Why
 did you call it Elven-latin?' he asked. 'Why Elven?'                      
   'It  seemed  to  fit,'  Lowdham  answered.   'But  certainly   I  didn't
 mean elf in any debased post-Shakespearean sort of sense....              
                                                                          
   The  remainder  of  Night  66  is  the same  as in  F 2  (pp. 242  - 5),
 except  that,  as  in  E,  Lowdham's  account  of  the  ancient   mode  of
 utterance is absent.                                                      
   It will be seen that in F 1, as in E, Wilfrid Jeremy interrupts to speak
 of  his  'dream-manuscript'  (p.  300),  found  in  a  library,  in  which
 occurred  the  names  Numenor  and  Earendil:  the  unknown  character  of
 some passages in it  was the  same as  that of  the single  leaf preserved
 from  Edwin  Lowdham's  'notes  in  a  queer   script'  (p.   235),  which
 Arundel  Lowdham  had  now  found   again;  but   that  this   passage  is

  entirely absent in F 2 (p. 237). Subsequently, in  E, Jeremy  returns to
  the subject ('That  breaks my  dream!', p.  303), remembering  both that
  he  found  - in  waking life,  years before  - the  manuscript not  in a
  library  but  in  the  second-hand  room  of  a  bookshop, and  that the
  manuscript  bore the  title Quenta  Eldalien, being  the History  of the
  Elves, by John Artburson; and this leads to a mention of Lewis's  use of
  the name Numinor. This second interruption of  Jeremy's is  not in  F 1,
  which is on the face of it strange,  since his  first speech  was surely
  intended to lead on to  his second.  A probable  explanation of  this is
  that my father decided to  discard this  element of  Jeremy's manuscript
  (perhaps  as  complicating excessively  the already  complex conception)
  while he was making the  typescript, and  that this  was one  reason why
  he produced the revised version at this point.  But Jeremy's  remarks at
  the previous meeting (Night 65, p. 232: 'I come  into it  too. I  knew I
  had heard that name as soon as Arry said it. But I can't for the life of
  me  remember where  or when  at the  moment. It'll  bother me  now, like
  a thorn in the foot, until I get it out') should have been removed.     
                                                                         
                                   NOTES.                                 
                                                                         
   1. The genitive and accusative  cases maris,  marem are  given because
      the nominative is mas ('male').                                     
   2. Jeremy is referring to the earlier  passage (Night  65, p.  232) in
      which  he  claimed  that  he  himself  had  heard  the  name Numenor,
      but could not remember when.                                        
   3. In the revised text F 2  there is  no mention  of the  missing leaf
      having  been  found  under  Night  66  -  naturally enough,  since it
      was  at  this  meeting  that Lowdham  referred to  it as  having been
      mislaid (p. 235). It was an odd oversight in E  and F  1 that  at the
      same  meeting  Lowdham  both  first  mentions  it  and  says  that he
      cannot find it at the  present time,  and also  declares that  he has
      found it and discussed it with Jeremy. In F 2 he  brings the  leaf to
      the next meeting (p. 248).                                          
   4. E has here: '... the contents of the dream-manuscript  - I  call it
      that,  because  I  doubt  now  whether this  dream is  really founded
      on  any  waking  experience  at  all;  though  I don't  somehow doubt
      that  such  a  manuscript  exists somewhere,  probably in  Oxford: it
      contains, I think, some kind of legendary history...'               
   5. Orendel  in  German,  Aurvandill  in   Norse,  Horwendillus  in
      Latinized   form   in   the  Danish   History  of   Saxo  Grammaticus
      (latter  half  of  the  twelfth  century).  The  form  in   Norse  is
      Aurvandill, but at the  occurrences of  the name  both in  E and  F 1
      my father spelt it Aurvendill. See note 6.                          
   6. In the 'Prose Edda' of Snorri Sturluson a strange tale is told  by the
      god  Thor,  how  he  'carried  Aurvandill  in  a  basket on  his back

      from  the  North  out  of Jotunheim  [land of  giants]; and  he added
      for a token that one  of his  toes had  stuck out  of the  basket and
      become frozen; and so Thor broke  it off  and cast  it into  the sky,
      and  made a  star of  it, which  is called  Aurvandilsta [Aurvandil's
      Toe]'  (Snorra  Edda,  Skaldskaparmal   $17).  Association   of  Aur-
      vandill  with  Orion  is the  basis of  the suggestions  mentioned by
      Lowdham  earlier  (p.  236):  'Some  guess  that  it  [Earendel]  was
      really a star-name for Orion, or for  Rigel' -  Rigel being  the very
      bright star in the left  foot of  Orion (as  he is  drawn in  the old
      figure).                                                             
  7.  E has, And  Earendil certainly  had a  connexion with  a star  in the
      strange tongue: I seem to remember that:  like the  ship' -  the last
      words  being  changed  from  'And  the  ship  was  Earendel's  Star'.
      Earlier in E (p. 284 note 25) the ship was called Earendel Star.     
  8.  In E Lowdham translates  Earendil as  'Lover of  the Great  Seas'; in
      the final text F 2 as 'Great Mariner, or literally Friend of the Sea'
      (p. 237).                                                            
  9.  This passage is modelled  on Alboin  Errol's words  to his  father in
      The  Lost  Road  (V.41),  using  the  same  examples,  with  the same
      distinction  in  respect  of the  word lome  ('night' but  not 'dark-
      ness'), the same  note that  alda was  one of  the earliest  words to
      appear, and the same remark that  (in Alboin's  words) 'I  like first
      one, then the other, in different moods.'                            
 10.  Eressean  was  Alboin  Errol's  name for  his first  language, 'Elf-
      latin'; the second was Beleriandic.                                  
 11.  Cf. p. 221 note 65:  the passage  cited there  from the  B manuscript
      of  Part  One,  in  which 'Tolkien's  Unfallen Elves'  and 'Tolkien's
      Eldar,  Eldalie'  are  referred  to,  though not  struck out  on that
      manuscript,  must  by  now  have  been  rejected;  it  is  clear that
      Lowdham  means  that  Eldar,  Eldalie  had  'come  through'  to  him,
      and that he only knew them so. See further note 14.                  
 12.  See p. 286 note 38.                                                  
 13.  Whitburn: see p. 149 and note 7.                                     
 14.  My father's father  was Arthur  Tolkien; he  was referring  of course
      to  his  manuscript  of  The  Silmarillion,  which  had   never  been
      published  but  had  washed  up,  forgotten  and disregarded,  in the
      second-hand  room  of  a  bookshop.  The  author of  The Silmarillion
      is  disguised  by  a  pseudonym;  for  no reference  can now  be made
      to the works of Tolkien, least of  all as  having been  published and
      known  to  members  of  the  Notion  Club  (see  the   citation  from
      manuscript B of Part One, p. 220  note 52  at end).  - In  a rejected
      form  of  this passage  the title  of the  manuscript was  not Quenta
      Eldalien but Quenta Eldaron.                                         
 15.  Ramer's  remark  'Lewis  also  mentions  the  name  somewhere'  is at
      first  sight  puzzling,  since  it  was  Lowdham's mention  of Eldar,
      Eldalie  that  brought  back  to  Jeremy's  mind  the  manuscript  by

 
                                                                         
    'John  Arthurson'  that  he  had  once  seen,  and  the  name  Numenor
    has  not  been  mentioned  for  some  time.  But  Ramer  was following
    his  own  thought,  that  'several  minds'  had  been   'working  back
    along  similar  lines' (and  of course  it was  the name  Numenor that
    had  originally  caught  Jeremy's  attention  and  finally led  to his
    recollection  of  the  manuscript).  - Jeremy's  words 'In  a preface,
    was  it?'  presumably  refer  to  Lewis's  preface  to   That  Hideous
    Strength:  'Those  who  would  like  to  learn  further  about Numinor
    and  the  True  West  must  (alas!)  await  the  publication  of  much
    that still exists only in the MSS. of  my friend,  Professor J.  R. R.
    Tolkien.' But  then why  does Jeremy  say 'from  a source  that hasn't
    been  traced',  since the  source, though  unpublished, was  stated by
    Lewis?  Such  an  untiring  researcher  as  Wilfrid Jeremy  would have
    found out who J. R. R. Tolkien was, even if now forgotten!            
       By  'All  the  other  sources'  Jeremy  presumably  means  his  own
    recollection  of  the  manuscript  by  'John  Arthurson' and  the name
    that had 'come through' to Ramer (p. 232) and Lowdham.                
       There  are  a  number  of  references  to  Numinor in  That Hideous
    Strength,  as:  'Merlin's  art  was  the  last  survival  of something
    older  and  different  -  something  brought  to Western  Europe after
    the  fall  of  Numinor'  (Chapter  9,  $v);  again  with  reference to
    Merlin,  'something  that  takes  us back  to Numinor,  to pre-glacial
    periods'  (Ch.12,  $vi);  (Merlin)  '"Tell me,  slave, what  is Numi-
    nor?"  "The  True  West,"  said  Ransom'  (Ch.13,  $i);  other  refer-
    ences in Ch.13, $v.                                                   
16. Westfolde (folde 'earth, land, country') seems  not to  be recorded
    in  Old  English.  This  is  the  same  as  Westfold  in  The  Lord of
    the  Rings.  -  Hesperia:  'western  land'  (hesperus  'western', 'the
    evening star').                                                       
17. Above the th of wraithas is written kw (see p. 287 note 48).          
18. In  F  1  Lowdham's  words  about  Avalloni  in  F  2  (p.  241)  are
    absent  ('Although that  is a  B name,  it is  with it,  oddly enough,
    that I associate language A; so  if you  want to  get rid  of algebra,
    you  can  call  A  Avallonian,  and  B  Adunaic').  Thus  there  is no
    explanation in  F 1  why he  calls the  A language  Avallonian despite
    the fact that Avalloni is a B name.                                   
                                                                         
      (ii) The original version of Lowdham's 'Fragments' (Night 67).      
                                                                         
 In  the  manuscript  E Lowdham's  fragments are,  like Alboin  Errol's in
 The  Lost  Road  (V.47)  in  one  language  only,   Quenya  ('Eressean').
 Lowdham  bursts  in  to  Ramer's  rooms  and  tells   of  his   visit  to
 Pembrokeshire  just  as he  does in  F (p.  246), but  he does  not bring
 copies of the text  that has  come to  him -  he asks  Ramer for  a large
 sheet of paper to pin up on a board. Then he says, Well, here it is! It s
 Numenorean  or  Eressean,  and  I'll  put  the text  that I  can remember

 down  first  large,  and the  English gloss  (where I  can give  any) under-
 neath. It's fragmentary, just a collection of incomplete sentences.'        
   The first of the two  fragments reads  thus, as  E was  originally written
 (the  change  of  ilu  to  eru  was  very  probably  made  at  the  time  of
 writing: for ilu 'the World' see IV.241 - 5):                               
                                                                            
   ar sauron       tule        nahamna ... lantier turkildi                 
   and    ?         came              ? ... they-fell ?                      
                                                                            
   unuhuine ... tarkalion ohtakare valannar                                  
   under-shadow ... ? war-made on-Powers                                     
                                                                            
   Herunumen [ilu >] eru terhante ... Iluvataren ...                         
   Lord-of-West world sunder-broke ... of-God                                
                                                                            
   eari           ullier       kilyanna ... Numenore ataltane.     
   seas     they-should-pour   in-Chasm ... Numenor down-fell.            
                                                                            
   It  will  be  seen that  the Elvish  here, apart  from the  curious change
 from ilu to eru, is identical in its forms with that of Alboin Errol's first
 fragment;  and  the  only  differences  in  the  glosses  are  'of-God'  for
 Alboin's  'of-Iluvatar',  'sunder-broke'  for  'broke',   and  'they-should-
 pour'  for  'poured'.  A  few  changes  were  made  subsequently:  lantier o
 lantaner,  eru  >  arda,  terhante  >  askante, and  the addition  of leneme
 'by leave' - the changed forms  being found  in the  final version  (p. 246)
 with  the  exception  of  askante,  where  the  final  version  has sakkante
 'rent'.                                                                     
   Then  follows  (where  in  The  Lost  Road  it  is  said: 'Then  there had
 seemed  to  be  a  long  gap'):  'After  that  there  came  a long  dark gap
 which  slipped out  of memory  as soon  as I  woke to  daylight. And  then I
 got this."                                                                  
                                                                            
   Malle tena lende numenna ilya si maller                                   
   road straight went westward all now roads                                 
                                                                            
   raikar ... turkildi  romenna ... nuruhuine                                 
    bent ... ?         eastward ... death-shadow                                     
                                                                            
   mene     lumna ... vahaya            sin   atalante.                        
   on-us is-heavy ... far-away          now    ?                                
                                                                            
   This  is  also  very  close  to  Alboin Errol's  second passage.  The word
 tena  'straight'  was  changed  from  tera  (as in  The Lost  Road), perhaps
 in  the  act  of  writing;  otherwise  the  only  differences in  the Quenya
 words   are   mene   lumna  for   mel-lumna  in   The  Lost   Road  (glossed
 'us-is-heavy'),  and  sin  for  sin,  where  Lowdham's  gloss   was  changed
 from  'now'  (as  in  The  Lost  Road)  to  'now-is'. This  fragment appears
 in  Adunaic  in  the final  version (Fragment  II, p.  247), apart  from the
 words vahaiya sin Andore / atalante.                                        
   In  E  Lowdham makes  the same  observations as  in F  (pp.247 -  8) about

                                                                      
                                                                        
 his glimpse of the script, with the thought that these were  passages out
 of  a book;  and he  says likewise  'And then  suddenly I  remembered the
 curious script in my  father's manuscript  - but  that can  wait', without
 however adding, as he does in F, 'I've brought the leaf  along', although
 at the  end of  the meeting,  after the  storm, Ramer  picks up  the leaf
 from  the  floor  and puts  it in  a drawer  (p. 291,  notes 68  and 70).
 Lowdham  remarks  that 'there  are some  new words  here', and  that 'all
 except nahamna I  at once  guessed to  be names'.  He naturally  has less
 to  say in  E about  the language  of the  fragments than  he does  in F,
 noting only that he thought  that Tarkalion  was a  king's name  and that
 Turkildi  was  'the  name  of  a  people:  "lordly  men",  I  think', and
 commenting  on  Atalante  in  very  much   the  same   words  as   in  F,
 translating it as '"It  (or She)  that is  downfallen", or  more closely
 "who has slipped down into an abyss" '.                                 
                                                                        
            (iii) The earlier versions of Lowdham's 'Fragments'          
                           in Adunaic (Night 67).                        
                                                                        
 There  are  two  manuscript  pages  of  Lowdham's  fragments   in  Quenya
 and Adunaic  preceding those  reproduced as  frontispieces. The  first of
 these pages, here called (1), has interlinear glosses  in English  in red
 ink;  the  second,  (2),  has  not.  In  the  Quenya  fragment I  (A) the
 development from the form found  in E  to the  final form  (pp. 246  - 7)
 can be observed, but there are  only a  few points  to mention.  The word
 nahamna,  which  neither  Alboin  Errol  nor  Lowdham   could  translate,
 became  in  (1)  kamindon, still  untranslatable but  with the  gloss -ly
 beneath,  and  in  (2)  akamna,  changed  to  nukumna.  The  name herunu-
 men  survived  in  (1)  and  (2),  but  was  changed  in  the  latter  to
 Numekundo (numeheruvi in the final form).                               
   The Adunaic fragments,  I (B)  and II  (B), underwent  a great  deal of
 change,  and  I  give  here  the text  in (1),  showing the  changes made
 carefully to the text in  ink, but  ignoring scribbled  pencilled emenda-
 tions which are mostly very difficult to interpret.                     
                                                                        
   Kado   zigurun zabathan [hunekku >] unekku ... eruhin          
   and so   ?     humbled        he-came      ...   ?       
                                                                        
   udubanim       dalad          ugrus     ... arpharazon                                  
   fell              under horror? shadow? ...     ?                         
                                                                        
   azgaranadu       avaloi-[men >] si ... barun-aduno                          
   was waging war?   Powers on        ... the Lord of West                        
                                                                        
   rakkhatu       kamat   sobethuma   eruvo   ...  azre                       
   broke asunder  earth   assent-with  of God ... seas                       
                                                                        
   nai [phurusam >] phurrusim   akhas-ada. anaduni      akallabi.               
   might-flow                   Chasm-into Westernesse fell in ruin.

 Adunaim                       azulada ... agannulo      burudan                          
 The  Adunai  (Men  of  W.)  eastward  ...  death-shade  heavy-is
                                                                
 nenum      ...  adun batan       akhaini ezendi     ido kathy       
 on-us      ...  West  road       lay    straight lo! now all       
                                                                
 batani     rokhF-nam ... [vahaia sin atalante] ... ephalek       
 ways       bent-are  ...                         far away                                   
                                                                
 idon            akallabeth    ... [haia vahaia sin atalante]                  
 lo! now is She-that-is-fallen ...                               
                                                                
 ephal        ephalek idon  athanate                             
 far        far away is now Athanate (the Land of Gift)          

    In the rejected typescript F 1 of Night 66  appears Athanati  (p. 305),
  where F 2 has Yozayan (p. 241).                                          
    In text (2) the final text of the fragments  was very  largely reached,
  but still with a number of differences. I list here all of these,  in the
  order of the occurrence of the words in the final text, giving  the final
  form first:                                                              
                                                                          
    unakkha: unakkha > yadda > unakkha                                     
    dubdam: dubbudam > dubdam                                              
    ar-pharazonun: ar-pharazon ) ar-pharazonun                             
    azaggara: azagrara, with azaggara as alternative                       
    barim: barun                                                           
    yurahtam: urahhata > urahta                                            
    hikallaba (typescript), hikalba (manuscript): hikallaba > hikalba      
    bawiba dulgi: dulgu bawib                                             
    an-nimruzir: nimruzir                                                  
    At the beginning of II Adunaim azulada retained from (1), then         
    struck out                                                             
    buroda nenud: buruda nenu                                              
    adun izindi batan taido ayadda: adun batan eluk izindi yadda           
    ido (manuscript) at last two occurrences, idon (typescript): idon     
    hi-Akallabeth: Akallabeth                                              
                                                                          
    Eru. The  appearance of  the name  Eru in  these texts  is interesting:
  Lowdham says (pp. 248 - 9) that  he thinks  that eruhinim  in I  (B) must
  mean  'Children  of  God';  that  eruvo 'is  the sacred  name Eru  with a
  suffixed  element  meaning  from>  -,   and  that   therefore  iluvataren
  means the same thing.' In a list of 'Alterations in last revision [of The
  Silmarillion]  1951'  my  father  included  Aman,  Arda,  Ea',  Eru,  and
  other names (V.338). It seems  very probable  that the  name Eru  (Eru) -
  and Arda also - first emerged at this time, as the Adunaic  equivalent of
  Iluvatar  (for  the  etymology  of  Eru  in  Adunaic  see  p.  432). The

 appearance of era in the E  text (p.  310), replacing  ilu 'world'  and in
 turn  displaced  by  arda,  could be  explained as  the first  emergence of
 eru, as a Quenya word, and with a different meaning.                      
                                                                          
         (iv) Earlier versions of Edwin Lowdham's Old English text.       
                                                                          
 Two  texts  of  a longer  Old English  version are  extant, the  second of
 these, followed here, being a revision of the first but closely similar to
 it  and  accompanied  by  a  translation.  This  version belongs  with the
 manuscript  E:  there  are  no  Adunaic  names,  and a  complete facsimile
 of  Edwin  Lowdham's  text  in  Numenorean   script  (tengwar)   bears  a
 page reference to  the manuscript.  In those  passages where  this version
 and the later one (pp. 257 - 8) can  be compared  many differences  in the
 forms  of  words  will  be  seen,  for  this  does  not represent  the old
 Mercian dialect (see p. 291 note 71).                                     
   I  give  the text  here as  my father  wrote it  in a  rapidly pencilled
 manuscript.  The  two  sides  of  Edwin  Lowdham's  page  in  tengwar  are
 reproduced on pp. 319 - 20;  the tengwar  text was  directly based  on the
 Old  English  that  now  follows,  and  (in  intention)  scarcely deviates
 from it. There are a very few  minor differences  in spelling  between the
 two,  including  the  last  word,  the  name   Niwelland,  which   in  the
 tengwar text is given as Neowolland (p. 292 note 76).                    
                                                                          
   Ealle  sae on  worulde  hi  oferlidon,  sohton  hi  nyston  hwaet  ac aefre
   wolde   hyra   heorte   westweard,    fordamde   hi    ofhyngrede   wurdon
   daere  undeadlican  blisse  daere  Eldalie  7  swa  hyra  wuldor  weox swa
   aefre  hyra  langung  7  hyra  unstilnes  wurdon  de  ma aetiht  ....... pa
   forbudon   da   Eldan   him   on   Eresse  up   to  cumanne,   fordam  hi
   mennisce  waeron  7  deadlice  7  peahpe da   Wealdend  him   langes  lifes
   udon  ne  mihton  hi  alysan  hi  of daere  woruldmednesse  he   on  ealle
   men  aer   dam   ende  faered   7  hi   swulton  efne   hyra  heacyningas,
   Earendles  yrfenuman,  7  hyra  liffaec  puhte  dam  Eldum   scort.  Fordon
   hit  swa  gefyrn  araedde  se AElmihtiga daet hi  steorfan sceoldon  7 pas
   woruld  ofgyfan  .......  ac  hi  ongunnon   murcnian, saegdon   daet  pis
   forbod  him  unryht  puhte.  Ponne  on  digle  asendon  hi   sceaweras  on
   Avallon  da  dyrnan  lare  dara  Eldena  to  asmeaganne;  ne  fundon  deah
   nawder  ne  rune  ne  raed de  him  to  bote waeron  .......   Hit  gelamp
   sippan   daet  se   fula   Deofles   pegn   de  AElfwina   folc   Sauron
   nemneb   weox   swide   on   middangearde   7   he   geaxode   Westwarena
   miht   7   wuldor   7  daet   hi   gyt   holde   waeren   Gode;   ongunnon
   upahaefenlice   swadeah   ...   Pa   gehyrde   Westwarena  cyning  aet  his
   saelidum  be  Saurone daet he  wolde  cyning  beon  ofer   eallum  cyning-
   um  7  healicran  stol  habban  wolde  donne Earendles afera sylf  ahte.
   Ponne  sende   he  Tarcalion   se  cyning   butan  Wealdendra  raede  oppe
   Eldena  his aerendracan  to  Saurone,  abead  him daet  he  on   ofste  on
   Westfoldan   cwome   paer to  daes  cyninges   manraedenne  to  buganne  7

 he   Sauron   lytigende  geeadmedde   hine daet   he  cwom,  waes  peah
 inwitful  under,  facnes  hogode  Westwarena peode.   Pa  cwom   he  up
 aet sumum  cyrre  on  Romelonde daere  hyde  7  sona  adwealde  fornean
 ealle  ha   Numenoriscan  mid   wundrum  7   mid  tacnum;   fordam  he
 mihte  mycel  on   gedwimerum  7   drycraeftum....... 7   hi  geworhton
 mycelne  ealh  on  dam  hean  'munte'  de  Meneltyula  - daet   is  to
 secganne  Heofonsyl  -  hatte  -  se  de aer  waes unawidlod;  dydon ha
 halignesse  to haehenum  hearge  7 paer onsaegdon   unasecgendlice  lac
 on  unhalgum  weofode  ...   swa  cwom   se  deapscua   on  Westfarena
 land.......                                                            
 Paes ofer  fela  geara  hit  gelamp daet Tarcalione wearp  yldo onsaege
 7   py  weard   he  hreow   on  mode   7  pa   wolde  he   be  Saurones
 onbryrdingum   Avallon   mid   fyrde   gefaran,  fordamde   Sauron  him
 saegde daet  da  Eldan  him  on woh  eces lifes  forwyrnden..... waeron
 Westwarena   scipfyrda   swaswa   unarimedlic   igland   on daere sae 7
 hyra maestas  gelice   fyrgenbeamum  on   beorghlidum,  7   hyra  here-
 cumbol  gelice  punorwolcnum;  waeron  hyra   segl  blodread   7  blacu
 ..... Nu sitte we on elelande 7  forgytad daere blisse de  iu waes 7 nu
 sceal  eft  cuman  naefre.  Us  swide  onsitt  Deapscua.  Woh  bip seo
 woruld. Feor nu is Niwelland d.                                        
                                                                       
 I cannot explain the 8 at the end of this text, which stands at the end
 of  a  line but  not at  the end  of the  page, and  which must  have a
 significance since the symbol for th concludes  the version  in tengwar
 (and concludes the page). The translation reads thus:                  
                                                                       
 All the seas  in the  world they  sailed, seeking  they knew  not what;
 but  their  hearts  were  turned  ever westward,  for they  were become
 greatly desirous  of the  undying bliss  of the  Eldalie, and  as their
 power  and  glory  grew  so was  their longing  and their  unquiet ever
 the  more  increased.......  Then  the  Eldar forbade  them to  land on
 Eresse,  for  they were  of human  kindred and  mortal; and  albeit the
 Powers had granted them  long life,  they could  not release  them from
 the weariness of the world that  comes upon  all men  ere the  end, and
 they died, even their  high-kings, descendants  of Earendel;  and their
 life-span  seemed  short  to  the  Eldar.  For  thus  had  the Almighty
 ordained it,  that they  should die  and leave  this world  ....... But
 they  began  to  murmur, saying  that this  prohibition seemed  to them
 unjust. Then they sent out in secret  spies to  Avallon to  explore the
 hidden knowledge of  the Eldar;  but they  discovered neither  lore nor
 counsel that was of any avail to them.......                           
   It came to pass afterward  that the  foul servant  of the  Devil whom
 the  people  of the AElfwinas call  Sauron grew  mightily in  the Great
 Lands,  and he  learned of  the power  and glory  of the  Westware, and
 that  they were  still faithful  to God,  but were  behaving arrogantly
 nonetheless...  Then  the  King  of  the Westware  heard news  from his

  mariners  concerning  Sauron,  that  he  desired  to  be King  over all
  Kings  and  to  have  a  more  exalted  throne  than  even the  heir of
  Earendel  himself  possessed.  Then  he,  Tarkalion  the  King, without
  counsel either of the Powers or of the Eldar,  sent his  ambassadors to
  Sauron,  commanding  him  to   come  with   all  speed   to  Westfolde,
  there  to  do  homage  to  the King.  And Sauron,  dissembling, humbled
  himself  and  came,  being  filled with  malice beneath,  and designing
  wickedness  against  the  people of  the Westware.  He landed  then one
  day  at  the  haven  of  Romelonde,  and  straightway  he  deluded well
  nigh  all  the Numenoreans  with signs  and wonders;  for he  had great
  craft  in  phantoms  and  in  wizardry  ...  and  they builded  a great
  temple  on  that  high  mountain  that was  called Meneltyula  (that is
  to  say  the  Pillar  of  Heaven),  which  before  was  undefiled,  and
  there they  did sacrifice  unspeakable offerings  upon an  unholy altar
  ...  thus  came  the  Deathshadow  upon  the   land  of   the  Westware
                                                                       
    Many  years  afterward  it  came  to  pass  that  old   age  assailed
  Tarkalion,  so  that  he  became  exceedingly  sad  in  mind,   and  he
  determined  then  (being  goaded  by  Sauron)  to  invade  Avallon with
  an army;  for Sauron  said to  him that  the Eldar  refused to  him the
  gift of everlasting life, wrongfully ..... The  fleets of  the Numenor-
  eans were as uncounted islands  in the  sea and  their masts  were like
  unto tall  trees upon  the mountain-sides,  and their  war-banners like
  to thunder-clouds, and their sails were bloodred and black.......     
    Now we dwell in  the land  of exile  and forget  the bliss  that once
  was  and  now  shall  come  again  never.  Heavy   lies  upon   us  the
  Deathshadow. Bent is  the world.  Far now  is the  Land that  is fallen
  low.                                                                  
                                                                       
 At the  end the  following bracketed  sentence was  added subsequently:
 '[that  is  Atalante  which was  before called  Andor and  Vinyamar and
 Numenor.]'                                                            
  A remarkable feature of this text is the ascription to the Eldar  of a
 ban  on Numenorean  landing in  Eressea, and  still more  the statement
 that Sauron told Tarkalion that the Eldar 'refused to  him the  gift of
 everlasting life'; on this see pp. 355 - 6-                            
  Of names in this  text the  following may  be noted.  There is  an Old
 English form  Eldan for  'Eldar', with  genitive plural  Eldena, dative
 plural  Eldum.  For  Meneltyula  (in  the first  draft of  this version
 Menelmindo)  see p.  302, and  for Heofonsyl  p. 242  and note  46. The
 statement that Sauron landed 'at the haven of Romelonde' (in  the first
 draft Romelonan) is  interesting: with  Romelonde 'East-haven'  cf. the
 great harbour of Romenna 'Eastward' in  the later  form of  the legend.
 Also notable is the name  Vinyamar of  Numenor in  the addition  at the
 end of the translation: with this cf. Vinya 'the Young', 'the New Land'
 in The Fall of Numenor (V.19, 25, and in this book p.  332) and  in The

  Lost  Road  (V.64).  Later   Vinyamar  'New   Dwelling'  became   the  name
  of  the  house of  Turgon on  the coast  of Nevrast,  before he  removed to
  Gondolin (Index to Unfinished Tales).                                      
    With  the  sails  of  the  Numenorean  ships  that  were   'bloodred  and
  black' cf. p. 290 note 63, where Jeremy  sees them  as 'scarlet  and black'
  in E, but 'golden and black' in F.                                         
                                                                            
    There are several other  Old English  texts and  scraps of  texts extant.
  In  one  of  these  a much  fuller account  of the  drowning of  Numenor is
  given, to which I append a translation:                                    
                                                                            
    Ac  pa  pa  Tarcaligeones  foregengan  dyrstlaehton paet hie on paet land
    astigen  and  hie paer dydon  micel yfel  ond atendon  Tunan pa  burg, pa
    hreowsode  Osfruma  and  he gebaed  him  to   pam AElmihtigan,   and  be
    paes Scyppendes  raede  7  leafe   onhwierfed  wearp   worulde  gesceapu.
    Weard   Osgeard   from   eorpan  asundrod,   7  micel  aefgrynde aetiewde
    on  middum  Garsecge,  be  eastan  Anetige.  7  pa sae dufon niper inn on
    paet gin,  ond  mid  pam  bearhtme  para  hreosendra waetera  wearp  eall
    middangeard  afylled;  7  para  waetergefealla  se  prosm  stanc   up  op
    heofon ofer para ecra munta heafdu.                                      
      Paer forwurdon  eall  Westfarena  scipu,  and   adranc  mid   him  eall
    paet folc.  Forwurdon  eac Tarcaligeon  se gyldena  7 seo  beorhte Iligen
    his  cwen,  feollon  butu  niper  swaswa steorran  on pystro  and gewiton
    seoppan  of  eallra  manna   cyppe.  Micle   flodas  gelumpon   on  pam
    timan   and   landa  styrunga,   and  Westfolde   pe aer   Numenor  hatte
    weard aworpen on Garsecges bosm and hire wuldor gewat.                  
                                                                            
      But  when  those  who  went  before  Tarcalion  dared  to  go  up  into
    the land, and did there great evil and set fire to the city of Tuna, then
    the Lord  of the  Gods grieved,  and he  prayed to  the Almighty;  and by
    the  counsel  and  leave  of  the Creator  the fashion  of the  world was
    changed.  Osgeard  [Valinor]  was   sundered  from   the  earth,   and  a
    great abyss appeared in the  midst of  Garsecg [the  Ocean], to  the east
    of  Anetig  [the  Lonely  Isle].  And  the  seas  plunged  down  into the
    chasm, and  all Middle-earth  was filled  with the  noise of  the falling
    waters;  and  the  smoke of  the cataracts  rose up  to heaven  above the
    heads of the everlasting mountains.                                      
      There perished all the  ships of  the Westfarers,  and all  that people
    were  drowned  with  them.  There  perished  also  Tarcalion  the  golden
    and bright Ilien his queen; they fell both like  stars into  the darkness
    and  passed  out  of  all  men's  knowledge. There  were great  floods in
    that  time  and tumults  of the  lands, and  Westfolde, which  before was
    named  Numenor,  was  cast  down  into  the  bosom  of  Garsecg,  and its
    glory perished.                                                          
                                                                            
    Tol Eressea, the Lonely Isle, is named Anetig in the Old English         
  version of the earliest Annals of Valinor (IV.281, etc.). In that work     
  Valinor  was  Godepel  changed  to  Esa-eard   (IV.283),  Esa   being  the

                                                          
                                                                        
 genitive  plural  of  Os  'god', as  here in  Osgeard (Valinor)  and in
 Osfruma  'Lord  of  the  Gods'  (Manwe).  Tarcaligeon,  Iligen  are  Old
 English spellings representing Tarcalion, Ilien.                        
   Comparison  of  this  text  with  The  Fall  of Numenor  $$6 -  8 (pp.
 336 - 7) will show a close  relation between  the two.  I think  it very
 probable that this  text represents  my father's  original idea  for the
 single  preserved  page  of  Edwin   Lowdham's  manuscript,   before  he
 decided that the page should consist, in Ramer's words  (p. 259),  of 'a
 series  of  fragmentary  extracts,  separated, I  should guess,  by very
 various intervals of omission'.                                         
   A  portion of  this text  is also  found written  in tengwar,  with an
 interlinear gloss in modern script. This, I think, was the first  of the
 texts in tengwar (see the next section).                                
   Other  Old  English  names  found  in  these papers  are Ealfaederburg
 'the  mountain  of  Allfather  (Iluvatar)'  as  an alternative  name for
 Heofonsyl  'Pillar  of Heaven';  Heafiras 'High  Men', of  the Numenor-
 eans  (cf. Freafiras  mentioned below);  and se  Malsca, of  Sauron (cf.
 Malscor, a name of Morgoth found in  a list  of Old  English equivalents
 of  Elvish  names  associated with  the Quenta,  IV.209; an  Old English
 noun malscrung 'bewitching, bewildering' is recorded).                  
                                                                        
   Lastly  may  be  mentioned  a   slip  of   paper  giving   the  Quenya
 fragments in their original form (that is, in the form in which they are
 found in The Lost Road and preceding that  in manuscript  E, as  is seen
 from tera 'straight' for tena, p. 310), with  the usual  English glosses
 and  queries,  but  also with  a translation  into Old  English (rapidly
 jotted down and hard to read):                                          
                                                                        
   7  Saweron  com  to  hype.  Gedruron  Freafiras  under  sceadu. Tarkal-
   ion  wig  gebead  pam  Heamaegnum.  Pa   tocleaf  Westfrea   pas  woruld
   be paes AElmihtigan  leafe.  7  fleowon  pa sae inn on paet micle  gin 7
   wearp) Nowendaland ahwylfed.                                          
    Geo  laeg riht  weg  westanweard,  nu  sind alle  wegas [?forcrymbed].
   Freafiras eastweard.  Deapscua us  lip hefig  on. Nu  swipe feor  is seo
   Niperhrorene.                                                         
                                                                        
 It is curious to see that nahamna (marked as usual with  a query  in the
 modern  English  gloss)  was  translated  to hype  'to haven'.  The Old
 English words be... leafe 'with leave' correspond to dots in  the Elvish
 text  (the  word  leneme  being  introduced  here later  in E,  p. 310).
 Freafiras  and  Nowendaland  are  mentioned  by  Lowdham  (p.   242  and
 notes 42, 43)  among names  that have  'come through'  to him  which are
 not  recorded  in  Old  English.  Heamaegnum: heah-maegen 'great power'.
 Westfrea ('Lord of the  West') was  struck out  and replaced  by (appar-
 ently) Regenrices  Wealdend ('Ruler  of Valinor':  cf. Regeneard  p. 242
 and note  44). No  verb (for)crymban  is recorded,  but cf.  Old English
 crumb 'crooked, bent', and crymbing 'curvature, bend'.                  

           (v) The page preserved from Edwin Lowdham's manuscript         
                        written in Numenorean script.                     
                                                                         
 My father's representations of this page are reproduced on  pp. 319  - 21.
 The first form, here called Text I, is written on both  sides of  a single
 sheet  as  was  Edwin  Lowdham's,  and  represents  the  Old  English text
 given  on  pp.  313  -  14;  as  already  explained,  this was  written to
 accompany  the  account  in  the  manuscript  E. My  father wrote  it with
 a  dipping  pen,  and  where  the  ink  ran  pale  parts of  many letters,
 especially  the  fine  strokes, are  extremely faint  in the  original and
 disappear  entirely in  reproduction. To  remedy this  I have  worked over
 a  photocopy  of  the  original  and  darkened  the  strokes to  make them
 visible;  and  I  have  added  line-numbers  in  the  margins  to  make my
 commentary on the tengwar easier to follow.                              
 Text II corresponds to  the later  Old English  version in  the typescript
 F, but it covers only one side of a sheet  and extends  only to  the words
 swe adwalde he for(nean) (p. 257): at that  point, as  it appears,  it was
 abandoned.  This  may  or may  not relate  to my  father's note  (p. 279):
 'the Anglo-Saxon should not be written in Numenorean script'.            
 The  reproductions  of  these  pages  are  followed  by   commentaries  on
 the  scripts, which  differ in  the two  versions. These  commentaries are
 reproduced  from  my  manuscript,  since  it  would  be  very   much  more
 difficult to print them.                                                 
 Text  I  was  written  quickly and  has a  number of  errors; Text  II was
 more  carefully  done.  Some  pages  of   notes  accompany   the  original
 texts,  but  these  are  very rough  and difficult  jottings and  have not
 proved  of much  help in  deducing the  structure. There  can be  no doubt
 that these texts were to some degree experimental,  especially in  the use
 of  the  diacritic  marks  and  in the  application of  the script  to Old
 English.                                                                 
 In what I take to be  the first of these  tengwar texts  (not reproduced),
 corresponding  to  part  of  the  Old English  text given  on p.  316, the
 vowel-diacritics differ from the usage in Text I. Those used  for o  and y
 in Text I are here used for u and o,  while y  is rendered  by that  for u
 together with a single dot (= i), reflecting the historical origin  of Old
 English y in many instances from u followed by i in the next syllable.

         (The surviving page of Edwin Lowdham's manuscript
                     Text I, recto.)                 

       (The surviving page of Edwin Lowdham's manuscript
                        Text I, verso.)                 

        (The surviving page of Edwin Lowdham's manuscript
                         Text II.)                    
