          PART THREE.      
                          
         THE DROWNING      
          OF ANADUNE.      
                          
  With the Third Version of
     THE FALL OF NUMENOR,
                          
   And Lowdham's Report on
     THE ADUNAIC LANGUAGE.

                           THE DROWNING OF ANADUNE                         
                                                                          
                (i) The third version of The Fall of Numenor               
                                                                          
 Before  coming  to  The  Drowning  of  Anadune  it  is  necessary  to  turn
 first to the original narrative of the  legend of  Numenor, which  arose in
 close  association  with  The  Lost  Road  (see  V.9).  This,  The  Fall of
 Numenor, is  extant (in  addition to  an initial  sketch) in  two versions,
 given  in  V.13  ff.,  which  I called  FN I  and FN  II, the  second being
 closely  similar to  the first  for the  greater part  of its  length. Some
 subsequent  work  was  done  on  this  text  during   the  period   of  the
 writing of The  Lord of  the Rings,  including a  rewriting of  the passage
 describing   'the   World   Made   Round'   and   a   development   of  the
 concluding  section  concerning  Beleriand  and  the  Last   Alliance  (see
 V.31  ff.);  but  since the  name Ondor  appears in  the latter  passage it
 can   be   dated   before   February   1942,   when  Ondor   became  Gondor
 (VII.423); at  that time  my father  was working  on Book  III of  The Lord
 of the Rings.                                                             
 Now  there  is   a  further   text  of   The  Fall   of  Numenor   in  fine
 manuscript,  which  I  referred  to  but did  not print  in Vol.V;  I noted
 there that 'this  version, improved  and altered  in detail,  shows however
 very little further advance in narrative  substance,' and  concluded there-
 fore that it belongs to the same period as the revisions just  referred to,
 i.e. to a relatively early stage in the writing of The  Lord of  the Rings.
 Since  The  Drowning  of  Anadune  shows  such  an   extraordinary  depar-
 ture  from  The Fall  of Numenor  I give  the third  version of  the latter
 in full here, calling  it 'FN  III', to  make comparison  of the  two works
 easier.  I  have  again introduced  the paragraph  numbers that  I inserted
 in the earlier versions; and various alterations that were  made to  FN III
 subsequently are shown as such.                                           
                                                                          
                               The Last Tales.                             
                                                                          
                           1. The Fall of Numenor.                         
                                                                          
 $1  In  the  Great  Battle,  when  Fionwe  son  of  Manwe  over-          
 threw Morgoth, the  three houses  of the  Men of  Beleriand were          
 friends and allies of the Elves, and they wrought many  deeds of          
 valour. But men of other kindreds turned to evil and  fought for          
 Morgoth, and after the victory of  the Lords  of the  West those          
 that were not destroyed fled back east into  Middle-earth. There          
 many of their race wandered still in the unharvested lands, wild          

 and  lawless,  refusing  the  summons  alike   of  Fionwe   and  of
 Morgoth  to  aid  them  in  their  war.  And the  evil men  who had
 served  Morgoth  became  their  masters;   and  the   creatures  of
 Morgoth   that  escaped   from  the   ruin  of   Thangorodrim  came
 among  them  and  cast over  them a  shadow of  fear. For  the gods
 [>  Valar]  forsook  for  a time  the Men  of Middle-earth  who had
 refused  their  summons  and had  taken the  friends of  Morgoth to
 be their  lords; and  men were  troubled by  many evil  things that
 Morgoth  had  devised  in  the  days of  his dominion:  demons, and
 dragons  and  ill-shapen  beasts,  and the  unclean orcs,  that are
 mockeries of  the creatures  of Iluvatar;  and the  lot of  men was
 unhappy.                                                          
   But  Manwe   put  forth   Morgoth,  and   shut  him   beyond  the
 World in the  Void that  is without;  and he  cannot [>  could not]
 return again into the World, present and  visible, while  the Lords
 are  [>  the  Lords  of  the  West  were]  enthroned. Yet  his will
 remaineth,  and  guideth  [>  remained,  and guided)  his servants;
 and it moveth  [> moved]  them ever  to seek  the overthrow  of the
 gods [> Valar] and the  hurt of  those that  obey [>  obeyed] them.
 When Morgoth was  thrust forth,  the gods  [> Valar]  held council.
 The  Elves  [>  Eldar]  were  summoned  to  return  into  the West;
 and  those  that  obeyed  dwelt  once more  in Eressea,  the Lonely
 Isle;  and that  land was  named anew  Avallon: for  it is  hard by
 Valinor and within sight of the Blessed  Realm. But  to men  of the
 three  faithful  houses  rich  reward  was  given.  Fionwe  son  of
 Manwe  came  among  them  and  taught  them;   and  he   gave  them
 wisdom,  and  power,  and  life  stronger than  any others  have of
 mortal  race.  [Added:  and  the  span  of  their years,  being un-
 assailed  by  sickness,  was  thrice that  of Men  of Middle-earth,
 and to the  descendants of  Hurin the  Steadfast even  longer years
 were granted, I even to three hundreds [> as is later told].](1)
   $2  A  land  was  made  for  them  to dwell  in, neither  part of
 Middle-earth, nor of Valinor; for  it was  sundered from  either by
 a wide sea, yet it was  nearer to  Valinor. It  was raised  by Osse
 out of the depths of  the Great  Water, and  it was  established by
 Aule  and  enriched  by  Yavanna;  and  the  Eldar  brought thither
 flowers  and  fountains out  of Avallon,  and they  wrought gardens
 there of great beauty, in which at times the  children of  the Gods
 [>  Valar]  would  walk.  That  land  the  Valar called  Andor, the
 Land of Gift; and by its own folk it was at first called Vinya, the
 Young; but in the days  of its  pride they  named it  Numenor, that
 is Westernesse, for it lay west of all lands inhabited  by mortals;

 yet it was far from the true West,  for that  is Valinor,  the land
 of  the  Gods.  But  the  glory  of  Numenor  was  thrown  down  [>
 overthrown]  and  its  name  perished;  and after  its ruin  it was
 named  in  the legends  of those  that fled  from it  Atalante, the
 Downfallen.                                                       
   Of old the chief city and  haven of  that land  was in  the midst
 of  its western  coasts, and  it was  called Undunie  [> Andunie],(2)
 because it faced the sunset. But the high place of the king  was at
 Numenos in the heart of the land,  the tower  and citadel  that was
 built  by  Elros  son of  Earendel [>Earendil],  whom the  gods and
 elves  and  men  chose to  be the  lord [>  who (was)  appointed to
 be  the  first  lord]  of  the Numenoreans.  He was  descended from
 the  line  of  both Hador  and Beor,  fathers of  Men, and  in part
 also  from  both the  Eldar and  the Valar,  for Idril  and Luthien
 were  his  foremothers.  But Elros  and all  his folk  were mortal;
 for the  Valar may  not withdraw  the gift  of death,  which cometh
 to  men  from  Iluvatar.  [This  passage,  from 'He  was descended
 ...;  was  struck  out and  replaced by  the following  rider: 'Now
 Elrond,  and Elros  his brother,  were descended  from the  line of
 both  Hador and  of Beor,  fathers of  Men, and  in part  also both
 from the Eldar and  the Valar,  for Idril  and Luthien  daughter of
 Melian  were  their  foremothers.  None  others  among  Men  of the
 Elder  Days had  kinship with  the Elves,  and therefore  they were
 called Halfelven. The  Valar indeed  may not  withdraw the  gift of
 death,  which  cometh  to  Men  from  Iluvatar,  but in  the matter
 of  the  Halfelven  Iluvatar  gave  them  judgement. And  this they
 judged:  choice  should  be  given  to  the  brethren.  And  Elrond
 chose to remain  with the  Firstborn, and  to him  the life  of the
 Firstborn was given, and  yet a  grace was  added, that  choice was
 never annulled, and while the world lasted he  might return,  if he
 would, to mortal men,  and die.  But to  Elros, who  chose to  be a
 king of men, still a great span of years  was granted,  seven times
 that of mortal men; and all his line,  the kings  and lords  of the
 royal  house  of  Numenor,  [added:  being  descended  from Hurin,]
 had  long  life  even  according  to the  span of  the Numenoreans,
 for  some  of  the  kings that  sat at  Numenos lived  four hundred
 years.  But Elros  lived five  hundred years,  and ruled  the Nume-
 noreans  four  hundred  years and  ten. Thus,  though long  in life
 and  assailed  by  no  sickness,  the  men  of Numenor  were mortal
 still.] Yet the speech of Numenor was  the speech  of the  Eldar of
 the  Blessed  Realm,  and  the   Numenoreans  conversed   with  the
 Elves,  and  were  permitted to  look upon  Valinor from  afar; for

 their ships went often to  Avallon, and  there their  mariners were
 suffered to dwell for a while.                                    
   $3  In  the  wearing  of time  the people  of Numenor  grew great
 and glorious, in all  things more  like to  the Firstborn  than any
 other of the  kindreds of  Men; yet  they were  less fair  and less
 wise than the Elves, though  greater in  stature. For  the Numenor-
 eans were exceedingly  tall, taller  than the  tallest of  the sons
 of  men  in  Middle-earth.  Above  all  arts  they  nourished ship-
 building  and  sea-craft,  and  became  mariners  whose  like shall
 never  be  again,  since  the  world  has  been   diminished.  They
 ranged  from Eressea  in the  West to  the shores  of Middle-earth,
 and  came  even  into  the inner  seas; and  they sailed  about the
 North  and   the  South   and  glimpsed   from  their   high  prows
 the  Gates  of Morning  in the  East. And  they appeared  among the
 wild  men  and  filled  them  with  wonder and  dismay; for  men in
 the  shadows  of  the  world  deemed  that  they  were gods  or the
 sons  of  gods  out  of the  West. Here  and there  the Numenoreans
 sowed good seed in  the waste-lands,  and they  taught to  the wild
 men  such  lore  and  wisdom  as  they  could  comprehend;  but for
 the most part the  men of  Middle-earth feared  them and  fled; for
 they were under  the sway  of Sauron  and the  lies of  Morgoth and
 they  believed  that the  gods were  terrible and  cruel. Wherefore
 out  of  that far  time are  descended the  echoes of  legends both
 bright  and  dark;  but  the  shadow  lay heavy  upon men,  for the
 Numenoreans  came  only   seldom  among   them  and   they  tarried
 never long in  any place.  Upon all  the waters  of the  world they
 sailed,  seeking  they  knew not  what, yet  their hearts  were set
 westward;  and  they  began  to  hunger  for  the undying  bliss of
 Valinor,  and  ever  their  desire and  unquiet increased  as their
 power and glory grew.                                             
   $4  The  gods  forbade  them  to  sail  beyond  the  Lonely  Isle
 and  would  not   permit  them   to  land   in  Valinor;   for  the
 Numenoreans  were  mortal,  and  though  the  Lords  of   the  West
 had  rewarded  them  with  long  life,  they  could  not  take from
 them  the  weariness of  the world  that cometh  at last,  and they
 died, even their kings of the seed of Earendel, and their  span was
 brief in the eyes of the Elves.  And they  began to  murmur against
 this  decree,  and  a  great  discontent  grew  among  them.  Their
 masters  of knowledge  sought unceasingly  for secrets  that should
 prolong their lives; and  they sent  spies to  seek hidden  lore in
 Avallon; and the gods were angered.                               
   $5  Now  it  came  to  pass  [added: in  the days  of Tar-kalion,

 and  twelve kings  had ruled  that land  before him,](3) that Sauron,
 servant   of  Morgoth,   grew  strong   in  Middle-earth; and  he
 learned  of  the  power and  splendour of  the Numenoreans,  and of
 their allegiance to the gods; and  he feared  lest they  should come
 and  wrest  from  him  the  dominion  of  the  East and  rescue the
 men  of  Middle-earth  from  the  Shadow.  And  the  king  from his
 mariners  heard also  rumour of  Sauron, and  it was  reported that
 he  would  make  himself  a  king,  greater even  than the  king of
 Numenor.  Wherefore,  taking  no  counsel  of  the  gods or  of the
 Elves,  Tar-kalion  the  king  sent  his  messengers to  Sauron and
 commanded  him   to  come   and  do   homage.  And   Sauron,  being
 filled  with  malice  and  cunning, humbled  himself and  came; and
 he  beguiled  the  Numenoreans  with signs  and wonders.  Little by
 little  Sauron  turned  their hearts  towards Morgoth,  his master;
 and  he  prophesied  to  them,  and   lied,  saying   that  Morgoth
 would   come   again   into   the  world.   And  Sauron   spake  to
 Tar-kalion,  and  to Tar-ilien  his queen,  and promised  them life
 unending and the dominion  of the  earth, if  they would  turn unto
 Morgoth.  And  they  believed  him,  and  fell  under  the  Shadow,
 and  the  greater  part   of  their   people  followed   them.  And
 Tar-kalion  raised  a  great  temple  to  Morgoth  upon  the  Moun-
 tain of Iluvatar in the midst of the land; and Sauron  dwelt there,
 and  all  Numenor  was  under  his  vigilance. [This  passage, from
 'upon  the  Mountain  of   Iluvatar  ...',   was  struck   out  and
 replaced by the following: in the  midst of  the city  of Numenos,(4)
 and its dome rose like a black  hill glowering  over the  land; and
 smokes  issued  from  it,  for  in  that  temple   the  Numenoreans
 made  hideous  sacrifice  to  Morgoth,   beseeching  the   Lord  of
 Darkness  to deliver  them from  Death. But  the hallowed  place of
 Iluvatar   was   upon   the  summit   of  the   Mountain  Menelmin,
 Pillar of Heaven, in the  midst of  the land,  and thither  men had
 been  wont  to  climb  to  offer  thanksgiving.  There only  in all
 Numenor  Sauron  dared  never  to  set  his  foot,  and  he forbade
 [any] to go there under pain of  death. Few  dared to  disobey him,
 even  if  they  so wished,  for Sauron  had many  eyes and  all the
 ways of  the land  were under  his vigilance.  But some  there were
 ;:, who remained faithful, and did not bow to him, and of these the
 chief were Elendil the fair, and his sons Anarion and  Isildur, and
 they were of the royal blood of  Earendel, though  not of  the line
 direct.]                                                           
    $6  But  in  the  passing  of  the  years  Tar-kalion  felt  the
 oncoming of  old age,  and he  was troubled;  but Sauron  said that

 the  bounty  of  Morgoth  was  withheld  by  the  gods,  and  that to
 obtain  plentitude  of  power  and  freedom   from  death   the  king
 must  be  master  of  the  West.  And  the  fear  of death  was heavy
 upon   Tar-kalion.   Therefore   at   his  command   the  Numenoreans
 made  a  great  armament;  and  their  might  and  skill   had  grown
 exceedingly in  those days,  for they  had in  these matters  the aid
 of  Sauron.  The  fleets  of  the  Numenoreans  were  like a  land of
 many  islands,  and  their  masts  were  like  a forest  of mountain-
 trees,  and  their  banners  like  the  streamers of  a thunderstorm,
 and  their  sails  were  scarlet  and  black.  And they  moved slowly
 into the West,  for all  the winds  were stilled,  and all  the world
 was  silent  in  the  fear  of  that   time.  And   they  encompassed
 Avallon; and  it is  said that  the Elves  mourned and  sickness came
 upon  them,  for  the  light  of  Valinor  was cut  off by  the cloud
 of  the  Numenoreans.   Then  Tar-kalion   assailed  the   shores  of
 Valinor,  and  he cast  forth bolts  of thunder,  and fire  came upon
 Tuna, and flame and smoke rose about Taniquetil.                    
   $7  But  the  gods  made  no  answer.  Then  the  vanguard  of  the
 Numenoreans   set   foot   upon  the   forbidden  shores,   and  they
 encamped  in  might  upon  the  borders  of  Valinor.  But  the heart
 of   Manwe   was  sorrowful   and  dismayed,   and  he   called  upon
 Iluvatar,  and  took  power  and  counsel  from  the  Maker;  and the
 fate  and  fashion  of  the  world  was changed.  The silence  of the
 gods  was  broken  and  their  power   made  manifest;   and  Valinor
 was sundered from  the earth,  and a  rift appeared  in the  midst of
 the Great Sea, east of Avallon.                                     
   Into  this  chasm  the  Great  Sea  plunged, and  the noise  of the
 falling waters filled all the earth, and the  smoke of  the cataracts
 rose  above  the  tops  of  the  everlasting  mountains. But  all the
 ships  of  Numenor  that  were  west  of  Avallon  were   drawn  down
 into  the  abyss,  and   they  were   drowned;  and   Tar-kalion  the
 golden and bright llien his queen fell like stars into the  dark, and
 they  perished out  of all  knowledge. But  the mortal  warriors that
 had  set foot  upon the  Land of  the Gods  were buried  under fallen
 hills;  there it  is said  they lie  imprisoned in  the Caves  of the
 Forgotten until the day of Doom and the Last Battle.                
   $8  Then  Iluvatar  cast  back  the  Great  Seas  west  of  Middle-
 earth  and  the  Empty  Lands  east  of  it,  and  new lands  and new
 seas  were  made;  and  the  world  was  diminished, for  Valinor and
 Eressea  were  taken from  it into  the realm  of hidden  things. And
 thereafter,  however  a  man  might  sail,   he  could   never  again
 reach  the  True  West,  but  would come  back weary  at last  to the

    place  of  his  beginning;  for  all  lands  and  seas  were equally
    distant from  the centre  of the  earth. There  was flood  and great
    confusion  of  waters in  that time,  and sea  covered much  that in
    the  Elder  Days  had  been  dry,  both  in  the  West  and  East of
    Middle-earth.                                                      
      $9  Numenor,  being  nigh  to  the  east  of  the great  rift, was
    utterly  thrown  down,  and overwhelmed  in the  sea, and  its glory
    perished, and only a remnant of all its people  escaped the  ruin of
    those  days.  Some  by  the  command  of  Tar-kalion,  and  some  of
    their own will (because they still  revered the  gods and  would not
    go  with  war into  the West)  had remained  behind when  the fleets
    set sail, and they sat in  their ships  upon the  east coast  of the
    land,  lest  the  issue  of  war  should  be evil.  Therefore, being
    protected for a while by the wall  of their  land, they  avoided the
    draught  of  the  sea;  and  many fled  into the  East, and  came at
    length to the shores of Middle-earth.                              
      Small  remnant  of  all  the  mighty  people  that   had  perished
    were  those  that  came  up  out  of  the  devouring  sea  upon  the
    wings of the  winds of  wrath, and  shorn were  they of  their pride
    and  power  of  old.  But  to  those  that   looked  out   from  the
    seaward  hills  and  beheld  their  coming,  riding  upon  the storm
    out of the  mist and  the darkness  and the  rumour of  water, their
    black  sails  against  the  falling  sun,  terrible and  strong they
    seemed, and the  fear of  the tall  kings came  into lands  far from
    the sea.                                                           
      $10  For  lords  and   kings  of   men  the   Numenoreans  became,
    and  nigh  to the  western shores  of Middle-earth  they established
    realms  and  strong  places.  Some  few were  indeed evil,  being of
    those  who  had  hearkened  to  Sauron  and  still  did  not forsake
    him  in  their  hearts; but  the most  were those  of good  will who
    had  revered  the  gods  and  remembered  the  wisdom  of  old.  Yet
    all alike were filled with the desire of long  life upon  earth, and
    the  thought  of  death  was heavy  upon them.  Their fate  had cast
    them  east  upon  Middle-earth,  but their  hearts still  were west-
    ward.  And  they  built  mightier  houses  for  their dead  than for
    their  living,  and  endowed  their  buried  kings  with  unavailing
    treasure; for their wise men hoped still to  discover the  secret of
    prolonging life, and maybe of recalling it. Yet it is said  that the
    span of their lives, which  had of  old been  thrice that  of lesser
    men,  dwindled   slowly;  and   they  achieved   only  the   art  of
    preserving  incorrupt  the   dead  flesh   of  men.   Wherefore  the
    kingdoms  of  the  western  world  became  a  place  of   tombs  and

 were filled with ghosts. And in the fantasy  of their  hearts, amid
 the  confusion  of  legends  concerning half-forgotten  things that
 once had been, they  imagined in  their thought  a land  of shades,
 filled with  the wraiths  of the  things that  are upon  the mortal
 earth;  and  many  deemed  that  this  land  was  in  the  West and
 ruled  by  the  gods,  and  that  in  shadow  the dead  should come
 there,  bearing  with them  the shadows  of their  possessions, who
 could in the body find the True  West no  more. Therefore  in after
 days many would bury  their dead  in ships,  setting them  forth in
 pomp upon the sea by the west coasts of the ancient world.        
   $11   Now   the   blood   of   the   Numenoreans   remained  most
 among  men  of  those  western  lands  and  shores; and  the memory
 of  the primeval  world abode  most strongly  there, where  the old
 paths  to the  West had  aforetime set  out from  Middle-earth. For
 the ancient line of  the world  remained in  the mind  of Iluvatar,
 and in the thought of the  gods, and  in the  memory of  the world,
 as  a  shape  and  plan  that  has been  changed and  yet endureth.
 And it has been likened to a plain of air, or to a  straight vision
 that bendeth not to the curving of the earth, or to a  level bridge
 that rises slowly above the heavy air.  Of old  many of  the exiles
 of Numenor could  still see,  some clearly  and some  more faintly,
 the paths to the True West; and  they believed  that at  times from
 a high place they could descry the peaks of  Taniquetil at  the end
 of the Straight Road, high  above the  world. Therefore  they built
 very high towers in  those days,  and their  holy places  were upon
 the  tops  of  mountains,  for they  would climb,  if it  might be,
 above  the mists  of Middle-earth  into the  clearer air  that doth
 not veil the vision of things far off.                            
   $12  But  ever the  number of  those that  had the  ancient sight
 dwindled, and those that had it not  and could  not conceive  it in
 their  thought  scorned  the  builders  of  towers, and  trusted to
 ships that sailed upon the water. But they came  only to  the lands
 of the  new world,  and found  them like  to those  of the  old and
 subject  to  death;  and they  reported that  the world  was round.
 For  upon  the Straight  Road only  the gods  could walk,  and only
 the ships of the Elves could journey; for being straight  that road
 passed through  the air  of breath  and flight  and rose  above it,
 and  traversed  Ilmen  in  which  no   mortal  flesh   can  endure;
 whereas  the  surface  of  the earth  was bent,  and bent  were the
 seas that lay upon it, and bent also were the heavy airs  that were
 above  them.  Yet  it  is said  that even  of those  Numenoreans of
 old  who  had  the  straight  vision  there were  some who  did not

 comprehend   this,   and  they   were  busy   to  contrive   ships  that
 should  rise  above  the   waters  of   the  world   and  hold   to  the
 imagined  seas.  But  they  achieved  only  ships  that  would  sail  in
 the  air of  breath. And  these ships,  flying, came  also to  the lands
 of  the  new  world,  and  to  the  East  of  the  old  world;  and they
 reported   that   the   world  was   round.  Therefore   many  abandoned
 the  gods  and  put  them  out  of  their  legends.  But men  of Middle-
 earth  looked   up  with   fear  and   wonder  seeing   the  Numenoreans
 that  descended  out  of  the  sky;  and  they  took  these  mariners of
 the  air  to  be  gods,  and  some  of  the  Numenoreans   were  content
 that this should be so.                                                 
   $13   Yet   not   all   the   hearts    of   the    Numenoreans   were
 crooked;  and  knowledge  of  the  days  before  the  Downfall   and  of
 the  wisdom  descended   from  the   Elf-friends,  their   fathers,  was
 long  preserved   among  them.   And  the   wisest  among   them  taught
 that  the  fate  of  Men  was  not bounded  by the  round path,  nor set
 for  ever  upon  the  straight.  For  the  round  has  no  end,  but  no
 escape;  and the  straight is  true, but  has an  end within  the world,
 and that is the fate of the Elves. But the  fate of  Men, they  said, is
 neither round nor ended, and is not complete within the world.          
   But  even  the  wisdom  of  the  wise  was  filled  with   sorrow  and
 regret;  and  they  remembered  bitterly  how   the  ruin   was  brought
 about  and  the  cutting  off  of   Men  from   their  portion   of  the
 Straight   Path.   Therefore   they  avoided   the  shadow   of  Morgoth
 according  to  their  power,  and  Sauron  they  held  in   hatred.  And
 they  assailed  his  temples  and  their servants,  and there  were wars
 among   the   mighty  of   Middle-earth,  of   which  only   the  echoes
 now remain.                                                             
                                                                        
   The concluding section ($14) of the  earlier versions  of The  Fall of
 Numenor concerning Beleriand (see p. 331) was omitted in FN III.       
   Accepting the conclusion  (see p.  331) that  the version  just given,
 as it was originally written,  comes from  a much  earlier stage  in the
 writing  of  The  Lord  of  the Rings  than do  The Notion  Club Papers,
 it seems almost certain that the  alterations and  additions made  to it
 belong  to  the  period  of  the  Papers and  The Drowning  of Anadune.
 The chief evidence  for this (5) lies in  the addition  to $5  stating that
 Tar-kalion was the  thirteenth king  of Numenor,  and in  the correction
 in $5 of the description of the temple: it  was not  on the  Mountain of
 Iluvatar, but 'in the midst of the city of Numenos' (see notes 3 and 4).
   The most remarkable, and  indeed astonishing,  feature of  these later
 additions to FN III is the statement in $2 that while  'the life  of the
 Firstborn' was given to  Elrond in  accordance with  his choice,  'yet a

  grace was  added, that  choice was  never annulled,  and while  the world
  lasted he  might return,  if he  would, to  mortal men,  and die.'  To my
  present  knowledge  no  such  thing is  said elsewhere  of the  Choice of
  Elrond; and contrast Appendix  A (I,  i) to  The Lord  of the  Rings: 'At
  the end of the First Age the Valar gave to the Half-elven  an irrevocable
  choice  to  which  kindred  they would  belong.' This  passage in  FN III
  concerning Elrond  and Elros  reappeared years  later in  the Akallabeth,
  but with this sentence removed (The Silmarillion, p. 261).               
                                                                          
                                   NOTES.                                  
                                                                          
  1. On the threefold  span of  the Numenoreans  see p.  378, $13.  - The
     descendants  of  Hurin  the  Steadfast:  presumably  an  inadvertence,
     for Huor, father of Tuor, father  of Earendil;  but Hurin  is repeated
     in the addition to $2. Cf. the note given in VII.6, 'Trotter is  a man
     of  Elrond's  race  descendant  of Turin',  where Turin  is presumably
     a slip for Tuor.                                                      
  2. Undunie': Andunie'  is the  form in  FN II,  but on  the amanuensis
     typescript  made  from  FN  II   (V.31)  the   form  was   changed  to
     Undunie'.                                                             
  3. Tar-kalion  became  the  fourteenth  (not  the  thirteenth)   king  of
     Numenor  by  correction  of  the  second  text  of  The   Drowning  of
     Anadune (see p. 381, $20).                                            
  4. On  uncertainty with  regard to  the site  of the  temple see  p. 384,
     $32.                                                                  
  5. On the back of the  slip carrying  the long  addition to  $2 concerning
     Elrond and Elros  are rough  notes in  which there  is a  reference to
     the Adunaic language; but these are not dateable.                     
                                                                          
             (ii) The original text of The Drowning of Anadune.            
                                                                          
  It  will  become  very  evident  that  The  Drowning  of  Anadune  was as
  closely  associated  with  Part  Two  of  The Notion  Club Papers  as was
  the original Fall of Numenor with The Lost Road. I  shall give  first the
  original draft, and postpone observations about it to the conclusion.
    The  draft  is a  typescript of  extreme roughness,  with a  great many
  typing errors, and I have little doubt that my  father, for  some reason,
  and for the first time, composed a primary draft entirely ab initio  on a
  typewriter, typing at speed. Certainly there is no  trace among  all this
  great collection of texts and notes of any still more 'primary' narrative
  (although there are preliminary sketches which are  given later,  pp. 397
  ff.). I print it here essentially as it was typed, correcting the obvious
  errors  and  here and  there inserting  punctuation, but  ignoring subse-
  quent  correction.  Such correction  is largely  confined to  the opening
  paragraphs, after which it ceases: it looks as if my  father saw  that it
  would  be  impossible to  carry out  a wholesale  rewriting on  a single-
  spaced  typescript  with narrow  margins. In  any case  these corrections

  were taken up into the second text,  which I  also give  in full.  One name
  that  was  consistently  changed,  however, is  Balai >  Avalai, as  far as
  $16,  where  Avalai appears  in the  typescript as  typed. I  have extended
  the marks  of  length  over  vowels  throughout   the  text:   my  father's
  typewriter having  no such  marks, he  inserted them  in pencil,  and often
  omitted them.                                                              
    The  numbered  paragraphs  have  of  course  no  manuscript   warrant:  I
  have   inserted   them   to  make   subsequent  reference   and  comparison
  easier. This first text has in fact little division into paragraphs, and my
  divisions are made largely on the basis of the following version.          
    I shall refer to this text subsequently  as 'DA  I'. It  had no  title as
  typed, but The Drowning of Numenor was pencilled in afterwards.            
                                                                            
    $1  Before  the  coming  of  Men  there  were many  Powers that          
  governed  Earth,  and they  were Eru-beni,  servants of  God, and          
  in  the  earliest recorded  tongue they  were called  Balai. Some          
  were lesser and some greater. The mightiest and the  chieftain of          
  them all was Meleko.                                                       
    $2  But  long ago,  even in  the making  of Earth,  he pondered          
  evil; he became a rebel against Eru, desiring the whole world for          
  his  own  and  to  have  none  above  him.  Therefore  Manawe his          
  brother endeavoured to rule  the earth  and the  Powers according          
  to the will  of Eru;  and Manawe  dwelt in  the West.  But Meleko          
  remained, dwelling in hiding in  the North,  and he  worked evil,          
  and  he  had  the  greater  power,  and  the  Great   Lands  were          
  darkened.                                                                  
    $3  And  at  the  appointed  time  Men   were  born   into  the          
  world, and they  came in  a time  of war;  and they  fell swiftly          
  under  the  domination  of  Meleko.  And  he  now came  forth and          
  appeared as a Great King and  as a  god, and  his rule  was evil,          
  and  his worship  unclean; and  Men were  estranged from  Eru and          
  from the Balai, his servants.                                              
    $4 But  there were  some of  the fathers  of Men  who repented,          
  seeing the evil of King  Meleko, and  their houses  returned with          
  sorrow to the allegiance of Eru, and they were befriended  by the          
  Balai, and they were called the Eruhil, the children of  God. And          
  the Balai and the Eruhil made war  on Meleko,  and for  that time          
  they  destroyed  his  kingdom  and threw  down his  black throne.          
  But Meleko was not destroyed  and he  went again  for a  while in          
  hiding, unseen by Men. But his evil was still  ever at  work, and          
  cruel kings and evil  temples arose  ever in  the world,  and the          
  most  part  of  Mankind were  their servants;  and they  made war          
  on the Eruhil.                                                             

   $5  And  the  Balai  in grief  withdrew ever  further west  (or if
 they  did  not  so  they   faded  and   became  secret   voices  and
 shadows  of  the  days  of  old); and  the most  part of  the Eruhil
 followed  them.  Though  it  is said  that some  of these  good men,
 simple  folk,  shepherds and  the like,  dwelt in  the heart  of the
 Great Lands.                                                       
   $6  But all  the nobler  of the  Eruhil and  those closest  in the
 friendship  of the  Balai, who  had helped  most in  the war  on the
 Black  Throne,  wandered  away until  they came  to the  last shores
 of the  Great Seas.  There they  halted and  were filled  with dread
 and longing; for the Balai  for the  most part  passed over  the sea
 seeking  the  realm  of Manawe.  And there  instructed by  the Balai
 men learned the craft of ship-building and of  sailing in  the wind;
 and they built  many small  ships. But  they did  not dare  to essay
 the  deep  waters,  and  journeyed  mostly  up  and down  the coasts
 and among the nearer isles.                                        
   $7  And  it  was by  their ships  that they  were saved.  For evil
 men  multiplied  in  those   days  and   pursued  the   Eruhil  with
 hatred; and  evil men  inspired by  the evil  spirit of  Meleko grew
 cunning  and  cruel  in  the  arts  of  war and  the making  of many
 weapons;  and the  Eruhil were  hard to  put to  it to  maintain any
 land in which to dwell.                                            
   $8  And  in  those  dark  days  of  fear  and  war  there  arose a
 man  among  the  Eruhil  and   his  name   was  Earendil   the  Sea-
 friend, for his  daring upon  the sea  was great.  And it  came into
 his  heart that  he would  build a  ship greater  than any  that had
 yet  been built,  and that  he would  sail out  into the  deep water
 and  come  maybe  to  the  land  of  Manawe and  there get  help for
 his  kinsfolk.  And  he  let  build a  great ship  and he  called it
 Wingalote,(1) the Foam-flower.                                       
   $9  And  when  it  was  all  ready  he said  farewell to  his sons
 and his  wife and  all his  kin; for  he was  minded to  sail alone.
 And he said: 'It is likely that you will see me never again,  and if
 you  do  not,  then  continue your  war, and  endure until  the end.
 But if I do not fail  of my  errand, then  also you  may not  see me
 again, but a sign you will see, and then have hope.'               
   $10  But  Earendel (2) passed  over  the  Great   Sea  and   came  to
 the Blessed Realm and spoke to Manawe.                             
   $11  [Rejected  at  once:  And  Manawe  said   that  he   had  not
 now  the  power  to  war  against  Meleko,  who  moreover   was  the
 rightful  governor of  Earth, though  his right  might seem  to have
 been  destroyed by  his rebellion;  and that  the governance  of the

 earth  was  now  in  the  hands  of]  And  Manawe  said  that  Eru had
 forbidden  the  Balai  to  make  war  by  force;  and  that  the earth
 was  now  in  the  hands  of  Men,  to  make  or  to mar.  But because
 of  their  repentance  and  their  fidelity  he  would  give,  as  was
 permitted to him, a land for  the Eruhil  to dwell  in if  they would.
 And that  land  was  a  mighty  island in  the midst  of the  sea. But
 Manawe   would   not   permit   Earendil   to  return   again  amongst
 Men, since  he had  set foot  in the  Blessed Realm,  where as  yet no
 Death  had  come.  And  he  took the  ship of  Earendil and  filled it
 with silver flame and raised it above the  world to  sail in  the sky,
 a marvel to behold.                                                   
    $12  And  the  Eruhil on  the shores  of the  sea beheld  the light
 of  it;  and they  knew that  it was  the sign  of Earendil.  And hope
 and  courage  was  born  in  their  hearts;  and  they  gathered their
 ships, small and great, and  all their  goods, and  set sail  upon the
 deep  waters,  following  the  star.  And  there was  a great  calm in
 those days and  all the  winds were  stilled. And  the Eruhil  came to
 the  land  that had  been set  for them,  and they  found it  fair and
 fruitful,  and  they  were glad.  And they  called that  land Andore,(3)
 the   land   of   Gift,   though   afterward   it  was   mostly  named
 Numenore, Westernesse.                                                
    $13  But  not  so  did  the Eruhil  escape the  doom of  death that
 had  been  pronounced  upon   all  Mankind;   and  they   were  mortal
 still; though for  their fidelity  they were  rewarded by  a threefold
  span, and their  years were  long and  blissful and  untroubled with
  sickness,  so  long  as  they  remained  true.  And   the  Numenoreans
  grew  wise  and  fair  and glorious,  the mightiest  of men  that have
  been;  but  their  number  was  not  great,  for  their  children were
  few.                                                                 
    $14  And  they  were  under  the  tutelage  of  the Balai,  and they
  took  the  language  of  the  Balai  and forsook  their own;  and they
  wrote  many  things  of lore  and beauty  in that  tongue in  the high
  tide  of  their  realm,  of which  but little  is now  remembered. And
  they  became  mighty  in  all  crafts,  so  that if  they had  had the
  mind  they  might  easily  have  surpassed the  evil kings  of Middle-
  earth  in  the making  of weapons  and of  war; but  they were  as yet
  men of peace; and of all arts they were most eager in the craft of
  ship-building,  and in  voyaging was  the chief  feat and  delight of
  their younger men.                                                   
    $15  But  the  Balai  as  yet  forbade  them  to sail  westward out
  of sight of the western shores of Numenor; and the Numenor-          
  eans  were as  yet content,  though they  did not  fully understand

   
                                                                 
 the purpose  of this  ban. But  the purpose  was that  the Eruhil
 should not  be tempted  to come  to the  Blessed Realm  and there
 learn discontent, becoming  enamoured of  the immortality  of the
 Balai, and the deathlessness of all things in their land.        
  $16  For as yet  the Balai  were permitted  by Eru  to maintain
 upon earth upon some  isle or  shore of  the western  lands still
 untrodden  (it  is  not  known  for  certain where;  for Earendel
 alone  of  Men  came ever  thither and  never again  returned) an
 abiding place, an earthly paradise and a  memorial of  that which
 might  have  been,  had  not  men  turned  to  Meleko.   And  the
 Numenoreans  named  that   land  Avallonde   the  Haven   of  the
 Gods, for at times when all the air was clear and the sun  was in
 the east they could descry, as them seemed, a  city white-shining
 on a distant shore and great harbours  and a  tower; but  only so
 when  their  own  western  haven,  Andunie  of  Numenor,  was low
 upon  the  skyline, and  they dared  not break  the ban  and sail
 further  west.  But  to Numenor  the Avalai  came ever  and anon,
 the children and  the lesser  ones of  the Deathless  Folk, some-
 times in oarless boats, sometimes as  birds flying,  sometimes in
 other fair shapes; and they loved the Numenoreans.               
  $17  And  so  it was  that the  voyages of  the men  of Western-
 esse in those days went east and  not west  from the  darkness of
 the North to  the heats  of the  South and  beyond to  the nether
 darkness. And the Eruhil came often  to the  shores of  the Great
 Lands,  and  they  took  pity  on the  forsaken world  of Middle-
 earth;  and  the  young  princes  of  the Numenoreans  would come
 among  the  men  of  the   Dark  Ages,   and  they   taught  them
 language  (for  the native  tongues of  men of  Middle-earth were
 yet rude  and unshapen)  and song,  and many  arts, such  as they
 could compass, and they brought them corn and wine.              
  $18  And  the  men  of  Middle-earth  were  comforted,   and  in
 some  places  shook  off somewhat  the yoke  of the  offspring of
 Meleko; and they revered the  memory of  the Men  out of  the Sea
 and called them Gods, for in  that time  the Numenoreans  did not
 settle or dwell in Middle-earth for long.  For though  their feet
 were set eastward their hearts were ever westward.               
                                                                 
  $19  Yet  in the  end all  this bliss  and betterment  turned to
 evil again, and men fell, as it is said, a second time. For there
 arose  a  second  manifestation  of  the  power of  darkness upon
 earth, and whether that was but a form of the  Ancient or  one of
 his old servants that waxed to  new strength,  is not  known. And

 this  evil  thing was  called by  many names,  but the  Eruhil named
 him Sauron,  and  men   of  Middle-earth   (when  they   dared  to
 speak  his  name  at  all)  named  him mostly  Zigur the  Great. And
 he made himself a  great king  in the  midst of  the earth,  and was
 at first well-seeming and just and his  rule was  of benefit  to all
 men  in  their  needs  of  the body;  for he  made them  rich, whoso
 would  serve  him.  But  those who  would not  were driven  out into
 the  waste  places.  Yet  Zigur  desired,  as  Meleko before,  to be
 both a king  over all  kings and  as a  god to  men. And  slowly his
 power   moved   north  and   south,  and   ever  westward;   and  he
 heard  of  the  coming  of  the  Eruhil  and  he  was wroth.  And he
 plotted in his heart how he might destroy Numenor.                 
   $20  And  news  came  also  to  Numenor   and  to   Tarkalion  the
 king, Earendel's heir (for this title had all the kings  of Numenor,
 and  they  were  indeed descended  in unbroken  line from  Elros the
 son  of  Earendel),  of  Zigur  the  Great, and  how he  purposed to
 become  master of  all Middle-earth  and after  of the  whole world.
 And  Tarkalion   was  angered,   for  the   kings  of   Numenor  had
 grown very glorious and proud in that time.                        
   $21  And  in  the  meanwhile evil,  of which  once long  ago their
 fathers  had  tasted, albeit  they had  after repented,  awoke again
 in the hearts of the Eruhil; for the desire of everlasting  life and
 the escape  from death  grew ever  stronger upon  them as  their lot
 in  the  land  of  Numenor  grew  more blissful.  And they  began to
 murmur  in  their  hearts  (and  anon   more  openly)   against  the
 doom  of  men;  and  especially  against  that  ban   which  forbade
 them to sail west or to visit the Blessed Realm.                   
   $22  'For  why  should the  Avalai sit  in peace  unending there,'
 said  they,  'while  we  must  die  and  go  we  know  not  whither,
 leaving  our  own  home;  for  the  fault  was   not  ours   in  the
 beginning;  and  is not  the author  of evil  Meleko himself  one of
 the Avalai?'                                                       
   $23  And  the  Avalai  knowing  what  was  said,  and  seeing  the
 cloud  of  evil  grow,  were grieved,  and they  came less  often to
 Numenor;  and  those  that  came  spoke  earnestly  to  the  Eruhil;
 and  tried  to  teach them  of the  fashion and  fate of  the world,
 saying that the world was round, and  that if  they sailed  into the
 utmost  West,  yet  would  they  but  come  back  again to  the East
 and  so to  the places  of their  setting out,  and the  world would
 seem to them but a prison.                                         
   $24  'And  so  it  is  to those  of your  strange race,'  said the
 Avalai.  'And  Eru  does  not  punish without  benefit; nor  are his

 mercies  without  sternness.  For  we  (you  say)  are  unpunished and
 dwell ever in bliss; and so it is that we  do not  die, but  we cannot
 escape,  and we  are bound  to this  world, never  again to  leave it,
 till  all  is  changed.  And  you  (you murmur)  are punished,  and so
 it  is  that  ye  die,  but  ye  escape  and leave  the world  and are
 not   bound   thereto.  Which   therefore  of   us  should   envy  the
 other?                                                               
   $25  'Ye  us  maybe,  for  of  you  is  required the  greater trust,
 knowing  not  what  lies  before you  in a  little while.  But whereas
 we  know  nothing  of  the  mind  of  Eru  in  this  (for  he  has not
 revealed  anything  of  his  purpose  with  you  unto the  Avalai), we
 say to you that that trust, if you give it, will not be  despised; and
 though  it  take many  ages of  Men, and  is yet  beyond the  sight of
 the  Avalai,  that  Iluvatar  the  Father  will  not let  those perish
 for  ever  who  love  him  and  who  love  the   world  that   He  has
 made.'                                                               
   $26  But  only   a  few   of  the   Numenoreans  harkened   to  this
 counsel.  For  it  seemed  hard  to  them, and  they wished  to escape
 from  Death  in  their  own  day,  and  they  became   estranged  from
 the   Avalai,   and   these  came   now  no   more  to   Numenor  save
 seldom and  in secret,  visiting those  few of  the faithful.  Of whom
 the  chief  was  one  Amardil  and  his  son  Elendil (who  was called
 also Earendil for  his love  of the  sea, and  for his  father, though
 not  of  the  elder line  which sat  upon the  throne of  Numenor, was
 also of the blood of Earendil of old).                               
   $27  But  Tarkalion  the  king   fell  into   evil  mood,   and  the
 worship  of  Eru  upon  the  high  place  the  mountain  of Meneltyula
 in the midst of the land was neglected in those days.                
   $28   But   Tarkalion   hearing   of   Sauron   determined,  without
 counsel  of  the  Avalai,  to  demand his  allegiance and  homage; for
 he  thought  that  no  king  so mighty  [could] ever  arise as  to vie
 with  the  lords  of  Numenor;  and he  began in  that time  to smithy
 great  hoard of  weapons of  war, and  he let  build great  ships; and
 he  sailed  into  the  east  and  landed  upon Middle-earth,  and bade
 Sauron  come  and  do  homage  to  him.  And   Sauron  came,   for  he
 saw  not  his  time  yet to  work his  will with  Numenor, and  he was
 maybe  not  a  little astonied  at the  majesty of  the kings  of men;
 and  he  was  crafty.  And  he  humbled  himself  and  seemed  in  all
 things fair and wise.                                                
   $29  And  it  came  into  the  heart  of  Tarkalion  the  King  that
 for  the  better  keeping  of Sauron  and his  new promises  of fealty
 he  should  be  brought  to  Numenor  as  his  own  hostage.   And  to

 this  Sauron assented  willingly, for  it chimed  with his  own desire.
 And  Sauron  looking  upon  Numenor  in  the  days  of  its  glory  was
 indeed astonied;  but his  heart within  was all  the more  filled with
 hatred.                                                               
   $30  Such  was  his  craft  and  cunning  that  ere  long  he  became
 closest  to  the  counsels  of  the  King;  and  slowly  a  change came
 over  the  land, and  the hearts  of the  Faithful, the  Avaltiri, were
 darkened.                                                             
   $31  For  with  subtle  arguments  Sauron   gainsaid  all   that  the
 Avalai  had  taught.  And  he  bade  them  think  that  the  world  was
 not  a  closed  circle;  and  that  therein there  were many  lands yet
 for  their  winning,  wherein  was  wealth  uncounted;  and  even  yet,
 when  they  came  to  the  end  thereof,  there  was the  Dark without,
 out  of  which  came  all  things.  'And  Dark  is  the  Realm  of  the
 Lord  of  All,  Meleko  the  Great,  who  made  this  world out  of the
 primeval darkness. And only Darkness is truly holy,' said he.         
   $32  And  Tarkalion   the  King   turned  to   the  worship   of  the
 Dark  and  of  Meleko  the  Lord  thereof.   And  the   Meneltyula  was
 deserted  in  those  days  and  none  might  ascend  it  under  pain of
 death,  not  even  those  of  the faithful  who yet  kept Eru  in their
 hearts. But Sauron let build on a hill in the midst of the city  of the
 Numenoreans,  Antirion  the  Golden,  a  great   temple;  and   it  was
 in the form of a circle at the ground,  and its  walls were  fifty feet
 thick,  and  they  rose  five  hundred  feet,  and  they  were  crowned
 with  a  mighty  dome,  and  it  was  wrought  all  of silver,  but the
 silver  was  black.  And this  was the  mightiest of  the works  of the
 Numenoreans,  and  the  most  evil,   and  men   were  afraid   of  its
 shadow.   And   from   the   topmost   of  the   dome,  where   was  an
 opening  or  great  louver,  there  issued  ever  and  anon  smoke, and
 ever  the  more  often  as  the  evil  of  Sauron  grew. For  there men
 sacrificed  to  Meleko  with   spilling  of   blood  and   torment  and
 great  wickedness;  and  ofttimes  it  was those  of the  faithful that
 were  chosen  as  victims.  But never  openly on  the charge  that they
 would   not   worship   Meleko;   rather   was  cause   sought  against
 them that  they hated  the King  or falsely  that they  plotted against
 their kin and devised lies and poisons.                               
   $33  And  for  all  this  Death  did  not   depart  from   the  land.
 Rather  it  came  sooner  and  more  often and  in dreadful  guise. For
 Whereas   aforetime   men  had   grown  slowly   old,  and   laid  them
 down  as to  sleep in  the end  when they  were weary  at last  of this
 world,  now  madness  and   sickness  assailed   them,  and   yet  they
 were afraid to die and go out into the dark, the realm of the lord

 they had taken. And men made weapons in those days and slew             
 one another for little cause.                                           
   $34 Nonetheless it seemed that they prospered. For their              
 wealth increased mightily with the help of Sauron, and they built       
 ever greater ships. And they sailed to the Middle-earth to get          
 them new wealth; but they came no longer as the bringers of             
 gifts, but as men of war. And they hunted the men of Middle-            
 earth and enslaved them and took their goods; but they built            
 fortresses and great tombs upon the western shores in those             
 days. And men feared them, and the memory of the kindly kings           
 of the Elder Days faded in the world and was overlaid with              
 many a dread legend.                                                    
   $35  Thus waxed Tarkalion the King to the mightiest tyrant             
 that had yet been seen in the world since the rule of Meleko;           
 and yet nonetheless he felt the shadow of death approach as his         
 days lengthened. And he was filled with anger and with fear.            
 And now came the hour that Sauron had planned. For he spoke             
 now to the King saying evil of Eru, that he was but a phantom, a        
 lie devised by the Avalai to justify their own idleness and greed;      
 and that the Avalai withheld the gift of everlasting life out of        
 avarice and fear lest the kings of men should wrest the rule .          
 of the world and the Blessed Realm from them. 'And though               
 doubtless the gift of everlasting life is not for all, and only for     
 such as are worthy, being men of might and pride and great              
 lineage, still,' said Sauron, 'it is against all justice that this gift,
 which is his least due, should be withheld from Tarkalion the           
 King, mightiest of the sons of Earth. To whom only Manawe               
 can compare, if even he.' And Tarkalion being besotted and also         
 under the shadow of Death, for his span was drawing to an end,          
 harkened to him, and devised war against the Avalai. Long               
 was he in pondering this design, and it could not be hidden             
 from all.                                                               
   $36  And in those days Amardil, who was of the royal house             
 as has been told, and faithful, and yet so noble and so well-           
 beloved of all save the most besotted of the people, that even in       
 the days of Sauron the King dared lay no hand on him as yet,            
 he learned of the secret counsels of the King, and his heart was        
 filled with sorrow and great dread. For he knew that Men could          
 not vanquish the Avalai in war, and that great ruin must come           
 upon the world, if this war were not stayed. Therefore he called        
 his son Elendil Earendil and he said to him: 'Behold, the days          
 are dark and desperate; therefore I am minded to try that rede          

 which  our  forefather  Earendil  took:  to  sail  into  the  West (be
 there  ban  or  no  ban)  and  speak  to  the  Avalai,  yea   even  to
 Manawe himself if may be, and beseech his aid ere all is lost.'       
   'Would you then bewray the King?' said Elendil.                     
   'For that very thing do I purpose to go,' said Amardil.             
   'And  what  then,  think  you,  is  like  to  befall  those  of your
 house   whom   you   leave   behind,    when   your    deed   becometh
 known?'                                                               
   $37 'It   must   not   become  known,'   said  Amardil.   'I  will
 prepare it  in secret  and I  will set  sail at  first into  the East,
 whither  many  ships  daily  set  out,  and  then  round   about.  But
 you  and  your  folk,  I  counsel  that  you  should  prepare yourself
 ships  and put  on board  all such  things as  your heart  cannot bear
 to  part  with,  and  lie  ready. But  you should  hold your  ships in
 the  eastern  havens;  and  give  out  among  men  that  you  purpose,
 maybe, when  all is  ready to  follow me  into the  East. And  I think
 not that your going will be  letted; for  the house  of Amardil  is no
 longer  so  dear  to our  kinsman on  the throne  of Earendil  that he
 will grieve  over much  if we  seek to  depart. But  do not  take many
 men  with  you,  or  he  may  become  troubled  because  of   the  war
 that  he  now plots,  for which  he will  need all  the force  that he
 hath.  Do  not  take  many,  and  only such  as you  may be  sure that
 they are faithful. Even so open not your design to any.'              
   $38 'And what design is this that you make for me?'                 
   'Until I return I cannot say. But to be sure it is like to be flight
 far  from  fair  Andore  that  is   now  so   defiled,  and   from  our
 people; east or  west the  Avalai alone  shall say.  But it  is likely
 enough  that  you  shall see  me never  again, and  that I  shall show
 you  no  sign  such  as  Earendil  our  sire showed  of old.  But hold
 you  ever  in  readiness,  for  the  end  of  the  world that  we have
 known is at hand.'                                                    
   $39  And  it  is  said  that  Amardil  set  sail  at night  and went
 east  and  then  about,  and  he  took three  servants with  him, dear
 to his  heart, and  never again  were they  heard of  by word  or sign
 in this world; nor is there any tale or guess of their fate.  But this
 much  may  be  seen,  that  men  could  not  be  a  second  time saved
 by  any  such  embassy;  and  for  the  treason  of Numenor  there was
 no  easy assoiling.  But Elendil  abode in  the east  of the  land and
 held  him secret  and meddled  not in  the deeds  of those  days; and
 looked  ever  for  the  sign  that  came  not.  At  whiles   he  would
 journey to the western shores of  the land  and gaze  out at  the sea,
 and  sorrow  and  yearning  was  upon  him,  for  he  had   loved  his

 father - but further he was not suffered to  go; for  Tarkalion was
 now gathering his fleets in the havens of the west.                
                                                                   
   $40  Now  aforetime  in  the  isle  of  Numenor  the  weather was
 ever fair, or leastways apt to the liking and needs of men, rain in
 due  seasons   and  in   measure,  and   sunshine,  now   warm  now
 cooler,  and winds  from over  the sea;  and when  the wind  was in
 the west it seemed to  many that  it was  filled with  a fragrance,
 fleeting but sweet, heart-stirring,  as of  flowers that  bloom for
 ever  in  undying meads  and have  no names  on mortal  shores. But
 now  that  too was  changed. For  the sky  itself was  darkened and
 there were storms  of rain  and hail  in those  days, and  ever and
 anon   the   great   ships   of   the  Numenoreans   would  founder
 and  return not  to haven.  And out  of the  West there  would come
 at whiles a great cloud, shaped as  it were  an eagle  with pinions
 spread to the North and  to the  South; and  slowly it  would creep
 up blotting out the sunset - for at that hour  mostly was  it seen;
 and  then  uttermost  night  would  fall   on  Numenor.   And  soon
 under the pinions of the  eagles was  lightning borne,  and thunder
 rolled in the heaven,  such a  sound as  men of  that land  had not
 before heard.                                                      
   $41  Then  men  were  afraid.  'Behold  the  Eagles of  the Lords
 of  the  West  coming  over  Numenor!'  they  cried, and  they fell
 upon  their  faces.  And  some  would  repent, but  others hardened
 their hearts and shook their fists at heaven, and said:  'The Lords
 of the West  have made  the war.  They strike  the first  blow, the
 next  shall  be  ours.'  And these  words were  spoken by  the King
 and devised by Sauron.                                             
   $42  But  the  lightnings  increased  and   slew  men   upon  the
 hills and in the meads, and ever the darts  of greatest  fury smote
 at the dome of the Temple. But it stood firm.                      
   $43  And  now  the  fleets  of   the  Numenoreans   darkened  the
 sea  upon  the  west  of the  land, like  an archipelago  of mighty
 isles, and their masts were as  forests, and  their banners  red as
 the dying  sun in  a great  storm and  as black  as the  night that
 cometh  after. But  the Eagles  of the  Lords of  the West  came up
 now out of the dayfall, in a long line one behind the other,  as if
 in  array  of  battle,  and as  they came  their wings  spread ever
 wider, until they embraced the heavens.                            
   $44  But  Tarkalion  hardened  his  heart,  and  he  went  aboard
 his  mighty  ship  Andaloke  and  let spread  his standard,  and he
 gave the order for the raising of anchors.                         

   $45  And  so the  fleet of  the Numenoreans  set forth  into the
 teeth of the storm, and they rowed resolutely  into the  West; for
 they  had  many  slaves.  And when  the storm  had abated  the sky
 cleared,  and  a wind  came up  out of  the East  (by the  arts of
 Sauron, some have said), and there was a false peace over  all the
 seas  and  land  while the  world waited  what should  betide. And
 the fleets of the Numenoreans sailed out of  sight of  Andunie and
 broke the  ban, and  held on  through three  nights and  days; and
 they passed out of the sight of all watchers.                    
   $46 And none  can tell  the tale  of their  fate, for  none ever
 returned.  And  whether  they  came  ever in  truth to  that haven
 which  of  old  men  thought  that they  could descry;  or whether
 they found it not or came to  some other  land and  there assailed
 the  Avalai,  who  shall  say, for  none know.  For the  world was
 changed in that time, and the memory  of all  that went  before is
 become dim and unsure.                                           
   $47  But  those  that are  wisest in  discernment aver  that the
 fleets   of  the   Numenoreans  came   indeed  to   Avallonde  and
 encompassed  it  about,  but  that  the Avalai  made no  sign. But
 Manawe being grieved sought the counsel  at the  last of  Eru, and
 the  Avalai  laid  down  their  governance   of  Earth.   And  Eru
 overthrew  its  shape, and  a great  chasm was  opened in  the sea
 between  Numenor  and  Avallonde  and  the  seas  poured  in,  and
 into that abyss fell all the  fleets of  the Numenoreans  and were
 swallowed  in  oblivion.  But  Avallonde  and Numenore  that stood
 on either side of  the great  rent were  also destroyed;  and they
 foundered  and  are  no  more.  And the  Avalai thereafter  had no
 local  habitation  on  earth, nor  is there  any place  more where
 memory  of  an  earth without  evil is  preserved; and  the Avalai
 dwell  in  secret or  have faded  to shadows,  and their  power is
 minished.                                                        
   $48  But  Numenor  went  down   into  the   sea,  and   all  its
 children and fair maidens and its ladies,  and even  Tar-Ilien the
 Queen, and all its gardens and  halls and  towers and  riches, its
 jewels and its webs  and its  things painted  and carven,  and its
 laughter  and  its  mirth  and  its  music  and  its   wisdom  and
 its speech, vanished for ever.                                   
   $49  Save  only  the  very  top  of Meneltyula,  for that  was a
 holy place and never defiled, and  that maybe  is still  above the
 waves, as a lonely isle somewhere in the great waters, if  haply a
 mariner  should come  upon it.  And many  indeed after  sought it,
 because  it  was  said  among  the remnant  of Numenor  that those

 with holy sight  had been  able from  the top  of Meneltyula  to see
 the  haven  of  Avallonde,  which  otherwise  only  those  could see
 who  sailed  far  westward.  And  the  hearts  of   the  Numenoreans
 even after their ruin were still set westward.                     
   $50   And   though   they   knew   that   Numenor   and  Avallonde
 were  no  more  they  said:  'Avallonde  is no  more and  Numenor is
 not;  yet  they were,  and not  in this  present darkness;  yet they
 were, and therefore still are in true being and  in the  whole shape
 of  the  world.'  And  the  Numenoreans  held  that  men  so blessed
 might look upon other  times than  those of  their body's  life, and
 they longed ever to escape  from the  darkness of  exile and  see in
 some fashion the light that was of old.  'But all  the ways  are now
 crooked,' they said, 'that once were straight.'                    
   $51  And  in  this  way  it  came  to  pass  that any  were spared
 from   the   downfall   of   Numenore;  and   maybe  that   was  the
 answer  to  the  errand  of  Amardil.  For  those  that  were spared
 were all  of his  house and  kin. For  Elendil had  remained behind,
 refusing  the  King's  summons  when  he  set  out  to  war,  and he
 went  aboard  ship,  and  abode there  riding out  the storm  in the
 shelter  of  the  eastern  shore.  And being  protected by  the land
 from  the  great  draught of  the sea  that drew  all down  into the
 abyss,  he  escaped  from  death  in  that time.  And a  mighty wind
 arose such as had  not before  been, and  it came  out of  the West,
 and it blew the sea into great hills; and fleeing before  it Elendil
 and  his sons  in seven  ships were  carried far  away, borne  up on
 the  crests  of  great  waves  like  mountains of  Middle-earth, and
 they were cast at length up far inland in Middle-earth.            
   $52  But  all  the  coasts  and  seaward  lands   of  Middle-earth
 suffered  great  ruin and  change in  that time.  For the  earth was
 sorely  shaken,  and  the  seas  climbed over  the lands  and shores
 foundered,   and   ancient   isles   were   drowned  and   new  were
 uplifted,  and  hills  crumbled  and rivers  were turned  to strange
 courses.                                                           
   $53  And  here  ends the  tale to  speak of  Elendil and  his sons
 who  after  founded  many  kingdoms  in  Middle-earth,   and  though
 their lore and craft  was but  an echo  of that  which had  been ere
 Sauron  came  to  Numenor, yet  did it  seem very  great to  the men
 of the wild.                                                       
   $54 And  it is  said that  Sauron himself  was filled  with terror
 at the fury of the wrath of the Avalai and the doom  of Eru,  for it
 was greater far than any  that he  had looked  for, hoping  only for
 the  death  of  the  Numenoreans  and  the  defeat  of  their  proud

 king.  But  he  himself  sitting  in  his black  seat in  the midst  of his
 temple   laughed   when   he   heard  the   trumpets  of   Tarkalion  sound
 for  battle;   and  he   laughed  yet   again  when   he  heard   afar  the
 noise  of  the  thunder;  and  a  third  time  even  as  he laughed  at his
 own   thought   (thinking   what   he   would   do  now   in  Middle-earth,
 being  rid  of  the Eruhil  for ever)  he was  caught in  the midst  of his
 mirth, and his temple and his seat fell into the abyss.                    
   $55   [Rejected   at   once:   It   was  long   before  he   appeared  in
 visible  form  upon  the  earth  again]  But  Sauron  was  not   of  mortal
 flesh,  and  though  he  was  robbed  of   that  form   in  which   he  had
 wrought  evil  for  so  long,  as  Zigur  the  great,   yet  ere   long  he
 devised    another;   and    he   came    back   unto    Middle-earth   and
 troubled  the  sons  of  Elendil  and  all  men  beside.  But  that  cometh
 not   into   the   tale   of   the  Downfall   of  Numenor,   Atalante  the
 downfallen,   as  the   exiles  ever   after  named   her  whom   they  had
 lost, the land of Gift in the midst of the Sea.                            
                                                                           
   There are two definitive clues to the date of this text.  One is  that at
 the foot  of one  of its  pages are  typed the  words 'Ramer  discusses the
 feeling of lost significance' (see pp. 183, 189); and the other is that the
 name   of  the   Pillar  of   Heaven  in   Numenor  is   Meneltyula,  which
 appears  as  a  pencilled  correction  of the  original name  Menelminda in
 the  manuscript  E  of  Part  Two  of  The  Notion  Club  Papers  (p. 302),
 while the next text of  the Papers  (the typescript  F 1)  has Menel-tubel,
 changed to Menel-tubil. It is  thus certain  that this  first draft  of The
 Drowning  of  Anadune  was  written  in  the  course  of  work on  Part Two
 of  The  Notion  Club  Papers,  and  can  indeed  be   placed,  presumably,
 precisely between the manuscript E and the typescript F 1.                 
   Comparison  with  the  text  of  the  third  version   of  The   Fall  of
 Numenor (FN III) given on pp. 331 ff. will  show that  this is  an entirely
 new  work,  an  altogether  richer  conception,   and  with   many  remark-
 able  differences.  But  comparison  with  the  much  later  Akallabeth (in
 the published Silmarillion, pp. 259 -  82) will  also show  that it  is the
 direct ancestor of that work, to  a much  greater extent  than The  Fall of
 Numenor, although that also was used in the Akallabeth.                    
   One  of  the  most  extraordinary  features  of  this  text  lies  in the
 conception of the Balai, whom I shall  call rather  the Avalai,  since this
 name  superseded  the  other  before  the  typing  of  DA I  was completed.
 At the beginning ($1) this is a  name, 'in  the earliest  recorded tongue',
 of  the  Eru-beni, 'servants  of  God',  who  'governed Earth';  'some were
 lesser and  some greater',  and 'the  mightiest and  the chieftain  of them

  all was  Meleko, brother  of Manawe  (see V.164,  note 4).  In $4  it is
  told  that certain  of the  fathers of  Men who  repented, and  who were
  named  Eruhil  'Children of  God', made  war on  Meleko in  concert with
  the Avalai and cast him down; but  ($5) in  grief at  the evil  works of
  Men the Avalai  withdrew ever  westwards ('or  if they  did not  so they
  faded and became secret voices  and shadows  of the  days of  old'), and
  the most part of the Eruhil  followed them.  And when  they came  to the
  shores of the Great Sea ($6) the Avalai 'for the  most part  passed over
  the sea seeking  the realm  of Manawe',  but the  Eruhil of  the western
  coasts were taught by the Avalai the craft of ship-building.            
    After the  coming of  the Eruhil  to Numenor  'they took  the language
  of the  Avalai and  forsook their  own' ($14);  and the  Avalai 'forbade
  them to sail westward out  of sight  of the  western shores  of Numenor'
  ($15).  The  Avalai  dwelt  somewhere  in  the  West  unknown   to  Men,
  who  called that  land Avallonde,  translated 'the  Haven of  the Gods',
  for at times they could see a distant city far off in the West;  and 'to
  Numenor  the  Avalai came  ever and  anon, the  children and  the lesser
  ones of the  Deathless Folk,  sometimes in  oarless boats,  sometimes as
  birds  flying, sometimes  in other  fair shapes'  ($16). Avalai  came to
  Numenor  and  attempted to  persuade the  Eruhil of  the error  of their
  thoughts  ($$23  -  5); and  when the  fleets of  Numenor came  to Aval-
  londe the Avalai 'laid  down their  governance of  Earth' ($47).  At the
  Cataclysm   Avallonde   and   Numenore   were   overwhelmed   and  swal-
  lowed up, 'and the Avalai thereafter  had no  local habitation  on earth
  ...  and [they]  dwell in  secret or  have faded  to shadows,  and their
  power is minished' ($47).                                               
    Who then are the  Avalai? Looking  no further  than the  present text,
  the  name  must  be  said to  represent the  whole 'order'  of deathless
  beings  who,  before the  coming of  Men, were  empowered to  govern the
  world  within  a  great  range  or  hierarchy  of  powers  and purposes.
  Looking at it in relation to the earlier narrative, The Fall of Numenor,
  the distinction between 'Gods' and 'Elves' is here  lost. In  that work,
  after  the  Great  Battle in  which Morgoth  was overthrown,  'the Elves
  were  summoned  to return  into the  West; and  those that  obeyed dwelt
  once more in  Eressea, the  Lonely Isle;  and that  land was  named anew
  Avallon: for it is hard by Valinor ...' (FN  III $1,  p. 332);  and 'the
  speech of Numenor  was the  speech of  the Eldar  of the  Blessed Realm,
  and  the Numenoreans  conversed with  the Elves,  and were  permitted to
  look upon  Valinor from  afar; for  their ships  went often  to Avallon,
  and there their mariners were suffered to dwell for a while' (FN III $2,
  p. 333). The Fall of Numenor was a vital  and far-reaching  extension of
  the legends embodied in the  Quenta Silmarillion,  but it  was congruent
  with  them.  This earliest  text of  The Drowning  of Anadune,  in which
  the Elves are not distinctly  represented, and  Valinor and  Eressea are
  confused, is not.                                                       
    Even  more  startling perhaps  is the  loss in  this narrative  of the

  conception   that   the   world  was   made  round   at  the   Downfall  of
  Numenor.  Here,  the  Avalai,   coming  to   Numenor  and   attempting  to
  teach  the Eruhil  'of the  fashion and  fate of  the world',  declared to
  them 'that the world was round,  and that  if they  sailed into  the utmost
  West,  yet  would  they but  come back  again to  the East  and so  to the
  places  of  their setting  out, and  the world  would seem  to them  but a
  prison'  ($23);  but when  Sauron came  to Numenor  he 'gainsaid  all that
  the Avalai  had taught.  And he  bade them  think that  the world  was not
  a  closed  circle'  ($31). Most  striking is  a hastily  pencilled passage
  written alongside $$49  - 50,  which was  not taken  up in  the following
  text: 'For they believed still the lies of Sauron that the world was plain
  ['flat'; see footnote to p. 392], until their  fleets had  encompassed all
  he  world  seeking  for  Meneltyula,  and  they  knew  that it  was round.
  Then  they  said  that  the  world  was  bent,  and   that  the   road  to
  Avallonde could not be found,  for it  led straight  on.' No  direction is
  given for  the insertion  of this;  but I  think that  it was  intended to
  replace  the  sentence  at  the  end  of  $50:  '"But  all  the  ways are
  now crooked," they said, "that once were straight." '                     
    In this  connection the  earlier version  of the  Old English  text (the
  single  preserved  leaf   of  Edwin   Lowdham's  book)   that  accompanied
  the manuscript E of The Notion  Club Papers  (pp. 313  - 15)  is interest-
  ing. In the  Old English  it was  the Eldar  who forbade  the Numenoreans
 to  land  on  Eresse  (whereas  in  The  Fall  of Numenor  it was  the Gods
 who  imposed  the  ban  on sailing  beyond Tol  Eressea, $4),  because they
 were   mortal,   although   it   was  'the   Powers'  (Wealdend)   who  had
 granted  them   long  life;   and  very   remarkably  Sauron   declared  to
 Tarkalion that 'the Eldar  refused to  him the  gift of  everlasting life'.
 The  Numenoreans  are  here  said  to  have  'sent out  in secret  spies to
 Avallon  to  explore  the hidden  knowledge of  the Eldar'  (a reminiscence
 of  FN  $4:  'they  sent  spies  to  seek  hidden  lore  in  Avallon'). The
 reference of Avallon is not explained in the  Old English  text, but  it is
 surely  the same  as Eresse  (in FN  $1 Eressea  was renamed  Avallon); yet
 Tarkalion  determined  to  invade  Avallon,  because  Sauron said  that the
 Eldar  had denied  him everlasting  life (whereas  in FN  $6 the  fleets of
 'the  Numenoreans,  having  'encompassed  Avallon',  'assailed  the  shores
 of Valinor').                                                              
    This  Old  English  version  came  in point  of composition  between the
 completion  of  manuscript  E  of  the  Papers  and the  writing of  DA 1.(4)
 There  is  thus  a  development  from  a  text in  which both  'the Powers'
 and 'the Eldar'  appear, but  in which  the Eldar  have powers  far greater
 and of a different  order than  could properly  be ascribed  to them,  to a
 text (DA I)  in which  'the Powers'  (Valar) and  'the Eldar'  are confused
 under  the single  term Avalai;  and in  the Old  English the  name Avallon
 seems  to  be  used  confusedly  (in  contrast  to  the  earlier   Fall  of
 Numenor),  while  in  DA  I  Avallonde  is  a  vague  term, related  to the
 vagueness of the name Avalai.                                              

   The  further  development  and the  significance of  these extraordinary
 departures is discussed later: see pp. 391 ff. and 405 ff.                
                                                                          
   In  this  text  DA  I  there  are many  other important  developments in
 the legend of  Numenor which  were retained  in the  later story.  The Ban
 now  becomes  more  severe,  for  the  Numenoreans  are not  permitted 'to
 sail  westward  out  of  sight of  the western  shores of  Numenor' ($15);
 the  importance  of  the  eastward  voyages  emerges,  the coming  of 'the
 Men out of the Sea' at first as teachers  and enlighteners  of the  men of
 Middle-earth  ($17),  but  afterwards as  oppressors and  enslavers ($34);
 and  the  'Avalai'  are  remembered  as   coming  out   of  the   West  to
 Numenor,  and  attempting  to  avert  the  growing  hostility to  the Ban.
 The  temple is  now built,  not on  the Mountain  sacred to  Iluvatar, but
 'in  the  midst  of  the  city  of the  Numenoreans, Antirion  the Golden'
 ($32),  and  ascent  of  the Mountain  is forbidden  under pain  of death.
 The 'Faithful' (named Avaltiri,  $30) are  referred to,  and the  story of
 Amardil  (for  later  Amandil)  and  his  son  Elendil  is told,  with the
 statement  that  although Amardil  was not  of the  elder line  from which
 came  the  kings  of  Numenor,  he  also   was  descended   from  Earendil
 ($$26,  36,  38). These  are only  the most  striking new  developments in
 the  narrative,  and   moreover  comparison   with  the   Akallabeth  will
 show  that  some of  the prose  itself remained  unchanged into  the final
 form.                                                                     
   It  seems  that in  DA I  Adunaic was  at the  point of  emergence, with
 Eru-bent,  Avalai, and  Zigur (said  to be  the name  of Sauron  among the
 men of Middle-earth, $19).                                                
                                                                          
                                   NOTES.                                  
                                                                          
 1. Wingalote:  in the  Quenta (Index  to Vol.IV)  the form  was Wingelot
    >  Vingelot, in  the Quenta  Silmarillion (Index  to Vol.  V) Vingelot.
    Wingalote  was  subsequently  corrected  to  Vingalote  on  this  type-
    script (see p. 377, $8).                                               
 2. The form Earendel  occurs also  in $$16,  20, but  it was  clearly no
    more  than  a casual  reversion. Already  in the  manuscript E  of Part
    Two  of  the  Papers Wilfrid  Jeremy notes  that the  name that  he saw
    in his 'dream-manuscript' was Earendil, not Earendel.                  
 3. Andore:  Andor  in  The  Fall  of  Numenor  ($2)  and  The   Lost  Road
    (V.65).                                                                
 4. The  matter  of  'Edwin  Lowdham's  page'   was  inserted   into  manu-
    script E of the Papers  after the  manuscript was  completed so  far as
    it went (see p. 291  note 70),  and the  name of  the Pillar  of Heaven
    in   the  accompanying   Old  English   text  was   already  Meneltyula
    (p. 314; for earlier Menelminda in E), as in DA I, so that this name is
    not here indicative of relative  date. On  the other  hand, in  the Old
    English text Sauron built the  great temple  on the  Meneltyula itself,

  not  in  the  midst  of  the city,  which is  good evidence  that it  was the
  earlier  composition.  So  also,  the  ban  upon  landing  on Eressea  in the
  Old  English  text  (p.  313)  was  clearly a  development from  the original
  story  in  The  Fall  of  Numenor  ($4),  that   the  Numenoreans   must  not
  sail  beyond  Eressea,  towards  that  in  DA  I  that  they  must  not  sail
  beyond sight of the western coasts of Numenor.                               
                                                                              
                (iii) The second text of The Drowning of Anadune.              
                                                                              
 This text, 'DA II', is a typescript typed with care and almost free  of error.
 A  paper  folded  round  it, in  my father's  writing, bears  my name  and the
 words  'Fair  copy  Anadune'.  DA  II  represents  so  great  an   advance  on
 and  elaboration  of DA  I that  (since it  is almost  free of  alterations or
 hesitations during the original typing) it is hard to believe that no drafting
 intervened between the  two, although  there is  no trace  now of  anything of
 the sort; but I do not think that I typed DA II (see p. 389, $28).            
 The  title  is  The  Drowning  of  Anadune.  A  fair  number   of  alterations
 were  pencilled  on  the  typescript,  and in  addition several  passages were
 rewritten  or  extended  on  typewritten  slips  attached to  the body  of the
 text.  These  are  ignored  in  the  text  printed,  but  all  changes  of any
 substance are recorded in the commentary on DA II, pp. 376 ff.                
 I  give  the  text  in  full,  although  this  involves  a  certain  amount of
 repetition especially in the latter  part of  the narrative,  for the  sake of
 clarity   in   the   commentary   and   in   making   comparison    with   the
 Akallabeth.   The    paragraphs   are    numbered   to    provide   convenient
 reference  to  DA  I.  In DA  II both  long marks  and circumflex  accents are
 used (inserted  in pencil);  the circumflex  superseded the  long mark,  as is
 seen from the fact that it  is found  chiefly in  corrected or  added passages
 and on corrected names,  and only  here and  there in  the original  text. The
 third  text  of  The  Drowning  of  Anadune  uses the  circumflex exclusively,
 and it is more convenient to do the same here.                                
                                                                              
                            THE DROWNING OF ANADUNE.                           
                                                                              
 $1  Before  the  coming  of  Men  there  were  many   Powers  that            
 governed the Earth, and these were the Eru-beni, servants  of God.            
 Many  were  their  ranks and  their offices;  but some  there were            
 among  them  that  were  mighty  lords,   the  Avaloi,   whom  Men            
 remembered as gods, and at the beginning the greatest of these was            
 the Lord Arun.                                                                
 $2  But it is said that long ago, even in the making of  the Earth,            
 the  Lord  Arun turned  to evil  and became  a rebel  against Eru,            
 desiring the whole world for his own and to  have none  above him.            
 Therefore his brother Aman endeavoured to rule  the Earth  and the            
 Powers according to the will of Eru; and Aman  dwelt in  the West.            

 But Arun remained on Earth, dwelling  in hiding  in the  North, and
 he worked evil, and he  had the  greater power.  And the  Earth was
 darkened in that time, so that to Arun  a new  name was  given, and
 he was  called Mulkher,  the Lord  of Darkness;  and there  was war
 between Mulkher and the Avaloi.                                   
   $3  At  the  appointed  hour Men  were born  into the  world, and
 they  were  called  the  Eru-hin,  the  children  of God;  but they
 came in a time of war and shadow, and they  fell swiftly  under the
 domination  of  Mulkher,  and  they  served  him.  And he  now came
 forth and  appeared as  a Great  King and  as a  god; and  his rule
 was  evil,  and  his  worship  unclean,  and  Men   were  estranged
 from Eru and from his servants.                                   
   $4  But  some  there  were of  the fathers  of Men  who repented,
 seeing  the  evil  of  the Lord  Mulkher and  that his  shadow grew
 ever longer on the  Earth; and  they and  their sons  returned with
 sorrow to the allegiance of Eru,  and they  were befriended  by the
 Avaloi,  and received  again their  ancient name,  Eruhin, children
 of  God.  And  the  Avaloi  and   the  Eruhin   made  war   on  the
 servants  of  Mulkher;  and  for  that  time  they   destroyed  his
 kingdom  and  threw  down  his  temples.   But  Mulkher   fled  and
 brooded  in  the  darkness without,  for him  the Powers  could not
 destroy. And the evil that he had begun still sprouted like  a dark
 seed in Middle-earth, bearing  bitter grain,  which though  it were
 ever  reaped  and  burned,  was never  at an  end. And  still cruel
 kings and  unholy temples  arose in  the world,  and the  most part
 of  Mankind were  their servants;  for Men  were corrupt  and still
 hankered  in  their  hearts  for  the  Kingdom  of  Arun,  and they
 made   war   on   the   Eruhin  and   pursued  them   with  hatred,
 wheresoever they might dwell.                                     
   $5  Therefore  the  hearts  of  the  Eruhin  were   turned  west-
 ward,  where  was  the  land  of  Aman,  as  they believed,  and an
 abiding peace. And it is said  that of  old there  was a  fair folk
 dwelling  yet  in  Middle-earth,  and  Men  knew  not  whence  they
 came.  But  some said  that they  were the  children of  the Avaloi
 and  did  not  die, for  their home  was in  the Blessed  Realm far
 away,  whither  they  still  might  go,   and  whence   they  came,
 working the will of Aman  in all  the lesser  deeds and  labours of
 the  world.  The  Eledai  they were  named in  their own  tongue of
 old, but by the Eruhin they  were called  Nimri, the  Shining Ones,
 for they were exceeding fair to look  upon, and  fair were  all the
 works  of   their  tongues   and  hands.   And  the   Nimri  became
 sorrowful  in  the  darkness   of  the   days  and   withdrew  ever

 westward;  and  never  again  was  grass so  green, nor  flower so
 fair, nor water so filled with light when they  had gone.  And the
 Eruhin  for  the  most  part  followed  them,  though  some  there
 were that remained in the Great Lands, free  men, serving  no evil
 lord;  and  they  were  shepherds  and dwelt  far from  the towers
 and cities of the kings.                                          
    $6  But  those  of  the  Eruhin  who  were  mightiest  and most
 fair, closest in friendship with  the Nimri,  most beloved  by the
 Servants of God, turned their faces to the light of the  West; and
 these were the children of the fathers that had been  most valiant
 in  the  war  upon  Mulkher.  And  at the  end of  journeys beyond
 memory they came at last to the  shores of  the Great  Seas. There
 they halted and were filled  with great  dread, and  with longing;
 for the Nimri passed  ever over  the waters,  seeking the  land of
 Aman, and the Eruhin could not follow them.                       
    Then such of the Nimri  as remained  in the  west of  the world
 took pity on the  Eruhin, and  instructed them  in many  arts; and
 the  Eruhin  became  wiser  in  mind,  more  skilled in  hand and
 ?tongue,  and they  made for  themselves many  things that  had not
 before been seen. In this way  the dwellers  on the  shore learned
 the craft of ship-building and of  sailing in  the wind;  and they
 built many fair ships. But their vessels were small, and  they did
 not dare to essay the deep waters; for though their desire  was to
 the unseen shores, they had not as yet the heart for the wastes of
 the  Sea,  and they  sailed only  about the  coasts and  among the
 hither isles.                                                     
    $7 Yet it  was by  their ships  that they  were saved  and were
 not  brought to  nought. For  evil men  multiplied in  those days,
 and  pursued  the  Eruhin  with  hatred;  and  the men  of Middle-
 earth, being filled with the spirit of  Mulkher, grew  cunning and
 cruel  in  the  arts of  war and  the making  of many  weapons, so
 that  the  Eruhin  were hard  put to  it to  maintain any  land in
 which to dwell, and their numbers were diminished.                
                                                                  
    $8  In  those  dark days  of fear  there arose  a man,  and his
 daring upon the Sea was greater than  that of  all other  men; and
 the Nimri  gave him  a name  and called  him Earendil,  the Friend
 of the Sea, Azrabel in  the language  of the  Eruhin. And  it came
 into the heart of Azrabel that he would build  a ship,  fairer and
 more  swift than  any that  men had  yet made;  and that  he would
 sail out over deep water  and come,  maybe, to  the land  of Aman,
 and there get  help for  his kinsfolk.  And with  the help  of the

 Nimri  he  let  build  a  ship,  fair and  valiant; white  were its
 timbers, and its sails were white, and its prow  was carven  in the
 light of a silver bird; and at its launching he gave it a  name and
 called it Rothinzil, Flower of the Foam, but  the Nimri  blessed it
 and named  it also  in their  own tongue,  Vingalote. This  was the
 first of all the ships of Men to bear a name.                     
   $9  When  at  last  his  ship  was   ready,  then   Azrabel  said
 farewell to his wife and to his sons and  all his  kin; for  he was
 minded to sail alone. And he said to  them: 'It  is likely  that ye
 will  see  me  never  again;  and if  ye do  not, then  harden your
 hearts, and cease not from war, but endure until the end. But  if I
 do not fail of my errand, then also ye  may not  see me  again; but
 a sign you will see, and new hope shall be given to you.'         
   $10 And it was at  the time  of evening  that Azrabel  set forth,
 and he sailed into the setting sun and passed out  of the  sight of
 men.  But  the  winds  bore  him  over  the  waves,  and  the Nimri
 guided  him,  and  he  went  through  the  Seas  of  sunlight,  and
 through the Seas  of shadow,  and he  came at  last to  the Blessed
 Realm and the land of Aman and spoke unto the Avaloi.             
   $11  But  Aman  said  that  Eru  had  forbidden  the   Avaloi  to
 make  war  again  by  force  upon  the  kingdoms  of  Mulkher;  for
 the Earth was  now in  the hands  of Men,  to make  or to  mar. Yet
 it  was  permitted  to  him,  because  of  their  fidelity  and the
 repentance of their fathers, to give to the Eruhin a land  to dwell
 in, if they would. And that land was a mighty  island in  the midst
 of  the  sea,  upon  which  no  foot  had  yet  been set.  But Aman
 would  not  permit  Azrabel  to  return again  among Men,  since he
 had  walked  in  the  Blessed Realm  where yet  no death  had come.
 Therefore he took the ship Rothinzil  and filled  it with  a silver
 flame, and raised it above the world to sail in  the sky,  a marvel
 to behold.                                                        
   $12  Then  the  Eruhin  upon  the  shores of  the Sea  beheld the
 new light rising in the West  as it  were a  mighty star,  and they
 knew  that  it  was  the  sign  of  Azrabel.  And hope  and courage
 were kindled in their hearts;  and they  gathered all  their ships,
 great and small, and their wives  and their  children, and  all the
 wealth  that  they  could  bear away,  and they  set sail  upon the
 deep waters,  following the  star. And  there was  a great  calm in
 those  days  and  all  the  winds  were  stilled.  So   bright  was
 Rothinzil  that  even  at morning  men could  see it  glimmering in
 the West; and in the cloudless night it shone  alone, for  no other
 star might come beside it. And setting their course towards  it the

 Eruhin came at last to  the land  that had  been prepared  for them,
 and they found it fair and fruitful,  and they  were glad.  And they
 called  that  land  Amatthane  the  Land   of  Gift,   and  Anadune,
 which is Westernesse, Numenore in the Nimrian tongue.              
   $13  But  not  so did  the Eruhin  escape the  doom of  death that
 had  been  pronounced  upon  all  Mankind,  and  they   were  mortal
 still, although for their  faithfulness they  were rewarded  by life
 of  threefold  span, and  their years  were full  and glad  and they
 knew no grief nor  sickness, so  long as  they remained  still true.
 Therefore  the  Adunai,  the  Men  of  Westernesse,  grew  wise  and
 fair and glorious; but their  numbers increased  only slowly  in the
 land,  for  though  sons  and  daughters  were  born to  them fairer
 than their fathers, and they loved their children dearly,  yet their
 children were few.                                                 
   $14  Thus  the  years  passed,  and  the  Adunai  dwelt  under the
 protection of the Avaloi, and in  the friendship  of the  Nimri; and
 the  kings  and  princes  learned  the  Nimrian  tongue,   in  which
 much  lore  and  song  was  preserved  from  the  beginning  of  the
 world.  And  they  made  letters  and  scrolls  and books  and wrote
 in  them  many  things  of  wisdom and  wonder in  the high  tide of
 their realm,  of which  all is  now forgot.  And they  became mighty
 in all other crafts, so that if they  had had  the mind,  they would
 easily  have  surpassed  the  evil  kings  of  Middle-earth  in  the
 making  of  war  and  the   forging  of   weapons;  but   they  were
 become  men  of  peace.  In  ship-building  still  was  their  chief
 delight,  and  this  craft  they  followed  more  eagerly  than  all
 others;  and  voyaging upon  the wide  seas was  the chief  feat and
 adventure of their younger men.                                    
   $15  But  the  Avaloi  forbade  them  to  sail  so   far  westward
 that  the  coasts  of  Anadune  could  no  longer  be seen;  and the
 Adunai  were  as  yet  content,  though  they  did not  fully under-
 stand the purpose  of this  ban. But  the purpose  of Aman  was that
 the Eruhin  should not  be tempted  to seek  for the  Blessed Realm,
 nor  desire  to  overpass the  limits set  to their  bliss, becoming
 enamoured  of  the  immortality  of  the Avaloi  and the  land where
 all things endure.                                                 
   $16  For  as  yet  Eru  permitted  the  Avaloi  to  maintain  upon
 Earth,  upon  some  isle  or shore  of the  western lands  (Men know
 not  where), an  abiding place,  an earthly  memorial of  that which
 might  have  been,  if  Mulkher  had  not  bent  his  ways  nor  Men
 followed  him.  And  that  land  the  Adunai  named   Avalloni,  the
 Haven of  the Gods;  for at  times when  all the  air was  clear and

 the sun was in the east they could  descry, as  them seemed,  a city
 white-shining  on  a  distant  shore,  and  great  harbours,  and  a
 tower. But this only  from the  topmost peak  of their  island could
 the far-sighted see, or from some ship that lay at anchor  off their
 western shores, as far as it was lawful for any  mariner to  go. For
 they did not dare to  break the  ban. And  some held  that it  was a
 vision of the Blessed Realm that men  saw, but  others said  that it
 was only a further isle where the  Nimri dwelt  and the  little ones
 that  do  not die;  for mayhap  the Avaloi  had no  visible dwelling
 upon Earth.                                                        
   And  certain  it is  that the  Nimri had  some dwelling  nigh unto
 Anadune,  for  thither  they  came  ever and  anon, the  children of
 the  Deathless  Folk,  sometimes  in  oarless  boats,  sometimes  as
 birds  flying,  sometimes  by paths  that none  could see;  for they
 loved the Adunai.                                                  
   $17  Thus  it  was  that  the  voyages  of  the  Adunai  in  those
 days  went  ever eastward  and not  west, from  the darkness  of the
 North  to  the  heats  of  the South,  and beyond  the South  to the
 Nether  Darkness.  And  the  Eruhin  came  often  to  the  shores of
 the  Great  Lands,  and  they  took  pity on  the forsaken  world of
 Middle-earth.  And the  princes of  the Adunai  set foot  again upon
 the  western  shores  in  the  Dark  Years  of  Men,  and  none  now
 dared  withstand  them; for  most of  the peoples  of that  age that
 sat  under  the  shadow  were  now  grown  weak  and   fearful.  And
 coming  among  them  the  sons  of  the  Adunai  taught   them  many
 things.  Language  they  taught  them,  for  the  tongues of  men on
 Middle-earth  were  fallen  into  brutishness,  and they  cried like
 harsh birds or snarled  like the  savage beasts.  And corn  and wine
 the  Adunai  brought,  and  they  instructed  men  in the  sowing of
 seed  and the  grinding of  grain, in  the shaping  of wood  and the
 hewing of stone, and in the ordering of  life, such  as it  might be
 in the lands of little bliss.                                      
   $18   Then   the   men   of   Middle-earth  were   comforted,  and
 here  and  there  upon  the  western  shores  the   houseless  woods
 drew  back,  and  men  shook  off  the  yoke  of  the  offspring  of
 Mulkher,  and  unlearned  their  terror  of   the  dark.   And  they
 revered  the  memory  of  the  tall  Sea-kings,  and  when  they had
 departed  called them  gods, hoping  for their  return; for  at that
 time  the  Adunai  dwelt  never  long in  Middle-earth nor  made any
 habitation  of their  own: eastward  they must  sail, but  ever west
 their hearts returned.                                             

   $19  Thus  came  the  lightening  of  the  shadow  upon  the  Earth
 and  the  beginning  of  betterment,  of  which  the  songs   of  men
 preserve still the distant memory like an  echo of  the Sea.  And yet
 in the end new good  turned again  to evil,  and Men  fell, as  it is
 said,  a  second  time.  For  there arose  a second  manifestation of
 the  power  of  darkness  upon  Earth:  a  new  shape of  the Ancient
 Shadow,  it  may  be, or  one of  its servants  that drew  power from
 it  and waxed  strong and  fell. And  this evil  thing was  called by
 many names;  but its  own name  that it  took in  the arising  of its
 power  was  Zigur,  Zigur  the  Great.  And  Zigur  made   himself  a
 mighty  king  in  the  midst of  the Earth;  and well-seeming  he was
 at first, and just, and his rule  was of  benefit to  all men  in the
 needs  of  the  body.  For  he  made  them  rich,  whoso  would serve
 him;  but  those  who  would  not  he  drove   out  into   the  waste
 places.  Yet  it  was  the  purpose  of Zigur,  as of  Mulkher before
 him, to make himself a  king over  all kings,  and to  be the  god of
 Men.  And  slowly  his  power  moved  north   and  south,   and  ever
 westward;  and  he  heard  of  the  coming  of  the  Eruhin,  and  he
 was  wroth,  and  he  plotted  in  his  heart  how  he  might destroy
 Anadune.                                                            
   $20  And  tidings   of  Zigur   came  also   to  Anadune,   to  Ar-
 Pharazon the king, heir of Azrabel; for this title had all  the kings
 of  Amatthane,  being   descended  indeed   in  unbroken   line  from
 Indilzar  son  of  Azrabel,  and  seven  kings  had ruled  the Adunai
 between  Indilzar  and  Ar-Pharazon,  and  slept  now  in  their deep
 tombs  under   the  mount   of  Menel-Tubal,   lying  upon   beds  of
 gold.  For  high  and  glorious  had  grown  the kings  of Amatthane;
 and  great  and  proud  was  Ar-Pharazon,  sitting  upon  his  carven
 throne  in  the city  of Ar-Minaleth  in the  noontide of  his realm.
 And  to  him  came  the  masters of  ships and  men returning  out of
 the  East,  and  they  spoke  of  Zigur,  how  he  named  himself the
 Great,  and  purposed  to  become  master  of  all  Middle-earth, and
 indeed of the  whole world,  if that  might be.  Great was  the anger
 of  Ar-Pharazon  when  he  heard  these  things, and  he sat  long in
 thought, and his mood darkened.                                     
   $21  For  it  must  be  told  that  evil,  of  which once  long ago
 their  fathers  had  partaken,  albeit they  had after  repented, was
 not  banished  wholly  from  the  hearts  of  the  Eruhin,   and  now
 again was stirring.  For the  desire of  everlasting life,  to escape
 from  death  and  the  ending  of  delight,  grew ever  stronger upon
 them  as  their  lot  in  the  land  of Amatthane  grew more  full of
 bliss.  And  the Adunai  began to  murmur, at  first in  their hearts

 and  anon  in  words, against  the doom  of Men;  and most  of all
 against that ban which forbade them to  sail into  the West  or to
 seek for the land of Aman and the Blessed Realm.                 
   $22  And  they  said  among  themselves:   Why  do   the  Avaloi
 sit in peace  unending there,  while we  must die  and go  we know
 not  whither,  leaving our  own home  and all  that we  have made?
 For the fault was not ours in the  beginning, seeing  that Mulkher
 was stronger  and wiser  than our  fathers; and  was not  he, even
 the Lord Arun, author of this evil, one of the Avaloi?'          
   $23  And  the  Nimri  reported  these words  to the  Avaloi, and
 the Avaloi were  grieved, seeing  the clouds  gather on  the noon-
 tide  of  Amatthane.  And  they  sent  messengers  to  the Adunai,
 who spoke earnestly to the  king and  to all  who would  listen to
 them,  teaching  them  concerning  the  fashion  and  fate  of the
 world.                                                           
   'The  doom  of  the world,'  they said,  'One alone  can change,
 who  made  it.  And  were  you  so  to  voyage that,  escaping all
 deceits and snares, you came indeed to  the Blessed  Realm, little
 good would it  do to  you. For  it is  not the  land of  Aman that
 maketh its people deathless,  but the  dwellers therein  do hallow
 the  land;  and  there  you  should rather  wither the  sooner, as
 moths in a flame too bright and hot.'                            
   But  Ar-Pharazon  said:  And  doth not  Azrubel [sic]  my father
 live? Or is he not in the land of Aman?'                         
   To  which  it  was  answered:  'Nay,  he  is  not  there; though
 maybe he  liveth. But  of such  things we  cannot speak  unto you.
 And behold! the fashion of  the Earth  is such  that a  girdle may
 be set about it.  Or as  an apple  it hangeth  on the  branches of
 Heaven, and it is round and fair, and the seas  and lands  are but
 the rind of the fruit, which shall abide upon  the tree  until the
 ripening  that  Eru  hath  appointed.  And  though you  sought for
 ever,  yet  mayhap  you would  not find  where Aman  dwelleth, but
 journeying  on  beyond  the  towers  of  Nimroth  would  pass into
 the uttermost West.  So would  you but  come at  the last  back to
 the places of your  setting out:  and then  the whole  world would
 seem shrunken, and you would deem that it was a prison.          
   $24 'And a prison,  maybe, it  hath indeed  become to  all those
 of your race,  and you  cannot rest  anywhere content  within. But
 the punishments of Eru  are for  healing, and  his mercies  may be
 stern. For the Avaloi, you say, are unpunished, and so it  is that
 they do not  die; but  they cannot  escape and  are bound  to this
 world, never again to leave it, till all is changed. And  you, you

 say, are punished, and so it  is that  you die;  but you  escape, and
 leave  the  world,   and  are   not  bound   thereto.  Which   of  us
 therefore should envy the other?'                                   
   $25   And   the   Adunai   answered:  'Why   should  we   not  envy
 the  Avaloi,  or  even  the  least  of  the deathless?  For of  us is
 required  the  greater  trust, knowing  not what  lieth before  us in
 a  little  while.  And  yet  we  too  love  the  world and  would not
 lose it.'                                                           
   And   the   messengers   answered:   'Indeed   the   mind   of  Eru
 concerning  you  is  not known  to the  Avaloi, and  he hath  not yet
 revealed  it.  But  earnestly  they  bid  you  not to  withhold again
 that   trust   to   which   you  are   commanded  and   your  fathers
 returned in sorrow. Hope rather  that in  the end  even the  least of
 your desires shall have fruit. For the love of this Earth was  set in
 your  hearts  by  Eru,  who  made  both  it  and  you;  and  Eru doth
 not  plant  to  no  purpose.  Yet  many  ages   of  men   unborn  may
 pass ere that purpose is made known.'                               
   $26  But  few  only  of  the  Adunai  gave  heed  to  this counsel.
 For it seemed hard  to them  and full  of doubt,  and they  wished to
 escape  from  Death  in  their  own  day,  not  waiting   upon  hope;
 and   they   became  estranged   from  the   Avaloi,  and   would  no
 longer  receive  their  messengers.  And  these came  now no  more to
 Anadune,  save  seldom  and  in  secret,  visiting  those   few  that
 remained faithful in heart.                                         
   Of  these  the  chief  was  one  Arbazan,  and  his  son  Nimruzan,
 great  captains  of  ships;  and they  were of  the line  of Indilzar
 Azrabelo,  though  not  of  the  elder  house,  to whom  belonged the
 crown and throne in the city of Arminaleth.                         
   $27  But  he  Ar-Pharazon  the  king  fell into  doubt, and  in his
 day  the offering  of the  first-fruits was  neglected; and  men went
 seldom  to  the  hallow  in   the  high   place  upon   Mount  Menel-
 Tubal  that  was  in  the  midst  of  the land;  and they  turned the
 more  to  works  of  handicraft, and  to the  gathering of  wealth in
 their  ships that  sailed to  Middle-earth, and  they drank  and they
 feasted and they clad themselves in silver and gold.                
   And  on  a  time  Ar-Pharazon  sat  with  his  counsellors  in  his
 high  house,  and  he  debated  the words  of the  messengers, saying
 that the  shape of  the Earth  was such  that a  girdle might  be set
 about it. 'For  if we  shall believe  this,' he  said, 'that  one who
 goeth west shall return out of the East,  then shall  it not  also be
 that  one  who  goeth  ever  east shall  come up  at last  behind the
 West, and yet break no ban?'                                        

   But  Arbazan said:  'It may  be so.  Yet nought  was said  of how
 long  the  girdle  might  be. And  mayhap, the  width of  the world
 is such that a man would wear  the whole  of his  life, or  ever he
 encompassed it. And I deem it  for a  truth that  we have  been set
 for  our health  and protection  most westward  of all  mortal men,
 where the land of those that do not die lies upon the very  edge of
 sight;  so  that he  that would  go round  about from  Anadune must
 needs traverse well nigh the whole  girdle of  the Earth.  And even
 so it may be that there is no road by  sea.' And  it has  been said
 that at that  time he  guessed aright,  and that  ere the  shape of
 things  was  changed,  eastward  of Anadune  the land  stretched in
 truth  from  the  North even  into the  uttermost South,  where are
 ices impassable.                                                  
   But  the  king  said:  'Nonetheless  we   may  give   thought  to
 this  road,  if  it  may  be  discovered.' And  he pondered  in his
 secret  thought  the  building  of  ships  of  great   draught  and
 burden,  and  the  setting  up of  outposts of  his power  upon far
 shores.                                                           
                                                                  
   $28  Thus  it  was  that  his  anger  was  the  greater,  when he
 heard those tidings of Zigur the Mighty  and of  his enmity  to the
 Adunai.  And he  determined, without  counsel of  the Avaloi  or of
 any  wisdom  but  his  own,  that  he  would demand  the allegiance
 and homage of this lord: for in his pride he  thought that  no king
 could ever arise  so mighty  as to  vie with  the heir  of Azrabel.
 Therefore  he  began  in  that  time  to  smithy  great   hoard  of
 weapons  of  war,  and  he let  build great  ships and  stored them
 with arms; and  when all  was ready  he himself  set sail  into the
 East,   and  he   landed  upon   Middle-earth;  and   he  commanded
 Zigur  to come  to him  and to  swear him  fealty. And  Zigur came.
 For he saw not  his time  yet to  work his  will with  Anadune; and
 he  was  maybe  for  the time  astounded by  the power  and majesty
 of  the  kings  of  men, which  surpassed all  rumour of  them. And
 he  was  crafty, well  skilled to  gain what  he would  by subtlety
 when  force  might   not  avail.   Therefore  he   humbled  himself
 before  Ar-Pharazon,  and  smoothed  his  tongue,  and   seemed  in
 all things fair and wise.                                         
   $29 And  it came  into the  heart of  Ar-Pharazon the  king that,
 for the better keeping of Zigur and his oaths of fealty,  he should
 be brought to Anadune,  and dwell  there as  a hostage  for himself
 and all his servants. And to this Zigur assented willingly,  for it
 chimed  with  his  desire.  And  Zigur  coming looked  upon Anadune
 and the city of Ar-Minaleth in the days  of its  glory, and  he was

 indeed  astounded; but  his heart  within was  filled the  more with
 envy and with hate.                                                 
    $30  Yet  such was  his cunning  that ere  three years  were past
 he  had  become  closest  to the  secret counsels  of the  king; for
 flattery  sweet  as  honey  was  ever on  his tongue,  and knowledge
 he  had  of  many  hidden  things;  and  all  the  counsellors, save
 Arbazan  alone,  began  to  fawn  upon  him.  Then  slowly  a change
 came over the  land, and  the hearts  of the  Faithful grew  full of
 fear.                                                               
    $31  For  now,   having  the   ear  of   men,  Zigur   with  many
 arguments  gainsaid  all  that the  Avaloi had  taught. And  he bade
 men think that  the world  was not  a circle  closed, but  there lay
 many  seas  and  lands  for  their   winning,  wherein   was  wealth
 uncounted.  And  still,  should  they at  the last  come to  the end
 thereof,  beyond  all  lay the  Ancient Darkness.  'And that  is the
 Realm  of  the  Lord  of  All,  Arun  the  Greatest,  who  made this
 world  out  of  the  primeval  Darkness;  and  other  worlds  he yet
 may  make  and  give  them  in  gift  to those  that serve  him. And
 Darkness alone is truly holy,' he said and lied.                    
                                                                    
    $32 Then Ar-Pharazon the king turned back to the worship         
 of the Dark, and of Arun-Mulkher the Lord thereof; and the          
 Menel-tubal was utterly deserted in those days, and  no man         
 might ascend to the  high place,  not even  those of  the Faithful
 who kept Eru in their hearts.  But Zigur  let build  upon a  hill in
 the  midst  of the  city of  the Eruhin,  Ar-Minaleth the  Golden, a
 mighty temple; and it was in the form of a circle  at the  base, and
 there the walls were fifty feet in thickness, and the width of their
 base was five hundred  feet across  the centre,  and they  rose from
 the  ground  five  hundred  feet,  and  they  were  crowned  with  a
 mighty dome; and it was wrought all  of silver,  but the  silver was
 turned  black.  And  from  the  topmost  of the  dome, where  was an
 opening  or  great  louver, there  issued smoke;  and ever  the more
 often  as  the  evil  power  of  Zigur  grew.  For  there  men would
 sacrifice  to  Mulkher  with  spilling  of  blood  and  torment  and
 great  wickedness,  that  he  should  release  them from  Death. And
 ofttimes it was those of the Faithful that  were chosen  as victims;
 but  never  openly  on  the  charge  that  they  would  not  worship
 Mulkher,  rather  was  cause  sought  against  them that  they hated
 the king and were  his rebels,  or that  they plotted  against their
 kin,  devising  lies  and poisons.  And these  charges were  for the
 most  part  false,  save  that  wickedness  breeds  wickedness,  and
 oppression brings forth murder.                                     

   $33  But  for  all  this  Death  did  not   depart  from   the  land.
 Rather  it  came  sooner  and  more  often and  in dreadful  guise. For
 whereas   aforetime   men   had   grown  slowly   old  and   laid  them
 down  in  the  end  to  sleep,  when  they  were weary  at last  of the
 world,  now  madness  and   sickness  assailed   them;  and   yet  they
 were afraid to die and  go out  into the  dark, the  realm of  the lord
 that  they  had  taken;  and  they  cursed  themselves in  their agony.
 And  men  took  weapons  in  those  days  and  slew  one   another  for
 little  cause,  for  they  were become  quick to  anger; and  Zigur, or
 those  whom  he   had  bound   unto  himself,   went  about   the  land
 setting  man  against  man,  so  that   the  people   murmured  against
 the  king  and the  lords and  any that  had aught  that they  had not,
 and the men of power took hard revenge.                               
   $34  Nonetheless  for  long  it  seemed  to  the  Adunai   that  they
 prospered,  and  if  they  were  not  increased  in happiness  yet they
 grew  more  strong  and  their  rich  men  ever  richer.  For  with the
 aid  of  Zigur  they  multiplied  their  wealth  and they  devised many
 engines,  and  they  built  ever  greater ships.  And they  sailed with
 power  and   armoury  to   Middle-earth,  and   they  came   no  longer
 as  the  bringers of  gifts, but  as men  of war.  And they  hunted the
 men  of  Middle-earth  and   took  their   goods  and   enslaved  them,
 and  many  they  slew  cruelly  upon  their  altars.  For   they  built
 fortresses  and  temples  and  great  tombs  upon  the  western  shores
 in  those  days;  and  men  feared   them,  and   the  memory   of  the
 kindly  kings  of  the  Elder  Days   faded  in   the  world   and  was
 darkened by many a tale of dread.                                     
   $35  Thus  Ar-Pharazon  the  King  of  the  land   of  the   Star  of
 Azrabel  grew  to  the  mightiest  tyrant  that  had  yet been  seen in
 the  world  since  the  reign  of  Mulkher,   though  in   truth  Zigur
 ruled  all  from  behind  the  throne.  And   the  years   passed,  and
 lo!  the  king  felt  the  shadow  of  Death   approach  as   his  days
 lengthened;  and  he  was  filled  with  rage  and  fear. And  now came
 the  hour  that  Zigur  had  planned  and   long  awaited.   And  Zigur
 spoke to  the king,  saying evil  of Eru,  that he  was but  a phantom,
 a  lie  devised  by  the  Avaloi  to  justify  their  own  idleness and
 greed.                                                                
   'For the Avaloi,'  said he,  'withhold the  gift of  everlasting life
 out  of  avarice  and fear,  lest the  kings of  Men should  wrest from
 them  the  rule  of  the  world  and  take  for themselves  the Blessed
 Realm.  And  though,  doubtless, the  gift of  everlasting life  is not
 for  all,  but only  for such  as are  worthy, being  men of  might and
 pride and great lineage, yet against all justice is it done,  that this

 gift, which  is his  least due,  should be  withheld from  the King,
 pe-Pharazon,  mightiest  of  the  sons  of   Earth,  to   whom  Aman
 alone  can  be  compared,  if  even  he.'  And   Ar-Pharazon,  being
 besotted,  and  walking  under  the  shadow of  Death, for  his span
 was  drawing  to  an  end,  harkened  to  Zigur;  and  he  began  to
 ponder  in  his  heart  how  he  might  make  war  upon  the Avaloi.
 Long was he in preparing this  design, and  he spoke  of it  to few;
 yet it could not be hidden from all for ever.                      
   $36  Now  there  dwelt  still  in  the  east  of Anadune,  nigh to
 the  city  of  Ar-Minaleth,  Arbazan,  who was  of the  royal house,
 as has  been told,  and he  was faithful;  and yet  so noble  had he
 been  and  so  mighty  a  captain  of  the  sea  that  still  he was
 honoured  by  all  save  the  most  besotted  of  the   people,  and
 though  he  had  the hatred  of Zigur,  neither king  nor counsellor
 dared lay hand  on him  as yet.  And Arbazan  learned of  the secret
 counsels of the king, and his heart was filled with grief  and great
 dread;  for  he  knew  that  Men  could not  vanquish the  Avaloi in
 war,  and that  great ruin  must come  upon the  world, if  this war
 were  not  stayed.  Therefore  he  called his  son Nimruzan,  and he
 said to him:  'Behold! the  days are  dark and  desperate. Therefore
 I  am  minded to  try that  rede which  our forefather  Azrabel took
 of old: to  sail into  the West  (be there  ban or  no ban),  and to
 speak  to the  Avaloi, yea,  even to  Aman himself,  if may  be, and
 beseech his aid ere all is lost.'                                  
                                                                   
   'Would you then bewray the King?' said Nimruzan.                 
   'For that very thing do I purpose to go,' said Arbazan.          
   'And what then, think you, is like to befall those of your       
 house   whom   you   leave   behind,   when   your   deed   becometh
 known?'                                                           
   $37  'It   must  not   become  known,'   said  Arbazan.   'I  will
 prepare  my going  in secret,  and I  will set  sail into  the East,
 whither  daily  many  ships  depart  from  our  havens,  and  there-
 after, as  wind and  chance may  allow, I  will go  about through
 south or north back into the West, and seek what I may find.       
   'But  you  and  your  folk,  my  son,  I  counsel that  you should
 prepare  yourself other  ships, and  put aboard  all such  things as
 your  hearts  cannot  bear  to  part  with, and  when the  ships are
 ready   you   should  take   up  your   abode  therein,   keeping  a
 sleepless  watch.  And  you should  lie in  the eastern  havens, and
 give  out  among  men  that  you  purpose, when  you see  your time,
 to set sail and follow me  into the  East. Arbazan  is no  longer so
 dear  to  our  kinsman  upon  the  throne that  he will  grieve over

 much, if we seek to depart for a season or  for good.  But let  it not
 be  seen  that  you  intend  to  take  many  men,  or  he  may  become
 troubled  because of  the war  that he  now plots,  for which  he will
 need  all  the  force  that  he  may  gather.  Seek  out   rather  the
 Faithful that are known to you, and let  them lie  ashore at  call, if
 they are willing to go with you.  But even  to these  men do  not tell
 more of your design than is needful.'                                
   $38  'And  what  shall  that  design  be,  that  you  make  for me?*
 said Nimruzan.                                                       
   'Until I  return, I  cannot say,'  his father  answered. 'But  to be
 sure most like is it that  you must  fly from  fair Amatthane  that is
 now  defiled,  and  lose  what  you have  loved, foretasting  death in
 life,  seeking  a  lesser  land  elsewhere. East  or West,  the Avaloi
 alone can say.                                                       
   'And  it  may  well prove  that you  shall see  me never  again, and
 that I  shall show  you no  such sign  as Azrabel  showed of  old. But
 hold you ever in  readiness, for  the end  of the  world that  we have
 known is now at hand.'                                               
   $39  And  it  is  said  that  Arbazan set  sail in  a small  ship at
 night,  and   steered  first   eastward  and   then  went   about  and
 passed  into  the  West.  And he  took three  servants with  him, dear
 to his  heart, and  never again  were they  heard of  by word  or sign
 in this world; nor is there any tale or guess of their fate.  But this
 much  may  be  seen  that  Men  could not  a second  time be  saved by
 any  such  embassy,  and  for  the  treason  of  Anadune there  was no
 easy  assoiling.  But  Nimruzan did  all that  his father  had bidden,
 and  his  ships  lay  off  the  east coast  of the  land, and  he held
 himself  secret  and  did  not meddle  with the  deeds of  those days.
 At  whiles  he  would  journey  to  the  western  shores and  gaze out
 upon  the  sea,   for  sorrow   and  yearning   were  upon   him,  for
 he  had  greatly  loved  his  father;  but  nought  could   he  descry
 but  the  fleets  of  Ar-Pharazon  gathering  in  the  havens  of  the
 west.                                                                
                                                                     
   $40  Now  aforetime  in  the  isle  of   Anadune  the   weather  was
 ever apt  to the  liking and  the needs  of men:  rain in  due seasons
 and  ever  in  measure,  and  sunshine,  now  warm  now   cooler,  and
 winds  from  over  the  sea;  and  when  the  wind  was  in  the West,
 it  seemed  to  many  that it  was filled  with a  fragrance, fleeting
 but  sweet,  heart-stirring,  as  of  flowers that  bloom for  ever in
 undying  meads  and  have  no  names  on mortal  shores. But  all this
 was  now  changed.  For  the  sky  itself  was  darkened,   and  there

 were  storms  of  rain  and  hail  in those  days, and  violent winds;
 and  ever  and  anon  a  great  ship  of  the  Adunai   would  founder
 and  return  not  to  haven,  though  never  had  such  a  grief betid
 before  since  the  rising  of  the Star.  And out  of the  West there
 would  come  at  whiles a  great cloud,  shaped as  it were  an eagle,
 with  pinions spread  to the  North and  to the  South; and  slowly it
 would  loom  up,  blotting  out the  sunset (for  at that  hour mostly
 was  it  seen),  and  then  uttermost  night  would  fall  on Anadune.
 And  anon  under  the  pinions  of  the  eagles  lightning  was borne,
 and  thunder  rolled  in  heaven,  such a  sound as  men of  that land
 had not heard before.                                                
   $41  Then  men  grew  afraid.  'Behold  the  Eagles  of   the  Lords
 of the West! ' they cried;  'the Eagles  of Aman  are over  Anadune! '
 and  they  fell  upon  their  faces.  And some  few would  repent, but
 the  others hardened  their hearts  and shook  their fists  at heaven,
 and  said:  'The  Lords  of  the  West  have  desired  this  war. They
 strike  first;  the  next  blow shall  be ours.'  And these  words the
 king himself spoke, but Zigur devised them.                          
   $42  Then   the  lightnings   increased  and   slew  men   upon  the
 hills, and in the fields, and in the streets of the city; and  a fiery
 bolt  smote  the  dome  of  the   Temple  and   it  was   wreathed  in
 flame.  But  the  Temple  was  unshaken;   for  Zigur   himself  stood
 upon  the  pinnacle  and  defied  the  lightnings;  and  in  that hour
 men  called  him  a  god  and did  all that  he would.  When therefore
 the  last  portent  came  they heeded  it little;  for the  land shook
 under   them,   and  a   groaning  as   of  thunder   underground  was
 mingled  with  the  roaring  of  the  sea;  and  smoke  appeared  upon
 the  top  of  Menil-Tubal  [sic].  But  still  Ar-Pharazon  pressed on
 with his designs.                                                    
   $43  And  now  the  fleets  of  the  Adunai  darkened  the  sea upon
 the  west  of  the  land,  and  they  were  like  an archipelago  of a
 thousand  isles;  their  masts were  as a  forest upon  the mountains,
 and  their  sails  were  like  a  brooding  cloud;  and  their banners
 were black and golden like  stars upon  the fields  of night.  And all
 things  now   waited  upon   the  word   of  Ar-Pharazon;   and  Zigur
 withdrew  into  the  inmost  circle  of  the  Temple, and  men brought
 him  victims  to  be  burned.  Then  the  Eagles of  the Lords  of the
 West  came  up  out  of  the  dayfall,  and they  were arrayed  as for
 battle,  one  after  another  in  an  endless line;  and as  they came
 their wings  spread ever  wider, grasping  all the  sky; but  the West
 burned  red   behind  them,   and  they   glowed  like   living  blood
 beneath,  so  that  Anadune  was  illumined  as  with  a  dying  fire,

 and men looked upon the  faces of  their fellows,  and it  seemed to
 them that they were filled with wrath.                             
   $44   Then   Ar-Pharazon   hardened   his   heart,  and   he  went
 aboard  his  mighty  ship,  Aglarrama,  castle  of  the  sea;  many-
 oared  it  was  and  many-masted,  golden  and  sable,  and  upon it
 the  throne  of  Ar-Pharazon  was set.  Then he  put on  his panoply
 and his crown, and let raise his  standard, and  he gave  the signal
 for  the  weighing of  the anchors;  and in  that hour  the trumpets
 of Anadune outrang the thunder.                                    
   $45  And  so  the  fleets   of  the   Adunai  moved   against  the
 menace  of  the  West;  and  there  was  little  wind, but  they had
 many  oars,  and many  strong slaves  to row  beneath the  lash. The
 sun  went down,  and there  came a  silence; and  over the  land and
 all the seas a dark stillness fell, while the world waited  for what
 should betide.  Slowly the  fleets passed  out of  the sight  of the
 watchers in the havens,  and their  lights faded  upon the  sea, and
 night  took  them;  and  in  the  morning  they  were  gone.  For at
 middle night a wind arose in the East (by Zigur's art, it  is said),
 and  it wafted  them away;  and they  broke the  ban of  the Avaloi,
 and  sailed  into  forbidden  seas,  going up  with war  against the
 Deathless Folk, to wrest from  them life  everlasting in  the circle
 of the world.                                                      
   $46 And who shall tell the tale  of their  fate? For  neither ship
 nor man of all that host returned ever to the  lands of  living men.
 And  whether  they  came  in  truth  to  that  harbour which  of old
 the  Adunai  could   descry  from   Menel-Tubal;  or   whether  they
 found it not,  or came  to some  other land  and there  assailed the
 Avaloi, it is not known.  For the  world was  changed in  that time,
 and the memory of all that went before is unsure and dim.          
   $47   Among   the   Nimri   only   was   word  preserved   of  the
 things that were; of whom  the wisest  in lore  of old  have learned
 this tale. And they say that the  fleets of  the Adunai  came indeed
 to  Avalloni  in  the  deeps  of  the sea,  and they  encompassed it
 about;  and  still  all  was silent,  and doom  hung upon  a thread.
 For  Ar-Pharazon  wavered  at   the  end,   and  almost   he  turned
 back; but pride was his master,  and at  last he  left his  ship and
 strode  upon  the  shore.  Then Aman  called upon  Eru, and  in that
 hour  the  Avaloi laid  down the  governance of  the Earth.  But Eru
 showed  forth  his  power,  and  he  changed  the  fashion   of  the
 world;  and  a  great  chasm  opened  in  the  sea  between  Anadune
 and  the  Deathless  Land,  and  the  waters  flowed  down  into it,
 and  the  noise  and  the  smoke  of  those  cataracts  went  up  to

 heaven,  and  the  world  was  shaken.  And  into  the abyss  fell all
 the  fleets  of the  Adunai and  were swallowed  in oblivion.  But the
 land  of Aman  and the  land of  his gift,  standing upon  either side
 of  the  great  chasm  in  the  seas, were  also destroyed;  for their
 roots  were  loosened,  and  they  fell  and  foundered, and  they are
 no  more.  And  the  Avaloi  thereafter  had  no habitation  on Earth,
 nor  is  there  any  place  more  where  a memory  of a  world without
 evil is  preserved; and  the Avaloi  dwell in  secret, or  have become
 as shadows and their power has waned.                                
    $48   In   an   hour   unlooked-for  this   doom  befell,   on  the
 seventh  evening  since  the  passing  of  the  fleets.  Then suddenly
 there  was  a  mighty  wind and  a tumult  of the  Earth, and  the sky
 reeled  and  the  hills  slid,  and  Anadune  went  down into  the sea
 with all its children, and its wives, and its maidens, and  its ladies
 proud; and all its gardens and its  halls and  its towers,  its riches
 and  its  jewels  and  its  webs  and its  things painted  and carven,
 and  its laughter  and its  mirth and  its music  and its  wisdom, and
 its  speech,  they vanished  for ever.  And last  of all  the mounting
 wave,  green  and  cold  and  plumed  with  foam,  took  to  its bosom
 Ar-Zimrahil  the Queen,  fairer than  silver or  ivory or  pearls; too
 late  she  strove  to  climb  the  steep  ways  of Menel-Tubal  to the
 holy  place, for  the waters  overtook her,  and her  cry was  lost in
 the roaring of the wind.                                             
    $49  But  indeed  the  summit  of  the  Mountain,  the   Pillar  of
 Heaven,  in  the  midst  of  the land  was a  hallowed place,  nor had
 it ever  been defiled.  Therefore some  have thought  that it  was not
 drowned  for  ever,  but  rose  again  above   the  waves,   a  lonely
 island  lost  in  the  great waters,  if haply  a mariner  should come
 upon it. And  many there  were that  after sought  for it,  because it
 was  said  among  the  remnant  of  the  Adunai  that  the far-sighted
 men  of  old  could  see  from  Menel-Tubal's   top  the   glimmer  of
 the  Deathless  Land.  For  even after  their ruin  the hearts  of the
 Adunai were still set westward.                                      
    $50  And  though  they  knew  that  the  land   of  Aman   and  the
 isle  of  Anadune  were  no  more,  they  said: 'Avalloni  is vanished
 from  the  Earth,  and  the Land  of Gift  is taken  away, and  in the
 world  of  this  present  darkness  they  cannot  be  found;  yet they
 were, and therefore  they still  are in  true being  and in  the whole
 shape  of  the  world.'  And  the  Adunai  held  that  men  so blessed
 might  look  upon  other  times  than  those  of  the body's  life; and
 they  longed  ever  to  escape  from  the shadows  of their  exile and
 to see in some fashion the light that was of old. Therefore some

 among them would still  search the  empty seas,.  but all  the ways
 are crooked that once were straight,' they said.                  
   $51  And  in  this  way  it  came  to pass  that any  were spared
 from  the  downfall  of  Anadune;  and  maybe  this was  the answer
 to  the  errand of  Arbazan. For  those that  were spared  were all
 of  his  house  and  kin,  or  faithful followers  of his  son. Now
 Nimruzan  had   remained  behind,   refusing  the   king's  summons
 when he set out to  war; and  avoiding the  soldiers of  Zigur that
 came to  seize him  and drag  him to  the fires  of the  Temple, he
 went aboard ship and  stood out  a little  from the  shore, waiting
 on the hour.  There he  was protected  by the  land from  the great
 draught  of  the  sea  that  drew  all  down  into  the  abyss, and
 afterward  from  the first  fury of  the storm  and the  great wave
 that  rolled   outwards  when   the  chasm   was  closed   and  the
 foundations of the sea were rocked.                               
   But when the land of Anadune toppled  to its  fall, then  at last
 he fled, rather for the saving of the lives of those  that followed
 him than of his  own; for  he deemed  that no  death could  be more
 bitter than the ruin  of that  day. But  the wind  out of  the West
 blew  still more  wild than  any wind  that men  had known;  and it
 tore  away  sail  and  threw  down  mast  and  hunted  the  unhappy
 men  like  straws  upon  the  water.  And the  sea rose  into great
 hills; and Nimruzan, and his  sons and  people, fleeing  before the
 black  gale  from  twilight  into  night  were  borne  up  upon the
 crests  of  waves  like  mountains  moving,  and  after  many  days
 they were cast away far inland upon Middle-earth.                 
   $52  And  all  the  coasts  and  seaward  regions  of  the  world
 suffered great  ruin and  change in  that time;  for the  Earth was
 sorely  shaken, and  the seas  climbed over  the lands,  and shores
 foundered,  and  ancient  isles  were drowned,  and new  isles were
 uplifted; and hills crumbled, and rivers  were turned  into strange
 courses.                                                          
   $53  And  here  ends  the  tale  to  speak  of  Nimruzan  and his
 sons  who  after  founded  many   kingdoms  in   Middle-earth;  and
 though  their lore  and craft  was but  an echo  of that  which had
 been  ere Zigur  came to  Anadune, yet  did it  seem very  great to
 the wild men of the world.                                        
   $54 And it is said that Zigur  himself was  filled with  dread at
 the  fury  of  the  wrath  of  the  Avaloi  and  the doom  that Eru
 wrought;  for  it was  greater far  than aught  that he  had looked
 for, hoping only  for the  death of  the Adunai  and the  defeat of
 their proud king. And Zigur sitting in his black seat in  the midst

   
                                                                         
   of   his   temple   laughed  when   he  heard   the  trumpets   of  Ar-
   pharazon  sounding   for  battle;   and  again   he  laughed   when  he
   heard  the  thunder  of  the  storm;  and  a  third  time,  even  as he
   laughed  at  his  own  thought  (thinking  what  he  would  now  do  in
   the world,  being rid  of the  Eruhin for  ever), he  was taken  in the
   midst of his mirth and his seat and his temple fell into the abyss.
        $55  But  Zigur  was  not  of  mortal  flesh,  and  though  he was
   robbed  of  that  shape  in  which  he  had wrought  so great  an evil,
   yet  ere  long  he  devised  another;   and  he   came  back   also  to
   Middle-earth  and   troubled  the   sons  of   Nimruzan  and   all  men
   beside.  But  that  comes  not  into  the  tale  of  the   Drowning  of
   Anadune,  of  which  all  is  now  told.  For  the  name  of  that land
   perished,  and  that  which  was  aforetime  the  Land  of Gift  in the
   midst  of  the  sea  was  lost,  and the  exiles on  the shores  of the
   world,  if  they  turned  to  the  West,  spoke  of  Akallabe  that was
   whelmed  in  the  waves,  the  Downfallen,  Atalante  in   the  Nimrian
   tongue.                                                                
                                       *                                 
        I have shown (p. 353) that the  original text  of The  Drowning of
   Anadune  (DA  I)  can  be  placed  between   the  composition   of  the
   manuscript  (E)  of  Part  Two  of  The  Notion  Club  Papers  and  the
   rejected section F 1 of the typescript, on the evidence of the  name of
   the Pillar of Heaven: Meneltyula in  DA I  (appearing as  an emendation
   in  E)  but  Menel-tubel  (>-tubil)  in  F  1  (from  here  onwards, in
   comparative  passages,  I  use  the  circumflex  accent  on  all  forms
   whatever the usage in the text cited).  On the  same basis  the present
   text  DA  II  belongs  with F  1, since  the Pillar  of Heaven  is here
   Menel-Tubal, whereas the replacement section F 2  of the  typescript of
   the Papers has Minul-Tarik. Similarly DA II  and F  1 agree  in Avaloi,
   Adunai for F 2  Avaloim, Adunaim  (for the  different forms  of Adunaic
   names in F 1 and F 2 see pp. 240 - 1, 305).                            
        On the other hand, DA II has Anadune, as does F 2, whereas F 1 has
   Anadun;  and  F  1  had  the  Adunaic  name  of  Earendil  as Pharazir,
   changed on  the typescript  to Azrubel,  while DA  II has  Azrabel from
   the first. In DA II appears the name Amatthane of  'the Land  of Gift',
   which supplanted the name in F 1, Athanati (see p. 378,  $12); F  2 has
   the final name, Yozayan.                                               
        From this comparison it is clear that  the writing  of DA  II fell
   between the original and rewritten  forms (F  1 and  F 2)  of Lowdham's
   account of Adunaic in Night 66 of The Notion Club Papers.              
                                                                         
        This greatly extended version of The  Drowning of  Anadune serves,
   looking further on, as an extraordinarily  clear exemplification  of my

  father's  method  of   'composition  by   expansion'.  Separated   by  years
  and  many  further  texts  from  the  published Akallabeth,  in DA  II (most
  especially in the latter part of it) a very great deal of the actual wording
  of  the Akallabeth  was already  present. The  opening of  DA II  is totally
  distinct  (for  here  the  Akallabeth   was  expanded   from  The   Fall  of
  Numenor);  but  beginning  with  $12  (the  sailing  to   Anadune  following
  the Star) I calculate that no less than three-fifths of the  precise wording
  of  DA  II  was  preserved  in  the  Akallabeth. This  is the  more striking
  when one looks at it  in reverse:  for I  find that,  beginning at  the same
  point in the Akallabeth (p. 260), only three-eighths  of the  latter (again,
  in  precisely  the  same  wording)  are present  in DA  II. In  other words,
  very  much  more  than  half  of  what  my  father  wrote  at this  time was
  exactly  retained  in  the  Akallabeth;  but  very much  less than  half the
  Akallabeth was an exact retention from DA II.                               
    A  good  deal  of  this  expansion  came about  through the  insertion (at
  different stages in the textual history) of phrases  or brief  passages into
  the body of  the original  text (and  a small  part of  this belongs  to the
  further  textual  history   of  The   Drowning  of   Anadune).  To   a  much
  greater  extent  the  old  narrative  was  transformed  by  the introduction
  of long sections  of new  writing. There  were also  significant alterations
  of structure.                                                               
    There  follows  here  a  commentary,  by  paragraphs,  on  DA   II,  which
  includes  all  alterations of  significance made  to the  text after  it was
  typed,  and  also  indications  of  the  later   expansions  found   in  the
  Akallabeth.                                                                 
                                                                             
                        Commentary on the second version.                     
                                                                             
   $1.  In DA  II the  ambiguity of  the term  Avalai in  DA I  is removed,
        and   the   Avaloi  are   'mighty  lords,   whom  Men   remembered  as
        gods',  the  Valar;  while  in  $5  appear  the  Nimri   (Eldar).  The
        phrase   'whom   Men  remembered   as  gods'   was  changed   to  'who
        were before the world was made, and do not die'.                      
           This  opening  paragraph  had  been  very  roughtly   rewritten  on
        DA  I  nearly  to  its  form in  DA II,  but for  'the Lord  Arun' the
        name was 'the Lord Kheru'.                                            
                                                                             
   $2.  his  brother   Aman  (DA   I  Manawe).   In  all   the  texts   of  The
        Drowning   of   Anadune   Manwe   is   named   Aman,   and   this   is   the
        sole  reference  of  the  name.  Aman  was   one  of   the  names   that  my
        father  listed  as  'Alterations  in  last  revision  [of  The Silmarillion]
        in  1951'  (see  p.   312),  and   there  seems   good  reason   to  suppose
        that   Aman   actually   made   its   first   appearance   here,    as   the
        Adunaic name of Manwe.                                                
                                                                             
   $5.  some said that they were  the children  of the  Avaloi and  did not
        die.  In  $16  the  Nimri  are  called,  without any  qualification of

  'some said', 'the children of the Deathless Folk'. Cf. the opening
  of the Quenta Silmarillion (V.204, $2):                           
      These spirits the Elves name the Valar,  which is  the Powers,
  and  Men  have  often  called  them Gods.  Many lesser  spirits of
  their  own  kind  they  brought  in  their  train, both  great and
  small;  and  some  of  these  Men  have  confused with  the Elves,
  but  wrongly,  for  they  were  made  before  the  World,  whereas
  Elves  and  Men  awoke  first in  the World,  after the  coming of
  the Valar.                                                        
  Though  not  mentioned  in  this passage,  the conception  of 'the
  Children of  the Valar'  is frequently  encountered in  the Quenta
  Silmarillion;  and  cf.  especially  The  Later Annals  of Valinor
  (V.110): 'With these great ones came  many lesser  spirits, beings
  of  their  own kind  but of  smaller might...  And with  them also
  were later numbered  their children...'  (see commentary  on this,
  V.120 - 1).                                                       
    Eledai: this name is found elsewhere; see pp. 397 ff.           

              
                                                                         
  $7  and  were  not brought  to nought:  changed to  'and did  not perish
      wholly from the Earth.'                                             
  $8  At the end  of the  opening sentence,  '... than  that of  all other
      men', the following was added in:
      for  often  he  would  launch  his  boat  into  the  loud  winds, or
      would  sail  alone  far  from  the  sight even  of the  mountains of
      his  land,  and  return  again  hungry  from  the  sea   after  many
      days.                                                               
      Azrabel: cf.  the rejected  section F  1 of  the typescript  of Part
                                                                         
      Two  of  the  Papers  (p.  305):  'Azrubel, made  of azar  "sea" and
      the  stem  bel-'.  The  form  Azrabel became  Azrubel in  the course
      of typing the third text DA III; but there is a single occurrence of
      Azrubel, as typed, in DA II ($23).  On the  significance of  the two
      forms see p. 429.                                                   
      Rothinzil: this name is found in the Akallabeth (pp. 259 - 60).     
      Vingalote:  in  DA  I  Wingalote;  becoming Wingalote in  DA III,
                                                                         
      and reverting to Vingalote in the final text DA IV.                 
 $11  The  concluding  passage,  beginning  'But  Aman  would  not  permit
      Azrabel...', was changed to read:                                   
      Azrubel  did  not  return  to  bear  these  tidings to  his kindred,
      whether  of  his  own  will,  for  he  could  not  endure  to depart
      again   living   from  the   Blessed  Realm   where  no   death  had
      come;  or  by  the  command  of  Aman,  that  report  of  it  should
      not  trouble  the  hearts  of  the  Eruhin,  upon  whom  Eru himself
      had  set  the  doom  of  death.  But  Aman  took the  ship Rothinzil
      and filled it with a silver flame, and set  therein mariners  of the
      Nimir,  and  raised  it  above  the  world  to  sail  in the  sky, a
      marvel to behold.                                                   

  The form Mimir, for Nimri, appears in the third text DA III.       
                                                                    
$12   The name Amatthane ('the Land  of Gift')  was typed  in subse-
  quently over an erasure, but the erased form can  be seen  to have
  had eight letters, beginning with  A and  probably ending  with e.
  In the text F 1 of  Part II  of the  Papers the  Land of  Gift was
  Athanati  (p.  305),  and Athanate  occurs in  an earlier  form of
  Lowdham's  fragment  II,  p. 312;  thus the  erased name  here was
  obviously  Athanate.  Subsequently  the  name   Amatthane  appears
  in DA III as typed.                                                
    To  this  paragraph  a typewritten  slip was  attached, changing
  the  passage  following  the words  'they set  sail upon  the deep
  waters, following the star':                                       
                                                                    
     

                                                  
 And  the  Avaloi  laid  a  peace  on  the  sea  for  many  days, and
 sent  sunlight  and  a sailing  wind, so  that the  waters glittered
 before the  eyes of  the Eruhin  like rippling  glass, and  the foam
 flew  like  shining snow  before the  stems of  their ships.  But so
 bright  was  Rothinzil  that  even  at  morning  men  could  see  it
 glimmering  in  the  West,  and  in  the  cloudless  night  it shone
 alone, for no other  star might  come beside  it. And  setting their
 course  towards  it, the  Eruhin came  at last  over leagues  of sea
 and  saw  afar  the  land  that  was  prepared  for  them, Zenn'abar
 the  Land  of  Gift,  shimmering  in  a   golden  haze.   Then  they
 went  up  out  of the  sea and  found a  country fair  and fruitful,
 and  they  were  glad.  And  they  called  that  land  Gimlad, which
 is   Starwards,   and  Anadune,   which  is   Westernesse,  Numenore
 in the Nimrian tongue.                                             
                                                                    
 This is virtually the text in the Akallabeth (pp. 260 - 1), apart of
 course  from  the  names.  Zenn'abar  was  subsequently  changed  to
 Zen'nabar,  and  then  to  Abarzayan  (which  was  the  form  in the
 third  text  DA  III).  The  name Amatthane  was not  lost, however:
 see p. 388, $23.                                                    

$13   The statement here and  in DA  I that  the Eruhin  were rewarded
  by a life of threefold span goes  back to  a change  made to  FN II,
  $10 (V.28); cf. also Aragorn's words  'I have  still twice  the span
  of  other men',  p. 57,  and the  statement in  Appendix A  (I,i) to
  The  Lord  of  the  Rings:  the  Numenoreans  were  granted  a  span
  of life 'in the beginning thrice that of lesser Men'. For an account
  of  my  father's  views  on  the  longevity  of the  Numenoreans see
  Unfinished Tales pp. 224 - 5.                                       
    Between  $13  and  $14  there  is  a  long  passage  in  the Akal-
  labeth  in  which  Andunie,  the  Meneltarma,  Armenelos,   and  the
  tombs  of  the  kings  are referred  to, and  then the  ancestry and
  choices  of  Elrond  and Elros  (this being  closely derived  from a
  long insertion to FN III $2: see pp. 333, 339 - 40).                

  $14   The opening sentence was changed to read:                          
          Thus  the  years  passed,  and   while  Middle-earth   went  back-
        ward  and  light  and   wisdom  failed   there,  the   Adunai  dwelt
        under  the  protection  of  the  Avaloi,  and  in the  friendship of
        the Nimri, and increased in stature both of body and of mind.      
        With  'the  kings  and  princes  learned  the  Nimrian   tongue,  in
        which  much  lore  and  song  was  preserved  from the  beginning of
        the  world'  cf.  FN III  $2 (p.  333): 'the  speech of  Numenor was
        the speech of the  Eldar of  the Blessed  Realm'. In  the Akallabeth
        the  linguistic  conception  is  more  complex  (p. 262):  the Nume-
        noreans  still used  their own  speech, but  'their kings  and lords
        knew  and  spoke  also  the  Elven  tongue  [Sindarin],  which  they
        had  learned  in  the  days of  their alliance,  and thus  they held
        converse still with the Eldar, whether  of Eressea  or of  the west-
        lands  of  Middle-earth.  And  the  loremasters  among  them learned
        also  the  High  Eldarin  tongue  of  the  Blessed  Realm,  in which
        much  story  and  song  was  preserved  from  the  beginning  of the
        world  ...'  See  note  19  to  Aldarion  and Erendis  in Unfinished
        Tales, p. 215.                                                     
                                                                          
  $15   On the progressive restrictiveness of the Ban see p. 356 note 4.
  $16   The  vagueness  of   knowledge  concerning   the  dwelling   of  the
        Avaloi  ('upon  some  isle  or  shore  of  the  western  lands  (Men
        know  not  where)')  is  retained from  DA I,  and the  Adunai still
        name  it  'the Haven  of the  Gods', Avalloni,  for Avallonde  in DA
        I. (In FN $1 the name Avallon was given to Tol  Eressea, 'for  it is
        hard  by  Valinor'.  In  both  versions  of  Lowdham's  exemplifica-
        tion  of   Numenorean  names   in  The   Notion  Club   Papers,  pp.
        241,  305,  he refers  to the  place-name Avalloni  without suggest-
        ing where or what it  might be;  and in  the second  version F  2 he
        adds that although it is a name of his Language  B, Adunaic,  'it is
        with  it, oddly  enough, that  I associate  Language A',  Quenya. In
        both  versions  he  calls  Language  A  'Avallonian'.)   The  Adunai
        named the  land of  the Avaloi  'the Haven  of the  Gods', Avalloni,
        'for at times ... they could descry  ... a  city white-shining  on a
        distant  shore,  and  great harbours,  and a  tower.' But  there now
        enters  in   The  Drowning   of  Anadune   the  idea   of  divergent
        opinions concerning this vision  of a  land to  the west:  'And some
        held that it was a vision  of the  Blessed Realm  that men  saw, but
        others said that it was only a  further isle  where the  Nimri dwelt
        ...  for  mayhap  the Avaloi  had no  visible dwelling  upon Earth.'
        The  latter  opinion  is  supported  by the  author of  The Drowning
        of Anadune, since 'certain it is  that the  Nimri had  some dwelling
        nigh  unto  Anadune,  for  thither  they  came  ever  and  anon, the
        children of the Deathless Folk...'                                 
          This  was  retained  through   the  two   further  texts   of  The

        Drowning  of  Anadune  without  any  significant  change  save the
        loss  of  the  words  'the  children of  the Deathless  Folk' (see
        the note on $5 above). In the  Akallabeth the  true nature  of the
        distant city is asserted: 'But the wise among them knew  that this
        distant  land was  not indeed  the Blessed  Realm of  Valinor, but
        was Avallone,  the haven  of the  Eldar upon  Eressea, easternmost
        of the Undying Lands' (pp. 262  - 3).  See further  the commentary
        on $47 below.                                                     
          Before  'the  Blessed  Realm'  the   name  Zen'naman   was  pen-
        cilled on the typescript, and again in $23; in both cases this was
        struck through. See the commentary on $47.                        
          The  reference  to   'their  own   western  haven,   Andunie  of
        Numenor' in DA  I is  now lost.  Andunie had  appeared in  FN ($2,
        p. 333): Of old the chief city and haven of that  land was  in the
        midst of its western coasts, and it was called Andunie, because it
        faced the sunset'; this reappears in the Akallabeth, p. 261.      
                                                                         
  $17   In  none  now  dared withstand  them 'now'  was changed  to 'yet';
        this is the reading of the Akallabeth, p. 263.                    
          The whole  of $$17  - 18  was retained  in the  Akallabeth, with
        the exception of the reference to the brutish speech of the men of
        Middle-earth  (repeated  in  the following  texts of  The Drowning
        of Anadune). In the Akallabeth there appears here a  reference to
        the  far  eastern  voyages  of  the  Numenoreans:  'and  they came
        even  into  the  inner  seas,  and  sailed about  Middle-earth and
        glimpsed  from  their  high  prows  the  Gates  of Morning  in the
        East'; this  was derived  from FN  $3 (p.  334; see  V.20, commen-
        tary on  $3). With  this cf.  the opinion  expressed in  $27, that
        there was no sea-passage into the East.                           
                                                                         
  $19   of which the songs of men preserve still  the distant  memory like
        an echo of the Sea. The  song of  King Sheave  is doubtless  to be
        understood as such an echo.                                       
          In  the  Akallabeth  the  first  mention  of  the  emergence  of
        Sauron is postponed to a much  later point  in the  narrative, and
        it is not until $21 that the old version begins to be  used again,
        with  the  murmurings  of  the  Numenoreans  against the  Doom of
        Men and the ban on their westward sailing.                        
          In  DA  I  Zigur  is  the  name  which  the men  of Middle-earth
        gave to Sauron; it is not said that it was the  name that  he took
        for himself.                                                      
                                                                         
  $20   Amatthane:  at  the first  occurrence in  this paragraph  the name
        was left to stand, but at  the second  (and again  in $21)  it was
        changed to Zen'nabar (see under $12 above).                       
          Indilzar:   Elros,  first   King  of   Numenor.  The   name  was
        changed  to  Gimilzor (and  so appears  in the  subsequent texts).

        In  the  later  development   of  the   Numenorean  legend   the  name
        (Ar-) Gimilzor  is  given  to  the twenty-third  king (father  of Tar-
        Palantir  who  repented  of  the   ways  of   the  kings   and  grand-
        father   of   Ar-Pharazon;   Unfinished   Tales  p.   223,  Akallabeth
        p.269).
        seven  kings:  here   Ar-Pharazon  becomes   the  ninth   king,  since
        it  is expressly  said that  'seven kings  had ruled  between Indilzar
        [Elros]  and  Ar-Pharazon'.  Seven  was  changed  to twelve,  and this
        remains  into  the  final  text  of  DA;  he  thus  becomes  the four-
        teenth king. In his  long exposition  of the  'cycles' of  his legends
        to  Milton  Waldman  in  1951  (Letters  no.  131,  p. 155)  my father
        wrote of 'the thirteenth  king of  the line  of Elros,  Tar-Calion the
        Golden'. It may be  that he  was counting  the kings  'of the  line of
        Elros'  and  excluding  Elros  himself;  but  on  the  other  hand, in
        an  addition  to FN  III $5  (p. 335)  it is  said that  'twelve kings
        had   ruled   before   him',   which   would   make   Ar-Pharazon  the
        thirteenth king including Elros. See further p. 433, Footnote 6.      
           Menel-Tubal: see p. 375.                                           
           Ar-Minaleth  replaces  the  name  of  the  city  in  DA   I  ($32),
        Antirion  the  Golden;  spelt  Arminaleth,  it  occurs  in  the  final
        form  of  the  Old  English  text  of  'Edwin  Lowdham's   page',  pp.
        257  -  8.  Arminaleth  remained  into  the   earlier  texts   of  the
        Akallabeth,  with  a  footnote:  'This  was  its  name  in  the Numen-
        orean  tongue;  for   by  that   name  it   was  chiefly   known.  Tar
        Kalimos it was called in the Eldarin tongue.'                         
                                                                             
  $23    The  words  'the  Avaloi   were  grieved'   were  changed   to  'Aman
         was grieved'; so also the Akallabeth has 'Manwe' here (p. 264).      
           Amatthane was not changed here (see under $20 above).              
           Azrubel: see under $8 above.                                       
           In  the  Akallabeth  the  words  of  the  'messengers' of  Manwe to
         the  Numenoreans  are  still  described as  'concerning the  fate and
         fashion of the world', but  the word  fashion referred  originally to
         their instruction as to its physical shape. In DA  I the  Avalai said
         baldly 'that the world was round, and  that if  they sailed  into the
         utmost  West,  yet  would  they  but  come  back  again  to  the East
         and so to the places of their setting out'; but now there enters (and
         this was retained in  the following  texts of  DA) the  conception of
         the Earth (which is 'such that a girdle may be set about it')  as 'an
         apple  [that]  hangeth  on  the  branches  of  Heaven',   whose  seas
         and lands are as 'the rind of the fruit, which  shall abide  upon the
         tree until the  ripening that  Eru hath  appointed.' Nothing  of this
         is left in the later work.
           the   towers   of   Nimroth:   Nimroth   was   changed   to   Nimrun,
         and  so  appears  in  the  following  texts;  neither  name  is found
         elsewhere.                                                           

  $24  The words 'till all is changed' were  altered to  'for its  life is
       theirs'.                                                           
                                                                         
  $25  After 'For of us  is required  the greater  trust' was  added: 'and
       hope  without assurance';  and 'he  hath not  yet revealed  it' was
       changed to 'he hath not  yet revealed  all things  that he  hath in
       store'.  Following  this  a further  passage was  added on  a type-
       written slip:                                                      
         But this we hold to be true that your home  is not  here, neither
       in  the  land  of  Aman,  nor  anywhere else  within the  girdle of
       the  Earth;  for  the  Doom  of  Men  was  not  [added:  at  first]
       devised  as  a  punishment.  If pain  it hath  become unto  you, as
       you  say  (though  this  we  do  not  clearly understand),  then is
       that  not  only  because  you  must now  depart at  a time  set and
       not  of  your  own choosing?  But this  is the  will of  Eru, which
       may  not  be  gainsaid;  and  the  Avaloi  do  most  earnestly  bid
       you ...'                                                          
                                                                
         At the end  of the  words of  the messengers  was added:  'and to
       you  it  will  be  revealed  and  not to  the Avaloim'  (the plural
       ending  -m  in  Adunaim,  Avaloim  appears  in  the  next  text, DA
       III; see p. 375).                                                  
                                                                         
  $26  From  the  refusal  of all  but a  few of  the Numenoreans  to give
       heed  to  the  counsel  of the  messengers the  Akallabeth diverges
       altogether  from  The  Drowning  of  Anadune,  with  the  introduc-
       tion of a very long passage (pp. 265  - 270)  in which  the history
       of  Numenor  was  vastly  extended.  Here  it   was  also   to  the
       thirteenth king (but including  Elros as  the first:  see Unfinished
       Tales  pp.  218  ff.,  and  under  $20  above) that  the messengers
       came,  but  he  was  Tar-Atanamir,  and  many  kings  would  follow
       him   before  Ar-Pharazon.   There  follows   an  account   of  the
       decadence  of  the  Numenoreans  in  that age  as their  wealth and
       power increased, of  their growing  horror of  death, and  of their
       expansion  into  Middle-earth.  The  brief  phrases of  the opening
       of  $27  are embedded  in this.  Then in  the Akallabeth  comes the
       arising of Sauron, told in entirely different terms from  the story
       in the old version,  with mention  of Barad-dur,  of the  One Ring,
       and of  the Ringwraiths;  and all  the history  of the  division of
       the  Numenoreans,  the  persecution  of  the  Faithful   under  Ar-
       Gimilzor and the banning of the Elvish tongue, and  of the  line of
       the  Lords  of  Andunie  and  the  repentance of  Tar-Palantir, the
       last king before Ar-Pharazon.                                      
         Arbazan  and  his  son  Nimruzan:  Amandil  (in  the  Akallabeth)
       and Elendil. In DA I Elendil's  father is  Amardil; but  the Elvish
       names do not appear again in The Drowning of Anadune.              
         Indilzar  Azrabelo  was  changed  to  Indilzar  Azrabelohin,  and
       then to Gimilzor (see under $20 above).                            

  $27   Menel-Tubal   was   here   changed   to  Menil-Tubal,   and  subse-
        quently.                                                            
          Of  the  debate of  Ar-Pharazon with  Arbazan on  the possibility
        of  sailing  east  and so  coming upon  the land  of Aman  from the
        west, retained in the following texts, there is  no vestige  in the
        Akallabeth.   On  Arbazan's   surmise  that   there  might   be  no
        eastern  passage  by  sea  see  under  $17  above.  It  is  perhaps
        possible that an idea of  the geographical  conception here  can be
        gained   from  the   two  maps   accompanying  the   Ambarkanta  in
        IV.249, 251: for in the first of these  there is  very emphatically
        no  sea-passage,  and  in  the  North  and  South  there  are 'ices
        impassable', while in the second there are  straits by  which ships
        might come into  the furthest  East. But  even if  this were  so it
        could of course have no more than a 'pictorial' relevance,  for the
        second  map  exhibits  the  convulsions   after  the   breaking  of
        Utumno  and  the  chaining  of Melkor  in the  First Battle  of the
        Gods (Quenta Silmarillion $21, V.213).                              
                                                                           
  $28   The  story  of  Ar-Pharazon's  expedition  into   Middle-earth  and
        the  submission  of  Sauron  is  much  enlarged in  the Akallabeth,
        but this enlargement entered already in the third text DA  III (see
        p. 389, $28).                                                       
                                                                           
  $31   For 'he bade  men think  that the  world was  not a  circle closed,
        but there lay many seas and lands for  their winning'  (retained in
        the  following texts)  the Akallabeth  (p. 271)  has: 'he  bade men
        think that in the world, in the east and even in the west, there lay
        yet many seas and many lands for their winning'.                    
          The concluding  passage of  $31, 'And  that is  the Realm  of the
                                                                           
        Lord of All...',  was replaced  by the  following on  a typewritten
        slip:                                                               
          'And  out of  it the  world was  made; and  the Lord  thereof may
        yet  make  other  worlds to  be gifts  to those  who serve  him, so
        that the increase of their power shall find no end.'                
            'And who is the lord of Darkness?' quoth Ar-Pharazon.           
            And  behind  locked  doors  Zigur spoke,  and he  lied, saying:
        'It  is  he  whose name  is not  now spoken,  for the  Avaloim have
        deceived  you  concerning   him,  putting   forward  the   name  of
        Eru,  a  phantom  devised  in  the  wickedness  [) folly]  of their
        hearts,  seeking  to  chain  Men  in  servitude to  themselves. For
        they are  the oracle  of this  Eru, which  speaketh only  what they
        will.  But  he  that  is their  master and  shall yet  prevail will
        deliver  you  from  this  phantom; and  his name  is Arun,  Lord of
        All.'                                                               
        Apart from names, this is almost the text of the Akallabeth.        
                                                                           
  $32   After the statement that Ar-Pharazon 'turned back to the            

  worship of  the Dark'  and that  most of  the people  followed him,
  there  enters  in  the  Akallabeth  (p. 272)  the first  mention of
  Amandil  and  Elendil,  taking  up  the  words  of  DA $26  and the
  opening  sentences  of  $36  and  greatly  expanding them,  with an
  account  of  the  friendship  of Ar-Pharazon  and Amandil  in their
  youth,  of Sauron's  hatred of  Amandil, and  of his  withdrawal to
  the haven of Romenna.                                              
     The sentence 'and no  man might  ascend to  the high  place' was
  changed  to  'for  though  not  even  Zigur  dared defile  the high
  place, yet the king would let no  man, upon  pain of  death, ascend
  to it'. The  revised form  appears in  the Akallabeth,  after which
  there is a long passage (pp. 272 - 3) concerning the White  Tree of
  Numenor:  of the  king's reluctance  to fell  the Tree  at Sauron's
  bidding,  of  Isildur's  circumventing  the  guards  about  Nimloth
  and  taking a  fruit, narrowly  escaping with  many wounds,  and of
  the  king's  then  yielding  to Sauron's  demand. Then  follows the
  description  of the  temple, not  greatly changed  from that  in DA
  II, but with the addition that the first fire made on the altar was
  kindled  with  the  wood  of   Nimloth.  Of   the  White   Tree  of
  Numenor  there  is  no  mention  in  the texts  of The  Drowning of
  Anadune.                                                           
     A puzzling reference to the site  of the  temple may  be noticed
  here.  This  is in  the final  version of  Edwin Lowdham's  page in
  Old  English,  that appearing  the typescript  F 2  of Part  Two of
  The Notion Club  Papers. In  the earlier  Old English  version (pp.
  314 - 15)  the temple  was built  'on that  high mountain  that was
  called  Meneltyula (that  is to  say the  Pillar of  Heaven), which
  before was undefiled'. In the final version (pp. 257 - 8; certainly
  later than DA II, p. 375) it was built 'in the midst of the town of
  Arminaleth  on the  high hill  which before  was undefiled  but now
  became  a  heathen fane'.  Since the  same words  are used  in both
  Old English texts the second version suggests  a halfway  stage, in
  which the temple was still built on the Pillar  of Heaven  (on daem
  hean munte), until now undefiled  (unawidlod),  but the  Pillar of
  Heaven was in the midst  of the  city of  Arminaleth. But  this can
  scarcely be so, for already in DA I the story  is present  that the
  Meneltyula was deserted, and that the  temple was  built on  a hill
  in the midst of the city (Antirion).                               
     In  DA  II  both  references  to Mulkher  were changed  to Arun,
  but Arun-Mulkher was retained.                                    
                                                                    
$35  For the passage following the words 'And Zigur spoke to the
     king' the following (retained almost exactly in the Akallabeth)
     was substituted on a typewritten slip:
     saying that his might was now so great that he might think to
     have his will in all things and be subject to no command or

                                                                   
                                                                        
       ban.  'For   behold!  the   Avaloim  have   possessed  themselves
       of  the  land  where  there  is  no  death; and  they lie  to you
       concerning  it,  hiding  it as  best they  may, because  of their
       avarice and their fear lest the  kings of  Men should  wrest from
       them  the  Blessed  Realm,  and  rule the  world in  their stead.
       And though, doubtless...                                          
                                                                        
  $38  Amatthane  was  here  changed  to  Anadune  (see  under  $$20, 23
       above).                                                           
                                                                        
  $39  In the Akallabeth (p. 276) there enters at this point  an account
       of the treasures that were put aboad the  ships at  Romenna, with
       the  Seven  Stones ('the  gift of  the Eldar')  and the  scion of
       Nimloth the  White  Tree.
  $43  their banners were black  and golden:  in DA  I the  banners were
       'red as the dying sun in a great storm and as black as  the night
       that cometh after.' So in  the manuscript  E of  Part Two  of the
       Papers  the  sails  of  the  Numenorean  ships were  'scarlet and
       black', but 'golden and black' in the typescript  F (p.  290 note
       63; 'scarlet and black' also in FN III $6, 'bloodred and black' in
       the earlier Old English text, pp. 314 - 15).                      
                                                                        
  $44  Aglarrama, castle of the sea: in the Akallabeth  the name  of the
       great  ship  of Ar-Pharazon  is Alcarondas,  with the  same mean-
       ing.                                                              
                                                                        
  $47  The radically different  conception of  the Cataclysm  (from both
       The Fall of Numenor and  the Akallabeth),  here derived  from the
       Nimri but in DA I attributed merely to  'the wisest  in discern-
       ment', in which the Land  of Aman  itself foundered,  remained in
       the following texts:  'the fleets  of the  Adunai came  indeed to
       Avalloni in the deeps of the sea, and they encompassed it about',
       and 'a  great chasm  opened in  the sea  between Anadune  and the
       Deathless Land... But the land of Aman and the land of  his gift,
       standing upon either side of the great chasm [) rift] in the seas,
       u ere also destroyed...'                                          
       Against  the  name  Avalloni  is  pencilled  Zen'naman,  and this
       name  appears  written beside  'the Blessed  Realm' in  $$16, 23,
       though there struck out. At the end of $47 is written, but struck
       out,  Zen'naman  and  Zen'nabar,  i.e. 'Land  of Aman'  and 'Land
       of Gift' (for Zen'nabar see under $12  above). The  references to
       Avalloni seem to amount to this: the distant city glimpsed across
       the sea  was named  by the  Adunai Avalloni  'Haven of  the Gods'
       (Avaloi) because they thought that it was a vision of the Blessed
       Realm ($16). Some said that this was not so: it was only  an isle
       on which the Nimri  dwelt that  they could  see. The  question is
       not  resolved;  but  the  name Avalloni  was nonetheless  used in
       $47 to refer to  the Land  of Aman.  The statement  that Avalloni

  was 'encompassed' by the  fleets of  the Adunai  is possibly  to be
  associated  with  the  words of  $16, that  the Avaloi  dwelt 'upon
  some isle or shore of the western lands'.                          
    Apart  from  the  opinion  held  by  some  in  Anadune  that  the
  land that they could see  was an  isle where  the Nimri  dwelt, and
  the  certainty  that  the  Nimri  must have  some dwelling  near to
  Anadune, since they came there,  Tol Eressea  is never  referred to
  in The Drowning of Anadune.                                        
    The  relation  of the  Akallabeth (pp.  278 -  9) to  the earlier
  works in this passage is curious and characteristic. Just as  in DA
  it is said that the fleets of Ar-Pharazon 'came indeed  to Avalloni
  ...  and  they  encompassed it  about', so  in the  Akallabeth they
  'encompassed Avallone'; but in the latter Avallone' is  the eastern
  haven of Tol Eressea, and the text continues: 'and all the  isle of
  Eressea, and the Eldar mourned, for the light  of the  setting sun
  was cut off  by the  cloud of  the Numenoreans.'  My father  was in
  fact turning back to The  Fall of  Numenor ($6,  p. 336),  which is
  almost  the   same  here   -  but   which  has   'they  encompassed
  Avallon', and lacks the words 'and all the isle of Eressea': for in
  FN Avallon was the name of Eressea itself.                         
    The description of  the 'changing  of the  fashion of  the world'
  in  the  Akallabeth  is  almost  exactly  as  in  The  Drowning  of
  Anadune:                                                           
  ...  and  a  great  chasm  opened  in   the  sea   between  Numenor
  and  the  Deathless  Lands,  and  the waters  flowed down  into it,
  and  the  noise  and  smoke  of  the cataracts  went up  to heaven,
  and  the  world  was  shaken.  And  all  the  fleets of  the Numen-
  oreans   were   drawn   down   into  the   abyss,  and   they  were
  drowned and swallowed up for ever.                                 
  But  whereas  in  The  Drowning  of  Anadune  this  is  followed by
  the  statement  that not  only Anadune  but the  Land of  Aman also
  disappeared into the great rift, in the Akallabeth my  father again
  turned to The  Fall of  Numenor ($$7  - 8),  telling that  the king
  and  his  warriors  who  had  set  foot in  the Blessed  Realm were
  'buried under falling hills' and  'lie imprisoned  in the  Caves of
  the Forgotten, until the Last  Battle and  the Day  of Doom'; and
  then,  that  'Iluvatar  cast back  the Great  Seas west  of Middle-
  earth... and  the world  was diminished,  for Valinor  and Eresse'a
  were  taken  from it  into the  realm of  hidden things.'  Thus the
  radical difference in the conception of the loss  of the  True West
  between  The  Drowning  of  Anadune  and   the  Akallabeth   was  a
  reversion to that of The Fall of Numenor.                          
    The  passage  'Iluvatar  cast  back  the  Great  Seas ...'  was a
  revision (see V.32) of  the original  form of  The Fall  of Numenor
  (V.16; the second text FN II is virtually the  same), in  which the
  World   Made   Round   was   more   unequivocally   expressed:  the

       Gods 'bent back the edges of  the Middle-earth,  and they  made it
       into  a  globe  ...  Thus New  Lands came  into being  beneath the
       Old World, and all  were equally  distant from  the centre  of the
       round earth...'                                                    
         This subject is further discussed on pp. 391 ff.                 
         In the  concluding sentence  of $47  in DA  II, 'and  the Avaloi
       dwell in secret, or  have become  as shadows  and their  power has
       waned',  my  father  was  following  DA I,  where the  name Avalai
       is ambiguously  used; in  the next  text DA  III the  sentence was
       changed (p. 391, $$46 - 7).                                        
                                                                         
  $48  Ar-Zimrahil:  Tar-Ilien in  DA I  and in  FN ($$5,  7); afterwards
       Tar-Miriel,   whose   Adunaic    name   was    Ar-Zimraphel   (Un-
       finished Tales p. 224, Akallabeth pp. 269 - 70).                   
                                                                         
  $$49 - 50 This passage, despite many small changes in the expression,
       does not differ at all in its content from that in  DA I,  except for
       the  addition  at  the  end  of  $50  of  'Therefore some  among them
       would still search the empty seas'. See further pp. 391 ff.        
                                                                         
  $51  After  'Nimruzan, and  his sons  and people'  the words  'in their
       seven  ships'  were  added  -  presumably  they  had  been omitted
       unintentionally, since 'in seven ships' is present in DA I. In the
       Akallabeth  there  were  nine  ships, 'four  for Elendil,  and for
       Isildur three, and for Anarion two'. The sons  of Elendil  are not
       named, nor their number given, in The Drowning of Anadune.        

              (iv) The final form of The Drowning of Anadune.            
                                                                        
 The extensive alterations to the text of DA II detailed in  the preceding
 commentary  were  taken  up  into  the  third  text,  DA  III,  which was
 typed  on  the  same  machine  and  the  same  paper   as  DA   II.  More
 changes  entered  in  DA  III,  and  the  completed  typescript  was then
 further altered. Finally another typescript, DA  IV, was  made, identical
 in appearance to the two preceding; in this  the changes  made to  DA III
 were  taken  up, but  the completed  text was  scarcely emended.  With DA
 IV  this  phase  in  the development  of the  Numenorean legend  comes to
 an end.                                                                 
  There  follows  here  an  account,  paragraph   by  paragraph,   of  the
 alterations  made  between  DA  II,  as  emended,  and  the  final  form,
 excluding  only  very  minor  changes  (such  as  'appointed   time'  for
 'appointed hour' in $3). In general  I do  not distinguish  between those
 that  entered in  DA III  and those  that were  made to  it subsequently,
 appearing in DA IV as typed.                                            
                                                                        
 $1  Avaloi  became Avaloim  throughout; this  is the  form in  the final
     text F 2 of Part Two of The Notion Club Papers (see p. 375).          
      Eru  (Eru-beni,  Eruhin)   became  Eru   throughout.  In   the  earlier

      form of Lowdham's fragments the name has a short vowel              
      (p. 311), but in the final form a long (p. 247).                    
                                                                         
  $5  The  opening  sentence  was  changed  to  read:  'And  out  of  the
      sorrows  of  the  world  the  hearts  of  the  Eruhin  were  turned
      westward, for there, as  they believed,  was the  land of  Aman and
      abiding peace.'                                                     
        Nimri became Nimir throughout.                                    
                                                                         
  $6  'filled with great dread, and with longing' > 'filled with longing'
  $8  Azrabel  became  Azrubel  throughout,  at  first  by  emendation of
                                                                         
      Azrabel on DA III, and then as typed; see p. 377, $8.               
        Vingalote > Wingalote > Vingalote, see p. 377, $8.             
                                                                         
 $12  The  Adunaic  name  of   'the  Land   of  Gift'   in  DA   III  was
      Abarzayan (see p.  378, $12),  changed to  the final  form Yozayan,
      which appears in DA IV  and in  the final  text F  2 of  The Notion
      Club Papers (pp. 241, 247). It is  thus seen  that DA  III preceded
      F2.                                                                 
                                                                         
 $13  'so long as they remained still true' was omitted.                  
        Adunai  became  Adunaim  throughout  (cf.  the  note  on Avaloi,
      Avaloim, $1 above).                                                 
                                                                         
 $16  'to break the ban' > 'to break the ban of Aman'                     
        '(a vision of the Blessed Realm) that men saw' > 'that men        
      saw by grace'                                                       
        'the children of the Deathless Folk' was omitted.                 
                                                                         
 $19  'And yet in the end new good turned  again to  evil, and  Men fell,
      as it is said, a second time' was  omitted, the  following sentence
      beginning  'But  after  an  age there  arose a  second manifestation
                                                                         
        '(he heard of the coming) of the Eruhin' > 'of the Sea-kings      
      out of the deeps'                                                   
                                                                         
 $20  The   name  Minul-Tarik   of  the   Pillar  of   Heaven,  replacing
      Menel-Tubal  (subsequently  Menil-Tubal) of  DA II,  first appears
      in DA III (see p. 375).                                             
                                                                         
 $21  'and  now again  was stirring'  ) 'and  now the  deep-planted seeds
      were stirring once again'                                           
                                                                         
 $23  For Amatthane in DA II $$21, 23 (where it refers  to 'the  Land of
      Gift')  the  following  texts  have  Anadune;  but for  the Blessed
      Realm  in  DA  II  $23  they  have  Amatthani,  the  Blessed Realm.
      Thus  Amatthane,  replaced in  its application  to Anadune  in turn
      by  Zen'nabar,  Abarzayan,  Yozayan,  now  reappears  in  the  form
      Amatthani  as  the  name of  Valinor; but  Avalloni is  retained in
      $$16,  47,  50.  The  etymology  of  Amatthani  is  given  in Lowd-
      ham's 'Report on Adunaic', p. 435.                                  

  $25   To the text of the typewritten rider attached to  DA II  and given
        on p. 382 the following was added in DA III  after the  words 'nor
        anywhere else within the girdle of the Earth': 'for it was not the
        Avaloim  that  named  you  in the  beginning Eruhin,  the children
        of God.'                                                          
          'who made both it and you' was omitted.                         
                                                                         
  $26   Arbazan   became   Aphanuzir,   and   Nimruzan   became  Nimruzir,
        in  DA  III.  Jeremy  calls  Lowdham Nimruzir  in The  Notion Club
        Papers,  pp.  250,  252,  and  the   name  appears   in  Lowdham's
        fragment I (B), p. 247, 'seven ships of Nimruzir eastward'.       
                                                                         
  $27   After  the  words  of  Aphanuzir  (Arbazan)  'It  may  be  so'  he
        observes of  the fraudulent  argument of  Ar-Pharazon: 'Yet  to go
        behind  a  command  is  not  to  keep  it';  and  in  the  passage
        following his speech the words 'where are ices  impassable', first
        changed to '... is ice...', were omitted.                         
                                                                         
  $28   The story  of the  expedition of  Ar-Pharazon to  Middle-earth was
        much  enlarged on  a typewritten  page inserted  into DA  III. The
        new text is very close  to that  in the  Akallabeth (p.  270), but
        lacks    the    reference    to     the    Havens     of    Umbar:
        ... and when  all was  ready he  himself set  sail into  the East.
        And  men  saw  his  sails  coming up  out of  the sunset,  dyed as
        with scarlet and gleaming  with red  gold, and  fear fell  on them
        and  they  fled far  away. Empty  and silent  under the  pale moon
        was  the  land  when  the  King  of Anadune  [> Yozayan]  set foot
        on  the  shore.  For  seven  days  he  marched  with   banner  and
        trumpet, and  he came  to a  hill, and  he went  up and  set there
        his pavilion and  his throne;  and he  sat him  down in  the midst
        of the land, and the tents  of his  host were  laid all  about him
        like  a  field of  proud flowers  [) ranged  all about  him, blue,
        golden,  and  white, as  a field  of tall  flowers]. Then  he sent
        forth  heralds  and  commanded  Zigur  to  come  before   him  and
        swear to him fealty.                                              
        A recollection of mine in connection with this passage  is perhaps
        worth  mentioning.  I  remember  my  father, in  his study  in the
        house  in  North  Oxford,  reading  me  The  Drowning  of  Anadune
        on a summer's evening: this was in 1946, for my parents  left that
        house in March 1947. Of this  reading I  recall with  clarity that
        the tents of Ar-Pharazon were as a field of  tall flowers  of many
        colours. Since the passage only entered with the text DA  III, and
        the  naming  of  the colours  of the  flowers, 'blue,  golden, and
        white', was pencilled onto the typescript, appearing in  the final
        text DA  IV as  typed, my  father was  reading from  DA III  or DA
        IV.  I  have  the strong  impression that  the Adunaic  names were
        strange  to  me,  and  that  my  father   read  The   Drowning  of

       Anadune  as  a  new  thing  that  he  had  written. This  seems to
       support the suggestion  I made  earlier (p.  147) that  the emerg-
       ence of Adunaic  and the  evolution of  a new  form of  the legend
       of the Downfall belong to the first half of 1946.                  
                                                                         
  $30    This paragraph was rewritten to read:                            
            Yet such was the  cunning of  his mind,  and the  strength of
         his  hidden  will,  that  ere  three  years  were passed  he had
         become closest to the secret counsels of the King;  for flattery
         sweet as  honey was  ever on  his tongue,  and knowledge  he had
         of  many things  yet unrevealed  to Men.  And seeing  the favour
         that he had of their lord, all  the counsellors,  save Aphanuzir
         alone,  began  to  fawn  upon  him.  Then  slowly a  change came
         over  the  land,  and  the  hearts of  the Faithful  were sorely
         troubled.                                                        
                                                                         
  $31  At the end of the text on the replacement slip in  DA II  given on
       p. 383, $31, after 'his  name is  Arun, Lord  of All',  was added:
       'Giver of Freedom, and he shall make you stronger than they.'      
                                                                         
  $32  The description of the  temple was  changed on  a retyped  page of
       DA  III by  the alteration  of the  sentences following  'a mighty
       dome':                                                             
         And that dome was wrought all of silver  and rose  glittering in
       the sun, so that the light of it could be seen afar off;  but soon
       the light was darkened  and the  silver became  black. For  in the
       topmost  of  the  dome  there was  a wide  opening or  louver, and
       thence there issued a great smoke...                               
         To  the  second  reference  to  Mulkher  (> Arun)  in DA  II was
                                                                         
       added 'Giver of Freedom' (cf. $31 above).                          
         The  final  sentence  of  the  paragraph became:  'These charges
       were for  the most  part false;  yet those  were bitter  days, and
       wickedness begets wickedness.'                                     
                                                                         
  $36  The reply of Aphanuzir (Arbazan) to Nimruzir's question
       'Would you then bewray the King?' was expanded to a form
       approaching that in the Akallabeth (p. 275):
         'Yea, verily that I would,' said Aphanuzir, 'if I thought that
       Aman needed such a messenger. For there is but one loyalty
       from which no man can be absolved in heart for any cause.
       And as for the ban, I will suffer in myself alone the penalty,
       lest all the Eruhin become guilty.'
                                                                         
  $38  'you must fly from fair Amatthane  that is  now defiled,  and lose
       what you have loved' > 'you  must fly  from the  land of  the Star
       with no other star to guide you;  for that  land is  defiled. Then
       you shall lose what you have loved'                                
                                                                         
  $39  'But this much can be seen that' was omitted.                      

  $41  '(the Eagles of Aman) are over Anadune! ' > 'overshadow           
       Anadune! '                                                        
                                                                        
  $43  'one after another in an endless line' > 'advancing in a line the
       end of which could not be seen'                                   
                                                                        
  $$46-7   This passage in DA II was closely preserved in the final form,
  including  the  reference  to  the  fleets  of  the  Adunaim  coming to
  'Avalloni  in  the  deeps  of  the  sea', apart  from an  insertion and
  alteration  following  'For   Ar-Pharazon  wavered   at  the   end  and
  almost he turned back' in $47:                                         
         His  heart  misgave  him  when  he  looked  upon  the  soundless
  shores   and   saw   the   Mountain  of   Aman  shining,   whiter  than
  snow,  colder  than  Death,  silent,  alone,  immutable,   terrible  as
  the  shadow  of  the  light  of  God.  But  pride  was now  his master,
  and  at  last  he   left  his   ship,  and   strode  upon   the  shore,
  claiming that land for his own, if none should do battle for it.       
       This  passage  was  retained  in  the  Akallabeth  (p.  278), with
  Taniquetil for the Mountain of Aman and Iluvatar for God.              
         Following 'the  land of  Aman and  the land  of his  gift' (near
  the  end  of  $47)  was  added  'Amatthani  and  Yozayan'   (see  under
  $23 above).                                                            
         The  final  sentence  of  $47  was  changed  to  read:  'And the
  Avaloim  thereafter  had  no  habitation  on  Earth,  and   they  dwell
  invisible;  nor  is  there  any  place  more  where   a  memory   of  a
  world without evil is preserved.' See p. 387 ($47, at end).            
                                                                        
                                 $$49-50                                 
  This  crucial  passage  was  at  first  retained in  DA III  in exactly
  the  form  that  it had  in DA  II (pp.  373 -  4) with  one difference
  (apart  from  Minul-Tarik  for  Menil-Tubal):  the   end  of   $50  was
  changed   to   read:   'Therefore   some   among   them   would   still
  search  the  empty  seas,  hoping  to  come upon  the Lonely  Isle. But
  they  found  it  not:  "for  all the  ways are  crooked that  once were
  straight,"  they  said.'  Already  in  $49 as  it appears  in DA  I the
  summit  of  the Pillar  of Heaven  is called  'a lonely  isle somewhere
  in  the  great  waters',  if  it  were  to  be  found rising  above the
  surface of the sea.                                                    
    Since  apart  from  the  statements  in  $16  that  the   Nimir  must
  have  dwelt  near  Anadune,  and  that  some  said  that  it   was  the
  island  of  the  Nimir  that could  be seen,  Tol Eressea  is otherwise
  conspicuous   by   its   absence   from   The   Drowning   of  Anadune,
  and  Avalloni  is a  name of  the Blessed  Realm, it  is clear  that my
  father  used  the  name  Lonely  Isle of  the summit  of the  Pillar of
  Heaven on Anadune with a deliberate intention of ambiguity.            
    Additional  typewritten  pages  were  substituted  for   the  conclu-
  sion ($$49  - 55)  of the  narrative in  DA III,  and $50  was extended

  ($$49-50)
         

                                                             
     in  a  very   remarkable  way.   The  text   was  not   further  changed
     subsequently,  and  this  is  the  final  form  of  $$49  -  50  in  The
     Drowning  of  Anadune  (I  give  the  passage  in   full  for   ease  of
     comparison  with  the  conclusion  of  the  Akallabeth   that  follows):
     Now    the    summit    of    Mount    Minul-Tarik,   the    Pillar   of
     Heaven,  in  the  midst  of  the   land  was   a  hallowed   place,  for
     there  the  Adunaim  had  been  wont   to  give   thanks  to   Eru,  and
     to  adore  him;  and  even  in  the  days  of  Zigur  it  had  not  been
     defiled.  Therefore  many  men   believed  that   it  was   not  drowned
     for  ever,  but  rose  again  above  the  waves,  a  lonely  island lost
     in  the  great  waters,  if  haply  a  mariner  should  come   upon  it.
     And  many  there  were  that  after  sought  for  it,  because   it  was
     said   among   the  remnant   of  the   Adunaim  that   the  far-sighted
     men  of  old  could  see  from  the  Minul-Tarik  the  glimmer   of  the
     Deathless  Land.  For  even  after   their  ruin   the  hearts   of  the
     Adunaim   were   still   set   westward;    [$50]   and    though   they
     knew   that   the   world   was   changed,   they  said:   'Avalloni  is
     vanished  from  the  Earth,  and  the  Land  of  Gift  is   taken  away,
     and   in   the   world  of   this  present   darkness  they   cannot  be
     found;  yet  once  they  were,  and  therefore  they  still are  in true
     being  and  in  the  whole  shape  of  the   world.'  And   the  Adunaim
     held   that  men   so  blessed   might  look   upon  other   times  than
     those  of  the  body's  life;  and  they  longed  ever  to  escape  from
     the  shadows  of  their  exile  and  to  see in  some fashion  the light
     that   was   of   old.   Therefore   some   among   them   would   still
     search  the  empty  seas,  hoping   to  come   upon  the   Lonely  Isle,
     and there to see a vision of things that were.                          
                 But they found it not, and they said: 'All the ways are bent
     that  once  were  straight.'  For in  the youth  of the  world it  was a
     hard  saying  to  men  that  the  Earth  was  not  plain * as  it seemed
     to  be,  and  few  even  of  the  Faithful  of  Anadune had  believed in
     their  hearts  this  teaching;  and   when  in   after  days,   what  by
     star-craft,  what  by  the  voyages  of  ships that  sought out  all the
     ways  and  waters  of  the  Earth,  the  Kings  of  Men  knew  that  the
     world   was   indeed   round,   then   the   belief  arose   among  them
     that   it  had   so  been   made  only   in  the   time  of   the  great
     Downfall,   and   was   not   thus   before.   Therefore   they  thought
     that,  while  the  new  world  fell  away,  the  old  road and  the path
     of  the   memory  of   the  Earth   went  on   towards  heaven,   as  it
     were   a   mighty   bridge   invisible.  And   many  were   the  rumours
     and   tales   among   them   concerning   mariners   and   men   forlorn
     upon  the  sea,  who  by  some  grace  or  fate  had  entered   in  upon

   (* plain is used in the lost sense 'flat'; but cf. the later spelling plane of the
  same word, and the noun plain.)                                                    

  ($$49-50)                                                              
           the  ancient  way  and  seen the  face of  the world  sink below
           them,  and so  had come  to the  Lonely Isle,  or verily  to the
           Land  of  Aman  that  was,  and  had   looked  upon   the  White
           Mountain, dreadful and beautiful, ere they died.                
                                                                          
         In the Akallabeth a good deal  of this  passage was  retained, but
         given  new  bearings.  I  cite  it here  as it  is printed  in The
         Silmarillion, pp. 281 - 2 (some editorial alteration at the begin-
         ning and end does not affect the sense of the passage).           
                                                                          
           Among  the   Exiles  many   believed  that   the  summit   of  the
           Meneltarma,  the  Pillar  of  Heaven,  was  not drowned  for ever,
           but  rose  again  above  the waves,  a lonely  island lost  in the
           great waters; for it had been a  hallowed place,  and even  in the
           days  of  Sauron  none  had  defiled  it. And  some there  were of
           the seed of  Earendil that  afterwards sought  for it,  because it
           was  said  among  loremasters  that  the  farsighted  men  of  old
           could  see  from  the  Meneltarma  a  glimmer  of   the  Deathless
           Land. For  even after  the ruin  the hearts  of the  Dunedain were
           still  set  westwards;  and  though  they  knew  indeed  that  the
           world  was  changed,  they  said: 'Avallone  is vanished  from the
           Earth  and  the  Land  of  Aman is  taken away,  and in  the world
           of  this  present  darkness they  cannot be  found. Yet  once they
           were,  and  therefore they  still are,  in true  being and  in the
           whole shape of the world as at first it was devised.'           
                 For the Dunedain held that even mortal  Men, if  so blessed,
           might  look upon  other times  than those  of their  bodies' life;
           and they longed ever  to escape  from the  shadows of  their exile
           and  to  see  in some  fashion the  light that  dies not;  for the
           sorrow  of  the  thought  of  death  had  pursued  them  over  the
           deeps  of  the sea.  Thus it  was that  great mariners  among them
           would  still  search  the  empty  seas,  hoping  to come  upon the
           Isle  of  Meneltarma, and  there to  see a  vision of  things that
           were.  But  they  found  it not.  And those  that sailed  far came
           only  to the  new lands,  and found  them like  to the  old lands,
           and subject to death.  And those  that sailed  furthest set  but a
           girdle about the Earth  and returned  weary at  last to  the place
           of their beginning; and they said: 'All roads are now bent.'
                 Thus in after days, what by  the voyages  of ships,  what by
           lore and  star-craft, the  kings of  Men knew  that the  world was
           indeed  made  round,  and yet  the Eldar  were permitted  still to
           depart  and  to  come  to  the  Ancient West  and to  Avallone, if
           they  would.  Therefore  the  loremasters  of  Men  said   that  a
           Straight  Road must  still be,  for those  that were  permitted to
           find it.  And they  taught that,  while the  new world  fell away,

  ($$49-50)                                                              
           the old road and the path  of the  memory of  the West  still went
           on,  as  it  were a  mighty bridge  invisible that  passed through
           the  air  of  breath and  of flight  (which were  bent now  as the
           world  was  bent),  and  traversed   Ilmen  which   flesh  unaided
           cannot  endure, until  it came  to Tol  Eressea, the  Lonely Isle,
           and  maybe  even  beyond,  to  Valinor,  where  the   Valar  still
           dwell  and  watch the  unfolding of  the story  of the  world. And
           tales  and  rumours  arose along  the shores  of the  sea concern-
           ing  mariners  and  men  forlorn  upon  the  water  who,  by  some
           fate or grace  or favour  of the  Valar, had  entered in  upon the
           Straight  Way  and seen  the face  of the  world sink  below them,
           and so had come to  the lamplit  quays of  Avallone, or  verily to
           the  last  beaches on  the margin  of Aman,  and there  had looked
           upon   the   White  Mountain,   dreadful  and   beautiful,  before
           they died.                                                      
                                                                          
         It will be seen that $49 and the first part of $50 (as far as 'But
         they found it not') in DA was largely  retained in  the Akallabeth
         (where  however all  this passage  concerning the  speculations of
         the  Exiles was  removed to  the end  of the  work). But  where DA
         has 'Avalloni is vanished from the Earth, and the Land of  Gift is
         taken  away'  the Akallabeth  has 'Avallone  is vanished  from the
         Earth  and the  Land of  Aman is  taken away'.  In DA  Avalloni is
         the  Land  of  Aman;  in  the Akallabeth  it is  the haven  in Tol
         Eressea (see  p. 386).  In DA  those who  searched the  empty seas
         hoped to come upon 'the Lonely Isle', which is  the summit  of the
         Pillar  of  Heaven;  in  the  Akallabeth they  hoped to  come upon
         'the Isle of Meneltarma'.                                         
           In  both  versions  the  mariners who  sailed west  from Middle-
         earth  seeking  for  the  summit  of  Minul-Tarik   or  Meneltarma
         discovered  by their  voyaging that  the world  was round;  but in
         DA the words are  'that the  world was  indeed round',  whereas in
         the Akallabeth they are 'that the world was indeed made round'.
           In  The  Fall  of  Numenor it  was explicit,  the kernel  of the
         legend of  the Cataclysm,  that the  world was  made round  at the
         time of the Downfall (see pp. 386 -  7): this  was the  story, and
         within the story the rounding of the world at that time is a fact,
         unqualified.  In  The Drowning  of Anadune  the Nimir  (Eldar) had
         come  to  the  Adunaim  and  expressly taught  that the  world was
         of its nature round ('as an apple  it hangeth  on the  branches of
         heaven',  $23),  but  Zigur  coming  had  gainsaid it  ('The world
         was not a circle closed', $31). In this work the author knows that
         the world is of its nature a globe;  but very  few of  the Adunaim
         had believed this teaching until the voyages  of the  survivors of
         the  Downfall  taught  them  that  it  was  true (cf.  the passage

($$49-50)
 written on the original text DA I, p. 355:  'For they  believed still
 the lies of Sauron that the world was plain,  until their  fleets had
 encompassed  all  the   world  seeking   for  Meneltyula,   and  they
 knew that  it was  round'). And  so (as  he recounts  the tradition),
 rather  than  accept  the  true  nature  of  the  Round  World,  'the
 belief  arose  among  them  that  it  had  so been  made only  in the
 time  of the  great Downfall,  and was  not thus  before.' So  it was
 that  the  survivors  of  Anadune  in the  West of  Middle-earth came
 to  the  conception  of  the Straight  Road: 'Therefore  they thought
 that, while the new world fell  away, the  old road  and the  path of
 the  memory  of  the  Earth  went  on  towards heaven,  as it  were a
 mighty bridge invisible.'                                            
    This is radically distinct from The Fall  of Numenor  (FN III
 $11,  p. 338):  For the  ancient line  of the  world remained  in the
 mind  of  Iluvatar,  and  in  the  thought  of the  gods, and  in the
 memory  of  the  world, as  a shape  and plan  that has  been changed
 and  yet  endureth.'  The  author  of  The  Fall  of   Numenor  knows
 that 'of old  many of  the exiles  of Numenor  could still  see, some
 clearly  and  some more  faintly, the  paths to  the True  West'; but
 for  the  rationalising  author  (as  he  may  seem  to  be)  of  The
 Drowning  of  Anadune  the  Straight  Road  was  a  belief   born  of
 desire and regret.                                                   
         The author of the Akallabeth had both  works before  him, and
 in this  passage he  made use  of them  both. I  give again  here the
 concluding  passage  of  the  Akallabeth   with  the   sources  shown
 (necessarily   somewhat   approximately):   The   Drowning   of  Ana-
 dune  in  italic,  The  Fall  of Numenor  (FN III  $$8, 12)  in roman
 between  asterisks,  and  passages  not  found  in  either  source in
 roman within brackets.                                               
         But they found it not. (And those that sailed far)* came only
 to  the  new  lands,  and  found  them  like  to  the old  lands, and
 subject  to  death.* (And  those  that  sailed  furthest  set  but a
 girdle  about  the  Earth  and  returned)* weary  at  last   to  the
 place  of  their  beginning;*  and  they  said:  'All  roads  are now
 bent.'                                                               
            Thus in after days, what by the voyages of ships,  what by
 (lore  and)  star-craft,  the  kings  of  Men  knew  that  the world
 was  indeed  (made)  round,  (and  yet   the  Eldar   were  permitted
 still  to  depart  and   to  come   to  the   Ancient  West   and  to
 Avallone,  if  they  would.)  Therefore   (the  loremasters   of  Men
 said  that  a  Straight  Road  must  still  be,  for those  that were
 permitted  to  find  it.  And  they  taught)  that,  while   the  new
 world  fell  away,  the  old  road  and  the  path  of the  memory of
 the  (West  still)  went  on, as  it were  a mighty  bridge invisible
 (that) * passed  through  the air  of breath  and of  flight *((which

  ($$49-50)                                                               
            were  bent  now  as the  world was  bent),)* and  traversed Ilmen
            which  flesh  unaided  cannot  endure,*  (until  it  came  to Tol
            Eressea,  the  Lonely Isle,  and maybe  even beyond,  to Valinor,
            where  the  Valar  still  dwell  and watch  the unfolding  of the
            story  of  the  world.) And  tales and  rumours (arose  along the
            shores  of  the  sea)  concerning mariners  and men  forlorn upon
            the water who, by some fate or  grace (or  favour of  the Valar,)
            had  entered  in upon  the (Straight)  Way and  seen the  face of
            the  world  sink  below  them, and  so had  come to  (the lamplit
            quays of Avallone, or verily to  the last  beaches on  the margin
            of)  Aman,  and  there  had  looked  upon  the   White  Mountain,
            dreadful and beautiful, before they died.                       
             The intention that lay behind these aspects of The Drowning of
          Anadune is discussed in the next section (v).                     
                                                                           
  $51     The  description  of  the  gale  that  followed  the  Cataclysm was
          rewritten  in DA  III to  a form  close to  that in  the Akallabeth
          (p. 280), but still retaining the seven ships (see p. 387, $51):
                But when the land  of Anadune  toppled to  its fall,  then he
          [Nimruzir]   would  have   been  drawn   down  and   perished,  and
          deemed  it  the  lesser  grief,  for  no wrench  of death  could be
          more  bitter than  the ruin  of that  day; but  the wind  took him,
          for  it  blew  still from  the West  more wild  than any  wind that
          Men  had  known;  and  it  tore  away  the  sails, and  snapped the
          masts,  and   hunted  the   unhappy  men   like  straws   upon  the
          water; and the deeps rose up in towering anger.                   
                Then the seven ships of Nimruzir fled  before the  black gale
          out  of  the  twilight  of  doom  into the  darkness of  the world;
          and   waves   like   moving   mountains   capped  with   snow  bore
          them  up  amid  the  clouds,  and  after many  days cast  them away
          far inland upon Middle-earth.                                     
          On  the text  of DA  IV seven  was altered  in a  hastily scribbled
          change to twelve.                                                 
  $55     At first the conclusion in DA III retained the form  in DA  II, but
          it was  replaced by  the following  (with pencilled  corrections as
          shown, appearing in DA IV as typed):                              
            And  the  name of  that land  has perished;  for neither  did men
          speak  of  Gimlad,  nor  of  Abarzayan  [>  Yozayan] the  Gift that
          was  taken  away,  nor  of  Anadune  upon   the  confines   of  the
          world; but the  exiles on  the shores  of the  Sea, if  they turned
          towards  the  West,  spoke  of  Akallabe  [>  Akallabeth]  that was
          whelmed   in   the   waves,   the   Downfallen,  Atalante   in  the
          Nimrian tongue.                                                   
          Akallabeth  is  the  form  in Lowdham's  fragments (pp.  247, 312).
                                    *
    I have shown (p. 353)  that the  composition of  the original  draft DA
  I  of  The  Drowning  of  Anadune  fell  between that  of the  sole manu-
  script  E  of  Part  Two  of  The  Notion  Club  Papers  and   the  first
  typescript F 1 of Night  66 in  the Papers.  The second  text DA  II fell
  between F 1 and the replacement F 2 (p. 375), as also did the  third text
  DA III (p. 388, $12). The  final text  DA IV  is the  first in  which the
  Adunaic  name of  'the Land  of Gift'  is Yozayan,  the form  in F  2; it
  cannot be seen  which of  these two  texts preceded  the other,  but this
  seems  to  be  of  slight  importance.  What  is significant  about these
  details, of course, is that they make it certain that the  composition of
  The  Drowning  of  Anadune  was  intertwined   with  and   was  completed
  within the same  period as  the further  development of  Part Two  of The
  Notion Club Papers.                                                      
                                                                          
                         (v) The theory of the work.                       
                                                                          
  I turn now to the fundamental question, what is  the significance  of the
  extraordinary  transformations  of,  and  omissions  from,  the  existing
  legends  in  the  development  of  The  Drowning   of  Anadune?   I  have
  headed this section The theory  of the  work because  my father  used the
  word in this  connection, and  because I  believe and  hope to  show that
  there was a 'theory' behind it.                                          
    Before attempting  to formulate  an answer,  there are  three extremely
  curious texts to be considered. All  three were  written at  great speed,
  dashed  down  in  careless  expression  as  words   came  to   mind,  and
  probably  one  after the  other. Very  obviously preceding  the emergence
  of  Adunaic,  they  are  a  series  of sketches  of the  rapidly evolving
  conceptions  that  would  underlie  the  new  version  of  the Numenorean
  legend that my father was  contemplating: the  first of  them is  in fact
  headed The theory of this version.                                       
    This first essay, which I will call 'Sketch  I', exceedingly  rough and
  disjointed, led on to a second ('Sketch  II') which  followed I  for some
  distance,  enlarging  and  expanding it,  but was  then abandoned.  It is
  convenient  to  give Sketch  II first  so far  as it  goes, and  then the
  remainder of I.                                                          
    Notes on this section will be found on pp. 410 ff.                     
                                                                          
      Evil reincarnates itself from time to time - reiterating, as  it were,
    the Fall.                                                              
      There  were  'Enkeladim'  once  on  earth,  but  that  was  not  their
    name in  this world:  it was  Eledai (in  Numenorean Eldar).(1) After the
    First  Fall  they  tried to  befriend Men,  and teach  them to  love the
    Earth and all things that grow in it. But  evil also  was ever  at work.
    There were false Eldar: counterfeits  and deceits  made by  evil, ghosts
    and goblins, but  not always  evil to  look at.  They terrified  Men, or
    else  deceived  and  betrayed  them,  and  hence arose  the fear  of Men
    for all the spirits of the Earth.                                      

    Men 'awoke' first in  the midst  of the  Great Middle  Earth (Europe
  and Asia), and Asia was first thinly inhabited,  before the  Dark Ages
  of great  cold. Even  before that  time Men  had spread  westward (and
  eastward) as far as the shores of  the Sea.  The [Enkeladim  >] Eledai
  withdrew into waste places or retreated westward.(2)                  
    The  Men  who  journeyed   westward  were   in  general   those  who
  remained in closest touch with the true Eledai, and for the  most part
  they  were  drawn  west  by  the  rumour of  a land  in or  beyond the
  Western  Sea  which  was  beautiful, and  was the  home of  the Eledai
  where all things  were fair  and ordered  to beauty.  This was  so for
  there  was a  great island  in the  Ocean where  the Eledai  had first
  'awakened'  when  the  world  was  made:  that  is complete  and ready
  for their operations.                                                 
    Thus  it  is  that  the more  beautiful legends  (containing truths)
  arose, of oreads, dryads, and nymphs; and of the Ljos-alfar.(3)       
    At  length  Men  reached  the  western  shores  of the  Great Lands,
  and  were  halted on  the shores  of the  Sea. The  shock and  awe and
  longing  of  that  meeting  has  remained  in  their  descendants ever
  since, and the Great  Sea and  the setting  sun has  been to  them the
  most moving symbol of Death and of Hope for Escape.                   
                                                                       
 In the margin of the text of this page,  which ends  at this  point, my
 father  wrote: 'The  Almighty even  after the  Fall allowed  an earthly
 paradise to be maintained for a while;  but the  Eledai were  bidden to
 withdraw  thither as  men spread  - if  they would  remain as  they had
 been: otherwise they would fade and diminish.'(4)                      
                                                                       
    In  times  remote,  when  Men,  though  they  had  now  wandered for
  many  many  lives  upon  the  face of  the Earth,  were yet  young and
  untutored (save such  few kindreds  as had  become knit  in friendship
  with  the  western  Eledai,  and their  language had  become enriched,
  and they knew verse and  song and  other arts),  evil once  again took
  visible shape. A great tyrant arose, first as the war-lord of a tribe,
  but he grew slowly to a mighty king, magician, and  finally a  god. In
  the midst [written above: North?] of the Great Lands  was the  seat of
  this  terrible dominion,  and all  about men  became enslaved  to him.
  In  that  time  Darkness  became  terrible.  The  black  power  slowly
  extended  westward;  for  Meleko (5) knew that  there lingered  the most
  powerful and beneficent of the Eledai, and that their  friendship with
  Men was the greatest obstacle to his complete dominion.               
    Those   among  Men   of  the   West  who   were  most   filled  with
  sea-hunger  began  to  make  boats,  aided  and  inspired (as  in much
  else) by the Eledai, and they began to essay the waters, at first with
  fear, but with growing mastery of  wind and  tide, and  of themselves.
  But  now  war  broke  out,  for  the forces  of Meleko  threatened the
  lands  of  the  west  marches of  the sea.  The Men  of the  West were
  strong,  and  free,  and the  Easterlings of  Meleko were  driven back

  again and again. But this  was only  a respite,  for the  Easterlings were
  innumerable,  and  the  attack  was  ever  renewed  with   greater  force;
  and  Meleko  sent  phantoms  and  demons  and  spirits  of  evil  into the
  western  lands,  so  that  these  also  might  become  intolerable  and  a
  time  of  dread,  when  men  cowered  in  their   houses  and   looked  no
  more on the stars.                                                        
    The  Eledai  had  long  disappeared.  Some  said   they  had   died,  or
  faded  into  nothing;  some that  they had  never been,  and were  but the
  inventions  of  old-time tales;  some few  that they  had passed  over the
  Sea to their land in the West.                                            
    A  mariner  arose  in  that  time who  was called  Earendel, and  he was
  king  of  Men  upon  the  west  shore  of the  Great Sea  in the  North of
  the  world.  He  reported  that once  taken by  a great  wind he  had been
  borne  far  out of  his course  and had  indeed seen  many islands  in the
  regions  of  the  setting  sun  -  and  one most  remote from  which there
  came a scent  as of  gardens of  fair flowers.  And it  came to  pass that
  all the Men of the West  who had  not died  or fallen  or fled  into waste
  places  were  now  hemmed  in  a  narrow  land, a  large island  some say,
  and  they  were  assailed  by  Meleko,  but  only  because their  land was
  an  isle,  divided  by  a  narrow water  from the  Great Lands,  were they
  able still to  hold out.  Then Earendel  took his  ship and  said farewell
  to his people. For he said it was his purpose  to sail  into the  West and
  find the Eledai and ask for their help. 'But I shall not return,' he said.
  'If I fail then the sea will have me,  but if  I succeed  then a  new star
  will arise in heaven.'                                                    
    And  what  deeds  Earendel  did  upon  his  last  voyage  is  not  known
  for  certain,  for  he  was  not seen  again among  living Men.  But after
  some  years a  new star  did indeed  arise in  the West,  and it  was very
  bright;  and  then  many  men  began  to  look  for  the  return   of  the
  Eledai to their aid; but they were hard pressed by evil.                  
                                                                           
  Here  Sketch  II  ends  as  a  continuously  written  text, but  my father
 added  some  scribbled  and  disjointed  notes  at  the end,  which include
 this passage:                                                              
                                                                           
  Meleko  was  defeated  with  the  aid  of  the Eledai  and of  the Powers,
  but  many  Men  had  seceded  to   him.  The   Powers  (under   orders  of
  Iluvatar)  withdrew  the  Eledai  to  the  Isle  of  Eresse,  whose  chief
  haven  was  westward,   Avallon(de).(6) Those   that  remained   in  Middle-
  earth  withered and  faded. But  faithful men  of the  Eruhildi (Turkildi)
  were also given an isle, between Eresse and Middle-earth.                 
                                                                           
  Sketch I (written  at extreme  speed in  soft pencil  on small  slips) was
 essentially  the  same  as  Sketch II,  though much  briefer, to  the point
 where Earendel enters in the  latter. In  Sketch I,  however, there  was no
 reference to  Earendel, and  all that  is told  is that  when there  came a
 respite in the war with 'the tyrant' (who is not named  in this  text) 'and

  his Easterlings' the Men of the West set sail, having been instructed in
  the  art of  ship-building by  'the last  lingering Enkeladim'  and they
  landed 'on a large island in the midst of the Great Sea'. At the head of
  the page my father noted: 'The first to  set sail  was Earendel.  He was
  never seen again.' Then follows (in very slightly edited form):         
                                                                         
    But  there  is  another  smaller isle  out of  sight to  the West  - and
    beyond that rumour of a Great Land [?uninhabited] in the West.       
      This island is called Westernesse Numenor, the other Eressea.       
      The  religion  of  the  Numenoreans   was  simple.   A  belief   in  a
    Creator of  All, Iluvatar.  But he  is very  remote. Still  they offered
    bloodless  sacrifice.  His  temple  was  the  Pillar  of Heaven,  a high
    mountain in the centre of the  island. They  believed Iluvatar  to dwell
    outside  the  world  altogether;  but  symbolized  that  by   saying  he
    dwelt in High Heaven.                                                 
      [Added:  But  they  believe  he  has  under  him Powers  (Valar), some
    at  his  special command,  some residing  in the  world for  its immedi-
    ate   government.   These   though   good  and   servants  of   God  are
    inexorable, and.......  hostile in  a sense.  They do  not pray  to them
    but  they  fear  and obey  them (if  ever any  contact occur).  Some are
    Valandili (Lovers of the Powers).]                                    
      But they believe  the world  flat, and  that 'the  Lords of  the West'
    (Gods) dwell beyond the great barrier of  cloud hills  - where  there is
    no death  and the  Sun is  renewed and  passes under  the world  to rise
    again.                                                                
      [Struck  out:  His  servants  for  the  governance  of the  world were
    Enkeladim  and  other   greater  spirits.   Added:  There   were  lesser
    beings -  especially associated  with living  things and  with making...
    - called Eldar.] These  they asked  for assistance  in need.  Some still
    sailed  to  Eressea. [In  margin: Elendili]  But the  most did  not, and
    except  among  the  wise  the  theory  arose that  the great  spirits or
    Gods  (not  Iluvatar)  dwelt  in  the West  in a  Great Land  beyond the
    sun.  [Bracketed:   The  Enkeladim   told  them   that  the   world  was
    round,  but  that  was  a  hard  saying  to them.]  Some of  their great
    mariners tried to find out.                                           
      They  lived  to  a  great age,  200 years  or more,  but all  the more
    longed  for  longer  life.   They  envied   the  Enkeladim.   They  grew
    mighty in  ship-building, and  began to  adventure to  sea. Some  try to
    reach the West beyond Eressea but fail to return.                     
      The Pillar of Heaven in neglected by all  but a  few. The  kings build
    great houses. The custom of  sending their  bodies adrift  to sea  in an
    east wind grows up. The east wind begins to symbolize Death.(7)       
      Some  sail  back  to  the  Dark  Lands.  There  they are  greeted with
    awe, for they are very tall  ............ They  teach true  religion but
    are treated as gods.                                                  
      Sauron comes into being.                                            

    He cannot prevail in arms against the Numenoreans who now              
 have many fortresses in the West.                                         
                                                                          
 The  text  ends  with  a very  rough sketch  of the  coming of  Sauron and
 the  Downfall.  'Sauron  is  brought  to  Numenor  to  do   allegiance  to
 Tarkalion'.  He  'preaches a  great sermon',  teaching that  Iluvatar does
 not  exist,  but  that  the  world  is ruled  by the  Gods, who  have shut
 themselves  in  the  West,  hating  Men  and  denying  them life.  The one
 good God has  been thrust  out of  the world  into the  Void; but  he will
 return. In an added passage (but  no doubt  belonging to  the time  of the
 writing of the text) it is told, remarkably, that  'Sauron says  the world
 is round. There is nothing outside but Night - and other worlds.'(8)      
 Sauron  has 'a  great domed  temple' built  on the  Pillar of  Heaven (see
 p. 384), and there human sacrifice takes  place, the  purpose of  which is
 'to add the lives of the  slain to  the chosen  living'. The  Faithful are
 persecuted, and chosen for the sacrifice; 'a few fly to Eressea asking for
 help  -  but the  Eresseans have  departed or  hidden themselves.'  A vast
 fleet is prepared 'to  assault Eressea  and go  on to  take the  West Land
 from  the  Gods';  and the  text ends  with the  bare statements  that the
 fleet was sucked into the great chasm  that opened,  and that  'only those
 Numenoreans  who  had  withdrawn  east  of  the  isle  and  refused to....
 war  were  saved.'  This  is  followed  by  a  morass of  names, including
 'Elendil son  of Valandil  and his  sons Arundil  and Firiel',  from which
 emerges  'Elendil and  his sons  Isildur and  Anarion'. Finally  there are
 some  further  notes: 'Sauron  flees East  also. The  Pillar of  Heaven is
 volcanic.(9) Sauron  builds  a  great  temple on  a hill  near where  he had
 landed.  The  Pillar of  Heaven also  begins to  smoke and  he calls  it a
 sign; and most believe him.'                                              
                                                                          
 The third text ( Sketch  III )  begins with  a note  on names:  Iluve Ilu:
 Heaven, the universe, all  that is  (with and  without the  Earth); menel:
 the heavens, the firmament.'(10) Then follows:                               
                                                                          
    In  the  beginning  was  Eru  the  One  God  (Iluvatar  the  Allfather,
 Sanavaldo  the  Almighty).  He  appointed  powers  (Valar)  to   rule  and
 order  the  Earth  (Arda).  One  Meleko,  the  chief,  became  evil. There
 were  also  two  kindreds of  lesser beings,  Elves: Eldar (* Eledai), and
 Men  (Hildi  =  sons, or  followers). The  Eledai came  first, as  soon as
 Arda  became  habitable  by  living  things, to  govern there,  to perfect
 the arts of using and  ordering the  material of  the Earth  to perfection
 and  beauty  in  detail,  and  to  prepare  the  way  for  Men.  Men  (the
 Followers  or  Second  Kindred)  came second,  but it  is guessed  that in
 the first design of God  they were  destined (after  tutelage) to  take on
 the  governance  of  all  the Earth,  and ultimately  to become  Valar, to
 'enrich  Heaven',  Iluve.  But  Evil (incarnate  in Meleko)  seduced them,
 and  they  fell.  They  became  immediately   estranged  from   the  Eldar
 and  Valar.  For  Meleko  represented  their  tutelage  as  usurpation  by

  Eldar  and  Valar  of  Men's  rightful  heritage.  God forbade  the Powers
  to  interfere  by  violence  or  might.  But  they  sent many  messages to
  Men,  and  the  Eldar  constantly  tried  to  befriend  Men  and  to teach
  them.  But  the  power  of Meleko  increased, and  the Valar  retreated to
  the  isle  of  Eresse  in  the  Great  Seas  far west  of the  Great Lands
  (Kemen)  -  where  they  had  always  had  as  it  were  a  habitation and
  centre in their early strife with Meleko.(11)                             
    Meleko   now   (because   evil   decreased  him,   or  to   further  his
  designs,  or  both)  took visible  shape as  a Tyrant  King, and  his seat
  was  in  the  North.  He  made  many  counterfeits   of  the   Eledai  who
  were  evil  (but  did  not  always  so  appear),   and  who   cozened  and
  betrayed  Men,  and  so  increased their  fear and  suspicion of  the true
  Eldar.                                                                    
    There  was  war  between  the  Powers  and   Meleko  (the   second  war:
  the first  had, been  in the  making of  the world,  before Elves  and Men
  were).  Though  all  Men  had  'fallen', not  all remained  enslaved. Some
  repented,  rebelled  against  Meleko,  and  made  friends  of  the  Eldar,
  and  tried  to  be  loyal  to  God.  They  had  no  worship  but  to offer
  firstfruits to Eru  on high  places. They  were not  wholly happy,  as Eru
  seemed  far  off,  and  they dared  not pray  to him  direct; and  so they
  regarded   the  Valar   as  gods,   and  so   were  often   corrupted  and
  deceived  by  Meleko,  taking  him  or  his  servants  (or  phantoms)  for
  'gods'. But in the  war against  the seats  of Meleko  in the  North there
  were  three  kindreds  of  good  men  (sons  of  God,  Eruhildi)  who were
  wholly  faithful  and  never   sided  with   Meleko.  Among   these  there
  was  Earendel,  and  he  was alone  of Men  partly of  the kindred  of the
  Eledai,  and he  became the  first of  Men to  sail upon  the Sea.  In the
  days  of  the  Second  War  when  Men  and   the  remaining   Eledai  were
  hard pressed he set sail West. He said: 'I shall not return. If I fail you
  will hear no more of me. If I do not  fail a  new star  will arise  in the
  West.'   He   came  to   Eresse  and   spoke  the   embassy  of   the  Two
  Kindreds  before  the  Chief  of  the  Valar,  and  they  were  moved. But
  Earendel  was  not  suffered  to   return  among   living  men,   and  his
  vessel  was  set  to  rise  in  the  sky as  a sign  that his  message was
  accepted.  And  Elves  and  Men  saw  it,  and  believed help  would come,
  and  were  enheartened.  And  the   Powers  came   and  aided   Elves  and
  Men  to  overthrow  Meleko,  and  his  bodily  shape  was  destroyed,  and
  his spirit banished.                                                      
    But  the  Powers  now  withdrew  the  Eldar  to  Eresse (where  they had
  themselves  dwelled,  but  now  they  had  no  longer  any  local  habita-
  tion  on  earth,  and  seldom  took  shape  visible  to  Elves   or  Men).
  Those  who  lingered  in  Kemen  were  doomed  to  fade  and  wither.  But
  in  Eresse  was  long  maintained  an  earthly  paradise  filled  with all
  beauties  of  growth  and  art  (without  excesses),  the dwelling  of the
  Eldar,  a  memorial  of what  Earth 'might  have been'  but for  Evil. But
  the  Men  (Eruhildi)  of  the  Faithful  Houses  were  allowed   (if  they

  would) to go and dwell in another isle (greater but less  fair) between
  Eresse and Middle-earth. Elros son  of Earendel  was their  first king,
  in the land of  Andor also  called Numenor:  so that  the kings  of the
  Numenoreans  were  called  'Heirs  of   Earendel'.  Earendel   was  not
  only partly of Elf-kin but he was an  Elf-friend (Elendil),  whence the
  Kings  of  Numenor  were  also  called Elendilli (AElfwinas). [Marginal
  addition: Elrond his other  son elected  to remain  in Kemen  and dwell
  with  Men  and  the  Elves  that yet  [?abode] in  the West  of Middle-
  earth.]                                                                
    In  that  time  the  world was  very forlorn  and forsaken,  for only
  fading Elves dwelt in the  West of  Middle-earth, and  the best  of Men
  (save  others  of  the Eruhildi  far away  in the  midst of  Kemen) had
  gone  westward.  But  even  the  Eruhildi of  Numenor were  mortal. For
  the  Powers  were  not  allowed to  abrogate that  decree of  God after
  the fall (that Men should die and should leave the  world not  at their
  own  will  but  by  fate  and  unwilling); but  they were  permitted to
  grant the Numenoreans a threefold span (over 200 years).               
    And  in  Numenor  the  Eruhildi  became wise  and fair  and glorious,
  the  mightiest  of  Men,  but  not  very  numerous (for  their children
  were  not  many).  Under  the  tutelage  of   the  Eresseans   -  whose
  language  they  adopted  (though  in  course  of  time they  altered it
  much) -  they had  song and  poesy, music,  and all  crafts; but  in no
  craft did they have  such skill  and delight  as in  ship-building, and
  they sailed on many seas. In those  days they  were permitted,  or such
  of   their  kings   and  wise   men  who   were  favoured   and  called
  Elf-friends  (Elendilli),  to voyage  to Eresse;  but there  they might
  come only to the haven of Avallon(de) on the east side of the  isle and
  the city of [Tuna >] Tirion on  the hill  behind, there  to stay  but a
  short  while.(12) Though  often the  Elendilli craved  to abide  in Eresse
  this  was  not permitted  to them  by command  of the  Powers (received
  from God);  for the  Eruhildi remained  mortal and  doomed at  the last
  to  grow  weary  of the  world and  to die,  even their  high-kings the
  heirs of Earendel. And  they were  not suffered  to sail  beyond Eresse
  westward,  where  they  heard  rumour  of  a New  Land, for  the Powers
  were  not willing  that that  land should  as yet  be occupied  by Men.
  But the hearts  of the  Eruhildi felt  pity for  the forsaken  world of
  Middle-earth,  and often  they sailed  there, and  wise men  or princes
  of  the  Numenoreans  would  at  times  come  among  men  in  the  Dark
  Ages  and  teach  them  language,  and  song,  and  arts, and  bring to
  them   corn   and  wine;   and  men   of  Middle-earth   revered  their
  memory as gods. And in one or two  places nigh  to the  sea men  of the
  western  race  made  settlements and  became kings  and the  fathers of
  kings. But at last all this bliss turned to evil, and men fell a second
  time.                                                                  
    For  there  arose  a   second  manifestation   of  Evil   upon  Ear&,
  whether the spirit  of Meleko  himself took  new (though  lesser) form,

  or  whether it  were one  of Meleko's  servants that  had lurked  in the
  dark  and  now  received  the  [?  counsel]  of Meleko  out of  the Void
  and  waxed  great  and  wicked, tales  differ. But  this evil  thing was
  called  by  many  names,  and  the  Eruhildi called  him Sauron,  and he
  sought  to  be  both  king  over  all kings,  and to  Men both  king and
  god.  His  seat  was  southward  and  eastward in  Kemen, and  his power
  over  Men  (especially  east  and  south)  grew  ever greater  and moved
  westward,  driving  away  the  lingering  Eledai  and  subjugating  more
  and  more  of  the  kindred  of  the  Eruhildi  who  had  not   gone  to
  Numenor.   And   Sauron   learned   of   Numenor   and  its   power  and
  glory;  and  to  Numenor  in  the  days  of  Tarkalion  the  Golden (the
  [21st  >] tenth  in the  line from Earendel)(13) news  came of  Sauron and
  his  power, and  that he  purposed to  take the  dominion of  all Kemen,
  and of all the Earth after.                                            
    But  in  the  meanwhile  evil  had  been  at  work  [?already]  in the
  hearts of the Numenoreans;  for the  desire of  everlasting life  and to
  escape  death  grew  ever   stronger  upon   them;  and   they  murmured
  against  the  prohibition  that  excluded  them  from  Eresse,  and  the
  Powers  were   displeased  with   them.  And   they  forbade   them  now
  even  to  land  upon  the  island.  At  this  time of  estrangement from
  Eledai  and  Valai  Tarkalion  hearing  of  Sauron   determined  without
  counsel  of  Eldar  or  Valar  to  demand the  allegiance and  homage of
  Sauron.... [sic]                                                       
    Numenor cast down.                                                   
    Eresse  and  the  Eledai  removed  from  the  world  save   in  memory
  and  the  world  delivered  to  Men.  Men  of  Numenorean   blood  could
  still see Eresse as a mirage [?on] a straight road leading thither.
    The  ancient  Numenoreans  knew  (being  taught  by  the  Eledai) that
  the Earth  was round;  but Sauron  taught them  that it  was a  disc and
  flat,  and  beyond  was  nothing, where  his master  ruled. But  he said
  that  beyond  Eresse  was a  land in  the [?utter]  West where  the Gods
  dwelt in bliss,  and usurped  the good  things of  the Earth.(14) And that
  it  was  his  mission  to  bring   Men  to   that  promised   land,  and
  overthrow  the  greedy  and  idle  Powers.  And Tarkalion  believed him,
  being hungry for life undying.                                         
    And  the   Numenoreans  after   the  downfall   still  spoke   of  the
  Straight  Road  that  ran  on  when  the  Earth was  bent. But  the good
  ones - those  that fled  from Numenor  and took  no part  in the  war on
  Eresse  -  used  this  only  in  symbol.  For by  'that which  is beyond
  Eresse' they meant the world of eternity and the  spirit, in  the region
  of Iluvatar.(15)                                                       
                                                                        
 Here this text ends,  with lines  drawn showing  that it  was completed.
 All  the  concluding  passage  (from   'The  ancient   Numenoreans  knew
 ...'),  concerning  the  shape  of  the  world  and  the meaning  of the
 Straight Road, was struck through, the only part of the text so treated.

                                                                  
                                                                          
   It will be seen that in the latter part of Sketch III appear a number of
 phrases  that  survived  into  The  Drowning  of  Anadune  (such  as  'men
 fell a second time', 'there arose  a second  manifestation (of  Evil) upon
 Earth', 'this evil thing was called by many names').                      
                                                                          
   It seems to me that  there are  broadly speaking  two possible  lines of
 explanation  of  my  father's  thinking  at  this time.  On the  one hand,
 many  years  had  passed  since  the   progressive  development   of  'The
 Silmarillion'  had been  disrupted, and  during all  that time  the actual
 narrative  manuscripts  had  lain  untouched;  but  it  cannot  be thought
 that he had put it altogether out of mind,  that it  had not  continued to
 evolve  unseen.  Above  all,  the  relation  between   the  self-contained
 mythology of 'The Silmarillion' and  the story  of The  Lord of  the Rings
 boded  problems  of  a  profound  nature.  This  work  had  now been  at a
 standstill  for  more  than  a  year;  but  The  Notion  Club  Papers  was
 leading  to  the  re-emergence  of  Numenor  as an  increasingly important
 element  in  the  whole,  even  as  the  Numenorean  kingdoms  in  Middle-
 earth had grown so greatly in significance in The Lord of the Rings.      
   It might seem  at least  arguable, therefore,  that the  departures from
 the  'received  tradition' (not  a line  of which  had been  published, as
 must always be borne in mind)  seen in  my father's  writing at  this time
 represent the emergence  of new  ideas, even  to the  extent of  an actual
 dismantling  and  transformation  of   certain  deeply   embedded  concep-
 tions. Chief among these are  the nature  of the  'dwelling' of  the Valar
 in Arda and the interrelated  question of  'the shape  of the  world'; and
 the   Fall   of   Men,  seduced   in  their   beginning  by   Meleko,  but
 followed by the repentance of some and their rebellion against him.       
   On  the  other  hand,  it  may  be argued  that these  developments were
 inspired  by  a  specific  purpose  in  respect  only  of The  Drowning of
 Anadune. Essentially this is the view that I myself take; but the other is
 not thereby excluded radically or at all points, for ideas that here first
 appear would have repercussions at a later time.                          
   It will be seen that the 'sketches' just given are remarkably dissimilar
 in  many  points,  although it  is true  that their  haste and  brevity, a
 certain  vagueness  of  language,  and my  father's characteristic  way of
 omitting some features and enlarging on  others in  successive 'outlines',
 make it often difficult to  decide whether  differences are  more apparent
 than  real.  But  I  shall  not  in  any  case  embark on  any comparative
 analysis, for I think it will  be agreed  without further  discussion that
 these  'sketches',  taken  with  the  opening  texts  of  The  Drowning of
 Anadune,  give a  strong impression  of uncertainty  on my  father's part:
 they are like a kaleidoscopic succession of  different patternings,  as he
 sought for a comprehensive conception that would satisfy his aim.         
   But  what  was  that  aim?  The  key,  I think,  is to  be found  in the
 treatment  of  the  Elves  (Enkeladim,  Eledai,  Eldar,  Nimri  or Nimir).
 For  beyond a  few very  generalised ideas  nothing is  known of  them: of

  their origin and history, of  the Great  March, of  the rebellion  of the
  Noldor, of their cities in Beleriand,  of the  long war  against Morgoth.
  In  the  first  text  of  The  Drowning  of  Anadune  this  ignorance  is
  extended  beyond  that of  the 'sketches'  to a  total obscuration  of the
  distinction between Valar and Eldar (see pp.  353 -  4), although  in the
  second  text  the  Eldar  appear  under  the  Adunaic  name   Nimri.  In
  the 'sketches' the isle of Eressea (Eresse) appears, yet  confusedly, for
  (in Sketch III) the  Valar dwelt  on Eresse,  and it  was to  Eresse that
  Earendel came and spoke before  'the Chief  of the  Valar'; while  in The
  Drowning of Anadune Tol Eressea has virtually disappeared.              
    Where  could such  ignorance of  the Elves  be found  but in  the minds
  of  Men  of  a  later  time?  This,  I  believe,  is  what my  father was
  concerned  to  portray:  a  tradition  of Men,  through long  ages become
  dim and confused. At this  time, perhaps,  in the  context of  The Notion
  Club  Papers and  of the  vast enlargement  of his  great story  that was
  coming into being in  The Lord  of the  Rings, he  began to  be concerned
  with questions of 'tradition' and the vagaries of tradition,  the losses,
  confusions,  simplifications  and  amplifications  in  the  evolution  of
  legend, as they  might apply  to his  own -  within the  always enlarging
  compass  of  Middle-earth.  This  is  speculation;  it  would  have  been
  helpful indeed if he had at this time  left any  record or  note, however
  brief, of his reflections. But many years later he did write such a note,
  though  brief  indeed, on  the envelope  that contains  the texts  of The
  Drowning of Anadune:                                                    
                                                                          
    Contains very old version (in Adunaic) which is good - in so far as it
    is just as much different (in inclusion and omission and emphasis) as
    would be probable in the supposed case:                                
       (a) Mannish tradition                                               
       (b) Elvish tradition                                                
       (c) Mixed Dunedanic tradition                                       
                                                                          
    The handwriting and the use of  a ball-point  pen suggest  a relatively
  late date, and were there no other evidence I would guess  it to  be some
  time in  the 1960s.  But it  is certain  that what  appears to  have been
  the  final  phase  of  my  father's  work   on  Numenor   (A  Description
  of   Numenor,   Aldarion   and   Erendis)   dates   from   the  mid-1960s
  (Unfinished Tales pp. 7 - 8); and it may be  that the  Akallabeth derives
  from that period also.                                                   
    At  any  rate,  there  is  here  unequivocal  evidence  of   how,  long
  afterwards, he perceived  his intention  in The  Drowning of  Anadune: it
  was, specifically, 'Mannish tradition'. It could well be that - while the
  'sketches' preceded the  emergence of  Adunaic -  the conception  of such
  a work was  an important  factor in  the appearance  of the  new language
  at this time.                                                            
    It seems to me likely that by 'Elvish tradition' he  meant The  Fall of
  Numenor;  and   since  'Mixed   Dunedanic  tradition'   presumably  means

 a  mixture  of Elvish  and Numenorean  tradition, he  was in  this surely
 referring  to  the  Akallabeth,  in which  both The  Fall of  Numenor and
 The Drowning of Anadune were used (see pp. 376, 395 - 6).               
                                                                         
   I conclude  therefore that  the marked  differences in  the preliminary
 sketches  reflect  my  father's  shifting  ideas  of  what  the  'Mannish
 tradition' might  be, and  how to  present it:  he was  sketching rapidly
 possible modes  in which  the memory,  and the  forgetfulness, of  Men in
 Middle-earth,  descendants  of   the  Exiles   of  Numenor,   might  have
 transformed their early history.(16)                                     
   In  The  Drowning  of  Anadune  the confusions  and obscurities  of the
 'Mannish tradition' were in fact deepened, in  relation to  the prelimin-
 ary sketches:  in the  submergence of  the Elves  under the  general term
 Avalai in DA I, and  in the  virtual disappearance  of Tol  Eressea, with
 the  name  'Lonely  Isle' given  to the  summit of  the Pillar  of Heaven
 sought by seafarers after the Downfall. It is seen  too in  the treatment
 of 'Avallon(de)': for in  the sketches  (see note  12) this  name appears
 already  in the  final application,  the eastward  haven in  Tol Eressea,
 while  in  DA  I  the  reference  of  Avallonde  is  obscure, and  in the
 subsequent  texts  Avalloni is  used of  the Blessed  Realm (see  pp. 379
 $16,  385  $47).  My father  seems not  to have  finally resolved  how to
 present  the  Blessed  Realm  in  this tradition;  or, more  probably, he
 chose to leave it as a matter 'unsure and dim'. In Sketch III it  is told
 that  after  the  banishment  of Meleko  from the  world the  Powers 'had
 no longer any local habitation on  earth', and  the Land  of the  Gods in
 the far West seems to be presented as a lie of Sauron's (see note 14). In
 The  Drowning  of  Anadune  ($16)  those  in  Anadune  who   argued  that
 the  distant  city  seen  over  the  water  was an  isle where  the Nimri
 (Nimir)  dwelt  held  also  that  'mayhap  the  Avaloi(m) had  no visible
 dwelling upon  Earth'; yet  later it  is recounted  ($47, and  still more
 explicitly  in  the  revision  made  to  this passage,  p. 391)  that Ar-
 Pharazon  set  foot  on  the Land  of Aman,  and after  the Land  of Aman
 was  swallowed  in  the abyss  'the Avaloi(m)  thereafter had  no habita-
 tion on Earth'.                                                          
                                                                         
   The  attempt  to  analyse  and  order   these  shifting   and  fugitive
 conceptions will perhaps yield  in the  end no  more than  an understand-
 ing  of  what  the  problems  were that  my father  was revolving  in his
 mind. But since there is no reason to think that he turned to the subject
 of Numenor again, after he  had forced  himself to  return to  the plight
 of  Sam  Gamgee  at  the  subterranean  door  of  the  Tower   of  Kirith
 Ungol, until many  years had  passed, it  is interesting  to see  what he
 wrote of it in his long  letter to  Milton Waldman  in 1951  (Letters no.
 131): and I reprint two extracts from that letter here.                  
                                                                         
    Thus,  as  the  Second  Age  draws  on,  we  have  a  great  Kingdom and
   evil theocracy (for Sauron is also the god of his  slaves) growing  up in

 Middle-earth. In the West - actually  the North-West  is the  only part
 clearly envisaged in these tales - lie the  precarious refuges  of thy
 Elves, while Men in those parts  remains more  or less  uncorrupted if
 ignorant. The better and nobler sort  of Men  are in  fact the  kin of
 those  that  had  departed  to  Numenor,  but   remain  in   a  simple
 'Homeric' state of patriarchal and tribal life.                       
   Meanwhile  Numenor  has   grown  in   wealth,  wisdom,   and  glory,
 under its line of great kings  of long  life, directly  descended from
 Elros, Earendil's  son, brother  of Elrond.  The Downfall  of Numenor,
 the  Second  Fall  of  Man  (or Man  rehabilitated but  still mortal),
 brings on the catastrophic end,  not only  of the  Second Age,  but of
 the Old World, the  primeval world  of legend  (envisaged as  flat and
 bounded).  After  which  the  Third  Age  began,  a  Twilight  Age,  a
 Medium Aevum,  the first  of the  broken and  changed world;  the last
 of the lingering dominion of  visible fully  incarnate Elves,  and the
 last also in which Evil assumes a single dominant incarnate shape.
   The Downfall is  partly the  result of  an inner  weakness in  Men -
 consequent,  if you  will, upon  the first  Fall (unrecorded  in these
 tales),  repented  but  not finally  healed. Reward  on earth  is more
 dangerous  for  men  than  punishment!  The  Fall  is achieved  by the
 cunning of Sauron in exploiting  this weakness.  Its central  theme is
 (inevitably, I think, in a story of Men) a Ban, or Prohibition.       
   The  Numenoreans  dwell   within  far   sight  of   the  easternmost
 'immortal'  land,  Eressea; and  as the  only men  to speak  an Elvish
 tongue (learned in the days of  their Alliance)  they are  in constant
 communication with  their ancient  friends and  allies, either  in the
 bliss  of Eressea,  or in  the kingdom  of Gilgalad  on the  shores of
 Middle-earth.  They  became  thus  in appearance,  and even  in powers
 of mind, hardly  distinguishable from  the Elves  - but  they remained
 mortal,  even  though rewarded  by a  triple, or  more than  a triple,
 span of years. Their reward is their undoing - or  the means  of their
 temptation.  Their  long  life  aids  their  achievements  in  art and
 wisdom, but breeds a possessive attitude to  these things,  and desire
 awakes for more  time for  their enjoyment.  Foreseeing this  in part,
 the  gods  laid  a  Ban on  the Numenoreans  from the  beginning: they
 must never sail to Eressea,  nor westward  out of  sight of  their own
 land. In all other directions they could go as  they would.  They must
 not  set  foot  on  'immortal' lands,  and so  become enamoured  of an
 immortality  (within  the  world),  which was  against their  law, the
 special doom or gift of Iluvatar (God), and  which their  nature could
 not in fact endure.                                                   
                              . . .                                   
   But at last Sauron's plot comes to fulfilment. Tar-Calion feels     
 old age and death approaching, and he listens to the last prompting
 of Sauron, and building the greatest of all armadas, he sets sail into

                      
                                                                                  
  the  West,  breaking  the  Ban,  and  going  up with  war to  wrest from         
  the gods 'everlasting life within the  circles of  the world'.  Faced by         
  this rebellion, of appalling folly  and blasphemy,  and also  real peril         
  (since   the  Numenoreans   directed  by   Sauron  could   have  wrought         
  ruin in Valinor itself)  the Valar  lay down  their delegated  power and         
  appeal  to  God,  and  receive  the  power and  permission to  deal with         
  the  situation;  the  old  world  is  broken  and  changed.  A  chasm is         
  opened  in  the  sea  and  Tar-Calion  and   his  armada   is  engulfed.         
  Numenor itself on the edge  of the  rift topples  and vanishes  for ever         
  with  all  its  glory  into the  abyss. Thereafter  there is  no visible         
  dwelling  of  the  divine or  immortal on  earth. Valinor  (or Paradise)         
  and  even  Eressea  are  removed, remaining  only in  the memory  of the         
  earth. Men may sail now  West, if  they will,  as far  as they  may, and         
  come  no  nearer  to  Valinor  or  the  Blessed  Realm, but  return only         
  into the east and so back  again; for  the world  is round,  and finite,         
  and a  circle inescapable  - save  by death.  Only the  'immortals', the         
  lingering Elves, may still if they will, wearying of  the circle  of the         
  world, take ship and find the 'straight  way', and  come to  the ancient         
  or True West, and be at peace.                                                   
                                                                                  
  Three years later my father said in a letter to Hugh Brogan (18                  
 September 1954, Letters no. 151):                                                 
                                                                                  
   Middle-earth  is   just  archaic   English  for {q oixovpivq}, the  inhabited
  world  of  men.  It lay  then as  it does.  In fact  just as  it does,  round and
  inescapable.  That  is  partly   the  point.   The  new   situation,  established
  at  the  beginning  of  the  Third  Age,  leads  on  eventually   and  inevitably
  to  ordinary  History,  and  we  here  see  the   process  culminating.   If  you
  or  I  or  any  of  the  mortal  men  (or  hobbits)  of Frodo's  day had  set out
  over   sea,   west,  we   should,  as   now,  eventually   have  come   back  (as
  now)   to   our   starting  point.   Gone  was   the  'mythological'   time  when
  Valinor  (or  Valimar),  the  Land  of  the  Valar  (gods  if  you  will) existed
  physically   in   the   Uttermost   West,   or   the  Eldaic   (Elvish)  immortal
  Isle  of  Eressea;  or   the  Great   Isle  of   Westernesse  (Numenor-Atlantis).
  After   the   Downfall   of   Numenor,   and  its   destruction,  all   this  was
  removed   from   the   'physical'   world,   and   not   reachable   by  material
  means.   Only   the   Eldar   (or   High-Elves)   could   still   sail   thither,
  forsaking time and mortality, but never returning.                               
                                                                                  
  A week later he wrote to Naomi Mitchison (25 September 1954,                     
 Letters no. 154):                                                                 
                                                                                  
   Actually  in  the  imagination  of   this  story   we  are   now  living   on  a
  physically   round   Earth.    But   the    whole   'legendarium'    contains   a
  transition  from  a  flat  world  (or  at  least  an {osxovpivq} with  borders all
  about  it)  to  a  globe:  an  inevitable  transition,  I  suppose,  to  a modern
  'myth-maker'   with   a   mind   subjected   to   the   same   'appearances'   as
  ancient   men,   and   partly   fed  on   their  myths,   but  taught   that  the

  Earth was round from the earliest years. So  deep was  the impression
  made by 'astronomy' on me that I do not  think I  could deal  with or
  imaginatively conceive a flat world, though a  world of  static Earth
  with a Sun going round it seems easier (to fancy if not to reason).
    The particular 'myth'  which lies  behind this  tale, and  the mood
  both of Men and Elves at  this time,  is the  Downfall of  Numenor: a
  special variety of the Atlantis tradition.                           
    I  have  written  an  account  of  the  Downfall,  which  you might
  be interested  to see.  But the  immediate point  is that  before the
  Downfall  there lay  beyond the  sea and  the west-shores  of Middle-
  earth an earthly Elvish paradise Eressea, and Valinor the land of the
  Valar  (the  Powers, the  Lords of  the West),  places that  could be
  reached physically by  ordinary sailing-ships,  though the  Seas were
  perilous. But after the rebellion  of the  Numenoreans, the  Kings of
  Men,  who dwelt  in a  land most  westerly of  all mortal  lands, and
  eventually in the height of their pride  attempted to  occupy Eressea
  and  Valinor  by  force,  Numenor  was  destroyed,  and  Eressea  and
  Valinor removed from the  physically attainable  Earth: the  way west
  was open, but led nowhere but back again - for mortals.              

                           NOTES.                                    
                                                                    
 1. The name Eledai occurs in DA II (and subsequent texts) $5,  as the
    name  of  the  Nimri  (Nimir)  in their  own language.  On Michael
    Ramer's Enkeladim see pp. 199, 206 and note 65, 303.             
 2. Sketch I has here: 'The Great Central Land,  Europe and  Asia, was
    first inhabited. Men awoke  in Mesopotamia.  Their fates  as they
    spread  were  very  various.  But  the  Enkeladim   withdrew  ever
    west.'                                                           
 3. Ljos-alfar:  Old  Norse,  'Light-elves',  mentioned in  the 'Prose
    Edda' of Snorri Sturluson.                                       
 4. Cf. DA II (and  subsequent texts)  $16: For  as yet  Eru permitted
    the Avaloi to maintain upon Earth... an abiding  place' (DA  I 'an
    abiding place, an earthly paradise').                            
      In  my  father's  exposition of  his work  to Milton  Waldman in
    1951 there is a passage of interest in relation to the  opening of
    this sketch (Letters no. 131, pp. 147 - 8):                      
         In the cosmogony there is a fall: a fall of Angels  we should
    say. Though quite different  in form,  of course,  to that  of the
    Christian  myth.  These  tales  are 'new',  they are  not directly
    derived from  other myths  and legends,  but they  must inevitably
    contain  a  large  measure  of  ancient  wide-spread   motives  or
    elements. After all, I believe that legends and myths  are largely
    made of 'truth', and indeed present  aspects of  it that  can only
    be  received  in  this  mode;  and  long  ago  certain  truths and
    modes  of  this  kind  were discovered  and must  always reappear.

      There  cannot  be  any  'story' without  a fall  - all  stories are
      ultimately about the  fall -  at least  not for  human minds  as we
      know them and have them.                                           
           So, proceeding, the Elves have a fall, before  their 'history'
      can  become  storial.  (The  first  fall  of  Man, for  reasons ex-
      plained,  nowhere  appears  -  Men  do  not   come  on   the  stage
      until all that is long past, and there is only a rumour that  for a
      while  they  fell  under  the  domination  of  the  Enemy  and that
      some  repented.)  The  main  body  of  the  tale,  the Silmarillion
      proper,  is  about  the  fall  of  the most  gifted kindred  of the
      Elves...                                                           
      Notable here is my father's reference to 'a rumour that for a while
      [Men]  fell  under  the  domination  of  the  Enemy  and  that some
      repented', and see also the  further citation  from this  letter on
      p. 408; with this cf. DA II (and subsequent texts) $$3-4:          
        At the  appointed hour  Men were  born into  the world,  and they
      were called the Eru-hin, the children of  God; but  they came  in a
      time  of  war  and  shadow,  and  they   fell  swiftly   under  the
      domination   of  Mulkher,   and  they   served  him....   But  some
      there were  of the  fathers of  Men who  repented, seeing  the evil
      of  the  Lord  Mulkher  and  that  his shadow  grew ever  longer on
      the Earth;  and they  and their  sons returned  with sorrow  to the
      allegiance  of Eru,  and they  were befriended  by the  Avaloi, and
      received again their ancient name, Eruhin, children of God.        
      Of this there is no suggestion in the Quenta Silmarillion  (V.274 -
      6);  cf. however  the suggestions  in Chapter  17 of  the published
      Silmarillion ('that a darkness lay upon the hearts  of Men  (as the
      shadow  of  the  Kinslaying  and the  Doom of  Mandos lay  upon the
      Noldor) [the Eldar]  perceived clearly  even in  the people  of the
      Elf-friends whom they first knew').                                
        At the head of the following  page of  the text  is a  very rough
      and  disjointed  note  in  which  are named  the Eruhildi,  sons of
      God, descended from Shem or Japheth (sons of Noah).                
  5.  Meleko:  a  footnote  to  the text  states: 'He  had many  names in
      different  tongues,  but  such  was  his  name  among  the Numenor-
      eans, which means Tyrant.' This is the form  of the  name in  DA I,
      but with long first vowel: Meleko.                                 
  6.  Eresse is the form in the  earlier version  of Edwin  Lowdham's Old
      English text, pp. 313 - 14. - On the haven of Avallon(de)  see note
      12. In 'whose chief haven was westward' read 'eastward'.           
  7.  In The Fall of Numenor ($10)  ship-burial came  to be  practised by
      the Exiles on the western coasts of Middle-earth.                  
  8.  This (presumably) contradicts the earlier, bracketed,  statement in
      this same text (p.  400): The  Enkeladim told  them that  the world
      was  round,  but that  was a  hard saying  to them.'  The statement
      here is of  course the  opposite of  the story  in The  Drowning of

      Anadune  ($$23,  31),  where  Sauron  taught   that  the   world  was
      flat,  contradicting  the  instruction  of  the  messengers   of  the
      Avaloi(m).  In  Sketch   III  (p.   404)  'The   ancient  Numenoreans
      knew  (being  taught by  the Eledai)  that the  Earth was  round; but
      Sauron  taught  them  that it  was a  disc and  flat, and  beyond was
      nothing, where his master ruled.'                                    
 9.   The  Pillar  of  Heaven  is  volcanic:   cf.  Lowdham's   comment  on
      Frankley's  poem  (p.  265):  'Your Volcano  is... apparently  a last
      peak of some Atlantis.'                                              
 10.  On  Ilu,  Iluve,  see  IV.241,  V.47, 63,  and the  Etymologies, stem
      IL, V.361.  The word  menel first  occurs here  or in  the manuscript
      E   of   Part  Two   of  The   Notion  Club   Papers,  in   the  name
      Menelminda of the Pillar of Heaven (p. 302).                         
 11.  The first occurrence  of the  word kemen  in the  texts, but  cf. the
      added    entry    stem    KEM -   in    the    Etymologies,    V.363.
      u here they had  always had  as it  were a  habitation and  centre in
      their early strife with Meleko: the  legend that  the isle  on which
      the  Valar  dwelt  before  Morgoth  overthrew  the  Lamps   was  also
      that  on  which Ulmo  ferried the  Elves to  Valinor, and  which Osse
      anchored  to the  sea-bottom far  out in  the ocean,  so that  it was
      named 'the Lonely Isle'. The original form of the  story is  found in
      The Book of Lost Tales  ('The Coming  of the  Elves', I.118  ff.) and
      then in the successive versions of 'The Silmarillion': the 'Sketch of
      the  Mythology'  from  the   1920s  (IV.12,   14,  45),   the  Quenta
      Noldorinwa  (IV.80,   86),  and   the  Quenta   Silmarillion  (V.208,
      221 - 2).                                                            
 12.  In the earlier version of the Old English text of the  surviving page
      of  Edwin  Lowdham's  manuscript  (pp.  313  -  14)  the  Numenoreans
      were forbidden to land on Eresse. Here they may  visit the  isle, but
      only  briefly,  and only  the haven  of Avallon(de)  and the  city of
      [Tuna >] Tirion  'on the  hill behind';  subsequently the  Powers, in
      their  displeasure,  transmuted  this  into  a   prohibition  against
      landing on Eresse at all (p. 404). On the reference  to 'the  city of
      [Tuna >] Tirion on the hill behind' see note 16.                     
         In notes added to Sketch II (p. 399),  as well  as in  the present
      passage, 'Avallon(de)' appears as the  name of  the haven  in Eresse,
      and  this  is  where  the  final  application  of  the   name  (later
      Avallone') first appears (in FN III Avallon was still the name of the
      Lonely Isle, as it remained in the earlier Old English  text referred
      to                                                            above).
 13.  tenth  in  the  line  from  Earendel:  this can  be equated  with the
      statement  in  DA II  $20 (see  the commentary,  p. 381)  if Earendel
      is himself numbered, as the first in  the line  though not  the first
      king of Numenor.                                                     
 14.  This  presumably implies  that the  idea of  a land  in the  far West
      where  the Gods  dwelt was  a lie  of Sauron's.  Earlier in  the text

 (p. 402)  it has  been told  that the  Gods had  dwelt in  Eresse, but
 after the  final overthrow  of Meleko  'they had  no longer  any local
 habitation on earth' (cf.  also Sketch  I, p.  400: 'except  among the
 wise the theory  arose that  the great  spirits or  Gods ...  dwelt in
 the West in a Great Land beyond the sun'). See further p. 407.        
15.   Cf. VIII.164 and note 37.                                          
16.   A curious case is presented by the statement in Sketch III, p. 403,
 that  'the  city  of  [Tuna  )] Tirion'  was 'on  the hill  behind the
 haven of Avallon(de)'; for Tun(a), Tirion  was of  course the  city of
 the  Elves   in  Valinor.   One  might   suppose  that   Homer  nodded
 here; but in  the earliest  draft of  an Old  English text  for 'Edwin
 Lowdham's  page'  (p.  316),  which  closely  followed  The   Fall  of
 Numenor  $6,  it  is told  that the  Numenoreans, landing  in Valinor,
 set fire to the city of Tuna. The statement in Sketch III is therefore
 more  probably  to be  taken as  intentional, an  example of  a famous
 name  handed  down  in  tradition  but   with  its   true  application
 forgotten.                                                            

               (vi) Lowdham's Report on the Adunaic Language.            
                                                                         
 This  is  a  typescript  made  by  my father  that ends  at the  bottom of
 its  seventeenth  page,  at  which  point  he  abandoned  it (there  is no
 reason  to  suppose that  further pages  existed but  were lost).  That it
 belongs  with  the  final  texts  DA  III  and  DA IV  of The  Drowning of
 Anadune  is   readily  seen   from  various   names  and   name-forms,  as
 Nimir,   Azrubel,   Adunaim,   Minul-Tarik,   Amatthani   (see   p.   388,
 $$5, 8, 13, 20, 23).                                                     
  In  printing  'Lowdham's  Report'  I  have  followed  my   father's  text
 very  closely indeed,  retaining his  use of  capitals, italics,  marks of
 length,  etc. despite  some apparent  inconsistency, except  where correc-
 tions are obvious and necessary. The only  point in  which I  have altered
 his  presentation is  in the  matter of  the notes.  These (as  became his
 usual practice in essays of this sort) he simply interspersed in  the body
 of the text as he composed it; but as  some of  them are  very substantial
 I have thought it best to collect them together at the  end. I  have added
 no commentary of my own.                                                 
  It  may  be  noted  that  the  'we' of  Lowdham's introduction  refers to
 himself and Jeremy; cf. Footnotes 2 and 6 on pp. 432 - 3.                
                                                                         
                                  ADUNAIC.                                
                                                                         
 It  is  difficult, of  course, to  say anything  about the  pre-history of
 a  language  which,  as   far  as   my  knowledge   goes,  has   no  close
 relations  with  any  other  tongue.  The  other  contemporary         
 language that came through together with Adunaic in my earlier           
 'hearings', and which I have called Avallonian, appears  to be           

 distinct  and  unrelated,  at least  not 'cognate'.  But I  guess that
 originally,  or  far  back  beyond   these  records,   Avallonian  and
 Adunaic  were  in  some  way  related. It  is in  fact clear  now that
 Avallonian  is  the  Nimriye or  'Nimrian tongue'  referred to  in the
 very  early  Exilic  text  that  we  have  managed  to  get concerning
 the  Downfall. In  that case  it must  be the  language of  the Nimir,
 or  a  western  form  of  it,  and so  be the  ultimate source  of the
 languages  of  Men  in  the  west   of  the   Old  World.   Perhaps  I
 should  rather  say  that the  glimpses of  the 'Nimrian  tongue' that
 we  have  received  show   us  a   language,  itself   doubtless  much
 changed,  that  is  directly  descended  from  the  primeval  Nimrian.
 From  that  Nimrian  in  a  later  stage,  but  still  older  than the
 Avallonian, the ancestor of Adunaic was partly derived.              
   But  Adunaic  must  then  for  a  long  time  have  developed  quite
 independently.   Also   I   think   it   came  under   some  different
 influence.   This  influence   I  call   Khazadian;  because   I  have
 received  a  good  many  echoes  of  a   curious  tongue,   also  con-
 nected  with  what  we  should  call  the  West  of  the   Old  World,
 that  is  associated  with  the  name   Khazad.  Now   this  resembles
 Adunaic  phonetically,   and  it   seems  also   in  some   points  of
 vocabulary  and structure;  but it  is precisely  at the  points where
 Adunaic   most   differs   from   Avallonian   that    it   approaches
 nearest to Khazadian.                                                
   However,   Adunaic   evidently   again   later   came   into   close
 contact with Avallonian, so that there is, as it were, a new  layer of
 later   resemblances   between   the   two   tongues:    Adunaic   for
 instance  somewhat  softened  its  harder  phonetic  character;  while
 it also shows a  fairly large  number of  words that  are the  same as
 the  Avallonian  words,  or  very  similar  to  them.  Of  course,  it
 cannot   always   be  determined   in  such   cases  whether   we  are
 dealing  with  a  primitive  community  of   vocabulary,  or   with  a
 later  borrowing  of  Avallonian terms.  Thus I  am inclined  to think
 that  the  Adunaic  Base  MINIL  'heaven,  sky'  is a  primitive word,
 cognate  with  the  Nimrian  Base  MENEL  and  not  borrowed  from it
 at  a  later  time;  although   certainly,  if   Menel  had   been  so
 borrowed,   it   would   probably   have   acquired  the   form  Minil
 [struck   out:   and   the   actual  Adunaic   noun  Minal   could  be
 explained  as  an  alteration to  fit Minil  into the  Adunaic declen-
 sional system].  On the  other hand  it seems  plain that  the Adunaic
 word lomi 'night' is an Avallonian  loan; both  because of  its sense
 (it  appears  to  mean  'fair  night,  a  night  of  stars',  with  no
 connotations  of  gloom  or  fear),  but  also  because  it  is  quite

 isolated in Adunaic. According to Adunaic structure, as I  shall try
 to exhibit it, lomi would require either  a biconsonantal  Base LUM,
 or  more  probably  a  triconsonantal  Base  LAW  M; but  neither of
 these  exist  in  our  material,  whereas  in Avallonian  lome (stem
 lomi-)  is  a  normal  formation  from  an  Avallonian biconsonantal
 Base LOM.                                                         
   I  will  try  now  and  sketch  the   structure  and   grammar  of
 Adunaic, as far as the material  that we  have received  allows this
 to  be  done.  The  language  envisaged  is  the language  about the
 period  of the  Downfall, that  is more  or less  during the  end of
 the  reign  of  King  Ar-Pharazon.  From  that  period  most  of the
 records  come.  There  are  only  occasional  glimpses   of  earlier
 stages, or of the  later (Exilic)  forms of  the language  among the
 descendants  of  the  survivors.  Some of  our chief  texts, notably
 The  Drowning,  are  in point  of time  of composition  Exilic: that
 is they must  have been  put together  at some  time later  than the
 reign  of  Ar-Pharazon;  but  they  are  in  a   language  virtually
 identical  with  the 'classical'  Adunaic. This  is probably  due to
 two  causes:  their  drawing  on older  material; and  the continued
 use  of  the  older  language  for higher  purposes. For  the actual
 daily  speeches  of  the  Exiles seem  in fact  to have  changed and
 diverged  quickly  on  the  western  shores.  Of  these  changed and
 divergent  forms  we  have  only  a few  echoes, but  they sometimes
 help in elucidating the forms and history of the older tongue.     

                                *                                   
 General Structure.                                                 
   The  majority  of  the  word-bases  of  Adunaic  were triconsonan-
 tal.  This  structure  is  somewhat reminiscent  of Semitic;  and in
 this  point  Adunaic  shows  affinity  with  Khazadian  rather  than
 with   Nimrian.   For   though   Nimrian  has   many  triconsonantal
 stems (other than  the products  of normal  suffixion), such  as the
 stem  MENEL  cited  above,  these  are  rarer  in  Nimrian,  and are
 mostly the stems of nouns.                                         
   The  vocalic  arrangements  within  the  base,  however,   do  not
 much   resemble   Semitic;  neither   does  Adunaic   show  anything
 strictly  comparable to  the 'gradations'  of languages  familiar to
 us, such  as the  e/o variation  in the  Indo-European group.  In an
 Adunaic  Base  there  is  a Characteristic  Vowel (CV)  which shares
 with  the  consonants  in  characterizing  or identifying  the Base.
 Thus  KARAB and  KIRIB  are  distinct  Bases  and  may  have  wholly
 unrelated   meanings.   The   CV  may,   however,  be   modified  in

 certain  recognized  ways  (described  below under  the Vowels)              
 which can produce effects not unlike those of gradation.                     
                                                                             
  In addition to the triconsonantal Bases, there existed also in              
 Adunaic a large number  of biconsonantal  Bases. Many  of these              
 are clearly ancient, though  some may  have been  borrowed from              
 Avallonian,  where  the  biconsonantal  Base  is  normal. These              
 ancient biconsonantal Bases are probably an indication that the              
 longer forms are in  fact historically  a later  development. A              
 few  of  the  commonest  verbal  notions  are expressed  by bi-              
 consonantal forms, though the verb form  of Adunaic  is usually              
 triconsonantal: thus  NAKH 'come,  approach', BITH  'say', con-              
 trasted with SAPHAD 'understand', NIMIR 'shine',  KALAB 'fall',              
 etc. [Footnote 1]                                                            
  A number of ancient elements  also exist:  affixes, pronominal              
 and numeral stems, prepositional  stems, and  so on,  that only              
 show one consonant. When, however,  a 'full  word', a  noun for              
 instance, has a uniconsonantal  form, it  must usually  be sus-              
 pected that an older second consonant has disappeared.  Thus pa              
 'hand' is probably derived from a Base PA3.                                  
                                                                             
 Consonants.                                                                  
  The  following  is  a  table of  the Consonants  which Adunaic              
 appears originally (or at an earlier stage) to  have possessed:              
 [Footnote 2]                                                                 
                                                                             
                             (a)         (b)         (d)            (d)      
                            p-series  t-series     c-series      k-series
                                                                             
 STOPS                                                                        
 1. Voiceless:                P.          T.           C.            K.       
 2. Voiced:                   B.          D.           J.            G.       
 3. Voiceless aspirated:      Ph.         Th.          Ch.           Kh.      
 CONTINUANTS                                                                  
                                                                             
 4.  Voiceless:               -           S.           2.            H.       
 5.  Voiced  (weak):          W.       L, R, Z.        Y.          3. ?.    
 6.  Voiced:  Nasals:         M.          N.           -             9.       
                                                             [Footnote 3]
                                                                             
  The sounds of the c-series: c, J,  Ch, z  were front  or palatal            
 consonants originally; that is roughly consonants of the K-series            
 made  in the  extreme forward  or y-position,  and they  might be            
 so  represented,  but  the  above  notation  has   been  adopted,            
 because  their later  development was  to simple  consonants. The            

 sign  2  represents  a  voiceless  hissed  v,  that  is  the German
 ich-laut, or a rather stronger form of the voiceless v  often heard
 initially in such an English word as huge.                        
   It  will  be  noted  that  the  T-series  is  the most  rich, and
 possessed three voiced  continuants. The  T-series is  probably the
 most  frequently  employed  in  Ease-formation;  and  is  certainly
 the  most  used  in pronominal  and formative  elements (especially
 those of uniconsonantal  form). The  P-series  is the  poorest and
 possesses  no  voiceless  hiss; but  it is  very probable  that one
 anciently  existed, a  voiceless w  (as English  wh), but  became H
 prehistorically.                                                  
   H  represents  the  voiceless  back  hissing  sound,  the  ch  of
 Welsh,  Gaelic, and  German (as  in acht).  3 is  the corresponding
 voiced spirant, or 'open' G.                                      
                                                                  
   Adunaic   employs   affixion   in  word-formation,   though  more
 sparingly  than  Avallonian;  and  in  contrast  to  Avallonian em-
 ploys  prefixion  more  frequently  than  suffixion: the  latter is
 sparingly   used  in   forming  stems   (where  the   two  elements
 become  merged),  but  is  more  frequent  in inflexion  (where the
 two  elements  usually  remain  distinct).  The  primitive  Adunaic
 combinations  of  consonants,  in  consequence,  are due  mainly to
 the  contact  of  the  basic consonants,  and are  predominantly of
 the  form  'Continuant  +  some  other  consonant', or  vice versa.
 This is so,  because the  predominant (but  not exclusive)  form of
 the  Adunaic  Bases,  when  triconsonantal,  is  X  +  Continuant +
 X; or X + X + Continuant, where X = any consonant.                
   A   much  employed   method  of   derivation,  however,   is  the
 lengthening  or  'doubling'  of  one of  the basic  consonants. The
 consonant  doubled  is  usually  either  the  medial or  final con-
 sonant of the Base, though  in certain  formations the  initial may
 be doubled (only one of the basic consonants is  so treated  in any
 one word).                                                        
   Similar to this  method, and  so to  some extent  competing wit-h
 it in functions, is the infixion of an homorganic nasal  before the
 final, or less frequently the  medial, basic  consonant: thus  s to
 MB;  D  to  ND;  G  to  NG.  This  method  cannot,  of  course,  be
 distinguished  from  doubling  in  the  case of  the Nasals.  It is
 doubtful if it  originally occurred  before the  other continuants:
 the  apparent  cases  of NZ  may be  due to * NJ, which  became NZ,
 or to the analogy of such cases. [Footnote 4]                     
   Adunaic, like Avallonian, does  not tolerate  more than  a single

 basic  consonant  initially  in  any   word  (note   that  Ph,   Th,  Kh,
 are   simple  consonants).   Unlike  Avallonian   it  tolerates   a  large
 number    of    combinations   medially,    and   there    consonants   in
 contact  are  very  sparingly  assimilated.  Finally,  in  the 'classical'
 period   Adunaic   did    not   possess    consonant-combinations,   since
 affixes  always  ended   in  a   vowel  or   a  single   consonant;  while
 basic   stems   were   always   arranged    in   the    following   forms:
 ATLA,  TAr.(A)  in   the  case   of  biconsonantal   bases;  AK(A)LAB(A),
 (A)KALBA   in   the  case   of  triconsonantals.   But  the   omission  of
 short  final  A  (not  I  or  U),   both  in   speech  and   writing,  was
 already  usual  before  the  end  of  the   classical  period,   with  the
 consequence   that    a   large    number   of    consonant   combinations
 became final.                                                            
                                                                         
   The  following  list  will  show  the  normal development  of the      
 more  primitive  consonants  in later  Adunaic. The  consonants are      
 here set out in the order of  the former  table, and  not according      
 to the phonetic classification.                                          
                                                                         
                      (a)      (b)        (c)          (d)               
            1.         P.       T.         S.           K.                
            2.         B.       D.         Z.           G.                
            3.         Ph.      Th.        S.           Kh.               
            4.         -        S.         S.           H.                
            5.         W.     L,R,Z.       Y.        - (G). -.            
            6.         M.       N.         -        (N) [Footnote 5]
                                                                         
   It will be observed that the consonants have not  suffered any         
 very material change except in the case  of the  c-series, which         
 has  become  dental  (apart  from  v, which  remains unchanged).         
 With  the  development  of c,  ch, 2  to s  may be  compared the         
 development  of Latin  fronted c  in part  of the  Romance area;         
 and  the  development  of  Indo-European  K  to  s  in Slavonic.         
 Similarly  the  development  of  J  (fronted  c)  to  z  may  be         
 compared  with  the  change  of Indo-European  fronted c  and Gh         
 to  z in  Iranian and  Slavonic. The  assumption of  a primitive         
 c-series is based partly on scraps of internal evidence (such as         
 the presence of an infixion NZ, whereas  infixion of  Nasal does         
 not occur before the genuine consonants); partly on early forms,         
 especially  some scraps  of an  early inscription,  [Footnote 6]         
 which shows two different s-letters and z-letters. The treatment         
 of  Avallonian  loans is  also significant;  in early  loans the         
 Avallonian Ty and Hy (approximately equivalent to the  English t         

 in tune and h  in huge)  both become  s in  Adunaic: as  for instance
 Adunaic   sulum   'mast',   sula   'trump'   from   Nimrian  kyuluma,
 hyola, Avallonian tyulma, hyola.                                    
    In  the earlier  language Ph,  Th, Kh  had plainly  been aspirated
 stops, as  in ancient  Greek. This  is most  clearly seen  when these
 sounds  came into  contact with  others (see  below). But  it appears
 from  various  signs  in  the spelling,  from the  later developments
 in  Exilic,  and  from  the  actual  pronunciations  of  words coming
 through  in  audible  form,  that  before  the  Downfall  these aspi-
 rates  had  become  strong  spirants:  F  (bilabial),  p  (as English
 voiceless  th),  and  x  (the  ach-sound  originally belonging  to H,
 with  which  Kh  now  coalesced  in  cases  where H  had not  gone on
 to  the  breath-H).  At  the  same  time  the combinations  PPh, TTh,
 KKh  became  the  'affricates'  PF,  TP,  KX, and  then the  long or
 double  spirants  FF, pp,  XX. PTh  and KTh  appear to  have become
 Fp> Xp).                                                            
    H  was  originally,  as noted  above, the  voiceless back-spirant;
 but in the classical  language it  had usually  become the  breath H.
 So,  always  initially,  and  medially  between  vowels.   It  never,
 however,  becomes  silent  in  these  positions.  [Footnote   7]  The
 spirantal  sound  of  H  was  retained  before  s  [added:  and where
 long or doubled  HH] (where  it later  therefore coalesced  with Kh);
 and in some  'hearings' it  seems to  occur before  T and  Th, though
 usually before consonants it is  heard as  a breathless  puff, having
 the  timbre  of  the  preceding  vowel.  On the  development of  H in
 other contacts, see below.                                          
    The   original  consonants   w  and   Y  were   weak  (consonantal
 forms   of   the  vowels   v  and   i).  Medially   they  disappeared
 prehistorically  before  the  vowels  v   and  I   respectively.  But
 initially   they   were   strengthened,   becoming   more   spirantal
 (though  w  remained  bilabial);  so  that  the  initial combinations
 WU  and  YI  remained.  The   same  strengthening   occurred  between
 vowels  (where  w  and  v  had  not  been  lost).   After  consonants
 both  w  and  Y  remained  weaker,  like  English  w  and  Y.  Before
 consonants  and  finally  they  were   vocalized  and   usually  com-
 bined  with  the  preceding  vowels  to  form  diphthongs   (see  the
 Vowels). [Footnote 8]                                               
    The  sound  >  [see  Footnote 1]  had no  sign in  Adunaic script,
 except  in  the  archaic  inscription  referred  to  above  [page 418
 and  Footnote  6]. Presumably  it disappeared  very early.  It cannot
 be  determined  whether  it  had  ever  been   used  medially   as  a
 base-forming consonant. Probably not.                               

   3 became weakened, until in the classical period  (parallel with
 the softening of the voiceless  equivalent H  to the  breath-H) it
 merged  with  the  adjacent  vowels.  This  softening of  the back
 spirants may be ascribed to Avallonian influence.                 
   Initially  3  disappeared.  Medially  between  vowels   it  dis-
 appeared  also,  and  contractions often  resulted (always  in the
 case of like vowels, A3A to  A); U3  + vowels  became UW-,  and 13
 +  vowel  became  n-.  Finally,  or before  a consonant,  3 became
 merged  with  the  preceding  vowel,  which  if  short  was conse-
 quently lengthened; as A3DA to ADA.                               
                                                                  
 Assimilations in contact.                                         
   As noted above,  these were  only sparingly  made, owing  to the
 strong  consciousness  of  the basic  consonantal pattern  in Adu-
 naic.  And  even  those  assimilations   most  commonly   made  in
 actual speech  are seldom  represented in  writing, except  in the
 comparatively rare cases where the  structure of  the word  was no
 longer recognized.                                                
   The  nasals  offer,  however,  a  surprising  exception  to this
 conservative tendency, both in writing and speech. This is all the
 more  remarkable,  since  the  combinations  MP,  NT, NK  seem not
 only  easy  to  us, but  are highly  favoured in  Avallonian. They
 were disliked in Adunaic,  and tended  to be  changed even  at the
 contact  point  of  distinct  words  in composition:  as Amatthani
 from AMAN + THANI 'the realm of Aman'.                            
   The  dental nasal  N was  in speech  assimilated in  position to
 following consonants of other series. It thus  became M  before P,
 Ph,  B,  and  M;  though notably  NW remained  unchanged (NW  is a
 favoured combination in Avallonian); and 9 before K, Kh, c, H, 3.
 Where the nasal still remained a nasal, as in MB, NG,  this change
 of position is often disregarded in writing.                      
   After  these  changes in  position the  combinations of  Nasal +
 Voiceless  consonant  all  suffered  change.  In  the combinations
 MP, MPh, NT, NTh, NK, NKh the nasal was  first unvoiced,  and then
 denasalized, the resulting  combinations being  PP, PPh,  TT, TTh,
 KK, KKh. These  changes were  recognized as  a rule  in writing,
 though a diacritic was usually placed above  the I,  T, or  x that
 resulted from a nasal; the evidence of the audible forms  seems to
 show  that  this  sign  was  etymological  and   grammatical,  not
 phonetic.  In  old  formations  N  +  H  became  9H  and  then  HH
 (phonetically XX, long  back voiceless  spirant); but  in contacts
 made after the  weakening of  H to  breath-H, or  remodelled after

 the  event,  NH  remained  and  is  heard as  a voiceless  NN with
 breath off-glide. NS became TS.                                  
   Since  M  did not  become assimilated  in position  to following
 consonants  there  were  the  combinations MT,  MTh, MK,  MKh, MS,
 and  MH.  Parallel  with  the  development  described  above these
 became PT, PTh, PK,  PKh, PS,  but no  example of  P-H for  M-H is
 found. In the few cases of contact  of M  + H  MH is  written, and
 (as in the case of NH) a voiceless MM is heard.                  
   Where  the  following  consonant  was  voiced  the  changes  are
 few (other than the changes in position described above).  3 after
 N  or  the  infixed homorganic  9 does  not disappear  but becomes
 nasalized yielding 99, which became NG (phonetically 9G).  NR, NL
 tended  to  become  RR,  LL,  but  usually  with the  retention of
 nasality  (transferred  to  the preceding  vowel), in  speech; the
 change  is  not  as  a  rule represented  in writing,  though such
 spellings as NRR,  NLL are  found. M3  became, in  accordance with
 the general tendency of 3 to be assimilated to a  preceding voiced
 sound,  MM.  MW  became  in  speech  MM (colloquially  a preceding
 labial usually absorbs a following w), but this change  is usually
 not shown in spelling.                                           
                                                                 
   Other  assimilations are  rarer and  less remarkable.  In speech
 there was a tendency for consonants in  contact to  be assimilated
 in the matter of voice; but this tendency is less strong  than in,
 say,  English,  and  is  mostly  disregarded  in writing.  Thus we
 usually  find  Sapda  from Base  SAPAD, and  Asdi from  Base ASAD,
 where  sabda  and  azda  may  be spoken  (though the  z in  such a
 form is only partly voiced  and is  not the  same as  the strongly
 buzzed sound of a basic z).                                      
   The  aspirates  Ph,  Th,  Kh have  naturally a  strong unvoicing
 tendency on  the sounds  that follow,  and transfer  their aspira-
 tion or audible breath off-glide to the end of the group.  Thus Ph
 + n, or T, or Th  became PTh  (or strictly  PhTh). Thus  from Base
 SAPHAD  is  derived * saphdan  'wise-man, wizard',  becoming later
 sapthan  (phonetically,  as  described  above,  safpan).  But such
 combinations  are  not  very  common,  and  in  perspicuous  forms
 (such, for example, as arise in  verbal or  noun inflexion,  or in
 casual  composition)  were  liable  to  be  remodelled, especially
 after the change of the  aspirates to  spirants; thus  usaphda 'he
 understood' for usaptha.                                         
   The continuants W, Y; L, R, Z  are pronounced  voiceless after
 the  aspirates,  but  otherwise  suffer no  change. They  are also

 unvoiced after s and H. Before  H and  s the  continuants L,  R, Z
 were  unvoiced,  but  w  and v  had already  become vowels  (U and
 I). M, N were unvoiced after the  aspirates (while  these remained
 as such), but not after  other sounds;  after the  later developed
 spirants F, p, X the unvoicing of M, N was only partial.          
   After  voiceless  sounds 3  while it  still remained  an audible
 consonant  became  H. After  voiced sounds  it was  assimilated to
 these, so that for instance B3, D3 became BB,  DD. As  noted above
 N3, 93, became 99 and then NG.                                    
   After  voiced  sounds  H was  not voiced  but tended  to unvoice
 the  preceding  consonant.  Similarly where  it preceded  a voiced
 continuant (as in HR, HM, HZ, etc.); but before B, D, G  it tended
 to become  voiced, that  is to  become the  same as  3, and  so to
 disappear, being merged in the preceding vowel.                   
                                                                  
 The Adunaic Vowels.                                               
   Adunaic  originally  possessed  only  the three  primary vowels:
 A, I, U; and the two basic diphthongs AI, AU.                     
   Each Base possessed one of these vowels: A, t, v  as one  of its
 essential components; this I call the CV (Characteristic Vowel).
   The normal  place of  the CV  was between  the first  and second
 basic consonant: thus NAK-, KUL B.                                
   The 2-consonant  Bases could  also add  the CV  at the  end; and
 the 3-consonant Bases could add it before the last  radical: NAKA,
 KULUB.  These  forms  with  two  basic  vowels  may be  called the
 Full forms of the Base.                                           
                                                                  
   Various other forms or modifications occurred.                  
 (i) Prefixion of the CV: ANAK, UKULB, IGIML.                      
 (ii)  Suffixion  of  the  CV in  3-consonant Bases:  KULBU, GIMLI.
 (iii) Suppression of the CV in its normal place, in which  case it
 must be present in some other place: -NKA, -KLUB, -GMIL.          
   This  'suppression'  of  the  normal  CV   can  only   occur  in
 2-consonant Bases where it is also suffixed. It also requires that
 the CV shall  be prefixed:  ANKA, UKLUB,  IGMIL; or  (more rarely)
 that  some  other  formative  prefix  ending in  a vowel  shall be
 present: DA-NKA, DA-KLUB DA-GMIL.                                 
   These  modifications  are  seldom  combined:  that  is,  a basic
 form does not usually  have the  CV repeated  more than  twice (as
 UKULBU,  KULUBU);  though  such  a  form  as  UKULB   could  not
 originally  stand  in  Adunaic as  a word,  some other  vowel than
 the CV was taken as the ending (as UKULBA).                       

   One of the vowels  of a  basic stem  must be  either the  CV or
 one  of  its  normal  modifications  (described  below);  but the
 second vowel of the 'Full form' need not  be the  CV, but  may be
 any  one  of  the  primary vowels  (or their  modification). Thus
 NAKA - NAKI, NAKU; KULUB - KULAB, KULIB. The prefixed            
 vowel (as distinct from a separate formative prefix)  must always
 be  the  CV;  but  the suffixed  vowel may  also vary:  so KULBA,
 KULBI; GIMLA, GIMLU. [Footnote 9]                                
                                                                 
   Every  primary  vowel A,  t, v  can show  one of  the following
 modifications:                                                   
 (i) Lengthening: A, I, U.                                        
 (ii) Fortification or A-infixion: A, AI, AU.                     
 (iii) N-infixion: AN, IN, UN. [Footnote 10]                      
   In  the older  language over-long  vowels were  recognized, and
 marked with a special sign, in my transcription represented by ".
 These occurred: (i) as an actual  basic modification:  chiefly in
 2-consonant Bases, and  in any  case only  before the  last basic
 consonant;  (ii)  as the  product of  the contraction  of vowels,
 where  one  of  the  merged  vowels was  already long.  Thus Base
 ZIR 'love, desire' produces both zir and zir; and also  zaira and
 zair 'yearning'.                                                 
   Similar  forms  were  sometimes produced  by Bases  with medial
 W,  Y  and  lengthened  CV:  as  Base  DAWAR produces * daw'r and
 so  daur  'gloom';  zayan  'land' produces  plural * zayin and so
 zain.                                                            
                                                                 
   Except in  the oldest  texts and  'heard' forms  the diphthongs
 ai,  au  have  become  monophthongized  to  long  (open) e  and o
 respectively.  The  long diphthongs  remained unchanged,  and are
 usually heard, whatever their origin, as  diphthongs with  a long
 vowel as the first element, and a shorter one (always t or  u) as
 the second element; though this second  element is  rather longer
 and  clearer  than  in  a  normal  diphthong:  the  intonation is
 'rising-falling'.                                                
   The only source of e, o in Adunaic is the older  diphthongs ai,
 au.  The  language  consequently  possesses  no  short  e  or  o.
 Avallonian e and o are usually  represented by  i and  u, respec-
 tively;  though  sometimes  (especially  in  unstressed syllables
 before r, or where the Adunaic system favours it) both  appear as
 a. In the earlier  loans from  Avallonian, presumably  before the
 monophthongization  of ai,  au, Avallonian  e and  o appear  as t
 and u respectively; but later they appear as e and o.            

 Contact of vowels.                                                    
   This  can  be  produced  (i)  by  the  loss  of  a  medial consonant,
 especially  3; (ii)  in suffixion,  especially in  the addition  of the
 inflexional elements: i, u, a, at, im, etc.                           
   If  one  or both  of the  components is  long then  the product  is a
 long        diphthong        or        an        over-long       vowel.
 v contracts with U; I with I; and A with A.                           
   After  v  a  glide  consonant w  is developed  (so u  - a,  u -  t to
 uwa,  uwi),  as described  above. Similarly  after t  a Y  is developed
 (soi-a,i-u to iya, iyu)                                                 
   Earlier  Adunaic  also  possessed  the   long  diphthongs:   OI,  OU,
 and  EI,  EU.  These  were  all  contraction   products,  and   EU  was
 rare.  In  the  classical  period   OI  (and   EU)  remained;   but  OU
 became  the  over-long  simple  vowel  o,  and  similarly  h  became E.
 These   diphthongs   were  mainly   found  in   inflexional  syllables,
 where  they  appear  to   be  produced   by  adding   such  inflexional
 elements  as  -i,  -u  direct   to  the   uninflected  form   (come  to
 be  regarded  as  the  stem)  instead  of  to  the  etymological  stem.
 Thus  the  plural  of  mano  'spirit',  from * manaw-,  or * manau,  is
 manoi.                                                                
   But  similar  forms  can  also  be  produced  basically. Thus  a Base
 KUY  can  produce  by  'fortification' kauy-  to koy,  koi. A  Base KIW
 can  produce  by  'fortification'  kaiw-  to kew,  keu. It  is possible
 that  the  inflexional  forms  are  also, at  least partly,  of similar
 origin. If the plural inflexion was in fact originally YI not I  (as it
 seems  to  be,  because  Y  was  lost  before  I  medially)   then  the
 development   would   be   so:  manaw,   manau  +   yi  to   manoyi  to
 manoi; and similarly izray, izrai + yi to izreyi to izrei to izre.
                                                                      
   By  the  processes  (i)  of   N-infixion,  and   consonant  doubling;
 and  (ii) of  varying the  position of  the CV,  and modifying  it; and
 varying  the  vowels   of  the   subordinate  syllables,   the  Adunaic
 Bases,  and  especially  those  of   3-consonant  form,   were  capable
 of   an  enormous   number  of   derivative  forms,   without  recourse
 to  prefixion  or  suffixion.  Naturally  no  single  Base  shows  more
 than  a  few  of  the  possible  variations.  In  any  case,  any given
 derivative  never  shows  two  of  the  one  kind  of variation  at the
 same  time;  for  this  purpose   w-infixion  and   consonant  doubling
 count  as   one  kind   of  process;   and  Lengthening   and  A-forti-
 fication  count  as  another.  Alteration  in the  position of  the CV,
 and  variation  of  the  subordinate  vowels,  can  be   combined  with
 any other derivative process.                                         

   Even  with  these  limitations  such  Bases  as KULUB  and GIMIL
 can  for  example  develop  the  following  variants  (among other
 possible forms):                                                   
        KULBU, -A -I; KULAB, KULIB, KULUB; UKLUB - Kulbo, -a, -e,
 -u, -F;  kolab, kolib,  kolub, kulob,  kuleb, kulab,  kulub, kulib;
 uklob, uklub                                                       
      Kullub, -ib, -ab (with variants showing -ub, ib, ab,  eb, ob);
 kulubba,  kulubbi,  kulabbu,  kulabba,  kulabbi,  kulibbu, kulibbi,
 kulibba;   kulumba   (also    kulimba,   kulamba,    etc.,   though
 N-infixion  is  usually  found  with the  CV preceding  the nasal);
 uklumba; etc.                                                      
           GIMLI, -A, -U; GIMAL GIMIL, GIMUL; IGMIL with parallel
 variations,  such  as  GEMIL, GIMEL,  IGMEL, GIMMIL,  GIMILLA, etc.
   The apparent gradations produced by these changes are:           
 Basic A: a - a - a                                                 
 Basic I: i - i - i; e - ai                                         
 Basic U: u - u - u; o - au.                                        
                                                                   
 Declension of nouns.                                               
   Nouns  can  be  divided  into  two   main  classes:   Strong  and
 Weak.  Strong  nouns  form the  Plural, and  in some  cases certain
 other  forms,  by  modification  of  the  last  vowel of  the Stem.
 Weak nouns add inflexions in all cases.                            
   The stems  of strong  nouns were  doubtless originally  all Basic
 stems in one or other of the  fuller forms:  as NAKA,  GIMIL, AZRA;
 but the strong type  of inflexion  had spread  to most  nouns whose
 stem ended  in a  short vowel  followed by  a single  consonant. No
 nouns with a monosyllabic stem are strong.                         
   The  stems  of  Weak  nouns  were  either  monosyllabic,  or they
 ended in a lengthened or  strengthened syllable  (such as  -a, -an,
 -u, -on, -ur, etc.), or  they were  formed with  a suffix  or added
 element.                                                           
                                                                   
   It  is  convenient  also  to divide  nouns into  Masculine, Femi-
 nine,  Common,  and  Neuter  nouns;  though  there is  not strictly
 speaking any 'gender' in Adunaic (there is no m. f.  or n.  form of
 adjectives, for example).  But the  subjective case,  as it  may be
 called, differs in the four named varieties in the singular; and is
 formed  differently  in  the  plural  neuter  from  the  method em-
 ployed in the m. f. and c. This arises  because the  subjective was
 originally  made  with  pronominal  affixes,  and  Adunaic disting-
 uishes  gender  (or  rather  sex)  in  the  pronouns  of  the third
 person.                                                            

   All  nouns are  Neuter, except  (i) Proper  names of  persons, and
 personifications;  (ii)  Nouns  denoting  male or  female functions;
 and  male  or  female  animals, where  these are  specifically char-
 acterized:  as  'master,  mistress, smith,  nurse, mother,  son'; or
 'stallion, bitch'.                                                  
   Masculine  or  Feminine  are   the  personifications   of  natural
 objects, especially lands and cities,  which may  have a  neuter and
 a personalized  form side  by side.  Often the  'personification' is
 simply  the  means   of  making   a  proper   name  from   a  common
 noun  or  adjective:  thus  anaduni  'western', Anadune  f. 'Wester-
 nesse'.  Abstractions  may  also be  'personified', and  regarded as
 agents:  so  Agan  m.  'Death',  agan  n.  'death'.  In  such cases,
 however,  as  nilo  n.  'moon',  and  ure   n.  'sun',   beside  the
 personalized  forms Nilu  m.  and  Uri  f.,  we  have  not  so  much
 mere personification but  the naming  of real  persons, or  what the
 Adunaim  regarded  as  real  persons:  the  guardian spirits  of the
 Moon  and  the  Sun,  in  fact  'The  Man  in  the  Moon'  and  'The
 Lady of the Sun'.                                                   
   Common  are  the  noun   ana  'homo,   human  being';   the  names
 of  all  animals  when  not specially  characterized; and  the names
 of peoples (especially in the plural, as Adunaim). [Footnote 11]
                                                                    
   The  stems  of nouns  can end  in any  single basic  consonant, or
 in  a  vowel. It  must be  noted, however,  that the  original basic
 consonants w, Y,  3 have  become vocalized  finally, and  that these
 final  forms  tend to  become regarded  as the  actual stems.  So pa
 hand  probably  from  * pa놹, pl.  pai,.  khau  and  kho  crow  from
 * khaw and * khaw;  pls.  khawi(m) and   khoi  (the   latter  should
 historically be khawi).                                             
   Long  consonants  or  combinations  of  consonants  do  not  occur
 finally  in  classical  Adunaic.  [Footnote 12]  The stems  of nouns
 consequently  can  end  only  in  one  (or  no)  consonant. Suffixal
 elements usually end in a vowel, or in dental stops: t, th, d; or in
 continuants,  especially  s,  z,  l,  r,  the nasals  n and  m; less
 commonly in consonants  of the  other series  such as  h, g,  p, ph,
 b, though k is not uncommon.                                        
   Where,   however,  a   noun  has   a  basic   stem  there   is  no
 limitation.  Thus  puh  'breath';  rukh  'shout'; niph  'fool'; urug
 'bear';  pharaz  'gold'.  Such  'basic' forms  are not  very common,
 except  as  neuters;  and  they  are very  rare as  feminines (since
 specifically feminine words are usually made  with the  suffixes -t,
 -e  from  the  masculine  or  common  stem).  The  only  frequent f.

 noun  of  this  type  is  nithil  'girl'.  The  word  mith 'baby girl,
 maid-child'  appears  to  be  of  this  type,  but  is  probably  made
 with  an  affix  -th  (often  met  in  feminines)  from  a  base  MIYI
 'small'; cf. the m. form mik, and the dual miyat '(infant) twins'.
   In  compound  nouns  and   names,  however,   a  bare   stem  (often
 containing  a lengthened  or fortified  vowel) is  very frequent  as a
 final  element.  In  such  formations,  whatever  the function  of the
 stem used  as a  simplex, this  final element  very frequently  has an
 agental  force,  and  so requires  the objective  form in  the preced-
 ing  element  (on  the  objective  form  see  below).  So  izindu-beth
 'true-sayer,   prophet';  Azrubel   p.n.  'Sea-lover'.   Contrast  the
 simplex beth 'expression, saying, word'.                              
                                                                      
   Masculine  nouns  usually have  o, u,  or a  in the  final syllable.
 If  they  have  affixed  elements they  end in  -o, or  -u; or  in the
 favoured 'masculine' consonants k, r, n, d preceded by o, u, or a.
   Feminines  usually  have  e,  f,  or  a in  the final  syllable; and
 if they have affixed elements (as is usual) they end in  -e or  -f; or
 in the favoured 'feminine' consonants th, l, s, z  preceded by  e, t,
 or a.                                                                 
   Common   nouns   have   'neuter'   stem   forms,   or   favour   the
 ending -a or -a in the final syllable.                                
   Neuter nouns do not  show F,  or u,  in the  last syllable  of their
 stems, nor do they  employ suffixes  that contain  u, o,  or s,  e, as
 these  are  signs   of  the   masculine  and   feminine  respectively.
 [Footnote 13]                                                         
                                                                      
   Nouns  distinguish  three  numbers:  Singular,  Plural,   and  Dual.
 In most cases  the Singular  is the  normal form,  and the  others are
 derived  from  it.  There  are,  however,  a  good  number   of  words
 with a more or less plural significance that  are 'singular'  (that is
 uninflected)   in   form,  while   the  corresponding   singulars  are
 derived  from  them,  or show  a less  simple form  of the  base. Thus
 gimil  'stars',  beside  the sg.  gimli or  igmil (the  latter usually
 meaning  a  star-shaped  figure,  not  a  star  in  the   sky).  These
 plural-singulars are really collectives and usually  refer to  all the
 objects of their kind (either all there are in the world, or all there
 are  in  any  specific  place  that  is being  thought or  spoken of).
 Thus gimil means 'the stars of heaven, all the stars  to be  seen', as
 in such a sentence as 'I went out last  night to  look at  the stars';
 the  plural  of  the  singulars  gimli,  igmil -  gimli, igmil  - mean
 'stars, several stars,  some stars',  and will  in consequence  be the
 only  forms  to  be  used  with  a  specific  numeral, as  gimli hazid

 'seven  stars'. Similarly  in the  title of  the Avale  or 'goddess'
 Avradi:  Gimilnitir  'Star-kindler',  the  reference  is to  a myth,
 apparently, of  her kindling  all the  stars of  heaven; gimlu-nitir
 would mean 'kindler of a (particular) star'.                        
                                                                    
 The  Duals  are  collectives  or  pairs,  and  mean  'both'  or 'the
 two'. Hence they never  require the  article. They  are made  with a
 suffix -at. The  Dual is  only normally  used of  things that  go in
 natural  or  customary  pairs:  as  shoes,   arms,  eyes.   For  the
 expression  of,  say,  two   separate  shoes   not  making   a  pair
 Adunaic  would  use  the  singular  noun  with  the   numeral  'two'
     following.  But  in  the  older  language things  only belonging
        casually,  where  we  should  say  'the  two',  are sometimes
    into the dual.                                                   
   The  chief  use  in  classical  Adunaic  of the  Dual was  to make
 pair-nouns  when  (a)  two  objects  are  generally  associated,  as
 'ears';  or  sometimes  (b)  when they  are generally  contrasted or
 opposed, 'day and  night'. The  first case  gives no  difficulty: so
 huzun 'ear', huznat 'the two ears  (of one  person)'. In  the second
 case, if the two objects are sufficiently different to have separate
     , then  either  (a)  the  two  stems   can  be   compounded  and
       inflexion  added  at  the  end; or  occasionally (b)  one only
 of  the  stems  is  used,  the  other  being  understood,  or  added
 separately  in  the  singular.  Thus  for 'sun  and moon'  are found
 uriyat, urinil(uw)at, and uriyat nilo.                              
                                                                    
   Nouns  distinguish  two  forms  or  'cases'  in  each  number:  1.
 Normal  2. Subjective.  In addition  in the  singular only  there is
 an Objective form.                                                  
   The Normal (N) shows no inflexion for 'case'.                     
   It is used in  all places  where Subjective  (S) or  Objective (0)
 are not obligatory.  Thus: (i)  as the  object of  a verb.  It never
 immediately precedes a verb of which it is  the object.  (ii) Before
 another noun it is  either (a)  in apposition  to it,  or (b)  in an
 adjectival or possessive genitive  relation. The  first noun  is the
 one  in  the  genitive  in  Adunaic  (adjectives   normally  precede
 nouns).  For  that  reason  cardinal  numerals,  which  are  (except
 'one') all nouns, follow their noun: gimli hazid = 7 of  stars. The
 two  functions:  apposition, and  genitival adjective,  were normal-
 ly  distinguished  by  stress  and  intonation. [Footnote  14] (iii)
 Predicatively:  Ar-Pharazonun  Bar   'nAnadune  'King   Pharazon  is
 Lord  of  Anadune'.  (iv)  As subject  when it  immediately precedes
 a  fully  inflected verb.  In that  case the  verb must  contain the

 requisite  pronominal  prefixes. If  the subjective  is used  the verb
 need  not  have  any  such  prefixes.  Thus  bar  ukallaba  'the  lord
 fell', or barun (u)kallaba; the latter  is rather  to be  rendered 'it
 was  the  lord  who  fell',  especially  where  both   subjective  and
 pronominal  prefix  are  used.  (v)  As  the  base  to  which  certain
 adverbial 'prepositional'  affixes are  added; such  as o  'from', ad,
 ada 'to, towards', ma 'with', ze 'at'.                                
                                                                      
   The  Subjective  (S)  is used  as the  subject of  a verb.  As shown
 above  the  subjective  need  not  be used  immediately before  a verb
 with  pronominal  prefixes;  an object  noun is  never placed  in this
 position. The S. also represents the verb 'to be' as copula; cf. (iii)
 above.  When  two  or   more  nouns   in  apposition   are  juxtaposed
 in  Adunaic  only  the  last  of  the  series receives  the subjective
 inflexion:    thus    Ar-Pharazon    kathuphazganun   =    'King   Ar-
 Pharazon   the    Conqueror'.   Contrast    Ar-Pharazonun   kathuphaz-
 gan = 'King Ar-Pharazon is (was) a Conqueror'.                        
                                                                      
   The  Objective   form  (0)   is  only   used  in   compound  expres-
 sions,   or   actual   compounds.   Before   a  verb-noun,   or  verb-
 adjective (participle), or any  words that  can be  held to  have such
 a  sense,  it  is  then  in an  objective-genitive sense.  Thus Minul-
 Tarik  'Pillar  of  Heaven',  the name  of a  mountain. Here  minul is
 the  O.  form  of  minal  'heaven',  since  tarik 'pillar'  here means
 'that  which  supports'.  minal-tarik  would  mean  'heavenly pillar',
 sc.  a  pillar  in  the  sky,  or  made  of  cloud.  Contrast Azru-bel
 (where  azru  shows  the  O.  form  of  azra 'sea')  'Sea-lover', with
 azra-zain.                                                            
   Plural  nouns  are  seldom   (and  Dual   nouns  never)   placed  in
 such  a  position.  When a  plural noun  is so  used it  always stands
 in  object  and  not  adjectival  or possessive  relation to  the noun
 that  follows,  so  that the  plural nouns  need no  special objective
 form.  The  genitive  of  a  plural  noun can  only be  expressed with
 the  prefix  an-  described  in  the  note  above  [see  Footnote 14];
 thus Aru'nAdunai 'King of the Anadunians'.                            
                                                                      
   Plurality is  expressed in  Adunaic either  by F  as the  last vowel
 of  the  stem  before  the final  consonant (in  strong nouns),  or by
 the  suffixion  of  the  element -s.  It is  suggested above  that the
 suffix originally had the form -yt [see page 424].                    
                                                                      
   Duality  is  expressed  by  the  suffix -at.  There are  no 'strong'
 forms.                                                                

   The   Subjective:   in   Neuter   nouns   this   is   expressed   by
 a-fortification of the last vowel of the stem, in  the case  of strong
 nouns:  as  zadan  with  the  S.  form  zadan;   in  weak   nouns  the
 suffix -a  is used.  In Masculine  nouns, strong  or weak,  the suffix
 -un  is  used;  in  Feminines  the  suffix  -in;  in Common  nouns the
 suffix -an, or -n. In plurals it has the suffix -a in Neuters,  and in
 all other nouns the suffix -im.                                       
                                                                     
   The Objective has either the  vowel u  in the  last syllable  of the
 stem, or else the suffix -u.                                         
                                                                     
                         Examples of Declension                       
   Nouns  may  be  divided  as   noted  above   [see  page   425]  into
 Strong  and  Weak.  In  Strong  nouns  the  cases  and   plural  stems
 are  formed  partly  by  alterations  of  the last  vowel of  the stem
 (originally  the  variable  vowel  of  the  second  syllable  of basic
 stems),  partly  by  suffixes; in  the Weak  nouns the  inflexions are
 entirely suffixal.                                                   
   The  Strong  nouns  may  again  be  divided   into  Strong   I,  and
 Strong  II.  In  I  the   variable  vowel   occurs  before   the  last
 consonant  (Base  form  KULUB);  in  II  the  variable vowel  is final
 (Base forms NAKA, KULBA).                                            
                                                                     
 Neuter Nouns                                                         
                                                                     
                               Strong I                               
                                                                     
 Examples: zadan, house; khibil, spring; huzun, ear.                  
                                                                     
 Singular   N. zadan   khibil   huzun                                       
            S. zadan   khibel   huzon                                     
            O. zadun   khibul   huzun, huznu [Footnote 15]                
                                                                     
 Dual       N. zadnat  khiblat  huznat                                  
                                                                     
            S. zadnat  khiblat  huznat                                  
                                                                     
 Plural     N. zadin   khibil   huzin                                         
            S. zadina  khibila  huzina                                    
                                                                     
 The  Dual  usually  shows,  as  in  the  above  examples,  suppression
 of the final vowel before the suffix -at; but the  final vowel  of the
 N.  form  is  often  retained,  especially  where   suppression  would
 lead   to   the  accumulation   of  more   than  two   consonants,  or
 where  the  preceding  vowel   is  long:   so  usually   tarikat  'two
 pillars'.                                                            
   In  all  nouns  the N.  and S.  of Duals  was only  distinguished in
 earlier  texts.  Before  the Exilic  periods the  ending -at  was used

 for both N. and S. This doubtless was due to the coalescence of         
 N. and S. in the very numerous class Strong II.                         
                                                                        
                                 Strong II                               
                                                                        
 Examples: azra,  sea; gimli, star; nilu, moon.                          
                                                                        
 Singular  N.     azra           gimli             nilu                  
           S.     azra           gimle             nilo                  
           O.     azru           gimlu             nilu                  
                                                                        
 Dual      N.     azrat, -at     gimlat, -iyat     nilat, -uwat          
           S.     azrat          gimlat, -iyat     nilat, -uwat          
                                                                        
 Plural    N.     azri           gimli             nili                  
           S.     azriya         gimliya           niliya                
                                                                        
 Beside  the  normal  plural  gimli  there  exists,  as  noted  above  [see
 page  427],  also  the  plural  with  singular  form gimil  (declined like
 khibil,  only with  no plural  or dual  forms), in  the sense  'the stars,
 all  the  stars'  or  'stars'  in general  propositions. Other  plurals of
 this   type   are   not   uncommon:   such   as   kulub   'roots,   edible
 vegetables   that   are   roots   not   fruits',  contrasted   with  kulbi
 'roots' (a definite number of roots of plants).                         
   The  dual  forms  N.  azrat;  N.   gimlat,  S.   gimlat;  N.   nilat,  S.
 nilat  are  archaic,  but  in   accordance  with   the  basic   system  of
 Adunaic,  and  show  a   parallel  suppression   of  the   variable  vowel
 to  that  seen  in  zadnat, etc.  The later  forms are  due to  the growth
 of  the  feeling  that  the  final  vowels  of the  N. forms  azra, gimli,
 nilu  are  suffixal  and  invariable,  so  that  -at was  added to  the N.
 form   without   suppression,   producing   azrat,    gimilyat,   niluwat.
 Later  forms  show  -at  in  both  N.  and  S.   owing  to   the  predomi-
 nance numerically of the nouns with final -a.                           
                                                                        
                                    Weak.                                
                                                                        
 Here   belong   monosyllabic  nouns;   and  disyllabic   nouns  with
 a  long  vowel  or  diphthong in  the final  syllable, such  as puh,
 breath; abar, strength, endurance, fidelity; batan, road, path.         
                                                                        
 Singular  N. puh   abar   batan                                              
           S. puha  abara  batana                                          
           O. puhu  abaru  batanu                                          
                                                                        
 Dual      N. puhat abarat batanat                      
           S. puhat abarat batanat                      

 Plural   N. puhi    abari    batani [Footnote 16]                 
          S. puhiya  abariya  bataniya                         
                                                                      
 Masculine, Feminine, and Common Nouns                                 
                                                                      
  M.,  F.,  and  C.  nouns  only  differ  in  the  Singular  Subjective,
 where  the  suffix  -n is  usually differentiated  by the  insertion of
 the sex or gender signs u, i, a. In later, but still  pre-exilic, texts
 the  Feminine  Objective  often  takes  the  vowel  i  (so  nithli  for
 nithlu)   owing  to   the  association   of  the   vowel  u   with  the
 masculine.  Feminine  nouns  are  seldom  of  'basic'  form,   that  is
 few  belong  to  Strong  declension  Ia,  since  specifically  feminine
 words are usually formed from the M[asculine]                         
                                                                      
      Here Lowdham's 'Report' breaks off at the foot of a page (see p.
 436). The 'footnotes' to the text now follow.                         
                                                                      
 Footnote 1.                                                            
  In  reckoning  the  number  of  consonants  in  a  Base  it   must  be
 observed   that   many   bases   originally   began   with   weak  con-
 sonants  that  later  disappeared,  notably  the 'clear  beginning' (or
 possibly  the  'glottal  stop')  for which  I have  used the  symbol ?.
 Thus  Base  ?IR  'one,  alone',  from  which  is  derived  a  number of
 words (e.g. Eru 'God'), is a biconsonantal base.                      
                                                                      
 Footnote 2.                                                            
  In  so  far  as  this  table  differs  from  the  list  of  the actual
 consonants  of  our records,  it is  arrived at  by deduction  from the
 observable   changes   occurring   in   word-formation,   from   varia-
 tions  in  spelling  in the  written documents  'seen' by  Jeremy, from
 the  treatment  of  Avallonian  loan-words,  and  from  the  alteration
 of the older forms that have been occasionally noted.                 
                                                                      
 Footnote 3.                                                            
  Adunaic   did   not   possess,   as   independent   Base-forming  ele-
 ments,  nasals  of  the  c-  or K-series.  The latter  (here symbolized
 by  9),  the  sound  of  ng in  English sing,  occurs, however,  as the
 form  taken  (a)  by  an  'infixed'  nasal  before  consonants  of  the
 K-series,  and  (b)  by  the  dental  nasal  N  (not  M) when  it comes
 in  contact  with  a  consonant   of  the   K-series  in   the  process
 of  word-formation.   On  'infixion'   see  below   [see  p.   417  and
 Footnote  4].  Doubtless  Adunaic  originally  possessed   similarly  a
 nasal of the c-series, but as these  all became  dentals, except  Y, if
 it occurred at all, it  could only  occur in  NY. In  this combination,

              
                                                                     
 however,  the  Adunaim  appear  to  have  used the  same sign  as for
 dental x.                                                            
                                                                     
 Footnote 4.                                                          
   Nasal-infixion  is  of   considerable  importance   in  Avallonian;
 but  does  not  seem  to  occur  at  all in  Khazadian; so  that this
 element  in  Adunaic  structure   may  be   due  to   Avallonian  in-
 fluence in the prehistoric period.                                   
                                                                     
 Footnote 5.                                                          
   This sound only occurs in the combination NG, for which            
 Adunaic employed a single letter.                                    
                                                                     
 Footnote 6.                                                          
   Jeremy  could not  see this  very clearly;  it was  perhaps already
 very old  and partly  illegible at  the period  to which  his 'sight'
 was  directed.  We  believe  it  to  have   been  on   some  monument
 marking  the  first  landing  of  Gimilzor,  son  of Azrubel,  on the
 east  coast  of  Anadune.  It  cannot  have been  quite contemporary,
 since the texts seem to  speak of  the Adunaic  script as  being only
 invented after they had dwelt some little time in  the island.  It is
 likely, nonetheless,  to date  from a  time at  least 500  years, and
 quite  possibly  1000  years,  before the  time of  Ar-Pharazon. This
 is  borne  out  both  by  the  letter-forms  and  by the  archaism of
 the  linguistic  forms.  The length  of the  period during  which the
 Adunaim  dwelt  in  Anadune  cannot  of  course  be  computed  at all
 accurately  from  our  scrappy  material;  but  the  texts   seem  to
 show that (a)  Gimilzor was  young at  the time  of the  landing; (b)
 Ar-Pharazon  was  old at  the time  of the  Downfall; (c)  there were
 twelve kings in between: that is practically 14  reigns [see  p. 381,
 $20].  But  members  of  the  royal  house seem  often to  have lived
 to  be  close  on  300;  while  kings  seem  normally  to  have  been
 succeeded  by the  grandsons (their  sons were  as a  rule as  old as
 200 or even  250 before  the king  'fell asleep',  and passed  on the
 crown  to  their  own  sons,  so that  as long  and unbroken  a reign
 as  possible  might  be  maintained,  and  because   they  themselves
 had  become  engrossed  in  some  branch  of  art or  learning). This
 means  that  the  realm  of  Anadune  may   have  lasted   well  over
 2000 years.                                                          
                                                                     
 Footnote 7.                                                          
   Apparent   cases,   such  as   the  variation   between  pronominal
 u- and hu-,  are due  to the  existence of  two stems,  one beginning

 with  a  weak consonant  (3 or  ?), the  other with  the intensified
 H-form.                                                             
                                                                    
 Footnote 8.                                                         
   In   composition   or   inflexion  a   'glide'  w   was  developed
 between  u  and  a  following  vowel  (other   than  v),   and  this
 developed  into  a  full  consonant  in Adunaic.  Similarly a  v was
 developed  between  i  and  a  following vowel  (other than  i). The
 best  representation  of Adunaic  w in  English letters  is probably
 w; but I have used v in the Anglicizing of Adunaic names.           
                                                                    
 Footnote 9.                                                         
   Note  that these  variations are  only permitted  where the  CV is
 in   normal   position;  such   forms  as   AN'KU,  UKLIB   are  not
 permitted.                                                          
                                                                    
 Footnote 10.                                                        
   These modifications are  not held  to change  the identity  of the
 CV,  so  that  they  can  occur  together  with  vowel-variation  in
 subordinate  syllables:  thus  from  Base  GIM'L  a form  GAIMAL is
 possible.                                                           
   N-infixion,  though  not  strictly a  vocalic change,  is included
 here  because  it  plays a  similar part  in grammar  and derivation
 to  Lengthening. It  only occurs  before a  medial or  final radical
 (never as in Avallonian before  the initial),  and there  is limited
 to  occurrence  before  the  Stops  and  z   (on  which   see  above
 [p. 417]).                                                          
                                                                    
 Footnote 11.                                                        
   Common   nouns   can   be   converted   into   M.   or   F.   when
 required  by  appropriate modifications  or affixes;  or, naturally,
 separate  words  can  be  used.  Thus   karab  'horse',   pl. karib,
 beside karbu m. 'stallion',  karbi 'mare'; raba  'dog', rabo  m. and
 rabe  f.  'bitch'.  ana  'human being',  anu 'a  male, man',  ant 'a
 female';  beside  naru  'man', kali  'woman'. nuphar  'parent' (dual
 nuphrat  'father  and  mother'  as  a  pair),  beside   ammi,  amme,
 'mother'; attu, atto 'father'.                                      
                                                                    
 Footnote 12.                                                        
   In  most  of  our  records  from  approximately  the  time  of the
 Downfall final  -a was  in fact  often omitted  in speech,  not only
 before  the  vocalic beginning  of another  word, but  also (especi-
 ally) finally (i.e. at the end of a sentence or phrase) and in other
 cases;  so  that  the  spoken  language  could  have  various  final
 consonant combinations.                                             

 Footnote 13.                                                        
   This use of u and i (and of o from  au, e  from ai)  as m.  and f.
 signs runs through all Adunaic  grammar. u  and i  are the  bases of
 pronominal  stems  for  'he'  and  'she'.  The  use  of  the affixed
 elements -u and  -F finally  to mark  gender (or  sex): as  in karbu
 'stallion',  or  urgi  'female bear',  is in  fact probably  a close
 parallel  to  such  modern  English  formations as  'he-goat', 'she-
 bear'.                                                              
                                                                    
 Footnote 14.                                                        
   In  apposition  each  noun  was  separate  and  had   an  indepen-
 dent accent. In the  genitive function  the preceding  or adjectival
 noun  received  a  louder stress  and higher  tone, the  second noun
 being   subordinated.   These   combinations   are    virtual   com-
 pounds.  They  are  often  in  Adunaic  script  joined  with  a mark
 like  a  hyphen  (  -  ) or  (=), or  are actually  compounded. Even
 when  they  are  not  conjoined  the  end  of  one  noun   is  often
 assimilated  to  the  following,  as  in  Aman-thani  to Amat-thani,
 Amatthani   'Land   of   Aman'.   Adunaic   has   another   way   of
 expressing the genitive, where the nexus is not  quite so  close: by
 the adjectival  prefix -an.  Though this  resembles the  function of
 English 'of', it is not a preposition  (Adunaic prepositions  are in
 fact  usually  'postpositions'  following  their  noun);  it  is the
 equivalent of  an inflexion  or suffix.  Thus thani an Aman, usually
 thani  'nAman  'Land  of  Aman'.  The  same  prefix  occurs  in adun
 'west,  westward',  aduni  'the  West',  anaduni   'western'.  Other
 examples  of  the  adjectival  use   are:  kadar-lai   'city  folk',
 azra-zain  'sea-lands,  sc.  maritime  regions',  Ar-Pharazon  'King
 Pharazon'.                                                          
                                                                    
 Footnote 15.                                                        
   The  O.  form  huznu,  borrowed  from  the  nouns  of   Strong  II
 and  Weak,  is frequently  found in  nouns whose  final vowel  is u.
 It occurs  also in  nouns with  other final  vowels (as  zadnu), but
 less frequently.                                                    
                                                                    
 Footnote 16.                                                        
   Dissyllabic  nouns  with  a  long  final  syllable  (containing a)
 sometimes, especially in the older  texts, make  a strong  plural by
 change  of  a  to i,  but not  other strong  forms: so batin, batina
 'roads'.                                                            
                                                                    
                                  *                                 

                                                              
                                                                              
   Of  further  material  on   Adunaic  in   addition  to   'Lowdham's  Report'
 there is  not a  great deal,  and what  there is  consists almost  entirely of
 preliminary  working,  much  of  it  very  rough,  for  the text  given above.
 From  the  point  where  it breaks  off (at  the beginning  of the  section on
 Masculine,   Feminine,   and   Common   Nouns,   p.   432),   however,  draft-
 ing  in  manuscript is  found for  its continuation.  The complexities  of the
 passage  of  these  nouns  from  'strong'  to  'weak'  declension  are  rather
 obscurely  arranged  and  presented,  and  there  are  illegibilities.  I have
 been  in  two  minds  whether  to  print  this  draft;  but  on  the  whole it
 seems  a  pity  to  omit  it.  The  form  given  here  is somewhat  edited, by
 removal  of  repetition,  small  clarifications  of  wording,  omission  of  a
 few  obscure  notes,  and  the  use  of  the  macron  throughout  in  place of
 the confusing mixture of macron and circumflex in the manuscript.             
                                                                              
   Masculine,   Feminine,   and   Common   nouns   only  differ   in  the      
 Singular  Subjective,  where the  suffix is  M. -un,  F. -in,  C. -(a)n.      
 Feminines   also   are   very  rarely   'basic',  being   nearly  always      
 formed   with   suffix   from   a   masculine   or   common   noun  [see      
 p. 426].                                                                      
   M.   and   F.   nouns  also   have  mainly   become  weak,   since  as      
 a  rule  they  show  lengthening  in  the  stem  (final  syllable)  as a      
 formative not an inflexional device.                                          
   Therefore  corresponding  to  Neuter   Strong  I   we  have   a  small      
 class  I(a)  as  tamar  'smith',  and  a  diminishing  variety  I(b)  as      
 phazan  'prince,  king's  son'.  Corresponding   to  Neuter   Strong  II      
 there  is  a  small  class  II(a)  of  mainly   common  nouns   as  raba      
 'dog',  and  II(b)  of  nouns  ending  in  u (masc.),  i  (fem.),  a      
 (common);  to  which  are  joined  nouns  ending  in  o  (masc.)  and  e      
 (fem.) [on which see below]. These have usually become weak.                 
                                                                              
                                  Strong I(a).                                 
                                                                              
 Examples: tamar, m. smith,- nithil, f. girl ., nimir, c. Elf .,               
 uruk, c. 'goblin, orc.'                                                       
                                                                              
 Singular N. tamar      nithil       nimir        uruk      
          S. tamrun     nithlin      nimran       urkan     
          O. tamur-     nithul-      nimur-       uruk-     
              (tamru-)   (nithlu-)    (nimru-)     (urku-)
                                                                              
 Dual        tamrat     nithlat      nimrat       urkat     
                                                                              
 Plural   N. tamir      nithil       nimir        urik      
          S. tamrim     nithlim      nimrim       urkim     

                                  I(b).                              
                                                                   
 Examples: phazan 'prince'; banath 'wife'; zigur 'wizard'.          
                                                                   
 Singular    N.    phazan       banath            zigur            
             S.    phazanun     banathin          zigurun           
             O.    (phazun-)    (banuth-)         (zigur-)          
                   phazanu-     banathu-          ziguru            
                                                                   
 Dual              phazanat     banathat          zigurat                    
                                                                   
 Plural      N.    phazin       banith            zigir                                      
             S.    phazinim     banithim          zigirim                           
                                                                   
 Here  belong  only  masculines  with  a,  u  in final  syllables and
 feminines  with  a.  And  these  may  all  be declined  weak: plural
 phazani, -im, banathi, ziguri, etc.                                
                                                                   
                                II(a).                              
                                                                   
 There  are  very  few  M.,  F.,  C.  nouns  here  since   such  have
 normally  long  final  stems  and  have  become  weak.  Here  belong
 chiefly archaic naru 'male', zini 'female' (beside naru,  zini), and
 nouns denoting animals, as raba 'dog'.                             
                                                                   
 Singular    N. naru   zini       raba                      
             S. narun  zinin      raban                     
             O. naru-  zinu-      rabu-                     
                                                                   
 Dual           narat  zinat      rabat                             
                                                                   
 Plural      N. nari   zini       rabi                                           
             S. narim  zinim      rabim                                    
                                                                   
  Nouns corresponding to II(b) have all become weak except          
 ana 'human being', which makes plural ani beside weak anai.        
                                                                   
 Singular    N. ana      Dual anat Plural N. ani                            
             S. anan                      S. anim                   
             O. anu-                                                
                               Weak (a).                            
                                                                   
 Here  belong  nouns  ending  in  a   consonant.  These   are  seldom
 'basic' (except as described above in compounds).                  
 Examples: bar 'lord'; mith 'little  girl'; nuph  'fool' [but  niph p.
 426].                                                              

 Singular    N.  bar      mith        nuph                                 
             S.  barun    mithin      nuphan (or m.f. nuphun, -in)         
             O.  baru-    (mithu-)    nuphu- (f. nuphi-)                   
                          mithi-                                           
                                                                             
 Dual            barat    mithat      nuphat                               
                                                                             
 Plural      N.  bari     mithi       nuphi                                                   
             S.  barim    mithim      nuphim                                           
                                                                             
                                   Weak (b).                                  
                                                                             
 Here belong (i) masculines and feminines  ending in  u and  t and            
 common  nouns  in  a.  Also (ii)  a new  class, masculines  in o,            
 feminines in e. These are not quite clear in origin.  They appear            
 to derive (a) from basic stems in aw, ay; (b) from -aw,  -ay used            
 as m. f. suffixes as variants of u, i; (c) from common nouns in a            
 + m. u, f. i, instead of varying vowel. So raba  > rabau  > rabo.            
 These are specially used in f., since rabi would appear  the same            
 as the common plural.                                                        
 Examples:  nardu  'soldier'; zori   'nurse'; mano  'spirit'; izre            
 'sweetheart, beloved'; ana 'human'. To this class  (especially in            
 plural) belong many names of peoples as Adunai.                              
                                                                             
 Singular  N. nardu      zori          mano      izre             
           S. nardun     zorin         manon     izren            
           O. nardu-     zori- (arch.  mano-     izre (izrayu)
                           zoriyu)                                       
                                                                             
 Dual         narduwat   zoriyat       manot     izret (izrayat)          
                                       (manawat)                      
                                                                             
 Plural    N. narduwi    zori          manoi     (izre) izreni            
           S. narduwim   zorim         manoim    (izrem) izrenim         
                                                                             
  Other  rough  pages  are  interesting  as  showing  that  a  major  change in
 my  father's  conception   of  the   structure  entered   as  the   work  pro-
 gressed:  for  the  Adunaic noun  at first  distinguished five  cases, Normal,
 Subjective,   Gentitive,   Dative,   and  Instrumental.   To  give   a  single
 example,  in  masculine  nouns  the  genitival  inflexion  was o  (plural om);
 the dative -s, -se  (plural -sim);  and the  instrumental -ma  (plural -main),
 this  being  in  origin  an  agglutinated  post-position  meaning  'with', and
 expressing  an  instrumental  or  comitative  relation.  At  this   stage  the
 masculine bar 'lord' showed the following inflexional system (if I     
 interpret it correctly):          
 Singular   N. bar                Dual barut           Plural bari            
            S. barun                   barut                  barim          

        G. baro                   barot                 bariyom            
        D. barus                  barusit               barisim            
        I. baruma                 barumat               barumain           
                                                                          
  Of  notes  on  other  aspects  of  Adunaic  grammar  there is  scarcely a
 trace: a few very rough jottings on the verb system  are too  illegible to
 make  much  of.  It  can  be  made  out  however  that  there  were  three
 classes of verbs: I Biconsonantal,  as kan  'hold'; II  Triconsonantal, as
 kalab  'fall  down';  III  Derivatives,  as  azgara-  'wage  war', ugruda-
 'overshadow'.  There  were  four  tenses:  (1)  aorist  ('corresponding to
 English "present", but used more often  than that  as historic  present or
 past in narrative'); (2) continuative (present); (3)  continuative (past);
 (4) the past tense ('often used as pluperfect when aorist is used  = past,
 or  as future  perfect when  aorist =  future'). The  future, subjunctive,
 and  optative  were  represented  by  auxiliaries;  and  the  passive  was
 rendered by the impersonal verb forms 'with subject in accusative'.       
                                                                          
 I  have  remarked  before  on   the  altogether   unmanageable  difficulty
 that much of my  father's philological  writing presents:  I wrote  in The
 Lost Road and Other Writings (V.342):                                     
   It  will  be  seen  then   that  the   philological  component   in  the
 evolution   of   Middle-earth   can   scarcely   be  analysed,   and  most
 certainly cannot be presented,  as can  the literary  texts. In  any case,
 my  father  was  perhaps  more  interested  in  the  processes  of  change
 than  he  was  in displaying  the structure  and use  of the  languages at
 any given time - though this  is no  doubt due  to some  extent to  his so
 often  starting  again  at  the  beginning with  the primordial  sounds of
 the  Quendian  languages,  embarking   on  a   grand  design   that  could
 not  be  sustained  (it  seems  indeed that  the very  attempt to  write a
 definitive  account  produced  immediate  dissatisfaction  and  the desire
 for  new  constructions:  so  the  most  beautiful  manuscripts  were soon
 treated with disdain).                                                    
 'Lowdham's  Report'  is  thus  remarkable  in  that  it  was   allowed  to
 stand, with virtually no subsequent  alteration; and  the reason  for this
 is  that  my  father  abandoned  the  further  development of  Adunaic and
 never returned to it. This is emphatically not to suggest, of course, that
 at  the  moment  of   its  abandonment   he  had   not  projected   -  and
 probably quite fully projected  - the  structure of  Adunaic grammar  as a
 whole;  only  that  (to  the  best  of  my  knowledge)  he  wrote  down no
 more  of  it.  Why  this  should  have  been must  remain unknown;  but it
 may  well  be  that  his  work was  interrupted by  the pressure  of other
 concerns  at  the  point  where  'Lowdham's  Report'  ends, and  that when
 he had leisure to return  to it  he forced  himself to  turn again  to The
 Lord of the Rings.                                                        
  In the years that followed  he turned  into different  paths; but  had he
 returned  to  the  development  of  Adunaic,  'Lowdham's  Report'   as  we
 have  it  would  doubtless  have  been   reduced  to   a  wreck,   as  new

  conceptions  caused  shifts and  upheavals in  the structure.  More than
  likely, he would have begun again, refining  the historical  phonology -
  and  perhaps  never  yet  reaching  the  Verb.  For   'completion',  the
  achievement  of  a fixed  Grammar and  Lexicon, was  not, in  my belief,
  the over-riding aim. Delight lay in the creation itself, the creation of
  new linguistic form  evolving within  the compass  of an  imagined time.
  'Incompletion'  and  unceasing  change, often  frustrating to  those who
  study these languages,  was inherent  in this  art. But  in the  case of
  Adunaic,  as  things  turned  out,  a  stability  was  achieved,  though
  incomplete:  a  substantial  account of  one of  the great  languages of
  Arda,  thanks  to  the  strange  powers  of  Wilfrid Jeremy  and Arundel
  Lowdham.                                                                
