                              FOREWORD.                            
                                                                  
 In  my  Foreword  to  Sauron  Defeated  I  wrote  that I  would not
 attempt a study  of the  Appendices to  The Lord  of the  Rings 'at
 this  time'. That  was an  ambiguous remark,  for I  rather doubted
 that I would ever make the attempt; but  I justified  its postpone-
 ment,  at  least,  on  the  ground  that  'my  father  soon  turned
 again,  when  The  Lord  of the  Rings was  finished, to  the myths
 and  legends  of  the  Elder  Days', and  so devoted  the following
 volumes to  the later  history of 'The Silmarillion'. My intentions
 for the twelfth book were uncertain; but  after the  publication of
 The War of the Jewels I came to  think that  since (contrary  to my
 original  conception)  I  had  included in  The History  of Middle-
 earth a lengthy account of  the writing  of The  Lord of  the Rings
 it  would  be a  strange omission  to say  nothing whatever  of the
 Appendices, in  which the  historical structure  of the  Second and
 Third Ages, based on a firm chronology, actually emerged.         
  Thus  I  embarked  on  the study  of the  history of  these works,
 of  which I  had little  precise knowledge.  As with  the narrative
 texts of The Lord of  the Rings,  those of  the Appendices  (and of
 the  Prologue)  became  divided,  in  some  cases in  a bewildering
 fashion,  at  the  time  of  the  sale of  the papers  to Marquette
 University;  but  I  received  most   generous  help,   prompt  and
 meticulous,  from  Charles  Elston, the  Archivist of  the Memorial
 Library   at  Marquette,   which  enabled   me  to   determine  the
 textual relations. It was only now that I  came to  understand that
 texts  of  supplementary  essays  to  The  Lord  of  the  Rings had
 reached  a  remarkably  finished  form,  though  in  many  respects
 far  different  from the  published Appendices,  at a  much earlier
 date than I had supposed: in  the period  (as I  judge) immediately
 following my father's writing of the  last chapter  of The  Lord of
 the Rings in 1948. There is indeed a total  absence in  these texts
 of  indications  of external  date; but  it can  be seen  from many
 points that when they  were written  the narrative  was not  yet in
 final  form,  and  equally clearly  that they  in fact  preceded my
 father's return to the  First Age  at the  beginning of  the 1950s,
 as described in  the Foreword  to The  War of  the Jewels.  A major
 upheaval in the historical-linguistic structure was still  to come:

 the  abandonment  of  their   own  tongue   by  the   Noldor  returning
 out  of  the  West  and  their  adoption  of  the  Sindarin  of Middle-
 earth.                                                                
   In  my  account  I  have  of  course  concentrated  on   these  early
 forms,  which  belong  so  evidently,  in  manner  and  air,  with  the
 narrative itself.  I have  little doubt  that my  father had  long con-
 templated   such   a   supplement   and   accompaniment  to   The  Lord
 of  the  Rings,  regarding  it as  an essential  element in  the whole;
 and  I  have  found  it  impossible  to  show  in any  satisfactory way
 how  he  conceived  it  at  that  time  without  setting out  the early
 texts in full, although this naturally entails the  recital, especially
 in  the  case  of  the history  of Arnor  and Gondor,  of much  that is
 known  from  its  survival  in  the  published  versions of  the Appen-
 dices.  I  have  excluded  the  Appendix  E  ('Writing  and Spelling'),
 but  I  have  included  the  Prologue;  and  I  have   introduced  into
 this  part  of  the  book  an  account  of  the origin  and development
 of   the  Akallabeth,   since  the   evolution  of   the  chronological
 structure  of  the  Second  Age  was  closely  related  to  my father's
 original  formalised  computation   of  the   dates  of   the  Numenor-
 ean kings.                                                            
   Following  this  part  I  have  given  three  essays  written  during
 his last  years; and  also some  brief writings  that appear  to derive
 from  the  last  years  of  his  life,  primarily  concerned   with  or
 arising  from  the  question  whether   Glorfindel  of   Rivendell  and
 Glorfindel  of  Gondolin  were  one  and  the  same.  These  late writ-
 ings  are  notable  for  the  many  wholly  new  elements  that entered
 the  'legendarium';  and  also  for  the  number  of   departures  from
 earlier  work  on  the  Matter  of  the  Elder  Days.  It  may  be sug-
 gested  that  whereas  my  father  set  great  store by  consistency at
 all  points  with  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  and  the  Appendices,  so
 little  concerning  the First  Age had  appeared in  print that  he was
 under  far  less  constraint.  I  am inclined  to think,  however, that
 the  primary  explanation  of  these  differences  lies  rather  in his
 writing  largely  from  memory.   The  histories   of  the   First  Age
 would  always  remain  in  a  somewhat  fluid  state  so  long  as they
 were  not  fixed  in  published  work;  and he  certainly did  not have
 all  the  relevant  manuscripts  clearly  arranged  and set  out before
 him.  But  it  remains  in  any  case  an  open  question,  whether (to
 give  a  single  example)  in  the  essay  Of  Dwarves  and Men  he had
 definitively  rejected  the  greatly elaborated  account of  the houses
 of  the  Edain  that  had  entered  the  Quenta  Silmarillion  in about
 1958, or whether it had passed from his mind.                         

                      
                                                                      
   The  book  concludes  with  two  pieces  further  illustrating the
 instruction  that  AElfwine  of   England  received   from  Pengolod
 the  Wise  in  Tol  Eressea,  and  the  abandoned beginnings  of two
 remarkable stories, The New Shadow and Tal-elmar.                     
                                                                      
   With the picture of such  clarity in  the tale  of Tal-elmar  of the
 great  ships  of  the  Numenoreans  drawing  into  the coast,  and the
 - fear among  men of  Middle-earth of  the terrible  'Go-hilleg', this
 'History' ends. It is a long  time since  I began  the work  of order-
 ing  and  elucidating  the  vast  collection  of  papers  in  which my
 father's  conception  of  Arda,  Aman,   and  Middle-earth   was  con-
 tained,  making,  not  long  after  his  death, some  first transcrip-
 tions  from  The  Book  of  Lost  Tales,  of  which  I  knew virtually
 nothing,  as  a  step  towards  the  understanding  of the  origins of
 'The Silmarillion'. I had little notion  then of  what lay  before me,
 of  all  the  unknown  works  crammed  in  disorder  in   that  formi-
 dable  array  of  battered box-files.  Nearly a  quarter of  a century
 later the story, as I have been able to tell it, is at last concluded.
 This  is  not  to  say  that  I  have given  an account  of everything
 that  my  father  wrote,  even  leaving  aside the  great body  of his
 work  on  the  languages  of the  Elves. My  father's very  late writ-
 ings  have  been  selectively  presented,  and  much  further  detail,
 especially  concerning  names   and  the   etymology  of   names,  can
 be  found  in  texts  such  as  those that  I excerpted  in Unfinished
 Tales,  notably  in the  part of  that book  entitled 'The  History of
 Galadriel   and   Celeborn'.  Other   omissions  have   arisen  almost
 one  might  say  from  inadvertence  as the  work and  its publication
 proceeded.                                                            
   It  began  indeed as  an entirely  'private' study,  without thought
 or   purpose   of   publication:   an  exhaustive   investigation  and
 analysis  of  all  the  materials  concerned  with  what  came  to  be
 called  the  Elder  Days,  from the  earliest beginnings,  omitting no
 detail  of  name-form  or  textual   variation.  From   that  original
 work  derives  the  respect  for  the  precise  wording of  the texts,
 and  the  insistence   that  no   stone  (especially   stones  bearing
 names)  be  left  unturned,  that characterises,  perhaps excessively,
 The  History  of   Middle-earth.  Unfinished   Tales,  on   the  other
 hand,  was  conceived   entirely  independently   and  in   an  essen-
 tially  different  mode,  at  a  time  when  I  had  no notion  of the
 publication  of  a  massive  and  continuous  history;  and  this con-
 stitutes  an  evident  weakness  in  my  presentation  of   the  whole
 corpus,  which  could  not   be  remedied.   When  Rayner   Unwin,  to
 whom  I  am   greatly  indebted,   undertook  the   uncertain  venture

 of  publishing my  work on  the history  of 'The  Silmarillion' (in
 form  necessarily  much  altered)  I had  no intention  of entering
 into  the  history of  the Later  Ages: the  inclusion of  The Lost
 Road,   The   Drowning   of  Anadune,   The  Notion   Club  Papers,
 and  above  all  the  history  of the  writing of  The Lord  of the
 Rings,  extending  the  work  far  beyond  my original  design, was
 entirely unforeseen.                                              
   Thus  it  came  about  that  the later  volumes were  written and
 published  under  much  greater  pressure  of  time  and  with less
 idea of the overall structure than the earlier. Attempting  to make
 each  book  an  independent  entity  in  some  degree,  within  the
 constraints of length, I was often  uncertain of  what it  would or
 could contain until it was done; and this lack of prevision  led to
 some  misjudgements  of  'scale' -  the degree  of fulness  or con-
 ciseness  that  would  ultimately prove  appropriate to  the whole.
 Thus,  for  example,  I  should  have  returned  at  the end  of my
 account  of  the  writing of  The Lord  of the  Rings to  give some
 description, at least, of  the later  developments in  the chapters
 The  Shadow  of  the  Past  and  The  Council  of  Elrond,  and the
 evolution in relation to these of the work Of the Rings  of Power
 and the Third Age. However, all the stories  and all  the histories
 have now been told,  and the  'legendarium' of  the Elder  Days has
 been very fully mined.                                            
   Since  the  ceaseless  'making'  of  his  world extended  from my
 father's youth into his old age, The History of Middle-earth  is in
 some sense also a record of his life, a form of biography, if  of a
 very  unusual kind.  He had  travelled a  long road.  He bequeathed
 to  me  a  massive  legacy  of  writings  that  made  possible  the
 tracing of that road, in as I hope its true  sequence, and  the un-
 earthing of the deep foundations  that led  ultimately to  the true
 end of his great  history, when  the white  ship departed  from the
 Grey Havens.                                                      
   In the twilight of autumn it  sailed out  of Mithlond,  until the
 seas  of the  Bent World  fell away  beneath it,  and the  winds of
 the  round  sky  troubled  it  no  more,  and  borne upon  the high
 airs  above  the  mists  of the  world it  passed into  the ancient
 West, and  an end  was come  for the  Eldar of  story and  of song.
 It has been an absorbing  and inspiring  task, from  the splendours
 of the Ainulindale or  the tragedy  of the  Children of  Hurin down
 to the smallest detail of changing  expression and  shifting names.
 It has also of its nature been  very laborious,  and with  times of

                         
                                                                         
 doubt,  when  confidence  faltered;  and  I  owe  a  great  deal  to all
 those   who   have   supported   the   work  with   generous  encourage-
 ment  in  letters  and  reviews.  Most  of  all  do  I  owe  to  my wife
 Baillie,  to  whom  I  dedicate  this  last  volume: but  the dedication
 may   stand   for   the   whole.    Without   her    understanding   and
 encouragement   over   the   years,   making   mutual   the   weight  of
 such   a   long   and  demanding   work,  it   would  never   have  been
 achieved.                                                                
                                                                         
                             Note on the text.                            
                                                                         
 As a general rule I  have preserved  my father's  often varying  usage in
 the spelling of names (as e.g. Baraddur beside  Barad-dur), but  in cer-
 tain  cases  I  have  given  a  standard form  (as Adunaic  where Adunaic
 is sometimes written, and Gil-galad  rather than  Gilgalad). In  his late
 texts he  seldom used  the diaeresis  (as in  Finwe), but  (in intention
 at  least)  always  employed  N  to  represent initial  ng sounded  as in
 English sing (thus Noldor); in this  book I  have extended  the diaeresis
 throughout  (other  than  in  Old  English names,  as AElfwine),  but re-
 stricted N to the texts in which it occurs.                              
  References  to  The  History of  Middle-earth are  given as  in previous
 volumes  in  Roman  numerals  (thus  VI.314).  For the  necessarily abun-
 dant  references  to  the published  Appendices I  have used  the letters
 RK  (The  Return  of  the  King),  the  page-numbers  being those  of the
 three-volume  hardback  edition;  and  occasionally  FR  and  TT  for The
 Fellowship of the Ring and The Two Towers.                            
  To the removal of error (especially in the citation  of texts)  from The
 Peoples  of  Middle-earth, which  was  completed  under   great  pressure
 of  time,  Mr  Charles  Noad  has  contributed more  perhaps than  to any
 of  the  previous  volumes  which  he  has  read independently  in proof;
 and with the conclusion of  the work  I must  express again  my gratitude
 to  him  for  his  meticulous,  informed,  and  extraordinarily  generous
 labour. I wish also to record my appreciation of the great skill and care
 which  Mr  Norman  Tilley  of  Nene  Phototypesetters  has  again brought
 to this particularly demanding text -  including the  'invisible mending'
 of errors in my manuscript tables.                                       
  Mr  Noad  has  also  made  a  number  of  suggestions  for  the improve-
 ment of the text by  clarification and  additional reference  which where
 possible  I  have  adopted.  There  remain some  points which  would have
 required too  much rewriting,  or too  much movement  of text,  to intro-
 duce, and two of these may be mentioned here.                            
  One  concerns the  translation of  the curse  of the  Orc from  the Dark
 Tower  given  on  p.  83.  When  writing  this  passage  I  had forgotten
 that  Mr Carl  Hostetter, editor  of the  periodical Vinyar  Tengwar, had
 pointed  out  in  the  issue  (no. 26)  for November  1992 that  there is

  a  translation  of  the  words  in  a note  to one  of the  typescripts of
  Appendix E (he being  unaware of  the existence  of the  certainly earlier
  version that I  have printed);  and I  had also  overlooked the  fact that
  a  third  version  is  found  among  notes  on   words  and   phrases  'in
  alien speech' in The  Lord of  the Rings.  All three  differ significantly
  (bagronk,  for example,  being rendered  both as  'cesspool' and  as 'tor-
  ture (chamber)'); from which it  seems clear  that my  father was  at this
  time  devising  interpretations  of  the  words,  whatever  he   may  have
  intended them to mean when he first wrote them.                           
    I should also  have noticed  that the  statement in  the early  texts of
  Appendix  D  (The  Calendars),  pp.  124,  131,  that  the Red  Book 'ends
  before  the  Lithe of  1436' refers  to the  Epilogue to  The Lord  of the
  Rings,  in  which  Samwise,  after  reading  aloud  from  the   Book  over
  many   months, finally  reached its  end on  an evening  late in  March of
  that year (IX.120-1).                                                     
    Lastly, after the  proofs of  this book  had been  revised I  received a
  letter  from  Mr  Christopher  Gilson  in  which  he  referred to  a brief
  but  remarkable  text  associated  with  Appendix  A that  he had  seen at
  Marquette.  This was  a curious  chance, for  he had  no knowledge  of the
  book  beyond  the  fact  that  it  contained  some  account of  the Appen-
  dices; while although I had  received a  copy of  the text  from Marquette
  I had passed it over  without observing  its significance.  Preserved with
  other difficult and disjointed notes, it is very roughly written on a slip
  of  paper  torn from  a  rejected  manuscript.  That  manuscript   can  be
  identified  as the  close predecessor  of the  Appendix A  text concerning
  the  choice  of  the  Half-elven  which  I  have given  on pp.  256-7. The
  writing on the verso reads:
  and  his  father  gave  him  the  name  Aragorn,  a   name  used   in  the
  House  of  the  Chieftains.  But  Ivorwen  at  his  naming  stood  by, and
  said 'Kingly Valour' (for  so that  name is  interpreted): 'that  he shall
  have,  but I  see on  his breast  a green  stone, and  from that  his true
  name  shall  come  and  his chief  renown: for  he shall  be a  healer and
  a renewer.'                                                               
  Above  this  is  written:  'and  they  did  not know  what she  meant, for
  there  was  no  green  stone  to  be  seen  by  other  eyes'  (followed by
  illegible words); and beneath  it: 'for  the green  Elfstone was  given to
  him by Galadriel'. A large X is also written, but it is not  clear whether
  this relates to the whole page or only to a part of it.                   
    Mr Gilson observes that this text,  clearly to  be associated  with work
  on  the Tale  of Aragorn  and Arwen  (see p.  263), seems  to be  the only
  place  where  the  name  Aragorn  is  translated;   and  he   mentions  my
  father's letter of 17  December 1972  to Mr  Richard Jeffery  (Letters no.
  347),  who  had  asked  whether  Aragorn  could  mean 'tree-king'.  In his
  reply my father  said that  it 'cannot  contain a  "tree" word',  and that
  '"Tree-King" would have no special fitness for him'. He continued:        

  The names in the line of Arthedain  are peculiar  in several  ways; and
  several, though Sindarin in  form, are  not readily  interpretable. But
  it  would  need  more  historical  records  and  linguistic  records of
  Sindarin than exist (sc. than I have found time or need to invent! ) to
  explain them.                                                          
