    PART ONE.     
                 
  THE PROLOGUE
 AND APPENDICES TO
 THE LORD OF THE
      RINGS.      

                                      I.                                   
                                                                          
                                THE PROLOGUE.                              
                                                                          
 It  is  remarkable  that  this celebrated  account of  Hobbits goes  so far
 back in the history of the writing of The Lord of  the Rings:  its earliest
 form,  entitled  Foreword:  Concerning  Hobbits,  dates  from   the  period
 1938 -  9, and  it was  printed in  The Return  of the  Shadow (VI.310-14).
 This was a  good 'fair  copy' manuscript,  for which  there is  no prepara-
 tory work extant; but I  noticed in  my very  brief account  of it  that my
 father  took  up  a  passage  concerning   Hobbit  architecture   from  the
 chapter A Short Cut to Mushrooms (see VI.92, 294 - 5).                    
   Comparison  with  the  published  Prologue  to  The  Lord  of  the  Rings
 will show  that while  much of  that original  version survived,  there was
 a  great  deal still  to come:  the entire  account of  the history  of the
 Hobbits  (FR  pp.  11-15)  in  section  1  of  the  Prologue, the  whole of
 section  2,  Concerning  Pipe-weed,  and  the  whole   of  section   3,  Of
 the  Ordering  of  the  Shire,  apart  from  the  opening  paragraph; while
 corresponding  to  section  4, Of  the Finding  of the  Ring, there  was no
 more than a brief reference to the story of Bilbo and Gollum (VI.314).
   In  order  to  avoid confusion  with another  and wholly  distinct 'Fore-
 word', given in the next chapter, I shall use the letter P in  reference to
 the  texts  that  ultimately led  to the  published Prologue,  although the
 title  Foreword:  Concerning  Hobbits  was  used  in the  earlier versions.
 The original text given in The  Return of  the Shadow  I shall  call there-
 fore P 1.                                                                 
   My father made a  typescript of  this, P  2, and  judging from  the type-
 writer used I think  it probable  that it  belonged to  much the  same time
 as P 1 - at any rate, to a fairly early period in the  writing of  The Lord
 of the Rings. In my  text of  P 1  in The  Return of  the Shadow  I ignored
 the  changes  made  to  the  manuscript  unless  they  seemed  certainly to
 belong to the time of  writing (VI.310),  but all  such changes  were taken
 up into P 2, so that it  was probably  not necessary  to make  the distinc-
 tion.  The  changes  were  not   numerous  and   mostly  minor,(1) but  the
 whole  of  the  conclusion  of  P  1,  following the  words 'his  most mys-
 terious  treasure:  a  magic ring'  (VI.314), was  struck out  and replaced
 by  a  much  longer  passage,  in  which  my  father  recounted  the actual
 story  of  Bilbo  and  Gollum,  and slightly  altered the  final paragraph.
 This  new  conclusion  I  give  here.  A  part  of the  story as  told here
 survived  into  the  published  Prologue, but  at this  stage there  was no
 suggestion  of  any  other  version  than  that  in  The Hobbit,  until the

                                           
                                                                     
 chapter Riddles in the Dark was altered in the  edition of  1951. With
 all these changes incorporated, the typescript P 2 was a  precise copy
 of the original version (see note 7).                                
                                                                     
 This  ring  was  brought  back  by  Bilbo  from  his  memorable  jour-
 ney.  He  found  it  by  what  seemed  like  luck. He  was lost  for a
 while  in  the  tunnels  of  the  goblins  under the  Misty Mountains,
 and there he put his hand on it in the dark.                         
  Trying  to  find  his  way  out,  he  went  on down  to the  roots of
 the  mountains  and  came  to  a  full  stop.  At  the  bottom  of the
 tunnel  was  a cold  lake far  from the  light. On  an island  of rock
 in  the  water  lived  Gollum.  He  was  a loathsome  little creature:
 he paddled a  small boat  with his  large flat  feet, and  peered with
 pale  luminous eyes,  catching blind  fish with  his long  fingers and
 eating them raw. He ate  any living  thing, even  goblin, if  he could
 catch  and  strangle  it  without  a  fight; and  he would  have eaten
 Bilbo, if  Bilbo had  not had  in his  hand an  elvish knife  to serve
 him  as  a  sword.  Gollum   challenged  the   hobbit  to   a  Riddle-
 game:  if  he  asked  a  riddle that  Bilbo could  not guess,  then he
 would  eat  him;  but  if  Bilbo  floored  him,  then  he  promised to
 give him a splendid gift. Since  he was  lost in  the dark,  and could
 not  go  on  or  back,  Bilbo  was  obliged  to accept  the challenge;
 and in  the end  he won  the game  (as much  by luck  as by  wits). It
 then  turned  out  that  Gollum  had  intended to  give Bilbo  a magic
 ring  that  made  the  wearer  invisible.  He  said he  had got  it as
 a  birthday  present  long  ago;  but  when  he looked  for it  in his
 hiding-place  on  the  island,  the  ring  had  disappeared.  Not even
 Gollum  (a  mean  and   malevolent  creature)   dared  cheat   at  the
 Riddle-game,  after  a  fair  challenge,  so  in  recompense  for  the
 missing  ring  he  reluctantly  agreed  to  Bilbo's  demand   that  he
 should  show him  the way  out of  the labyrinth  of tunnels.  In this
 way  the  hobbit  escaped  and   rejoined  his   companions:  thirteen
 dwarves   and   the  wizard   Gandalf.  Of   course  he   had  quickly
 guessed  that  Gollum's  ring   had  somehow   been  dropped   in  the
 tunnels and that he  himself had  found it;  but he  had the  sense to
 say  nothing  to  Gollum.  He  used  the ring  several times  later in
 his  adventures,  but  nearly always  to help  other people.  The ring
 had  other  powers  besides  that  of  making  its  wearer  invisible.
 But  these  were  not  discovered,  or  even  suspected,   until  long
 after  Bilbo  had  returned  home  and  settled  down   again.  Conse-
 quently  they are  not spoken  of in  the story  of his  journey. This
 tale is chiefly concerned with the ring, its powers and history.     
  Bilbo,  it  is  told,  following his  own account  and the  ending he

                                                     
                                                                         
 himself  devised  for  his  memoirs  (before  he  had  written   most  of
 them),  'remained  very  happy  to  the  end  of  his  days,   and  those
 were   extraordinarily   long.'  They   were.  How   long,  and   why  so
 long,  will  here  be  discovered.  Bilbo  returned to  his home  at Bag-
 End  on  June   22nd  in   his  fifty-second   year,  having   been  away
 since  April  30th (2) in the year  before,  and  nothing   very  notable
 occurred  in  the  Shire  for  another  sixty  years,  when  Mr.  Baggins
 began  to  make  preparations   for  the   celebration  of   his  hundred
 and   eleventh  birthday.   At  which   point  the   tale  of   the  Ring
 begins.                                                                  
                                                                         
 Years  later  my  father  took up  the typescript  P 2  again. He  made a
 number  of  minor  alterations  in  wording,  replaced the  opening para-
 graph,  and rewrote  a part  of the  story of  Bilbo and  Gollum (improv-
 ing  the presentation  of the  events, and  elaborating a  little Bilbo's
 escape from the tunnels); these need not be recorded. But he  also intro-
 duced  a  lengthy  new passage,  following the  words (VI.313)  'but that
 was not so true of other families, like the Bagginses or the Boffins' (FR
 p. 18). This begins 'The  Hobbits of  the Shire  had hardly  any "govern-
 ment" ...', and is the origin of most of  section 3  (Of the  Ordering of
 the Shire) in the published Prologue, extending as far as 'the first sign
 that everything was not quite as  it should  be, and  always used  to be'
 (cf. FR p. 19).                                                          
  Much of the  new passage  survived into  the final  form, but  there are
 some interesting differences. In the third paragraph  of the  section (as
 it stands in FR) the new text in P 2 reads:                              
                                                                         
  There  was,  of  course,  the  ancient  tradition in  their part  of the
 world  that  there  had  once  been  a  King  at  Fornost  away  north of
 the  Shire  (Northworthy  the  hobbits  called it),(3) who    had  marked
 out  the  boundaries  of  the  Shire  and  given it  to the  Hobbits; and
 they  in  turn  had  acknowledged  his  lordship.  But  there   had  been
 no  King  for  many  ages,  and  even  the  ruins  of   Northworthy  were
 covered with grass ...                                                   
                                                                         
 The  name  Northworthy  (for  later  Norbury)  is not  found in  the Lord
 of  the  Rings  papers,  where  the  earlier  'vernacular' names  are the
 Northburg, Northbury. See p. 225, annal c.1600.                          
  The fourth paragraph of the section reads thus in the P 2 text:         
                                                                         
  It  is  true  that  the  Took  family  had  once  a   certain  eminence,
 quite  apart  from  the  fact  that  they  were  (and   remained)  numer-
 ous,  wealthy,  peculiar,  and  of  great  social  importance.  The  head
 of  the  family  had  formerly  borne  the  title  of  The  Shirking. But
 that title  was no  longer in  use in  Bilbo's time:  it had  been killed
 by  the  endless  and  inevitable  jokes  that  had  been made  about it,

 in defiance of its obvious  etymology. The  habit went  on, how-           
 ever, of referring to the head of the family as The Took, and of           
 adding (if required) a number: as Isengrim the First.                      
                                                                           
 Shirking  is  of  course  a  reduction of  Shire-king with  shortening (and
 in  this  case  subsequent alteration)  of the  vowel, in  the same  way as
 Shirriff is derived from Shire-reeve; but this was a  joke that  my father
 decided  to  remove  -  perhaps  because  the  choice  of  the  word 'king'
 by  the  Hobbits  seemed  improbable  (cf.   p.  232   and  note   25,  and
 Appendix A (I, iii), RK p. 323).(4)                                        
   The new passage in P 2 does not give  the time  of the  year of  the Free
 Fair  on  the  White  Downs  ('at  the  Lithe,  that  is at  Midsummer', FR
 p. 19), and nothing is said of the letter-writing proclivities  of Hobbits.
 To  the  mention  of the  name 'Bounders'  my father  added '(as  they were
 called  unofficially)';  the word  'unofficially' he  subsequently removed,
 thus in this case retaining the joke but not drawing attention to it.      
   It seems to me all but certain that this new  element in  the text  is to
 be  associated  with  the  emergence of  the Shirriffs  in the  chapter The
 Scouring  of  the Shire  - where  the office  is shown  to have  been long
 established  'before  any  of  this  began', as  the Shirriff  Robin Small-
 burrow  said  to  Sam  (RK  p.  281). The  fact that  the term  'Thain' had
 not yet emerged does not contradict this, for that came  in very  late (see
 IX-99,  101,  103).  I  have  concluded  (IX.12-13) that  Book Six  of The
 Lord of the Rings was written in 1948.                                     
   At  the  end  of  this passage  on the  ordering of  the Shire,  which as
 already noted (p. 5) ends with the  words 'the  first sign  that everything
 was not quite as it  should be,  and always  used to  be', the  addition to
 P 2 continues (with a later pencilled heading 'Tobacco'):(5)               
                                                                           
 There  is  one  thing  more  about  these  hobbits  of  old  that  must  be
 mentioned:  they  smoked  tobacco  through  pipes  of   clay  or   wood.  A
 great deal  of mystery  surrounds the  origin of  this peculiar  custom ...
 From this point the remainder of section 2 in  the final  form of  the Pro-
 logue was achieved in  P 2  with only  a very  few minor  differences: 'Old
 Toby'  of  Longbottom  was  Tobias  (not   Tobold)  Hornblower   (on  which
 see p. 69), and the date of  his first  growing of  the pipe-weed  was 1050
 (not 1070), in the time of Isengrim the First (not  the Second);  the third
 of   the  Longbottom   varieties  was   'Hornpipe  Twist'   (not  'Southern
 Star');  and  it  is  not said  of sweet  galenas that  the Men  of Gondor
 'esteem it only for the fragrance of its flowers'. There is also a footnote
 to the words 'about the year 1050 in Shire-reckoning':                     
                                                                           
   That  is  about  400  years  before  the  events  recorded  in  this  book.
   Dates  in  the  Shire  were  all  reckoned from  the legendary  crossing of
   the Brandywine River by the brothers Marco and Cavallo.                  
                                                                           
 Later  changed  to  Marcho  and  Blanco,  these  names  do  not  appear in
 the  narrative  of  The  Lord of  the Rings:  they are  found only  in the

                                       
                                                                         
 further  long   extension  to   the  Prologue   concerning  Hobbit-history
 (FR  p.  13)  and in  the introductory  note to  Appendix C,  Family Trees
 (RK p. 379).                                                             
   For  the history  of the  passage on  pipe-weed, which  began as  a lec-
 ture on the  subject delivered  by Merry  to Theoden  at the  ruined gates
 of  Isengard,  see  VIII.36-9.  After  much  development my  father marked
 it  'Put into  Foreword' (VIII.38 and note 36).(6) - On Isengrim  Took the
 First  and  the  date 1050  see VIII.45,  note 37.  When this  addition to
 P 2 was written the old  genealogical tree  of the  Tooks (given  and dis-
 cussed  in  VI.316-18),  found  on  the  back  of a  page from  the 'Third
 Phase' manuscript of A Long-expected Party, was still in being.(7)     
   As has  been seen  (p. 4),  in P  2 as  revised the  story of  Bilbo and
 Gollum was still  that of  the original  edition of  The Hobbit,  in which
 Gollum  fully  intended  to give  Bilbo the  Ring if  he lost  the riddle-
 contest  (see VI.86).  The curious  story of  how the  rewritten narrative
 in the chapter Riddles in the  Dark came  to be  published in  the edition
 of 1951 is sufficiently indicated in Letters nos.111, 128 - 9.  In Septem-
 ber 1947 my father  sent to  Sir Stanley  Unwin what  he called  a 'speci-
 men' of such a rewriting, not  intending it  for publication,  but seeking
 only  Sir  Stanley's  comments  on the  idea. Believing  that it  had been
 rejected, he was  greatly shocked  and surprised  when nearly  three years
 later, in July 1950,  he received  the proofs  of a  new edition  with the
 rewriting  incorporated.  But  he  accepted  the  fait   accompli.  Beyond
 remarking  that  the  full  correspondence  makes it  very clear  how, and
 how  naturally,  the  misunderstandings  on  both sides  that led  to this
 result  arose, there is no  need to  say any  more about  it here: for the
 present purpose its significance.lies in the conclusion that  the revision
 of P 2 cannot have been carried out after  July 1950.  In fact,  I believe
 it to belong to 1948 (see pp. 14-15).                                    
                                                                         
   From the revised and  extended text  P 2,  now in  need of  a successor,
 my  father  made  a  new  typescript (P  3). This  was again  an uncharac-
 teristically exact copy. It  received a  good deal  of correction,  in the
 earlier part only, but these corrections were  restricted to  minor alter-
 ations  of  wording  and  a  few  other  details,  such  as the  change of
 'Northworthy'  to  'Norbury'  and of  the date  of Bilbo's  departure with
 Gandalf and  the Dwarves  to April  28th (note  2). From  this in  turn an
 amanuensis  typescript  was  made  (P  4),  but  this  my   father  barely
 touched.  These  texts both  bore the  original title,  Foreword, Concern-
 ing Hobbits.                                                             
   The next stage  was a  very rough  manuscript, P  5, without  title (but
 with  Concerning  Hobbits  added  later), and  without either  the section
 on  pipe-weed  or  that  on  the story  of Bilbo  and Gollum,  which while
 constantly  moving  the  detail  of expression  further towards  the final
 form held still to the original structure, and  retained such  features as
 the  Shirking.(8) To convey  the  way  in  which  the  text  was developed

 (with minute attention to tone, precision  of meaning,  and the  fall of
 sentences) in successive stages I give this single brief example.       
                                                                        
 P1 (VI.311).                                                         
    ' And yet plainly they must  be relatives  of ours:  nearer to  us than
   elves are, or even dwarves.  For one  thing, they  spoke a  very similar
   language  (or languages),  and liked  or disliked  much the  same things
   as we used to. What exactly the  relationship is  would be  difficult to
   say.  To  answer that  question one  would have  to re-discover  a great
   deal of the now wholly lost history  and legends  of the  Earliest Days;
   and  that  is  not likely  to happen,  for only  the Elves  preserve any
   traditions  about  the Earliest  Days, and  their traditions  are mostly
   about  themselves  -  not  unnaturally:  the  Elves  were much  the most
   important people of those times.                                      
 P2 (as revised).                                                     
      And yet plainly they must  be relatives  of ours:  nearer to  us than
   Elves  are, or  even Dwarves.  For one  thing, they  spoke a  very simi-
   lar  language  (or  languages),  and  liked and  disliked much  the same
   things  as  we  used  to.  What  exactly  the  relationship is  would be
   difficult  to  say.  To  answer  that  question  one  would have  to re-
   discover much that is now lost and  forgotten for  ever. Only  the Elves
   now preserve traditions  of the  Elder Days,  and even  their traditions
   are incomplete, being concerned chiefly with Elves.                   
 P5.                                                                   
      Yet plainly they are relatives  of ours:  far nearer  to us  than are
   Elves,  or  even  Dwarves.  They  spoke  the   languages  of   Men,  and
   they  liked  and  disliked much  the same  things as  we once  did. What
   exactly  our  relationship  was  in  the  beginning  can,   however,  no
   longer  be told.  The answer  to that  question lies  in the  Elder Days
   that  are  now  lost  and forgotten  for ever.  Only the  Elves preserve
   still  any traditions  of that  vanished time,  but these  are concerned
   mostly with their own affairs.                                        
                                                                        
   To  the  manuscript  P 5,  however, my  father added,  at the  time of
 writing,  much new  material. One  of these  passages was  that concern-
 ing the martial qualities of the Hobbits, or lack of them, the existence
 of arms in the  Shire (and  here the  word mathom  first appears  in the
 texts of the Prologue), and  the 'curious  toughness' of  Hobbit charac-
 ter. This was already fairly close to the published form (FR pp. 14-15),
 and its most notable omission  is the  absence of  the reference  to the
 Battle of Greenfields; the text reads here:                             
                                                                        
   The Hobbits were not warlike, though at times they  had been          
 obliged to fight  to maintain  themselves in  a hard  and wild          
 world. But at this period there  was no  living memory  of any          
 serious assault on the borders of the Shire. Even the weathers          
 were milder ...                                                         

                                    
                                                                           
 The  original  text  of  the  chapter  The  Scouring  of  the  Shire  had no
 reference  to  the Battle  of Greenfields:  'So ended  the fierce  battle of
 Bywater, the only battle ever fought in  the Shire'  (IX.93). In  the second
 text (IX.101) my father repeated this, but altered  it as  he wrote  to 'the
 last battle fought in the Shire, and the only battle since  the Greenfields,
 1137,  away  up  in  the North  Farthing'. It  seems a  good guess  that (as
 with  the  passage concerning  the Shirriffs,  p. 6)  the appearance  of the
 Battle of Greenfields  in the  Prologue soon  after this  (see below)  is to
 be associated with the writing of The Scouring of the Shire.               
   It is convenient  here, before  turning to  the rest  of the  new material
 that  came in  with the  manuscript P  5, to  notice a  text written  on two
 small  slips and  attached to  the amanuensis  typescript P  4. This  is the
 origin  of the  passage concerning  the founding  of the  Shire in  the pub-
 lished Prologue (FR pp. 13 - 14), but it is worth giving in full.          
                                                                           
 In the Year 1 (according to  the reckoning  of Shire-folk)  and in         
 the  month  of Luyde {9} (as they used to say) the  brothers Marco         
 and  Cavallo,  having  obtained  formal  permission from  the king         
 Argeleb II in the waning city of Fornost,  crossed the  wide brown         
 river Baranduin. They crossed by the great  stone bridge  that had         
 been built in the days  of the  power of  the realm  of Arthedain;         
 for  they  had  no  boats.  After  their  own manner  and language         
 they  later  changed  the  name  to   Brandywine.  All   that  was         
 demanded  of  the  'Little  People' was  (1) to  keep the  laws of         
 Arthedain;  (2)  to  keep the  Bridge (and  all other  bridges) in         
 repair; (3) to allow the king to hunt still in the woods and moors         
 thrice a year.  For the  country had  once been  a royal  park and         
 hunting ground.                                                            
   After  the  crossing  the  L[ittle]  P[eople]  settled  down and         
 almost disappeared  from history.  They took  some part  as allies         
 of the  king in  the wars  of Angmar  (sending bowmen  to battle),         
 but  after  the  disappearance  of  the realm  and of  Angmar they         
 lived mostly at peace. Their last battle was against  Orcs (Green-         
 fields  S.R.  1347?).  For  the  land  into  which they  had come,         
 though now long deserted, had been richly tilled in days  of yore,         
 and  there the  kings had  once had  many farms,  cornlands, vine-         
 yards, and woods.  This land  they called  the Shire  [struck out:         
 (as  distinct  from  the  Old  Home  at  Bree)],  which  in  their         
 language  meant  an  ordered district  of government  and business         
 -  the  business  of  growing  food  and eating  it and  living in         
 comparative  peace  and content.  This name  Shire served  to dis-         
 tinguish  it  from the  wilder lands  eastward, which  became more         
 and  more desolate,  all the  way back  to the  dreadful Mountains         
 over which (according to their  own tales)  their people  had long         

 ago   wandered   westward;   also   from   the   smaller   country,   the
 Oldhome  at  Bree,  where  they  first  settled  -   but  not   by  them-
 selves:  for  Bree  they  shared  with  the  Bree-men.  Now   these  folk
 (of   whom   the   brothers  Marco   and  Cavallo   were  in   their  day
 the  largest  and  boldest)  were   of  a   kind  concerning   which  the
 records  of ancient  days have  little to  say -  except of  course their
 own   records  and   legends.  They   called  themselves   Hobbits.  Most
 other  peoples   called  them Halflings  (or   words  of   similar  mean-
 ing   in  various   languages),  when   they  knew   of  them   or  heard
 rumour  of  them.  For  they  existed  now  only  in  the   Shire,  Bree,
 and  [?  lonely]  here  and  there were  a few  wild Hobbits  in Eriador.
 And  it  is  said  that  there  were still  a few  'wild hobbits'  in the
 eaves  of  Mirkwood  west  and  east  of   the  Forest.   Hobbit  appears
 to   be   a   'corruption'   or  shortening   of  older   holbytla  'hole
 dweller'.(10) This  was   the  name   by  which   they  were   known  (to
 legend)  in  Rohan,  whose  people  still  spoke   a  tongue   very  like
 the   most   ancient   form   of  the   Hobbit  language.   Both  peoples
 originally came from the lands of the upper Anduin.(11)                  
                                                                         
 The date '1347?' of the Battle of Greenfields (12) suggests that it  was here
 that  that  event  re-entered  from  The  Hobbit  (see IX.119);  later my
 father changed it here to 1147,  while in  The Scouring  of the  Shire it
 was first given as 1137 (IX.101 and note 31).                            
   Returning  briefly  to the  manuscript P  5, I  have not  yet mentioned
 that in this text, as originally written, the old passage in P 1 concern-
 ing  the  Hobbits  of  the  Marish  ('the  hobbit-breed  was   not  quite
 pure', 'no pure-bred hobbit had a beard', VI.312), still preserved in the
 revision of P 2, was now altered:                                        
                                                                         
 The   Hobbits   of   that   quarter,   the   Eastfarthing,   were  rather
 large   and   heavy-legged;   and   they   wore   dwarf-boots   in  muddy
 weather.  But  they  were  Stoors  in  the  most of  their blood,  as was
 shown  by  the  down  that  some  grew  on  their  chins.   However,  the
 matter  of  these  breeds  and   the  Shire-lore   about  them   we  must
 leave aside for the moment.                                              
                                                                         
 In the published Prologue  this passage  (apart of  course from  the last
 sentence) comes after the account of the  'three breeds'  (FR p.  12), in
 which  the  Stoors had  been introduced.  But a  further new  passage was
 added on a separate page  of the  P 5  manuscript, corresponding  to that
 in FR pp. 11 - 13 from  'Of their  original home  the Hobbits  in Bilbo's
 time  preserved  no  knowledge'  to  '...  such  as  the  Tooks  and  the
 Masters  of  Buckland';  and  the  account here  of the  Harfoots, Stoors
 and Fallohides was derived with little change  from the  earliest version
 of Appendix F, in which (p. 55, note 10) the idea  of the  'three breeds'
 is seen in its actual emergence. The text in P 5 is all but  identical to

                     
                                                                           
 that  in  the  final  form,  lacking only  the statement  that many  of the
 Stoors   'long   dwelt  between   Tharbad  and   the  borders   of  Dunland
 before they moved north  again', and  still placing  the Stoors  before the
 Harfoots (see ibid.).                                                      
  The word smial(s) first  occurs, in  the texts  of the  Prologue, in  P 5.
 Its  first occurrence  in the  texts of  The Lord  of the  Rings is  in The
 Scouring  of  the  Shire:  see  IX.87  and  note  16  (where  I  omitted to
 mention  that  in  Pippin's  reference  to  'the Great  Place of  the Tooks
 away  back  in  the  Smials  at  Tuckborough'  in  the   chapter  Treebeard
 (TT p. 64) the words  'the Smials  at' were  a late  addition to  the type-
 script of the chapter).                                                    
                                                                           
  A  further  manuscript,  P  6,  brought  the  Prologue  very close  to the
 form that it  had in  the First  Edition of  The Lord of the Rings.(13) This
 was  a  clear  and  fluently  written  text  bearing  the  title  Prologue:
 Concerning  Hobbits;  and  here  entered  the  last  'missing  passage', FR
 pp. 13-14, from 'In the westlands of Eriador ...' to  'They were,  in fact,
 sheltered, but they had ceased to remember it.'                            
  The text of P 6  differed still  from the  published form  in a  number of
 ways,  mostly  very  minor  (see  note 14).  The text  was not  yet divided
 into  four  numbered  sections,  though the  final ordering  and succession
 of the parts  was now  reached; and  the concluding  section, on  the find-
 ing of the Ring, was still the original story (see p. 7): this was derived,
 with some rewriting, from the text  of P  2, but  with a  notable addition.
 After  the  reference to  Gollum's saying  that he  had got  the Ring  as a
 birthday present long ago there follows:                                   
                                                                           
 Bilbo might indeed have wondered  how that  could be,  and still           
 more  why  Gollum  should  be  willing to  give such  a treasure           
 away, if his case had been less desperate, and if in fact Gollum           
 had  ever  given  him  the  present.  He  did  not, for  when he           
 returned to his island to fetch it the Ring was not to be found.           
                                                                           
 This part then concludes much as in  P 2,  with the  addition of  a passage
 about  Bilbo's  secrecy  concerning  the  Ring, and  his disposal  of Sting
 and the  coat of  mail; ending  'And the  years passed,  while he  wrote in
 his leisurely fashion the story of his journey.'                           
  In P 6 the 'Shirking' had  disappeared, and  in its  place stood  at first
 the title 'Elder', though  this was  replaced by  'Thane' before  the manu-
 script  was  completed,  and  the  spelling  'Thain' was  substituted later
 (see p. 6). In  this text  the Battle  of Greenfields,  with the  date S.R.
 1147, appears.(14)                                                         
  The  manuscript  ends  with  a  passage,  subsequently  struck  out,  that
 was preserved with little material change  as the  conclusion of  the Fore-
 word  to the  First Edition  of 1954.  This begins  with the  remarks about
 the  map  of  the  Shire  (now  with  the addition  'besides other  maps of
 wider and  more distant  countries') and  the 'abridged  family-trees' that
 go back to P 1 (VI.313-14), but then continues:                            

 There is also an index of names [struck out:  with explanations]           
 and strange words; and a table of days and dates. For  those who           
 are  curious  and like  such lore  some account  is given  in an           
 appendix of the languages, the alphabets, and the calendars that           
 were used in  the Westlands  in the  Third Age  of Middle-earth.           
 But such lore is not necessary, and those who do not need it, or           
 desire it,  may neglect  it, and  even the  names they  may pro-           
 nounce as they will. Some care has been given to the translation           
 of their spelling from  the original  alphabets, and  some notes           
 on the sounds that  are intended  are offered.  But not  all are           
 interested in such matters, and many who are not may  still find           
 the account of these great and valiant deeds worth  the reading.           
 It was in that hope that this long labour was undertaken; for it           
 has required several years to translate, select, and arrange the           
 matter of the Red Book of Westmarch in the form  in which  it is           
 now presented to Men of a later  Age, one  no less  darkling and           
 ominous than were the  great years  1418 and  1419 of  the Shire           
 long ago.(15)                                                              
                                                                           
   This text was followed  by a  typescript copy  (P 7).  To this  my father
 made  the  corrections  and  additions  that  brought  the Prologue  to its
 final  form (many  being made  to its  exemplar P  6 as  well); and  it was
 on this typescript that he rejected the original tale of  Bilbo's encounter
 with  Gollum  and  introduced  the  'true  tale' (FR  pp. 20-2).  The story
 is  told  here  on  appended  pages in  exactly its  form in  the published
 Prologue,  ending with  Gollum's cry  'Thief, thief!  Baggins! We  hates it
 for ever!'                                                                 
   From  this  point,  however, there  are two  texts. In  one of  these the
 original  story, now  become Bilbo's  untrue version,  is not  mentioned at
 all,  and  the  text  moves  at  once from  Gollum's cry  of hatred  to 'Of
 Bilbo's later  adventures little  more need  be said  here'. But  my father
 was  in  doubt,  whether  or  not  to  say anything  in the  Prologue about
 Bilbo's  doctored  accounts  of  the  events;  for at  the point  where the
 actual story ends ('We hates it for ever!') he  subsequently added  in this
 text a direction  to a  'Note' on  a separate  sheet, which  was apparently
 written quite independently. In this 'Note'  (which was  the origin  of the
 passage concerning  the two  versions in  FR p.  22) the  satisfying expla-
 nation of the difference in the story as told  in the  two editions  of The
 Hobbit  is  probably  seen at  its emergence.  He began:  'This is  not the
 story as Bilbo first told it to his  companions and  to Gandalf,  or indeed
 as he first set it down in his book' (my italics), but struck out the words
 following  'Gandalf';  he  then  went  on  to  say  that  though  Bilbo set
 down  the  false  story in  his memoirs,  and 'so  it probably  appeared in
 the  original  Red  Book',  nonetheless  'many  copies  contain   the  true
 account  (alone  or  as  an  alternative),  derived,  no doubt,  from notes

                     
                                                                          
 made by Frodo or Samwise, both of whom knew the truth.'                   
  On this page he  noted (later):  'Alternative, if  the only  reference to
 this is made in Chapter II (second fair copy).' This is a reference to the
 final  typescript of  the chapter  The Shadow  of the  Past, that  went to
 the  printers.  The explanation  of this  apparently very  obscure comment
 is as follows. On the text preceding the  one to  which he  referred, that
 is to  say the  penultimate typescript,  he had  introduced a  long rider (16)
 after Gandalf's words  (FR p.  66) 'I  put the  fear of  fire on  him, and
 wrung the true story  out of  him, bit  by bit,  with much  snivelling and
 snarling.' In this rider Gandalf continued:                               
                                                                          
 '...  I  already  suspected  much  of  it.  Indeed  I   already  suspected
 something   that  I   am  sure   has  never   occurred  to   you:  Bilbo's
 story was not true.'                                                      
  'What do you mean?' cried Frodo. 'I can't believe it.'                   
  'Well,   this   is   Gollum's   account.   Bilbo's  reward   for  winning
 was  merely  to  be  shown  a  way  out  of  the  tunnels.  There  was  no
 question  of  a  present,  least  of  all of  giving away  his "precious".
 Gollum  confesses  that  he   went  back   to  his   island  to   get  it,
 simply  so  as  to  kill Bilbo  in safety,  for he  was hungry  and angry.
 But  as  Bilbo  had  already  picked  up  the  ring,  he escaped,  and the
 last   Gollum   knew   of   him   was   when  he   crept  up   behind  and
 jumped over him in the dark. That is much more like Gollum!'              
  'But  it  is  quite  unlike  Bilbo,  not  to  tell  the true  tale,' said
 Frodo. 'And what was the point of it?'                                    
  'Unlike  Bilbo,  yes.  But  unlike  Bilbo  with  the   ring?  No,   I  am
 afraid  not.  You  see,  half-unknown   to  himself   he  was   trying  to
 strengthen  his  claim  to  be  its  rightful  owner:  it  was  a present,
 a   prize   he   had   won.   Much   like   Gollum   and   his  "birthday-
 present".   The   two   were  more   alike  than   you  will   admit.  And
 both   their   tales   were   improbable    and   hobbitlike.    My   dear
 Frodo,  Elven-rings  are  never  given  away   as  presents,   or  prizes:
 never.  You  are  a  hobbit  yourself  or  you  would  have   doubted  the
 tale, as I did at once.                                                   
  'But  as  I  have  told  you,  I  found it  impossible to  question Bilbo
 on  the  point  without  making  him  very  angry.  So  I  let it  be, for
 our  friendship's  sake.  His   touchiness  was   proof  enough   for  me.
 I  guessed  then  that  the  ring  had  an  unwholesome  power   over  its
 keeper  that  set  to  work  quickly. Yes,  even on  Bilbo the  desire for
 ownership  had  gripped   at  once,   and  went   on  growing.   But  for-
 tunately  it  stayed  at  that,  and  he  took little  other harm.  For he
 got  the  ring  blamelessly.  He did  not steal  it; he  found it,  and it
 was  quite  impossible  to  give  it  back:   Gollum  would   have  killed
 him  at  once.  He  paid  for  it,  you  might say,  with mercy,  and gave

                                                             
                                                                            
 Gollum  his  life  at  great  risk.  And so  in the  end he  got rid  of the
 thing, just in time.                                                        
   'But  as  for  Gollum:  he  will  never  again  be  free  of   the  desire
 for it, I fear. When I  last saw  him, he  was still  filled with  it, whin-
 ing  that  he  was  tricked  and  ill-used.  [But  when   he  had   at  last
 told me his history ...                                                     
                                                                            
 In  the  following  (final)  typescript  of  the  chapter  the rider  is not
 present; but my father added  a note  at this  point 'Take  in rider'  - and
 then struck it  out. It  was clearly  at this  time that  he wrote  the note
 referred  to  above, 'Alternative,  if the  only reference  to this  is made
 in  Chapter  II': he  meant, if  no more  was to  be said  of the  matter in
 Chapter  H  than  Gandalf's  words  'I  put  the  fear of  fire on  him, and
 wrung  the  true  story  out  of  him,  bit  by  bit,  with  much snivelling
 and snarling' - i.e., without the rider just given. If that rider was to be
 rejected,  then a  passage on  the subject  must be  given in  the Prologue.
 This  was  ultimately  his  decision;  and  the  second  of  the  two  texts
 appended  to  P  6  is  exactly  as  it  stands  in the  published Prologue,
 p. 22: 'Now it is a curious fact that this is not the  story as  Bilbo first
 told it to his companions ...'(17)                                          
                                                                            
   The  Note  on  the Shire  Records entered  in the  Second Edition.  In one
 of  his  copies  of  the  First  Edition  my father  noted: 'Here  should be
 inserted Note on the Shire  Records'; but  he wrote  against this  later: 'I
 have  decided  against  this. It  belongs to  Preface to  The Silmarillion.'
 With  this  compare  my  remarks  in  the  Foreword  to  The  Book  of  Lost
 Tales Part One, pp. S-6.                                                    
                                                                            
   I have given  this rather  long account  of the  history of  the Prologue,
 because  it  is  one of  the best-known  of my  father's writings,  the pri-
 mary  source  for   knowledge  of   the  Hobbits,   on  which   he  expended
 much thought and  care; and  also because  it seems  of special  interest to
 see  how  it  evolved.  in  relation  to the  narrative of  The Lord  of the
 Rings. I will here briefly  recapitulate some  elements that  seem to  me to
 emerge from this history.                                                   
   While  it  is  not  strictly  demonstrable,  I  think it  extremely likely
 that  my  father  returned  after  many years  to the  original form  of the
 Prologue  (or  Foreword  as  he  still called  it) about  the time,  or soon
 after it,  when he  was writing  the long  first draft  that went  from Many
 Partings   through   Homeward   Bound   and  The   Scouring  of   the  Shire
 to The  Grey Havens,  that is  to say  in the  summer of  1948 (IX.12  - 13,
 108).  I  have  pointed  to  a  number  of  indications  that  this  was so.
 On  the  one  hand,  we  see  the  appearance, at  successive stages  in the
 writing of the Prologue, of the Shirriffs  in the  revision of  the old  P 2
 text (p. 6); of the word smial in P 5 (p. 11); of the Battle  of Greenfields
 in P  6 (see  pp. 9-11);  of the  title of  Thane (Thain)  in the  same text
 (p. 11). On the other hand, all these first  appear in  The Scouring  of the

                   
                                                                         
 Shire - and in  two cases,  the Battle  of Greenfields  and the  title of
 Thain,  they  were  absent  from the  original draft  of that  chapter. I
 believe that my father's return to the Shire at  the end  of The  Lord of
 the  Rings  provided the  impulse for  his renewed  work on  the Prologue
 and  its  subsequent  extension  by  stages.  Moreover  it  is  seen from
 the history of this text how  much of  the account  of Hobbits  and their
 origins actually emerged after  the narrative  of The  Lord of  the Rings
 was completed - most notably, perhaps,  the idea  of their  division into
 Harfoots, Stoors, and Fallohides,  which entered  from the  earliest ver-
 sion of the appendix on  languages (p.  10). Some  of these  new elements
 were then introduced  into the  existing narrative,  such as  smials into
 the chapter  Treebeard (p.  11), or  Stoors into  the chapter  The Shadow
 of the Past (p. 66, $20).                                                
  Successive  stages  in  the  development  of  the  Prologue  were accom-
 panied, of  course, by  development in  the Appendices,  as is  seen from
 references  to  the  languages  and  to  dates, and  from such  points as
 the  naming  of  Argeleb II  as the  king who  granted possession  of the
 Shire to the Hobbits (p. 9, and see p. 209). But the-latest stage  of the
 Prologue  discussed  here,  the manuscript  P 6  and its  typescript copy
 P 7, which in all other respects closely approached the final form, still
 had  the  old story  of the  finding of  the Ring,  and can  therefore be
 dated, at the latest, to before July 1950.                               

                            NOTES.                                    
                                                                     
 1. The  Hobbit  was  now  said to  have been  'based on  [Bilbo's] own
    much  longer  memoirs';   'Earliest  Days'   was  changed   to  'Elder
    Days',   and   'Folco   Took'   (by   way   of  'Faramond   Took'  and
    'Peregrin Boffin', see VII.31-2)  to 'Peregrin  Took'; 'the  one real-
    ly  populous  town  of  their   Shire,  Michel-Delving'   became  'the
    only  town  of  their  Shire,  the  county-town,  Michel-Delving'; and
    the  boots  of  the hobbits  of the  Marish became  'dwarf-boots'. The
    Hobbits'  antipathy  to  vessels  and  water, and  to swimming  in it,
    was the only actual addition.                                        
     In  a  letter to  Sir Stanley  Unwin of  21 September  1947 (Letters
    no.111)  my  father   said  that   he  was   sending,'the  preliminary
    chapter  or  Foreword  to  the  whole:  "Concerning   Hobbits",  which
    acts  as  a link  to the  earlier book  and at  the same  time answers
    questions  that  have  been  asked.'  From  the  date, this  must have
    been a copy of the original version, as corrected.                   
 2. The date April 30th  was corrected  to April  28th on  the text  P 3
    (p- 7).                                                              
 3. Northworthy:   the   Old   English  word,    wordig   were  common
    elements  in  place-names,  with  the  same  general  meaning  as  tun
    (-ton), an enclosed dwelling-place.                                  
 4. The fiction of 'translation'  from the  'true' Hobbit  language (the

     Common Speech) was inimical to puns in any case, good though          
     this one was..                                                        
  5. The extension to P 2 on the ordering of the Shire was  a typescript,
     but  that  on  pipe-weed  was  a  manuscript  written  on   slips.  My
     father inserted them into P 2 as  a unit,  but they  clearly originat-
     ed separately: see note 6.                                            
  6. In  his letter  to me  of 6  May 1944  (cited in  VIII.45, note  36) my
     father  said  that  'if  [Faramir]  goes  on  much more  a lot  of him
     will  have  to  be  removed  to  the appendices  - where  already some
     fascinating  material  on   the  hobbit   Tobacco  industry   and  the
     Languages  of  the  West  have  gone.'  I  remarked   (VIII.162)  that
     Faramir's  exposition  of  linguistic  history  'survived   into  sub-
     sequent  typescripts,  and  was  only  removed at  a later  time; thus
     the  excluded  material  on  "the  Languages  of  the  West"  was  not
     the account given by Faramir.' It is indeed difficult  to say  what it
     was.  On  the  other  hand,  the   'pipe-weed'  passage   was  removed
     from  the  chapter  The Road  to Isengard  before the  first completed
     manuscript was written (VIII.39). It  is in  fact quite  possible that
     the  account  of  'pipe-weed'  in  the long  addition to  P 2  does go
     back so early,  seeing that  it was  certainly written  quite indepen-
     dently of the first part of the addition, on the ordering of the Shire
     (see note 5).                                                         
                                                                          
  7. Similarly  the  statement  in P  1 (VI.311)  that Bandobras  Took, the
     Bullroarer, was the  son of  Isengrim the  First was  retained in  P 2
     as  revised:  in  the  published  genealogical  tree  he   became  the
     grandson  of  Isengrim  II.  -  A  curious  exception to  my statement
     (p. 4) that P 2 as typed was a  precise copy  of the  original version
     is  found  in  the  name  Bandobras,  which  in  P 2  became Barnabas;
     but  this  was  probably  a  mere  slip.  It  was  corrected  back  to
     Bandobras in the revision.                                            
  8. In  P  5  the  name  Lithe entered  as my  father wrote,  changing 'at
     Midsummer' to 'at the Lithe (that is Midsummer)'.                     
  9. The  name Luyde  for  the  month   of  March   is  found   once  else-
     where,   a   comparative   calendar   of   Hobbit  and   modern  dates
     written on the back of a  page of  the earliest  text of  the Appendix
     on  Calendars  (see  p.  136,  note  3}.  Above Luyde  here  my father
     wrote  a  name  beginning  Re  which  is  certainly  not as  it stands
     Rethe,  the  later  Hobbit  name  of March,  but must  be taken  as an
     ill-written form of that name.                                        
 10. On  holbytla  translated  'hole  dweller'  see  p.  49,  $48  and com-
     mentary (p. 69).                                                      
 11. This  is  to  be  associated  with  the early  version of  Appendix F,
     $$22-3  (p.  38):  '...  before  their crossing  of the  Mountains the
     Hobbits  spoke  the  same  language  as  Men  in  the higher  vales of
     the  Anduin  ...  Now  that  language  was  nearly  the  same  as  the
     language of the ancestors of the Rohirrim'.                           

                                                                     
                                                                        
 12. The second figure of the date 1347 is  slightly uncertain,  but it
    looks much more like a '3' than a '1'.                               
 13. The  significant  changes  made  in the  Second Edition  (1966) were
    few. On FR p.  14, where  the later  text has  'There for  a thousand
    years they were little troubled by wars ...' to '... the  Hobbits had
    again  become  accustomed to  plenty', the  First Edition  had simply
    'And  thenceforward  for  a  thousand  years  they  lived  in  almost
    unbroken  peace'  (thus  without  the  mention  of  the  Dark Plague,
    the Long Winter, and the  Days of  Dearth}. At  the beginning  of the
    next  paragraph  the reading  of the  Second Edition,  'Forty leagues
    it  stretched  from  the   Far  Downs   to  the   Brandywine  Bridge,
    and  fifty  from the  northern moors  to the  marshes in  the south',
    was  substituted  for  'Fifty  leagues  it  stretched from  the West-
    march  under  the  Tower   Hills  to   the  Brandywine   Bridge,  and
    nearly  fifty  from  the northern  moors ...'.  My father  noted that
    the word 'nearly' was  (wrongly) omitted  in the  text of  the Second
    Edition, 'so this must be accepted'.                                 
       On FR p. 16,  in 'Three  Elf-towers of  immemorial age  were still
    to  be  seen  on the  Tower Hills',  the words  'on the  Tower Hills'
    were  an  addition,  and  in  a  following  sentence  'upon  a  green
    mound'  was changed  from 'upon  a green  hill'. At  the end  of this
    first  section  of  the  Prologue  (FR p.  17) the  sentence 'Hobbits
    delighted in such things ...'  was in  the First  Edition put  in the
    present tense throughout.                                            
       Lastly, in the first paragraph of the third section, FR p. 18, the
    sentence  'Outside  the  Farthings  were the  East and  West Marches:
    the  Buckland;  and  the  Westmarch  added  to  the  Shire   in  S.R.
    1462' was an addition.                                               
 14. A few further  differences in  P 6  from the  published text  may be
    recorded.  In  the  paragraph  concerning  the  script  and  language
    of  the  Hobbits  (FR p.  13) P  6 had:  'And if  ever Hobbits  had a
    language of  their own  (which is  debated) then  in those  days they
    forgot  it  and  spoke  ever  after  the  Common Speech,  the Westron
    as  it was  named', this  being changed  to the  reading of  FR, 'And
    in  those  days  also they  forgot whatever  languages they  had used
    before,  and  spoke  ever  after the  Common Speech  ...' And  at the
    end  of the  paragraph the  sentence 'Yet  they kept  a few  words of
    their own,  as well  as their  own names  of months  and days,  and a
    great store of personal names out of  the past'  is lacking.  Cf. the
    original version of Appendix F, pp. 37-8, $$21 - 3.                 
       The founders of the  Shire were  still Marco  and Cavallo  (pp. 6,
    9;  later  changed  to  Marcho  and  Blanco); and  the second  of the
    conditions imposed on the Hobbits of  the Shire  (cf. the  text given
    on p. 9) was 'to foster the land' (changed later to 'speed the king's
    messengers'). The first grower of  pipe-weed in  the Shire  was still
    Tobias  Hornblower,  and  still  in  the time  of Isengrim  the First

     (p. 6);  the date  was apparently first written  1050 as  before, but
     changed  to  1020.  Later  Isengrim  the  Second  and  the  date 1070
     were  substituted,  but  Tobias  remained.   The  footnote   to  this
     passage  (p.  6)  was  retained,  but  'about  400  years'  was later
     altered  to  'nearly  350'. The  third of  the Longbottom  brands now
     became   'Hornpipe  Cake',   but  was   changed  back   to  'Hornpipe
     Twist'.                                                              
 15. In the Foreword as published this concluding paragraph began:
          Much information, necessary and unnecessary, will be found
      in the Prologue. To complete it some maps are given, including
      one of the Shire that has been approved as reasonably correct
      by those Hobbits that still concern themselves with ancient
      history. At the end of the third volume will be found also some
      abridged family-trees ...
    When P 6 was written, of course, the idea that The Lord of the
    Rings should be issued as a work in three volumes was not
    remotely envisaged. The published Foreword retained the refer-
    ence to 'an index of names and strange words with some expla-
    nations', although in the event it was not provided.
 16. I did not carry my account of the history of The Shadow of the
    Past so far as this: see VII.28-9.
 17. In this connection it is interesting to see what my father said in
    his letter to Sir Stanley Unwin of 10 September 1950 (Letters
    no.129):
       I have now on my hands two printed versions of a crucial
     incident. Either the first must be regarded as washed out, a
     mere miswriting that ought never to have seen the light; or the
     story as a whole must take into account the existence of two
     versions and use it. The former was my original simpleminded
     intention, though it is a bit awkward (since the Hobbit is fairly
     widely known in its older form) if the literary pretence of
     historicity and dependence on record is to be maintained. The
     second can be done convincingly (I think), but not briefly ex-
     plained in a note.
    The last words refer to the note required for the new edition of
    The Hobbit explaining the difference in the narrative in Riddles
    in the Dark. Four days later he wrote again (Letters no.130):
     I have decided to accept the existence of both versions of
    Chapter Five, so far as the sequel goes - though I have no time
    at the moment to rewrite that at the required points.

                                    II.                                   
                         THE APPENDIX ON LANGUAGES.                       
                                                                        
 Beside  the  Foreword:  Concerning  Hobbits,  whose  development, clear
 and coherent, into the Prologue has been described  in the  last chapter,
 there is another text of a prefatory  or introductory  nature; and  it is
 not easy to see  how my  father designed  it to  relate to  the Foreword:
 Concerning  Hobbits.  Indeed,  except  in  one  point, they  have nothing
 in common; for this further text (which  has no  title) is  scarcely con-
 cerned with Hobbits at all. For  a reason  that will  soon be  apparent I
 give it here in full.                                                   
  It  was  typed  on  small  scrap  paper,  and  very  obviously  set down
 by  my  father  very  rapidly  ab initio  without any  previous drafting,
 following  his  thoughts as  they came:  sentences were  abandoned before
 complete  and  replaced  by  new  phrasing,  and so  on. He  corrected it
 here and there in pencil, either then or  later, these  corrections being
 very largely minor improvements  or necessary  'editorial' clarifications
 of the very rough text; in most cases I have incorporated these  (not all
 are  legible).  I  have  added  paragraph  numbers for  subsequent refer-
 ence. Notes to this section will be found on page 26.                   
                                                                        
  $1. This  tale  is   drawn  from   the  memoirs   of  Bilbo   and  Frodo
 Baggins,  preserved  for  the  most  part  in  the  Great  Red   Book  of
 Samwise.  It  has  been  written   during  many   years  for   those  who
 were  interested  in  the  account  of  the  great  Adventure  of  Bilbo,
 and  especially  for  my  friends,  the  Inklings  (in  whose   veins,  I
 suspect,  a  good  deal  of  hobbit blood  still runs),  and for  my sons
 and daughter.                                                           
  $2. But  since  my  children  and  others  of   their  age,   who  first
 heard  of  the  finding  of  the   Ring,  have   grown  older   with  the
 years,  this  tale  speaks  more  clearly  of  those darker  things which
 lurked  only  on  the  borders  of  the  other   tale,  but   which  have
 troubled the world in all its history.                                  
  $3.  To   the   Inklings  I   dedicate  this   book,  since   they  have
 already  endured  it  with  patience  -  my   only  reason   for  suppos-
 ing  that  they  have  a  hobbit-strain  in  their   venerable  ancestry:
 otherwise  it  would   be  hard   to  account   for  their   interest  in
 the   history   and   geography   of   those   long-past   days,  between
 the  end  of  the  Dominion  of  the  Elves  and  the  beginning  of  the

 Dominion  of  Men,  when  for  a  brief time  the Hobbits  played a
 supreme part in the movements of the world.                       
   $4. For  the  Inklings I  add this  note, since  they are  men of
 lore, and curious in such matters.  It is  said that  Hobbits spoke
 a language, or languages, very similar to ours.  But that  must not
 be  misunderstood.  Their  language  was  like  ours in  manner and
 spirit; but  if the  face of  the world  has changed  greatly since
 those  days,  so  also  has every  detail of  speech, and  even the
 letters and scripts  then used  have long  been forgotten,  and new
 ones invented.(1)                                                 
   $5. No  doubt  for  the  historians  and  philologists  it  would
 have  been  desirable  to  preserve   the  original   tongues;  and
 certainly  something of  the idiom  and the  humour of  the hobbits
 is lost in translation, even into a language as similar in  mood as
 is our own. But the study of the languages  of those  days requires
 time  and  labour,  which  no  one  but-myself  would, I  think, be
 prepared to give to  it. So  I have  except for  a few  phrases and
 inscriptions  transferred  the  whole  linguistic setting  into the
 tongues of our own time.                                          
   $6. The  Common  Speech  of  the  West  in  those  days  I  have
 represented  by  English.  This  noble  tongue  had  spread  in the
 course  of  time  from  the  kingdoms  of  Fornost and  Gondor, and
 the  hobbits  preserved  no memory  of any  other speech;  but they
 used it in their own manner, in  their daily  affairs very  much as
 we  use  English;  though  they  had  always  at  command  a richer
 and  more  formal   language  when   occasion  required,   or  when
 they  had  dealings  with  other  people.  This  more   formal  and
 archaic style was still the normal use in the  realm of  Gondor (as
 they  discovered)  and  among the  great in  the world  outside the
 Shire.                                                            
   $7. But  there  were  other  languages in  the lands.  There were
 the  tongues  of  the  Elves.  Three  are here  met with.  The most
 ancient of all, the High-Elven, which they used in secret  as their
 own  common  speech  and  as  the  language of  lore and  song. The
 Noldorin,  which  may  be  called  Gnomish,  the  language  of  the
 Exiles  from  Elvenhome  in the  Far West,  to which  tongue belong
 most of the names in this  history that  have been  preserved with-
 out  translation.  And  the  language  of  the woodland  Elves, the
 Elves of Middle-earth. All  these tongues  were related,  but those
 spoken  in Middle-earth,  whether by  Exiles or  by Elves  that had
 remained  here  from  the  beginning,  were  much   changed.(2) Only
 in Gondor was the Elvish speech known commonly to Men.            

       
                                                                 
  $8. There  were  also  the  languages  of  Men,  when  they  did
 not  speak  the  Common  Tongue.  Now  those  languages   of  Men
 that are here met  with were  related to  the Common  Speech; for
 the  Men of  the North  and West  were akin  in the  beginning to
 the  Men  of Westernesse  that came  back over  the Sea;  and the
 Common  Speech  was  indeed made  by the  blending of  the speech
 of Men of Middle-earth with the  tongues of  the kings  from over
 the Sea.(3) But in the North old forms survived. The speech  of the
 Men of Dale, therefore, to show its relationship has been cast in
 a Northern form related distantly to the  English which  has been
 taken to represent  the Common  Speech. While  the speech  of the
 Men  of  Rohan,  who  came  out  of  the  North, and  still among
 themselves  used  their  ancestral  language  (though  all  their
 greater folk spoke  also the  Common Speech  after the  manner of
 their allies in Gondor), I have  represented by  ancient English,
 such as  it was  a thousand  years ago,  or as  far back  from us
 about  as  was  the  day  of  Eorl  the  Young  from  Theoden  of
 Rohan.(4)                                                         
  $9. The  orcs  and  goblins  had  languages  of  their  own,  as
 hideous as  all things  that they  made or  used; and  since some
 remnant  of  good  will,  and  true  thought  and  perception, is
 required to keep even a base language alive  and useful  even for
 base purposes, their tongues were endlessly diversified  in form,
 as they were  deadly monotonous  in purport,  fluent only  in the
 expression of abuse, of hatred  and fear.  For which  reason they
 and  their  kind  used (and  still use)  the languages  of nobler
 creatures in  such intercourse  as they  must have  between tribe
 and tribe.(5)                                                    
  $10. The  dwarves  are  a  different  case.  They  are   a  hard
 thrawn folk for the most part, secretive, acquisitive, laborious,
 retentive of the memory of injuries (and of benefits),  lovers of
 stone, of metals, of  gems, of  things that  grow and  take shape
 under the hands of craft rather than of things that live by their
 own life. But they are not and  were not  ever among  the workers
 of wilful evil in the world nor servants  of the  Enemy, whatever
 the  tales  of  Men may  later have  said of  them; for  Men have
 lusted after the works of their hands, and there has  been enmity
 between  the  races. But  it is  according to  the nature  of the
 Dwarves  that travelling,  and labouring,  and trading  about the
 world  they  should  use  ever  openly the  languages of  the Men
 among whom they dwell; and yet in secret  (a secret  which unlike
 the Elves they are unwilling to  unlock even  to those  whom they

 know  are  friends  and  desire  learning  not  power)  they  use  a
 strange slow-changing tongue.(6) Little is known about  it. So  it is
 that  here  such  Dwarves  as   appear  have   names  of   the  same
 Northern  kind  as  the  Men  of  Dale that  dwelt round  about, and
 speak  the  Common  Speech,  now  in  this   manner  now   in  that;
 and  only  in a  few names  do we  get any  glimpse of  their hidden
 tongue.                                                            
   $11. And  as  for  the scripts,  something must  be said  of them,
 since  in this history there  are both  inscriptions and  old books,
 such  as  the  torn remnants  of  the Book of Mazarbul,(7) that must
 be  read.  Enough  of  them  will  appear  in  this  book,to  allow,
 maybe,  the  skilled  in  such  matters to  decipher both  runes and
 running hands.  But  others  may wish  for a  clearer key.  For them
 the  Elvish Script  (in its  more formal  shape, as  it was  used in
 Gondor  for  the  Common  Speech)  is  set out  in full;  though its
 various  modifications  used  in  writing other  tongues, especially
 the  High-Elven  or  the  Noldorin,  must   here  be   passed  over.
 Another script plays a  part both  in the  previous account  and the
 present one:  the Runes.  These also,  as most  other things  of the
 kind,  were  also  an  Elvish  invention.  But  whereas  the flowing
 scripts (of two kinds,  the alphabet  of Rumil  and the  alphabet of
 Feanor,  only the  later of  which concerns  this tale)  were devel-
 oped  in  Elvenhome  far  from  Middle-earth,  the Runes,  or cirth,
 were  devised  by  the  Elves  of  the woods;  and from  that origin
 derive their peculiar character, similar to the  Runes of  the North
 in our days, though their detail is different and it is  very doubt-
 ful  if there  is any  lineal connexion  between the  two alphabets.
 The  Elvish  cirth  are  in  any  case  more elaborate  and numerous
 and  systematic.  The  Dwarves  devised no  letters and  though they
 used  such  writing as  they found  current for  necessary purposes,
 they  wrote  few  books,  except brief  chronicles (which  they kept
 secret).  In  the  North  in  those regions  from which  the Dwarves
 of  this  tale came  they used  the cirth,  or Runes.  Following the
 general  lines  of  translation,  to which  these records  have been
 submitted,  as  the names  of the  North have  been given  the forms
 of  Northern  tongues  in  our own  time, so  the Runes  were repre-
 sented by the runes of ancient  England. But  since the  scripts and
 runes  of that  account interested  many of  its readers,  older and
 younger,  and  many  enquiries  concerning  them  have   been  made,
 in this book it has been thought better to  give any  runic inscrip-
 tions or writings that occur in their truer form, and to add  at the
 end a table of the cirth, with their names,  according to  the usage

                            
                                                                   
 of  Dale, among  both Dwarves  and Men.  A list  of the  names that
 occur is  also given,  and where  they are  taken from  the ancient
 records  the  language  to which  they belong  is stated  and their
 meaning, or the meaning of their component parts, is added.        
   $12. The  word  Gnomish  is  used  above;  and  it  would  be  an
 apt  name,  since   whatever  Paracelsus   may  have   thought  (if
 indeed  he invented  the word),  to the  learned it  suggests know-
 ledge.  And  their  own true  name in  High-Elven is  Noldor, Those
 that Know; for of the  Three Kindreds  of the  Elves in  the begin-
 ning,  ever  the  Noldor  were  distinguished  both by  their know-
 ledge of things that are and were in this world, and by  the desire
 to know yet more. Yet  they were  not in  fact in  any way  like to
 the gnomes of our learned theory, and still less  to the  gnomes of
 popular  fancy  in  which  they  have  been  confused  with dwarves
 and  goblins,  and  other  small  creatures  of  the   earth.  They
 belonged to a race high and  beautiful, the  Elder Children  of the
 World,  who now  are gone.  Tall they  were, fairskinned  and grey-
 eyed,  though their  locks were  dark, and  their voices  knew more
 melodies than any  mortal speech  that now  is heard.  Valiant they
 were and their history was lamentable,  and though  a little  of it
 was  woven  with  the  fates  of the  Fathers of  Men in  the Elder
 Days, their fate is not our fate, and their lives and the  lives of
 Men cross seldom.(8)                                               
                                                                   
   $13. It  will  be  noted  also  that  in  this  book,  as before,
 Dwarves  are  spoken  of,  although dictionaries  tell us  that the
 plural  of  dwarf  is dwarfs.  It should,  of course,  be dwarrows;
 meaning  that,  if  each,  singular  and plural,  had gone  its own
 natural  way  down  the  years,  unaffected  by  forgetfulness,  as
 Man  and  Men  have,  then  dwarf  and  dwarrows  we  should  have
 said  as  surely as  we say  goose and  geese. But  we do  not talk
 about  dwarf  as  often  as  we  talk  of man,  or even  goose, and
 memories  are  not  good  enough  among  men  to  keep  hold  of  a
 special plural for a race now relegated (such is their fate and the
 fall of their great pride) to folktales, where at least some shadow
 of the truth is preserved, or at last to nonsense tales  where they
 have  become  mere  figures  of fun  who do  not wash  their hands.
 But here something  of their  old character  and power  (if already
 diminished) is still glimpsed; these  are the Nauglir (9) of old, in
 whose  hearts  still smouldered  the ancient  fires and  the embers
 of their  grudge against  the Elves;  and to  mark this  dwarves is
 used, in defiance of  correctness and  the dictionaries  - although
 actually  it is  derived from  no more  learned source  than child-

 hood  habit.  I always  had  a  love  of  the  plurals  that  did   not  go
 according  to  the  simplest   rule:  loaves,   and  elves,   and  wolves,
 and  leaves;  and  wreaths  and   houses  (which   I  should   have  liked
 better  spelt wreathes   and  houzes);   and  I   persist  in   hooves  and
 rooves   according  to   ancient  authority.   I  said   therefore  dwarves
 however  I  might  see  it  spelt,  feeling  that  the  good  folk  were  a
 little dignified so;  for  I  never  believed  the  sillier  things  about
 them  that  were  presented  to  my  notice.   I  wish   I  had   known  of
 dwarrows  in  those  days.  I  should have  liked it  better still.  I have
 enshrined  it  now  at  any  rate  in  my  translation   of  the   name  of
 Moria in  the Common Speech, which meant     The    Dwarf-
 delving,   and   that   I   have   rendered   by   The   Dwarrow-delf.  But
 Moria  itself  is  an  Elvish  name  of  Gnomish  kind,  and   given  with-
 out  love,  for  the  true  Gnomes,  though  they  might  here   and  there
 in  the  bitter  wars  against   the  Enemy   and  his   orc-servants  make
 great  fortresses  beneath  the  Earth,  were  not  dwellers  in  caves  or
 tunnels  of  choice,  but  lovers  of  the  green earth  and of  the lights
 of   heaven;   and   Moria  in   their  tongue   means  the   Black  Chasm.
 But   the   Dwarves   themselves,   and   this   name   at  any   rate  was
 never   secret,   called  it   simply  Khazad-dum,   the  Mansion   of  the
 Khazad,  for  such  is  their  own  name  for  their  own  race,   and  has
 been so, since their birth in the deeps of time.(10)                      
                                                                           
 The opening remarks of this text  certainly suggest  that the  narrative of
 The  Lord  of  the  Rings  had been  completed; and  this in  turn suggests
 that  it  was  not  far  removed  in  time  from  the  renewed work  on the
 Foreword:   Concerning  Hobbits  (i.e.  the  Prologue).  Though  it  is not
 much  mom  than  a  guess, I  incline to  think that  when my  father began
 it he intended it as a personal and dedicatory 'preface', entirely distinct
 in  nature  from  the  account  of  the  Hobbits,  which  was   a  prologue
 expressly relating to  the narrative;  but that  involuntarily he  was soon
 swept  into  writing  about  those  matters of  languages and  scripts that
 he  felt  needed  some  introduction and  explanation at  least as  much as
 did  the Hobbits.  The result  was, clearly,  a combination  wholly unsuit-
 able to his purpose, and he put it aside. I  would also  guess that  it was
 the writing of this text that gave rise to the idea  of a  special Appendix
 on languages and scripts  (ultimately divided  into two);  and this  is why
 I  place  it at  the beginning  of this  account of  the evolution  of what
 came  to  be  'Appendix  F',  The  Languages  and  Peoples  of   the  Third
 Age. Since I shall number the texts  of this  Appendix from  'F 1',  it is
 convenient to call this anomalous 'Foreword' F*.                           
   My  father  did  not lose  sight of  this text,  however, and  later used
 elements  from  it,  both  in  Appendix  F (11) and in the   Foreword  that
 accompanied  the  First   Edition  of   The  Fellowship   of   the  Ring,

 published in 1954. Since copies of  the First  Edition may  not be  easy to
 come by, I print  the greater  part of  it again  here (for  the concluding
 section see p. 12 with note 15).                                           
                                                                           
   This  tale,  which has  grown to  be almost  a history  of the  great War
   of  the  Ring,  is  drawn  for  the  most  part from  the memoirs  of the
   renowned  Hobbits,  Bilbo  and  Frodo,  as  they  are  preserved  in  the
   Red  Book  of  Westmarch.  This  chief  monument  of  Hobbit-lore  is  so
   called  because  it  was  compiled, repeatedly  copied, and  enlarged and
   handed   down   in   the   family   of   the  Fairbairns   of  Westmarch,
   descended  from  that  Master  Samwise  of  whom   this  tale   has  much
   to say.                                                                  
     I  have  supplemented  the  account of  the Red  Book, in  places, with
   information  derived  from  the  surviving  records  of  Gondor,  notably
   the  Book  of  the Kings;  but in  general, though  I have  omitted much,
   I  have  in  this  tale  adhered  more  closely to  the actual  words and
   narrative of  my original  than in  the previous  selection from  the Red
   Book,  The  Hobbit.  That  was  drawn  from  the  early   chapters,  com-
   posed originally by Bilbo himself. If  'composed' is  a just  word. Bilbo
   was  not  assiduous,  nor  an  orderly  narrator,  and  his   account  is
   involved  and  discursive,  and  sometimes  confused:  faults  that still
   appear  in  the  Red  Book,  since  the copiers  were pious  and careful,
   and altered very little.                                                 
     The  tale  has  been  put  into  its  present form  in response  to the
   many  requests that  I have  received for  further information  about the
   history of  the Third  Age, and  about Hobbits  in particular.  But since
   my children and others of their age, who  first heard  of the  finding of
   the  Ring,  have  grown  older  with  the  years,  this book  speaks more
   plainly  of  those  darker  things which  lurked only  on the  borders of
   the  earlier  tale,  but  which  have  troubled  Middle-earth in  all its
   history. It is, in fact, not a book written for  children at  all; though
   many children will, of course, be interested in  it, or  parts of  it, as
   they still are in the histories and legends of other times (especially in
   those not specially written for them).                                   
     I  dedicate  the  book  to  all  admirers of  Bilbo, but  especially to
   my  sons  and  my  daughter,  and  to  my  friends  the Inklings.  To the
   Inklings,  because  they  have already  listened to  it with  a patience,
   and  indeed  with  an  interest,  that  almost leads  me to  suspect that
   they  have  hobbit-blood  in  their  venerable ancestry.  To my  sons and
   my  daughter  for  the  same  reason,  and  also  because  they  have all
   helped  me  in the  labours of  composition. If  'composition' is  a just
   word,  and  these  pages  do  not  deserve  all  that  I have  said about
   Bilbo's work.                                                            
     For if the  labour has  been long  (more than  fourteen years),  it has
   been  neither  orderly  nor  continuous.  But  I  have  not  had  Bilbo's
   leisure. Indeed much  of that  time has  contained for  me no  leisure at

 all, and  more  than  once for  a whole  year the  dust has  gathered on
 my unfinished  pages.  I  only  say this  to explain  to those  who have
 waited  for this  book why  they have  had to  wait so  long. I  have no
 reason  to  complain.  I  am  surprised  and  delighted  to   find  from
 numerous  letters  that  so  many  people,  both  in England  and across
 the Water, share my interest in  this almost  forgotten history;  but it
 is not yet universally recognized as  an important  branch of  study. It
 has indeed no obvious  practical use,  and those  who go  in for  it can
 hardly expect to be assisted.                                           
   Much  information,  necessary  and  unnecessary,  will  be   found  in
 the Prologue....                                                        
                                                                        
 In the Second  Edition of  1966 this  Foreword was  rejected in  its en-
 tirety. On one of his copies of the First Edition my father wrote beside
 it:   'This Foreword  I should  wish very  much in  any case  to cancel.
 Confusing (as it  does) real  personal matters  with the  "machinery" of
 the Tale is a serious mistake.'(12)                                    

                            NOTES.                                     
                                                                      
 1. On this passage see note 11.                                     
 2. On my father's conception at this time of the use in Middle-earth
    in  the  Third  Age  of  Noldorin  on  the  one  hand, and  of 'the
    language of the woodland Elves* on the other, see  p. 36,  $18, and
    commentary (pp. 65-6).                                             
 3. On  this passage  concerning the  origin of  the Common  Speech see
    p. 63, $9.                                                         
 4. In Appendix  A (RK  pp. 349  - 50)  the length  of time  between the
    birth-dates of Eorl the Young and Theoden was 463 years.           
 5. My father was asserting, I think, that a language  so base  and nar-
    row  in  thought  and  expression  cannot  remain  a  common tongue
    of widespread use; for from  its very  inadequacy it  cannot resist
    change  of  form,  and  must  become  a  mass  of  closed  jargons,
    incomprehensible even to others of the same kind.                  
 6. This  passage  concerning  the  Dwarves,  absent  in  the  original
    version of  Appendix F,  reappeared subsequently  (p. 75),  and was
    retained, a good deal altered, in the final  form of  that Appendix
    (RK p. 410).                                                       
 7. My father deeply regretted that in the event his 'facsimiles' of the
    torn and  burned  pages  from  the  Book   of  Mazarbul   were  not
    reproduced  in  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  (see   Letters  nos.137,
    139-40;  but  also  pp.  298-9  in  this  book). They  were finally
    published in Pictures by J. R. R. Tolkien, 1979.                   
 8. This is  where the  passage that  concludes Appendix  F in  the pub-
    lished form first arose. See further pp. 76-7.                     
 9. Nauglir: curiously, my  father here  returned to  the form  found in

       
                                                                        
 the  Quenta  of  1930,  rather   than  using   Naugrim,  found   in  the
 Quenta   Silmarillion   and   later   (see   V.273,  277;   XI.209).  As
 with those referred to in notes  6 and  8, this  passage, absent  in the
 original  version  of  Appendix  F,  was  reinstated  and  appears  with
 little  change  in  the  published  form  (where  the name  is Naugrim).
10.   Years later my father called this text a 'fragment' (see note 12). It
 ends at the foot  of a  page, the  last words  typed being  'since their
 birth', with 'in the deeps of time' added in pencil.                    
11.   For passages  from F'  that reappeared  in the  course of  the devel-
 opment see  notes 6,  8 and  9. In  this connection  there is  a curious
 and  puzzling  point  arising  from F'.  In this  text my  father showed
 his  intention  to  say  something  in  the  published  work  about  the
 fiction  of  translation:  that  he had  converted the  'true' languages
 of  Men  (and  Hobbits)  in  the  Third  Age  of   Middle-earth,  wholly
 alien  to  us,  into  an  analogical  structure  composed of  English in
 modern   and  ancestral   form,  and   Norse  ($$5-6,   8).  Introducing
 this  subject,  he  wrote  ($4):  'It  is  said  that  Hobbits  spoke  a
 language,  or  languages, very  similar to  ours. But  that must  not be
 misunderstood.   Their   language   was   like   ours   in   manner  and
 spirit; but if the face  of the  world has  changed greatly  since those
 days, so also has every detail of speech ...'                           
   One  might  wonder  for  a  moment  who  said  this  of  Hobbits,  and
 why  my  father  should  introduce  it  only  to  warn   against  taking
 it  literally;  but it  was of  course he  himself who  said it,  in the
 original   version   P   1   of   the   Foreword:   Concerning   Hobbits
 (VI.311,  cited  on  p.  8):  'And  yet plainly  they must  be relatives
 of  ours  ...  For one  thing, they  spoke a  very similar  language (or
 languages),  and  liked  or  disliked much  the same  things as  we used
 to.' This was repeated years later in  the revision  of the  second text
 P  2  (see  the  comparative  passages  given  on  p.  8), but  here the
 qualifying   statement,   warning   against  misunderstanding,   is  not
 present.                                                                
   I  cannot  explain  why  my  father  should  have  made   this  cross-
 reference  to  the  Foreword:  Concerning  Hobbits,  in  order  to point
 out  that  it  is  misleading,  nor  why  he should  have retained  it -
 without  this  caveat -  in his  revision of  P 2.  What makes  it still
 odder  is  that,  whereas  in  the  first  versions  of  Appendix  F (in
 which  the  'theory  and  practice'  of  the  translation  of  the  true
 languages  was  greatly  elaborated)  the  remark  is  absent,   it  re-
 appears in the third version (F 3,  p. 73),  and here  in a  form almost
 identical to that in F': it is given as  a citation,  'It has  been said
 that  "the  Hobbits  spoke  a  language, or  languages, very  similar to
 ours"',  and  this  is followed  by the  same qualification:  'But this
 must  not  be  misunderstood.  Their  language  was  like  ours  in man-
 ner and tone ...' As a final curiosity,  by the  time the  third version
 of  Appendix  F   was  written   the  remark   had  been   removed  from

     the  Prologue  (see  the  citation  from  the  text  P  5  on p.  8), and
     replaced  by  'They   spoke  the   languages  of   Men,  and   they  liked
     and  disliked  much  the  same  things  as  we  once  did',  though still,
     as in  the published  Prologue, in  the context  of this  being a  sign of
     the dose original relationship of Hobbits and Men.                       
 12. Many  years  after  the writing  of F'  my father  noted on  the type-
     script:  'Fragment  of  an  original  Foreword  afterwards   divided  into
     Foreword   and  Prologue'.   This  was   misleading,  because   F'  played
     no  part  in  the  Prologue,  but did  contribute to  the Foreword  of the
     First Edition and to Appendix F.                                         
                                                                          
                                     *                                     
                                                                          
 The  history  of  Appendix  F,  whose  final title  was The  Languages and
 Peoples  of  the  Third  Age  (while  the  discussion  of   alphabets  and
 scripts, originally joined to that  of the  languages, became  Appendix E,
 Writing  and  Spelling),  undoubtedly  began  with  the  abortive  but not
 unproductive  text  F>, but  the first  version of  that Appendix  is best
 taken to be constituted by  two closely  related manuscripts,  since these
 were  written as  elaborate essays  to stand  independently of  any 'Fore-
 word'.                                                                    
 Long  afterwards  my  father  wrote  (p.  299)  that  'the  actual  Common
 Speech  was  sketched  in  structure  and  phonetic  elements, and  a num-
 ber of words invented'; and in this work  he is  seen developing  the true
 forms in the Westron tongue  to underlie  the translated  (or substituted)
 names,  especially  of Hobbits.  A great  deal of  this material  was sub-
 sequently lost from the Appendix. This original version  is also  of great
 interest  in  documenting  his  conception  of  the  languages  of Middle-
 earth  and  their interrelations  at the  time when  the narrative  of The
 Lord  of  the  Rings  had  recently  been completed;  and also  in showing
 how substantially that  conception was  still to  be developed  before the
 publication of The Lord of the Rings in 1954-5.                           
 To date this version precisely seems  scarcely possible,  but at  least it
 can certainly be placed before the  summer of  1950, and  I think  that it
 may well be earlier than that.(1)                                          
 The earlier of the two texts, which I will refer to  as F  1, is  a fairly
 rough  and  much  emended,  but  entirely  legible,   manuscript  entitled
 Notes  on  the  Languages  at the  end of  the Third  Age. A  second manu-
 script, F 2, succeeded it, as I think, very soon if not  immediately, with
 the title The Languages at the end o f the Third  Age. Writing  with great
 care  and clarity,  my  father  followed  F 1  pretty closely:  very often
 changing the  expression or  making additions,  but for  the most  part in
 minor  ways,  and  seldom  departing from  the previous  text even  in the
 succession of the sentences. The two texts  are far  too close  to justify
 giving them both, and I print therefore  F 2,  recording in  the primarily
 textual notes on pp. 54 ff. the relatively few cases where different read-
 ings in F 1 seem of some significance or interest (but  in the  section on

                              
                                                                       
 Hobbit  names,  where there  was much  development in  F 2,  all differ-
 ences between the two texts are detailed).                             
  F2. was substantially corrected and  added to  (more especially  in the
 earlier part of the essay), and some pages were rewritten.  These alter-
 ations are  not all  of a  kind, some  being made  with care  and others
 more roughly, and I have found it extremely  difficult to  determine, in
 relative  terms, when  certain of  them were  made: the  more especially
 since  the  development  after  F  2  was not  a steady  progression, my
 father evidently feeling that a different treatment  of the  subject was
 required.  Some  corrections  undoubtedly  belong  to  a  time  when the
 text as a whole had been supplanted.  I have  therefore included  in the
 text that follows all alterations made  to the  manuscript, and  in most
 cases I have shown them as such, though in order  to reduce  the clutter
 I have in  some cases  introduced them  silently, when  they do  no more
 than improve the text (largely to increase its  clarity) without  in any
 way altering its purport.                                              
  In  general I  treat F  2 as  the representative  text of  the original
 version,  and  only  distinguish  F  1  when  necessary.  The paragraph-
 numbers  are  of  course  added  editorially.  A commentary  follows the
 notes on pp. 61 ff.                                                    
                                                                       
                              The Languages                             
                            at the end of the                           
                                Third Age.                              
                                                                       
  $1. I  have   written  this   note  on   the  languages   concerned  in
 this  book  not only  because this  part of  the lore  of those  days is
 of  special  interest  to  myself, but  because I  find that  many would
 welcome   some   information   of   this   kind.   I   have   had   many
 enquiries  concerning  such   matters  from   readers  of   the  earlier
 selections from the Red Book.*                                        
  $2. We  have  in  these  histories  to  deal   with  both   Elvish  and
 Mannish (2) tongues. The  long  history  of  Elvish  speech  I  will not
 treat; but since  three [>  two] varieties  of it  are glimpsed  in this
 book a little may be said about it.                                    
  $3.  According   to   Elvish  historians   the  Elven-folk,   by  them-
 selves  called  the  Quendi,  and  Elven-speech  were   originally  one.
 The  primary  division  was  into  Eldar  and  Avari.  The   Avari  were
 those   Elves   who   remained   content   with   Middle-earth   [struck
 out:]  and  refused  the  summons  of  the  powers;  but they  and their
                                                                       
  (* The  Hobbit,  drawn  from  the  earlier  chapters  of the  Red Book,
 those  mainly  composed  by Bilbo  and dealing  only with  the discovery
 of the Ring.)                                                           

 many secret  tongues  do  not  concern  this  book.  The  Eldar were
 those  who set  out and  marched to  the western  shores of  the Old
 World.  Most  of  them then  passed over  the Sea  and came  to that
 land in  the Ancient  West which  they called  Valinor, a  name that
 means  the  Land  of the  Powers or  Rulers of  the World.  But some
 of  the  Eldar  [added: of  the  kindred  of  the  Teleri]  remained
 behind  in  the north-west  of Middle-earth,  and these  were called
 the Lembi  or 'Lingerers'.  It is  with Eldarin  tongues, Valinorean
 or Lemberin [> Telerian] that these tales are concerned.            
    $4. In  Valinor, from  the  language   of  that   Elvish  kindred
 known  as  the  Lindar,  was  made a  High-Elven speech  that, after
 the  Elves  had  devised  letters, was  used not  only for  lore and
 formal  writing,  but  also  for high  converse and  for intercourse
 among  Elves  of  different  kindreds.  This,  which  is  indeed  an
 'Elven-latin' as it were, unchanging  in time  and place,  the Elves
 themselves called Quenya: that is simply 'Elvish'.                  
    $5. Now  after  long  ages  of  peace  it  came  to  pass,  as is
 related  in  the  Quenta  Noldorion,  that the  Noldor, who  were of
 all the kindreds of the Eldar' the most skilled in crafts  and lore,
 departed  as  exiles  from  Valinor  and  returned  to Middle-earth,
 seeking  the  Great Jewels,  the Silmarilli,  which Feanor  chief of
 all  their  craftsmen had  made. Their  language, Noldorin,  that at
 first differed little from the Lindarin or  Quenya, became  on their
 return  to  Middle-earth  subject  to the  change which  even things
 devised by the  Elves here  suffer, and  in the  passing of  time it
 grew  wholly  unlike  to  the  Quenya of  Valinor, which  tongue the
 exiles  nonetheless  retained  always  in  memory  as a  language of
 lore and song and courtesy.*                                        
                                                                    
    $6  According  to  the  Elves  Men  shared,  though  in  a lesser
 degree,  many  of the  powers of  the Elves,  and they  were capable
 of  devising  languages  of a  sort for  themselves, as  indeed they
 have  done, it  seems, in  many remote  lands. But  in fact  Men did
 not  in  all  regions  go through  the slow  and painful  process of
 invention.  In  the North  and West  of the  Old World  they learned
 language  direct  and  fully  made  from  Elves who  befriended them
 in  their  infancy  and  early  wanderings; and  the tongues  of Men
                                                                    
  (* On the other hand the  Noldorin and  Lemberin tongues,  that had
 long been sundered,  being now  spoken by  peoples dwelling  side by
 side, drew closer together; and though they remained wholly distinct
 they became similar in sound and style.)                            

          
                                                                    
 which  are,  however  remotely, of  this origin  the Quendi  have at
 all  times  found  the  more pleasant  to their  own ears.  Yet soon
 even  these  western  tongues  of  Men  became  estranged  from  the
 speech  of  Elves, being  changed by  process of  time, or  by Men's
 own  inventions  and  additions,  or  by  other  influences, notably
 that  of  the  Dwarves  from   whom  long   ago  some   Men  learned
 much, especially of delving, building, and smithying.               
  $7. Now  the  Men  who  first  came  westward  out  of   the  heart
 of Middle-earth  to lands  near the  shores of  the Sea  were called
 by  the  Elves  Atani,(3) [added: or  in  Noldorin  the  Edain,] the
 Fathers  of  Men,  and there  was great  friendship between  the two
 races.  For  when  the  Fathers  of  Men  came  over  the  mountains
 they met for the first time the Eldar, or High-elves; and  the Eldar
 were at that  time engaged  in a  ceaseless war  with the  Dark Lord
 of that Age, one greater far  than Sauron,  who was  but one  of his
 minions.  In  that  war  three houses  of the  Fathers of  Men aided
 the  Elves,  especially  the  Noldor,  and  lived  among   them  and
 fought  beside  them;  and  the  people  [>  lords] of  these houses
 learned  the  Noldorin speech  [struck out:]  and forsook  their own
 tongue.(4)                                                           
  $8. When  at  last  that  war  was  ended,   most  of   the  exiled
 Noldor  returned  over  the  Sea  to  Valinor  or  to  the  land  of
 Eressea that lies / within sight of it [> near]. Then the  people of
 the  Three  Houses  of  Men  were  permitted  as  a  reward  to pass
 also over the Sea, if they would, and to dwell in an isle  set apart
 for  them.  The  name  of  that  great  isle  was Numenor,  which in
 Quenya   signifies  Westernesse.   Most  of   the  Fathers   of  Men
 departed  and  dwelt  in   Numenor  and   there  became   great  and
 powerful;  and  they  were  fair of  face and  tall, and  masters of
 craft and lore only less than the Eldar, and the span of their lives
 was  thrice  that  of  men  in  Middle-earth,  though  they remained
 mortal  nonetheless,  and  were  not  permitted  to  set  foot  upon
 the  shores  of  the  deathless  land of  Valinor. They  were called
 Kings  of  Men,  the  Numenoreans,  or  in  Noldorin   the  Dunedein
 [> Dunedain].(5)                                                   
  $9.  The   language   of   the   Dunedain   was  thus   the  Elvish
 Noldorin,  though  their  high   lords  and   men  of   wisdom  knew
 also   the   Quenya,  [>   Thus  in   Numenor  two   languages  were
 used:  the  Numenorean  (or  Adunaic),  and  the   Elvish  Noldorin,
 which all the  lords of  that people  knew and  spoke, for  they had
 many dealings with the Elves in the days ere  their fall.  But their
 men  of  wisdom  learned  also  the  Quenya,  and  could   read  the

 books  of  Elven  lore;]  and  in  that  high  tongue  they  gave names
 to  many  places  of  fame  or  reverence,  and to  men of  royalty and
 great   renown.*   After   the   Downfall   of   Numenor   (which   was
 contrived  by  Sauron)  Elendil  and  the   fugitives  from   the  West
 fled  eastwards.  But   in  the   west-lands  of   Middle-earth,  where
 they   established   their   exiled   realms,   they  found   a  common
 tongue  in  use  along  the  coast-lands  from  the  Mouths  of  Anduin
 to  the  icy  Bay  of  Forochel  in  the  North.  This  tongue  was  in
 Noldorin  called  Falathren  or  'Shore-language',  but  by  its  users
 was  called  Yandune  [>  Andunar  >  Adunar]  (that  is   Westron)  or
 Soval Phare (that is Common Speech).(6)                                
   $10.  This   Common   Speech   was  [struck   out:]  in   the  begin-
 ning  /  a  Mannish  language,  and  was  indeed only  a later  form of
 the  native  tongue  of  the  Fathers  of  Men themselves  before those
 of  the Three  Houses passed  over the  Sea. It  was thus  closely akin
 to  other  languages   of  Men   that  [>   Other  languages   of  Men,
 derived  also  from  the  tongues  of  the  Edain  or  closely  akin to
 them]  were  still  spoken  further  inland,  especially in  the north-
 ern  regions  of  the  west-lands  or  about  the  upper waters  of the
 Anduin.  Its  spread  [>  The  spread  of  the  Westron]  had  been  at
 first  due  largely  to  the  Dunedain  themselves;  for  in  the  Dark
 Years  they  had  often  visited  again  the  shores  of  Middle-earth,
 and  in  the  days  of  their  great voyages  before the  Downfall they
 had  made  many  fortresses  and havens  for the  help of  their ships.
 One  of  the  greatest  of  these  had  been  at  Pelargir   above  the
 Mouths of  Anduin, and  it is  said that  it was  the language  of that
 region  (which  was  afterwards  called  Gondor)  that  was  the  foun-
 dation  of  the  Common  Speech.  But  Sauron,   who  could   turn  all
 things  devised  by  Elves  or  Men  to  his  own  evil  purposes,  had
 also  favoured  the  spread  of   this  Common   Speech,  for   it  was
 useful  to  him  in  the  governing of  his vast  lordship in  the Dark
 Years.                                                                 
   $11.  Beside   the    Common   or    Westron   Speech,    and   other
 kindred  tongues  of  Men,  there   remained  also   in  the   days  of
 Elendil  the  languages  of  the  Eldar.  Strange  though it  may seem,
                                                                       
 (* Of  Quenya  form,  for  instance,  are  the names  Elendil, Anarion,
 Isildur, and all the royal names of Gondor, including Elessar; also the
 names of the kings of the Northern Line as far as the  tenth, Earendil.
 [Added: The  names of  other lords  of the  Dunedain such  as Arathorn,
 Aragorn,  Boromir,  Denethor  are  for  the  most  part  Noldorin;  but
 Imrahil and Adrahil are Numenorean (Adunaic) names.])                  

 seeing  that  the  Dunedain  had  dwelt  for  long  years   apart  in
 Numenor,  the  people of  Elendil could  still readily  converse with
 the  Eldar that  spoke Noldorin.  The reasons  for this  are various.
 First,   the   Numenoreans   had   never   become   wholly   sundered
 from  the  Noldor;  for  while  those  who  had  returned   into  the
 West  often  came   to  Numenor   in  friendship,   the  Numenoreans,
 as  has  been  said,  often  visited  Middle-earth  and had  at times
 aided the Elves  that remained  there in  their strife  with Sauron.(7)
 Again,  the   change  and   decay  of   things,  though   not  wholly
 removed,  was  yet  much  delayed  in  the  land  of the  Dunedain in
 the days of its blessedness; and the like may be said of the Eldar.(8)
   [This  paragraph  was  rewritten  thus:  Beside  the  Common  or
 Westron   Speech,   and   other   kindred   tongues  of   Men,  there
 remained also  in the  days of  Elendil the  languages of  the Eldar;
 for  many  still  dwelt in  Eriador. With  those that  spoke Noldorin
 the people of Elendil  could still  readily converse.  For friendship
 had   long   endured   between  the   Numenoreans  and   the  Noldor,
 and  the  folk  of  Eressea  had  often  visited  Numenor,  while the
 Numenoreans  had  sailed  often  to  Middle-earth  and  had  at times
 aided the Elves in their strife with Sauron.]                       
   $12.  Moreover,   those  were   the  days   of  the   Three  Rings.
 Now,  as  is  elsewhere  told,  these  rings  were  hidden,  and  the
 Eldar  did  not  use  them  for  the  making of  any new  thing while
 Sauron  still  reigned  and  wore  the Ruling  Ring; yet  their chief
 virtue  was  ever secretly  at work,  and that  virtue was  to defend
 the  Eldar  who  abode in  Middle-earth [added:  and all  things per-
 taining  to  them]  from  change  and  withering  and  weariness.  So
 it was that in all the long  time from  the forging  of the  Rings to
 their  ending,  when  the  Third Age  was over,  the Eldar  even upon
 Middle-earth  changed   no  more   in  a   thousand  years   than  do
 Men in ten; and their language likewise.                            
   $13. Now  the  people  of  Elendil  were  not  many,  for   only  a
 few  great  ships  had escaped  the Downfall  or survived  the tumult
 of the Seas. They found,  it is  true, many  dwellers upon  the west-
 shores  who  came  of  their  own  blood,  wholly  or in  part, being
 descended  from  mariners  and  from  wardens  of  forts  and  havens
 that  had  been  set  there  in  days  gone  by;  yet  all  told  the
 Dunedain  were  now  only  a small  folk in  the midst  of strangers.
 They  used,  therefore,  the  Westron  speech  in all  their dealings
 with  other  men,  and  in  the  governing  of  the  realms  of which
 they  had  become  the   rulers;  and   this  Common   Speech  became
 now  enlarged,  and  much   enriched  with   words  drawn   from  the

 language  of  the Dunedain,  which was,  as has  been said,  a form
 of  the   Elvish  Noldorin   [>  and   much  enriched   with  words
 drawn  from  the  Adunaic  language  of  the  Dunedain,   and  from
 the  Noldorin].  But  among  themselves the  kings and  high lords,
 and  indeed  all  those  of  Numenorean  blood  in any  degree, for
 long  used  the  Noldorin  speech;  and  in  that tongue  they gave
 names  to  men and  to places  throughout the  realms of  the heirs
 of Elendil.                                                       
   $14. In this way  it had  come about  that at  the time  when the
 events recorded in this  book began  it might  be said  that nearly
 all  speaking-folk  of  any race  west of  the east-eaves  of Mirk-
 wood   spoke  after   some  fashion   this  Common   Speech;  while
 Men  who  dwelt  in  Eriador,  the  wide  land  between  the  Misty
 Mountains  and  Ered  Lindon, or  in the  coast-lands south  of the
 White  Mountains,  used  the  Westron  only  and  had  long forgot-
 ten their own tongues. So  it was  with the  folk of  Gondor (other
 than  the  lords)  and  of  the  Anfalas and  beyond; and  with the
 Bree-folk  I  and the  Dunlendings [>  in the  North]. East  of the
 Misty  Mountains,  even  far  to  the  north,  the   Common  Speech
 was  known;  though there,  as in  Esgaroth [>  as beside  the Long
 Lake]  or  in  Dale,  or  among  the Beornings  and the  Woodmen of
 the   west-eaves  of   Mirkwood,  Men   also  retained   their  own
 tongues in daily use. The Eorlings,  or the  Rohirrim as  they were
 called in Gondor,  still used  their own  northern tongue,  yet all
 but  their  humbler  folk  spoke  also  the  Common   Speech  after
 the  manner  of  Gondor;  for  the  Riders  of  Rohan had  come out
 of  Eotheod  near  the sources  of Anduin  only some  five hundred
 years before the days here spoken of.                             
   [The  conclusion  of  this  paragraph  was  rewritten  thus:  The
 Eorlings,  or the  Rohirrim as  they were  called in  Gondor, still
 used  their  own  northern  tongue;  for  the  Riders of  Rohan had
 come  out  of Eotheod  near the  sources of  Anduin only  some five
 hundred years before the  days here  spoken of.  Yet all  but their
 humbler  folk  spoke  also  the  Common  Speech  after  the  manner
 of  Gondor.  In  the  Dunland  also  the  Dunlendings,  a dwindling
 people,  remnant  of  those   who  had   dwelt  in   western  Rohan
 before  the  coming  of  the  Rohirrim,  still  clung to  their own
 speech.  This  was  wholly   unlike  the   Westron,  and   was  de-
 scended,  as it  seems, from  some other  Mannish tongue,  not akin
 to  that  of  the  Atani,  Fathers  of Men.  A similar  and kindred
 language was probably  once spoken  in Bree:  see (the  footnote to
 $25).]                                                            

                                        
                                                                   
  $15.  More   remarkable  it   may  be   thought  that   the  Common
 Speech  had  also  been  learned  by  other  races,  Dwarves,  Orcs,
 and even Trolls. The  case of  the Dwarves  can, however,  be easily
 understood.  At  this  time  they  had  no longer  in the west-lands
 any  great cities  or delvings  where many  lived together.  For the
 most  part  they  were  scattered,  living  in  small  groups  among
 other  folk,  often  wandering,  seldom staying  long in  any place,
 until, as is told in the beginning of the Red Book, their  old halls
 under  the  Lonely  Mountain  were  regained  and  the   Dragon  was
 slain.  They  had  therefore  of  necessity  long  used  the  Common
 Speech  in their  dealings with  other folk,  even with  Elves.' Not
 that  Dwarves  were  ever  eager  to  teach  their  own   tongue  to
 others.  They  were  a  secretive  people, and  they kept  their own
 speech to themselves,  using it  only when  no strangers  were near.
 Indeed  they  even  gave  themselves  'outer'  names, either  in the
 Westron  or  in  the  languages  of  Men  among  whom   they  dwelt,
 but had  also 'inner'  and secret  names in  their own  tongue which
 they  did  not  reveal.  So it  was that  the northern  Dwarves, the
 people   of   Thorin   and   Dain,   had   names   drawn   from  the
 northern  language  of  the  Men  of  Dale,  and their  secret names
 are  not known  to us.  For that  reason little  is known  of Dwarf-
 speech  at this  period, save  for a  few names  of mines  and meres
 and mountains.                                                     
  $16  The  Orcs  had  a  language  of  their  own, devised  for them
 by the Dark Lord of old, but  it was  so full  of harsh  and hideous
 sounds  and  vile  words  that  other mouths  found it  difficult to
 compass,  and  few  indeed  were  willing to  make the  attempt. And
 these creatures, being filled with  all malice  and hatred,  so that
 they did not love even their  own kind,  had soon  diversified their
 barbarous  and  unwritten  speech  into  as  many  jargons  as there
 were  groups  or  settlements  of  Orcs.  Thus  they were  driven to
 use  the language  of their  enemies even  in conversing  with other
 Orcs of different  breed or  distant dwellings.  In the  Misty Moun-
 tains,  and  in  other  lingering Orc-holds  in the  far North-west,
 they  had  indeed  abandoned  their  native  tongue  and   used  the
 Common   Speech,  though   in  such   a  fashion   as  to   make  it
 scarcely less unlovely than the Orkish.                            
  $17.  Trolls,  in   their  beginning   creatures  of   lumpish  and
 brutal  nature,  had  nothing  that  could  be called  true language
                                                                   
 (* For there was an ancient enmity between Dwarf and Elf and        
 neither would learn the other's tongue.)                           

 of  their  own;  but  the  evil Power  had at  various times  made use
 of  them,  teaching  them  what  little  they  could  learn,  and even
 crossing  their  breed  with  that  of  the  larger Orcs.  Trolls thus
 took  such  language  as  they  could  from  the  Orcs,  and   in  the
 west-lands  the  Trolls  of the  hills and  mountains spoke  a debased
 form of the Common Westron speech.                                    
   $18.  Elves,   it   may   be   thought,   had   no  need   of  other
 languages   than   their  own.   They  did   not,  indeed,   like  the
 Dwarves   hide   their   own   language,   and   they   were   willing
 to  teach  the  Elven-tongues  to  any  who   desired  or   were  able
 to  learn  them.  But  these  were  few,  apart  from  the   lords  of
 Numenorean   descent.   The   Elves,   therefore,   who   remained  in
 the  west-lands  used  the  Common  Speech  in  their   dealings  with
 Men  or  other  speaking-folk;  but  they  used  it  in  an  older and
 more  gracious  form,  that  of  the  lords  of  the  Dunedain  rather
 than  that  of  the  Shire.  Among  themselves  they  spoke  and  sang
 in   Elven-tongues,   and   throughout   Eriador   from    Lindon   to
 Imladrist  [>  Imladris]  they  used  the  Noldorin  speech;   for  in
 those  lands,  especially  in Rivendell  and at  the Grey  Havens, but
 also  elsewhere  in  other  secret  places, there  were still  many of
 the  exiled  Noldor  abiding  or  wandering  in  the wild.  Beyond the
 Misty  Mountains  there  were  still  Eldar  who  used   the  Lemberin
 [>  Telerian]  tongue.  Such  were  the  people  of   the  elf-kingdom
 in    Northern    Mirkwood,    whence    came     Legolas.    Lemberin
 [>  Telerian]  was  the  native  tongue  also  of  Celeborn   and  the
 Elves  of  the  hidden  land  of  Lorien.  There  the   Common  Speech
 was  known  only  to  a  few,  for  that  people  strayed  seldom from
 their borders.*                                                       
   $19. The  Elvish  names  that  appear  in   this  book   are  mainly
 of   Noldorin   form;  but   some  are   Lemberin  [>   Telerian],  of
 which  the  chief  are  [added:  Thranduil,]  Legolas,  Lorien,  Caras
 Galadon,  Nimrodel,  Amroth;  and   also  the   names  of   the  House
 of  Dol  Amroth:  Finduilas,  [added:   Adrahil,]  and   Imrahil.  The
 exiled  Eldar   still  preserved   in  memory,   as  has   been  said,
 the  High-elven  Quenya;  and  it  was  from  Noldorin   visitants  to
 the  Shire  that  Bilbo  (and  from  him  Frodo)  learned a  little of
 that  ancient  speech.  In Quenya  is the  polite greeting  that Frodo
 addressed  to  Gildor  (in   Chapter  III).   The  farewell   song  of
 Galadriel  in  Lorien (in  Chapter )  [sic] is  also in  Quenya. Tree-
                                                                      
  (* But the lady of that land, Galadriel, was of Noldorin race, and in
 her household that language was also spoken.)                         

 beard  knew this  tongue as  the noblest  of the  'hasty' languages,
 and frequently used  it. His  address to  Galadriel and  Celeborn is
 in  Quenya;  so  are  most  of  the  words  and  names that  he uses
 which are not in the Common Speech.(9)                             
   $20.  To   speak   last   of   Hobbits.   According   to  accounts
 compiled  in  the  Shire, the  Hobbits, though  in origin  one race,
 became  divided  in  remote  antiquity  into  three   somewhat  dif-
 ferent  breeds:  Stoors,  Harfoots,   and  Fallohides,   which  have
 already  been  described.  [Struck  out:]  No   tradition,  however,
 remains of any difference of speech between these three kinds.(10)
   $21. Since  Hobbits  were  a  people  more  nearly  akin   to  Men
 than  any  other  of  the  speaking-folk  of  the ancient  world, it
 might  be  supposed  that  they  would possess  a language  of their
 own,  different  from  the  languages  of Men  but not  unlike them.
 Yet  of  this  there  is  no  evidence in  any record  or tradition.
 Admittedly  none  of  the  legends  of  the  Hobbits refer  to times
 earlier than some centuries after  the beginning  of the  Third Age,
 while their actual  records did  not begin  until after  the western
 Hobbits  had  settled   down,  somewhere   about  Third   Age  1300;
 but  it  remains  remarkable  that all  such traditions  assume that
 the  only  language  spoken  by   Hobbits  of   any  kind   was  the
 Westron  or  Common  Speech.  They  had,   of  course,   many  words
 and usages peculiar to  themselves, but  the same  could be  said of
 any other folk that used the Common Speech as a native tongue.     
   [The  latter  part  of  this  paragraph,  following any  record or
 tradition,  was  rewritten  thus:  They had,  of course,  many words
 and usages peculiar to  themselves, but  the same  could be  said of
 any other folk that used the Westron as a native tongue. It  is true
 that none  of the  legends of  Hobbits refer  to times  earlier than
 some centuries after  the beginning  of the  Third Age,  while their
 actual records did  not begin  until after  the western  Hobbits had
 settled  down,  somewhere  about  Third  Age  1300,  and   had  then
 long  adopted  the   Common  Speech.   Yet  it   remains  remarkable
 that in all such  traditions, if  any tongue  other than  the Common
 Speech  is  mentioned,  it  is  assumed   that  Hobbits   spoke  the
 language of Men among whom, or near whom, they dwelt.]             
   $22.  Among  Hobbits   [added:  now]   there  are   two  opinions.
 Some  hold that  originally they  had a  language peculiar  to them-
 selves.  Others assert  that from  the beginning  they spoke  a Man-
 nish  tongue  [> Mannish  tongues], being  in fact  a branch  of the
 race of Men. But in any case it  is agreed  that after  migration to
 Eriador  they  soon  adopted  the  Westron  under  the  influence of

 the Dunedain of the North-kingdom. The first opinion  is now            
 favoured by Hobbits [> is favoured by many Hobbits], because            
 of their growing  distaste for  Men," but  there is  in fact  no trace
 to  be  discovered   of  any   special  Hobbit-language   in  antiquity.
 The  second  opinion  is clearly  the right  one, and  is held  by those
 of  most  linguistic  learning.  Investigation  not  only  of  surviving
 Hobbit-lore  but  of  the  far  more  considerable  records   of  Gondor
 supports  it.  All  such enquiries  show that  before their  crossing of
 the  Mountains  the  Hobbits  spoke   the  same   language  as   Men  in
 the  higher   vales  of   the  Anduin,   roughly  between   the  Carrock
 and the Gladden Fields.+ (11)                                           
    $23.  Now   that   language    was   nearly    the   same    as   the
 language  of  the ancestors  of the  Rohirrim; and  it was  also allied,
 as  has  been  said  above,  both  to  the  languages  of   Men  further
 north  and  east  (as  in  Dale  and  Esgaroth),  and  to  those further
 south  from  which  the  Westron   itself  was   derived.  It   is  thus
 possible   to  understand   the  rapidity   with  which   evidently  the
 Hobbits   adopted   the   Common   Speech  as   soon  as   they  crossed
 into  Eriador,  where  it  had  long  been  current.  In this  way, too,
 is   explained   the   occurrence   among   the   western   and  settled
 Hobbits   of   many   peculiar   words   not   found   in   the   Common
 Speech but found in the tongues of Rohan and of Dale.++(12)             
                                                                        
 (* Supported,  as  it  appears  to  them to  be, by  the fact that among
 themselves they speak now a  private language,  though this  is probably
 only  a  descendant,  the  last to  survive, of  the old Common Speech.)
  (+ [The   following   footnote   was   added:   Though    the   Stoors,
 especially the  southern branch  that long  dwelt in  the valley  of the
 Loudwater,  by  Tharbad  and  on  the  borders  of  Dunland,  appear  to
 have  acquired a  language akin  to Dunlandish,  before they  came north
 and adopted in their turn the Common Speech.])                          
 (++ In  Gandalf's  view  the  people  of  'Gollum'  or  Smeagol  were of
 hobbit-kind.  If  so,  their  habits  and  dwelling-places mark  them as
 Stoors. Yet it is plain that they spoke [> as Stoors; though they appear
 to  have  used]  the  Common Speech.  Most probably  they were  a family
 or small  clan that,  owing to  some quarrel  or some  sudden 'homesick-
 ness',  turned  back  east and  came down  into Wilderland  again beside
 the  River  Gladden.  There  are  many  references  in Hobbit  legend to
 families or small  groups going  off on  their own  'into the  wild', or
 returning 'home'. For eastern Eriador was less friendly and fertile than
 Wilderland and many  of the  tales speak  of the  hard times  endured by
 the early emigrants. It  may be  noted, however,  that the  names Deagol
 and Smeagol  [ > Deagol  and Smeagol]  are both  words belonging  to the
 Mannish languages of the upper Anduin.)                                 

   $24. An  example  of  this  is  provided by  the name  Stoor itself.
 It  seems  originally  to  have  meant  'big',  and  though   no  such
 word  is  found  in the  Common Speech,  it is  usual in  the language
 of   Dale.   The   curious   Hobbit-word   mathom,   which   has  been
 mentioned,  is  clearly  the  same  as  the   word  mathum   used  in
 Rohan for a 'treasure' or  a 'rich  gift'. The  horn given  at parting
 to   Meriadoc   by   the   Lady   Eowyn   was   precisely   a  mathum.
 Again,  smile  or  smial,  in  Hobbit-language  the  word  for  an in-
 habited  hole,  especially  one  deep-dug  and  with  a  long, narrow,
 and  often  hidden  entrance,  seems  related  to  the word  smygel in
 Rohan   meaning   'a   burrow',   and  more   remotely  to   the  name
 Smeagol  [>  Smeagol]  (cited  [in  the  footnote  to  $23]),  and  to
 Smaug  the  name  in  [>  among  men  of]  the  North  for  the  Drag-
 on  of  the Lonely Mountain.(13) But  most   remarkable  of   all  are
 the   Hobbit   month-names,   concerning   which   see  the   note  on
 Calendar and Dates.(14)                                                
   $25. The  Hobbits  in   the  west-lands   of  Eriador   became  much
 mingled  together,  and   eventually  they   began  to   settle  down.
 Some  of  their  lesser   and  earlier   settlements  had   long  dis-
 appeared  and  been  forgotten  in  Bilbo's  time;  but  one   of  the
 earliest  to  become  important  still  endured,  if  much  reduced in
 size.  This  was  at  Bree,  and  in  the  country  round  about. Long
 before  the  settlement  at  Bree  Hobbits  had  adopted   the  Common
 Speech,  and  all  the names  of places  that they  gave were  in that
 language;  while  the  older  names,  of  Elvish  or   forgotten  Man-
 nish  origin,*  they  often  translated  (as  Fornost to  Norbury), or
 twisted  into  a  familiar  shape (as  Elvish Baranduin  'brown river'
 to Brandywine).                                                       
   [The end of this paragraph was rewritten  thus: ...  (as Fornost
 to  Norbury).  The  Elvish  names  of hills  and rivers  often endured
 changed  only  to  fit  better  into  Hobbit  speech. But  the Brandy-
 wine  is  an  exception.  Its  older  name  was  the  Malvern, derived
 from  its  Noldorin  name  Malevarn,  but  the  new  name  appears  in
 the earliest records. Both names  refer to  the river's  colour, often
 in  flood  a  golden  brown,  which  is  indeed  the  meaning  of  the
                                                                      
 (* The  Men  of  Bree,  who claimed,  no doubt  justly, to  have dwelt
 in those regions  from time  out of  mind, long  before the  coming of
 Elendil,  had  of  course also  adopted the  Common Speech,  but there
 were names in those parts that pointed to an  older Mannish  tongue, I
 only remotely connected if at  all [>  unconnected] with  the language
 of the Fathers of Men, or Westron. Bree is said in that tongue to have
 signified 'hill', and Chet (as in Chetwood, Archet) 'forest'.)        

 Elvish name.  This was  further changed  to read:  ... Of  this the
 Brandywine  is  an  example.  Its  Elvish  name  was  the Baranduin
 'brown river'. Both  names refer  to the  river's colour,  often in
 flood  a golden  brown, but  the Hobbit  name is  historically only
 a picturesque alteration of the Noldorin name.]                   
   $26. As  soon  as  they  had  settled  down  the Hobbits  took to
 letters.  These  they learned,  with many  other matters,  from the
 Dunedain;  for  the  North-kingdom  had  not  yet  come  to  an end
 in Eriador  at that  time. The  letters used  by the  Dunedain, and
 learned  and adopted  by the  Hobbits, were  those of  the Noldorin
 or  Feanorian  alphabet  (see  below).(15) It was soon  after their
 learning  of  letters,  about  Third Age  1300, that  Hobbits began
 to  set  down  and  collect  the  considerable  store of  tales and
 legends  and  oral  annals  and   genealogies  that   they  already
 possessed. The lore-loving Fallohides played a chief part  in this.
 The original documents had, of  course, in  Bilbo's time  long been
 worn  out  or  lost,  but  many  of  them  had  been  much  copied.
 When the  Shire was  colonized, about  Third Age  1600, it  is said
 that  the  leading  families  among  the  migrants  took  with them
 most of the writings then in existence.                           
   $27. In  the  Shire,   which  proved   a  rich   and  comfortable
 country,  the  old  lore  was  largely  neglected;  but  there were
 always  some  Hobbits who  studied it  and kept  it in  memory; and
 copying  and  compilation, and  even fictitious  elaboration, still
 went  on.  In  Bilbo's  time  there  were  in the  book-hoards many
 manuscripts  of  lore  more than  500 years  old. The  oldest known
 book,   The   Great   Writ   of   Tuckborough,   popularly   called
 Yellowskin,  was supposed  to be  nearly a  thousand years  old. It
 dealt  in  annalistic  form with  the deeds  of Took  notables from
 the foundation of the Shire, though its  earliest hand  belonged to
 a period at least four centuries later.                           
  $28. In this  way it  came about  that the  Hobbits of  the Shire,
 especially  in  the great  families, such  as Took,  Oldbuck (later
 Brandybuck),  and  Bolger,  developed  the  habit, strange  and yet
 not unparallelled in our times, of giving  names to  their children
 derived not  from their  daily language  nor from  fresh invention,
 but  from   books  and   legends.  These   to  the   Hobbits  high-
 sounding  names  were  often  in   somewhat  comic   contrast  with
 the  more  homely  family  names.  Hobbits  were, of  course, fully
 aware of this contrast and amused by it.                          
                                                                  
   [The  following  passage  was  an  addition:  The  sections  that
 follow  are  written  mainly  for  those  of  linguistic curiosity.

                                  
                                                                      
 Others  may  neglect them.  For these  histories are  intelligible, if
 it  is  assumed  that  the  Common  Speech  of  the time  was English,
 and  that  if  any language  of Men  appears which  is related  to the
 Common  Speech,  though  not   the  same,   it  will   be  represented
 by  languages  of  our  world  that  are  related  to English:  as for
 example   the   archaic   language   of   Rohan   is   represented  by
 ancient  English,  or  the  related tongues  of the  far North  (as in
 Dale) by names of a Norse character.                                  
  But  this  was not,  of course,  historically the  case. None  of the
 languages  of  the  period  were  related   discernibly  to   any  now
 known  or   spoken.  The   substitution  of   English  (or   forms  of
 speech  related  to  modern  English)  for  the  Common   Speech  (and
 kindred  tongues)  of  the  day  has  involved  a  process  of  trans-
 lation,  not  only  of  narrative  and  dialogue  but  also  of nomen-
 clature,  which  is  described  below,  for   the  benefit   of  those
 interested in such matters.]                                          
                                                                      
                            On Translation.(16)                        
                                                                      
  $29.   The    linguistic    situation    sketched    above,   simple'
 though  it  is  compared  with  that   observable  in   many  European
 countries  in  our times,  presents several  problems to  a translator
 who  wishes to  present a  picture of  Hobbit life  and lore  in those
 distant  days; especially  if he  is more  concerned to  represent, as
 closely  as  he  can,  in  terms now  intelligible the  actual feeling
 and  associations  of  words  and  names  than  to  preserve   a  mere
 phonetic accuracy.                                                    
  $30.  The  Elven-tongues  I  have  left  untouched.   I  have   in  my
 selection  and  arrangement  of  matter  from  the  once   famous  and
 much  copied  Red  Book  reduced  the  citations  of  these languages,
 apart  from  the  unavoidable  names  of  places  and  persons,  to  a
 minimum,  keeping  only  enough  to  give  some  indication  of  their
 sound  and  style. That  has not  been altogether  easy, since  I have
 been  obliged  to  transliterate  the  words and  names from  the rich
 and  elegant  Feanorian  alphabet,  specially  devised for  them, into
 our  own  less  adequate  letters,  and yet  present forms  that while
 reasonably  close  to  the  phonetic intentions  of the  originals are
                                                                      
 (* We are  in  fact  in this  book only  primarily concerned  with the
 Elvish  Noldorin  and  the  Mannish 'Common  Speech' (with  some local
 variations), while the Quenya or 'Elf-latin' and the archaic tongue of
 the  Rohirrim  and  the  Elvish  Lemberin  make an  occasional appear-
 ance.)                                                                

 not (I hope) too strange or uncouth to modern eyes.*(17)        
   $31.   My   treatment    of   the    Common   Speech    (and   of
 languages connected with  it) has,  however, been  quite different.
 It has  been  drastic,  but I  hope defensible.  I have  turned the
 Common  Speech  and  all  related things  into the  nearest English
 equivalents. First of all, the narrative and  dialogue I  have nat-
 urally been obliged to translate as closely  as possible.  The dif-
 ferences between the use of this speech in different places  and by
 persons  of  higher and  lower degree,  e.g. by  Frodo and  by Sam,
 in the Shire and in Gondor,  or among  the Elves,  I have  tried to
 represent  by  variations  in  English  of  approximately  the same
 kind. In the result these differences have,  I fear,  been somewhat
 obscured.  The  divergence  of  the  vocabulary,  idiom,  and  pro-
 nunciation in the free and easy talk  of the  Shire from  the daily
 language of  Gondor was  really greater  than is  here represented,
 or  could  be  represented  without using  a phonetic  spelling for
 the  Shire  and  an  archaic  diction  for  Gondor that  would have
 puzzled  or  infuriated  modern  readers.  The  speech of  Orcs was
 actually  more filthy  and  degraded  than  I have  shown it.  If I
 had tried to use an  'English' more  near to  the reality  it would
 have  been  intolerably  disgusting  and  to  many  readers  hardly
 intelligible.                                                     
   $32. It  will  be  observed  that  Hobbits  such  as  Frodo,  and
 other  persons  such  as  Aragorn  and Gandalf,  do not  always use
 quite the same style  throughout. This  is intentional.  Hobbits of
 birth  and  reading  often  knew  much  of  higher and  older forms
 of  the  Common  Tongue  than  those  of  their  colloquial  Shire-
 usage,  and they  were in  any case  quick to  observe and  adopt a
 more  archaic  mode  when  conversing  with Elves,  or Men  of high
 lineage. It was natural for much-travelled persons,  especially for
 those  who  like  Aragorn  were  often  at  pains to  conceal their
 origin and business, to speak more  or less  according to  the man-
 ner of the people.among whom they found themselves.               
                                                                  
 Note                                                              
   $33. I will here  draw attention  to a  feature of  the languages
 dealt  with  that   has  presented   some  difficulty.   All  these
 languages,  Mannish  and  Elvish,  had,   or  originally   had,  no
 distinction  between  the  singular  and   plural  of   the  second
                                                                  
  (* A note on my spelling and its intended values will be found
 below.)                                                           

 person  pronouns;  but  they  had  a  marked   distinction  between
 the familiar forms and the courteous.                             
   $34. This  distinction  was  fully   maintained  in   all  Elvish
 tongues,  and  also in  the older  and more  elevated forms  of the
 Common  Speech,  notably  in   the  daily   usage  of   Gondor.  In
 Gondor  the  courteous  forms  were  used  by  men  to  all  women,
 irrespective of rank, other than their lovers, wives,  sisters, and
 children.  To  their  parents  children  used  the  courteous forms
 throughout  their  lives,  as  soon  as they  had learned  to speak
 correctly.  Among  grown  men  the  courteous  form  was  used more
 sparingly, chiefly to those of superior rank  and office,  and then
 mainly on  official or  formal occasions,  unless the  superior was
 also  of  greater  age. Old  people were  often addressed  with the
 courteous  form  by  much  younger   men  or   women,  irrespective
 of all other considerations.                                      
   $35. It  was  one of  the most  notable features  of Shire-speech
 that  the  courteous  form  had  in  Bilbo's time  disappeared from
 the  daily  use,  though  its  forms were  not wholly  forgotten: a
 reversal of the case of thou and you in English. It  lingered still
 among  the  more  rustic  Hobbits,  but  then,   curiously  enough,
 only as an  endearment. It  was thus  used both  by and  to parents
 and between dear friends.                                         
   $36. Most  of  these  points  cannot  be represented  in English;
 but it may be remembered by readers that  this is  one of  the fea-
 tures  referred  to  when people  of Gondor  speak of  the strange-
 ness of hobbit-language.  Pippin, for  instance, used  the familiar
 form  throughout  his  first  interview  with  the  Lord  Denethor.
 This  may  have  amused  the  aged  Steward,   but  it   must  have
 astonished  the  servants that  overheard him.  No doubt  this free
 use  of the  familiar form  was one  of the  things that  helped to
 spread the  popular rumour  in the  City that  Pippin was  a person
 of very high rank in his own country.                             
   $37. Only  in  a  few  places where  it seemed  specially import-
 ant  have  I  attempted  to represent  such distinctions  in trans-
 lation,  though  this  cannot  be  done  systematically.  Thus thou
 and  thee  and  thy  have  occasionally been  used (as  unusual and
 archaic in English)  to represent  a ceremonious  use of  the cour-
 teous form,  as in  the formal  words spoken  at the  coronation of
 Aragorn. On the  other hand  the sudden  use of  thou, thee  in the
 dialogue  of  Faramir  and  eowyn  is  meant  to  represent  (there
 being  no  other  means  of  doing this  in English)  a significant
 change from the courteous  to the  familiar. The  thee used  by Sam

 Gamgee to Rose at the end of  the book  is intentional,  but corre-
 sponds  there  to  his  actual use  of the  old-fashioned courteous
 form as a sign of affection.                                       
                                                                   
    $38. Passing  from  the  translation  of narrative  and dialogue
 to names I found yet greater difficulties. For it seemed to me that
 to preserve all names, Elvish and Westron alike, in  their original
 forms  would  obscure  an  essential  feature  of  the   times,  as
 observed  by  the  ears  and  eyes  of  Hobbits,  through  whom for
 the  most  part  we  are  ourselves  observing  them:  the contrast
 between  a  wide-spread language,  as ordinary  and diurnal  to the
 people  of  that  day as  is English  now to  English-speakers, and
 the remains of  far older  more reverend  and more  secret tongues.
 All  names,  if  merely  transliterated,   would  seem   to  modern
 readers equally strange and remote.                                
   $39. For instance, if I had  left unaltered  not only  the Elvish
 name  Imladrist  [>  Imladris]  but  also  the  Westron  name  Car-
 bandur,  both  would   have  appeared   alien.  But   the  contrast
 between  Imladrist  [>  Imladris] and  Rivendell, a  translation of
 Carbandur (18) and  like  it  having  a  plain  meaning   in  everyday
 language, represents far more truly the actual feeling of  the day,
 especially  among  Hobbits.  To  refer  to  Rivendell  as Imladrist
 [>  Imladris]  was  to  Men  and  Hobbits  as  if  one  now  was to
 speak of Winchester  as Camelot.  Save that  the identity  was cer-
 tain, while in Rivendell there still dwelt a  lord of  renown older
 than Arthur would be, were he still living in Winchester today.
    $40. To  translate  the   names  in   the  Common   Speech  into
 English in this way has the advantage also that it often, as in the
 case of Rivendell, provides the key  to the  meaning of  the Elvish
 name as well; for the one  was frequently  a direct  translation of
 the  other.  This  is  not,  however,  always so.  Some place-names
 have  no  meaning  now  discernible  and  derive,  no  doubt,  from
 still older and forgotten days. In  some cases  the names  had dif-
 ferent  meanings  in  different  tongues.  Thus  the  C.S. Dwarrow-
 delf *(19) was a translation  of   the  Dwarvish  name  Khazad-dum,
                                                                   
   (* That is  'Dwarves' mine'.  I have  translated the  actual C.S.
 Phuru-nargian as Dwarrowdelf, since in Bilbo's time the  word phuru
 (related to phur- 'to delve') was obsolete in ordinary  speech, and
 nargian contained a derivative form of narac 'dwarf' that  had long
 disappeared from use. Dwarrow is what the ancient  English genitive
 plural dwerga 'of dwarves' would have become had it survived in use
 or in a place-name.)                                               

 whereas   the  Elvish   name  Moria   (older  Mornya)   meant  'black
 pit'.                                                                
   $41. The  nomenclature  of  the  Hobbits  themselves  and   of  the
 places  in  which  they  lived   has,  nonetheless,   presented  some
 obstacles to the satisfactory carrying out of this process  of trans-
 lation.  Their place-names,  being (in  the Shire  especially) almost
 all  originally of  C.S. form,  have proved  least difficult.  I have
 converted  them  into  as  nearly  similar English  terms as  I could
 find,  using  the   elements  found   in  English   place-names  that
 seemed suitable both in sense and in period: that  is in  being still
 current  (like  hill), or  slightly altered  or reduced  from current
 words  (like  ton  beside town),  or no  longer found  outside place-
 names  (like  wich,  bold,  bottle).  The  Shire  seems  to  me  very
 adequately  to  translate  the  Hobbit  Suza-t,  since this  word was
 now  only  used  by  them  with  reference  to their  country, though
 originally  it  had meant  'a sphere  of occupation  (as of  the land
 claimed by  a family  or clan),  of office,  or business'.  In Gondor
 the  word  suza  was  still applied  to the  divisions of  the realm,
 such  as  Anorien,  Ithilien,  Lebennin,  for  which in  Noldorin the
 word  lhann  was  used.  Similarly  farthing  has  been used  for the
 four  divisions  of  the Shire,  because the  Hobbit word  tharni was
 an  old  word  for  'quarter'  seldom  used  in   ordinary  language,
 where  the  word  for  'quarter'  was  tharantin  'fourth  part'.  In
 Gondor tharni was  used for  a silver  coin, the  fourth part  of the
 castar (in Noldorin the canath or fourth part of the mirian).(20)   
   $42.  The   personal   names   of   the   Hobbits   were,  however,
 much   more   awkward   to   manage  on   this  system.   Rightly  or
 wrongly,  I  have  attempted  to  translate  these also  into English
 terms,  or  to  substitute  equivalents,  wherever possible.  Many of
 the  family  names  have  more  or  less  obvious  meanings   in  the
 Common    Speech:   such    as   Goodenough,    Bracegirdle,   Proud-
 foot, Burrows, and the like, and these can fairly  be treated  in the
 same  way  as  the  place-names.*  In  these  cases  translation will
 not,  I think,  be quarrelled  with, and  may even  be allowed  to be
 necessary.  For  if   his  name   clearly  meant   to  contemporaries
 'horn-blower',  it  is  truer  to  the  facts  to  call  a  character
 Hornblower   than Rasputa,(21) which   though  the   actual  Hobbit
                                                                     
  (* Some family-names, but fewer than in England, for the use of such
 names outside a few 'great families' was of more  recent development,
 were actually place-names or derived  from them.  Gamgee is  one (see
 below).)                                                             

 sound-form is now meaningless.  But, of  course, if  a large  part of
 the names are thus anglicized the  rest must  be made  to fit;  for a
 mixture  of  English  and  alien  names  would  give  a  wholly false
 impression.  It  is thus  with the  less clearly  interpretable names
 that  difficulties  arise.  Some  are  border-line  cases,   such  as
 Baggins itself, which  because of  its importance  I have  dealt with
 below  more  fully.  Some defy  translation, since  they were  to the
 Hobbits  themselves  just  'names',  of  forgotten  origin  and mean-
 ing.  Tuc,(22) for instance,  the  name  of  the  most eminent of the
 'great  families'  of  the  Shire. According  to their  own tradition
 tuca was  an  old word  meaning 'daring',(23) but this appears  to be
 a  wholly  unfounded  guess;  and I  have in  this case  been content
 with anglicization of the form to Took.                              
   $43.  More  debatable,   perhaps,  has   been  my   procedure  with
 the  many  curious  names  that  Shire-hobbits,  as  observed  above,
 gave  to  their  children.  Here  I  long  hesitated  between leaving
 them  alone,  and finding  equivalents for  them. I  have in  the end
 compromised.  I  have  left  some  unaltered.   These  are   the  not
 uncommon  names   which  even   to  Hobbits   had  no   'meaning'  or
 derivation   or  connexion   with  books   or  legends:   names  such
 as  Bilbo,  Bungo,  Bingo,  Polo,   Porro,  Ponto.   Hobbits  readily
 coined  such  names,  and  I do  not think  that the  impression made
 by  them  in  their  day  differed much  from their  effect today.*(24)
 But  it  would  have  given a  very false  impression of  Hobbitry to
 the  modern  reader,  if   these  personal   names  had   in  general
 been  simply  transliterated.  All  would  then  have  today  sounded
 equally   outlandish,   whereas   to   Hobbits  personal   names  had
 many  gradations   of  association   and  suggestion.   Some  derived
 from   early   history   and   ancient   Hobbit-legend;   some   from
 stories   about   Elves   and   Men  and   even  about   dwarves  and
 giants.  Some  were  rare,  others  familiar;  some  comic  in  tone,
 others  romantic  or  elevated;  some  were  of  high  and   some  of
 lower social standing.                                               
   $44. It  seemed  to   me  that,   once  embarked   on  translation,
 even  of  dialogue,  names  of  this sort  would be  best represented
 by  drawing on  the similar  wealth of  names that  we find  or could
 find  in our  own traditions,  in Celtic,  Frankish, Latin  and Greek
 and other sources.                                                   
   $45. This  method  entails,  of  course,   far-reaching  alteration
                                                                     
 (* In fact they ended as a rule in a (Bunga) not o, since an ending a
 was as a rule masculine. I have changed the a to o.)                 

 
                                                                      
 of  the  actual  phonetic  forms  of  such given-names;  but I  do not
 feel  it  more  illegitimate  than  altering  Rasputa  to Hornblower,
 or  indeed  than  translating  the  dialogue  of  the  Red  Book  into
 English,  whereby  naturally  its  true  sound  is  changed  and  many
 of  its verbal  points are  obscured. I  have, in  any case,  done the
 'translation'  with  some  care.  The  fondness  of families  for runs
 of  similar  names,  or  of  fathers  for giving  to their  sons names
 that  either  alliterated  with  their  own or  had a  similar ending,
 has  been  duly  represented.*  The  choice  of  equivalents  has been
 directed  partly  by  meaning  (where  this'  is  discernible  in  the
 original  names),  partly  by  general  tone,  and  partly  by  length
 and  phonetic  style.  The  heroic  and  romantic  names,   of  Fallo-
 hide  legend  according  to  the  Hobbits,  specially  but  not solely
 affected   by   Tooks,   have   been   represented   by  names   of  a
 Germanic  or  Frankish  cast.  'Classical'  names  or ones  of similar
 form  on   the  other   hand  represent   usually  names   derived  by
 Hobbits   from   tales   of   ancient  times   and  far   kingdoms  of
 Men. +(25)                                                            
   $46.  Hobbits   very   frequently   gave  their   daughters  flower-
 names. But  even these  are not  so simple  to deal  with as  might be
 expected.  Where  the  flower  is  certainly to  be identified  I have
 naturally  translated  the  name  into  English (or  botanical Latin).
 But not all the wild flowers of the Shire, and  certainly not  all the
 flowers  cultivated  in  its  gardens can  be identified  with flowers
 that  are  now  familiar.  In  cases  of  doubt I  have done  the best
 that  I  could.  For  instance:  I  have translated Hamanullas (26) by
 Lobelia,  because  although  I  do  not  know  precisely  what  flower
 is  intended,  hamanullas  appears  to  have  been  usually  small and
 blue  and  cultivated  in  gardens, and  the word  seems to  have been
 a gardener's rather than a popular name.                              
   $47. For  the  benefit of  the curious  in such  matters I  add here
 a  few  notes  in supplement  of what  has been  said above  to illus-
 trate my procedure.                                                   
                                                                      
 (* The curious alternation between initial H and initial I in the names
 of  the  Old  Took's  many children  represents an  actual alternation
 between S and E.)
 (+ Thus the perhaps to us rather ridiculous subnames or titles  of the
 Brandybucks  adopted  by  the  heads of  the family,  Astyanax, Aureus,
 Magnificus, were originally half-jesting and were  in fact  drawn from
 traditions about the  Kings at  Norbury. [This  note was  later struck
 out.])                                                                

                             Family names.                            
 Took.  Hobbit Tuc, as noted above.(27)                                 
 Baggins.  H. Labingi.  It is  by no  means certain  that this  name is
 really connected with C.S. labin 'a  bag'; but  it was  believed to
 be  so,  and  one  may  compare  Labin-nec  'Bag  End'  as  the  name
 of  the  residence  of   Bungo  Baggins   (Bunga  Labingi).   I  have
 accordingly   rendered   the   name   Labingi   by   Baggins,   which
 gives,  I  think,  a  very  close  equivalent in  readily appreciable
 modern terms.                                                        
                                                                     
 Brandybuck.  Earlier Oldbuck.  These are  direct translations         
  of H. Assargamba [> Brandugamba] and Zuragamba.(28)                 
  [Added: Zaragamba is translated by  sense, but  since Zara-         
  gamba  (Old-buck)  was altered  to Brandugamba  by adoption         
  of the first half of the river-name (Branduhim) I have used         
  for  it  Brandybuck.  For the  treatment of  the river-name         
  Branduhim see (the note at the end of the text, $58).]              
                                                                     
 Bolger.  Merely  an  anglicized  form  of  H.  Bolgra.  By  chance in
  C.S.  bolg-  has  much the  same significance  as our  'bulge', so
  that  if  Bolger  suggests  to  a  modern  reader a  certain fatness
  and rotundity, so did Bolgra in its own time and place.             
                                                                     
 Boffin.  Anglicized  from  H.   Bophan.  This   was  said   (by  mem-
  bers  of  the  family)  to  mean  'one who  laughs loud'.  I thought
  at first, therefore, of rendering it by Loffin; but since, as in the
  case  of  Took,  the  family  tradition  is a  mere guess,  while in
  C.S.  Bophan  had  in  fact  no  suggestion  of  laughter,   I  have
  remained content with a slight anglicization.(29)                   
                                                                     
 Gamgee.  H.  Galbassi.   A  difficult   name.  According   to  family
  tradition (in  this case  reliable) duly  set out  by Sam  Gamgee at
  the  end  of  the  Red  Book, this  name was  really derived  from a
  place-name:  Galb(b)as.  That  name  I  have  closely   rendered  by
  Gamwich   (to   be   pronounced   Gammidge),   comparing   galb-=
  Gam  with  C.S.  galap,  galab-=  'game';  and  the ending  bas in
  place-names   with   our   -wick,  -wich.   Galbassi  may   thus  be
  fairly   represented   by  Gammidgee.   In  adopting   the  spelling
  Gamgee  I   have  been   led  astray   by  Sam   Gamgee's  connexion
  with  the  family  of  Cotton  into  a  jest  which  though  Hobbit-
  like  enough  does  not  really  reside  in  the suggestions  of the
  names Galbassi and Lothran to people of the Shire.(30)              
                                                                     
 Cotton.  H. Lothran. A not uncommon village name in the
         Shire, corresponding closely to our Cotton (cot-tun), being

 
                                                                           
  derived  from   C.S.  hlotho   'a  two-roomed   dwelling',  and   ran  'a
  village,  a  small  group  of  dwellings  on  a  hill-side'. But  in this
  case   the   name   may   be  an   alteration  of   hloth-ram(a),  'cot-
  man,    cottager'.    Lothram,    which    I   have    rendered   Cotman,
  was   the   name   of   Farmer  Cotton's   grandfather.  It   is  notable
  that,   though   the   resemblance   is  not   so  complete   as  between
  our   Cotton   and   the  noun   cotton,  in   C.S.  the   words  luthur,
  luthran    meant    'down,    fluff'.    But   unfortunately    no   such
  suggestions   are   associated   with   Galbas,   and   the   village  of
  that   name   was   known   only   locally   for   rope-making,   and  no
  tissues were produced there of any fibre softer than hemp.                
                                                                           
  $48. Hobbit.                                                              
                                                                           
 Hobbit.  This,   I   confess,   is   my  own   invention;  but   not  one
  devised  at  random.  This  is  its  origin.  It is,  for one  thing, not
  wholly  unlike  the   actual  word   in  the   Shire,  which   was  cubuc
  (plural  cubugin).*  But   this  cubuc   was  not   a  word   of  general
  use   in   the   Common   Speech   and   required   an   equivalent  that
  though  natural   enough  in   an  English   context  did   not  actually
  occur   in   standard   English.   Some   Hobbit-historians   have   held
  that  cubuc  was  an  ancient   native  word,   perhaps  the   last  sur-
  vivor  of  their  own  forgotten  language.  I  believe,   however,  that
  this  is  not  the  case.  The  word is,  I think,  a local  reduction of
  an  early  C.S.  name   given  to   Hobbits,  or   adopted  by   them  in
  self-description,   when   they   came   into   contact   with   Men.  It
  appears   to   be   derived  from   an  obsolete   cubug  'hole-dweller',
  which  elsewhere  fell  out  of  use.   In  support   of  this   I  would
  point  to  the  fact   that  Meriadoc   himself  actually   records  that
  the   King   of   Rohan   used  the   word  cugbagu   'hole-dweller'  for
  cubuc   or   'Hobbit'.   Now   the   Rohirrim   spoke  a   language  that
  was   in  effect   an  archaic   form  of   the  Common   Speech.+    The
                                                                           
  (* For  another,  I  must  admit  that  its  faint  suggestion  of  rabbit
  appealed to me. Not that hobbits at  all resembled  rabbits, unless  it be
  in burrowing. Still, a jest is a jest as all cubugin will allow, and after
  all it does so happen that the coney (well-known  in the  Shire if  not in
  ancient  England)  was called  tapuc, a  name recalling  cubuc, if  not so
  clearly  as  hobbit  recalls  rabbit.  [This note  was later  struck out.])
  (+ More  accurately:  the  tongue  of  the  Mark  of  Rohan   was  derived
  from  a  northern  speech  which,  belonging  at   first  to   the  Middle
  Anduin,  had  later  moved  north  to  the  upper  waters  of  that river,
                                                       continued on page 50)

 primitive  form represented  by Rohan  cug-bagu would  in the           
 later C.S.  have acquired  the form  cubug(u), and  so Hobbit           
 cubuc.(31) Since, as is explained below, I have represented C.S.           
 by modern English and have therefore  turned the  language of           
 Rohan into archaic English terms also,  I have  converted the           
 archaic cugbagu of  Rohan into  an ancient  English hol-bytla           
 'hole-dweller'. Of this hol-bytla (with the common loss  of l           
 in English between a, o, u, and b, m, v) my fictitious hobbit           
 would be a not impossible local 'corruption'.                           
                                                                        
 $49. Personal names.                           
 Bilbo. The actual H. name was Bilba, as explained above.(32)             
                                                                        
 Frodo. On  the  other  hand  the   H.  name   was  Maura.(33) This was
 not  a  common  name  in  the  Shire,  but  I  think  it  probably once
 had  a  meaning,  even  if  that  had  long  been  forgotten.  No  word
 maur-   can   be   found   in   the   contemporary   C.S.,   but  again
 recourse   to   comparison    with   the    language   of    Rohan   is
 enlightening.   In  that   language  there   was  an   adjective maur-,
 no  longer  current  at  this  time,  but familiar  in verse  or higher
 styles  of  speech;  it  meant  'wise,  experienced'.  I  have,  there-
 fore,  rendered   Maura  by   Frodo,  an   old  Germanic   name,  that
 appears   to   contain  the   word  frod   which  in   ancient  English
 corresponded closely in meaning to Rohan maur.                          
                                                                        
 Meriadoc (Merry). The  real name  was Chilimanzar  [> Cili-             
 manzar], a high-sounding and legendary name. I  have chosen             
 Meriadoc for the following reasons.  Buckland in  many ways             
 occupied a position with regard to the Shire such  as Wales             
 does to England; and it is not wholly inappropriate, there-             
 fore, to represent its many very peculiar names by names of             
 a Celtic or specifically Welsh character. Among  such names             
 I  chose  Meriadoc,  mainly  because  it gives  naturally a             
 shortening  'Merry';  for  the abbreviation  of Chilimanzar             
 [> Cilimanzar] by  which this  character was  usually known             
 was Chilic [> Cilic], a C.S. word  meaning exactly  'gay or             
 merry'.(34)                                                              
                                                                        
 before coming south in the days of Eorl. It was thus nearly akin  to the
 language of the lower Anduin, the basis of the C.S., but isolated in the
 North  it  had changed  far less  and had  remained little  mingled with
 alien words.                                                            

       
                                                                      
 Peregrin (Pippin).  The   H.   name   was   Razanul   [>   Razanur].
 This  was  the  name  of  a  legendary  traveller,  and  probably con-
 tains the  C.S. elements  raza 'stranger',  razan 'foreign'.  I there-
 fore chose  Peregrin to  represent it,  though it  does not  fit quite
 so  well.  Of  Peregrin,  Pippin  is  I   suppose  a   not  impossible
 'pet-form';  but  it  is not  so close  to its  original, as  is Razal
 [>  Razar]  (a  kind  of  small  red  apple)  by   which  abbreviation
 Razanul   Tuca  [>   Razanur   Tuc]   was   almost   inevitably  known
 to his contemporaries.(35)                                            
                                                                      
 Sam. His  real  name  was  Ban, short  for Banzir.  In C.S.  ba-, ban-
 occurred   in   many   words   with   the  meaning   'half-,  almost',
 while  zir(a)  meant  'wise'.  I  have  therefore translated  his name
 by  ancient   English  samwis   of  similar   sense.  This   was  con-
 venient,  since  Samwise   will  yield   an  abbreviation   Sam.  Now
 Ban  was  a  common  short  name  in  the   Shire,  but   was  usually
 then  derived   from  the   more  elevated   name  Bannatha,   as  Sam
 is with us usually shortened from Samuel.(36)                         
                                                                      
 The following passage ($$50-1) is a note (a part of the  manuscript as
 originally written) to the name Samuel, but in appearance is a part of
 the main text, and is most conveniently given so.                     
                                                                      
 $50. It  will  be   observed  that   I  have   not  [>   rarely]  used
 Scriptural   names   or   names   of   Hebraic  origin   to  represent
 Hobbit-names.  There  is  nothing  in  Hobbit  lore  or  history  that
 corresponds   [added:  closely]   to  this   element  in   our  names.
 Bildad,  a  name  occurring  among  the  Bolgers,  is   an  accidental
 resemblance;  it  is  a  genuine  Hobbit  name which  I have  left un-
 altered.  Other  abbreviations  like  Tom  and Mat  I have  also often
 left  unchanged.  Many   such  monosyllables   were  current   in  the
 Shire,  but  were  the  shortenings  of  genuine  Hobbit   names.  For
 instance   Tom   of   Tomacca,   Tomburan;   Mat  of   Mattalic;  Bill
 (Bil)  of  Bildad  (Bildat), Bilcuzal,  or any  of the  numerous names
 ending  in  -bil,  -mil,  as  Arambil. Farmer  Cotton's full  name was
 in   fact  Tomacca   Lothran.(37) [Added: Tobias  (Hornblower)   is  an
 exception.  I  have  used  this  name because  the resemblance  of the
 real  Hobbit-name  Tobi  was  so  close,  and  it   seemed  inevitable
 to  translate  Zara-tobi  by  'Old  Toby';  no  other  name  could  be
 found  to  fit  so  well.  This  was  changed to:  Tobias (Hornblower)
 is  not  an  exception.  Tobias  was  his  real name,  though accented
 Tobias.  I  have  retained  this  name  because  the   resemblance  of
 the real Hobbit-name was so close, &c.]                               
 $51.   Barnabas    is    [added:    not]   an    exception.   Barnabas

                             
                                                                  
 Butterbur was a Man of Bree,  not a  hobbit. I  gave him  this name
 for various reasons. First of all a  personal one.  On an  old grey
 stone  in  a quiet  churchyard in  southern England  I once  saw in
 large  letters  the  name Barnabas  Butter. That  was long  ago and
 before  I  had seen  the Red  Book, but  the name  came back  to me
 when the character  of the  stout innkeeper  of Bree  was presented
 to  me  in  Frodo's  record.  The  more  so  because  his  name, in
 agreement  with  the  generally  botanical  type  of  name favoured
 in  Bree,  was  actually  Butterburr,  or  in  the  C.S. Zilbarapha
 [>  Zilbirapha].  Barnabas  has  unfortunately  only a  very slight
 phonetic similarity to the real first-name of the  innkeeper: Bara-
 batta (or Batti). This  was the  nickname of  the landlord  of 'The
 Pony'  which  he  had borne  so long  that if  he ever  had another
 given-name  it  had  been  forgotten:  it  means  'quick-talker  or
 babbler'.  Still,  in  converting  Batti Zilbarapha  [> Zilbirapha]
 into Barney Butterbur I do not think I have been unjust.(38)      
                                                                  
  $52. A  final  consequence  of  the   conversion  of   the  Common
 Speech,  and of  all names  formed in  that language,  into English
 terms has already been referred to  above. It  entailed translation
 of the related languages  of Rohan  and the  North into  terms that
 would  correspond linguistically,  as closely  as possible,  to the
 ancient situation.                                                
  $53  In  the  records  of  the  Red  Book  there  are  in  several
 places allusions to  the fact  that Hobbits  hearing the  tongue of
 the  Riders  of  Rohan  felt  that it  was akin  to their  own, and
 recognized  some  of  the  words  used,   though  they   could  not
 understand  the  language  as  a whole.  Since I  had, necessarily,
 converted the C.S. of  the Hobbits  into English,  it seemed  to me
 that  it  would be  absurd then  to leave  the related  language of
 Rohan in  its wholly  alien form.  Now the  tongue of  the Rohirrim
 was not only related to the  C.S., but  it had  remained in  a much
 more archaic state, and it was,  even in  its newer  southern home,
 much  less  mingled  with  alien  (Noldorin  and  Quenya)  words; I
 therefore  substituted  for it  a form  of language  resembling Old
 English, since  this tongue,  that was  removed from  its ancestral
 home  to  another, closely  corresponds in  its relation  to modern
 English (especially in its  freedom from  accretions of  French and
 Latin origin) with the relations of  the tongues  of the  Shire and
 the Mark.                                                         
  $54  This  translation was  not difficult,  since the  Rohirrim in
 fact used a very similar type of  nomenclature to  that of  our own

 ancestors.  I  have usually  considered the  sense of  their names
 rather  than  the form;  except that  I have  chosen names  in Old
 English of the  same length,  where possible,  and have  only used
 compound  names,  such  as   Freawine,  Eomer,   Eowyn,  Hasufel,
 Halifirien, when  the  originals  were  also compounded.  The ele-
 ment eo-, which so often  appears (not  unnaturally, being  an old
 word  meaning  'horse', among  a people  devoted to  horses), rep-
 resents an element  loho-, lo-  of the  same sense.  Thus Eotheod,
 'Horse-folk'  or  'Horse-land',  translates  Lohtur.  Theoden,  as
 are many of  the other  royal names,  is an  old word  for 'king',
 corresponding to Rohan turac-.(39)                                
                                                                  
   $55. Note.  In  a  few  cases  I  have, not  quite consistently,
 modified  the  words  and  names  of  the  Mark, making  them more
 like  modern  English,  especially in  spelling. Examples  of this
 process   in   varying   degrees   are:   Dunharrow   (= Dun-harug
 'hill-sanctuary'),   Starkhorn,   Entwash,   Helm's   Deep,  Combe
 (=  Cumb);  Halifirien  (=  Halig-firgen   'holy-mountain');  Fen-
 march  for  Fenmerce;  Shadowfax  for Scadufax.  In a  similar way
 in  'The  Hobbit'  Oakenshield  was anglicized  from Eikinskialdi.
 The name Rohan itself is of Noldorin origin, a translation  of the
 native  Lograd  (sc.  Eo-marc 'the  Horse-maik' or  'Borderland of
 the Horsemen').  Its strictly  correct form  was Rochann,  but the
 form  Rohan  represents  the  actual  pronunciation of  Gondor, in
 which medial ch was colloquially weakened to h.                   
                                                                  
   $56. This  translation  had  a  disadvantage  which  I  did  not
 foresee. The 'linguistic notes' on the  origin of  peculiar Hobbit
 words had also to be 'translated'. I have  already alluded  to the
 translation  of  the actual  relation of  Rohan cugbagu  and Shire
 cubuc  into  an  imagined  one  of  holbytla  and   hobbit.  Other
 examples are these (cf. [$24]):  Stoor in  relation to  a Northern
 word meaning 'big' (cf. Scandinavian stor- 'big') is a translation
 of actual Hobbit tung (40) in relation to a  similar word  in Dale.
 Supposed  Hobbit  mathom  in  relation  to  Rohan  (that   is  Old
 English)  mathum  is a  translation of  actual Hobbit  cast (older
 castu) compared with Rohan castu.                                 
   $57. Similarly,  Rohan  smygel,  actually  an  Old  English word
 for  a  burrow,  related  to   a  Northern   stem  smug   /  smeag
 (smaug),(41) here represents  the genuine  Rohan trahan related to
 Hobbit  tran.  From  smygel  I  have  derived an  imaginary modern
 smile  (or smial)  having a  similar relation  to the  older form.
 Smeagol and  Deagol are  thus Old  English equivalents  for actual

                               
                                                                         
 Trahand  and  Nuhund  'apt  to  creep  into  a hole'  and 'apt  to hide,
 secretive'  respectively.  (Smaug,  the  Dragon's  name,  is   a  repre-
 sentation  in  similar  terms,  in  this  case  of  a  more Scandinavian
 character,  of  the  Dale  name  Tragu,   which  was   probably  related
 to the trah- stem in the Mark and Shire.)                                
                                                                         
    $58.  Note.   In   cases   where   'folk-etymology'    has   operated
 to  alter  older  (Elvish)  names into  the appearance  of names  in the
 C.S. special  difficulty may  be met,  since it  is unlikely  that suit-
 able  words  will  be  found  in  modern  English  that  will   at  once
 translate  the  C.S.  name  and  yet  also   have  some   similarity  in
 sound  to  the  Elvish  name.  The chief  example is  that of  the River
 Baranduin,  the  ancient  boundary  eastward  of  the  Shire.   This  is
 an   Elvish   name   composed   of   baran   'golden-brown'   and   duin
 '(large)  river'.  But  it  was by  the Hobbits  picturesquely perverted
 into   Branduhim,   signifying   in   their   tongue    'foaming   beer'
 (brand(u)  'foam';  him(a)  'beer').  I  have  imitated this  by calling
 the  river  the  Brandywine,  similar  in  sound  and  a  very  possible
 'corruption'  of  Baranduin,  although  the  sense  is not  very closely
 similar.  (There  is,  in  fact,  no  evidence  for the  distillation of
 brandy in the Shire.)                                                    
    $59   For   the  same   reasons  the   Northern,  or   rather  North-
 easterly,  'outer'  names  of  the  Dwarves   taken  from   the  Mannish
 languages  of   that  region   have  been   all  given   a  Scandinavian
 style: they are indeed all genuine Norse dwarf-names.(42)                
                                                                         
                                  NOTES                                   
                                                                         
 1.    The  idea  of  the  three  kinds  of  Hobbit,  Harfoots,  Stoors, and
       Fallohides, arose in the  first of  the two  texts (F  1), and  was then
       transferred  (before  the  second  text   F  2   was  written)   to  the
       Prologue (see note 10  below, and  p. 10).  But the  text of  the latter
       (P  5)  in  which  it  appeared  gave only  the old  story of  Bilbo and
       Gollum,  and  thus  must have  been earlier  than July  1950: see  p. 7.
 2.    F 1 as written had 'Human',  subsequently changed  to 'Mannish';
       this term occurs later in F 1 as first written. See the commentary
       on $2.                                                             
 3.    Atani:  in  F  1  as  written  no  Elvish  name  appears   here, but
       Atanatari  was added  in the  margin, then  changed to  Atanni (so
       spelt).                                                            
 4.    As  originally written,  F 1  had: 'In  that war  the Fathers of Men
       aided the Elves, and lived with them and  fought beside  them; and
       their  chieftains  learned  the Noldorin  speech, and  some indeed
       forsook  their  own tongue,  even in  the daily  use of  their own

           
                                                                         
     houses.'  This  was  changed  to: 'In  that war  three houses  of the
     Fathers  of  Men  aided  the Elves,  and lived  with them  and fought
     beside  them; and  the people  of these  houses learned  the Noldorin
     speech,  and  forsook  their  own  tongue.' On  this see  the commen-
     tary on $7.                                                          
       The final reading in F 2, 'the  lords of  these houses  learned the
     Noldorin  speech',  belongs  with  the  changes  made  in $9  and $13
     introducing  Adunaic,  which  were  made  after  the   third  version
     of the text had been written,  or was  at any  rate in  progress (see
     pp. 74-5).                                                           
  5. Throughout  F  2  the  name   was  written   Dunedein,  subsequently
     corrected  at  all  occurrences to  Dunedain (the  spelling in  F 1).
     This is not further indicated in the text printed, where I have spelt
     the name in the usual form.                                          
  6. At  first  F  1  read  here:  'This  tongue  was  in  Noldorin called
     Falathren  "Shore-language",  but  by  its  speakers Westnish  or the
     Common  Speech.'  The  name  Westnish  was   used  throughout   F  1,
     changed  everywhere  to  Westron  (see  the  commentary  on  $9). The
     present  sentence  was  altered  to  read: '...  but by  its speakers
     Unduna (that is Westron) or Soval Phare the Common Speech.'          
  7. F  1  has:  'First:  the  Numenoreans  had  not been  wholly sundered
     from  the Eldar  that remained  in Middle-earth,  and there  had been
     much coming and going between Numenor and the westlands.'            
  8. After  'in  the  days of  its blessedness'  F 1  has: 'and  there the
     language  of  the Kings  of Men  had changed  little and  slowly. And
     the like may be said of the Eldar.'                                  
  9. For  the  passage  in  F  2  concerning  Treebeard F  1 has:  'As was
     natural  in  one  so  ancient  Treebeard also  knew this  tongue, and
     such  words and  names as  he is  here recorded  to have  used, other
     than those in the Common Speech, are Quenya.'                        
 10. F  1  is  here altogether  different. Following  the words  'To speak
     last of Hobbits' it continues:                                       
       These  were  a  people  who,  as  has been  said, were  more nearly
     akin  to  Men  than  any  other  of the  speaking-peoples of  the an-
     cient  world.  Their  language  must  then be  supposed to  have been
     of  similar  kind  and  origin  to  the language  of Men.  But, owing
     to  the  absence  of  all  records  among  the  Hobbits  before their
     settlement  in  the  West,  the  remoter  history  of Hobbit-language
     is difficult and obscure. [This passage was struck out.]             
        Among  the  Hobbits  of  the  Shire,  though  a  love  of learning
     was  far  from  general (unless  it be  of genealogical  lore), there
     were  always  some  few,  especially  in  the  greater  families, who
     were   lore-masters,  and   gathered  information   concerning  older
     times  and  distant  lands,  either  from  their  own  traditions, or
     from  Elves  and  Men   and  Dwarves.   According  to   the  accounts
     thus  compiled  in   the  Shire,   Hobbits,  though   originally  one

                                                     
                                                                   
 race,  became  divided  in  remote  antiquity  into  three somewhat
 different kinds: Stoors, Harfoots, and Fallohides.                 
                                                                   
 Here there follows in F 1  an account  of the  three kinds  that is
 already very close to that  in the Prologue (FR  pp. 12-13);  and it
 is clear that it was here that the conception of the  three Hobbit-
 kinds first entered (see the commentary on $20). It is notable that
 while the actual wording of  F 1  was little  changed subsequently,
 the Stoors were at first placed before the Harfoots, and a  part of
 the description of the Harfoots was at first applied to  the Stoors
 and vice versa.                                                    
  The  Stoors  were  broader, heavier  in build,  and had  less hair
 on their feet and  more on  their chins,  and preferred  flat lands
 and  riversides.  [Added:  Their  feet and  hands were  large.] The
 Harfoots  were  browner  of  skin,  smaller  and shorter,  and they
 were  beardless and  bootless; they  preferred highlands  and hill-
 sides.  [Added: Their  hands and  feet were  neat and  nimble.] The
 Fallohides were fairer of skin and often of  hair, and  were taller
 than  the  others;  they  were  lovers  of  trees   and  woodlands.
 [Added:  All  Hobbits  were  'good  shots'  with  stone,  sling  or
 bow, but the Fallohides were the surest on the mark.]              
  The  Stoors  [>  Harfoots]  had  much  to   do  with   Dwarves  in
 ancient  times,  and  long  lived  in  the  foothills of  the Misty
 Mountains.   They   moved   westward   early,   and   crossed   the
 Mountains  and  roamed  over  the  land of  Eriador beyond,  as far
 as Weathertop or further, while  the others  were still  in Wilder-
 land.  [Struck  out:  The  Harfoots  lingered  long  by  the  Great
 River,  and  were  friendly  with  Men.  They  came  westward after
 the  Stoors.]  They  were  probably  the   most  normal   and  rep-
 resentative  variety  of  Hobbits  and  were  certainly   the  most
 numerous.  They  were  the most  inclined to  settle, and  the most
 addicted  to  living  in  holes  and  tunnels.  [Added:  The Stoors
 lingered  by  the  banks  of  the  Great  River, and  were friendly
 with  Men.  They  came  westward  after  the  Harfoots,   owing  to
 the  great  increase  of Men  in Anduin  Vale according  to the[ir]
 tales,  and  followed  the  course  of  the Bruinen  (or Loudwater)
 southwards.]  The  Fallohides  were  the  least numerous,  a north-
 erly branch....                                                    
 The text  F 1  then proceeds  in almost  the same  words as  in the
 Prologue, as far as 'they were often found as leaders or chieftains
 among clans of Stoors or Harfoots' (FR p. 13). At this  point there
 is a footnote:                                                     
 Thus it is said to  have been  clans of  a still  markedly Stoorish
 strain  that  first  moved on  west again  from Bree  and colonized
 the Shire,  attracted originally  to the  riverbanks of  the Baran-
 duin. In Bilbo's time  the inhabitants  of the  Marish in  the East

       Farthing,  and  also  of  Buckland,  still showed  Stoorish charac-
       teristics. Yet even there the chief  families, notably  the Brandy-
       bucks, had a strong Fallohidish strain in their make-up.          
                                                                        
      (On this see the commentary on $20.)                               
       Before F 2 was written the  account of  the Harfoots,  Stoors, and
      Fallohides was removed to stand in the Prologue, where at its first
      appearance it had almost word for  word its  form in  the published
      work (see p. 10).                                                  
       From this point F 1 continues  as the  basis for  the F  2 version
                                                                        
      from $$21 ff.                                                     
  11. For this paragraph F 1 reads as follows:                           
         More recent enquiries have failed, it is true, to find any trace
      of a special  Hobbit language,  but they  do suggest  that Westnish
      [> Westron]  was not  in fact  the oldest  language spoken  by this
      people.  The  very  earliest  glimpses  of  Hobbits  to  be caught,
      either  in their  own legends  or those  of their  neighbours, show
      them  rather  to  have  at  that  time spoken  the language  of Men
      in  the  higher  vale of  Anduin, roughly  between the  Carrock and
      the Gladden Fields.                                                
      The footnote here in F 1 corresponds in subject to that  in F  2 at
      the end of $23, and reads:                                         
       If  Gandalf's theory  is correct  the people  of Gollum  must have
      been  a  late-lingering  group  of Stoors  in the  neighbourhood of
      the  Gladden.  And  it  may  be  that   the  memories   of  Smeagol
      provide  one of  the earliest  glimpses of  Hobbitry that  we have.
      It  may  be  noted  therefore  that  Deagol  and  Smeagol  are both
      words in the languages of Anduin-vale.                             
  12. The footnote here in F 1 (see note 11) reads:                      
       Of  course,  since  the  Common  Speech  was  itself  derived from
      a  related  speech,  it  may  sometimes  have  happened   that  the
      Hobbits  preserved  in  use  a  word  that   had  once   been  more
      widely current in Westnish [> Westron].                            
  13. F 1 has here: 'and to the name of the  Dragon Smaug  (if that  is a
      name given to him by the northern men of  Dale, as  seems likely).'
  14. F 1  does not  have the  reference to  the Hobbit  month-names, but
      introduces a paragraph that was not taken up here in F 2  (cf. $28,
      which appears also in F 1).                                        
         Hobbits  therefore  appear  from  their  linguistic  history  to
      have  had  in  early   times  a   special  aptitude   for  adopting
      language  from  their  neighbours, and  in no  other point  is this
      better  illustrated  than  in their  giving of  names. They  had of
      course  many  names  of  their  own invention  - usually  short and
      often  comic  in  sound  (to  us and  to Hobbits)  - but  from very

                                    
                                                                          
      early  times  they  had  also in  traditional use  a wealth  of other
      names  drawn  not  from  the  language  of daily  use but  from their
      legends  and  histories  and  fictitious  tales  which  dealt  by  no
      means  solely  with  their  own  heroes  and  adventures,   but  with
      Elves and Men and Dwarves and even giants.                           
                                                                          
  15. This is a reference to the conclusion of the  text, which  is omitted
      in this book (see note 42).                                          
  16. The heading On Translation is absent in F 1.                         
  17. For the reference of the footnote at this point see note  15. In  F 1
      the  footnote reads:  'A note  on the  spelling and  intended pronun-
      ciation of the Elvish words  and names  will be  found at  the begin-
      ning of the Index.'                                                  
  18. In a draft of this passage in F 1  the Westron  name of  Imladris was
      Karbandul.                                                          
  19. The  footnote  to  the  name  Dwarrowdelf  differs somewhat in  F 1.
      The   Common   Speech   name   of   Moria  was   Kubalnarga  (changed
      to Kubalnargia), translated as Dwarrowdelf  'since in  Bilbo's time
      the  word  kubal  (related to  kubu  "delve")  was obsolete  in ordi-
      nary  speech,  and  narga [>  nargia] contained  a plural  [> deriva-
      tive)  form  of  narag "dwarf"  that had  long disappeared  from use.
      Dwarrows  is  what  our  older  dwergas would  have become  if the
      singular dwarf from  older dwerh  had not  replaced it,  long ago.'
      Subsequently  the  C.S.  name  was  changed in  F 1  to Satun-nargia,
      and  finally   to  Phurun-nargia   (with  corresponding   changes  of
      kubal, kubu  to phurun, phur-).                                      
  20. The whole of the  discussion in  $41 of  the name  Suza of  the Shire
      and the reason for the use of 'Farthing' is lacking in F 1; but after
      the  reference  to  English wich,  bold, bottle  there is  a footnote
      which was not taken up in F 2:                                       
      In one  case I  have coined  a word:  smial (or  smile if  you prefer
      it  so).  The  Hobbits  used  a  peculiar  word  of their  own, gluva
      [written  later  nearby: Rohan  globa], for  'an inhabited  hole'. I
      would  have  left  it  unchanged  but  it  would  have   looked  out-
      landish  in  an  English  context.  Accordingly  I  have  used smial,
      since the  ancient English  smygel 'a  hole to  creep in'  would, had
      it  survived  or  been  adopted  by   latterday  Hobbits,   have  now
      had some such form.                                                  
  21. In   F   1   the   Hobbit  name   for  'Hornblower'   was  Rhasputal,
      changed to Rasputa as in F 2.                                       
  22. In F 1 my  father first  wrote Tuk  but emended  it to  Tuca; in  F 2
      he wrote Tuca, but then erased the final -a.                          
  23. In  F  1  the  adjective  tuca  was described  as 'a  Fallohide word
      meaning "great" ', corrected to the reading of F 2.                  
  24. The  footnote at  this point  concerning the  masculine ending  -a is
      absent in F 1.                                                       

            
                                                                          
  25. The  footnote  concerning the  'to us  rather ridiculous  subnames or
      titles' of the heads of the Brandybuck clan is absent in F 1. See the
      commentary on $45.                                                   
  26. Hamanullas:   in   F   1  the   name  was   Amanullith,  subsequently
      changed to Hamanulli.                                                
  27. In  F  1  the name  was Tuk,  later corrected  to Tuca, as previously
      (see note 22).                                                       
  28. The  names  in  F  1  were  Shuran-kaphir  and Zarkaphir,  changed to
      Assargamba and Zaragamba as in F 2.                                  
  29. F 1 has the same note, but  in addition  it is  said that  Bophan was
      'of  Harfoot  origin',-and also  that 'to  Hobbits in  general Bophan
      was as devoid of meaning as Boffin today.'                           
  30. In  F  1  the  account  of Gamgee  was the  same, but  the underlying
      names  were  different:  the  Hobbit  name  was   Charbushi,  derived
      from   the   place-name   Charb(b)ash;   the   Common   Speech   word
      meaning   'game'   was   charab;  and   the  place-name   ending  was
      -bash,  -bas.  These  forms  were  then  corrected to  those in  F 2.
      Charbash appears again in the note on Cotton in F 1.                 
  31. In  F  1  the  Shire  word for  'Hobbit' was  kubud and  the obsolete
      Common  Speech  word  from  which  it   was  derived   was  kubud(u)r
      'hole-dweller';  Theoden's  word  was  kugbadru.  These   forms  were
      then  changed:  the   Shire  word   became cubut   (plural  cubudil),
      derived   from   obsolete   C.S.   cubadul,   and    Theoden's   word
      cugbadul.                                                            
        In F 2  cubuc and  the associated  words and  forms were  all first
      written  cu-,   changed  to   cu-.  The   Common  Speech   and  Rohan
      forms were a good  deal altered  in the  text and  I have  given only
      those  finally adopted:  thus the  plural of  cubuc was  first cubuga
      and  then  cubugen,  the obsolete  C.S. word  was cubugl(a),  and the
      Rohan word was cugbagul (again in $56).                              
  32. In F 1 it is said that 'Bilbo is  the actual  Hobbit name':  see note
      24.                                                                  
  33. In  F  1  the  name  was  written  Mauro  before  being   changed  to
      Maura.                                                               
  34. The  note  in  F 1  on the  true name  of Meriadoc  is the  same, but
      with the spellings Khilimanzar, Khilik.                              
  35. The note on Peregrin (Pippin) read in F 1, before emendation:        
        The  Hobbit  name  is Rabanul.  This is  not a  name of  C.S. form;
      it is said to be [Fallohide >] a Harfoot name; but  since it  is also
      said  to  mean  'traveller',  and  was  in  any  case  the name  of a
      legendary  rover  and  wanderer,  I  have  chosen  Peregrin  to  rep-
      resent it. Of Peregrin,  Pippin is  I suppose  a not  impossible pet-
      form,  though  it  is  not  so  close  to  Peregrin  as  Rubul  is to
      Rubanul. But rubul is  in C.S.  the name  of a  kind of  small apple.
                                                                          
  36. The  original discussion  of the  name Sam  in F  2 was  rejected and

  replaced. I give the second form, since it scarcely differs  from the
  first except in clarity. In F 1 the same statement was made,  but the
  linguistic  elements  were  different.  His  real  name  was Bolnoth;
  the  common  Shire-name  (Ban  in  F  2)  was  Bol,  held  to  be  an
  abbreviation  of  Bolagar;  the  prefix  meaning 'half-,  almost' was
  bol-;  and  the  word  in  the Common  Speech meaning  'wise' (zir(a)
  in  F  2)  was noth.  These were  changed to  the forms  in F  2, but
  with Bannatho for Bannatha (see note 24).                            
37.  For Tomacca F 1 has  Tomak (and  k for  c in  other names  in this
  passage,  as  throughout),  and  for  Arambil  has   Shambil;  Farmer
  Cotton's  full  name  is  Tomakli  Lothron,  changed  subsequently to
  Tomacci.                                                             
38.  In F 1  Butterbur's real  name was  Barabush Zilibraph,  the first
  name  meaning  (like  Barabatta  in  F  2)  'quick-talker,  babbler',
  shortened to Barabli,  and the  second a  compound of  zilib 'butter'
  and  raph(a) a  'burr'. This  latter was  changed to  Zilbarapha, the
  form first written in F 2. At the end of the note F 1 has: 'the nick-
  name  which  the  landlord  of  "The  Pony"  had  so long  borne that
  Frodo had never heard his true given-name'.                          
    With  the  discussion  of  Butterbur  the  text  F  1 ends,  but my
  father added the following in pencil later:                          

                                                   
                                                                    
 A  final  note on  the other  languages. Now  since the  language of
 Rohann  and  of  Dale  were  akin,  that of  Rohann closely  akin in
 origin  to  the  Common   Speech,  it   seemed  plain   that  having
 converted  all  C.S.  into  English  the  more   northerly  (archaic
 and  less  blended)  tongues must  be represented  in the  same way.
 The language  of Men  in Dale  has thus  been given  (so far  as its
 names  show)  a  Norse  cast;  and  since  as  has  been   said  the
 Dwarves  adapt  their  names  and  speech  to  those  of  Men  among
 whom  they  live,  all  the  Dwarves  of  the  North  have  names of
 this  Northern  type  (in  fact  the  actual  names  of  Dwarves  in
 Norse).  The  Rohirrim   are  therefore   appropriately  represented
 by  speaking  a  tongue  resembling  ancient  English. It  will thus
 be  noted  that  for  the  archaic  Rohan  cugbadul  in  relation to
 Hobbit cubut [see  note  31]  I  have  .....  [?   ancient]  English
 holbytla in relation to hobbit.                                     
                                                                    
 From here to the end of the text (so far  as it  is given  here, see
 note 42) F 2 exists in two forms,  both consisting  of two  sides of
 a single manuscript  page: the  second form  is a  fair copy  of the
 first, and follows it very closely, with for the most part only very
 minor alterations of wording. I give here  the second  version, with
 a couple of differences of form recorded in the following notes.
39.  In  the  first  form  of the  F 2  text the  real word  in Rohan
 corresponding  to  Theoden  is  turan,  where  the second  form has
 turac-.                                                             

  40. The first form had tunga where the second has tung.
  41. These are forms of the same prehistoric stem, with differing
      vowels (smeag being the ancient English form, smaug the Scan-
      dinavian, while smygel is an English development of the stem
      smug).
  42. The remaining eight pages of the F 2 manuscript are taken up
      with an account of pronunciation, with sections on consonants,
      vowels, and accent, which was subsequently removed to become
      (in much developed form) the first part of Appendix E. I give here
      only the brief preface to this account.
        In transliterating words and names from the ancient languages
        that appear in the Red Book I have attempted to use modern
        letters in a way as agreeable to modern English eyes as could
        be combined with reasonable accuracy. Also I have used them
        as far as possible with the same value in all the languages
        concerned. Fortunately the languages of the Westlands of the
        period were fairly euphonious (by European standards) and
        simple in phonetic structure, and no very rare or difficult
        sounds appear to have occurred in them.
          Hobbit names, as has been explained, have all been con-
        verted into English forms and equivalents and can be pro-
        nounced accordingly. Thus Celador Bolger has c as in cellar,
        and g as in bulge. But in the alien languages the following
        points may be observed by those who are interested in such
        matters.
      Noldorin appears, of course, for Sindarin throughout (see the
      commentary on $$5, 18). For Celador Bolger, who does not
      appear in The Lord of the Rings, see pp. 94, 96.

                                COMMENTARY.                             
                                                                       
$2.  So far as I have been able to  discover, my  father never  used the
  adjective  'Mannish',  whether  of language  or tradition,  before its
  occurrence  in  this  work.  The  change  of  'Human' to  'Mannish' in
  F 1 (see note 2 above) therefore marks the entry of this term.        
$3.  The use of the term Lembi 'Lingerers',  for those  of the  Eldar who
  'remained behind in the north-west  of Middle-earth',  is a  clear in-
  dication of date, substantiating the  conclusion already  reached that
  this earliest version of Appendix F was at any rate written before the
  middle of  1950 (see  p. 28  and note  1). In  the long  and extremely
  complex history of the classification of the  divisions of  the Elvish
  peoples  and their  names, this  represents the  stage reached  in the
  Quenta  Silmarillion  $29  (V.215),  where  by  a  change that  can be
  dated  to  November  1937 the  old term  Lembi 'Lingerers'  became the
  name for those of the Eldar  who were  'lost upon  the long  road' and
  never crossed the  Great Sea  (V.215, 219).  Thus while  this earliest

  version  of  Appendix  F certainly  belongs to  the time  when the  end of
  the  actual  narrauve  of  The  Lord  of  the Rings  had been  reached, it
  equally  clearly  preceded  the  new  work  on  the  legends of  the First
  Age  which  included  (as   well  as   the  Annals   of  Aman,   the  Grey
  Annals,   and   many   other   works)   the   revision   of   the   Quenta
  Silmarillion: for in that  revision the  term Lembi  was first  changed to
  Lemberi  and  then   removed,  and   the  name   Sindar  emerged   (for  a
  detailed  account  see  X.163-4, 169  - 71).  As noted  in X.91,  the name
  Sindar  does  not  occur  in  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  apart   from  the
  Appendices.                                                              
$4.  The  name  Lindar  had  been  replaced  by  Vanyar  when  the  Annals
  of Aman and the Grey Annals were written.                                
    The  statement   here  concerning   Quenya,  the   'Elven-latin'  orig-
  inally  deriving  from the  language of  the Lindar,  echoes that  in the
  Lhammas  or  'Account  of  Tongues'  of  the   1930s  (see   V.172;  193,
  195).  It  may  be noted  that the  expression 'Elven-latin'  survived in
  the  published  form   of  Appendix   F  (RK   p.  406):   '[Quenya]  was
  no  longer  a  birth-tongue,  but  had  become,  as  it were,  an "Elven-
  latin" ...'.                                                             
$5.  The  name  Quenta  Noldorion,  for   Quenta  Silmarillion,   seems  to
  be unique in this place (where  it occurs  in both  texts). -  Nothing is
  said in this work of the adoption of Sindarin (or as  it is  called here,
  Lemberin)   by   the   Exiled   Noldor:   this   fundamental  development
  (which first appears in the earliest version of the 'linguistic excursus'
  in  the  Grey Annals,  XI.20-1) had  not yet  emerged (see  further under
  $18  below). But  the idea  found in  the earlier  forms of  that 'excur-
  sus'  (XI.21,  25,  27) that  the two  languages, Noldorin  and Sindarin,
  changed  in  similar  ways and  'drew together'  appears in  the footnote
  to $5.                                                                   
$7. In the  list of  Alterations in  last revision  1951 (see  X.7), often
  referred  to,   occurs  'Atani   N[oldorin]  Edain   =  Western   Men  or
  Fathers of Men'. It is possible  that the  form in  F 1,  Atanni, replac-
  ing  Atanatari  (note  3  above),  was  the  earliest  occurrence  of the
  name.                                                                    
    In  the  sentence  'In  that  war three  houses of  the Fathers  of Men
  aided the Elves ...' the word 'the' is not casually absent  before 'three
  houses': cf. $10, 'the  native tongue  of the  Fathers of  Men themselves
  before those of the Three Houses passed over the Sea.'                   
    The  statement  concerning  the loss  of the  original language  of the
  Atani shows  a curious  uncertainty (see  note 4  above): from  the orig-
  inal  version  in  F 1,  'their chieftains  learned the  Noldorin speech,
  and  some  indeed  forsook  their  own  tongue', revised  to the  form in
  F 2 'the people of  these houses  learned the  Noldorin speech,  and for-
  sook their own tongue', which  was then  altered to  'the lords  of these
  houses  learned  the  Noldorin  speech'.  That  my  father   should  have
  entertained at all at this time the  idea that  the original  language of

 the Atani  (of the  Three Houses)  was wholly  lost is  remarkable. In
 this connection it is interesting to compare what  he wrote  in draft-
 ing for  the chapter  Faramir (later  The Window  on the  West), which
 can be  dated precisely  to May  1944 (VIII.144).  Here, in  a passage
 concerning  the  Common  Speech  which  was  only  removed   from  the
 chapter at a late stage (see VIII.162), Faramir  had said:  Some there
 are  of  Gondor  who  have  dealings  with  the  Elves  ...  One great
 advantage we have:  we speak  an elvish  speech, or  one so  near akin
 that  we  can  in  part  understand  them  and they  us.' At  this Sam
 exclaimed:  'But  you  speak  the  ordinary  language!  Same   as  us,
 though a bit old-fashioned like, if you'll pardon my saying  it.' Then
 Faramir replied (VIII.159 - 60):                                     
                                                                     
       'Of course we do. For  that is  our own  tongue which  we perhaps
   preserve  better  than  you  do   far  in   the  North.   The  Common
   Tongue,  as  some  call it,  is derived  from the  Numenoreans, being
   but  a  form  changed by  time of  that speech  which the  Fathers of
   the  Three  Houses  [struck  out:  Hador and  Haleth and  Beor] spoke
   of  old.  This language  it is  that has  spread through  the western
   world amongst all folk  and creatures  that use  words, to  some only
   a second tongue for use in  intercourse with  strangers, to  some the
   only  tongue  they  know.  But  this  is  not an Elvish speech  in my
   meaning. All speech of men in this  world is  Elvish in  descent; but
   only if one go  back to  the beginnings.  What I  meant was  so: [the
   lords  >]  many  men  of  the  Three  Houses  long  ago gave  up man-
   speech  and  spoke  the  tongue  of  their  friends  the   Noldor  or
   Gnomes:  a  high-elvish  tongue  [struck  out:  akin  to  but changed
   from  the  Ancient  Elvish  of  Elvenhome]. And  always the  lords of
   Numenor  knew  that  tongue  and  used   it  among   themselves.  And
   so still do we among ourselves ...                                 
                                                                     
See further under $9 below.                                          
$9.  It is an extraordinary  feature of  this account  that there  is no
 suggestion   that   the   Numenoreans   retained  their   own  Mannish
 language, and it is indeed  expressly stated  here that  'The language
 of the  Dunedain was  thus the  Elvish Noldorin'.  This is  the expla-
 nation  of  the  statement  discussed  under  $7 that  the Men  of the
 Three   Houses   learned  Noldorin   and  abandoned   their  ancestral
 tongue  (as  has been  mentioned already  in note  4 above,  the emen-
 dation to F 2, whereby it was reduced  to 'the  lords of  these houses
 learned  the  Noldorin  speech',  was  made  at the  same time  as the
 rough alterations  of the  text here  and in  $13 whereby  Adunaic was
 introduced as the language of Numenor).                              
   I am altogether at a loss to account for this, in view  of Faramir's
 disquisition  to  Sam  cited  under  $7.  Moreover,  in  the anomalous
 'Foreword'  that I  have called  F' my  father had  said (p.  21, 58):
 'Now  those  languages  of  Men that  are here  met with  were related

  to  the  Common  Speech;  for  the  Men  of  the  North and  West were
  akin  in  the  beginning  to  the  Men of  Westernesse that  came back
  over  the  Sea;  and  the  Common  Speech  was  indeed  made   by  the
  blending of  the speech  of Men  of Middle-earth  with the  tongues of
  the kings from over the Sea.' This is not very clearly  expressed, but
  the  implication  seems  clear  that  the  Numenorean   language  that
  entered  into  the  Common  Speech  was  a Mannish  and not  an Elvish
  tongue.  One  seems to  be driven  to the  explanation that  my father
  when  writing  the  present  account  had  actually shifted  away from
  his  view  that  the  Mannish  language  of the  Three Houses  was the
  common  speech  of  Numenor;  yet  what  does  that  imply of  all his
  work on Adunaic and The Drouwing of Anadune in 1946?                  
    In the footnote to $9 the tenth king of the  Northern Line  is named
  Earendil,  not  as  in  Appendix  A  (RK pp.  318, 320)  Earendur; see
  p. 189.                                                               
    It  was  undoubtedly here  that the  name Westron  arose (apparently
  devised  by  my  father  on  the  analogy  of  the old  form southron,
  itself an alteration of southern); the F 1 text as  originally written
  had  Westnish  throughout  (note  6 above).  Westron occurs  only once
  in  the actual  narrative of  The Lord  of the  Rings, in  the chapter
  Lothlorien, where Legolas says  'this is  how it  runs in  the Westron
  Speech'  (FR p.  353), and  this was  a late  change from  'the Common
  Speech', made to the  typescript following  the fair  copy manuscript:
  see VII.223 and 235 with note 48.                                     
$10.   In  Faramir's  account  (see  under  $7)  the  Common  Speech was
  expressly  said  to  be  'derived  from  the Numenoreans':  changed by
  time, it was nonetheless  directly descended  from 'that  speech which
  the Fathers of the Three Houses spoke of old'. In fact, in corrections
  made  to  the  completed  manuscript of  that chapter,  the conception
  was  changed  to  the  extent  that  Faramir  now  says:  'The  Common
  Tongue, as  some call  it, is  derived from  the Numenoreans;  for the
  Numenoreans  coming  to  the  shores  of  these  lands  took  the rude
  tongue  of  the  men that  they here  found and  whom they  ruled, and
  they  enriched it,  and it  spread hence  through the  Western world';
  and he also says that 'in intercourse with other folk we use  the Com-
  mon  Speech  which we  made for  that purpose'  (VIII.162). Of  this I
  said  (ibid.):  'Here  the  idea  that the  Common Speech  was derived
  from  "that  speech which  the Fathers  of the  Three Houses  spoke of
  old" is denied'; but by 'the  rude tongue  of the  men that  they here
  found'  Faramir  may  have  meant  language  that  in  the  course  of
  millennia had  become greatly  altered and  impoverished, not  that it
  bore no ancestral kinship to that of the Numenoreans.                 
    In  Appendix  F  as  published  the  section  Of  Men  (RK  p.  406)
  begins:  'The  Westron  was  a  Mannish  speech,  though  enriched and
  softened  under  Elvish  influence.  It  was  in  origin  the language
  of  those  whom  the  Eldar  called  the Atani  or Edain,  "Fathers of

   Men"...' And further on in this section my father  wrote of  the great
   Numenorean  haven  of  Pelargir:  'There   Adunaic  was   spoken,  and
   mingled  with  many words  of the  languages of  lesser men  it became
   a Common Speech that spread thence along the coasts ...'              
    All  these  conceptions  differ  somewhat  among  themselves,  but as
   is often  the case  when comparing  varying texts  of my  father's one
   may feel unsure whether the differences do not  lie more  in differing
   emphasis than in real contradiction. In the present text,  however, it
   is perfectly clear that the Common Speech  was in  origin one  form of
   the  skein  of  Mannish  speech  that extended  from the  North (Dale,
   Esgaroth,  and  the  old  lands  of the  Rohirrim) southward  down the
   vales of Anduin (see $23); that  this particular  form was  centred on
   the  Numenorean  haven of  Pelargir ($10);  and that  it was  for this
   reason  much  influenced  by  the  Numenorean  language  -   but  that
   language was the Elvish Noldorin as it had evolved in Numenor.        
 $14.   The  statement (before  revision) that  the Dunlendings  had for-
   gotten  their  own  tongue and  used only  the Westron  conflicts with
   the  passage  in the  chapter Helm's  Deep, where  the Men  of Dunland
   cried out against the Rohirrim in their ancient speech, interpreted to
   Aragorn and Eomer by  Gamling the  Old (see  VIII.21). In  the revised
   form  of  the  paragraph  the  Dunland  tongue  is  said to  have been
   'wholly  unlike  the  Westron, and  was descended,  as it  seems, from
   some other  Mannish tongue,  not akin  to that  of the  Atani, Fathers
   of Men'; cf.  Appendix F  (RK p.  407): 'Wholly  alien was  the speech
   of  the  Wild  Men  of Druadan  Forest. Alien,  too, or  only remotely
   akin, was  the language  of the  Dunlendings.' In  an earlier  form of
   Faramir's exposition cited under $7 he said that  there was  a 'remote
   kinship'  between  the  Common  Speech  and  'the  tongues   of  Rohan
   and  of  Dale  and  of  Westfold  and   Dunland  and   other  places',
   VIII.159.                                                             
 $16.  'The Orcs had a language  of their  own, devised  for them  by the
   Dark Lord of old': in view of what is said in $7,  'the Eldar  were at
   that time engaged in a ceaseless war with the Dark  Lord of  that Age,
   one greater far than Sauron', this may seem to  refer to  Morgoth; but
   cf. Appendix F (RK  p. 409),  'It is  said that  the Black  Speech was
   devised by Sauron in the Dark Years'.                                 
 $18.  The entire conception of the  relations of  the Elvish  languages in
   Middle-earth at the  end of  the Third  Age as  presented here  was of
   course fundamentally altered  by the  emergence of  the idea  that the
   Exiled  Noldor  of  the  First  Age  adopted Sindarin,  the (Telerian)
   language  of  the  Eldar  who  remained  in  Middle-earth.   Thus  the
   language of the Elves  dwelling west  of the  Misty Mountains  is here
   Noldorin (see under $5 above), while the  Lemberin (i.e.  Sindarin) of
   Middle-earth   is  found   among  the   Elves  of   Northern  Mirkwood
   and  Lorien.  At  the  beginning of  $19 names  such as  Lorien, Caras
   Galadon,  Amroth,  Nimrodel  are  cited   as  examples   of  Lemberin;

                                                              
                                                                        
 whereas  in  Appendix  F  (RK  p.  405,  footnote)  they  are  cited  as
 'probably  of  Silvan  origin',  in contrast  to Sindarin,  the language
 spoken  in  Lorien  at  the end  of the  Third Age.  - With  the present
 passage cf. that in the text F', p. 20, $7.                             
$20.  It has been seen (note 10 above) that it was  in the  text F 1 that
 the  threefold  division  of  the  Hobbits  into  Harfoots,  Stoors, and
 Fallohides  entered,  whence  it was  removed, before  F 2  was written,
 to stand in the Prologue. In  the actual  narrative of  The Lord  of the
 Rings there is no reference to  Harfoots or  Fallohides, but  the Stoors
 are  named  once,  in the  chapter The  Shadow of  the Past,  where Gan-
 dalf  spoke  of  Gollum's  family.  The  introduction  of  the  name was
 made at a very  late stage  in the  evolution of  the chapter,  when the
 passage read (cf. the oldest version of the text, VI.78): 'I  guess they
 were  of  hobbit-kind;  or akin  to the  fathers of  the fathers  of the
 hobbits, though they  loved the  River, and  often swam  in it,  or made
 little boats of reeds'; this was altered to the final text (FR p. 62) by
 omitting  the  word  'or'  in 'or  akin', and  by changing  'hobbits' to
 'Stoors' and 'though they loved' to 'for they loved'.                   
$22.  My  father  was  writing of  Hobbits as  if they  were still  to be
 found,  as  he  did  in the  published Prologue  ('Hobbits are  an unob-
 trusive  but  very  ancient  people,  more  numerous formerly  than they
 are today',  &c., though  altering present  tense to  past tense  in one
 passage  in  the  Second  Edition,  p.  17,  note  13).  Here  indeed he
 attributed at  least to  some of  them a  lively interest  in linguistic
 history.                                                                
$$22-3.  In  the  footnotes  to  these  paragraphs  the   more  complex
 history of  the Stoors  can be  seen evolving.  In the  footnote in  F 1
 (note  11  above)  corresponding  to  that  to  $23  in F  2, concerning
 Gandalf's  opinion about  Gollum's origin,  it is  said that  his people
 'must  have  been  a late-lingering  group of  Stoors in  the neighbour-
 hood  of the  Gladden' (i.e.  after the  Stoors as  a whole  had crossed
 the  Misty  Mountains into  Eriador). In  the footnote  in F  2 (belong-
 ing  with  the  writing of  the manuscript)  my father  suggested rather
 that they were 'a  family or  small clan'  of Stoors  who had  gone back
 east  over  the Mountains,  a return  to Wilderland  that (he  said) was
 evidenced  in  Hobbit  legends,  on account  of the  hard life  and hard
 lands that they found in eastern Eriador.                               
   Later,  there  entered  the  story  that many  Stoors remained  in the
 lands  between  Tharbad  and  the  borders  of  Dunland:  this   was  an
 addition  to  the  Prologue  (FR  p. 12)  made when  the text  was close
 to its final form (cf.  p. 11),  and no  doubt the  footnote to  $22 was
 added at the same time.                                                 
   In  Appendix  A  (RK  p.  321)  the  return to  Wilderland by  some of
 the  Stoors  is  directly  associated  with  the  invasion  of  Arnor by
 Angmar in Third Age 1409:                                               
   It  was  at this  time that  the Stoors  that had  dwelt in  the Angle

  (between  Hoarwell  and   Loudwater)  fled   west  and   south,  because
  of  the  wars,  and  the  dread  of  Angmar,  and  because the  land and
  clime  of  Eriador,  especially  in  the   east,  worsened   and  became
  unfriendly.  Some  returned   to  Wilderland,   and  dwelt   beside  the
  Gladden, becoming a riverside people of fishers.                        
    These  Stoors  of  the  Angle  who  returned  to  Wilderland  are dis-
  tinguished  from  those  who   dwelt  further   south  and   acquired  a
  speech similar to  that of  the people  of Dunland:  see the  section Of
  Hobbits in Appendix F, RK p. 408 and footnote.                          
$25.   The  name  Brandywine  emerged  very  early in  the writing  of The
  Lord  of the  Rings (VI.29-30  and note  5), but  the Elvish  name first
  appeared in the  narrative in  work on  the chapter  Flight to  the Ford
  (VII.61; FR p. 222),  where Glorfindel,  in a  rejected draft,  spoke of
  'the  Branduin  (which  you  have  turned  into  Brandywine)'  (the word
  'have'  was  erroneously  omitted  in  the  text printed).  In F  1, and
  again at first in F 2, my father repeated this: 'older names,  of Elvish
  or forgotten Mannish origin, they often translated  ... or  twisted into
  a  familiar  shape  (as  Elvish  Baranduin  "brown  river"   to  Brandy-
  wine).' But  in revision  to F  2 he  rejected this  explanation, saying
  that  the  Elvish  name  of  the  river was  in fact  Malevarn ('golden-
  brown'),  transformed  in  the  Hobbits'  speech  to  Malvern,  but that
  this was then replaced by  Brandywine -  this being  exceptional, since
  it  bore  no relation  in form  to the  Elvish name.  This idea  he also
  rejected,  and  in  the  final  form of  $25 went  back to  the original
  explanation  of  Brandywine,  that  it   was  a   characteristic  Hobbit
  alteration of Elvish Baranduin.                                         
      In the passage of Flight to the Ford referred to  above the  name of
  the  river  appears  in the  manuscript as  Branduin, changed  to Baran-
  duin, and then to Malevarn (VII.66, note 36). It is surprising  at first
  sight to see that  Malevarn survived  into the  final typescript  of the
  chapter,  that  sent to  the printer,  where my  father corrected  it to
  Baranduin;  but  the  explanation  is  evidently  that  this  typescript
  had  been  made a  long time  before. Glorfindel's  use of  Baranduin or
  Malevarn  is  in  fact the  only occurrence  of the  Elvish name  of the
  river in the narrative of The Lord of the Rings.                        
$27.  In  Appendix  D  (RK  p.  389) Yellowskin  is called  'the Yearbook
  of Tuckborough'.                                                        
$37.  It is often impossible to be sure  of my  father's intention  in the
  usage  of  'thou,  thee'  and  'you'  forms  of  address:  when  writing
  rapidly  he  was  very  inconsistent,  and  in more  careful manuscripts
  he often  wavered in  his decision  on this  insoluble question  (if the
  distinction is to be represented at all). In the case of the chapter The
  Steward  and  the  King,  referred  to here,  the first  manuscript (see
  IX.54) is  a very  rapidly written  draft from  which no  conclusion can
  be  drawn;  while  in  the  second  manuscript,  a  good clear  text, he
  decided  while in  the course  of writing  the dialogue  between Faramir

 and  Eowyn  against  showing  the  distinction   at  all.   The  'sudden
 change' to which he referred  here (but  in F  1 he  wrote only  of 'the
 intrusion of thou, thee into the dialogue')  is possibly  to be  seen in
 their  first  meeting  in  the garden  of the  Houses of  Healing, where
 Faramir  says  (RK  p.  238):  'Then,  Eowyn  of  Rohan,  I  say  to you
 that you are beautiful', but at  the end  of his  speech changes  to the
 'familiar' form, 'But thou and  I have  both passed  under the  wings of
 the Shadow'  (whereas Eowyn continues  to use  'you'). In  the follow-
 ing  meetings,  in  this text,  Faramir uses  the 'familiar'  forms, but
 Eowyn  does  not  do  so  until  the  last  ('Dost  thou not  know?', RK
 p. 242); and soon  after this  point my  father went  back over  what he
 had written and changed every 'thou' and 'thee' to  'you'. In  the third
 manuscript (preceding the  final typescript)  there is  no trace  of the
 'familiar' form.                                                        
    I record these details because they are significant of the (relative)
 date  of  the  present  text, showing  very clearly  that when  he wrote
 this  earliest  form  of what  would become  Appendix F  he had  not yet
 completed the second manuscript of this chapter.                        
    'The  thee  used  by  Sam  Gamgee  to Rose  at the  end of  the book'
 refers to the end of the Epilogue (IX.118):  'I did  not think  I should
 ever  see  thee  again'. At  this stage  only the  first version  of the
 Epilogue  was  in  being  (though  these  words  are  used in  both ver-
 sions): see IX.129, 132.                                                
    On  a  loose  page  associated with  my father's  later work  on this
 Appendix my father wrote very rapidly:                                  
    Where thou, thee, thy  appears it  is used  mainly to  mark a  use of
 the  familiar  form  where  that  was  not usual.  For instance  its use
 by  Denethor  in  his  last  madness  to  Gandalf,  and  by  the Messen-
 ger  of  Sauron,  was  in  both  cases  intended  to   be  contemptuous.
 But  elsewhere  it  is  occasionally  used  to  indicate   a  deliberate
 change to a form of affection or endearment.                            
   The  passages  referred  to  are  RK  pp.  128-30   and  p.   165;  in
 Denethor's  speeches  to  Gandalf  there are  some occurrences  of 'you'
 that were not corrected.                                                
$39.  For  Westron  Carbandur  (F   1  at   first  Karbandul,   note  18)
 Appendix F has Kamingul (RK p. 412).                                    
$41.   With  the  Noldorin  word  lhann,  said here  to be  the equivalent
 'of Westron suza as used in Gondor for the divisions  of the  realm, cf.
 the   Etymologies,  V.367,   stem LAD,   where  Noldorin   lhand,  lhann
 'wide'  is  cited,  and also  the region  Lhothland, Lhothlann,  east of
 Dorthonion (see XI.60, 128).                                            
$42.   The   Westron   name   Rasputa   'Hornblower'  is   only  recorded
 here (F 1 Rhasputal, note 21 above). Since  it is  said ($13)  that the
 Common   Speech   was  'much   enriched  with   words  drawn   from  the
 language  of  the  Dunedain,  which  was  ...  a  form  of   the  Elvish
 Noldorin',  it  is  perhaps  worth  noting  that  the  stem  RAS  in the

 Etymologies  (V.383)  yields  Quenya  rasse,  Noldorin  rhaes  'horn',
 with  citation  of  Caradras. -  In Appendix  F (RK  p. 413)  the name
 Tuk is said to be an old name 'of forgotten meaning'.                 
$43. For the name Porro, not found in The  Lord of  the Rings,  see pp.
 87-8, 92.                                                             
$45. The 'classical' titles of the heads of the Brandybuck family given
 in the second footnote to  this paragraph  do not  appear in  The Lord
 of the Rings, but see pp. 102 - 3. Cf. Appendix F (RK p.  413): 'Names
 of classical origin have rarely been used; for the nearest equivalents
 to Latin and Greek in Shire-lore  were the  Elvish tongues,  and these
 the  Hobbits  seldom used  in nomenclature.  Few of  them at  any time
 knew the "languages of the kings", as they called them.'              
$46.  Apart  from  the  opening  sentence  nothing  of  this  paragraph
 remained  in  Appendix  F,  and  Lobelia Sackville-Baggins'  true name
 Hamanullas was lost.                                                  
$47.  Much  information  is  given  here  on  Hobbit  family-names that
 was  subsequently  lost,  notably  the  true  Westron name  of Baggins
 and  its   supposed  etymology;   other  names   (Brandybuck,  Cotton,
 Gamgee), discussed in the notes  that conclude  Appendix F,  differ in
 details of the forms. On  the name  Gamgee see  the references  in the
 index to Letters, and especially the letter to Naomi Mitchison  of 25
 April 1954 (no.144, near the end),  which is  closely related  to what
 is said here and in Appendix F.                                       
$48.  In the note at the end of Appendix F it is said that the  word for
 'Hobbit'  in use  in the  Shire was kuduk, and  that Theoden  used the
 form  kud-dukan  'hole-dweller'  when  he  met  Merry  and  Pippin  at
 Isengard,  which  in  the  narrative  (TT p.  163) is  'translated' by
 Holbytla(n),  though  no  rendering  of  this  given.  In  the present
 passage, both in F 1  (see note  31) and  in F  2, the  meaning 'hole-
 dweller' is  given for  holbytla and  for the  real Westron  and Rohan
 words (cf. also p. 10). In view of the etymology of bytla (bylta), for
 which  see  VII.424,  VIII.44,  one  would expect  'hole-builder', but
 this  only  occurs  in  fact  at an  earlier point  in Appendix  F (RK
 p. 408):  the word  hobbit seems  to be  'a worn-down  form of  a word
 preserved more fully in Rohan: holbytla "hole-builder" '  (see further
 p. 83, note 7).                                                       
   My father's remarks in the footnote to this  paragraph on  his asso-
 ciation of the words 'hobbit' and 'rabbit' are notable.               
$49.  In  Appendix  F  (RK p.  414) Meriadoc's  true name  was Kalimac,
 shortened Kali; but  nothing is  said of  the true  names of  Frodo or
 Peregrin.                                                             
$50. In the chapter The Road  to Isengard  the originator  of pipe-weed
 in  the  Shire  was  first  named  Elias  Tobiasson,  and  then Tobias
 Smygrave,  before  Tobias   Hornblower  emerged   (VIII.36-7).  Tobias
 remained to a late stage in the development of  the chapter  before he
 was renamed Tobold, though it is seen  from the  present text  that my

  father  for  a  time  retained  Tobias  while  asserting  that   the  name
  (pronounced  Tobias)  was  not   in  fact   a  'translation'   of  Hebraic
  origin at all.                                                           
    Bildad (Bolger)  is not  found in  The Lord  of the  Rings (but  see pp.
  94,  96);  while  the  abbreviated  names  Tom  and  Mat  are  differently
  explained in Appendix F.                                                 
$51.  As   with   Tobias   Hornblower,   my   father   retained   Barnabas
  Butterbur,  despite  what  he  had written  in $50,  but accounted  for it
  on  the  grounds  that  Butterbur  was  not a  Hobbit but  a Man  of Bree.
  In  Appendix  F  all  discussion  of  the  name  of  the  landlord  of The
  Prancing  Pony  was  lost.  The  change  of   Barnabas  to   Barliman  was
  made in very late revisions  to the  text of  The Lord  of the  Rings (cf.
  IX.78).                                                                  
$58.  These  remarks  on  the  history   of  the   Hobbits'  name   of  the
  Baranduin (see also $$25,  47) were  further altered  in the  final note
  at the end of Appendix F.                                                
                                                                          
 This is the most detailed account that  my father  wrote of  his elaborate
 and distinctive fiction of translation, of transposition and substitution.
 One  may  wonder  when  or by  what stages  it emerged;  but I  think that
 this is probably unknowable: the evidences  are very  slight, and  in such
 matters he left  none of  those discussions,  records of  internal debate,
 that  sometimes  greatly  assisted  in the  understanding of  the develop-
 ment of  the narrative.  It seems  to me  in any  case most  probable that
 the idea evolved gradually, as the history, linguistic and other, was con-
 solidated and became increasingly coherent.                               
  Central  to  the  'fiction  of  authenticity'  is  of  course  the Common
 Speech. I concluded that this was  first named  in the  Lord of  the Rings
 papers  in  the  chapter  Lothlorien  (dating  from  the beginning  of the
 1940s):  see  VII.223,  239.  In the  second of  these passages  my father
 wrote that the speech of the  wood-elves of  Lorien was  'not that  of the
 western  elves  which  was  in  those  days  used   as  a   common  speech
 among many folk'. In  a note  of the  same period  (VII.277) he  said that
 'Since  Aragorn  is  a  man  and  the  common  speech (especially  of mor-
 tals) is represented by English, then he  must not  have an  Elvish name';
 and in another note (VII.424), one of a collection of  jottings on  a page
 that bears  the date  9 February  1942 (at  which time  he was  working on
 the opening chapters of what became The Two Towers) he wrote:            
  Language of Shire = modern English                                       
  Language of Dale = Norse (used by Dwarves of that region)                
  Language of Rohan = Old English                                          
  'Modern English'  is lingua  franca spoken  by all  people (except  a few
 secluded folk like Lorien) - but little and ill by orcs.                  
 In  this, 'Language  of Dale  = Norse  (used by  Dwarves of  that region)'
 shows plainly  that a  major obstacle,  perhaps the  chief obstacle,  to a
 coherent  'authentication'  had  by  this  time  been  resolved.  When  my

                                                           
                                                                        
 father  wrote  The  Hobbit  he  had  of  course  no  notion that  the Old
 Norse  names  of  the  Dwarves  required  any  explanation,   within  the
 terms of the story: those were their names,  and that  was all  there was
 to it. As he said in a letter of December 1937, cited in the  Foreword to
 The Return of the  Shadow (p.  7): 'I  don't much  approve of  The Hobbit
 myself,  preferring  my  own mythology  (which is  just touched  on) with
 its consistent nomenclature ... and organized history, to this  rabble of
 Eddaic-named  dwarves  out  of  Voluspa  ...'  But  now  this inescapable
 Norse  element  had  to  be  accounted  for;  and  from  that  'rabble of
 Eddaic-named  dwarves  out  of  Voluspa   the  conception   emerged  that
 the  Dwarves  had  'outer  names' derived  from the  tongues of  Men with
 whom  they  had  dealings, concealing  their true  names which  they kept
 altogether  secret.  And  this  was  very  evidently  an  important  com-
 ponent  in  the  theory  of  the  transposition  of  languages:  for  the
 Dwarves  had  Norse  names  because  they  lived   among  Men   who  were
 represented in The Lord of the  Rings as  speaking Norse.  It may  not be
 too far-fetched,  I think,  to suppose  that (together  with the  idea of
 the  Common  Speech)  those  Dwarf-names  in  The  Hobbit   provided  the
 starting-point  for  the  whole  structure  of  the Mannish  languages in
 Middle-earth, as expounded in the present text.                         
   My father  asserted ($53)  that he  had represented  the tongue  of the
 Rohirrim as Old English because their real language  stood in  a relation
 to  the  Common  Speech  somewhat  analogous  to  that  of   Old  English
 and Modern English. This  is perhaps  difficult to  accept: one  may feel
 that  the  impulse  that  produced  the  Riders of  Rohan and  the Golden
 Hall  was  more  profound,  and  that  my  father's  statement  should be
 viewed as an aspect of the  fiction of  authenticity -,  for the  idea of
 'translation' had a further fictional dimension in its presentation  as a
 conception  established  from  the  outset  -  which in  the case  of the
 Dwarf-names (and the Hobbit-names) it was most assuredly not.           
   On  the other  hand, he  knew very  soon that  the Rohirrim  were orig-
 inally Men of the North: in  a note  made at  the time  when his  work on
 the  chapter  The  Riders  of  Rohan  was  scarcely  begun  (VII.390)  he
 wrote:                                                                  
   Rohiroth  are  relations  of  Woodmen  and  Beornings,  old Men  of the
 North.  But  they  speak  Gnomish   -  tongue   of  Numenor   and  Ondor,
 as well as [?common] tongue.                                            
 Taken  with  'Language  of  Rohan  =  Old  English'  among  the equations
 in the note cited above, from about the same time, it  may be  better not
 to force the distinction,  but to  say rather  that the  emergent 'trans-
 positional' idea  (Modern English  - Old  English -  Old Norse)  may well
 have played a part in my father's vision of Rohan.                      
                                                                        
   In the present text it can be seen that as he penetrated more deeply
 into the logic of the theory he came up against complexities that were
 difficult to manage. For example, it seems  clear that  when he  wrote in

                            
                                                                         
$25. that  the  Hobbits  had 'twisted  into a  familiar shape'  the Elvish
 name  Baranduin,  making  out  of it  Brandywine, he  had not  taken into
 account  the  fact  that  the  Hobbits  would  have had  no such  word as
 'Brandywine'  (whether or  not they  knew of  brandy, $58).  This realis-
 ation led  to his  avowal in  $56: 'This  translation had  a disadvantage
 which I did not foresee. The "linguistic  notes" on  the origin  of pecu-
 liar Hobbit words had also to be "translated" ';  and in  $58 he  is seen
 ingeniously introducing the necessary  'third term'  into the  history of
 Brandywine:  the  'picturesque  perversion'  of the  river-name Baranduin
 by  the  Hobbits  was  to  their  real  word  Branduhim,  which  meant in
 their  Westron 'foaming  beer'. He  could still  say that  Brandywine was
 'a  very  possible  "corruption"  of Baranduin',,because  Baranduin being
 an  Elvish   name  was   not  translated;   thus  Brandywine   must  both
 'imitate'  the  Hobbit  word  Branduhim, and  at the  same time  stand in
 Modern English as a corruption of Baranduin.                             
                                                                         
    It will be seen shortly that in the text of this Appendix next follow-
 ing  my  father  moved  sharply  away from  F 2,  and removed  almost all
 exemplification of true Westron names. It may  be that  at that  stage he
 had  come to  think that  the subtleties  demanded by  so close  an exam-
 ination of  the 'theory'  were unsuitable  to the  purpose; on  the other
 hand  it  seems  possible  that  mere considerations  of length  were the
 cause.                                                                   
                                                                         
                       Note on an unpublished letter.                     
                                                                         
 A long letter of my father's was sent for sale at auction  on 4  May 1995
 at Sotheby's in London. This  letter he  wrote on  3 August  1943, during
 the long  pause in  the writing  of The  Lord of  the Rings  (between the
 end  of  Book  Three and  the beginning  of Book  Four) that  lasted from
 about the end  of 1942  to the  beginning of  April 1944  (VIII.77-8). It
 was  addressed to  two girls  named Leila  Keene and  Pat Kirke,  and was
 largely  concerned  to  answer  their  questions about  the runes  in The
 Hobbit;  but  in  the  present  connection  it  contains  an  interesting
 passage  on  the  Common  Speech.  My  father  made  some  brief  remarks
 on the problem  of the  representation of  the languages  actually spoken
 in those days, and continued:                                            
        In some ways it was not too difficult. In Bilbo's time there was a
 language very widely used all  over the  West (the  Western parts  of the
 Great  Lands of  those days).  It was  a sort  of lingua-franca,  made up
 of all sorts of languages, but the  Elvish language  (of the  North West)
 for  the  most  part.  It  was  called  the  Western  language  or Common
 Speech;  and  in  Bilbo's  time  had  already  passed  eastward  over the
 Misty   Mountains   and   reached   Lake  Town,   and  Beorn,   and  even
 Smaug (dragons were ready linguists in all ages)....                     
        If hobbits ever had any special  language of  their own,  they had
 given   it   up.   They   spoke   the  Common   Speech  only   and  every

  day (unless they learned other languages, which was very seldom).       
  The most notable point in this is the description of the  composition of
  the  Common  Speech:  'a  sort of  lingua-franca, made  up of  all sorts
  of languages, but the Elvish language (of the North  West) for  the most
  part.' Allowance should perhaps  be made  for the  nature of  the letter
  (my father was not, obviously, writing a precise statement); but it cer-
  tainly seems that as late as 1943, when half  of The  Lord of  the Rings
  had been  written, he  had as  yet no  conception of  the origin  of the
  Common  Speech  in  a  form  of   Mannish  language   of  the   west  of
  Middle-earth,  and that  Faramir's account  of the  matter (see  p. 63),
  written  nine months  later, had  not emerged.  It may  be that  what he
  said in this letter ('the Elvish language  (of the  North West)  for the
  most part') is to be associated with what he had written in  the chapter
  Lothlorien, where he said (VII.239)  that the  language of  'the western
  elves' 'was in  those days  used as  a common  speech among  many folk.'
  He also referred in this letter to the  adoption by  the Dwarves  of the
  Lonely  Mountain  of  the language  of the  Men of  Dale, in  which they
  gave  themselves names,  keeping their  true names  in their  own tongue
  entirely secret (see p. 71).                                            
                                                                         
                                     *                                    
                                                                         
  For the notes to this concluding section of the chapter see pp. 82 ff.
    The third text ('F 3') was a typescript with  the title  The Languages
  of the Third Age, above  which my  father wrote  'Appendix I'.  No other
  of  the  many  texts  that  followed  has  any mention  of its  being an
  'Appendix'.                                                             
    This text F 3 represents  in some  degree a  new departure.  The first
  part of the work (that  preceding the  discussion of  'Translation') was
  reduced to not much more than a third of its  length in  F 2,  and while
  my father had F 2 in front of him he turned also  to the  curious 'Fore-
  word' F* that I have given on pp. 19 ff., and  made a  good deal  of use
  of it, as has been mentioned already.                                   
    At  this stage  he had  not changed  his view  that the  Exiled Noldor
  retained  their  own  language  in Beleriand  (see p.  62, $5),  and the
  'Telerian' speech (which  in F  2 was  originally called  'Lemberin') is
  confined  to  a  few  names. Thus  the conception  in F  2, $18,  was in
  essentials  preserved,  although  there  entered  here the  more complex
  account of the Elvish peoples of Mirkwood and Lorien:                   
                                                                         
    There  were  also  Elves  of  other  kind.  The East-elves  that being
  content   with   Middle-earth   remained   there,   and    remain   even
  now;  and  the  Teleri,  kinsfolk  of  the  High  Elves  who  never went
  westward,  but  lingered  on  the  shores  of  Middle-earth   until  the
  return  of  the  Noldor.(1) In the  Third  Age  few  of the  Teleri were
  left,  and  they  for  the  most  part  dwelt as  lords among  the East-
  elves  in  woodland  realms   far  from   the  Sea,   which  nonetheless

                                       
                                                                        
 they  longed  for  in  their  hearts. Of  this kind  were the  Elves of
 Mirkwood,   and  of   Lorien;  but   Galadriel  was   a  lady   of  the
 Noldor.  In  this  book  there  are  several  names of  Telerian form,(2)
 but little else appears of their language.                              
                                                                        
  The  extremely  puzzling  feature  of  the  original version,  that the
 language   of   the  Numenoreans   was  Noldorin   (for  the   Edain  in
 Beleriand  learned that  tongue and  abandoned their  own) was  at first
 retained in F  3; and  thus the  account of  the Common  Speech remained
 unchanged,  becoming  if  anything  more  explicit  (cf.  F  2,  $$9-10,
 13):                                                                    
                                                                        
  The   language   of   the   Dunedain   in   Numenor   was    thus   the
 Elvish,  or  Gnomish  speech   ...  After   the  Downfall   of  Numenor,
 which   was   brought   about  by   Sauron,  and   the  ending   of  the
 Second  Age,  Elendil  and  the  survivors  of  Westernesse   fled  back
 eastward  to  Middle-earth.  On  the  western  shores  in  the  days  of
 their   power   the   Numenoreans   had   maintained   many   forts  and
 havens  for the  help of  their ships  in their  great voyages;  and the
 chief  of  these  had  been  at  Pelargir  at the  mouths of  the Anduin
 in  the  land  that  was  after  called  Gondor.  There the  language of
 the  Edain  that  had  not  passed  over  Sea  was spoken,  and thence
 it  spread  along  the  coastlands,  as  a  common  speech  of  all  who
 had   dealings   with   Westernesse   and    opposed   the    power   of
 Sauron.  Now  the  people  of  Elendil  were  not   many,  for   only  a
 few  great  ships  had  escaped the  Downfall. There  were, it  is true,
 many  dwellers  upon   the  west-shores   who  came   in  part   of  the
 blood   of    Westernesse,   being    descended   from    mariners   and
 wardens  of  forts  set  there  in  the  Dark  Years;  yet all  told the
 Dunedain  were  only  a  small  people  in  the  midst  of  lesser  Men.
 They  used  therefore  this   Common  Speech   in  all   their  dealings
 with  other  folk  and  in  the  government  of   the  wide   realms  of
 which  they  became  the  rulers,   and  it   was  enriched   with  many
 words   drawn   from   the  tongues   of  the   Elves  and   the  Numen-
 orean  lords.  Thus   it  was   that  the   Common  Speech   spread  far
 and  wide  in  the  days  of  the  Kings,  even  among   their  enemies,
 and   it  became   used  more   and  more   by  the   Numenoreans  them-
 selves;  so  that  at the  time of  this history  the Elvish  speech was
 spoken  by  only  a  [added:  small]  part  of   the  people   of  Minas
 Tirith, the city  of Gondor,  and outside  that city  only by  the lords
 and princes of fiefs.                                                   
                                                                        
 The  account  of  the  origin  and  spread  of the  Common Speech  as it
 appears  in Appendix  F (RK  p. 407)  had, in  point of  actual wording,
 been quite largely attained - and yet still with the fundamental differ-

                                                              
                                                                         
 ence,  that  the  Numenoreans  themselves  spoke  an  Elvish  tongue,  and
 Adunaic does not exist.                                                  
   Probably while  this text  was still  in the  making, my  father retyped
 a  portion  of  it,  and  it  was only  now that  Adunaic entered,  or re-
 entered,  the  linguistic  history.  Making  similar  changes at  the same
 time to the previous text F 2 (see p. 54, note  4), he  wrote now  that it
 was  the lords  of the  Edain who  learned the  Noldorin tongue,  and that
 'in  Numenor  two  speeches  were  used:  the  Numenorean   (or  Adunaic);
 and  the  Elvish  or Gnomish  tongue of  the Noldor,  which all  the lords
 of that people knew and spoke'. In the passage just  given he  altered the
 words that I italicised  to: 'There  [at Pelargir]  the Adunaic,  the Man-
 nish language of the Edain,  was spoken,  and thence  it spread  along the
 coastlands...',  the  remainder of  the passage  being left  unchanged. No
 further light is cast on this matter in the texts of 'Appendix F',  and it
 remains to me inexplicable.                                              
   There is not  a great  deal more  that need  be said  about the  part of
 the text  F 3  that deals  with the  languages. For  the language  of Orcs
 and  Trolls  my  father  followed  F 2,  $$16 -  17, but  for that  of the
 Dwarves  he  turned  to  F*  (p. 21,  $10), and  repeated closely  what he
 had said there. But at  that point,  still following  this text  ($11), he
 turned now to the subject  of alphabets  ('Of the  alphabets of  the Third
 Age something also  must be  said, since  in this  history there  are both
 inscriptions and old writings ...'), and repeated what he  had said  in F*
 as far as 'the Runes, or cirth, were devised by the  Elves of  the woods'.
 Here he left the  earlier text  and continued  as follows  (the forerunner
 of the passage in Appendix E, RK pp. 395, 397):                          
                                                                         
 ...  the  Runes,  or  Cirth  as they  were called,  were first  devised by
 the  Danians  (far  kin  of  the  Noldor)  in  the  woods   of  Beleriand,
 and  were  in   the  beginning   used  mainly   for  incising   names  and
 brief   memorials   upon  wood,   stone,  or   metal.  From   that  begin-
 ning  they  derive  their  peculiar  character,  closely  similar  in many
 of  their  signs  to  the  Runes  of  the  North  in  our  own  times. But
 their  detail,  arrangement,  and  uses  were  different,  and  there  is,
 it   seems,  no   connexion  of   descent  between   the  Runes   and  the
 Cirth.  Many  things  were  forgotten   and  found   again  in   the  ages
 of Middle-earth, and so it will be, doubtless, hereafter.                
   The   Cirth   in   their  older   and  simpler   form  spread   far  and
 wide,  even  into  the  East,  and  they  became   known  to   many  races
 of   Men,   and   developed  many   varieties  and   uses.  One   form  of
 the   old   Cirth   was   used  among   Men  of   whom  we   have  already
 spoken,   the   Rohirrim  and   their  more   northerly  kindred   in  the
 vale  of   Anduin  and   in  Dale.   But  the   richest  and   most  well-
 ordered   alphabet   of  Cirth   was  called   the  Alphabet   of  Dairon,
 since  in  Elvish  tradition  it  was  said  to  have  been  arranged  and

 enlarged  from  the  older  Cirth  by  Dairon,  the  minstrel   of  King
 Thingol  in  Doriath.  This'  was  preserved  in   use  in   Hollin  and
 Moria,  and  there  mostly  by  the  Dwarves.   For  after   the  coming
 of  the  Noldor  the  Feanorian  script  replaced  the  Cirth  among the
 Elves and the Edain.                                                    
   In  this  book  we  meet  only  the  Short  Cirth  of  Dale   and  the
 Mark;  and  the  Long  Cirth  of  Moria,  as  they  were called  at this
 time;  for  though  the  Dwarves, as  with their  speech, used  in their
 dealings  with   other  folk   such  scripts   as  were   current  among
 them,  among  themselves  and  in  their  secret  memorials  they  still
 used  the  ancient  Alphabet  of Dairon.  A table  is given  setting out
 the  Short  Cirth  of  Dale  and  the  Mark;  and  the  Long   Cirth  of
 Moria   in   the   form   and   arrangement   applied   to   the  Common
 Speech.  [The  following  was  subsequently  struck   out:  A   list  is
 also  given  of  all  the  strange words  and the  names of  persons and
 places  that  appear  in  the  tale,  in  which  it  is shown  from what
 language  they   are  derived,   and  what   is  their   meaning  (where
 that  is  known);]  and  also  the  English  Runes  in  the  forms  that
 were used for the translation of the Cirth in The Hobbit.               
                                                                        
 The first devising of the Runes by 'the Danians (far kin of  the Noldor)
 in the woods of Beleriand' (where F* has  'the Elves  of the  woods') is
 found also in  the two  texts given  in VII.453-5,  where the  origin is
 attributed to 'the  Danian elves  of Ossiriand  (who were  ultimately of
 Noldorin  race)'.  The  old  view  that  the  Danas or  Danians (Nandor)
 came from  the host  of the  Noldor on  the Great  March was  changed in
 the  course  of  the  revision  of  the  Quenta Silmarillion,  when they
 became Teleri from the host of Olwe (X.169-70;  cf. the  use of  the old
 term Lembi in F 2, p. 61, $3).                                          
                                                                        
   The final  section of  F 3,  On Translation,  presents a  very greatly
 reduced form of that in the original version, and loses virtually all of
 the exemplification and discussion of  the 'true'  names from  which the
 'translation'  was  made:  the  sole  Westron  names that  survived were
 Carbandur  (Rivendell)  and Phuru-nargian  (Moria).  The  new  text  had
 indeed  the  structure and  much of  the actual  wording of  Appendix F,
 but it was a good deal briefer; and the published text represents  a re-
 expansion, in which some of the old material had been reinstated,  if in
 altered form.(3) But since no new material  was introduced in F 3, there
 is no need to give more account of this part of it.                     
   The  text  ends  with  a  return to  the conclusion  of F*,  pp. 23-4,
 $$12-13:                                                                
                                                                        
   In conclusion I will add a note on two important modern               
 words used in translation. The name Gnomes is sometimes used            
 for the Noldor, and Gnomish for Noldorin. This has been done,           

        
                                                                           
 because   whatever   Paracelsus   may   have   thought   (if    indeed   he
 invented   the   name),   to   some   Gnome   will   still   suggest  Know-
 ledge.  Now   the  High-elven   name  of   this  folk,   Noldor,  signifies
 Those  who   Know;  for   of  the   Three  Kindreds   of  the   Elves  from
 their   beginning   the   Noldor   were   ever   distinguished    both   by
 their  knowledge  of  things  that  are   and  were   in  this   world  and
 by  their  desire  to  know  more.  Yet  they  were  not  in  any  way like
 to   the   gnomes   of  learned   theory,  or   of  literary   and  popular
 fancy.   They  belonged   to  a   race  high   and  beautiful,   the  Elder
 Children  of  the  world,  who  now  are  gone.   Tall  they   were,  fair-
 skinned  and  grey-eyed,  though  their  locks  were  dark,  save   in  the
 golden   house   of   Finrod;   and   their   voices  knew   more  melodies
 than   any  mortal   speech  that   now  is   heard.  Valiant   they  were,
 but  their  history  was  grievous;  and  though  it  was  in  far-off days
 woven  a  little with  the fates  of the  Fathers, their  fate is  not that
 of   Men.   Their   dominion   passed   long  ago,   and  they   dwell  now
 beyond the circles of the world, and do not return.                        
                                                                           
 The  naming  of  'the  golden house  of Finrod'  (later Finarfin)  seems to
 have been the first mention  of this  character that  marked out  the third
 son of Finwe, and his children.                                            
  In a later (in fact the penultimate)  text of  the section  On Translation
 my father still  retained this  passage, even  though by  that time  he had
 decided  against  using  Gnome, Gnomish  at all  in The  Lord of  the Rings
 (as  being  'too misleading'),  and introduced  it with  the words  'I have
 sometimes  (not  in  this  book)  used  Gnomes  for  Noldor,   and  Gnomish
 for  Noldorin'.  Perhaps  because  the  passage now  seemed otiose,  in the
 final text he still retained a part of it but changed its  application: the
 word  to  be  justified  was  now  Elves,  used  to  translate  Quendi  and
 Eldar. In my discussion  of this  in 1.43-4  I pointed  out that  the words
 'They  were  tall,  fair  of skin  and grey-eyed,  though their  locks were
 dark,  save  in  the  golden  house of  Finrod [Finarfin]'  were originally
 written of the Noldor only, and not of all the Eldar,  and I  objected that
 'the  Vanyar  had  golden  hair,  and  it  was  from   Finarfin's  Vanyarin
 mother  Indis  that  he, and  Finrod Felagund  and Galadriel  his children,
 had their golden hair', finding in the final use of this passage an 'extra-
 ordinary  perversion  of  meaning'.  But  my  father  carefully  remodelled
 the passage in order  to apply  it to  the Eldar  as a  whole, and  it does
 indeed  seem 'extraordinary'  that he  should have  failed to  observe this
 point.  It seems  possible that  when he  re-used the  passage in  this way
 the conception of the golden hair of the Vanyar had not yet arisen.(4)      
  Despite  the  great  contraction  in  F  3  of  the  original  version, my
 father  repeated  the  long  last  paragraph   of  F*   concerning  dwarves
 and  dwarrows  (pp.  23 -  4, $13)  almost in  its entirety,  omitting only
 his  remarks  on  his  liking  for irregular  plurals, and  introducing the

 Westron  name  Phurunargian  of  Moria.  With the  words 'and  has been
 so since their birth in the deeps of time' this text ends.             
                                                                       
   The next typescript, F 4, still called The Languages of the Third Age
 but changed to The  Languages and  Peoples of  the Third  Age, followed
 the major revision of 1951. My father's  long experimentation  with the
 structure and expression of this Appendix now issued in his  most lucid
 account  of  the  Elvish  languages,  in  which  the  terms  Sindar and
 Sindarin at last appeared, and the acquisition of the Grey-elven tongue
 by the exiled Noldor.                                                  
                                                                       
 Besides   this   Common   Speech  there   were,  however,   many  other
 tongues  still  spoken  in the  West-lands. Noblest  of these  were the
 languages  of  the  Western  Elves  (Eldar)  of  which  two   are  met:
 the High-elven (Quenya) and the Grey-elven (Sindarin).                 
   The   Quenya   was   no  longer   a  daily   speech  but   a  learned
 tongue,  descended  from  ages  past,  though  it  was  still  used  in
 courtesies,  or  for  high  matters  of  lore  and  song,  by  the High
 Elves,   the   Noldor   whose   language   it   had  been   in  Eldamar
 beyond  the  Sea.  But  when  the  Noldor  were  exiled   and  returned
 to   Middle-earth,   seeking   the   Great   Jewels   which   the  Dark
 Power  of  the  North  had  seized,  they  took   for  daily   use  the
 language  of  the  lands  in  which  they  dwelt.  Those  were  in  the
 North-west,  in  the   country  of   Beleriand,  where   Thingol  Grey-
 cloak was king of the Sindar or Grey-elves.                            
   The  Sindar  were  also  in   origin  Eldar,   and  kindred   of  the
 Noldor,  yet  they  had  never  passed  the  Sea,  but had  lingered on
 the   shores   of   Middle-earth.  There   their  speech   had  changed
 much   with   the   changefulness   of   mortal   lands  in   the  long
 Twilight,  and  it  had  become  far  estranged   from  the   high  and
 ancient Quenya. But  it was  a fair  tongue still,  well fitted  to the
 forests, the hills, and the shores where it had taken shape.           
   In the fall  of the  Dark Power  and the  end of  the First  Age most
 of  Beleriand   was  overwhelmed   by  the   waters,  or   burned  with
 fire.  Then  a great  part of  its folk  went west  over Sea,  never to
 return.  Yet  many  still  lingered  in  Middle-earth,  and  the  Grey-
 elven  tongue  in  those  days  spread  eastward;   for  some   of  the
 elven-peoples  of  Beleriand  crossed  the  mountains  of   Lune  (Ered
 Luin),  and  wherever  they  came  they  were  received  as  kings  and
 lords,  because  of  their  greater  wisdom  and  majesty.  These  were
 for  the  most  part  Sindar; for  the Exiles  (such few  as remained),
 highest  and  fairest of  all speaking-peoples,  held still  to Lindon,
 the  remnant  of  Beleriand  west  of  the  Ered Luin.  There Gil-galad
 was their lord, until the Second Age drew to its end.                  

  Nonetheless   to   Rivendell   (Imladris)    there   went    with   Master
  Elrond  many   Noldorin  lords;   and  in   Hollin  (Eregion)   others  of
  the  Noldor  established  a  realm  near  to   the  West-gate   of  Moria,
  and  there  forged  the  Rings  of  Power.  Galadriel,  too,  was  of  the
  royal   house   of   Finrod   of   the   Noldor;   though   Celeborn,  her
  spouse  of  Lorien,  was  a  Grey-elf,  and  most  of  their  people  were
  of a woodland race.                                                       
    For  there  were  other  Elves  of  various  kind  in  the   world;  and
  many   were  Eastern   Elves  that   had  hearkened   to  no   summons  to
  the   Sea,   but   being   content   with  Middle-earth   remained  there,
  and  remained  long  after,  fading  in  fastnesses   of  the   woods  and
  hills,  as  Men  usurped  the  lands.  Of  that  kind  were  the  Elves of
  Greenwood   the  Great;   yet  among   them  also   were  many   lords  of
  Sindarin  race.  Such  were  Thranduil  and  Legolas   his  son.   In  his
  realm   and   in   Lorien   both   the    Sindarin   and    the   woodland
  tongues  were  heard;  but  of   the  latter   nothing  appears   in  this
  book,  and  of  the  many  Elvish  names  of  persons  or  of  places that
  are used most are of Grey-elven form.                                     
  From  the  assured  and  perspicuous  writing alone  one might  think that
  this belonged  to the  time of  the Grey  Annals and  the Annals  of Aman.
  But it was by no means the last in the series of texts that finally issued
  in the published form of Appendix F.                                      
    Of F 4  there are  only a  few other  points to  mention. The  origin of
  the Common Speech is here formulated in these words:                      
  There  [at   Pelargir]  Adunaic   was  spoken,   to  which   language  the
  tongues   of  Men   that  dwelt   round  about   were  closely   akin,  so
  that  already  a  common  speech  had   grown  up   in  that   region  and
  had   spread  thence   along  the   coasts  among   all  those   that  had
  dealings with Westernesse.                                                
  After typing the text my father added this sentence:                      
    Of  the  speech  of  Men  of  the  East  and allies  of Sauron  all that
  appears is mumak, a name of the great elephant of the Harad.              
  A  carbon  copy  of  F  4  is  extant,  and  here my  father in  a similar
  addition  named  beside  mumak  also  Variag  and   Khand  (RK   pp.  121,
  123, 329).                                                                
    Lastly, it was  in F  4 that  there entered  the passage  concerning the
  new race of Trolls that appeared at  the end  of the  Third Age.  Here the
  name  was  first  Horg-hai, but  changed as  my father  typed the  text to
  Olg-hai  (Olog-hai in  RK, p.  410). The  account of  them did  not differ
  from the final form except in the statement of their origin:              
                                                                           
  That Sauron bred them none doubted, though from what stock                
  was  not  known. Some  held that  they were  a cross-breed                

                                        
                                                                           
 between  trolls  and the  larger Orcs;  others that  they were             
 indeed not trolls at all but giant Orcs. Yet there was no kin-             
 ship from the beginning between the stone-trolls and  the Orcs             
 that they  might breed  together;(5) while  the Olg-hai  were in             
 fashion of mind and body quite unlike even the largest of Orc-             
 kind ...                                                                   
                                                                           
  With  this  text  and  its  successors  the  section  On  Translation  was
 typed and  preserved separately,  and it  is not  possible to  relate these
 precisely to the texts of the first section. Of these latter there are four
 after  F  4,  textually  complex  and not  all complete,  and for  the pur-
 poses of this account it is  not necessary  to describe  them.(6) Even  if my
 father had  not said  so very  plainly himself  in his letters, it would be
 very  evident  from  these  drafts  that  the  writing  of an  account that
 would  satisfy  him  was  exceedingly tasking  and frustrating,  largely (I
 believe)  because  he  found  the  constraint  of  space  profoundly uncon-
 genial.  In  March  1955  (Letters  no.160)  he wrote  to Rayner  Unwin: 'I
 now  wish  that  no  appendices  had  been  promised!  For  I  think  their
 appearance  in  truncated  and  compressed   form  will   satisfy  nobody';
 and in the same letter he said:                                            
                                                                           
 In  any   case  the   'background'  matter   is  very   intricate,  useless
 unless  exact,  and  compression  within  the  limits  available  leaves it
 unsatisfactory.  It  needs  great  concentration  (and leisure),  and being
 completely  interlocked  cannot  be  dealt  with  piecemeal. I  have  found
 that out, since I let part of it go.                                       
 Even the final typescript of Appendix F was  not a  fair copy,  but carried
 many emendations.                                                          
                                                                           
  Two  texts  of  the  second  section  of Appendix  F, On  Translation, are
 extant, following the  reduced version  in F  3 (p.  76) and  preceding the
 final typescript. They were evidently  made at  a late  stage in  the evol-
 ution of this appendix; and it was in the  first of  these, which  may con-
 veniently be called 'A', that my father reinstated a  part of  the detailed
 discussion of  names in  the original  version that  had been  discarded in
 F  3.  At  this  stage  he very  largely retained  the name-forms  found in
 F  2,   in  his   discussion  of   Baggins,  Gamgee,   Cotton,  Brandywine,
 Brandybuck;  the  word  hobbit;   the  origin   of  Hobbit-names   such  as
 Tom,  Bill,  Mat;  Meriadoc,  Samwise.  There  are  however  some  differ-
 ences  and  additions,(7) notably  in  his  account  of  the  curious names
 found in Buckland (cf. RK pp. 413-14):                                     
                                                                           
  These I have often left unaltered, for if queer now,  they were           
 queer in their own day. Some I have given a Celtic cast, notably           
 Meriadoc  and  Gorhendad. There  is some  reason for  this. Many           
 of the actual Buckland (and  Bree) names  had something  of that           
 style: such as Marroc, Madoc, Seredic; and  they often  ended in           

 ac,  ic, oc.  Also the  relation of,  say, Welsh  or British  to English
 was  somewhat  similar  to  that  of  the older  language of  the Stoors
 and Bree-men to the Westron.                                            
   Thus   Bree,   Combe,   Archet,   and   Chetwood   are   modelled   on
 British relics  in English  place-names, chosen  by sense:  bree 'hill',
 chet   'wood'.   Similarly   Gorhendad   represents   a   name  Ogforgad
 which   according   to   Stoor-tradition   had   once    meant   'great-
 grandfather   or   ancestor'.   While   Meriadoc   was  chosen   to  fit
 the  fact  that  this  character's  shortened  name  meant  'jolly, gay'
 in   Westron   kili,  though   it  was   actually  an   abbreviation  of
 Kilimanac [> kali, Kalamanac].                                          
                                                                        
 The text A  lacks the  discussion (RK  pp. 414-15)  of the  words mathom
 and smial and  the names  Smeagol and  Deagol, and  ends, at  the bottom
 of a page, with this passage:                                           
                                                                        
   The  yet  more  northerly  tongue  of Dale  is here  seen only  in the
 names  of  the  Dwarves  that  came  from  that  region,  and   so  used
 the  language  of  Men  there,  and  took  their  'outer' names  in that
 language.  The  Dwarvish  names  in   this  book   and  in   The  Hobbit
 are  in   fact  all   genuine  Norse   dwarf-names;  though   the  title
 Oakenshield is a translation.                                           
                                                                        
 Thus the concluding passage in F 3 (see pp. 76 -  7) concerning  the use
 of the word Gnomes and  of the  plural Dwarves  is absent,  but whether
 because my father had rejected it,  or because  the end  of the  A type-
 script is lost, is impossible to say.                                   
                                                                        
   In the second of these texts On Translation, which I will call 'B', he
 retained  all  this  reinstated material  from A,  changing some  of the
 name-forms,(8) and even extended it,  going back  to the  original version
 F 2 again for a  passage exemplifying  his treatment  of the  true names
 in  the  language  of  the  Mark. Here  reappears material  derived from
 F  2  $$54 -  5 concerning  the real  native name  of Rohan  Lograd, the
 translation  of Lohtur by  Eotheod and  of turak  'king' by  Theoden; and
 this  is  followed  by  the  discussion  of mathom, smial,  Smeagol and
 Deagol - the only portion of this passage retained in the final  form of
 Appendix F.                                                             
   In  B my  father followed  the passage  given above  from A  ('The yet
 more northerly language of Dale ...') with a statement on  the different
 treatment of the 'true' Runes in The Hobbit  and The  Lord of  the Rings
 that derives from that in F* (p. 22, $11):                              
                                                                        
 In  keeping  with  the  general  method  of  translation  here outlined,
 as  applied  to  the  Common   Speech  and   other  languages   akin  to
 it,  in  The  Hobbit  the  Cirth  were  turned  into  Runes,  into forms
 and  values,  that  is,  practically  the  same  as  those once  used in

 England.  But  since  the  Cirth  were  actually  of  Elvish  origin,  and
 little   used   for  writing   the  Common   Speech  (save   by  Dwarves),
 while  many  readers   of  The   Hobbit  found   the  matter   of  scripts
 of  interest,  in  this  larger history  it seemed  better to  present the
 Cirth  as  well  as  the  Feanorian  letters  in  their proper  shapes and
 use.  Though  naturally  an   adaptation  by   the  translator   of  these
 alphabets  to  fit  modern  English  has  had  to  replace   their  actual
 application   to   the   Westron   tongue,   which   was   very  different
 from ours.                                                                
                                                                          
 This is followed by the conclusion concerning Gnomes and Dwarves          
 which is lacking in A.                                                    
                                                                          
   In the final typescript, that sent to the printer, many  changes entered
 that were not, as  was almost  invariably my  father's practice  when pro-
 ceeding from one draft  to the  next, anticipated  by corrections  made to
 the  preceding  text:  they seem  in fact  to have  entered as  he typed.(9)
 There is no suggestion  in text  B, for  instance, of  the footnote  to RK
 p.  414  warning  against an  assumption, based  on the  linguistic trans-
 position,  'that  the  Rohirrim  closely  resembled  the  ancient  English
 otherwise'; nor of the removal from the body of the  text of  the detailed
 discussion  of  the  word  hobbit  and  the   names  Gamgee   and  Brandy-
 wine to a note at its end;(10) nor yet of the alteration of the passage (dis-
 cussed  on  p.  77) concerning  the word  Gnomes so  that it  should apply
 to the word Elves, and the placing of it at  the end  of the  text instead
 of  preceding  the  discussion  of  Dwarves.   Nothing  could   show  more
 clearly  the  extreme pressure  my father  was under  when, after  so much
 labour, he  at last  sent Appendix  F to  the publishers.  It seems  to me
 more  than  likely  that  had  circumstances  been  otherwise the  form of
 that appendix would have been markedly different.                         

                           NOTES.                                      
                                                                      
 1. The apparent  implication here  that Teleri  was the  name exclu-
    sively  of  those  of the  Eldar who  remained in  Middle-earth was
    certainly unintentional.                                           
 2. A footnote at this point  reads: 'Such  as Thranduil  and Legolas
    from   Mirkwood;  Lorien,   Galadriel,  Caras   Galadon,  Nimrodel,
    Amroth and others from Loth-lorien.'                               
 3. For an account of this reinstatement of  material from  F 2  see pp.
    80-1, with notes 7 and 8.                                          
 4. It  must be  admitted, however,  that the  statement in  the chapter
    Of  Maeglin  in The  Silmarillion (p.  136) that  Idril Celebrindal
    'was golden as the  Vanyar, her  mother's kindred'  appears already
    in the original text (1951; see XI.316); and of course even  if the
    re-use of the passage did precede the appearance of the idea of the
    'golden Vanyar', it needed correction subsequently.                

                                  
                                                                         
  5. With this cf. the passage in F 2 concerning Trolls (p. 36,  $17): 'the
     evil  Power  had  at  various times  made use  of them,  teaching them
     what  little  they  could learn,  and even  crossing their  breed with
     that of the larger Orcs.'                                            
  6. There is scarcely anything in the  last texts  that calls  for special
     notice, but it should  be recorded  that in  the penultimate  draft my
     father  revealed  the  meaning  of  the sentence  in the  Black Speech
     uttered  by  one  of  the  Orcs  who  was   guarding  Pippin   in  the
     chapter  The  Uruk-hai  (TT  p.  48):  Ugluk  u  bagronk  sha pushdug
     Saruman-glob  bubhosh  skai.  At  the  end  of  the section  Orcs and
     the    Black    Speech    (RK    p.    410)    this     text    reads:
     ...  while  the  curse  of  the  Mordor-orc  in  Chapter  3   of  Book
     Three  is  in  the  more  debased  form  used by  the soldiers  of the
     Dark  Tower,  of  whom  Grishnakh  was  the  captain.  Ugluk   to  the
     cesspool, sha! the dungfilth;  the great Saruman-fool, skai!         
  7. Where  F 2  in the  discussion of  Baggins (p.  48) had  Westron labin
     'bag',  and  Labin-nec  'Bag End',  the text  A has  laban, Laban-nec.
     For  the  origin of  'hobbit' my  father retained  the form  cubuc and
     Theoden's  archaic  cugbagu  (p.  49),  noting  that it  meant '"hole-
     dweller"  (or  "hole-builder")':  see  p.  69. He  also gave  here for
     the  first  time  the  Westron name  for 'hobbits',  nathramin, though
     later  in  the text  the form  banathin appears;  and he  provided the
     true name of Hamfast Gamgee:                                         
       The  Gaffer's  name  on   the  other   hand  was   Ranadab,  meaning
     'settled,  living  in  a  fixed  abode  or  group   of  hobbit-holes',
     and   hence   often  'stay-at-home',   the  opposite   of  'wanderer'.
     Since  this  closely  corresponds   with  ancient   English  bamfaest,
     I  have   translated  it   as  Hamfast.   The  shortenings   [Sam  and
     Ham]  at  any  rate  rhyme,  as  did  Ban  and   Ran  in   the  Shire.
     Moreover    neither    Banzira   nor    Ranadab   were    any   longer
     current  in  the  Shire  as  ordinary  words  and  survived   only  as
     names,  originally  given  no  doubt   as  (not   entirely  complimen-
     tary)  nicknames,  but  used traditionally  in certain  families with-
     out  much  more  recognition  than  is  the  case  today   with,  say,
     Roy or Francis.                                                      
  8. For  Laban-nec  'Bag  End'  in  A  the  second  text  B  has Laban-neg.
     The  'hobbit'  word  became kubug,  and  the  Rohan   form  kugbagul,
     changed  on  the  typescript   to  cuduc   and  kudduka.   The  true
     name   of   Gorhendad   Oldbuck   became Ogmandab,   and    that   of
     Meriadoc  Kalimanac,  altered  to  Kalimanoc  (Kalimac  in  RK);  that
     of   Hamfast   Gamgee  became   Ranagad  (Ranugad   in  RK),   and  of
     Sam  Banzira.  The  Westron  word  for  'hobbit'  became  banakil,  as
     in  RK;  but  Branduhim  'foaming  beer'  as  the  Hobbits' perversion
     of  Baranduin   remained  (see   note  10),   as  did   Carbandur  for
     Imladris (with Karningul, as in RK, pencilled against it).            

 
                                                                 
  9. It is clear that there was no intermediate text.               
 10. The introduction of the Hobbits' original name for  the river,
     Branda-nin  'border-water'  or  'Marchbourn',   transformed  into
     Bralda-him 'heady ale', was only made in this last typescript.

                                    III.                                  
                                                                         
                             THE FAMILY TREES.                            
                                                                         
 This  chapter  is  an  account  of  the  evolution  of  the  genealogical
 tables given  in Appendix  C to  The Lord  of the  Rings; and  since such
 a  development  can  obviously be  followed far  more easily  and rapidly
 by successive  stages of  the tables  themselves than  by any  account in
 words, I present it  here largely  by redrawings  of the  original family
 trees. My father followed  his usual  course of  emending each  one (most
 of them being  carefully, even  beautifully, made)  more or  less roughly
 in  preparation  for  its successor;  I have  therefore in  my redrawings
 excluded  subsequent  alterations,  when the  distinction can  be clearly
 made.                                                                    
                                                                         
                            Baggins of Hobbiton.                          
                                                                         
 The first four genealogical tables of the Baggins family, to which I give
 the references BA 1 to BA 4, are found on pp. 89-92.                     
                                                                         
                               BA 1 (p. 89).                              
                                                                         
 This is the earliest tree of the family of Baggins of Hobbiton  (by which
 I mean the earliest fully formed and  carefully presented  table, exclud-
 ing such hasty genealogies as that referred  to in  VI.222). It  was very
 carefully  made,  but  was much  used and corrected later,  and is  now a
 very  battered   document.  The   number  of   members  of   the  Baggins
 family shown is  still far  fewer than  in the  published table;  and the
 presence  of  Folco  Took  (with Faramond  pencilled beside  it) suggests
 that it belongs to the period that I have called 'the Third Phase' in the
 writing of the earlier  chapters of  The Fellowship  of the  Ring, before
 the emergence of Peregrin Took (see VII.31-2). It  may be  related there-
 fore to the original text of the Prologue (see p. 3 and  note 1),  and to
 the original tree of the Took family given in VI.317.  As in  that table,
 the  ages  of  those present  at the  Farewell Party  are given,  but not
 extended as a system of  relative dating  for all  members of  the family
 including those  long dead;  and dates  are also  given according  to the
 Shire  Reckoning  (which  appeared quite  early, in  the autumn  of 1939,
 see VII.9).                                                              
  It will be seen that virtually all the dates in BA  1 differ  from those
 for  the  corresponding  persons  in  the  published form,  though seldom
 by much.                                                                 
  A good deal of this genealogy was  present already  in the  first stages

                                    
                                                                          
 of the writing of The Lord of the  Rings, but  I will  not return  here to
 the early history  of the  Baggins family  tree, since  it has  been fully
 recounted  in  The  Return of  the Shadow  and all  the names  indexed. It
 may  be  noted,  howerer,  that  the  maiden  name  of   Miranda  Burrows,
 who  was  described  (VI.283)  as  the   'overshadowed  wife'   of  Cosimo
 Sackville-Baggins,  was  never  given  in the  narrative texts  before she
 disappeared  (VI.324);  and  that  Flambard  Took,  son  of the  Old Took,
 and  his  wife  Rosa  Baggins  had  appeared in  the original  Took family
 tree given in VI.317.                                                     
                                                                          
                                BA 2 (p. 90).                              
                                                                          
 This  table  was  a  rough working  version, taking  up changes  marked on
 BA 1, and with further alterations  and additions  entering in  the course
 of its  making. It  was immediately  followed by  an even  hastier version
 without dates,  hardly differing  from BA  2, but  introducing one  or two
 further  changes  that  appear  in  BA  3  (and  changing  Miranda Burrows
 to  Miranda  Noakes  and  then  to  Miranda  Sandyman).  I  have  given no
 number to this text, regarding it simply as an extension of BA 2.         
  As  my  father  first  made  this  table  Bingo  Baggins  was  moved down
 to  become  the  youngest of  the three  sons of  Mungo, but  remained the
 husband  of  Maxima  Proudfoot.  While  it  was  in  progress,  however, a
 daughter  Linda  Baggins  was  introduced  above  him,  and she  took over
 the   Proudfoot  connection,   becoming  the   wife  of   Marco  Proudfoot
 and  the  mother  of Odo  Proudfoot; while  Bingo, now  the youngest  of a
 family of five, as he remained, became the husband of Fatima Chubb.       
  Olo  Proudfoot  was  first  named   Rollo;  and   Rosa  Baggins'  husband
 Flambard  Took  becomes  Hildigrim  Took  (the final  name:  see  the Took
 genealogy  T  3  on  p.  110).  The  names  Ponto,  Largo,  Longo,  Fosco,
 Dora,  replacing  Longo,  Tango,   Largo,  Togo,   Semolina  respectively,
 remained into the final form of the genealogy.  It may also be  noted that
 Drogo's  birth-date  was  changed  to  make  him a  year younger  than his
 sister Dora, though his place in the tree was not altered; it will be seen
 that in BA 3 he is again made older than her by a year.                   
                                                                          
                                BA 3 (p. 91).                              
                                                                          
 The third Baggins family tree is one of a series of carefully made tables,
 and being the first carries an explanatory head-note, as follows:         
  The  dates  in  these  Trees  are given  according to  the 'Shire-reckon-
 ing',  in  the  traditional  Hobbit manner,  calculated from  the crossing
 of   the   Baranduin  (Brandywine   River),  Year   1,  by   the  brothers
 Marco  and  Cavallo.  The  persons  mentioned  in  these  tables  are only
 a  selection  from  many  names.  All  are   either  concerned   with  the
 events  recounted  in  the  memoirs  of  Bilbo  and  Frodo;  or  are  men-
 tioned  in them;  or are  persons present  at the  Farewell Party,  or the
 direct  ancestors  of  the  guests on  that occasion.  The names  of these
 guests  (such  of  the  144  as  room has  been found  for) are  marked *.

  Bilbo   Baggins,   born  1290,   went  on   his  famous   journey  1341-2.
  At  the  age of  111 he  gave his  Farewell Party  in 1401.  Frodo Baggins
  sold  Bag  End  in  1418  and returned  at the  end of  1419. He  left the
  Shire  in  1421.  Meriadoc  Brandybuck  succeeded   to  Brandy   Hall  and
  the  headship  of  the  family  in  1432.  Peregrin  became The  Took (and
  Seventeenth   Shirking)   in   1434.   The   memoirs  (and   additions  by
  Samwise Gamgee) close in 1436.                                            
  The   mention  here   of  Peregrin   becoming  the   seventeenth  Shirking
  relates this table at once to the texts of the Prologue (see pp.  5-7, 11)
  composed  after  the  narrative  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings   had  been
  completed,  and  suggests  that  the  family trees  followed  something of
  the  same  succession as  is found  in the  Prologue texts.  - I  have not
  included in my  redrawing the  stars indicating  presence at  the Farewell
  Party, for my father only put them in later and incompletely.             
    On  the  family  name  Gaukroger   (subsequently  lost),   appearing  in
  Togo  Baggins'  wife  Selina  Gaukroger, see  VI.236 and  note 10;  and on
  Belisarius Bolger see note 3.                                             
                                                                           
                                 BA 4 (p. 92).                              
                                                                           
  The fourth tree is the first text of another set of genealogies, and seems
  to belong to much the  same time  as BA  3. This  also is  finely written,
  with an introductory note that is virtually the same as  that in  the pub-
  lished  form  (RK  p.  379),  apart  from  the  preservation of  the names
  Marco  and  Cavallo,  but  then  continues   with  the   second  paragraph
  (giving dates) of that to BA 3, and includes  the reference  to Peregrin's
  becoming the 'Seventeenth Shirking'.                                      
    This version retains  the dates  of BA  3 (not  repeated in  the redraw-
  ing), and  differs from  it chiefly  in the  addition of  descendants from
  Bingo and Ponto Baggins; also by  the loss  of Togo  Baggins and  his wife
  Selina  Gaukroger  and  their replacement  by a  second daughter  of Inigo
  and Belinda, Laura, and her husband Togo Gaukroger.                       
    The new names Polo, Porro are  referred to  in both  texts of  the orig-
  inal  version  of  the  Appendix on  Languages (see  p. 46,  $43), showing
  that  that  work  followed or  accompanied this  stage in  the development
  of the family trees.                                                      
    The starred names,  indicating presence  at the  Farewell Party,  are as
  in  the  published table,  with the  omission of  Cosimo Sackville-Baggins
  and  Dora  Baggins:  this  was  perhaps inadvertent,  but neither  name is
  starred in BA 3.                                                          
                                                                           
    Sweeping  changes  to  the  existing  names  were  entered  subsequently
  on  BA  4.  In  the  introductory  note  Marco  and  Cavallo  were changed
  to  Marcho  and  Blanco  (see pp.  6, 17),  and 'Seventeenth  Shirking' to
  'Twentieth  Thane'  (see under  BA 3).  In the  family tree  the following
  changes were made, listed by generations:                                 
                                                                           
    Inigo Baggins > Balbo Baggins                                           

 Belinda Boffin > Berylla Boffin                                             
 Regina Grubb > Laura Grubb                                                 
 Ansegar Bolger > Fastolph Bolger                                          
 Maxima Bunce > Mimosa Bunce                                                
 Cornelia Hornblower > Tanta Hornblower                                     
 Laura Baggins > Lily Baggins                                               
 Togo Gaukroger > Togo Goodbody                                             
 Bertha Baggins > Belba Baggins                                             
 Rudigor Bolger > Rudigar Bolger                                            
 Magnus Proudfoot > Bodo Proudfoot                                          
 Fatima Chubb > Chica Chubb                                                 
 Robinia Bolger > Ruby Bolger                                               
 Conrad Bolger > Wilibald Bolger                                            
 Cosimo Sackville-Baggins > Lotho Sackville-Baggins                         
 Gerda Chubb-Baggins > Poppy Chubb-Baggins                                  
 Arnor Bolger > Filibert Bolger                                             
 Porro Baggins > Porto Baggins                                              
 Crassus Burrows > Milo Burrows                                             
 Duenna Baggins > Daisy Baggins                                             
 Guido Boffin > Griffo Boffin                                               
 Flavus, Crispus, Rhoda, Fulvus Burrows > Mosco, Moro, Myrtle,              
   Minto Burrows                                                            
                                                                           
 In  addition,  the  wife  of  Posco  Baggins  was  introduced,  named (as
 in  the  final  form)  Gilly  Brownlock;  and  Ponto   Baggins'  daughter
 Angelica appeared.                                                         
 On  the  removal  of  the  Latin  names  of  Peony  Baggins'  husband and
 their offspring see p. 47, $45, and commentary (p. 69).                    
 The  nomenclature  and  structure   of  the   Baggins  genealogy   as  pub-
 lished was now present, except in this respect. In  the final  form Frodo's
 aunt  Dora  again  becomes  older  than  her   brother  Drogo   (see  under
 BA 2 above),  and her  husband Wilibald  Bolger (see  the list  just given)
 is removed; while  Posco Baggins  has a  sister Prisca,  born in  1306, and
 she gains Wilibald as her husband.                                         
 In  subsequent  manuscripts  (of  which  there   were  five,   making  nine
 all told, not including incomplete  drafts) these  changes entered,  and in
 one of them the word 'spinster' was written against Dora Baggins.          
                                                                           
                            Bolger of Bsdgeford.                            
                                                                           
 It is a curious fact that the genealogical tables of the families of Bolger
 of  Budgeford  and  Boffin  of  the Yale  were already  in print  when they
 were  rejected  from  Appendix  C, but  I have  not been  able to  find any
 evidence bearing on the reason for their  rejection. In  a letter  from the
 publishers  of  20  May  1955  my  father  was   told:  'We   have  dropped
 Bolger  and  Boffin  from  Appendix  C',  and  on   24  May   Rayner  Unwin

  wrote:  'I  have  deleted  the  two  family  trees  and  the  redundant note
  that introduced  them' (no  copy of  either tree  has any  note specifically
  relating  to  them).  These  remarks  might  suggest that  it was  my father
  who  proposed  their  omission,  though  no  trace  can  now  be   found  of
  any  such  request;  but  it  is hard  to see  why he  should have  done so.
  That he  was pressed  for space,  and greatly  oppressed by  that necessity,
  is certain, but it seems strange (if this is the explanation) that he should
  have  been  so  limited  as  to  abandon  these  genealogies  in   order  to
  obtain a couple of pages elsewhere in the Appendices.                       
    I refer to the versions of  the Bolger  genealogy by  the letters  BG, and
  the  three  that I  have redrawn,  BG 1,  BG 2,and  BG 4,  will be  found on
  pp. 95 - 7.                                                                 
                                                                             
                                  BG 1 (p. 95).                               
                                                                             
  This earliest form of the Bolger family  tree is  entitled Bolgers  of Wood-
  hall.  On  my father's  original map  of the  Shire, reproduced  as frontis-
  piece  to  The  Return  of  the Shadow,  the Bolger  territory is  marked as
  lying  north of  the Woody  End and  south of  the East  Road (i.e.  west of
  the Brandywine Bridge).                                                     
    The very  brief table  is found,  together with  genealogies of  the Tooks
  and  Brandybucks,  on  the  page  that carries  the original  Baggins family
  tree  BA  1,  and  was  very  plainly  made at  the same  time, at  an early
  stage in the writing of The Lord of the Rings  (see pp.  85, 89);  but these
  early  Bolgers,  Scudamor,  Cedivar,  Savanna,  Sagramor,  are   not  found
  in those  texts. Robinia  Bolger in  the fourth  generation appears  also in
  BA  1  as  the  wife  of  Togo  Baggins; but  her brother  Robur is  seen to
  have  existed  independently  before  he  was  introduced  into  the Baggins
  family in  BA 2  (p. 90)  as the  husband of  Bertha Baggins,  Bilbo's aunt,
  who first emerged in that version. Rollo  Bolger is  that friend  of Bilbo's
  to  whom  he  bequeathed  his  feather-bed  (VI.247).  Olo  and  Odo  appear
  in  the  Took  genealogy  given  in  VI.317;  for  my  attempt   to  expound
  briefly the history of 'Odo Bolger' see VII.31-2.                           
                                                                             
                                  BG 2 (p. 96).                               
                                                                             
  The  second  version  of  the  Bolger  genealogy (1) is one  of the  group of
  which the Baggins table BA 3  (p. 91)  is the  first, carrying  the explana-
  tory  head-note.  The  title  is  now  changed to  Bolgers of  Budgeford. In
  the  chapter  A  Conspiracy  Unmasked  (FR  p.  118)  Fredegar's  family  is
  said  to  come  'from  Budgeford  in Bridgefields'  (the only  occurrence of
  these names in the narrative of The Lord of the Rings).(2)                  
    Apart   from   Odovacar,   Rudigor    (later   Rudigar),    and   Fredegar
  (applied  to  a  different  person),  none  of the  actual names  of members
  of the Bolger family in  this genealogy  appear in  the family-trees  in RK,
  but  some  recur  in  other  tables  made  at  the  same  time: thus  in the
  Baggins  table  BA  3  are  found  Ansegar   (husband  of   Pansy  Baggins),

                                     
                                                                      
 Robinia  (wife  of Fosco  Baggins), Conrad  (husband of  Dora Baggins),
 and Belisarius (replacing Hamilcar).(3)                               
  Two  of  the  names subsequently  rejected are  mentioned in  the text
 F 2 of  the Appendix  on Languages:  Celador Bolger  (p. 61,  note 42),
 and Bildad Bolger. Bildad is mentioned in F 2 (p. 51, $50) in  the con-
 text of my father's not  using scriptural  names to  'translate' Hobbit
 names:  it  was 'a  genuine Hobbit  name', he  explained, that  bore a
 merely  accidental  resemblance  to  the  Biblical  Bildad (one  of the
 friends of Job).                                                      
  The  name  Miranda  (Gaukroger)  reappears  after   the  disappearance
 of Miranda  Burrows, wife  of Cosimo  Sackville-Baggins (p.  86). Robur
 Bolger (see under BG 1) has been replaced, as in BA 3, by  Rudigor, but
 Robur remains as the name of Rudigor's younger brother.               
                                                                      
                                  BG 3.                                
                                                                      
 This table corresponds  to BA  4 of  the Baggins  clan, but  it repeats
 BG 2 exactly except in the addition of Robur's descendants, and  in the
 change  of  the  name  Gundobad  to  Gundahad. I  have not  redrawn it,
 therefore, but give here the added element:                           
                                                                      
                 Robur = Amelia Hornblower                             
                                                                      
                    Omar = Alma Boffin                                 
                                                                      
                    Arnor = Gerda Chubb-Baggins                        
                                                                      
 Arnor and his wife Gerda  Chubb-Baggins appear  in BA  4. -  The birth-
 dates of these Bolgers are the same as those  of their  replacements in
 BG 4: Robur (Rudibert)  1260, Omar  (Adalbert) 1301,  Arnor (Filibert)
 1342.                                                                 
                                                                      
                              BG 4 (p. 97).                            
                                                                      
 On the Baggins table BA 4  my father  made many  changes to  the exist-
 ing names, and in so doing brought the Baggins  genealogy close  to its
 final form. On  the accompanying  Bolger table  BG 3  he did  the same,
 but even  more extensively,  so that  of the  existing names  none were
 left  save  Gundahad,  Rudigar  (altered  from Rudigor),  Odovacar (see
 VII.20), and  Fredegar  (who becomes  the former  Fredegar's grandson),
 and  the  Bolger  clan  have uniformly  'translated' names  of Germanic
 origin. At the same time  three children  of Wilibald  Bolger (formerly
 Conrad)  were  added;  and the  Hobbit family  names Diggle  and Light-
 foot (not found in The Lord of the Rings) appear.(4)                  
  Of  those  who do  not appear  in the  published genealogies  the fol-
 lowing are marked as guests at the  Farewell Party:  Wilimar, Heribald,
 and Nora, and also their mother Prisca Baggins (see p. 88), who  is not
 so  marked in  the Baggins  tree. She  was 95;  but Frodo's  still more
 ancient aunt Dora was present at the age of ninety-nine.              

    In this case, since there is no family tree of the  Bolgers in  The Lord
  of the Rings, I have redrawn the last of the  manuscript tables,  in which
  the alterations made to BG 3 were set out fair;  and it  was in  this form
  that  the  genealogy  was  printed.(5) In this  redrawing  the  names with
  asterisks  are  those  that  do  not  appear in  the genealogies  of other
  families in The Lord of the Rings.                                        
                                                                           
                              Boffin of the Yale.                           
                                                                           
  In  The  Lord of  the Rings  no 'homeland'  of the  Boffins is  named, and
  in  the  First  Edition  there  was  no mention  of the  Yale; but  on the
  original map of the  Shire (frontispiece  to Vol.VI)  the name  Boffins is
  written to  the north  of Hobbiton  Hill,(6) and Boffins are  clearly asso-
  ciated in early texts with the village of Northope  in that  region, 'only
  a  mile  or  two  behind  the  Hill'  (VI.319,  385).  Northope  was  sub-
  sequently  renamed  Overhill,  and  'Mr.  Boffin  at   Overhill'  remained
  into FR (p. 53).                                                          
    But  on  the first  Shire-map the  name Northope  was corrected,  not to
  Overhill  but  to  The Yale,  although that  name does  not appear  in the
  texts; and this must  be the  reference in  the genealogical  trees, which
  retained  'Boffin  of  the  Yale' into  the printed  form. Much  later the
  name was  added to  the Shire  map in  the Second  Edition in  a different
  place,  south  of  Whitfurrows  and  west  of Stock,  and a  reference was
  inserted into the text (FR p. 86), 'the lowlands of the Yale' (see VI.387,
  note  10);  but  the  Boffin  genealogy  had  been  abandoned  before  the
  publication of the First Edition (p. 88).                                 
    I refer to the Boffin family trees by the letters BF,  and those  that I
  have redrawn, BF 2 and BF 4, are found on pp. 100-1.                      
                                                                           
                                     BF1.                                   
                                                                           
  There is no Boffin  genealogy accompanying  the very  early tables  of the
  Baggins and Bolger  families. The  earliest form  consists of  two closely
  similar, extremely  rough drafts  on the  same pages  as the  two versions
  of BA  2 (see  p. 86):  so rough  and so  much corrected  that I  have not
  attempted to redraw either of  them. They  were in  any case  very largely
  repeated in the following version.                                        
                                                                           
                                BF 2 (p. 100).                              
                                                                           
  This genealogy is extant in two forms, differing only in that the first of
  them sets out  the earliest  generations separately,  and begins  the main
  table  with Otto  the Fat,  whereas in  the second  form the  elements are
  combined:  for  these  purposes  they can  be treated  as one.  This table
  belongs with BA 3 (p. 91) and BG 2 (p. 96).                               
    Hugo  Boffin,  whose  wife  was  Donnamira  Took,  and  their  son  Jago
  go  back  to  the  Took  genealogy  given  in VI.317;  Guido and  his wife
  Duenna  Baggins,  with  their  son Iolo,  are found  in the  Baggins table
  BA  3;  and  Jemima Boffin  wife of  Fredegar Bolger  in the  Bolger table

 BG  2.  Hugo  Bracegirdle,  who  does  not   appear  in   the  published
 genealogies, is named  in FR  (p. 46)  as the  recipient of  a book-case
 belonging to Bilbo.                                                     
   Lobelia  Sackville-Baggins' dates  make her  92 at  her death:  at the
 beginning  of  the  chapter The  Grey Havens  (RK p.  301) the  text had
 'she was after all quite ninety years  old', changed  on the  late type-
 scripts to 'more than a hundred'; and  on the  following version  of the
 Boffin genealogy her dates were altered to 1318-1420.                   
                                                                        
   The  subsequent  development  of the  Boffin genealogy  exactly paral-
 lels that of the Bolgers, and I treat them in the same way.             
                                                                        
                                  BF 3.                                  
                                                                        
 This is written on  the same  page as  BG 3,  and as  in that  table the
 previous  version  was  followed  exactly,  but  with  the corresponding
 addition (see p. 94) introducing Alma Boffin, the  wife of  Omar Bolger.
 This table is not  redrawn. As  in the  case of  BG 3  (and also  of the
 accompanying  Baggins  table  BA  4)  a  great  many  of the  names were
 changed  on  the manuscript  of BF  3, and  new Boffins  were introduced
 in the second generation.                                               
                                                                        
                              BF 4 (p. 101).                             
                                                                        
 As with the Bolger genealogy, I give  here the  final manuscript  of the
 Boffin table (written on the same  page as  BG 4),  the form  from which
 it  was  printed,  in  which  the  changed names  and additions  made on
 BF 3 appear in a fair  copy; and  here also  the starred  names indicate
 those that are not found  in the  genealogies of  other families  in The
 Lord of the Rings. Folco Boffin, who is not present in any of these, was
 a friend of Frodo's (FR  pp. 51,  76-7, and  see VII.30  - 2);  for Hugo
 Bracegirdle see under BF 2 above.                                       
   Of  those  who  do  not  appear  in  the  published   genealogies  the
 following  are  marked  as being  present at  the Farewell  Party: Vigo,
 Folco,  Tosto,  Bruno  Bracegirdle, Hugo  Bracegirdle, and  the 'various
 descendants' of Rollo Boffin and Druda Burrows.                         
                                                                        
                         Brandybuck of Buckland.                         
                                                                        
 The Brandybuck genealogies are referred to by the letters BR; for the
 redrawn versions BR 1 and BR 4 see pp. 104-5.                           
                                                                        
                              BR 1 (p. 104).                             
                                                                        
 This earliest version of the Brandybuck family tree is written below the
 earliest of the Baggins clan (BA 1), with  those of  the Bolgers  (BG 1)
 and the Tooks (not the earliest) on the reverse.                        
   Many of the  names found  here are  found also  in the  Took genealogy
 given  in  VI.317:  Gorboduc  Brandybuck  and  his wife  Mirabella Took,
 and  their  six  children  (see  VI.318)  Roderic,  Alaric,  Bellissima,
 Theodoric,  Athanaric, and  Primula; also  Caradoc, Merry's  father, and

                                          
                                                                        
 his  wife  Yolanda  Took  (cf.  VI.100,  251).  Merry's  cousin  Lamorac
 appears  in  early  texts  of  The Lord  of the  Rings,(7) where the name
 replaced  Bercilak  (VI.273)  who  in  the genealogy  is his  father. Of
 Madoc   (Gorboduc's   father)   and  the   descendants  of   his  second
 son  Habaccuc  there  is  no trace  in those  texts, except  for Melissa
 (afterwards  replaced  by  Melilot,  see  pp.  105-6,  who  made herself
 conspicuous at the Farewell Party, VI.38, 101).                         
                                                                        
                                  BR 2.                                   
                                                                        
 This is an  extremely rough  table, written  in ink  over pencil  on the
 reverse of the page carrying the rough  Baggins and  Bolger tables  BA 2
 and  BF 1:  here my  father is  seen devising  a much  changed genealogy
 of the Brandybucks. I have not redrawn  it, since  its names  and struc-
 ture largely survived into the fair copy BR 4, and it  needs only  to be
 recorded  that  it  was  here  that  Gorhendad Brandybuck  the 'founder'
 first appeared,  but with  the dates  1134 -  1236, and  not yet  as the
 remote  ancestor  Gorhendad  Oldbuck  of  four  centuries  before; while
 his  son  is  Marmaduc,  not  as subsequently  his grandson,  and Madoc,
 Sadoc,  and  Marroc  are  the  sons  of Marmaduc.  'Old Rory'  is called
 Cadwalader; and all the Latin titles (see BR 4) were already present.
                                                                        
                                  BR 3.                                  
                                                                        
 This was another rough  draft, scarcely  differing from  BR 2  except in
 the  reversal  of  Madoc  and  Marmaduc  and  in  the addition  of their
 wives:  Madoc's  wife   is  Savanna   Hogpen,  and   Marmaduc's  Sultana
 Bolger. In the original Bolger table (BG  1, p.  95) Savanna  Bolger was
 the  wife  of  Sadoc  Brandybuck,  while in  BG 2  the wife  of Marmaduc
 was Gloriana Bolger. Corrections to the  text altered  the name  of 'Old
 Rory'   from   Cadwalader   to  Sagramor   (taken  over   from  Sagramor
 Bolger in BG  1), and  of his  wife from  Matilda Drinkwater  to Matilda
 Goold.                                                                  
                                                                        
                              BR 4 (p. 105).                             
                                                                        
 This carefully made version is one of the series that includes (Baggins)
 BA 3 (p. 91), (Bolger) BG 2 (p. 96), and (Boffin) BF  2 (p.  100). Addi-
 tions were made subsequently to BR 4, but in this case it  is convenient
 to treat them as part of the table as first written (see below).        
  In  this  new  version  of the  Brandybuck tree,  comprised in  BR 2-4,
 my  father's enjoyment  of the  incongruity of  Hobbit customs  of name-
 giving  culminated  in  such marriages  as that  of Madoc  Superbus with
 Savanna  Hogpen,  and, in  the grandiose  epithets of  the heads  of the
 clan,  with  Meriadoc  taking  his  title Porphyrogenitus  from imperial
 Byzantium,  'born  in  the purple  (chamber)'. In  the text  F 2  of the
 Appendix  on  Languages  my  father  wrote  (p. 47,  $45): '"Classical"
 names  ...  represent  usually names  derived by  Hobbits from  tales of
 ancient  times  and  far  kingdoms  of  Men', and  added in  a footnote:

 'Thus the perhaps to  us rather  ridiculous subnames  or titles  of the
 Brandybucks  adopted  by  the  heads  of  the family,  Astyanax, Aureus,
 Magnificus, were  originally half-jesting  and were  in fact  drawn from
 traditions about the Kings at Norbury.' Afterwards  he struck  out this
 note and rejected classical names (see p. 69, $45).                   
   The  following  additions, included  in the  redrawing, were  made to
 the table after it had been completed. Sadoc Brandybuck, at  first said
 to have  had 'many  descendants', is  given 'Two  sons' and  a daughter
 Salvia, the wife of Bildad Bolger (see BG 2, p. 96);  Basilissa Brandy-
 buck  becomes the  wife of  Fulvus Burrows;  their son  Crassus Burrows
 is  added,  who  on  account  of  his  marriage  to  Peony  Baggins has
 appeared in BA 4 (p. 92), together with their four children;  and Hilda
 Bracegirdle enters as the wife of Ceredic Brandybuck, with  their three
 children.  As  the  table was  made Marmaduc's  wife was  still Sultana
 Bolger, but she was changed to Gloriana as in BG 2.                   
                                                                      
                                  BR 5.                                
                                                                      
 Following  the  general pattern,  BR 5  was recopied  from BR  4 almost
 as  it  stood:  the  only  change  made  was  that  Gorhendad  was  now
 actually  named  Gorhendad  Oldbuck, retaining  the note  'Built Brandy
 Hall and changed  the family  name to  Brandybuck' (retaining  also the
 dates  1134-1236);  and  then subsequently  a great  many of  the names
 were altered on the manuscript.                                       
   Gorhendad  Oldbuck  was  replaced   by  Gormadoc   'Deepdelver',  and
 his   wife   Malva  Headstrong   was  introduced.   'Gorhendad  Oldbuck
 of  the  Marish',  however,  is  Gormadoc's father,  and his  dates are
 1090-1191. At this time all the Latin or Greek titles  of the  heads of
 the Brandybuck clan were  replaced by  English names,  as in  the final
 genealogy. Other changes were (following the generations):            
                                                                      
   Savanna Hogpen > Hanna Goldworthy                                   
   Marmaduc > Marmadoc                                                 
   Gloriana Bolger > Adaldrida Bolger (see BG 4)                       
   Bildad Bolger > Gundabald Bolger (see BG 4)                         
   Gorboduc > Gormanac > Gorbadoc                                      
   Orgulus > Orgulas                                                   
   Sagramor > Rorimac                                                  
   Matilda Goold > Menegilda Goold                                     
   Bellissima > Amaranth                                               
   Carados > Saradas                                                   
   Basilissa > Asphodel                                                
   Fulvus Burrows > Rufus Burrows                                      
   Priamus > Dinodas                                                   
   Columbus > Gorgulas > Gorbulas                                      
   Caradoc > Saradoc                                                   

  Pandora Took > Esmeralda Took                                             
  Lamorac > Merimac                                                         
  Ceredic > Seredic                                                         
  Crassus Burrows > Milo Burrows (see p. 88)                                
  Melampus > Marmadas                                                       
  Bercilac > Berilac                                                        
  Roderic > Doderic                                                         
  Alberic > Ilberic                                                         
  Cara > Celandine                                                          
  Marcus > Merimas                                                          
  Melissa > Mentha                                                          
  Mantissa > Melilot                                                        
                                                                           
 The   names  of   the  children   of  Milo   Burrows  and   Peony  Baggins,
 Flavus,  Crispus,  Rhoda,  and Fulvus,  were struck  out but  not replaced,
 since they appear in the Baggins genealogy (see p. 88 and RK p. 380).      
  Only  in  these  respects does  BR 5  as corrected  differ from  the final
 form  (RK  p.  382):  Gorhendad  Oldbuck  is  the  father,  not  the remote
 ancestor   of   Gormadoc   Brandybuck;   and    Merry   is    still   named
 Meriadoc  Took-Brandybuck.   Subsequently  my   father  altered   the  note
 on  Gorhendad  to  begin  'c.740 began  the building  of Brandy  Hall', but
 left in his dates as 1090 -  1191, which  survived into  the proof,  as did
 Meriadoc Took-Brandybuck, when they were deleted.                          
                                                                           
                            Took of Great Smials.                           
                                                                           
 The  final  genealogy  of  the  Tooks  was   achieved  without   the  great
 upheaval  of  names  that  took  place  in  those  of the  Baggins, Bolger,
 Boffin and Brandybuck families. I give the letter  T to  the versions,  T 1
 being the very  early form  printed in  VI.317; the  redrawn versions  T 2,
 T 3, and T 4 appear on pp. 109-11.                                         
                                                                           
                                T2 (p. 109).                               
                                                                           
 This version is found on the page that carries  also the  first genealogies
 of  the  Baggins,  Bolger,  and  Brandybuck  families,  BA  1,  BG  1,  and
 BR 1. It is very closely related to T 1, and indeed differs from it chiefly
 in  giving  the  dates  according  to  the  years  of the  Shire Reckoning,
 rather than the  ages of  the persons  relative to  the Farewell  Party. If
 the age of each person given  in T  1 is  subtracted from  the year  of the
 Farewell Party, the birth-dates in  T 2  agree in  nearly every  case.(8) The
 only  other  changes  are  the  reversal  of  the  order  of  Isambard  and
 Flambard,  sons  of  the  Old  Took;(9) the addition  of  Vigo's  son  Uffo,
 and  of  Uffo's  son  Prospero  (see VI.38);  and the  change of  Odo Took-
 Bolger to Odo Bolger.                                                      
                                                                           
                                T3 (p. 110).                                
      The development of this version is best understood by comparison      

                                                                 
                                                                             
 with  T  2; but  it may  be noted  that Isembard  (for earlier  Isambard) has
 been  restored  to  the  second  place  among  the  sons  of  the  Old  Took,
 while  Flambard,   husband  of   Rosa  Baggins,   is  renamed   Hildigrim  (a
 change  seen  also  in  the  Baggins  tables  BA  1  and  2).  Fosco  becomes
 Sigismond,  and  rather  oddly  both  Hildigrim  and  Sigismond  have  a  son
 named   Hildibrand  (formerly   Faramond  and   Vigo):  the   Hildibrand  son
 of  Hildigrim  was  replaced   subsequently  on   the  manuscript   by  Adal-
 grim,  as  he  remained.  Among  the  many  changes in  the third  and fourth
 generations  from  the  Old  Took  may  be  noted  the  arrival  of  Peregrin
 son  of  Paladin  (see  VII.35),  while  Odo  Bolger  becomes  Hamilcar;  the
 replacement  of  Merry's  mother   Yolanda  by   Pandora  (cf.   the  Brandy-
 buck  tables  BR  1  and  4);  and  the  appearance  of Odovacar  Bolger (cf.
 BG 2).(10)                                                                   
                                                                             
                                 T4 (p. 111).                                
                                                                             
 At  this  stage (corresponding  to BA  3, BG  2, BF  2, and  BR 4)  my father
 made a series of four tables all closely similar - differing scarcely at all,
 in  fact, except  in the  names of  the children  of the  Old Took,  who were
 increased  in  number   without  thereby   altering  the   subsequent  gener-
 ations  as they  now existed.  I have  redrawn the  fourth of  these, calling
 it T 4, but note below the differences in the three preceding versions.      
   In all four copies the first  ancestor recorded  in the  tree is  now Isen-
 grim II, with the title 'Seventh Shirking' (in the  first copy  'Shireking or
 Shirking'),  on  which  see  p.  87.  Isengrim  eldest son  of the  Old Took,
 now  Isengrim  III,  retained  through three  copies the  dates given  to him
 in  T  3,  1232  -  1282,  remarkably  short-lived  among  all   the  centen-
 arians, with the  note added  'no children'.  In all  the copies  the holders
 of  the  title  Shirking are  underlined, as  the Thains  are starred  in the
 final form (RK p. 381).                                                      
   A  daughter  named  Gloriana,  following   Isengrim  III,   was  introduced
 in  the  first  copy,  but  was changed  at once  to Hildigunda  (see below),
 either   because  Gloriana   Bolger  (BG   2,  BR   4)  already   existed  or
 because  the  name  Gloriana  was  at  once  transferred  to  her. Hildigunda
 had a brief life, her dates  on the  first copy  being 1235  - 1255;  on sub-
 sequent  copies  no  dates  were  given,  but  she  is  said  to  have  'died
 young'.  On  the  third  copy  her  name  was  changed  to  Hildigard,  as it
 remained.                                                                    
   Between  Hildigunda  /  Hildigard  and   Hildigrim,  a   son  of   the  Old
 Took   named   Isumbras   IV   (the  remote   ancestor  being   now  Isumbras
 III)  was  introduced,  himself  the  father  and  grandfather  of subsequent
 Shirkings.  Since  Isengrim  III  had  no  descendants,   on  the   death  of
 the  unmarried  Ferumbras  III  the  headship  of  the  family passed  to the
 descendants  of  the  third  son  of  the  Old  Took,  Hildigrim,   and  thus
 Pippin's  father  Paladin  became the  Shirking. It  seems probable  that the
 alterations  to this  part of  the genealogy  were made  in order  to achieve
 this.(11)                                                                    

   After  Hildigrim  there  enters Isembold,  with no  descendants indi-
 cated;  and  after  Isembold there  was in  the first  copy Hildigunda,
 changed  to Hildifuns  when Hildigunda  replaced Gloriana  (see above).
 On the third copy Hildifuns became Hildifons: he lived to the  ripe age
 of 102 (see below), again with no descendants shown.                   
   Isembard  was  moved  down  to become  the seventh  child of  the Old
 Took; while Sigismond (the fourth child in T 3) changes place  with his
 son Hildibrand. Finally,  a twelfth  child entered  on the  third copy:
 Isengar, about whom nothing is said.                                   
   Pippin's  son Faramir  I and  his wife  Goldilocks, daughter  of Sam-
 wise, entered on the fourth copy (T 4).                                
                                                                       
      The version T 4 received a number of changes of name, though far
 fewer than in the preceding families, and some added notes; the title
 was changed to 'Tooks of Great Smials'.                                
 Isengrim II (seventh Shirking) > Isengrim II (tenth Thain of the       
 Took line)                                                             
 Bandobras: (many descendants) > (many descendants, including           
 the Northtooks of Long Cleeve)                                         
 Isembold: [added:] (many descendants)                                  
 Hildifons 1244-1346 > Hildifons 1244- (went off and never              
 returned)                                                              
 Gorboduc Brandybuck > Gormanac Brandybuck (see below)                  
 Isengar: [added:] said to have 'gone to sea' in his youth              
 Paladin II > Pharamond II (see below)                                  
 Pandora > Esmeralda (see p. 101)                                       
 Caradoc Brandybuck > Saradoc Brandybuck (see p. 103)                   
 Diamanda > Rosamunda (see BG 4)                                        
 Prima > Pearl                                                          
 Pamphila > Pimpernel                                                   
 Belisarius Bolger > Fredegar Bolger                                    
 Faramond > Ferdibrand                                                  
 In addition, Pippin's mother Eglantine Banks was introduced, and his
 wife Diamond of Long Cleeve; and 'several [> three] daughters' were
 given to Adelard Took.                                                 
 In subsequent manuscript versions the points in which the gen-         
 ealogy still differed from the final form were corrected: thus Pippin's
 father  reverted  from  Pharamond  II to  Paladin II;  Gormanac Brandy-
 buck became Gorbadoc,  as also  in the  Brandybuck genealogy  (p. 103);
 and  Folco Boffin  was omitted,  perhaps because  of the  difficulty of
 fitting him in (he appeared in any case in the Boffin genealogy).      
                                                                       
                  The Longfather-tree of Master Samwise.                
  There is no very early genealogy of the Gamgees and Cottons, and the
    first version to appear belongs with the group beginning with the
  Baggins table BA 3: it is indeed written on the same page as BG 2 of

                        
                                                                          
  the Bolgers. The tables have different titles, and I letter them S, those
  that I have redrawn being found on pp. 114-16.                           
                                                                          
                                 S1 (p. 114).                             
                                                                          
  This consists of two brief tables set out side  by side  without intercon-
  nection: the  only link  between the  two families  being the  marriage of
  Sam  Gamgee  with  Rose  Cotton.  It  is notable  that their  children are
  only  eight  in  number,  ending  with Daisy  born in  1436. In  the first
  version of the Epilogue to The  Lord of  the Rings,  which takes  place in
  that year, Daisy was the youngest, in her cradle  (IX.114). In  the second
  version  (IX.122)  this was  repeated, but  corrected to  say that  it was
  Primrose, the ninth child, who was in the cradle.                        
                                                                          
                                 S2 (p. 115).                             
                                                                          
  I include under this reference two  closely related  tables both  with the
  same title (the first form, not redrawn, differs from  the second  only in
  these  points:  Wiseman  Gamwich  is  absent,  and  Hamfast   of  Gamwich,
  who  'moved  to  Tighfield',  is  the  father of  Hob Gammidge  the Roper;
  Ham  Gamgee's  sister  May  is   absent;  and   neither  the   husband  of
  Elanor  nor  the  husband  of  Goldilocks  is  shown).  The  second  form,
  like S 1, is part of the series beginning with the Baggins table BA 3.
     In  these  texts  the  Cotton  family is  again written  out separately
  from  the  Gamgees,  but Sam's  sister Marigold  is now  the wife  of Rose
  Cotton's  brother  Tom  ('Young Tom',  RK p.  286). It  will be  seen that
  at  this  stage  the  third  family,  beginning  with  Holman  'the green-
  handed'  of  Hobbiton (as  he is  named in  the final  form), had  not yet
  entered  the  genealogy;  and  that  Sam and  Rose had  fourteen children,
  not as  later thirteen,  the youngest  being Lily  (born when  her parents
  were  very  advanced  in  years,  according  to  the  dates  given!). Lily
  survived into the first proof, when she was deleted.                     
     Later  correction  to  S  2 replaced  Goodwill Whitfoot  (Elanor's hus-
  band)  by  Fastred  Fairbairn (in  the final  form Fastred  of Greenholm),
  and  rejected  the  Whitfoots  of  the  White  Downs,  adding  this  hasty
  note:  'They  removed  to  a  new  country  beyond  the  Far   Downs,  the
  Westmarch  between  Far  Downs  and  Tower  Hills.  From  them   are  come
  the  Fairbairns  of  the Towers,  Wardens of  Westmarch.' The  sentence in
  the Prologue (FR  p. 18)  'Outside the  Farthings were  the East  and West
  Marches:  the  Buckland;  and  the  Westmarch  added   to  the   Shire  in
  S.R.1462' was added in the Second Edition (see p. 17).                   
                                                                          
                                 S3 (p. 116).                             
                                                                          
  This  version,  untitled,  was  written  on  the  reverse  of  the  'Note'
  concerning  the  two  versions  of  Bilbo's story  about his  meeting with
  Gollum (see p. 12).                                                      
     Here  the  'greenhanded'  strain  entered the  genealogy, but  the gen-
  erations,  in  relation  to  the  Gamgees  and  the  Cottons,  would  sub-

              
                                                                         
 sequently be displaced 'upwards': see under S 4. This version has no     
 note on the Fairbairns.                                                  
                                                                         
                                    S4.                                   
                                                                         
 In this finely made tree,  entitled 'Genealogy  of Master  Samwise, show-
 ing the rise of the family of Gardner of  the Hill',  the final  form was
 reached in all but a few  points. The  moving up  of the  'Greenhands' by
 a   generation   now   entered:    Hending   'greenhand'    of   Hobbiton
 remained, but was now  born in  1210; his  children likewise  have birth-
 dates  earlier by  some forty  years; and  Hending's daughters  Rowan and
 Rose  now  marry,  not  Hobson  Gamgee  and  Wilcome  Cotton,  but  their
 fathers, Hob Gammidge and Cotman.                                        
  At first sight my father's alteration of names in  the family  trees, as
 here,  with  its  baffling  movement  of  Holmans  and Halfreds, may seem
 incomprehensibly finicky, but in some  cases the  reasons can  be clearly
 seen, and this is in fact a good example. In S3 Ham  Gamgee is  said to
 have  'taken up  as a  gardener with  his uncle  Holman': this  is Holman
 Greenhand the gardener,  brother of  his mother  Rowan -  and he  is 'old
 Holman'  who  looked  after  the  garden  at  Bag  End before  Ham Gamgee
 took on the job  (FR p.  30). But  with the  displacement of  the 'Green-
 hand'  generations   that  entered   in  S4  Holman   Greenhand  would
 become   Ham   Gamgee's   great-uncle   (brother   of   his   grandmother
 Rowan), and so too old. It  was for  this reason  that my  father changed
 Holman  Greenhand  of  S  3,  born  in 1292,  to Halfred  Greenhand (born
 in  1251),  and  gave him  a son  named Holman,  born in  1292, described
 in  the  final  genealogy  as  Ham  Gamgee's  'Cousin  Holman':   he  was
 Ham Gamgee's first cousin once removed.                                  
  In  S  4 Hending's  third son  (Grossman in  S 3)  is Holman:  the names
 of  father  and  son  were  subsequently  reversed. Ham  Gamgee's brother
 Holman   of   Overhill   remained  (later   Halfred  of   Overhill);  and
 Wilcome  Cotton  becomes Holman  Cotton, as  in the  final form,  but his
 nickname  is  'Long  Holm',  not  'Long  Hom'.  This  name  Holman  is to
 be taken, I think, in the sense 'hole-dweller'.                          
  Elanor's  husband remains  in S 4 Fastred  Fairbairn, and  Frodo's son,
 Samwise Gardner in S 3, reverts to  Samlad Gardner  as in  S 2:  this was
 corrected to the final name, Holfast. The dates of birth of the children
 of  Sam  Gamgee  and  Rose  Cotton  remain  as  they were  in S  3; thus
 Primrose, the ninth child, was born in 1439 (see under S 1 above).       
  In all other respects S 4 was as the final genealogy, including the note
 on  the Fairbairns;  and it  was on  this manuscript  that the  last cor-
 rections were made (the birth-date of  Sam and  Rose's last  child, Lily,
 becoming 1444).                                                          
  S4  was  followed  by  a  beautifully  drawn  tree,  from   which  the
 genealogy in The Lord of the Rings was printed, and here the  final title
 entered. As already  noticed, it  was on  the first  proof that  Lily was
 removed.                                                                 

                             NOTES.                                     
                                                                       
 1. This manuscript of  the Bolger  family was  the latest  that remained
    in my father's  possession, and  he had  of course  no copies  of the
    texts  that  went  to  Marquette.  Years  later  he  wrote  on  BG 2:
    'Doesn't  fit genealogies  published. Fredegar  should be  born about
    1385-8.  Put in  Estella 1387'.  On one  of his  copies of  the First
    Edition  he  added  to  the  genealogy   of  the   Tooks  (Fredegar's
    mother  being  Rosamunda Took)  'Estella' as  the sister  of Fredegar
    and  her  birth-date  1385;  and  to  the  Brandybuck   genealogy  he
    added to Meriadoc '= Estella  Bolger 1385',  noting beside  this that
    he  had  told  a  correspondent in  1965 that  'I believe  he married
    a  sister  of  Fredegar Bolger  of the  Bolgers of  Budgeford'. These
    corrections,  for  a  reason  unknown  to  me, were  not incorporated
    in  the  Allen  and Unwin  Second Edition,  but they  did occur  in a
    later  impression  of  the  Ballantine  edition  of  1966,  and hence
    Estella  Bolger  and  her  marriage to  Merry Brandybuck  are entered
    in The Complete Guide to Middle-earth by Robert Foster.             
       These  additions to  the family  trees were  made at  the instance
    of  Douglas  A.  Anderson in  the Houghton  Mifflin edition  of 1987,
    to which he contributed a note on  the history  of the  text. Estella
    Bolger  and  her  marriage  to  Meriadoc  have  finally  entered  the
    British 'tradition' in the re-set edition published  by HarperCollins
    in  1994  (see  Douglas  Anderson's  'Note  on  the  Text'   in  this
    edition, p. xii).                                                   
 2. My  statement  in  VII.39,  note  19,  that  Bridgefields   does  not
    appear on the  original map  of the  Shire is  erroneous: it  is pen-
    cilled on that map  (and can  be seen  in the  reproduction, frontis-
    piece to Vol.VI)  beside the  name Bolger,  a region  just south-west
    of  the  Brandywine  Bridge.  As  noted  in VII.39,  on my  large map
    of the Shire  made in  1943 my  father pencilled  in the  name Budge-
    ford, this being the crossing of the  Water by  the road  (entered on
    the  map  at  the same  time) from  Whitfurrows on  the East  Road to
    Scary. At the same time he wrote in Bridgefields  in a  new position,
    north-west  of  the  Brandywine Bridge  and north  of the  East Road,
    as it appears on the published map of the Shire.                    
 3. In  late  typescripts  of  the  chapters  in  which  Fredegar  Bolger
    appears  in  The  Lord  of the  Rings the  name Belisarius  (with the
    nickname   Belly,   which   no   doubt   accounts  for   the  choice)
    replaced  the  earlier  Hamilcar,  and  was  then itself  replaced by
    Fredegar.                                                           
 4. Jemima  Boffin  of  BG  2  was  first  renamed  Jasmine,   which  was
    replaced  by  the  form  Jessamine; and  so also  in the  Boffin gen-
    ealogy.                                                             
 5. On  one  of  the  proofs  my  father corrected  Fredegar's birth-date
    from  1377  to  1380,  but the  genealogy was  omitted from  the book

     before  this was  introduced; in  the Took  table, however,  the date
     was changed. See note 1.                                             
  6. This was in fact  an alteration  (VI.298 and  note 1):  originally my
     father  marked  the  Boffins  north-west  of the  Woody End,  and the
     Bolgers  north  of  Hobbiton,   subsequently  changing   them  about;
     cf.  VI.298,  'as  far  west as  Woodhall (which  was reckoned  to be
     in the Boffin-country)'.                                              
  7. In  VI.273,  275  I printed  the name  as Lanorac,  which was  a mis-
     reading of the difficult manuscript.                                 
  8. In VI.316 I noted that some of  the figures  in T  1 were  changed on
     the manuscript, and gave a list of them; but I  said that  these were
     'the earlier ones', whereas they are in  fact the  corrected figures.
     See note 9.                                                          
  9. In  T  1  the  birth-dates  of  Isambard  and  Flambard were  170 and
     165  years  before  the  Farewell  Party,  but  these   were  changed
     (see  note  8)  to 160  and 167  (in T  2 1241  and 1234);  hence the
     reversal of the positions of the brothers in T 2.                    
 10. On  T  2  Uffo  Took  and   his  son   Prospero  were   corrected  to
     Adelard  and  Everard  (see  VI.247,  315),  Uffo  becoming  a Boffin
     name (see BF 2). It will  thus be  seen that  they have  been removed
     from the  descent of  the fourth  son (Fosco  > Sigismond)  and given
     to  that   of  the   second  son   Isembard  (formerly   without  any
     descendants  named),  whose  son  Flambard  takes  over   the  former
     name of Hildigrim.                                                   
 11. Farmer  Cotton's  reference  to  Pippin's father  as the  Thain ('You
     see,  your  dad,  Mr.  Peregrin, he's  never had  no truck  with this
     Lotho,  not  from the  beginning: said  that if  anyone was  going to
     play the chief at this time of day, it  would be  the right  Thain of
     the Shire and no upstart ...') was a late addition to the text of the
     chapter  The  Scouring of  the Shire  (RK p.  289); for  the original
     form of the passage see IX.99.                                       

                                      IV.                                   
                                THE CALENDARS.                              
                                                                           
 The  earliest  text  of  what became  Appendix D  to The  Lord of  the Rings
 is a brief, rough manuscript without title, which I will call D 1.  In style
 and appearance it suggests  association with  the first  of the  two closely
 related  manuscripts  of  the  Appendix  on  Languages,  F  1  (see  p. 28),
 and that this is the case is shown by a reference in the  text to  'the note
 on  Languages  p.  11'.  This in  fact refers  to the  second version,  F 2,
 which was thus  already in  existence (see  p. 136,  note 2).  D 1  was fol-
 lowed, clearly at no long interval, by a  fair copy,  D 2,  exactly parallel
 to  the  manuscripts  F  1  and  F  2  of  the  Appendix  on  Languages; and
 thus the order of  composition was  F 1,  F 2;  D 1,  D 2.  I have  no doubt
 at all that all  four texts  belong to  the same  time, which  was certainly
 before  the  summer  of  1950  (see  p.  28  and   note  1),   and  probably
 earlier:  in  fact, an  envelope associated  with D  1 is  postmarked August
 1949.                                                                      
   In this case, since the texts are far briefer than F 1 and F 2,  and since
 the  second  manuscript  D  2  was  substantially  altered  from   its  pre-
 decessor,  I  give them  both. These  earliest versions  of the  Appendix on
 Calendars  show,  as  do  those  of  the  Appendix  on  Languages,  how  far
 the  conception  still  was,  when  The  Lord  of  the  Rings had  been com-
 pleted,  from  the  published  form.  There  follows  here  the text  of the
 manuscript D 1.                                                            
                                                                           
 In  the  Shire  the   Calendar  was   not  arranged   as  ours   is;  though
 the  year  seems  to  have  been  of  the  same  length,  for  long  ago  as
 those   times   are   now,  reckoned   in  years   and  men's   lives,  they
 were   not   (I   suppose)   far   back   in   the   age   of  Middle-earth.
 According   to   the   Hobbits   themselves   they   had   no   'week'  when
 they   were   a   wandering   people,   and   though   they    had   months,
 reckoned  by  the  moon,   their  keeping   of  dates   and  time   was  not
 particularly   accurate.   In   Eriador  (or   the  West-lands)   when  they
 settled    down   they    adopted   the    reckoning   of    the   Dunedain,
 which  was  of  Elvish  origin.  But  the  Hobbits  of  the  Shire  after  a
 while  altered  things  to  suit  their  own  convenience   better.  'Shire-
 reckoning' was eventually adopted also in Bree.                            
   It  is  difficult  to  discover  from  old  records precise  details about
 those   things   which   everybody   knows  and   takes  for   granted,  nor

                   
                                                                  
 am I skilled in such abstruse matters. But in that part  of Middle-
 earth at that time it seems that the Eldar (who  had, as  Sam said,
 more  time  at  their  disposal)  reckoned  in centuries.  Now they
 had  observed  -  I  do  not  know  how,  but  the Eldar  have many
 powers,  and  had  observed many  centuries -  that a  century con-
 tains, as near  as no  matter for  practical purposes,  36524 days.
 They therefore divided  it into  100 years  (or sun-rounds)  of 366
 days, and dealt with the inaccuracy, not as we  do by  inserting at
 intervals an  additional day  to make  up for  the deficit,  but by
 ejecting a few days at stated  times to  reduce the  surplus. Every
 four  years  they  would  have used  three days  too many,  if they
 had done nothing to correct it.                                   
    Normally  they  divided  their  year  of  366  days  into twelve
 months,  six  of  31  and  six  of  30  days. They  alternated from
 January to June 31, 30; from July to  December 30,  31. It  will be
 observed  that  their  months thus  had the  same lengths  as ours,
 except for February, 30, and July, 30. Every  eighth year  they got
 rid of their excess of 6 days by  reducing all  months to  30 days;
 and  these years  were called  ['Equal-month Years'  or 'Thirty-day
 Years' >] 'Sixty-week Years' or 'Short Years'.                    
    The  Elvish  week  had  only six  days; so  normal years  had 61
 weeks, and every eighth year  had 60  weeks. The  first day  of the
 year  always  began  on the  first day  of the  week. In  the Short
 (eighth) Years  every month  began on  the first  day of  the week.
 In the normal years they progressed thus: 1, 2, 2, 3,  3, 4,  4, 4,
 5,5,6,6.(1)                                                         
    The Eldar still at the  end of  a century  would have  had 36525
 days, not 35624; so once a century they  left out  the last  day of
 the  last  month  (reducing  December  to  30  days).  The week-day
 went with it: there was no sixth day of the week  in the  last week
 of the century.                                                   
                                                                  
    The  Dunedain  altered  these  arrangements.  They  favoured the
 number  7,  and  also  found  a  seven-day  week  more  convenient.
 They  also  preferred  a  system by  which all  the months  had the
 same  lengths and  did not  vary at  intervals. [Struck  out later:
 They  had 12  months (not  13) so  that the  year could  be divided
 into two exact halves.)                                           
    In  Gondor,  therefore,  and  in  most  regions  where  the Com-
 mon  Speech  was  used,  the  year  had  365  days;  there  were 12
 months  of  30 days  each; and  52 weeks  of 7  days each.  But the
 method  of  dealing  with the  extra 5  days differed  in different
 countries.                                                        

                                          
                                                                     
  In  Gondor,  between  June  30  and  July  1 they  placed a  kind of
 short  month  of  5  days,  which  were   called  The   Summer  Days,
 and  were  a  time  of  holiday. The  middle day  of the  Summer Days
 (the  third)  was  called  Midyear's  Day and  was a  festival. Every
 fourth  year  there  were  6  Summer  Days,  and  the  Midyear festi-
 val was  two days  long (celebrated  on the  third and  fourth days).
 In  the  last  or  hundredth year  of a  century the  additional Sum-
 mer Day was omitted, bringing the total to 36524.                    
  In  the  Shire  (and  eventually   in  Bree   where  Shire-reckoning
 was  finally  adopted)  there  were  3  Summer  Days,  called  in the
 Shire  The  Lithe  or The  Lithedays; and  2 Yule  Days, the  last of
 the  Old Year  and the  first of  the New.*  Every fourth  year there
 were  4  Lithedays [added:  except in  the last  year of  a century].
 The  Lithedays  and  the  Yuledays  were   the  chief   holidays  and
 times  of feasting.  The additional  Litheday, called  Overlithe, was
 a  day  of special  feasting and  merrymaking. Yule  was in  full the
 last week of the old  year and  the first  of the  new, or  in Shire-
 reckoning  (since  December  had  only  30   days)  December   24  to
 January  7  inclusive; but  the two  middle days  of the  period, Old
 Year's  Day  or  Yearsend  (December  30)  and  New  Year's   Day  or
 Yearsday (January 1), were the great Yuledays, or Yule proper.       
  The   Hobbits   introduced  one   notable  innovation   (the  Shire-
 reform).  They  found  the  shifting  of  the  weekday name  in rela-
 tion  to  dates  from  year to  year untidy  and inconvenient.  So in
 the  time  of  Isengrim  II  they  arranged that  the odd  day, which
 put   the   succession  out,   should  have   no  weekday   name.  So
 Midyear's  Day  (the  second  and  middle  day of  the Lithe)  had no
 weekday  name,  and  neither  had  Overlithe  (which  followed  it in
 every  fourth  year).  After  this  reform the  year always  began on
 the first day of the  week and  ended on  the last  day of  the week;
 and  the  same  date  in  one  year  always  had  the   same  weekday
 name  in  all  other  years.  In consequence  of which  Hobbits never
 troubled  to  put  weekdays on  their letters.  They found  this very
                                                                     
 (* The reckoning of the year's  beginning had  varied much in various
 times and places. The beginning after Yule (originally intended to be
 at the Winter Solstice) was used in the North Kingdom  and eventually
 adopted by Hobbits. The wild Hobbits  were said  to have  begun their
 year  with  the  New  Moon nearest  to the  beginning of  Spring. The
 settled Hobbits for a time  began their  year after  Harvest, roughly
 October 1st. This habit  long endured  in Bree.  In Gondor  after the
 downfall of Baraddur a new era was  begun with  that day  reckoned as
 the first day of its first year.)                                    

                                 
                                                                     
 convenient  in the  Shire, but  of course,  if they  travelled further
 than  Bree,  where  the  reform  was  adopted,  they  found  it rather
 confusing.                                                           
  It  will  be  observed  if  one  glances  at  a   Hobbit  (perpetual)
 Calendar  that  the  only  day  on   which  no   month  began   was  a
 -Friday. It was thus  a jesting  idiom in  the Shire  to speak  of 'on
 Friday the first' when referring to a day  that did  not exist,  or to
 a day on which impossible events like the  flying of  pigs or  (in the
 Shire) the walking of trees might be  expected to  occur. In  full the
 expression  was  'Friday  the  first  of  Summerfilth', for  there was
 no such month.                                                       
                                                                     
  In  the  above  notes  I  have  used  our  modern  month   and  week-
 day  names,  though  of  course  neither  the  Eldar nor  the Dunedain
 nor  the  Hobbits  actually  did  so.  But  dates  are  both important
 and  easily  confused,  so  that  I  thought  a  translation  into our
 familiar  names  essential.  These  may  very  properly be  allowed to
 represent   the   usual   names   in   Gondor   and   in   the  Common
 Speech.  But  in  fact,  the  Hobbits  of  the   Shire  and   of  Bree
 adhered   to   old-fashioned   month-names,   which   they   seem   to
 have  picked  up  in  antiquity  from  the  Men  of  the  Anduin-vale;
 at  any  rate  very  similar  names were  found in  Dale and  in Rohan
 (see  the  note  on  Languages  p. 11).(2) The original  meanings  of
 these  had  been  as  a  rule long  forgotten and  they had  become in
 consequence  worn  down  in  form,  -math  for  instance  at  the  end
 of  four  of  them  is  a reduction  of month.  There was  some varia-
 tion  in  the  names. Several  of the  Bree-names differed  from those
 of the  Shire, and  in one  or two  cases the  East-farthingers agreed
 with Bree.                                                           
                                                                     
              Shire              Bree                                 
 January      Afteryule          Frery (also East Farthing)           
 February     Solmath (a)        Solmath (a)                          
 March        Rethe (3)          Rethe                                
 April        Astron             Chithing (also East Farthing)        
 May          Thrimilch (b)      Thrimidge                            
 June         Forelithe          Lithe                                
              The Lithe or       The Summer                           
               Lithedays         Days                                 
 July         Afterlithe         Mede                                 
 August       Wedmath            Wedmath                              
 September    Halimath           Harvest(math) (also East Farthing)
 October      Winterfilth        [Wintermath >] Wintring              

 November   Blotmath (c)   Blooting                                         
 December   Foreyule       Yulemath
 (a)   Pronounced   So'math.   (b)   Pronounced  Thrimidge   and  also
 written  Thrimich,   Thrimidge,  the   latter  being   already  most
 usual  in  Bilbo's  time.  (c)   Often  pronounced   Blommath.  There
 were often jests in Bree about 'Winterfilth in the Shire',  after the
 Breefolk  had  altered  their  name  to  Wintring;  but the  name had
 probably  meant  'filling,  completion'  and  may  have  derived from
 the  time  when  the  year  ended  and  began  in October  after Har-
 vest. Winter was indeed (as still with us) often  used for  'year' in
 reckoning age.(4)                                                     
                                                                    
   The   Hobbit   week   was   taken   from   the  Dunedain   and  the
 names  were  translations  of  the  names   given  by   the  Dunedain
 following  the  Eldar.  The  six-day  week  of  the  Eldar  had  days
 dedicated to  the Stars,  Sun, Moon,  the Two  Trees of  Valinor, the
 Sky, and the Valar or Rulers, in that order, the  last day  being the
 chief or high day.                                                  
   The  Dunedain  kept  the  dedications  and  order, but  altered the
 fourth  day  to  Tree-day  with  reference  to  the  Eldest  Tree  of
 which  a  descendant  grew  in  Numenor,  and  desiring  a  seven day
 week  and  being  great mariners  they inserted  a Sea-day  after the
 Sky-day.                                                            
   The  Hobbits  took  over  this  arrangement,  but  the  meanings of
 the  days  were  soon  forgotten  and  the  names  reduced  in  form.
 The  'translation'  was  made  more  than  a  thousand  years  before
 Bilbo's time. In the oldest known records of the  Shire, in  the ear-
 lier   parts   of  the   Great  Writ of Tuckborough,(5) the  names
 appeared in the following archaic forms.                            
                                                                    
   1. Sterrendei   that is   Stars' day                                  
   2. Sunnendei              Sun's day                                           
   3. Monendei               Moon's day                                           
   4. Treowesdei             Tree's day                                        
   5. Heovenesdei            Heaven's (Sky's) day                              
   6. Meresdei               Sea's day                                          
   7. Hihdei                 High day                                               
                                                                    
 But in  the language  of the  date of  the Red  Book these  names had
 become  written:  Sterday  (or   Stirday),  Sunday,   Munday,  Trews-
 day,   Hevensday,   Mersday,  Hiday;   and  Hevensday   was  univer-
 sally   pronounced   Hensdy   and   often   written   He'nsday.   The
 spelling Stirday (usual in the Red Book)  was due  to the  fact that,

 the  old  meaning  being  forgotten,  Stirday,  which  began   the  week
 again,  after  the  holiday  of  Hiday,  was  popularly  supposed  to be
 connected with Stirring.                                                
   Since   the   Hobbit-names   are   accidentally   somewhat   like  our
 own,  and  two  are  identical  (in  spoken  form)(6) I thought it would
 be  inconvenient  to  translate  them  according   to  their   order.  I
 have  therefore  translated  them  according  to  their  sound.  But  it
 must  be  remembered  that  the  associations  in  the  Shire  were dif-
 ferent.   Translated   the   week   runs:   Saturday,   Sunday,  Monday,
 Tuesday,   Wednesday,   Thursday,   Friday.   But   Saturday   was   the
 first  day  of the  week, and  Friday the  last. In  associations Satur-
 day was more like our Monday and Friday like our Sunday.                
   The  month  names  I  have,  as   explained  above,   translated.  But
 for  fear  of getting  into confusion  I have  left Bilbo's  and Frodo's
 dates  unchanged:  that  is,  I   have  kept   the  Hobbit   lengths  of
 month.  This  only  closely  concerns  this  book  at  the  turn  of the
 years  1418  -  19.  It  must  then  be  remembered  by  those  who wish
 to  follow  the  various   movements  of   the  characters   that  while
 December   1418   and   January   1419  have   (because  of   the  addi-
 tion  of  a  Yule-day  to  each)  the  same  length  as  ours,  February
 has  30,  so  that  e.g.  March  25  would  be  March  27  in  our reck-
 oning.                                                                  
   The  Leapday  or  Overlithe  does  not  concern   the  Red   Book,  as
 it did not occur in  any of  the important  years for  the story  of the
 Ring.  It  occurred  in  the  year  before  Bilbo  went  to  the  Lonely
 Mountain,  1340;  it  had  been  missed  in  1400  being  the  end  of a
 century  (just  before  Bilbo's  Farewell  Party  in  1401), and  so had
 not  occurred  from  1396  until  1404.  The   only  years   dealt  with
 in  the  Red  Book  in  which   it  occurred   were  1420,   the  famous
 Harvest,  and  1436.  But  though  no  doubt   the  feasting   at  Over-
 lithe  in  1420  was  tremendous  it  is  not  mentioned specially.(7) The
 Book ends before the Lithe of 1.436.                                    
                                                                        
 It will be seen that the account of the Eldarin calendar in Middle-earth
 given in D1 bears no relation to that in  the published  text. Moreover,
 while  the  Shire Calendar  as described  in D  1 was  preserved without
 change, it  is much  more closely  based on  the Numenorean  system than
 in Appendix D. In  D 1  both calendars  had a  year of  12 months  of 30
 days each, and the only difference in that of the Shire was  the distri-
 bution  of  the  five  Summer  Days  of  Gondor  into  two  Yuledays and
 three  Summer  Days  or  Lithedays  (the leap-year  day of  Overlithe or
 fourth  Litheday  corresponding  to  the  sixth  Summer Day  in Gondor).
 In  Appendix  D,  on  the other  hand, the  Numenorean calendar  had ten

  months  of  30  days  and  two  of  31  (making 362),  with the  three 'extra
  days'  being  yestare  (the  beginning  of the  year), loende  (the mid-day),
  and mettare (the ending of the year).                                        
    In  writing  of  the  names  of  the  months  and  days  of  the   week  my
  father  used  the word  'translation'. He  was referring,  of course,  to the
  substitution  of  e.g.  Thursday  for  Mersday  or  March  for Rethe.  But it
  is  to  be  remembered  that  Mersday,  Rethe,  etc. were  themselves feigned
  to  be  'translations'  of  the  true  Hobbit  names.  We  do  not  know what
  the  'real'  translation  of  the  Numenorean  name  Oraearon  (RK   p.  388)
  was;  the  theory  is  that  my father  devised a  translation of  the Hobbit
  name,  which  he  knew,  in  archaic  English  form,  Meresdei   later  Mers-
  day,  and  then  substituted  Thursday  in  the  narrative.  The  rhyming  of
  'Trewsday,   Hensday,   Mersday,   Hiday'   with   our   'Tuesday,  Wednesday
  (Wensday),  Thursday,  Friday'  he  naturally  called  an   accidental  like-
  ness;  but  it  was  an  astonishing  coincidence!  I  am  much  inclined  to
  think  that  the  Hobbit  calendar  was  the  original  conception,  and that
  the names of the  days were  in fact  devised precisely  in order  to provide
  this 'accidental likeness'. If this is so, then of course the earlier history
  of  the names  of the  week (going  back to  the six-day  week of  the Eldar)
  was  a  further evolution  in this  extraordinarily ingenious  and attractive
  conception.  It is  notable, I  think, that  the Elvish  names do  not appear
  until  the  text  D  2  (where the  Sindarin names  are called,  as is  to be
  expected, Noldorin).                                                         
    This  second  text  now   follows  (with   certain  omissions,   which  are
  noted). It  is a  very carefully  written manuscript,  bearing the  title The
  Calendar. I believe it to have been written soon after D 1.                  
                                                                              
                                  The Calendar.                                 
                                                                              
  The Calendar in the Shire differed in several features  from ours.           
  The year seems to have been of the  same length,  for long  ago as           
  those times  are now,  reckoned in  years and  lives of  men, they           
  were  not,  I  suppose,  very  remote according  to the  memory of           
  the Earth. It is recorded by the Hobbits that  they had  no 'week'           
  when  they  were  still a  wandering people,  and though  they had           
  'months',  governed more  or less  by the  Moon, their  keeping of           
  dates and calculations of time were vague  and inaccurate.  In the           
  west-lands of Eriador, when they  had begun  to settle  down, they           
  adopted  the  reckoning  of  the  Dunedain  of  the North-kingdom,           
  which  was ultimately  of Elvish  origin; but  the Hobbits  of the           
  Shire  introduced  several  minor  alterations. This  calendar, or           
  'Shire-reckoning' as it  was called,  was eventually  adopted also           
  in Bree, except for the Shire-usage of counting as Year 1 the year           
  of the foundation or colonization of the Shire.                              
    It is often difficult to discover from old tales  and traditions           

 precise  information  about  those  things  which  people  knew  well
 and took for granted in  their own  day, like  the names  of letters,
 or of  the days  of the  week, or  the names  and lengths  of months.
 I have done as well  as I  could, and  have looked  into some  of the
 surviving  works  on  chronology.  Owing  to  their  general interest
 in  genealogy,  and  to the  [added: later]  interest of  the learned
 among  them  in  ancient  history,  the  Shire-hobbits  seem  to have
 concerned  themselves  a  good  deal  with   dates;  and   they  even
 drew  up  complicated  tables  showing  the  relations  of  their own
 system with others. I  am not  learned or  skilled in  these abstruse
 matters,  and  may  have  made  many  mistakes; but  at any  rate the
 chronology  of  the  crucial  years  (Shire-reckoning 1418,  1419) is
 so  carefully  set  out in  the Red  Book that  there cannot  be much
 doubt about days and times at this point.                            
   It  seems  clear  that  the  Eldar,  who  had, as  Samwise remarks,
 more  time  at  their  disposal,  reckoned  in  centuries,   and  the
 Quenya  word  yen,  often  translated  'year',  really  means  a hun-
 dred  of our  years, sometimes  called quantien  or 'full  year'. Now
 they  observed  -  I  do not  know how  or when:  but the  Eldar have
 many  powers,  and  they  had  observed  many  centuries  -  that the
 century  or  quantien  contained,  exactly  or  exactly   enough  for
 practical  purposes,  36524  days.  They  therefore  divided  it into
 100  coranari * (sun-rounds  or  years)  of  366  days.   This  would
 have  given  them  36600  days,  or  76  too  many;  and  they  dealt
 with  the  inaccuracy,  not  as we  do by  inserting at  intervals an
 additional  day  to  make up  for a  deficit, but  by ejecting  a few
 days at stated times  to reduce  the surplus.  Every four  years they
 would  have  had  (very  nearly)  three  days too  many, if  they had
 done  nothing  to  correct  this.  Their  method  of  correction  may
 seem  complicated  to  us,  but  they  favoured  the numbers  six and
 twelve,  and  they  were  chiefly  concerned  to  make   things  work
 out properly at the end of their 'full year' or century.             
   Normally  they  divided  their  coranar  of  366  days  into twelve
 months,  six  of  31  days  and six  of 30  days. The  lengths alter-
 nated  from  January + to  June  31,  30;  and  from  July  to Decem-
 ber  30,  31.  It will  be observed  that their  months thus  had the
 same  lengths  as ours,  except for  February, 30  (usual in  all the
 calendars  of  this  period), and  July, 30.  Every eighth  year they
                                                                     
 (* Also called in less astronomical contexts loa 'time of growth', sc.
 of plants, etc.)                                                     
 (+ The month-names are here translated to avoid confusion.)         

 got  rid  of  the  excess  of 6  days by  reducing all  the months  to 30
 days  and  thus  having   a  year   (or  coranar)   of  only   360  days.
 These years they called 'Short Years' or 'Sixty-week Years'.             
   The  Eldarin  week  had  only  six  days,  so   normal  years   had  61
 weeks,  and  every  eighth  year  had  60  weeks.  The  first day  of the
 coranar  always  began  on  the  first  day  of  the  week. In  the Short
 Years every month also began with the first day.                         
   These  eight-year  cycles  ran  on  regularly  until  the  end  of  the
 96th  year  of  the  quantien  or  century.  There  then   remained  four
 more  years  to  deal  with,  and  1460  days   were  required   to  com-
 plete  the  full  tale  of  36524.  Four  years  of  365 days  would have
 done  this,  but  that  would   not  have   fitted  the   Elves'  six-day
 week.   Their   actual   arrangement,    rounding   off    the   quantien
 neatly,  was  this:  at  the  end of  the century  they had  a half-cycle
 of  three  long  years  of  366  days  (total 1098),  and one  short year
 (the  last  of  the  century)  of  360:  making  1458  and  exactly  com-
 pleting  the  weeks.  The  two  more  days  still required (8) were added
 at  the  end  and  the  beginning  of  the  quantien;  they had  no week-
 day   name  nor   month,  but   only  their   names:  Quantarie   Day  of
 Completion,   Oldyear's   Day,   and   Vinyarie   Newyear's   Day;   they
 were  times  of  festival. Thus  the year  1 of  the Eldarin  century had
 367  days;  Years 8,  16, 24,  32, 40,  48, 56,  64, 72,  80, 88,  96 had
 360  days;  Year  100  had  361;  and  the  remainder  had  366.   It  is
 thus   impossible   to  translate   an  Eldarin   date  into   our  terms
 without  a  possible  error  of  some  days,  unless  one  knows  at what
 point  in  an  Eldarin  century  a  given year  stands, and  whether that
 century did in fact begin on what we should call January 1.*             
                                                                         
  (* I believe that the Elves observe the Sun and stars closely,  and make
 occasional  corrections.  Their  quantieni  are arranged,  I am  told, to
 begin  as  nearly  as  possible with  the first  sunset after  the Winter
 Solstice. The Eldarin 'day' or are  was reckoned  not from  midnight, but
 from  the  moment  of  the  disappearance  of the  sun below  the horizon
 as observed from the shores  of the  sea. Among  other peoples  the reck-
 oning  of  the  year's  beginning  had  varied  much at  different times,
 though it was usually at mid-winter,  or at  a date  taken as  the begin-
 ning  of  Spring,  and  occasionally after  Harvest. The  beginning after
 Yule  (taken  as  at  or  near  the  Winter  Solstice)  was  used  by the
 Dunedain  in  the  North-kingdom,  and  eventually  was  adopted  by  the
 Hobbits.  The  Wild  Hobbits  were  said  to have  begun their  year with
 the  New  Moon  nearest  the  beginning  of  Spring. The  settled Hobbits
 for some time began their year after Harvest,  or after  the introduction
 of regular fixed months on October the first. A trace of this was left in
 the keeping of October 1 as a minor festival m the Shire and Bree.)      

   The   Dunedain   altered   these   arrangements.   Being    mortal   if
 long-lived  the  actual  'sunround'  or  year  was  their  natural  unit.
 They  required  therefore  a  system  in  which   months  had   the  same
 length  from  year  to  year.   Also  they   much  favoured   the  number
 seven.  The  following  was  the  system  used  in  Numenor,   and  after
 the   Downfall   in  the   North-kingdom,  and   also  in   Gondor  until
 the  end of  the line  of Kings:  it is  called, therefore,  King's Reck-
 oning.                                                                   
   The  year  had  365  days;  there  were  12  months,  normally   of  30
 days  each;  but  the  months  on  either  side of  the mid-year  and the
 year's-end  had  31  (in  our  terms  January,  June,   July,  December).
 The   183rd   day   or   Midyear   Day  belonged   to  no   month.  Every
 fourth  year,  except  in  the  last  year  of a  century, there were two
 Midyear   Days.   From   this   system  the   Shire-reckoning,  described
 below, was derived.                                                      
   But  in  Gondor  later,  in  the time  of the  Stewards, the  length of
 the   months   was   equalized.   Each   month    had   30    days,   but
 between  June  30  and  July  1   were  inserted   5  days,   called  the
 Summer  Days.  These   were  usually   a  time   of  holiday.   The  mid-
 dle  or  third  of  these  days,  the  183rd  of  the  year,  was  called
 Midyear  Day  and  was  a  festival.  As  before,   it  was   doubled  in
 every  fourth  year  (except  the  hundredth  year  of  a  century). This
 was  called  the  Steward's  Reckoning,  and  was  usual  in  nearly  all
 countries   where   the   Common   Speech   was   used    (except   among
 Elves, who used it only in their dealings with Men).                     
   The   Hobbits,   however,   remained   conservative,    and   continued
 to  use  a  form  of  King's  Reckoning  adapted  to  fit their  own cus-
 toms.  Their  months  were  all  equal   and  had   30  days,   but  they
 had  three  Summer  Days,  called  in   the  Shire   the  Lithe   or  the
 Lithedays  between  June  and  July;  and  two  Yuledays,  the   last  of
 the  old  year.  and  the  first  of  the  new  year.  So that  in effect
 January,  June,  July,  December  still  had  31  days,  but  the  Lithe-
 days  and  Yuledays  were  not   counted  in   the  month   (January  1st
 was  the  second  and  not  the  first  day  of  the year).  Every fourth
 year,  except  in  the  last  year  of  the  century,*  there  were  four
 Lithedays.  The  Lithedays  and  the  Yuledays   were  the   chief  holi-
                                                                         
  (* Earlier it had been the first year of the century, for it so happened
 that Hobbits  adopted King's  Reckoning in  the last  year of  a Dunedain
 century, probably Third Age 1300, which  became the  first year  of their
 reckoning.  But  as  Shire  Reckoning  1  was  found  to   correspond  to
 King's Reckoning 1601 things were later  adjusted to  fit in  with King's
 Reckoning.)                                                              

 days  and  times  of  feasting.  The  additional Litheday  added after
 Midyear  Day  (and  so  the  184th  day  of  the  longer   years)  was
 called  Overlithe  and  was  a  day  of  special merrymaking.  In full
 'Yuletide'  was  fourteen  days  long, the  last week  of the  old and
 the  first  of  the new  year (from  December 25  to January  6 inclu-
 sive),  but  the  two  middle   days  of   the  period,   Yearsend  or
 Oldyear's  Day,  and  Yearsday  or  Newyear's   Day  were   the  great
 Yuledays.                                                             
   The   Hobbits   introduced   one   small  but   notable  innovation,
 the 'Shire-reform'....                                                
                                                                      
   The  text  continues  without significant  change from  that of  D 1
 (p. 121), with the same page-reference to the text F 2 of the Appendix
 on  Languages  (see  note  2),  and  without the  Quenya names  of the
 months which  are given  in Appendix  D (RK  p. 388).  In the  list of
 Hobbit  month-names  Yulemath  (as  well  as  Harvest(math))   is  now
 included as being current in the East Farthing as well as in Bree, and
 the Shire-name of May  becomes Thrimidge,  as in  Bree, with  the note
 'formerly  written  Thrimich  and  archaically Thrimilch'.  The expla-
 nation  of the  name Winterfilth  is altered,  'the name  had probably
 originally meant the filling or completion of winter, or rather of the
 year leading up to the entry of winter', the precise meaning  of which
 is obscure to me (see note 4).                                        
   Following the list of  month-names and  the notes  on them  the text
 D 2 continues:                                                        
                                                                      
   I  have  not  ventured  to  use  these  actual  unfamiliar  names in
 the  course  of  the  narrative; but  it must  be understood  that the
 reference  is  always  to  the  Shire  Calendar,  even  where  'Shire-
 reckoning'  is  not  specified, as  it sometimes  is. Thus  the points
 essential  to  the turn  of the  years S.R.1418,  1419 are  that Octo-
 ber  1418  has  only  30  days; while  January 1st  is the  second day
 of  1419,  and  February  1419  has  30  days. In  consequence Bilbo's
 birthday  September  22nd  being  the  99th  and  not  the  100th  day
 from  the  year-end  corresponds  to  our  September   23rd;  February
 1st  corresponds  to  our  February  1st,  but  29,  30  to  our March
 1,  2;  and  the date  of the  downfall of  Baraddur and  Sauron, S.R.
 March 25, corresponds to our March 27th.                              
   The   Hobbit   week   was   taken   from   the  Dunedain,   and  the
 names  were  translations  of  the  names  given  to the  week-days in
 the  old  North-kingdom,  those  in  turn  deriving  from  the  Eldar.
 These  names  were  at  that  time  almost  universal  among  users of
 the Common Speech, though there were some local variations.           
   The  six-day  week  of  the   Eldar  had   days  dedicated   to,  or

                                   
                                                                      
 named  after,  the  Stars,  the  Sun,  the Moon,  the Two  Trees,* the
 Heavens,  and  the  Valar  or  Powers,  in  this  order, the  last day
 being  the  chief  or  high  day  of  the  week.  Their  Quenya  names
 were:   Elenya,   Anarya,  Isilya,   Aldarya,  Menelya,   Valarya  (or
 Tarinar).   The   Noldorin   names   were   [Argiliath   >]  Argilion,
 Aranor,   Arithil,   [Argelaid   >]   Argaladath,   Arvenel   (-fenel,
 -mhenel), Arvelain (or Ardorin).(9)                                   
  The  Dunedain  kept  the  dedications  and  order,  but  altered  the
 fourth  day  to  Argalad  'Tree-day'  with  reference  to   the  Elder
 Tree  only, of  which the  White Tree  that grew  in the  King's Court
 in  Numenor  was  a  descendant.  Also,  desiring  a seventh  day, and
 being  the  greatest of  mariners, they  inserted a  'sea-day' Aroeren
 (Quenya Earenya) after the Heavens' day.                              
  The Hobbits took over this arrangement ...                           
                                                                      
  The text then follows  that of  D 1  (p. 123)  almost exactly  in the
 account of the names of the days of the week  in the  Hobbit calendar,
 but the Red Book spellings of Sterrendei and Hihdei are given as Star-
 day  and  Hiday  (or Highday).  Starday was  then changed  to Sterday,
 with the note: 'The spelling Stirday, sometimes found in the Red Book,
 was due to the forgetting of the meaning of  the name.  Sterday, which
 began  the  week,  was  popularly  supposed   to  be   connected  with
 "stirring" after the holiday of Highday.'                             
  D 2 then concludes thus:                                             
                                                                      
  I  have  translated  these  names  also  into  our   familiar  names,
 and  in  deciding  which  name  to  equate  with  which   modern  name
 I  have  observed  not  the  Hobbit  order  (beginning  with Sterday),
 but  the   meanings.  Thus   since  Sunday   and  Munday   are  prac-
 tically  identical   with  our   Sunday  and   Monday  and   have  the
 same  'dedications'  in  the  same  order,  I  have equated  these and
 taken the rest in  the same  order as  they stand  in the  Shire list:
 thus Hobbit 1, 2, 3, 4,  5, 6,  7 have  been translated  by our  7, 1,
 2,  3,  4,  5, 6.  It must  be remembered,  however, that  the associ-
 ations  of the  weekday names  will thus  be different:  Saturday, for
 instance,   will   correspond  closely   in  Hobbit-custom   with  our
 Monday,  while  Friday  will  correspond  as  closely  as  anything in
 the Shire did with Sunday.                                            
                                                                      
  The   Overlithe   or   Leapday   does  not   concern  the   Red  Book
 since it did not  occur in  any of  the important  years in  the story
                                                                      
  (* The  Two  Trees  of Valinor,  Silpion of  silver (the  Elder), and
 Laurelin of gold (the Younger), which gave light to the Blessed Realm.)

                    
                                                                         
 of  the  Great  Ring.  It  occurred  in  the year  before Bilbo  went to
 the  Lonely  Mountain,  namely  in   1340;  it   had  been   missed  out
 in 1400,*  the  year  before  his  Farewell  Party  (1401), and  so had
 not  occurred  from  1396  to  1404.  The  only  years  dealt   with  in
 the   Red   Book   in   which   it  occurred   were  1420,   the  famous
 Harvest,  and   1436.  No   doubt  the   merrymaking  of   Overlithe  in
 1420  was  as  marvellous   as  everything   else  in   that  marvellous
 year,  but  it  is  not  mentioned  specially  by  Master   Samwise.  He
 had  many  other  things  to  think  about,  and  his  brief  account of
 them   has  not   been  enlarged   upon.  The   book  ends   before  the
 Lithe of 1436.                                                           
                                                                         
  On the assumption, which I feel  sure is  correct, that  D 2  belongs to
 very much the same time  as D  1, my  father quickly  became dissatisfied
 with his first account of the antecedents of  the Hobbit  calendar (which
 itself remained virtually  unchanged throughout).  In the  Eldarin calen-
 dar  he  now  introduced  the  words  yen  and  quantien, both  meaning a
 hundred of  our years  (coranari 'sun-rounds'),  but retained  the essen-
 tial structure described in D 1 of 366 days to the year, divided into six
 months  alternating  between  30  and 31  days, with  a reduction  of all
 months  to  30  days  in  every  eighth year,  these being  called 'Short
 Years'. On the other hand, he altered the Eldarin  treatment of  the last
 four years of  the century:  whereas in  D 1  (p. 120)  a day  was simply
 rejected at the very end of the century, in D  2 two  were added,  one at
 the beginning and one at the end of the century (see note 8).            
  The   Numenorean   calendar  was   more  radically   changed.  In   D  1
 there were  12 months  of 30  days each  in a  year of  365 days,  with a
 period  of  5  days  (standing  outside  the  months) called  'the Summer
 Days'  between  June  30  and  July 1,  the third  of these  being called
 'Midyear's  Day'.  Every  fourth year  was a  leap-year with  six 'Summer
 Days'  including two  'Midyear's Days'.  From this  calendar that  of the
 Hobbits was derived, with  the 5  'extra' days  dispersed into  3 'Summer
 Days'  ('Lithedays')  and 2  'Yuledays', the  leap-year day  being 'Over-
 lithe'.                                                                  
  In  D  2,  on  the  other  hand,  the Numenorean  calendar had  8 months
 of 30 days and 4  months of  31 (January, June, July,  December), requir-
 ing  only  one  'extra' day,  Midyear Day,  standing outside  the months,
 this (as in D 1) being doubled every fourth year. This was called 'King's
                                                                         
 (*  The  determination  of the  centuries was  ultimately taken  from the
 reckoning  of  the  Dunedain.  For  though  'Shire-reckoning'  only began
 with the settlement of the Shire, it was found that this had  occurred in
 year 1601  of the  Third Age  according to  King's Reckoning.  To convert
 S.R.  years into  T.A. years  one therefore  adds 1600.  Bree-years began
 300 years earlier than Shire-years.)                                     

                       
                                                                       
 Reckoning'.  Despite  this  alteration  of  the Numenorean  calendar the
 Hobbit  calendar  (unchanged  from  D  1)  is  still,  rather curiously,
 derived from it:  for my  father explained  (p. 128)  that they  did 'in
 effect'  retain the  four 31-day  months in  the two  Yuledays (January,
 December) and two  Lithedays (June,  July, on  either side  of Midyear's
 Day), although  these in  the Hobbit  calendar were  not counted  in the
 months.                                                                
  A  further innovation  in D  2 is  the later  revision of  the calendar
 in  Gondor, 'in  the time  of the  Stewards', when  the months  were all
 reduced  to  30 days,  with 5  inserted 'Summer  Days'. This  was called
 'Steward's  Reckoning',  and  was  widely  adopted  -  but  not  by  the
 Hobbits. 'Steward's Reckoning' is of course a reversion to  the original
 Numenorean  calendar  in  D  1 -  which was  the source  of that  of the
 Hobbits.                                                               
  In  Appendix  D  the  conservative  nature of  the Hobbit  calendar was
 retained,  being  a  form  of the  King's Reckoning  rather than  of the
 reformed  Steward's  Reckoning,  but  these  were  again   altered.  The
 precise relations can best be understood from the actual texts,  but the
 following is an attempt to summarise the essential differences.        
 D 1. Numenorean:  all  months  of  30  days,  5  'Summer  Days' outside
      the  months.   Hobbit  calendar   derived  from   this,  with   2  Yule-
      days and 3 Lithedays outside the months.                               
 D 2. Numenorean  'King's  Reckoning':  4  months  of  31  days, Midyear
      Day outside the months. Hobbit calendar derived from this.             
     Numenorean   'Steward's  Reckoning':   all  months   of  30   days,  5
      'Summer   Days'   outside   the   months.   Not   adopted   by  Hobbits.
 Appendix  D  Numenorean  'Kings'  Reckoning':  2  months  of   31  days,
 with  3   days  outside   the  months   (yestare,  loende,   mettare  at
 the  beginning,  middle,  and   end  of   the  year).   Hobbit  calendar
 (still as in D 1, D 2) derived from this.                              
   Numenorean   'Stewards'   Reckoning':   introduced   by   Mardil:  all
 months   of  30   days,  with   2  further   days  outside   the  months
 (tuilere,  yaviere,  at  end   of  March   and  September)   added.  Not
 adopted by Hobbits.                                                    
  In D 2 there is no reference to the introduction of  a new  calendar in
 Third Age 3019 (S.R.1419), the  year of  the fall  of Barad-dur  and the
 coronation  of  King Elessar,  beginning on  March 25  (RK p.  390); but
 in D 1 there is such a reference (p. 121, footnote) to a  new reckoning,
 the  year  beginning,  however,  in  the  autumn:  'The  settled Hobbits
 for a time began their year  after Harvest,  roughly October  1st.... In
 Gondor after the  downfall of  Baraddur a  new era  was begun  with that
 day reckoned as the first day of its first year.'                      
  My  father wrote  two statements  at this  time on  the subject  of the
 new reckoning, differently arranged but virtually identical  in content:
 I give the second version, which is somewhat clearer.                  

                                 New Era.                               
                                                                       
 Gondor   Calendar   of   the   Fourth  Age.   After  the   downfall  of
 Sauron  and  the  return  of  the  King,  a  new  calendar  was devised
 in  Gondor  and   adopted  throughout   the  realm   and  in   all  the
 westlands.  This was  calculated to  begin on  the day  of the  fall of
 Barad-dur.  That  took  place  in   Third  Age   3019  (Shire-reckoning
 1419),   on   March   25th   according   to   Shire-reckoning,   King's
 reckoning,  and  the  Elvish  calendars  (March  27th  in   our  calen-
 dar, and March 26th in Steward's reckoning).(10)                       
  In   honour  of   the  Halflings   (Hobbits)  their   week-day  Sunday
 (for  25 March)  was taken  for the  first week-day  of the  first year
 of  the  New  Era,  and so  became also  the first  day of  every week.
 Also   the  'Shire-reform'   was  adopted,   by  which   Midyear's  Day
 had   no   weekday  name,   so  that   weekday  names   remained  fixed
 in  relation  to  dates,  and  each  year  began  on a  Sunday (Anarya)
 and ended on a Saturday (Elenya).                                      
  The   calendar   of   months   and    seasons   was    also   entirely
 reformed.   The   year   now   began   with   Spring   (25   March  old
 style).  It was  divided into  five seasons:  two long  (three months),
 and   three   short   (two   months):   Spring  (April,   May);  Summer
 (June,  July,   August);  Autumn   or  Harvest   (September,  October);
 Winter    (November,    December,    January);    Stirring   (February,
 March).*                                                               
  Each  month  was  30  days  long.  There  were  thus  5  days  (or  in
 Leap-years  6)  outside  the  months.   These  were:   2  'Spring-days'
 before  April  1st,  which  began  the new  year, and  were festivals.+
 'Midyear's   Day'    fell   between    September   and    October   and
 became   now   a  harvest   festival.  In   Leap-years  this   Day  was
 doubled.  The  year  ended  with  2  'Stirring-days'  after  March  30:
 these  days  were  days  of  preparation  for  the  New  Year   and  of
 commemoration of the dead and fallen.                                  
  Dates  were  usually  given   in  official   documents  by   the  Sea-
 sons,    but    the    old    month-names    (Common-speech,   Noldorin
 or  Quenya)  remained  in  private  and   popular  use,   though  their
                                                                       
 (* When  the  year  was  divided  into  two halves,  Winter was  held to
 run from October to  Year's end,  and Summer  from Year's  beginning to
 the end of September.)
 (+ The first Spring-Day and the first day of the Year was especially the
 commemoration  of  the  fall  of  Sauron, since  it corresponded  to 25
 March in earlier reckoning.)                                           

 incidence was somewhat altered: they began and ended earlier                
 in the year than in older calendars.                                        
                                                                            
   On the reverse of the page  carrying the  first of  these accounts  of the
 calendar  of  the  New  Era  is  a  table made  at the  same time;  this was
 struck out and replaced by another,  identical in  all essentials,  and this
 latter I have redrawn (p. 134). In this  table the  first column  of figures
 refers  to  actual dates  (with the  five days  standing outside  the months
 numbered  1  and  1, 2);  thus the  five figures  given for  Tuile (Spring),
 1,  2,  1,  1, 30,  refer respectively  to the  two Tuilear  (Springdays), 1
 (Entare) and 2; the first day of Viresse (April 1); the first day of Lotesse
 (May  1);  and  the  last day  of Lotesse   (May 30).  The second  column of
 figures is  the cumulative  total of  days in  each season  corresponding to
 those  in the  first column:  thus 1  Lotesse is  the 33rd  day of  the year
 (2 Tuilear, Viresse 30 days, Lotesse 1, = 33).                              
   In  Appendix  D  this   elegantly  balanced   structure  had   been  aban-
 doned   and   replaced   by   a   different   system,   somewhat   obscurely
 recounted.  But  it  seems  extremely  probable  that it  was here,  in this
 original  account  of  the  calendar  of  the  New  Era,  that   the  Quenya
 names of the months  first entered.  It will  be seen  that the  names given
 in  Appendix  D  are  all  present  except that  of February,  Nenime, which
 is  here  Nendesse; while  the opening  day of  the year  is Entare  (on the
 first  form  of  the  table  written  Entale  and  then  changed)  for later
 Yestare,  and  Midyear's  Day  is  Arendien  for  later Loende.  The changed
 names were written onto the table later, probably much later.               
   On  the  back  of  the  second  table,  and  clearly  intended to  be con-
 tinuous with it, is the following.                                          
                                                                            
   Alternative names.(11)                                                    
   Autumn: Endien (Midyear).                                                 
   April: Ertuile            October: Lasselanta (Noquelle)
   May: Notuile              November: Errive                 
   June: Ellaire             December: Norrive                
   July: Nolaire             January: Meterrive                
   August: Metelaire         February: Ercoire                                       
   September: Erquelle       March: Nocoire                                        
                                                                            
   The Noldorin month names and seasons corresponding were:                  
   Spring: Ethuil: April Gwirith. May Lothron.                              
   Summer: Loer: June Norui. July Cerfeth. August Urui                       
   Autumn: Firith: September Ifonneth. October Narbeleth.                    
   Winter: Rhiw: November Hithui. December Girithron.                       
     January Nerwinien.                                                   
   Stirring: Echuir: February Nenneth. March Gwaeron.                        
   Occasional variants: Autumn: [Dant, Dantilais >] Dannas,                  

 Lasbelin. June: Ebloer. July: Cadloer. December: Ephriw.                
 January: Cathriw.                                                       
                                                                        
 The old Year beginning corresponded to N[ew] E[ra] January              
 8, the 68th day of Winter, and 281st day of the year.                   
 The old Midyear corresponded to N.E. July 6, the 36th day               
 of Summer, and 98th day of the year.                                    
 The old Year's-end corresponded to N.E. January 7, the 67th             
 day of Winter, and 280th day of the year.                               
 The Shire Lithedays = N.E. July 5, 6, 7                                 
 The old Gondor Summerdays = N.E. July 4 - 8 inclusive.                  
                                                                        
 Here  the  Noldorin  (Sindarin)  names  first appear,  and are  the same
 as  those  given  in  Appendix  D,  with  two exceptions:  Nerwinien for
 Narwain  (January)  and  Nenneth  for   Ninui (February).   Narwain  and
 Ninui were written in much later, together  with the  following changes:
 Metelaire,  Meterrive  >  Mettelaire,  Metterrive;  Cerfeth  >  Cerveth;
 Ifonneth  >  Ivanneth;  Loer  >  Laer,  Ebloer   >  Eblaer,   Cadloer  >
 Cadlaer.                                                                
                                                                        
 Together  with  many  other  tables   of  comparative   reckoning,  some
 beautifully made, this effectively completes  all the  calendar material
 that I can certainly identify as belonging to this  primary phase  of my
 father's work on the subject. It is remarkable  that (amid  abundant but
 very rough and difficult notes) there is no further text until the type-
 script (itself rough and a  good deal  emended) from  which the  text of
 Appendix D was printed.(12) It seems very  unlikely that  any intervening
 text should have been lost, and I am  inclined to  think that  my father
 was still developing and refining his theory of  the Calendars  when the
 need  to  submit  his  text  to  the  publishers  became  imperative and
 urgent. Of the final form I believe that what I said of Appendix F, that
 'had  circumstances  been  otherwise  the  form  of that  appendix would
 have been markedly different'  (p. 82),  can be  repeated of  Appendix D
 with greater force.(13)                                                 
                                                                        
                                 NOTES.                                  
                                                                        
 1. I have added the final 6, absent in the manuscript.                   
 2. As noted on p. 119 this is a reference to  the manuscript  F 2  of the
    Appendix  on  Languages,  pp.  38  - 9, $$23-4.  The  sentence  at  the
    end  of  $24,  'But  most  remarkable  of  all  are  the  Hobbit  month-
    names,  concerning  which  see   the  note   on  Calendar   and  Dates',
    was  an  addition, but  one made  with care  near to  the time  of writ-
    ing  of  F  2  - no  doubt when  my father  reached this  point in  D 1.
 3. Rethe was  not the  original name.  On the  back of  this page  of the
    manuscript   is  a   comparative  table,   struck  through,   of  Hobbit

      dates  and  modern  dates  by  month  and  day;  and the  third month
      is  here Luyde,  not  Rethe. Luyde  occurs  also in  one of  the Pro-
      logue texts (see p. 9), but I have  not found  it anywhere  else; nor
      have  I  found  any  other names  preceding those  in the  list given
      here, which survived without change.                                 
  4.  Winterfylleth  was  the  Old  English  name  of October.  Its meaning
      was  discussed  by  Bede  (died  735),  who  explained  the  name  by
      reference to the ancient English division of the year into  two parts
      of  six  months  each,  Summer  and  Winter:  Winterfylleth   was  so
      called because it was the first  month of  Winter, but  fylleth, Bede
      supposed,  referred  to  the  full  moon  of  October,   marking  the
      beginning of that period of the year.  My father's  interpretation of
      the name in D  1, 'the  filling (completion)  of the  year', 'winter'
      being used in the sense  'year', is  at variance  both with  Bede and
      apparently with that  in the  published text  (RK p.  388, footnote),
      'the filling or completion of the year before Winter'. In either case
      it  must  be  supposed  that the  'true' words  underlying translated
      'filth' and 'Winterfilth' could make the same pun!                   
         On  the  former  beginning of  the Hobbit  year after  Harvest see
      p. 121, footnote.                                                    
  5.  The  Great  Writ  of  Tuckborough  (later   the  Yearbook   of  Tuck-
      borough)  is  mentioned  also in  the Appendix  on Languages,  p. 40,
      $27.                                                                 
  6.  The words '(in spoken  form)' refer  to the  spelling Munday.  In the
      published  text  the  sentence reads:  'In the  language of  the time
      of  the  War  of  the   Ring  these   had  become   Sterday,  Sunday,
      Monday  ...',  instead  of  'had become  written', thus  avoiding the
      question  of  Munday,  Monday:  the latter  being a  mere peculiarity
      of English spelling, as in many other  words with  the vowel  of but,
      as monk, son,  etc. Sunday  was once  often spelt  Sonday. -  So also
      Hiday  of  D  1  is  given the  modern spelling  Highday in  the pub-
      lished text. But in the list of archaic (Old English) forms it should
      not be Highdei but Hihdei, as in D 1.                                
  7.  Contrast  Appendix  D  (RK  p.  384): 'the  merrymaking in  that year
      [1420] is said to have been the greatest in memory or record.'       
  8.  The  different  computation  in  D  1 (p.  120), whereby  the Eldarin
      calendar  would  have  36525  days  in  a  century  (leading  to  the
      removal of the  last day  of a  century) was  reached thus:  the last
      four  years  of  a  century were  computed as  half of  an eight-year
      cycle, that is 2922  (seven long  years and  one short  year) divided
      by two, 1461. Added  to the  total (35064)  of the  days in  96 years
      this  made 36525.  In D  2 the  last four  years are  not half  of an
      eight-year cycle but three  full years  and one  short year,  that is
      35064  +  1458 in  a century,  total 36522  (leading to  the addition
      of the  two extra  days outside  the structure  of weeks  and months,
      Quantdrie and Vinydrie).                                             

 9.   I have found no further list of the Elvish names of  the days  of the
      week,  nor any  mention of  individual names,  before the  third (and
      final)  text,  from  which  Appendix  D  was  printed  (see  p. 136).
      There,  the  Quenya  names  of  the  fourth  and sixth  days, Aldarya
      and  Valarya,  were  still  in  that  form  (but Tarion  had replaced
      Tarinar);  my father  emended them  very clearly,  on both  copies of
      the typescript, to Aldauya  and Valanya.  On the  proof of  the first
      of these  was printed  Aldanya, and  he emended  this to  Alduya, as
      it appears in Appendix D.                                            
         On  the  use  of  'Noldorin'  for 'Sindarin'  see the  Appendix on
      Languages,  especially  p.  36,  $18,   and  commentary,   pp.  65-6.
      These  month-names  next  reappear in  the final  typescript, already
      changed   to   Orgilion,   Oranor,   Orithil,   Orgaladhad,  Ormenel,
      Orebelain  (or   Rodyn);  and   similarly  with   the  name   of  the
      'Sea-day'  added  by  the  Numenoreans,   changed  from   Aroeren  to
      Oraearon.                                                            
 10.  In  the  Eldarin  calendar  (p.  126),  in  the long  (normal) years,
      January  had  31  days  and  February  30;  thus  March 25th  was the
      86th day  of the  year. In  the Gondorian  King's Reckoning  (p. 131)
      the  same  was  true.  In  the   Shire  Reckoning   Yuleday  preceded
      January  1,  but  both  January  and  February had  30 days,  so that
      March 25 was again the 86th day of the year.                         
         In  the  Gondorian  Steward's  Reckoning  (p.  132), on  the other
      hand,  the  count  is  simply  30  days  in  January  and 30  days in
      February, so that March  25 is  the 85th  day of  the year;  while in
      our calendar 31 + 28 + 25 makes March 25 the 84th day.               
 11   Some of these alternative  names are  included in  the first  form of
      the table, with the difference that Errive and Norive (so  spelt) are
      alternatives  respectively  for   Ringare  (December)   and  Narvinye
      (January).                                                           
 12.  It is a curious point that  this typescript  begins with  the printed
      'Shire  Calendar  for  use  in all  years' exactly  as it  appears in
      Appendix  D  (RK  p.  384):  my father's  typescript begins  below it
      ('Every year began on the first day of the week  ...'), and  the same
      is  true of  the carbon  copy. Presumably  this calendar  was printed
      first and  separately and  copies were  sent to  my father,  who used
      them in this way.                                                    
         The   manuscript  calendar   from  which   this  was   printed  is
      extant, and it is interesting to see that on the left-hand side there
      is  a  column  headed 'Weekday'  with the  names of  the days  of the
      week  set  out  against  each  of  the  three  transverse  groups  of
      months, thus for example in the second month Solmath:                
                       Stirday  -  5  12  19  26                         
                       Sunday   -  6  13  20  27                          
                       Munday   -  7  14  21  28                           
                       Trewsday 1  8  15  22  29                               

 and so on. This  column of  the days  of the  week would  have made
 the  calendar easier  to understand;  but on  the manuscript  it is
 struck through, by whom is not clear. I can see no reason  for this
 but that of space on  the page,  which one  would think  could have
 been   quite   easily   accommodated.   -  This   manuscript  table
 undoubtedly goes back  to the  original phase  of my  father's work
 on the calendars, described in this chapter.                      
13.  Among various alterations  made by  my father  on the  proof, it
 may be noted that the  text of  Appendix D  as first  printed ended
 thus:  'Some  said  that it  was old  Sam Gardner's  birthday, some
 that it was  the day  on which  the Golden  Tree first  flowered in
 1420,  and  some  that it  was the  Elves' New  Year. The  last was
 (more or less) true, so all may have been.'                       

                                    V.                                    
                                                                         
                      THE HISTORY OF THE AKALLABETH.                      
                                                                         
 The  development  of  Appendix  B,  The  Tale  of  Years,  was  naturally
 associated  with  and  dependent  on that  of Appendix  A, which  as pub-
 lished bears the title Annals  of the  Kings and  Rulers. But  more unex-
 pectedly, the  Tale of  Years of  the Second  Age was  closely associated
 with  the  evolution of  the history  of Numenor  and of  the Akallabeth.
 In  the  presentation  of  the  early  forms of  these Appendices  I have
 found after trial and error that the best  course is  to divide  the Tale
 of Years into two  parts, the  Second and  the Third  Ages, and  to treat
 them  separately;  and also,  to introduce  at this  point an  account of
 the  Akallabeth,  followed  by the  Tale of  Years of  the Second  Age in
 Chapter VI.                                                              
                                                                         
   In  the  History  of  Middle-earth I  have given  no indication  of how
 this  work,  a  primary  narrative of  the Second  Age, developed  to the
 form given  in the  published Silmarillion,  or when  it first  came into
 being. The early history of the legend, closely related to  the abandoned
 story The Lost  Road, was  studied in  Volume V,  where the  two original
 narratives  of  The  Fall  of Numenor,  which I  called FN  I and  FN II,
 were printed (V.13 ff.). In Sauron Defeated (IX.331 ff.)  I gave  a third
 version, FN III, which I have  ascribed to  a fairly  early stage  in the
 writing  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings.  The  massive development  of the
 legend  in  the  work  called  The Drowning  of Anadune,  closely associ-
 ated  with  The  Notion  Club  Papers  and the  emergence of  the Adunaic
 language, was  studied in  Sauron Defeated,  where I  ascribed it  to the
 first half of 1946 (IX.147,  389-90): this  dating was  subsequently con-
 firmed  by  the observation  of John Rateliff that  W. H.  Lewis recorded
 in his  diary that  my father  read the  work to  the Inklings  in August
 1946 (Foreword to Morgoth's King, X.x).                                  
   In  my  commentary  on  The  Drowning  of   Anadune  I   indicated  and
 discussed at many points its relationship to the Akallabeth, but  for the
 text of the latter I made use only of the final form,  as printed  in The
 Silmarillion, pp. 259 ff. Since the writing  of the  Akallabeth evidently
 post-dated  the  writing  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings I  postponed dis-
 cussion of its history, but I found no room for it in the very long books
 Morgoth's Ring and The War of the Jewels.                                
   I  did,  however,  in  Sauron  Defeated  make  an   extraordinary  mis-
 statement  on  the  subject of  the Akallabeth,  which must  be repaired.

 When  discussing  (IX.406)  my  father's  late  note  on  The  Drowning of
 Anadune, in which he referred it to 'Mannish tradition', I said:          
   The handwriting and the  use of  a ball-point  pen suggest  a relatively
 late  date,  and  were  there no  other evidence  I would  guess it  to be
 some  time  in the  1960s. But  it is  certain that  what appears  to have
 been  the  final  phase  of  my  father's  work  on  Numenor  (A  Descrip-
 tion  of  Numenor,  Aldarion  and  Erendis)   dates  from   the  mid-1960s
 (Unfinished  Tales  pp.  7 - 8);(1) and  it  may  be that  the Akallabeth
 derives from that period also.                                            
 This last remark is patent nonsense. The  great extension  of the  line of
 the  Numenorean  kings,  which  entered  in  the  course  of  the develop-
 ment  of the  Akallabeth, was  present in  Appendix A  (and a  mere glance
 through the texts of the  work is  sufficient to  show, simply  from their
 appearance, that they could  not conceivably  date from  so late  a time).
 How I  came to  write this  I do  not know,  nor how  it escaped  all sub-
 sequent checking and revision.  I perhaps  meant to  say that  my father's
 note  on  The  Drowning  of  Anadune  may  have  derived  from   the  same
 period as Aldarion and Erendis.                                           
   When  I  wrote  Sauron  Defeated  I  was  nonetheless  not at  all clear
 about the time of the original writing  of the  Akallabeth, and  I assumed
 without sufficient study of the  texts that  it was  later than  it proves
 to be.                                                                    
                                                                          
   The  textual  history  is  relatively  brief and  simple in  itself. The
 earliest text, which I will call A, is a clear manuscript  of 23  pages; a
 good deal of this  text is  extant also  in pages  that were  rejected and
 written out again, but virtually  nothing of  any significance  entered in
 the rewriting, and the two  layers of  this manuscript  need not  be given
 different letters.                                                        
   My  father then  corrected A,  fairly extensively  in the  earlier part,
 very little in the story of the Downfall, and made a second text,  a type-
 script, which I will  call B.  He followed  the corrected  manuscript with
 an uncharacteristic fidelity, introducing only  a very  few changes  as he
 typed. It cannot be demonstrated, but I think  it virtually  certain, that
 the  series  A, A  corrected, B,  belong to  the same  time; and  there is
 usually no need to distinguish the stages of this 'first phase', which can
 be conveniently referred to as AB.                                        
   After some considerable interval, as I judge, he  returned to  the type-
 script  B  and  emended  it.  This  left  the  greater  part  of  the text
 untouched,  but  introduced  a  vast  extension  into  Numenorean history:
 primarily by the  insertion of  a long  rider in  manuscript, but  also by
 transpositions of text, alteration of names, and the rewriting  of certain
 passages.                                                                 
   The  third  and  final  text (C)  was an  amanuensis typescript  (in top
 copy  and  carbon)  taken from  B when  all alterations  had been  made to
 it. It seems  to me  very probable  that this  was made  at the  same time

 (?1958)  as  the  typescripts  of the  Annals of  Aman, the  Grey Annals,
 and  the  text  LQ 2  of the  Quenta Silmarillion  (see X.300,  XI.4). To
 this typescript my father  made only  a very  few and  as it  were casual
 corrections.                                                             
   The  alterations (including  the long  inserted rider)  made to  B con-
 stitute a 'second phase'; and this is  the final  form of  the Akallabeth
 (apart from  the few  corrections to  C just  mentioned). There  are thus
 only  two  original texts,  the manuscript  A and  the typescript  B, but
 the  corrections  and  extensions  made  to  B represent  a significantly
 different 'layer' in the history of the work. To make  this plain  I will
 call the typescript B as subsequently altered B 2.                       
                                                                         
   While  the  development  of  the  Akallabeth  is  of  much  interest in
 particular features, a very great deal  of the  text never  underwent any
 significant  change;  and  as I  noted in  IX.376, something  like three-
 fifths  of the  precise wording  of the  second text  of The  Drowning of
 Anadune  (which  was  printed  in  full  in  that  book) survived  in the
 Akallabeth.  Moreover  the  final  form  of   the  Akallabeth,   if  with
 some editorial alteration, is available in The Silmarillion. In  order to
 avoid  an  enormous  amount  of  simple  repetition,  therefore,   I  use
 the  Silmarillion  text,  which  I  will refer  to as  SA ('Silmarillion-
 Akallabeth'),  as  the  basis  from  which  to  work  back, so  to speak,
 rather  than  working  forward from  A. To  do this  I have  numbered the
 paragraphs  in  SA  throughout,  and  refer  to  them  by  these numbers,
 together with the opening words to aid in their identification.          
   The Silmarillion text was of course that of B  2 (with  the corrections
 made  in  C),  but  as I  have said  a number  of editorial  changes were
 made,  for  various  reasons, but  mostly in  the quest  (somewhat exces-
 sively  pursued,  as  I  now  think) for  coherence and  consistency with
 other writings. Unless these changes were trivial they are noticed in the
 account that follows.                                                    
   I do not here go into the relations  of the  Akallabeth to  its sources
 (The  Drowning  of  Anadune,  and  to  a  more  minor  degree  the  third
 version of The Fall of Numenor, FN III), since these are  fully available
 in  Sauron  Defeated,  where  also  the  most  crucial  developments were
 extensively discussed.                                                   
                                                                         
         The original title in the manuscript A was The Fall of Numenor,
 which  was  corrected  to  The  Downfall  of  Numenor  and  so remained:
 none of the texts bears the title Akallabeth, but  my father  referred to
 the work by that name (cf. p. 255).                                      
$$1-2.  The  original  opening  of  A  was  almost  a  simple copy  of the
 opening  of  FN  HI  (IX.331-2):  'In  the Great  Battle when  Fionwe son
 of  Manwe  overthrew  Morgoth',  etc.;  but  this  was at  once rejected,
 though  appearing  in  revised  form  in  SA  $3,   and  a   new  opening
 substituted,  which  constitutes,  with some  editorial changes,  that in
 SA  ($$1-2).  The authentic  text begins:  Of Men,  AElfwine, it  is said

                                                    
                                                                     
 by the Eldar that they came into the world in the  time of  the Shadow
 of Morgoth ...', and in  SA I  removed the address to AElfwine.(2) The
 Akallabeth was conceived as a tale told  by Pengolod  the Wise  (as it
 must  be  supposed,  though  he  is  not  named)  in  Tol  Eressea  to
 AElfwine of England, as becomes again very explicit (in  the original)
 at the end; and  no change  was made  in this  respect in  the 'second
 phase' B 2, nor on the final amanuensis typescript C.(3)             
   In $1 I also altered  the sentence  'and the  Noldor named  them the
 Edain' to  'The Edain  these were  named in  the Sindarin  tongue'; on
 this change see under $9 below.                                      
   In  $2,  Earendil's  ship  was named  Vingilot in  AB, but  this was
 changed to the otherwise unrecorded Ealote in  B 2;  in SA  I reverted
 to  Vingilot.  The  name  Rothinzil  is derived  from The  Drowning of
 Anadune.(4)                                                          
$3.  In  the  Great  Battle  ... The  opening of  this paragraph  in AB
 read:                                                                
                                                                     
   In  the  Great  Battle  when at  last Fionwe  son of  Manwe overthrew
   Morgoth   and  Thangorodrim   was  broken,   the  Edain   fought  for
   the Valar, whereas other kindreds of Men fought for Morgoth.       
                                                                     
 This was changed in B 2 to read:                                     
                                                                     
   In  the  Great  Battle  when  at  last  Eonwe  herald of  Manwe over-
   threw  Morgoth  and   Thangorodrim  was   broken,  the   Edain  alone
   of the  kindreds of  Men fought  for the  Valar, whereas  many others
   fought for Morgoth.                                                
                                                                     
 In SA the reference to Eonwe was removed; and  similarly later  in the
 paragraph  'refusing  alike  the summons  of [Fionwe  >] Eonwe  and of
 Morgoth'  was  changed  to 'refusing  alike the  summons of  the Valar
 and of Morgoth'. The reason for this lay in the treatment of  the last
 chapter of the  Quenta Silmarillion  in the  published work.  The only
 narrative of the Great Battle at the end of the First Age  (V.326 ff.)
 derived  from  the  time  when  the  Children  of  the  Valar  were an
 important  conception,  and  Fionwe  son  of  Manwe  was   the  leader
 and  commanding  authority  in  the  final  war  against  Morgoth  and
 his  overthrow;  but  the  abandonment  of  that  conception,  and the
 change in the 'status' of  Fionwe /  Eonwe to  that of  Manwe's herald
 led  to  doubt  whether  my  father, had  he ever  returned to  a real
 retelling of the story of the end  of the  Elder Days  (see XI.245-7),
 would  have  retained  Eonwe  in  so  mighty  and  elemental  a  role.
 His  part  was  in  consequence   somewhat  diminished   by  omissions
 and  ambiguous  wording  (as  may  be  seen by  comparing the  text in
 Vol.V with that of the published Silmarillion; cf. also  the editorial
 addition  made  to  the  Valaquenta,  X.203).  There  is   however  no
 evidence for this supposition, and  I now  believe it  to have  been a
 mistaken  treatment  of the  original text,  and so  also here  in the
 Akallabeth.(5)                                                        

$4.  But  Manwe  put  forth  Morgoth  ... In  this paragraph  my father
 was still  closely following  FN III  (IX.332), but  at the  end, after
 'Andor,  the  Land  of  Gift' he  turned to  The Drowning  of Anadune,
 which  was  thereafter  the  primary  source,  though with  some inter-
 weaving  of  passages  from  FN III.  In FN III the  passage concerning
 Morgoth,  originally  written in  the present  tense, was  corrected to
 the past tense, and this was followed in A; but it  is curious  that in
 B my father reverted  in one  of the  phrases to  the present:  'and he
 cannot  himself  return  again  into  the  World, present  and visible,
 while the Lords of  the West  are still  enthroned.' This  was retained
 in SA.                                                                
    After  the  words  'life  more  enduring than  any others  of mortal
 race have  possessed' I  omitted in  SA the  following sentence  in the
 original: 'Thrice that of  Men of  Middle-earth was  the span  of their
 years, and  to the  descendants of  [Hurin the  Steadfast >]  Hador the
 Fair even longer years were granted, as later is told.'  This omission,
 scarcely  necessary,  was made  on account  of divergent  statements on
 the  subject  (see  Unfinished  Tales  p. 224,  note 1).  The erroneous
 reference to  Hurin, surviving  from FN  III (see  IX.332 and  note 1),
 was only corrected in B 2.                                            
    In  the  original  manuscript  A  the  words  of  FN  III concerning
 Eressea  were  retained:  'and that  land was  named anew  Avallon; for
 it is hard by Valinor and  within sight  of the  shores of  the Blessed
 Realm.' This was corrected to the text that appears  in SA  ('and there
 is in  that land  a haven  that is  named Avallone  ...'). On  this see
 further under $12 below.                                              
$5.  Then the  Edain set  sail ...  The original  opening of  this para-
 graph, not subsequently changed, was:                                 
    Then the Edain gathered all the  ships, great  and small,  that they
 had  built with  the help  of the  Elves, and  those that  were willing
 to  depart  took their  wives and  their children  and all  such wealth
 as they  possessed, and  they set  sail upon  the deep  waters, follow-
 ing the Star.                                                         
   I cannot now say with certainty  why this  passage (derived  from The
 Drowning  of  Anadune,  IX.360,  $12)  was  omitted from  SA: possibly
 on  account  of  a  passage  in  the  'Description  of   Numenor',  not
 included in the extracts given in Unfinished Tales, in which  the ships
 of the migration are described as Elvish:                             
    The  legends  of the  foundation of  Numenor often  speak as  if all
 the  Edain  that accepted  the Gift  set sail  at one  time and  in one
 fleet. But this is only due to the  brevity of  the narrative.  In more
 detailed  histories  it  is  related  (as  might  be  deduced  from the
 events  and  the numbers  concerned) that  after the  first expedition,
 led by Elros, many other  ships, alone  or in  small fleets,  came west
 bearing others  of the  Edain, either  those who  were at  first reluc-

 tant to dare the  Great Sea  but could  not endure  to be  parted from
 those  who  had  gone,  or  some  who  were  far  scattered  and could
 not be assembled to go with the first sailing.                        
        Since the boats that were used were of Elvish model,  fleet but
 small, and each  steered by  one of  the Eldar  deputed by  Cirdan, it
 would  have  taken  a  great  navy  to  transport  all the  people and
 goods   that   were   eventually   brought   from    Middle-earth   to
 Numenor.  The  legends  make  no  guess  at   the  numbers,   and  the
 histories say little. The  fleet of  Elros is  said to  have contained
 many  ships  (according  to  some  a  hundred  and  fifty  vessels, to
 others  two  or  three  hundred)  and to  have brought  'thousands' of
 the  men,  women,  and  children  of   the  Edain:   probably  between
 five  thousand  or at  the most  ten thousand.  But the  whole process
 of migration appears in fact to  have occupied  at least  fifty years,
 possibly  longer,  and  finally  ended  only  when  Cirdan  (no  doubt
 instructed by the Valar) would provide no more ships or guides.       
   In this paragraph is the first appearance of the name Elenna ('Star-
 wards') of Numenor.                                                   
$6.  This was the beginning  of that  people ...  In the  first sentence
 the words 'that people that in  the Grey-elven  speech are  called the
 Dunedain'  were  an editorial  alteration from  'that people  that the
 Noldor call the Dunedain'.(6) Cf. the  similar change  made in  $1, and
 see under $9.                                                         
$7.  Of old the chief city  and haven  ... Following  the words  'it was
 called  Andunie  because  it faced  the sunset'  A had  originally the
 following passage:                                                    
    But the high place of the King was at Numenos in  the heart  of the
 land, and there  was the  tower and  citadel that  was built  by Elros
 son of Earendil,  whom the  Valar appointed  to be  the first  king of
 the Dunedain.                                                         
   Numenos survived from FN III  (IX.333) and  earlier (see  V.25, $2).
 This was replaced in B  by the  passage in  SA: 'But  in the  midst of
 the  land  was  a  mountain  tall  and  steep,  and  it was  named the
 Meneltarma,' etc. The name  of the  city was  given here,  however, as
 Arminaleth  (the  name  in  The  Drowning  of  Anadune), with  a note:
 'This  is  the  Numenorean  name,  for  by  that  name it  was chiefly
 known,  Tar  Kalimos  in  the  Eldarin tongue.'  In B  2 the  name was
 changed  here  (and  at  the  subsequent occurrences)  from Arminaleth
 to  Armenelos,  and  the note  changed to  read: 'Arminaleth  was the
 form  of  the  name in  the Numenorean  tongue; but  it was  called by
 its  Eldarin  name  Armenelos until  the coming  of the  Shadow.' Thus
 the  statement  in  Index II  to Sauron  Defeated (IX.460)  that Armi-
 naleth  was  'replaced by  Armenelos' is  incorrect: Armenelos  was a
 substitution in  the Akallabeth  because my  father was  now asserting
 that  this  was  the name  by which  the city  was known  through long

 ages,  but  its  Adunaic   form  remained   Arminaleth.  It   was  Tar
 Kalimos  that  was  replaced  by  Armenelos. -  This note  was omitted
 in SA.                                                                
$8.  Now  Elros  and  Elrond  his  brother  ... The  words in  SA 'were
 descended  from  the  Three  Houses  of the  Edain' were  an editorial
 change  from  'were  descended  from  the  lines  of  both  Hador  and
 Beor'. - Near the end of the paragraph, the span  of years  granted to
 Elros was said (in all texts) to have  been 'seven  times that  of the
 Men  of  Middle-earth',  but  on  one  copy  of  C  my  father changed
 'seven' to 'three' and placed an  X against  the statement  that Elros
 lived for five hundred years. The reading  'many times'  in SA  was an
 editorial substitution.                                               
 $9 Thus the years passed ... In the sentence  'For though  this people
 used still  their own  speech, their  kings and  lords knew  and spoke
 also the Elven tongue, which  they had  learned in  the days  of their
 alliance' AB had 'the  Noldorin tongue'.  Similarly in  $$1, 6  it was
 said  that  Edain,  Dunedain  were  Noldorin names,  but only  in the
 present case  did my  father change  (in B  2) 'Noldorin'  to 'Elven'.
 Thus the old conception that  the Noldor  in Beleriand  retained their
 own tongue was still present, as it was also in the original  forms of
 the  Appendices  on  Languages  and  Calendars (see  p. 138,  note 9).
 This at once shows a relatively early date for the Akallabeth;  and as
 noted  earlier  the  adoption  of  Sindarin by  the Exiled  Noldor had
 already emerged in the Grey Annals (p. 62, $5).                       
   The  continuation  of the  same sentence  originally read  'and they
 remained in great  friendship with  the Eldar,  whether of  Avallon or
 of the westlands of Middle-earth', but  this was  changed to  the text
 in SA, 'and thus they held converse still with  the Eldar,  whether of
 Eressea',  etc.  The  same  removal  of the  word 'friendship'  of the
 relations  between  the  Eldar and  the Numenoreans  is found  also in
 $$12, 29.                                                             
$$10, 11.  For  the  Dunedain  became  mighty  ...,  But the  Lords of
 Valinor ... There were no  editorial alterations  made to  these para-
 graphs,  which  go  back  with no  change of  any significance  to the
 earliest text.                                                        
$12. For in those  days Valinor  still remained  ... In  A the  name of
 the  Mountain  of  Numenor  was   Menelmindon;  in   FN  III   it  was
 Menelmin   (IX.335),   and   Menelmindo,   Menelminda  occur   in  The
 Notion Club Papers. But Meneltarma is found  already in  A at  a later
 point in the narrative.                                               
   In  A  as  originally  written the  name Avallon  was still  the new
 name of the isle of Eressea, but in the rewriting of that passage (see
 under $4) it  was corrected  to Avallone,  now the  name of  the haven
 of the Eldar  in Eressea.  In the  present paragraph  A had:  'But the
 wise  among  them  knew  that  this  distant   land  was   not  indeed
 Valinor, the Blessed Realm, but was Avallone, the  Isle of  the Eldar,

  easternmost  of the  Undying Lands';  Avallone was  here the  form first
  written,  and  thus  my  father  moved  from  Avallon to  Avallone while
  writing  the  manuscript,  without  however  changing  the  significance
  of  the  name  (but  see  under  $75).  The  text  was then  altered, to
  embody  the  new  conception, but  only by  changing 'Isle'  to 'Haven',
  to  which  in  SA  I  added 'upon  Eressea' to  make the  meaning clear.
  (Much  of  the  present   passage  derives   fairly  closely   from  The
  Drowning   of  Anadune,   IX.361,  $16:   on  the   extremely  difficult
  question  of  the  meaning  of  Avalloni  in  that  work  see IX.379-80,
  385-6.)                                                                 
    In  the  passage  describing  the coming  of the  Eldar to  Numenor AB
  had:                                                                    
    And  thence  at  times  the  Firstborn  still  would  come  to Numenor
  in  oarless  boats,  or  as birds  flying, for  the friendship  that was
  between the peoples.                                                    
  The text of SA here is that of B 2, and  here again  (see $9  above) the
  'friendship' of the Eldar and the Numenoreans was removed.              
    The  conclusion  of  the  paragraph  provides  further  clear evidence
  of the early  date of  the Akallabeth.  This passage  began as  an addi-
  tion to  A (following  the words  'for the  friendship that  was between
  the  peoples'  cited  above)  as follows,  with the  changes made  to it
  shown:                                                                  
    And  they  brought  to  Numenor  many  gifts:   birds  of   song,  and
  flowers  of  sweet  fragrance  and   herbs  of   great  virtue.   And  a
  seedling  they  brought  of  the  White  Tree   [Nimloth  the   Fair  >]
  Galathilion  that  grew  in  the  [courts  of   Avallone  >]   midst  of
  Eressea,  and  was  in  his  turn  a  seedling   of  the   Eldest  Tree,
  [Galathilion  the  light  of  Valinor  >] Telperion  of many  names, the
  light  of Valinor.  And the  tree grew  and blossomed  in the  courts of
  the  King  in  [Numenos  >]  Ar-minaleth;  Nimloth   the  fair   it  was
  named,   and   the   night-shadows   departed   when   Nimloth   was  in
  flower.                                                                 
  The history of  the names  of the  White Trees  is complex,  for several
  reasons:  the  names  were  applied  to  the  Two  Trees of  Valinor and
  re-used as names for the later trees; the later trees (of Tirion (Tuna),
  Eressea, Numenor)  entered at  different times;  and there  was shifting
  in their applications. It is simplest to  consider first  the statements
  deriving  from  the  major  period  of  work on  the Elder  Days between
  the completion and the publication of The Lord of the Rings.            
    In  the  Annals  of  Aman  (X.85,  $69)  Yavanna  gave  to  the Noldor
  of  Tuna (Tirion)  'Galathilion, image  of the  Tree Telperion'.  In the
  revision  of  the  Quenta  Silmarillion  from  the  same  period (X.176,
  $39) it is said of this tree that 'Yavanna made for them  a tree  in all
  things like a lesser image of Telperion, save that it did not give light
  of its own being'; its name is not given. It  is also  said in  the same

  version  of  the Quenta  Silmarillion (X.155)  that Galathilion,  a name
  of  Telperion,  was  given also  to the  White Tree  of Tuna,  which was
  known  as  'Galathilion  the  Less';  and that  'his seedling  was named
  Celeborn in Eressea, and  Nimloth in  Numenor, the  gift of  the Eldar.'
  As  my  father  first  wrote this  addition to  A he  named the  Tree of
  Eressea Nimloth,  saying that  it was  'a seedling  of the  Eldest Tree,
  Galathilion the  light of  Valinor'; he  thus omitted  the Tree  of Tuna
  (Galathilion  the  Less).  He  immediately  changed  the  name   of  the
  Tree of Eressea to Galathilion, a  seedling of  Telperion, and  gave the
  name  Nimloth  to  the  Tree  of   Numenor.  (This   shows  incidentally
  that the addition preceded the  writing of  the account  of the  fate of
  the  Tree  of  Numenor  later  in  A,  for  there  the name  was Nimloth
  from the first.)                                                        
    The  passage  as  emended  reappears  without  any  further  change in
  the second text, the typescript B. But on this text my father  struck it
  out and rewrote it thus (B 2):                                          
    And  a  seedling  they  brought  of the  White Tree  that grew  in the
  midst  of  Eressea,  and  was  in  its turn  a seedling  of the  Tree of
  Tuna,  Galathilion,  that  Yavanna  gave  to  the Eldar  in the  Land of
  the  Gods  to  be a  memorial of  Telperion, Light  of Valinor.  And the
  tree  grew  and  blossomed  in  the  courts of  the King  in Ar-Minaleth
  [>  Ar-Menelos];  Nimloth  the  Fair  it  was  named,  and  flowered  in
  the evening and the shadows of night it filled with its fragrance.      
  Here, in this 'second phase'  of the  Akallabeth, with  the introduction
  of  the  Tree  of  Tuna  (Galathilion),  the gift  of Yavanna,  the same
  succession  is  found  as  in the  Annals of  Aman and  the contemporary
  revision   of   the   Quenta   Silmarillion:   Telperion   of   Valinor;
  Galathilion  of  Tuna;  [Celeborn]  of  Eressea;  Nimloth   of  Numenor.
  The conclusion  is thus  inescapable that  the first  phase (AB)  of the
  Alkallabeth  was earlier  than those  works (the  Annals of  Aman, etc.)
  that can be dated with sufficient accuracy to 1951.                     
    In  SA  the  passage  was  slightly  rewritten,  introducing  the name
  Celeborn  of  the  Tree  of  Eressea  (X.155)  and  (unnecessarily)  the
  word  'image'  of  the  Tree  of Tuna  from the  Annals of  Aman (X.85).
  In  this  connection it  is interesting  to compare  the passage  in The
  Return  of  the King  (p. 250,  at the  end of  the chapter  The Steward
  and  the  King)  where  the  finding  of  the  sapling  tree   on  Mount
  Mindolluin is recounted. Gandalf's words are:                           
    Verily this is a sapling of the line of Nimloth the fair; and that was
  a  seedling  of  Galathilion,  and  that  a fruit  of Telperion  of many
  names, Eldest of Trees.                                                 
  It will be seen that this agrees with  the emended  form of  the passage
  in  the  first phase  (AB) of  the Akallabeth:  for Galathilion  (as the
  parent of Nimloth)  is here  the Tree  of Eressea,  there is  no mention
  of the Tree of Tuna, and Galathilion is a 'fruit'  of Telperion  (not an

 'image', or a 'memorial'). The  conclusion must  be that  this passage
 was not revised when the Tree of Tuna entered the history.(7)         
$13.  Thus it was that because of the Ban  of the  Valar ...  The devel-
 opment  of  the  opening  passage  concerning  the  great   voyage  is
 curious.  In  The  Drowning  of  Anadune  (IX.362,  $17) it  was said
 that  the  mariners  of  Numenor  sailed  'from  the  darkness  of the
 North to the heats of the South, and  beyond the  South to  the Nether
 Darkness.  And  the  Eruhin  [Numenoreans]  came  often to  the shares
 of  the  Great  Lands, and  they took  pity on  the forsaken  world of
 Middle-earth.'  In  the  Akallabeth,  after the  words 'to  the Nether
 Darkness', my father introduced a passage from FN HI (IX.334):        
   They  ranged  from  Eressea  in the  West to  the shores  of Middle-
 earth, and came even into the inner  seas; and  they sailed  about the
 North  and  the  South  and  glimpsed  from   their  high   prows  the
 Gates of Morning in the East.                                         
 This goes back to the  earliest texts  of The  Fall of  Numenor (V.14,
 20,  25). But  when incorporating  it into  the Akallabeth  he changed
 this to 'and  they came  even into  the inner  seas, and  sailed about
 Middle-earth  and  glimpsed  from  their  high  prows  the   Gates  of
 Morning in  the East'  - returning  to The  Drowning of  Anadune with
 'And  the  Dunedain  came  often  to  the shores  of the  Great Lands'
 (with 'often' > 'at times' in B 2).                                   
   This is the text in SA. It seems altogether  impossible to  say what
 geographical  conception of  the East  of the  World lies  behind this
 passage.                                                              
   In  SA,  after  the   words  'the   Numenoreans  taught   them  many
 things',  the following  passage (likewise  derived from  The Drowning
 of Anadune, ibid.) was omitted:                                       
   Language  they  taught  them,  for  the  tongues   of  the   Men  of
 Middle-earth, save in the  old lands  of the  Edain, were  fallen into
 brutishness, and they cried like harsh birds,  or snarled  like savage
 beasts.                                                               
$14.  Then  the  Men  of Middle-earth  were comforted  ... to  $17 And
 some  there  were  who  said ...  (SA pp.  263-4). No  changes entered
 the text in B 2, but two editorial changes were made in $17:  for 'the
 bliss of the Great' and 'the people of Earth' I substituted 'the bliss
 of the Powers' and 'the people of Arda'.                              
$18.  The  Eldar  reported  these  words  ...  A  has:  'and   he  sent
 messengers  to the  Dunedain, who  spoke earnestly  to the  King, Tar-
 Atanamir'.   My  father   was  closely   following  The   Drowning  of
 Anadune in this paragraph  (IX.364, $23),  but in  that work  the king
 was  Ar-Pharazon:  Tar  Atanamir  here  first  appears.(8) See  further
 under $$24 - 5.                                                       
$19.  'The  Doom  of  the  World,'  they  said  ...  to  $23  Then  the
 Messengers  said  ...  Scarcely  any  changes, and  none that  need be

  recorded, entered the text in B 2 in this part  of the  Akallabeth; there
  were  however  some  minor  editorial  alterations  made  in  SA.  In $21
  there  is  in  the  original  a  complex  interchange between  'thou' and
  'you' in  the reply  of the  Messengers, according  as they  are address-
  ing  the  King  or  referring  to  the  people as  a whole,  for example:
  'thou  and  thy  people  are  not of  the Firstborn,  but are  mortal Men
  as  Iluvatar  made  you',  or  'And  you, thou  sayest, are  punished for
  the  rebellion  of  Men'.  In SA  'you' was  employed throughout.  In $23
  'within the girdle of the Earth' was  changed to  'within the  Circles of
  the World', and 'The love of this Earth' to 'The love of Arda'.         
 $  $24,  25  These  things   took  place   ...,  Then   Tar-Ancalimon  ...
 These   two   paragraphs   have   to  be   considered  together.   AB  $24
 opened:                                                                  
    These  things  took  place  in  the  days of  Tar-Atanamir, and  he was
 the  seventh  of  those  kings  that  succeeded  Elros  upon   the  throne
 of  Numenor;  and  that  realm  had  then  endured   for  more   than  two
 thousand years ...                                                       
  And AB $25 opened:                                                      
    Then  [Kiryatan   >  Ar-Kiryatan   >]  Tar-Kiryatan   the  Shipbuilder,
 son of Atanamir, became King, and he was of like mind ...                
  It  would  be clear  in any  case from  these new  names that  a develop-
 ment had taken place, or was  taking place,  in the  history of  the royal
 house  of  Numenor  from  that  in  The  Drowning   of  Anadune;   but  in
 fact  there  is  an  extremely  interesting  isolated  page  in  which  my
 father set forth the new  conception, and  it is  most convenient  to give
 this page here.                                                          
                                                                         
                                 Second Age                               
                                                                         
  Elros           died         S.A. 460                                           
  King    1.       "             c. 682                                   
          2.       "             c. 903                                   
          3.       "             c. 1125                                  
          4.       "             c. 1347                                  
          5.       "             c. 1568                                  
          6.       "             c. 1790 [added:] In his day the          
                                                                         
                                             Numenoreans aided            
                                             Gil-glad in the defeat of
                                             Sauron                       
          7.       "             c. 2061                                                      
 In his time the Shadow first fell on Numenor. His name was               
 Tar-Atanamir. To him came messages from the Valar, which                
 he rejected. [Added:] He clung to life for an extra 50 years.            
          8.     died       S.A. c. 2233                                             
 In his time first began the division of the folk between the             

                                                   
                                                                        
 King's folk and the Nimruzirim (9) (Elendilli) or Elf-friends.              
 The King's folk and Royal House cease to learn or use Elvish            
 speech and are more usually known by their Numenorean                   
 names. This king was Tar-Kiryatan (Shipwright) or in                    
 Numenorean Ar-Balkumagan. Settlements of dominion in                    
 Middle-earth begin.                                                     
    9.    died    S.A. c. 2454                                                 
 Estrangement of Elf-friends and King's Men deepens. The                 
 King makes the Elf-friends dwell in East, and their chief place         
 becomes Romenna. Many depart to settle on shores of N.W.                
 of Middle-earth. The King's folk as a rule go further south.            
   10.    died    S.A. c. 2676                                                  
   11.     "           c. 2897                                                           
   12.     "           c. 3118.                                                          
 Power but not bliss of Numenor reaches zenith.                          
   13 and last Tarkalion or Arpharazon. Challenges Sauron                
 and lands at Umbar 3125                                                 
   Downfall of Numenor 3319.                                             
                                                                        
 General  aspects of  this text  are discussed  later (pp.171-2  and note
 4).  There  can  be no  doubt that  it is  a scheme  that my  father had
 beside   him   when   writing   the   original   manuscript  A   of  the
 Akallabeth.  For  the  moment,  it  can  be  observed  that,  as  in  A,
 Atanamir   (to   whom   the   Messengers   came)   was  the   father  of
 Kiryatan;  and  that  when  my  father  wrote  in  A that  Atanamir 'was
 the  seventh  of  those  kings  that  succeeded  Elros'  he  meant  this
 precisely: for in the 'Scheme' (as I will refer to it) he is numbered 7,
 and Kiryatan is numbered 8, while Elros has no number.                  
  In  B  2  the  openings  of  these  two  paragraphs,  $$24  -  5,  were
 .changed to the text given in SA: 'These things took  place in  the days
 of  Tar-Kiryatan  the  Shipbuilder,  and of  Tar-Atanamir his  son ...",
 and  'Then  Tar-Ankalimon,  son of  Atanamir, became  King ...'  In this
 'second  phase'  not  only  was  the  order  of  Atanamir  and  Kiryatan
 reversed, but (although it was still  to him  that the  Messengers came)
 Atanamir  becomes  the  thirteenth king  (the original  words in  A, 'of
 those  kings  that  succeeded  Elros'  being  now  removed: in  The Line
 of  Elros  in Unfinished  Tales (p.  221) Kiryatan  was the  twelfth and
 Atanamir the thirteenth, with Elros  counted as  the first).  The second
 phase (B 2) of the  Akallabeth thus  represents, or  rather rests  on, a
 further  large  development   of  the   Numenorean  history   from  that
 seen in the first phase, or AB.                                         
  At  the  end  of  $25  there  is a  paragraph in  AB which  was omitted
 in its entirety in B 2 (i.e. it was struck out on the B typescript):
                                                                        
     The Elendili dwelt mostly near the west coasts of the land; but as

 the  shadow  deepened  in men's  hearts, the  estrangement between
 the  two  parties  grew greater,  and the  king commanded  them to
 remove and dwell in the east of the island, far from the  haven of
 Andunie, to  which the  Eldar had  been wont  to come;  and there-
 after the Eldar visited them only seldom and in secret.  The chief
 dwelling of the Elf-friends in the later days  was thus  about the
 harbour  of  Romenna;  and thence  many set  sail and  returned to
 Middle-earth, where they might speak with the  Elves in  the King-
 dom  of Gil-galad.  For they  still taught  to their  children the
 Eldarin  tongues,  whereas  among  the  King's  Men  these tongues
 fell into disuse, and even the heirs of  Earendil became  known to
 their  people by  names in  the Numenorean  tongue. And  the kings
 desired to put an end to all friendship  between their  people and
 the Eldar (whom they called now  the Spies  of the  Valar), hoping
 to keep their deeds and their  counsels hidden  from the  Lords of
 the  West.  But  all was  known to  Manwe that  they did,  and the
 Valar  were  wroth  with  the  Kings  of  Numenor  and  gave  them
 counsel no more.                                                 

                                           
                                                                      
 For the explanation of this omission see  p. 155.  B 2  now continues
 with SA $26.                                                          
$26.  Thus  the  bliss  of  Westernesse became  diminished ...  At the
 end  of  this paragraph  AB has  'after the  days of  [Ar-Kiryatan >]
 Tar-Kiryatan'  (Kiryatan  being  then the  son of  Atanamir); in  B 2
 this  became  'after  the  days  of  Tar-Ankalimon' (who  has already
 appeared in $25 as the son of Atanamir).                              
   There is extant some original drafting  for the  passage concerning
 the   mounting   obsession   with   death   among   the  Numenoreans,
 including the following passage that was not taken up in A:           
                                                                      
   And some taught  that there  was a  land of  shades filled  with the
   wraiths  of  the  things  that  they  had known  and loved  upon the
   mortal  earth,  and  that  in  shadow  the  dead  should  come there
   bearing with them the shadows of their possessions.                 
                                                                      
 $27. Thus it came to pass  ... This  paragraph in  SA goes  back with-
   out change to the earliest text.                                      
 $28. In all this the Elf-friends had small  part ...  The end  of this
   paragraph, from  'lending them  aid against  Sauron', was  altered in
 SA; the authentic text reads:                                         
                                                                      
   But the King's  Men sailed  far away  to the  south, and  though the
   kingdoms  and  strongholds  they  made  have  left  many  rumours in
   the  legends  of  Men,  the   Eldar  know   naught  of   them.  Only
   Pelargir they remember, for there was the haven of the Elf-friends
   above the mouths of Anduin the Great.                               
                                                                      
 Pengolod  implied,  no  doubt,  that after  the great  division arose
 among the  Numenoreans the  Elves of  Eressea were  cut off  from any

  knowledge  of  the  imperial  enterprises  of  the  King's  Men  in the
  further  south  of  Middle-earth.  But  with  the  removal  of Pengolod
  and  AElfwine  from  the  published  text,  the  Akallabeth   lost  its
  anchorage in expressly Eldarin lore;  and this  led me  (with as  I now
  think an excess of vigilance) to alter the end of the paragraph. - This
  was the first appearance of Pelargir in the narratives of Numenor.     
$29.  In this Age, as is  elsewhere told  ... In  AB the  second sentence
 of  this  paragraph  ran:  'It  was indeed  in the  days of  Atanamir in
 Numenor  that  in  Mordor  the  Tower  of  Barad-dur  was  full-wrought,
 and  thereafter  Sauron  began  to  strive for  the dominion  of Middle-
 earth ...' In B 2 this was altered to the  text of  SA, 'Already  in the
 days of Tar-Minastir,  the eleventh  King of  Numenor, he  had fortified
 the  land of  Mordor and  had built  there the  Tower of  Barad-dur ...'
 The  appearance  here  of Tar-Minastir  the eleventh  king is  of course
 a  further  element  in  the  enlarged  history  already  encountered in
 $$24-6.  So  also  in  this  paragraph  the  text  of  AB  'nor  did  he
 forget  the  aid  that  they  [the  Numenoreans]  had  rendered  to Gil-
 galad of  old' was  changed in  B 2  to 'the  aid that  Tar-Minastir had
 rendered ...'                                                           
    In  the  sentence  'And  Sauron  hated  the  Numenoreans,  because of
 the deeds of their fathers and  their ancient  alliance with  the Elves'
 the  word  'alliance'  was  an  early  change  from  the  original  word
 'friendship'; see under $9 above.                                       
    The  words  in SA  'in that  time when  the One  Ring was  forged and
 there  was  war  between  Sauron  and  the  Elves  in  Eriador'  were an
 editorial addition.                                                     
$30.  Yet  Sauron  was  ever  guileful  ... This  paragraph goes  back to
 A unaltered, except for  the early  change of  'great lords  of Numenor'
 to 'great lords  of Numenorean  race'. -  The name  Ulairi of  the Ring-
 wraiths seems to mark a period  in my  father's work:  it is  found also
 in  a  text  of the  Tale of  Years (p.  175); in  The Heirs  of Elendil
 (Chapter  VII);  and  in  Of  the  Rings  of  Power  and  the  Third Age
 (published in The Silmarillion).                                        
    At the end  of the  paragraph my  father wrote  on the  typescript C,
 to  follow  'he began  to assail  the strong  places of  the Numenoreans
 upon the shores of  the sea':  'but Umbar  he could  not yet  take'. See
 $41 below.                                                              
    After SA $30 there is a second passage in  AB (see  p. 151)  that was
 excluded in B 2:                                                        
    In those days there arose and took  the throne  of the  Sea-kings the
 great  Tar-Calion,  whom   men  called   Ar-Pharazon  the   Golden,  the
 mightiest  and  the  proudest  of  all  his   line.  And   twelve  kings
 had   ruled   the   Numenoreans    between   Elros    and   Ar-Pharazon,
 and  slept   now  in   their  deep   tombs  under   the  mount   of  the
 Meneltarma,  lying   upon  beds   of  gold.   Great  and   glorious  was
 Ar-Pharazon,   sitting   upon  his   carven  throne   in  the   city  of

                                            
                                                                        
 Ar-minaleth  in  the  noon-tide  of  his  realm;  and  to  him  came  the
 masters  of  ships  and  men  returning  out  of   the  East,   and  they
 spoke  of  Sauron,  how  he  named  himself   the  Great,   and  purposed
 to   become   master   of   all   Middle-earth,   and  to   destroy  even
 Numenor, if that might be.                                              
      Then  great  was  the  anger of  Ar-Pharazon hearing  these tidings,
 and  he  sat  long  in  thought,  and  his mood  darkened. And  he deter-
 mined  without  the  counsel  of  the  Valar,  or the  aid of  any wisdom
 but  his  own,  that  he  would  demand  the  allegiance  and  homage  of
 this lord; for in  his pride  he deemed  that no  king should  ever arise
 so mighty as to vie with the Heir of Earendil.                          
  Ar-Pharazon  is  here  named  the fourteenth  king, since  'twelve kings
 had   ruled  the   Numenoreans  between   Elros  and   Ar-Pharazon';  and
 this  agrees  with  The  Drowning   of  Anadune (10) and also   with  the
 Scheme  on  p.  151,  where  Ar-Pharazon  is  numbered  13  and  Elros is
 not counted.                                                            
    At this point (i.e. following  the conclusion  of SA  $30) there  is a
 direction on the typescript B to take in  a rider,  this being  a finely-
 written manuscript of four sides.                                       
$31.  In  those  days  the Shadow  grew deeper  ... to  $40 Great  was the
 anger  ...  This  passage in  SA (pp.  267 -  70) follows  almost exactly
 the text of the rider just referred to. Here there entered  the narrative
 of   Numenor  the   story  of   the  reigns   of  Ar-Adunakhor   and  Ar-
 Gimilzor;  of  the  Lords  of  Andunie, who  were of  the Line  of Elros;
 of  the  sons  of  Ar-Gimilzor,  Inziladun   and  Gimilkhad,   and  their
 conflict; of the unhappy reign  of Inziladun  (Tar-Palantir); and  of the
 forced  marriage  of  his  daughter  Miriel (Ar-Zimraphel),  the rightful
 Queen,  to  Pharazon  son  of  Gimilkhad,  who  seized  the  sceptre  for
 himself.                                                                
    The  few  significant  points  in  which  the  text  of the  rider was
 changed in SA are as follows.                                           
    In  $31  I  altered  'the  twentieth  king'  (Ar-Adunakhor)  and  'the
 twenty-third   king'   (Ar-Gimilzor)   to   'nineteenth'   and   'twenty-
 second',  and  in  $38  I  altered  'four  and  twenty  Kings  and Queens
 had   ruled   the   Numenoreans'   before   Ar-Pharazon  to   'three  and
 twenty'.   My   reason   for   making   these  (incorrect)   changes  (an
 omission  in  the  list  of  the rulers  of Numenor  given in  Appendix A
 (I, i)) has been fully explained in Unfinished Tales p. 226, note 11.     
    In  $33  I  omitted  two  notes  (belonging  to the  same time  as the
 manuscript   and   forming   part   of  it)   concerning  the   Lords  of
 Andunie. The first of these refers  to the  words 'for  they were  of the
 line of  Elros' and  reads: 'And  they took  names in  Quenya, as  did no
 other  house  save  the  kings';  the  second  refers  to  the  following
 words,  'being   descended  from   Silmarien,  daughter   of  Tar-Elendil
 the fourth king':                                                       
    And in  their line  the sceptre  would indeed  have descended  had the

 law  been  in  his  day  as  it  was later  made. For  when Tar-Ankalime
 became  the  first  ruling  Queen,   being  the   only  child   of  Tar-
 Aldarion  the  Sixth  King,  the  law  was  made  that the  oldest child
 of  the  King  whether  man   or  woman   should  receive   the  sceptre
 and   the   kingly  authority;   but  Silmarien   was  older   than  her
 brother Meneldur who succeeded Tar-Elendil.                            
   On  this  see  Unfinished Tales  p. 208,  where the  different formu-
 lations  of  the  new  law  brought  in  by Tar-Aldarion  are discussed.
 The law is stated here in the same words as in Appendix  A (I,  i), i.e.
 simple  primogeniture irrespective  of sex  (rather than  inheritance of
 the throne by a daughter only if the Ruler had no son).(11)            
     In $37 the Adunaic name of  Tar-Miriel is  not Ar-Zintraphel  in the
 long rider, but Ar-Zimrahil, and this is  the form  in all  the sources:
 in  The  Drowning  of  Anadune  (IX.373,  $48),  in Akallabeth  AB (see
 $78  below), in  The Line  of Elros  (Unfinished Tales  p. 224),  and in
 Aldarion  and  Erendis  (ibid.  p.  190).  Ar-Zimraphel  actually occurs
 in one  place only,  a change  made by  my father  in the  present para-
 graph on the  amanuensis typescript  C. This  I adopted  in SA,  and the
 change  to  Ar-Zimraphel  was  also  made  silently  to the  passages in
 The Line of Elros and Aldarion and Erendis.                            
     Under $$24-5 and  30 above  I have  given two  passages in  AB that
 were  struck  out  when  the  long  rider was  introduced. The  first of
 these,  following  SA  $25  and  beginning  'The  Elendili  dwelt mostly
 near the west coasts ...' (p. 151) was largely re-used in the  rider (SA
 $32, Now  the Elendili  dwelt mostly  in the  western regions  ...), but
 the  forced  removal  of  the  Elf-friends  to the  east of  Numenor was
 now  carried  out  by  Ar-Gimilzor,  whereas  in  AB  the king  who com-
 manded  it  is  not  named.  The  second  omitted passage,  following SA
 $30 and beginning  'In those  days there  arose and  took the  throne of
 the  Sea-kings  the  great Tar-Calion'  (p. 153),  was postponed  to the
 end  of  the  rider,  where it  reappears in  revised form  (SA $$38-40,
 p. 270). At the  words in  $40 'so  mighty as  to vie  with the  Heir of
 Earendil' the rider  ends, and  the AB  or 'first  phase' text  takes up
 again  with  'Therefore  he  began in  that time  to smithy  great hoard
 of weapons ...'.(12)                                                   
     Several  pages  were  placed  with  the rider,  written on  the same
 paper, in which  my father  is seen  devising a  different story  of the
 marriage of Pharazon and MirieL For this see pp. 159 ff.               
$41.  And men  saw  his  sails coming  up out  of the  sunset ...  In the
 first sentence the words 'gleaming with red and gold'  (of the  sails of
 the  ships  of  Ar-Pharazon)  should  read 'gleaming  with red  gold' (a
 phrase  that  goes  back  to  The  Drowning  of  Anadune,  IX.389, $28).
 In  the  second  sentence  I  altered  the  original text  'Umbar, where
 there  was  a  mighty  haven  that  no  hand  had  wrought'  to  'Umbar,
 where  was  the  mighty  haven  of  the  Numenoreans  that no  hand had
 wrought',  in  view  of  Appendix  B,  Second Age  2280: 'Umbar  is made

                         
                                                                       
 into  a  great  fortress of  Numenor' (nearly  a thousand  years before
 the coming of Ar-Pharazon).  For the  same reason  I changed  the orig-
 inal text in the following sentence, from 'Empty  and silent  under the
 sickle moon was the land when the  King of  the Sea  set foot  upon the
 shore' to 'Empty  and silent  were all  the lands  about when  the King
 of  the  Sea  marched  upon  Middle-earth'. (It  is probable  that when
 my  father  wrote  this  he  did  not  yet  suppose  that  Umbar  was a
 Numenorean  fortress  and   harbour  at   the  time   of  Ar-Pharazon's
 landing.)                                                              
$$42 ff.  In the remainder of the  Akallabeth the  text of  the original
 manuscript  A  underwent very  little change  indeed at  any subsequent
 stage;  there is  thus no  further need  to comment  on the  text para-
 graph  by  paragraph.  Only  occasional  editorial alteration  was made
 in  SA,  and in  the rest  of this  account it  can be  understood that
 except as stated the published  work follows  the original  exactly, or
 at most with very slight modification not worth recording.(13)         
$44.   Yet such was the cunning of his mind  ... (p.  271). The  text of
 AB  reads  'all  the  councillors,  save Valandil  only, began  to fawn
 upon  him'.  In  B 2  my father  changed Valandil  to Amandil  here and
 at   all   subsequent   occurrences.   Since   Amandil  had   not  been
 mentioned  in  the  text  previously  I  added   the  words   'lord  of
 Andunie' in SA. - It  is curious  that the  naming of  Elendil's father
 Valandil was a reversion to  The Lost  Road (V.60,  69). In  the course
 of the writing of  The Lord  of the  Rings the  name was  variously and
 fleetingly applied to a brother of Elendil, to a son of Elendil, and to
 Elendil himself (VI.169, 175; VII.121, 123-4).                         
$53.  Nonetheless  for  long  it  seemed  to  the  Numenoreans  ...  (p.
 274). In the last sentence 'the kindly kings of the ancient days' is an
 editorial change from 'the kindly kings of the Elder Days'.            
$57.  'The days are dark,  and there  is no  hope for  Men ...  (p. 275).
 The  text  has  'there  is  no  hope  in  Men', and  the reading  in SA
 appears to be a mere error, since there  is no  reason for  the change.
 In  the  speeches  of  Amandil  and  Elendil  that  follow   my  father
 evidently  intended  a distinction  between 'thou'  from father  to son
 and 'you' from son to father, but his usage was  not consistent.  In SA
 I substituted 'you' throughout.                                        
$73.  Then  Ar-Pharazon  hardened  his  heart  ...  (p.  278).  The name
 of  the  great  ship  of  Ar-Pharazon  is  Aglarrama in  AB (as  in The
 Drowning  of  Anadune,  IX.372,  $44),  changed  in  B  2  to  Alkaron-
 das.                                                                   
$75.  But the fleets of  Ar-Pharazon ...  (p. 278).  In the  original text
 (at all stages) this paragraph begins:                                 
  But who among  Men, AElfwine,  can tell  the tale  of their  fate? For
 neither ship nor man of all  that host  returned ever  to the  lands of
 the living; and  the world  was changed  in that  time, and  in Middle-

      
                                                                      
 earth  the  memory  of  all  that went  before is  dim and  unsure. But
 among  the  Eldar  word  has  been  preserved of  the deeds  and things
 that  were;  and  the  wisest  in  lore  among  them  tell  this  tale,
 AElfwine, that I tell now to thee. And they say that the fleets  of Ar-
 Pharazon  came  up  out  of  the  deeps  of  the  Sea  and  encompassed
 Avallone and all the Isle of Eressea ...                              
  Since this last phrase is found  already in  A it  is clear  that the
 changed  meaning  of   Avallone  (signifying   the  eastern   haven  in
 Eressea, not the Isle itself) had entered during the writing of  A (see
 under $12 above).                                                     
  In  SA  'Taniquetil'  is  an  editorial change  from 'the  Mountain of
 Aman', and 'the light of Iluvatar' from 'the light of God'.           
$76.  Then  Manwe upon  the Mountain  ... In  the first  sentence 'their
 government  of  Arda'  was  a change  in SA  from 'their  government of
 the Earth'.                                                           
$77.  But  the  land  of  Aman  ... Two  changes were  made here  in SA.
 The original text has  'were taken  away and  removed from  the circles
 of the  world beyond  the reach  of Men  for ever',  and 'there  is not
 now within the circles of the world any place abiding ...'.           
$78.  In  an  hour  unlooked  for  by  Men  ...  AB  has  'Ar-Zimrahil',
 changed in B 2 to 'Tar-Miriel'; see note 12.                          
$80.  Nine ships there were ... All the texts  have 'Twelve  ships there
 were: six for Elendil, and for Isildur four, and for Anarion  two', but
 on  the  amanuensis  typescript  C  my   father  changed   the  numbers
 to 'nine: four, three, two', noting  in the  margin: 'Nine,  unless the
 rhyme in LR is altered to Four times  three.' The  reference is  to the
 song  that  Gandalf sang  as he  rode on  Shadowfax with  Pippin across
 Rohan on their way to Minas Tirith (The Two Towers p. 202):           
      Tall ships and tall kings                                        
             Three times three,                                        
      What brought they from the foundered land                        
             Over the flowing sea?                                     
$81.  Elendil  and  his  sons  ...  The  opening  of this  paragraph was
 altered in SA to remove  a reference  to AElfwine:  'And here  ends the
 tale, AElfwine, to speak  of Elendil  and his  sons, who  later founded
 kingdoms in Middle-earth ...'.                                        
$83.  But  these things  come not  into the  tale ...  B had  'the Drown-
 ing  of  Anadune',  corrected to  'the Drowning  of Numenor'  (a rever-
 sion to the reading of A). At the end  of the  paragraph AB  had 'spoke
 of  Akallabeth  that  was  whelmed  in   the  waves,   the  Downfallen,
 Atalante   in  the   Eldarin  tongue',   with  Akallabeth   changed  to
 Mar-nu-Falmar  in  B  2.  The  removal of  Akallabeth (restored  in SA)
 belongs  with  the  general  replacement  of  Adunaic by  Elvish names:
 see  under  $78  above, and  note 12.  - On  one of  the copies  of the
 typescript C my father wrote this note on the name Atalante:          

  The   Adunaic   or   Numenorean   name   of   the  same   meaning  was
  Akallabeth, vKALAB.   By  a   curious  coincidence   (not  consciously
  prepared) before this tale was written a base vTALAT   'collapse, fall
  in  ruin'  had  already  been  invented, and  from that  base atalante
  'it  has  fallen  down'  was  a correct  formation according  to gram-
  matical  rules  devised  before  Numenor  had  been  thought  of.  The
  resemblance to Atlantis is thus by chance (as we say).               
                                                                      
 Against  this  note  is  written  '71',  which  must  mean  '1971' (see
 XI.187,  191).  With  this  statement  on  the  subject  cf.  Lowdham's
 remarks  in  The  Notion  Club  Papers, IX.249;  my father's  letter of
 July 1964 cited  in V.8  (footnote); and  the Etymologies,  V.390, stem
 TALAT.                                                               
$$84-6.  The concluding section of the Akallabeth, beginning in SA
 Among the Exiles many believed ...' (pp. 281 - 2), was headed in A
 Epilogue; this was omitted in B. There is a full discussion of this
 section in relation to The Drowning of Anadune in IX.391-6.
$84.  Among the Exiles many believed ... The original text, not
 changed from A, reads:
   But if thou wouldst know, AElfwine, ere thou goest, why it is that
   men of the seed of Earendil, or any such as thou to whom some
   part, however small, of their blood is descended, should still
   venture upon the Sea, seeking for that which cannot be found,
   this much I will say to thee.
     The summit of the Meneltarma, the Pillar of Heaven, in the
   midst of the land, had been a hallowed place, and even in the days
   of Sauron none had defiled it. Therefore among the Exiles many
   believed that it was not drowned for ever, but rose again above
   the waves, a lonely island lost in the great waters, unless haply a
   mariner should come upon it. And some there were that after
   sought for it, because it was said among lore-masters that the far-
   sighted men of old could see from the Meneltarma a glimmer of
   the Deathless Land.
$86.  Thus in after days ... The sentence 'until it came to Tol
 Eressea, the Lonely Isle' was a change in SA from the original 'until
 it came to Eressea where are the Eldar immortal'. Immediately
 following, 'where the Valar still dwell and watch the unfolding of
 the story of the world' was an early change from the reading of A,
 'where the Valar still dwell but watch only and meddle no longer in
 the world abandoned to Men'.
   In the last sentence 'and so had come to the lamplit quays of Aval-
 lone' was an editorial change from 'and so had come to Avallone
 and to Eressea' ('to Eressea and to Avallone' A). For the 'lamplit
 quays of Avallone' see V.334.
   After the conclusion of the Akallabeth in SA the following lines
 were omitted:

 And  whether  all  these  tales  be  feigned, or  whether some  at least         
 be  true,  and  by  them  the  Valar  still  keep  alight  among  Men  a         
 memory   beyond   the   darkness    of   Middle-earth,    thou   knowest         
 now, AElfwine, in thyself. Yet haply none shall believe thee.                    
                                                                                 
                    Note on the marriage of Miriel and Pharazon.                  
                                                                                 
 My  father  did  much  work  on this  story, but  it is  not easy  to see  how it
 is  to  be  related  to the  paragraph (SA  $37, And  it came  to pass  that Tar-
 Palantir  grew  weary  ...)  in  the  long  rider  inserted  into  the typescript
 B,   which  is   exactly  repeated   in  SA   except  for   the  change   of  Ar-
 Zimrahil  to  Ar-Zimraphel  (p.  155).  It  will in  any case  be clearer  if the
 genealogy  is  set  out  (cf.  The  Line of  Elros in Unfinished Tales,  p. 223).
                                                                                 
         Earendur                                  Lindorie                       
       15th Lord of                                                               
          Andunie                                                                 
                                                                                 
                                                   Inzilbeth = Ar-Gimilzor        
                                                                                 
                                                         
         Numendil                                  Inziladun    Gimilkhad
       17th Lord of                              Tar-Palantir                     
          Andunie                                                                 
                                                                                 
                                                                                  
                                                                                 
 Amandil             Elentir                       Tar-Miriel = Ar-Pharazon       
                                                                                 
                                                  Ar-Zimrahil                     
                                                                                 
 The  significance  of  Amandil's  brother  Elentir  will  be  seen  in  the texts
 given  here:  so  far  as  I  am  aware  he  appears  nowhere  else.  These texts
 were  written  on  the  same  paper  as   the  long   rider  and   were  inserted
 with it into the typescript B.                                                   
                                                                                 
                                        (a)                                       
 This  is  a  very  rough   manuscript  written   in  such   haste  that   it  has
 proved  extraordinarily  difficult  to  decipher.  The   text  that   follows  is
 uncertain  in  many  points,  but  these  do  not  affect  the  narrative  and  I
 have  largely  dispensed  with  brackets   and  queries;   it  does   not  convey
 at all the appearance of the original.                                           
 He   [Ar-Pharazon]   was   a   man   of   great   beauty   and   strength/stature
 after  the  image  of  the  first  kings,  and  indeed  in  his  youth   was  not
 unlike  the  Edain  of  old  in  mind  also,  though  he  had  strength  of  will
 rather  than   of  wisdom   as  after   appeared,  when   he  was   corrupted  by
 the  counsels  of  his  father  and  the acclaim  of the  people. In  his earlier
 days   he   had   a   close   friendship   with   Amandil   who   was  afterwards
 Lord   of   Andunie,(14) and  he   had  loved   the  people   of  the   House  of

                       
                                                                         
    Valandil  with  whom  he  had kinship  (through Inzilbeth  his father's
    mother).  With  them  he  was often  a guest,  and there  came Zimrahil
    his  cousin,  daughter of  Inziladun who  was later  King Tar-Palantir.
    Elentir  the  brother  of  Amandil loved  her, but  when first  she saw
    Pharazon her eyes and her  heart were  turned to  him, for  his beauty,
    and for his wealth also.                                              
         But  he  went  away (15) and  she  remained  unwed.  And now  it came
    to pass  that her  father Tar-Palantir  grew weary  of grief  and died,
    and as he had  no son  the sceptre  came to  her, in  the name  of Tar-
    Miriel,  by  right  and  the  laws  of  the  Numenoreans.  But Pharazon
    [?arose)  and  came  to  her,  and  she  was  glad,  and   forsook  the
    allegiance of her  father for  the time,  being enamoured  of Pharazon.
    And  in  this  they  broke the  laws of  Numenor that  forbade marriage
    even in the royal  house between  those more  nearly akin  than cousins
    in the second degree. But  they were  too powerful  for any  to gainsay
    them.  And  when  they  were   wedded  she   yielded  the   sceptre  to
    Pharazon,  and  he sat  upon the  throne of  Elros in  the name  of Ar-
    Pharazon the Golden, but she retained also her title as hers  by right,
    and was called Ar-Zimrahil.(16)                                      
         The Elendili alone were not subservient to him, or dared  to speak
    against his wishes, and it became well-known to all  in that  time that
    Amandil  the  Lord  of  Andunie  was  head  of  their party  though not
    openly  declared.  Therefore   Ar-Pharazon  persecuted   the  Faithful,
    stripping  them  of  any  wealth  that  they had,  and he  deprived the
    heirs of  Valandil of  their lordship.  Andunie he  took then  and made
    it a  chief haven  for the  king's ship-building,  and Amandil  who was
    now  the  Lord  he  commanded  to  move  and  dwell  also  in  Romenna.
    Yet he did not otherwise molest him [? at this  time], nor  dismiss him
    from the Council of  the Sceptre,  because he  remembered still  in his
    heart their friendship of  old; and  Amandil was  well beloved  also by
    many who were not of the Elendili.                                    
         And  now  when  he  deemed  himself [?firm]  upon the  throne and
    beyond  all  gainsaying  he  sat  in  A[rmenelos] in  the glory  of his
    power, and he found it too little to appease his [?lust], and  amid all
    his splendour he brooded darkly upon war.                             
                                                                         
 There are a number of phrases in this  text that  are identical  or almost
 so to those found in  the long  rider ('Tar-Palantir  grew weary  of grief
 and  died',  'by  right  and  the  laws of  the Numenoreans',  'those more
 nearly  akin  than  cousins  in  the  second  degree', 'he  brooded darkly
 upon  war',  SA  $$37, 39).  It would  be natural  to suppose  that these
 phrases  made  their  first  appearance  in  this  text, which  was dashed
 down on the page,  and that  they were  repeated in  the rider,  which was
 a  manuscript written  with great  care; and  in that  case it  would have
 to  be  concluded  that  my  father discarded  this story  of the  love of
 Amandil's  brother  Elentir  for Zimrahil,  and of  her turning  away from

 him and from the Elf-friends and glad acceptance of Pharazon, before
 writing the final version. But I doubt that this was the case.         
                                                                       
                                   (b)                                  
 A  second page  is in  handwriting even  more obscure,  and I  have not
 been able to make out the whole of it after repeated attempts.         
   In  his  boyhood  he  had  a  close  friendship  with Amandil  son of
 Numendil  Lord  of  Andunie,  who  being one  of the  chief councillors
 of the Sceptre dwelt often in Armenelos.                               
    Cut  out  friendship.  Ar-Pharazon's  policy to  Amandil was  due to
 his wife?                                                              
    Now  Zimrahil,  whom  her  father  called  Miriel, only  daughter of
 Tar-Palantir, was a woman of great beauty,  smaller [?in  ... stature]
 than  were  most  women of  that land,  with bright  eyes, and  she had
 great skill in ... She  was older  than Ar-Pharazon  by one  year," but
 seemed younger, and  his eyes  and heart  were turned  to her;  but the
 laws  of  Numenor  lay between,  beside the  displeasure of  her father
 whom   Gimilkhad  opposed   in  all   ways  that   he  could.   For  in
 Numenor cousins in the first  degree did  not marry  even in  the royal
 house.  And  moreover  Zimrahil  was  betrothed  to  Elentir  Amandil's
 [?older] brother and heir of Numendil.(18)                            
    From  a  distance,(19) for Gimilkhad  and  his  son were  not welcome
 in the house of the king.                                              
 In the remainder of the  text there  are a  number of  whole sentences,
 clearly essential to  the briefly  sketched narrative,  in which  I can
 decipher virtually nothing.                                            
   Now it came into his heart that he would .......... Pharazon  was not
 disposed to admit hindrance to his desires, and  he asked  leave there-
 fore of Amandil to be  a guest  in his  house, learning  ..... Zimrahil
 was at the time  in Andunie.  Gimilkhad was  little pleased  with this,
 for  the  Lords  of  Andunie  were  his  chief opponents.  But Pharazon
 [?laughed] saying he would do as he would, and ..........              
    And  Amandil  and  Pharazon   rode  in   Andunie  and   Elentir  and
 Zimrahil saw them afar as they  [?stood] .....  for Elentir  loved his
 brother.  But  when  Zimrahil  saw  Pharazon  in  the splendour  of his
 young manhood come riding [? in]  .......... Suddenly  Zimrahil's heart
 turned  towards   him.  And   when  Pharazon   was  greeted   upon  the
 steps of the house their eyes met .......... and were abashed.         
 I take this to be a further movement in the story struggling to emerge,
 in  which  my  father   was  considering   a  different   treatment  of
 Pharazon's intrusion into the relationship of  Miriel and  Elentir (who
 are now said to be betrothed); but the sketch is so rapid, and  so much
 is indecipherable, that the actual course of the story is obscure.     

                                     (c)                                   
 A brief, clearly written text is the third of these papers  associated with
 the rider inserted into the text of the Akallabeth.                       
   For  Pharazon  son  of  Gimilkhad  had  become  even  more  restless  and
 eager  for  wealth  and  power  than  his  father.  He was  a man  of great
 beauty  and  stature,  in  the  likeness  of  the first  kings of  men; and
 indeed  in his  youth he  was not  unlike the  Edain of  old in  mind also,
 though  he  had  courage  and  strength  of  will  rather  than  of wisdom,
 as  after  appeared,  when  he  was  corrupted  by  the  counsels   of  his
 father,  and  the  acclaim  of the  people. In  his earlier  days he  had a
 close  friendship  with  Amandil   son  of   Numendil,  Lord   of  Andunie,
 and  he  loved  the  people  of  that  House,  with  whom  he  himself  had
 kinship  (through  Inzilbeth  his  father's  mother).  With  them   he  was
 often  a  guest,  and  there also  his cousin,  daughter of  Inziladun, was
 often  to  be  found.  For  Elentir  Amandil's brother  loved her,  and she
 had  turned  her  heart  to  him,  and it  was known  that soon  they would
 be betrothed.                                                             
 In this my father was closely following the  opening of  text (a),  but the
 last sentence of the text, before it  was abandoned,  turns away,  with the
 mention  of  the  approaching  betrothal  of  Elentir  and   Zimrahil,  and
 was perhaps about to take a different course.                             
                                                                          
                                     (d)                                   
                                                                          
 Finally,  my  father  wrote  the  following  passage in  the margin  of the
 inserted  rider  against  $37,  though without  indication of  its placing:
 most  probably  at  the  end of  the paragraph  ('... and  the name  of his
 queen he changed to Ar-Zimrahil').                                        
   And  he  persecuted  the  Faithful,  and  deprived  the Lords  of Andunie
 of  their  lordship,  since  they  had  aided  Tar-Palantir  and  supported
 his  daughter.  Andunie  he  took  then and  made it  the chief  harbour of
 the  king's  ships,  and  Amandil  the  Lord  he  commanded  to   dwell  in
 Romenna.  Yet  he   did  not   otherwise  molest   him,  nor   dismiss  him
 yet  from  his  Council.  For  in  the days  of his  youth (ere  his father
 corrupted him) Amandil had been his dear friend.                          
 This is very closely related to  the end  of text  (a), p.  160, 'Therefore
 Ar-Pharazon  persecuted  the  Faithful ...';  on the  other hand,  it seems
 clear  from  the  words  'and  supported  his daughter'  that the  story of
 Zimrahil's love for Pharazon is not present.                              
                                                                          
   It  is not  perfectly clear  to me  how the  textual puzzle  presented by
 these writings is to be resolved,  but I  am inclined  to think  that, con-
 trary  to appearance,  the texts  (a), (b),  and (c)  in fact  followed the
 writing  of  the  long  rider to  the Akallabeth,  and that  they represent
 the  emergence  of  a doubt  in my  father's mind  whether the  marriage of
 Pharazon  and  Zimrahil  was  indeed  'against her  will', and  the sketch-

  ing  of  a  new  story  on the  subject. The  close agreement  of phrases
  in (a) with those in the rider (see pp. 160 - 1) must then be interpreted
  as simple repetition of what was  already present  there, rather  than as
  drafting for it. Finally, on this view, he abandoned  the new  story, and
  returned to that already present  in $37.  Amandil's brother  Elentir was
  lost, at any rate in the recorded tradition.                             
    It  may  be  noted  that  the  youthful  friendship  of   Pharazon  and
  Amandil  is  referred   to  in   SA  $47   (Then  Ar-Pharazon   the  King
  turned  back ...,  p. 272),  and this  indeed goes  back to  the original
  manuscript  of  the  Akallabeth:  'In  the days  of their  youth together
  Valandil  [>  Amandil]  had  been  dear  to  Ar-Pharazon,  and  though he
  was of the Elf-friends he  remained in  his council  until the  coming of
  Sauron.'                                                                 

                              NOTES.                                      
                                                                         
  1. I think now that such  slight evidence  as there  is points  rather to
     about 1960 as the date of these works.                               
  2. In $1 I altered the original 'yet they came at last to the  lands that
     look  upon  the  Sea. These  are indeed  that folk  of whom  thou hast
     heard  that  came  into  Beleriand  in  the  days  of  the war  of the
     Noldor  and  Morgoth'  in order  to remove  the italicised  words (the
     alteration of the last sentence to 'entered Beleriand  in the  days of
     the War of the Jewels' was a  very late  change, one  of the  very few
     that  my  father  made  to  the  typescript  C).  In $2,  similarly, I
     changed 'and  thou hast  heard how  at the  last' to  'and in  the Lay
     of Earendil it is told how at the last'.                             
  3. The  Line  of Elros  ends with  the words  (Unfinished Tales  p. 224):
     'Of the deeds  of Ar-Pharazon,  of his  glory and  his folly,  more is
     told in the tale of  the Downfall  of Numenor,  which  Elendil wrote,
     and which was preserved in Gondor.'                                  
  4. In A my  father added  a footnote  here, omitted  in B:  'Rothinzil is
     a  name  in  the  Numenorean  tongue,  and  it  has  the  same meaning
     as Vingilot, which is Foamflower.'                                   
  5. It  is  true that  in the  opening sentence  of the  Tale of  Years my
     father substituted in the final typescript 'The  First Age  ended with
     the  Great  Battle,  in  which  the  Host  of Valinor  broke Thangoro-
     drim  and  overthrew  Morgoth',  replacing  a  reference   to  'Fionwe
     and the sons of the Valar' of preceding  versions (see  pp. 172  - 3);
     but  he  may  not  have  removed  the  name  Fionwe  (Eonwe)  for  the
     same reason as I did in the Akallabeth.                              
  6. The manuscript A had 'called', which became 'call' in B.             
  7. Cf.  Elrond's  words  in  The Council  of Elrond  (FR p.  257): 'There
     in the courts of  the King  [in Minas  Anor] grew  a white  tree, from
     the seed  of that  tree which  Isildur brought  over the  deep waters,
     and  the  seed  of  that  tree  before came  from Eressea,  and before

     that out of  the Uttermost  West in  the Day  before days  when the
     world was young.'                                                 
  8. 'Tar-Atanamir' was struck out in A and  does not  appear in  B, but
     this seems to have been due only  to my  father's wish  to postpone
     the naming of the king to $24.                                    
  9. Nimruzirim:  Nimruzir is  the name  of Elendil  in The  Drowning of
     Anadune.                                                          
 10. In  The  Drowning  of  Anadune  (IX.363,  $20)  'seven   kings  had
     ruled ... between  Indilzar [Elros]  and Ar-Pharazon',  but 'seven'
     was changed to 'twelve' (IX.381).                                 
 11. Other footnotes  (on the  inscription of  the Quenya  name Herunu-
     men  of  Ar-Adunakhor  in  the  Scroll  of Kings,  $31, and  on the
     explanation  of  the  name  Tar-Palantir, $35,  with which  cf. The
     Line of Elros in Unfinished  Tales p.  223) were  incorporated into
     the body of the text in SA. At the end of $35 I extended  the words
     of  the  original  text 'the  ancient tower  of King  Minastir upon
     Oromet' to  '... upon  the hill  of Oromet  nigh to  Andunie', this
     being  taken  from  The Line  of Elros,  p. 220;  and in  $37 after
     'Miriel' I added the words 'in the Elven-tongue'.                 
 12. Before the second of these passages was struck  out (and  so before
     the insertion of the rider) my father went through  it and  all the
     remainder  of  the  typescript  B   and  replaced   Ar-Pharazon  by
     Tar-Kalion (in the rejected passage, p. 153, he  cut out  the words
     'whom  men  called  Ar-Pharazon',  thus  leaving   'Tar-Calion  the
     Golden').  His  intention,  presumably,  was  to  use  Elvish names
     exclusively; nonetheless, in the inserted rider  he named  the king
     Ar-Pharazon.  The  typist  of  C  therefore  moved  from  one  name
     to  the  other;  and seeing  this my  father began  on C  to change
     Tar-Kalion back to Ar-Pharazon,  but soon  wearied of  it. In  SA I
     adopted Ar-Pharazon.                                              
 13. Throughout  this concluding  part of  the Akallabeth  I substituted
     the  name  Ar-Pharazon  for  Tar-Kalion, as  explained in  note 12.
     Arminaleth  was  changed  to  Armenelos  on B,  and this  was taken
     up in SA.                                                         
 14. The following  is written  in the  margin here:  '3rd in  line from
     Earendur and 18th from Valandil the First Lord of Andunie .       
 15. Above 'he went  away' is  written '[?Pharazon]  went to  the wars';
     cf.  SA  $36  (Now  Gimilkhad  died ...):  He [Pharazon]  had fared
     often abroad, as a  leader in  the wars  that the  Numenoreans made
     then in the coastlands of Middle-earth'.                          
 16. At  this point  in the  manuscript stands  the following:  'And his
     love therefore of the Lords of Andunie turned  to hate,  since they
     alone  were  powerful  or  wise  enough  to  restrain him  and give
     counsel against his desires.' A second  version following  this was
     struck out, and no doubt my  father intended  the rejection  of the
     first also.                                                       

 17. In  The  Line  of  Elros  Ar-Pharazon  was born  in 3118,  and Tar-
     Miriel in 3117 (Unfinished Tales p. 224)-                              
 18. The  word  I have  given as  'older' is  scarcely interpretable  at all
     as it stands, but 'older' or 'elder' seems inevitable, since Elentir is
     called  the  heir  of  Numendil,  Lord  of  Andunie,   apparently  dis-
     placing Amandil.                                                       
 19. 'From  a  distance'  presumably  refers  back  to  the words  'his eyes
     and heart were turned to her'.                                         

                                        VI.                                     
                                                                               
                               THE TALE OF YEARS OF                             
                                  THE SECOND AGE.                               
                                                                               
 The  chronology  of  the  Second  Age  can  be  traced  back  to  its  origin in
 two  small  half-sheets  of paper.  That these  are not  only the  first written
 record  of  such  a  chronology,  but  represent  the   actual  moment   of  its
 establishment,   seems   certain   from   the   obviously   experimental  nature
 of the calculations. I will  refer to  the various  texts of  the Tale  of Years
 by  the  letter  T, and  call the  first of  these pages,  given below,  T(a) to
 indicate  its  primary  nature.  The  rejected  figures, being  overwritten, are
 in  some  cases  hard to  make out,  but I  believe this  to be  a substantially
 correct representation of  the text  as it  was first  written; following  it, I
 give the subsequent changes.                                                   
                                                                               
                                   Time Scheme.                                 
 'Ages' last about 3000 years.                                                  
 The 'Black Years' or the age between the Great Battle and defeat               
 of Morgoth, and the Fall of Numenor and the overthrow of                       
 Sauron lasted about 3500.                                                      
 Thus:                                                                          
 Great Battle                                                                   
 Judgement of Fionwe and establishment of Numenor    10                           
 Reign of Elros                                     410
 11 other kings averaging 240 each                 2640
                                                                             
 Last 13th king                                     220
                                                  -----                       
                                                   3280
                                                                               
 Elendil (very long-lived) was [many rejected figures] 200 years                
 old at Fall of Numenor, and Isildur 100. The new  realms lasted                
 100 years before Sauron opened war.                      100
 The gathering of Alliance 3 years, the Siege 7            10                      
                                                         3390
                                                                               
 The Third Age was 'drawing to its end' in Frodo's time. So that                
 Loss of Ring was  about 3000  years ago.  For 500  years Sauron                
 remained  quiet and  then began  slowly to  grow in  Mirkwood -                
 that stirred events and wakened the Ring to come back.                         
 So Smeagol and Deagol's finding occurred about 600  years after                

 Isildur's death. Gollum therefore had the Ring near[ly] 2400               
 years.                                                                     
                                                                           
 Average life of a Numenorean   210 years (3 X 70)                            
 Average life of royal house    350 years (5 X 70)                             
 A King of Numenor usually acceded when about 100-120 and                   
 ruled about 250 years.                                                     
                                                                           
   These dates seem  to have  been changed  in this  order. First,  the dur-
 ation  of  the  new  realms  before  Sauron   assailed  them   was  changed
 from 100 to 110 years,  giving a  total of  3400 (and  at the  beginning of
 the text the figure of 'about 3500' for the length of the Black Years, i.e.
 the  Second  Age,  was  changed  to  'about  3400',  and  not  subsequently
 altered).  Then  the  establishment  of  Numenor  was  changed  from  10 to
 50, giving the  date 3320  for the  Fall of  Numenor, and  a total  of 3440
 years in the Second Age.                                                   
   Sauron's  'remaining  quiet'  (in  the  Third Age)  was changed  from 500
 to 1000 years,  the finding  of the  Ring in  the Anduin  from 600  to 1100
 years after Isildur's death,  and Gollum's  possession of  it from  2400 to
 1900 years.                                                                
   A  pencilled  note,  very  probably  of  the  same  time,  on  this  page
 reads:  'In  character  Aragorn  was  a  hardened  man  of  say 45.  He was
 actually  90,  and  would  live at  least another  50 (probably  70) years.
 Aragorn  was  a  Numenorean  of  pure  blood  but  the  span  had  dwindled
 to double life.'                                                           
                                                                           
   The  second  of  these  two  primary  pages,  unquestionably  written  at
 the same time  as the  first (as  is shown  by the  paper used),  is headed
 'The  Second  Age  and  the  Black Years',  and gives  dates from  'B.Y.' 0
 (the end of the  Great Battle)  to the  loss of  the One  Ring and  the end
 of  the  Second  Age,  the  date  of  which  (3440  in  T(a))  now  becomes
 3441,  which  was  never  changed.  This page,  being the  earliest version
 of an actual 'Tale of Years', I will call T 1. In its earlier part T  1 was
 so  much  corrected  and  reworked  as  my  father  proceeded  that  it  is
 scarcely  possible  to  analyse  the  successive  stages  of  its endlessly
 changed  chronology;  but  in  a  subsequent  text  he  followed  the final
 form of T 1 so closely that it can be given in its  place. The  chief point
 to  notice  in  it  is  the  entry  'Foundation  of  Tarkilion',  which was
 changed  (probably  at  once)  to   'Foundation  of   Artheden  (Dunhirion)
 and  Gondor'.  The  name  Dunhirion  is  also found,  but not  so far  as I
 know  elsewhere,  in  a late  text of  the chapter  The Council  of Elrond,
 where  it  was corrected  to Annuminas;  while Tarkilion  is found  in the
 original  manuscript of  Of the  Rings of  Power and  the Third  Age, like-
 wise  corrected  to  Annuminas,  and  likewise  apparently not  found else-
 where.  Artheden  is  clearly  the  first  appearance of  Arthedain, though
 not with its later significance.                                           
   The page T 1 (in  its final  form) was  followed so  closely by  the next

  text that it seems probable that no long interval had  elapsed. This  is a
  clearly written manuscript on two sides of a single sheet; I will refer to
  it as T 2. A few changes were made to it in  red ink,  but they  were made
  after  the subsequent  version had  been written  (since the  same changes
  were made to that, also in red ink), and I do not notice them here.       
                                                                           
                             Of the Tale of Years                           
                              in the latter ages.                           
                                                                           
  The  'First  Age' (1) ended with the  Great   Battle  and   the  departure
  of   the   Elves   and   Fathers   of   Men,   and   the   foundation   of
  Numenor.                                                                  
    The   'Second   Age'   ended   with   the   overthrow  of   Sauron,  and
  the Loss of the One Ring.                                                 
    The  'Third  Age'  is  drawing  to  its end  in the  tales of  the Shire
  and of the Hobbits.                                                       
    Each   'Age'   last[ed]  somewhat   more  or   less  than   3000  years;
  so   that   the   Loss   of  the   Ring  was   about  3000   years  before
  Frodo's  time.  Deagol  finds   it  about   1100  years   after  Isildur's
  death. 'Gollum' therefore had the Ring for about 1900 years.              
                                                                           
                 The Second Age or the Black Years                          
              reckoned from the overthrow of Morgoth                        
          End of the Great Battle.                                          
    10. Foundation of the Havens, and the kingdom of Lindon.                 
    50. Foundation of Numenor.                                               
   460. Death of Elros, Earendel's son, first king of Numenor.               
   500. Reawakening (2) of Sauron in Middle-earth.                              
   700. First ships of the Numenoreans return to Middle-earth.               
        Others come at times, but seldom, and they do not stay.           
   750. Foundation of Imladrist (3) (Rivendell) and Eregion                     
       (Hollin).                                                         
   900. - Sauron begins in secret to build the fortress of Barad-            
         dur in Mordor, and makes the forges of Orodruin.                  
  1200-1500. The Rings of Power are made in Eregion.                         
  1550. War of the Elves and Sauron. The 'Days of Flight' begin,             
        or the Black Years properly so called.                            
  1600. Gil-galad defends Lindon; and Imladris is besieged but               
        holds out. Eregion is laid waste.                                 
  1700. The great voyages of the Numenoreans begin. They                     
        come in many ships to Lindon, and they aid Gil-galad              
        and Elrond.                                                       
  1900. Barad-dur is completed.                                              

 2000-3000. Sauron's dominion  slowly extends  over all        
       Middle-earth, but  it is  withheld from  the North-West,        
       and all along the West-shores, even far  southwards, the        
       Numenoreans have fortresses and outposts.                       
 3118. Tar-kalion  the young  king, the  thirteenth of  his line,        
       ascends the throne of Numenor. He resolves  to challenge        
       Sauron the Great, and begins an armament (3120).                
 3125. Tar-kalion sets sail to Middle-earth. Sauron is  obliged to        
       yield and is taken to Numenor.                                  
 3319. Downfall  of  Numenor.  Elendil,  Anarion and  Isildur fly        
       to Middle-earth. Foundation of Arthedain (with  the city        
       Annuminas) in the North;  and of  Gondor (with  the city        
       Osgiliath) in the South.                                        
 3320. Sauron returns to Mordor.                                  
 3430-3. Sauron at  last being  ready makes  war in  Gondor. The        
       Last Alliance is formed.                                        
 3433 [> 3434]. Battle of Dagorlad. Siege of Barad-dur begun.             
 3441. Sauron  overthrown.  Ring  taken  and  lost.  End  of  the        
       Second Age.                                                     
                                                                        
   The following are the only differences in the chronology  of T  2 from
 its forerunner. In T 1  Sauron's departure  to Numenor  is given  a sep-
 arate entry under the year 3128; and (while  T 1  already has  the final
 date 3319 for the Downfall, where T(a) had 3320)  the flight  of Elendil
 and his sons is placed, most strangely, a year later, in 3320.          
   It will be seen that the dates of events in the Second Age are for the
 most  part at  variance with  those in  Appendix B,  in many  cases very
 widely so (thus Imladris was  founded at  the same  time as  Eregion, in
 750, but in  Appendix B  not until  1697, in  the War  of the  Elves and
 Sauron, when Eregion was  laid waste).  The most  extreme of  these dif-
 ferences refers in fact to the Third Age, in the  headnote to  the text,
 where the statement in T(a) that Deagol  found the  Ring in  about Third
 Age  1100  and  therefore  Gollum  possessed  it  for  some  1900  years
 (p. 167) is repeated: in Appendix B Deagol finds  the Ring  in T.A.2463,
 by which reckoning Gollum had  it for  478 years,  until Bilbo  found it
 in 2941.                                                                
   There  are  a  number  of  points  of  agreement  between  T  2 (under
 which I include here the closely similar T  1) and  the 'Scheme'  of the
 Numenorean  kings  accompanying  the  original   manuscript  A   of  the
 Akallabeth, given on pp. 150-1. In both,  the death  of Elros  is placed
 in  the  year  460  (not as  later in  442); in  T 2  the coming  of the
 Numenoreans  to  the aid  of Gil-galad  in Lindon  is dated  1700, while
 in the 'Scheme' this is said to have occurred in the days of the unnamed
 sixth king (after Elros), who died in 1790; in T 2 the accession of Tar-
 kalion is placed in 3118, and in  the 'Scheme'  his father,  the unnamed

                         
                                                                           
 twelfth king (after Elros) died in that year; and in both  the date  of Tar-
 kalion's  landing  in  Middle-earth is  3125. A  further point  of agreement
 between  both,  and  also  with  the  manuscript A  of the  Akallabeth, con-
 cerns  the  completion  of  Barad-dur:  in  T  2  this  is  dated  1900;  in
 Akallabeth A (see  p. 153,  $29) it  is said  to have  occurred in  the days
 of  Atanamir;  and  in  the  'Scheme'  Atanamir  is  said  to  have  died in
 2061, his father having died in 1790.                                      
    Two other points in this earliest version (or  strictly versions)  of the
 Tale  of  Years  of  the  Second  Age remain  to be  mentioned. The  loss of
 the  One  Ring  is  expressly placed  in the  last year  of the  Second Age,
 3441;  whereas  in  Appendix  B  the  headnote states  that that  Age 'ended
 with the  first overthrow  of Sauron  ... and  the taking  of the  One Ring'
 (cf.  also  the  last words  of section  I (i)  of Appendix  A, RK  p. 318),
 while  the  planting  of  the  White Tree  in Minas  Anor, the  handing over
 of  the  South  Kingdom to  Meneldil, and  the death  of Isildur  are placed
 in the year 2 of  the Third  Age. Secondly,  in the  entry for  3319 Anarion
 is placed before Isildur, and it will be seen shortly that this  does indeed
 mean that  Anarion was  the elder  of Elendil's  sons (cf.  the text  FN III
 in  IX.335:  'his  sons  Anarion  and  Isildur'). In  Akallabeth A  and sub-
 sequently  Isildur  had  four  ships  and  Anarion two  (p. 157,  $80), from
 which it seems  clear that  the reversal  of this  had already  taken place.
 On  the  other  hand,  in an  early version  of the  chapter The  Council of
 Elrond Isildur was expressly stated to be the elder (VII.126).             
                                                                           
    Found  with  T  2  and  to  all  appearance  belonging  to the  same time
 is  another  page  in  which  my  father  restated  in  the same  or closely
 similar  terms  a part  of his  notes on  Numenor and  the aftermath  of the
 Downfall in T(a),  pp. 166-7.  This page  I will  call T(b).  Corrections to
 it were made at the same time as those  to T  2, and  are not  noticed here.
                                                                           
 Average life of a Numenorean before the fall was about 210                 
 years (3 x 70). Average life of the royal house of the line of             
 Earendel' was about 350 years (5 X 70). A king of Numenor                  
 usually came to the throne when about 120 years old and                    
 reigned 200 years or more.                                                 
   50  Numenor founded                                                      
  410  years Elros reigned                                                 
 2640  11 other kings (averaging 240 each)                                   
  220  Last king (Tarkalion)                                               
 ----                                                                      
 3320                                                                       
                                                                           
 Elendil was very long-lived (being of Earendel's line).  He was            
 about 200 years  old at  the time  of the  Fall of  Numenor and            
 Anarion  110, Isildur  100. The  new realms  of Arnor  and Gon-            
 dor lasted about 110 years before Sauron made his first attacks            
 on them. The gathering of the Last Alliance, the  march, battle            

 and siege, lasted about 11 years. (121)                                  
 3320 + 121, 3441.                                                        
                                                                         
    The  remainder  of  this  page  and its  verso are  taken up  with the
 earliest version of the Tale of Years of the  Third Age,  obviously writ-
 ten continuously from T(b) just given; for this see p. 225.              
                                                                         
    These initial computations  of the  chronology of  the Second  Age are
 remarkable in themselves  and perplexing  in the  detail of  their inter-
 relations.                                                               
    The text T(a), self-evidently the starting-point,  made 3320  the date
 of the Downfall. After  a lapse  of 110  years Sauron  opened war  on the
 new  kingdoms  (3430),  and  a  further ten  passed before  his overthrow
 in 3440, the last year of the Second Age.                                
    In T 1, written at the same time as, but after, T(a), the  Downfall is
 placed in 3319 (no reason for the change being  evident), but  the flight
 of  Elendil  and  his sons  is incomprehensibly  placed in  the following
 year,  3320  (p.  169).  Again  after  110  years Sauron  attacked Gondor
 (3430), but now eleven years passed before his overthrow in 3441.        
    In T 2, which is little more than a fair copy of T 1, the  founding of
 the  kingdoms  in Middle-earth  is placed  in the  year of  the Downfall,
 which  is  now  111  years before  Sauron's attack  in 3430;  as in  T 1,
 eleven years passed before the overthrow of Sauron in 3441.              
    Finally, the extremely puzzling text T(b) goes back to T(a) in placing
 the  Downfall  in  3320, and  110 years  passed before  the war  began in
 3430; but the total of 3441 is reached as in  T 1  and T  2 by  the lapse
 of  eleven years  before the  overthrow. T(b)  is apparently  a companion
 page to T 2, and must be later than the other  texts, since  the Northern
 Kingdom  is  here  called  Arnor,  not  Arthedain,  and this  change only
 entered after a further text of the Tale of Years had been written.      
    If  we now  turn to  the Akallabeth  'Scheme' (pp.  150-1) it  will be
 seen  that  the  date  3319  of the  Downfall is  reached by  an entirely
 different route. In the  'Scheme' the  intervals between  the death-dates
 of the kings are in every case either 221 or 222 years, except  for those
 between  the  unnamed  sixth  king  and  Atanamir,  the   seventh,  which
 was  50  years  longer  (271  years),  and between  Atanamir and  his son
 Kiryatan which was 50 years shorter (172 years).  If all  these intervals
 are added together they reach a total of 2658  years; and  if to  this is
 added the year of the death of Elros (460)  and the  length of  the reign
 of  Tar-kalion  (201 years)  we reach  3319, the  date of  the Downfall.(4)
 In the  'Scheme' Tar-kalion  is numbered  '13', but  he is  expressly the
 thirteenth king excluding Elros, as he is  also in  Akallabeth A  and The
 Drowning  of  Anadune  as  revised  (see  p.  154 and  note 10),  so that
 there were fourteen kings of Numenor in all.                             
    In the texts T(a) and T(b), on  the other  hand, 'eleven  other kings'
 ruled  between  Elros  and Tar-kalion,  making thirteen  in all;  and the
 average length of their reigns being here 240 years,  the total  is 2640.

  When to this is added 460  and Tar-kalion's  reign of  220 years  the total
  is 3320.                                                                   
    A final element is the  fact that  in T  1, the  companion page  to T(a),
  Tar-kalion ascended  the throne  in 3118  and reigned  for 201  years, just
  as in the 'Scheme'.                                                        
    Every  explanation  of  this  extraordinary   textual  puzzle   seems  to
  founder. It is not in itself perhaps a matter of great significance, though
  one  certainly gets  the impression  that there  is more  to the  date 3319
  (and possibly also to 3441) than the evidence reveals. It is clear,  at any
  rate, that all these texts, the original manuscript  of the  Akallabeth and
  its  associated  'Scheme',  the computations  in the  texts T(a)  and T(b),
  and the  initial version  of the  Tale of  Years, arose  at the  same time,
  before the narrative of  The Lord  of the  Rings was  in final  form; while
  the  evidence  suggests  that  it  was these  computations of  the Numenor-
  ean  kings,  formulaic  as  they  were,  that  provided  the  chronological
  'vehicle'  of the  Second Age,  established at  that time.  It can  be seen
  from  the text  T 1  that the  Numenorean history  provided the  fixed ele-
  ment,  while  the  dating  of  events in  Middle-earth before  the Downfall
  were at first of an extreme  fluidity (the  making of  the Rings  of Power,
  for  instance,  was  moved  from  1000-1200  to  1200-1500,  and   the  War
  of the Elves and Sauron from 1200 to 1550).                                
                                                                            
  The third text of the Tale of Years, which I will call T 3,  is (so  far as
  the  Second  Age  is concerned)  little more  than a  copy of  T 2,  with a
  number  of  entries  somewhat  expanded,  and  one  sole  additional entry:
  '3440 Anarion is slain'; no dates were altered.  Anarion and  Isildur still
  appear  in  that order,  and the  North Kingdom  is still  named Arthedain,
  though  both  were  subsequently  corrected.  The  statement  in  the open-
  ing passage of T 2 concerning the  length of  the Ages  and the  finding of
  the  Ring  by  Deagol  was  omitted,  and  in its  place the  following was
  introduced:                                                                
    The  Fourth  Age  ushered  in  the  Dominion  of Men  and the  decline of
  all the other 'speaking-folk' of the Westlands.                            
  Following  the  usual pattern,  a number  of additions,  some of  them sub-
  stantial,  were  made  to the  manuscript T  3, but  virtually all  of them
  were  taken  up  into  the  following  version, the  greatly expanded  T 4,
  whose entries  for the  Second Age  are given  here. This  is a  good clear
  manuscript  with  few  subsequent  alterations  in this  part of  the text;
  those  which were  made before  the following  text was  taken from  it are
  noticed if significant.                                                    
                                                                            
                               The Tale of Years                             
                                    in the                                   
                                  Latter Ages.                               
       The First Age was the longest. It ended with the Great Battle in      
           which Fionwe and the sons of the Valar broke Thangorodrim         

 and  overthrew Morgoth.(5) Then  most   of  the   exiled  Elves
 returned into the West and dwelt in Eressea that  was afterwards
 named  Avallon,  being  within  sight of  Valinor.(6) The  Atani or
 Edain,  Fathers of  Men, sailed  also over  Sea and  founded the
 realm of Numenor or Westernesse,  on a  great isle,  westmost of
 all mortal lands.                                               
                                                                
 The  Second Age  ended with  the first  overthrow of  Sauron and
 the loss of the One Ring.                                       
                                                                
 The Third Age came to its end in the  War of  the Ring,  and the
 destruction  of  the  Dark  Tower  of  Sauron,  who  was finally
 defeated.                                                       
                                                                
 The  Fourth  Age  ushered  in  the  Dominion  of  Men   and  the
 decline of all other 'speaking folk' of the Westlands.          
 [Added: The first three ages are  now by  some called  The Elder
 Days,  but of  old and  ere the  Third Age  was ended  that name
 was given only to the First Age and the world before the casting
 forth of Morgoth.](7)                                           

                          The Second Age.                       
                                                               
 These were the Dark Years of Middle-earth, but the high  tide of
 Numenor.  Of events  in Middle-earth  scant record  is preserved
 even  among  the  Elves,  and  their dates  here given  are only
 approximate.                                                   
                                    

   10. Foundation of the Grey Havens, and the Kingdom of
       Lindon. This was ruled by Gil-galad son of Felagund,(8)
       chief of all the Noldor who did not yet depart to
       Avallon.
   50. Foundation of Numenor. [Added: About the same time
       the works of Moria were begun by Durin the Dwarf and
       his folk from the ruins of the ancient dwarf-cities in the
       Blue Mountains. This was struck out and replaced by:
       About this time many dwarves fleeing from the ruins of
       the dwarf-cities in the Blue Mountains came to Moria,
       and its power and the splendour of its works were
       greatly increased.](9)
  460. Death of Elros Earendil's son, first King of Numenor.
  500. Sauron, servant of Morgoth, begins to stir again in
       Middle-earth.
  700. First ships of the Numenoreans return to Middle-earth.
       At first they came only seldom, and the Numenoreans
       did not stay long in any place.

 750.    Foundation  of  Imladris  (or  Rivendell)  and  of  Eregion
         (or  Hollin)  as  dwellings  of the  Noldor or  High Elves.
         Remnants  of  the  Telerian  Elves  (of Doriath  in ancient
         Beleriand)  establish  realms  in  the woodlands  far east-
         ward, but most of  these peoples  are Avari  or East-elves.
         The  chief  of  these  were  Thranduil  who  ruled  in  the
         north   of   Greenwood   the   Great  beyond   Anduin,  but
         Lorien  was  fairer and  had the  greater power;  for Cele-
         born had to wife the Lady Galadriel  of the  Noldor, sister
         of Gil-galad [> sister of Felagund Gil-galad's sire].(10)
 900.    Sauron  in  secret  begins  the  building of  the fortress,
         Barad-dur,  in  Mordor,  and  makes  there  the  forges  of
         Orodruin,  the  Mountain  of Fire.  But he  professes great
         friendship  with the  Eldar, and  especially with  those of
         Eregion, who were great in smith-craft.                   
                                                                  
 1200-1500. The Rings of Power are forged in Eregion; but the     
                                                                  
         Ruling Ring is forged by Sauron in Orodruin.              
 1550.   War of the Elves and  Sauron begins.  The 'Days  of Flight'
         begin,  or  the  'Dark  Years'  properly  so  called, being
         the  time  of  the  dominion  of  Sauron.  Eregion  is laid
         waste.  The  Naugrim  (or  Dwarves)  close  the   gates  of
         Moria.  Many  of  the  remaining  Noldor  depart  west over
         Sea.                                                      
 1700.   The  great  voyages  of  the  Numenoreans  begin. Gil-galad
         defends   Lindon   and   the   Grey  Havens.   Imladris  is
         besieged  but  holds  out  under  the  command   of  Elrond
         Earendil's   son.   The   Numenoreans   come    with   many
         ships  to  Lindon  and  they  aid  Gil-galad   and  Elrond.
         Sauron  retreats  from  Eriador  (west  of the  Misty Moun-
         tains).                                                   
 1900.   Barad-dur  is  completed  with  the  power  of  the  Ruling
                                                                  
         Ring.                                                     
 c.2000.  The  Shadow  falls  on  Numenor.  The  Numenoreans        
         begin to  murmur against  the Valar,  who will  not permit        
         them  to  sail  west  from  their  land;  and  they become        
         jealous  of   the  immortality   of  the   Eldar.  [Added:        
         (c.2250).]  A  division  appears  among   the  Numenoreans        
         between the Elf-friends, the smaller party, and the King's        
         Folk. The latter  become slowly  estranged from  the Valar        
         and the Eldar, and abandon the use  of the  Elven tongues;        
         the  kings  take  names  of  Numenorean  form.   The  Elf-        
         friends,  dwelling  most  in the  east of  Numenor,(11) remain        

       loyal  to  the  kings  except in  the matter  of rebellion
       against the decrees of the Valar.                         
 2000-3000. The Numenoreans now make permanent
                                                                
       dwellings on  the shores  of Middle-earth,  seeking wealth
       and  dominion;  they  build  many  havens  and fortresses.
       The Elf-friends go  chiefly to  the North-west,  but their
       strongest  place  is  at  Pelargir  above  the  Mouths  of
       Anduin.  The  King's  Folk  establish lordships  in Umbar (12)
       and Harad and in many other  places on  the coasts  of the
       Great Lands.                                              
          During  the  same  time  Sauron  extends  his  dominion
       slowly  over  the  great  part  of  Middle-earth;  but his
       power  reaches  out  eastward, since  he is  withheld from
       the coasts by the  Numenoreans. He  nurses his  hatred for
       them,  but  cannot  yet  challenge  them  openly.  Towards
       the end of this time the Ulairi, the Ringwraiths, servants
       of Sauron and slaves of the Nine Rings first appear.      
 3118. Tar-kalion,  calling   himself  Ar-Pharazon   the  Golden,
       thirteenth  king  of  the  line  of Earendil,  ascends the
       throne  of Numenor.  He resolves  to challenge  Sauron the
       Great, and builds an armament.                            
 3125. Ar-Pharazon  sets  sail  for  Middle-earth. The  might and
       splendour  of  the  Numenoreans  fills  the   servants  of
       Sauron  with  fear.  Ar-Pharazon  lands  at Umbar,  and in
       pursuance  of  his  own   secret  design   Sauron  humbles
       himself  and  submits.  Sauron  is taken  as a  hostage to
       Numenor.                                                  
                                                                
 3140-3310. Sauron slowly gains the confidence of Ar-             
                                                                
       Pharazon,  until  he  dominates  his  counsels.  He  urges
       Ar-Pharazon  to  make  war  on  the Lords  of the  West to
       gain everlasting life.                                    
          Most  of  the  Numenoreans  fall  under  the   sway  of
       Sauron,  and  they  persecute  the  Elf-friends;  and they
       become tyrants over men in Middle-earth.                  
 3310. Ar-Pharazon  feeling  the  approach   of  death   at  last
       takes  the  counsel of  Sauron and  prepares a  vast fleet
       for  an  assault  upon   Avallon  and   Valinor.  Valandil
       [>  Amandil](13) the faithful  breaks the  ban of  the Valar
       and sails west, hoping to repeat the embassy  of Earendil,
       and obtain the help of the Lords of the West. He  is never
       heard of again. His son Elendil, as his father had bidden,
       makes ready ships on  the east  coast of  Numenor, prepar-

        ing for flight with all the faithful that he can gather.     
 3319.  The great fleet of Ar-Pharazon  sets sail  into the  West and
        encompassing   Avallon   assails   the  shores   of  Valinor.
        Numenor  is  destroyed,   and  swallowed   up  by   the  sea.
        The  world  is   broken  and   Valinor  separated   from  the
        lands of the living.                                         
           Elendil  and  his  sons  Isildur  and  Anarion  escape and
        fly  east  with  nine  great  ships (14) to  Middle-earth.  They
        bring  with  them  the  Seven Stones  or Palantiri,  gifts of
        the  Eldar  of Avallon,  and Isildur  brings also  a seedling
        of the White Tree of Avallon.                                
 3320.  Foundation  of  the  realm  of  Arnor  in  the  north  of the
        Westlands,   with   the   city   Annuminas;  and   of  Gondor
        about  the  waters  of  Anduin  in the  south, with  the city
        Osgiliath.  The  Stones  are  divided: Elendil  retains three
        in   the   North-kingdom,   at   Annuminas,   and   on   Amon
        Sul,  and in  the tower  of Emyn  Beraid (the  Tower Hills).(15)
        His sons take four,  and set  them at  Minas Ithil,  at Minas
        Anor, at Osgiliath, and at Orthanc.                          
           In  the  same  year  Sauron  returns to  Middle-earth, and
        being at first filled  with fear  by the  power and  wrath of
        the  Lords  of the  West he  hides himself  in Mordor  and is
        quiet.                                                       
                                                                    
 3430-3 [> 3429-30]. Sauron, being at last ready again, makes
        war   upon   Gondor.   Orodruin   bursts   into   smoke   and
        flame,  and  Men  of  Gondor  seeing  the  sign   re-name  it
        Amon    Amarth,   Mount    Doom.(16) Sauron    comes   forth
        and assails  Minas Ithil,  and destroys  the White  Tree that
        Isildur planted there. Isildur takes a  seedling of  the Tree
        and  escapes  by  ship   down  Anduin   with  his   wife  and
        sons. He sails  to Elendil  in the  North. The  Last Alliance
        is  formed  between  Gil-galad  Elven-king  and  Elendil  and
        his  sons.  They  march  east   to  Imladris   summoning  all
        folk to their aid.                                           
                                                                    
 3434.  The Host of the Alliance crosses the Misty Mountains         
                                                                    
        and marches south. They encounter the host of Sauron         
                                                                    
        upon Dagorlad north of the gates of Mordor, and they         
        are victorious. Sauron takes refuge in Barad-dur.            
 3434-    Siege of Barad-dur begins and lasts seven years.           
 3440.  Anarion is slain in Gorgoroth.                               
 3441.  Sauron comes forth, and wrestles with Elendil and Gil-       
        galad. They overthrow him but are themselves slain.          

  The  One  Ring  is  taken  from  the  hand of  Sauron by               
  Isildur as the weregild of his father,  and he  will not               
  permit it to be destroyed. He plants the seedling of the               
  White  Tree  in  Minas  Anor  in  memory of  his brother               
  Anarion,  but he  will not  himself [added:  long] dwell               
  there. He delivers the South-kingdom to Meneldil  son of               
  Anarion and marches north  up the  vale of  Anduin, pur-               
  posing to take up the realm of Elendil.  He is  slain by               
  Orcs near the Gladden fields and the Ring is lost in the               
  River.(17) The Ringwraiths fall into darkness and silence.               
  The Second Age ends.(18)                                             
                                                                        
 In this fourth text of the Tale of Years the pattern  of dating  seen in
 T 1, T 2, with its great differences from the final form in  Appendix B,
 is  preserved. Thus  Rivendell was  still founded  far earlier,  in 750;
 Barad-dur  was  begun  in  900 and  its building  still took  a thousand
 years; the making of the Rings of Power in Eregion, and  the War  of the
 Elves and Sauron, are  dated as  they were,  extending over  far greater
 periods  of  time.  The  work  was becoming  a condensed  history rather
 than a list of dates; but scarcely any new dates were introduced.       
 In  new  material  in  the  entry  for c.2000  the sentence  'The Shadow
 falls  on Numenor'  is clearly  related to  the Akallabeth  'Scheme' (p.
 150), where it  is noted  of the  reign of  Tar-Atanamir (c.1790-c.2061)
 that 'In his time the Shadow first fell on Numenor'. The fullness of the
 entries concerning  the reign  of Ar-Pharazon  reinforces the  view that
 my father made these early versions  of the  Tale of  Years when  he was
 writing the Akallabeth, as do a number of  particular features,  such as
 the sentence concerning the Great  Battle in  the headnote  to T  4 (see
 note 5) and  the occurrence  of the  name Ulairi  of the  Ringwraiths in
 the entry for 2000-3000 (see  p. 153,  $30). The  fact that  Avallon was
 still  the name  of Eressea  (and not  that of  the haven)  shows beyond
 doubt that the Akallabeth was still at the stage  of the  earliest manu-
 script (see note 6).                                                    
 I think it extremely  probable that  this text  T 4  (of which  the part
 pertaining to the Third Age is very  much longer)  belongs in  time with
 the texts F  2 and  D 2  of the  Appendices on  Languages and  on Calen-
 dars, and with the third text of The Heirs of Elendil, given in the next
 chapter. But external evidence of date seems to be entirely lacking.
                                                                        
 From   T  4   an  amanuensis   typescript  T   5  was   made,  carefully
 following the original. At  some stage  my father  subjected one  of the
 copies to very heavy  correction, but  his chief  (though not  the only)
 purpose  in  doing  so  seems  to  have  been  to  abbreviate it  by the
 omission of phrases. By this time the 'second  phase' of  the Akallabeth
 (see  p.  154,  $31) had  entered, and  the last  years of  Numenor were
 altered on the typescript (cf. p. 175):                                 

    3118. Birth of Ar-Pharazon.                                                
    3255. Ar-Pharazon  the  Golden,  twenty-fifth  king   of  the   line  of
          Elros,   seizes   the   sceptre   of   Numenor.   He  resolves   to  chal-
          lenge Sauron the Great, and builds an armament.                           
    3261. Ar-Pharazon  sets  sail  for  Middle-earth.   The  might   of  the
          Numenoreans   fills   the    servants   of    Sauron   with    fear.   Ar-
          Pharazon   lands   at    Umbar,   and    Sauron   humbles    himself   and
          submits. Sauron is taken as a hostage to Numenor.                         
    3262-3310. Sauron  slowly  gains  the  confidence  of   Ar-Pharazon  ...
  The  opening dates  of the  Second Age  were also  changed: Year  1, Foun-
  dation  of  the  Grey  Havens;  32  Foundation  of  Numenor; 442  Death of
  Elros;  600  First  ships  of  the  Numenoreans  return  to  Middle-earth.
  Other  changes  were  the  replacement of  Ulairi by  Nazgul in  the entry
  for  2000-3000  (changed  to  2200-3000),  and  the  removal   of  Avallon
  at all occurrences, either by altering it to Eressea or by the omission of
  any name.                                                                 
    The evident reason for  the revision  of the  typescript (in  respect of
  the abbreviation of the text) is discussed  later (see  p. 246).  The next
  stage  in  the  development was  an attempt  to reduce  the Tale  of Years
  much more drastically.  This is  represented by  a confused  collection of
  typescript pages (from  which a  good deal  of the  Third Age  is missing)
  made  very evidently  under stress:  the deadline  for the  publication of
  The  Return  of  the  King  was  fast approaching,  and the  situation was
  indeed afflicting. Not only must the  record of  events be  further pruned
  and  curtailed,  but  fundamental  features  of  the  chronology   of  the
  Second  Age  were  not  yet  established;  and  this  work  must  be  done
  against time.                                                             
    I give in illustration a portion of the first version of the  Second Age
  chronology  comprised  in  this  material.  My  father  was   typing  very
  rapidly, faster  than he  could manage,  and there  are very  many errors,
  which I  have of  course corrected;  I have  also introduced  divisions to
  indicate successive shifts in the  dating, though  there is  no suggestion
  of  these  in the  typescript, where  the rejected  passages are  not even
  struck  through.  Thus  the  text  that  follows  has  a  very  much  more
  ordered appearance than does the original.                                
                                                                           
   900. Sauron secretly begins the building of Barad-dur. He makes the
        forges of the Mountain of Fire.
  1200. Sauron seeks the friendship of the Elves, especially those of
        Eregion, who are great in smith-craft.
  1200-1500. The Rings of Power are forged in Eregion; but the
        Ruling Ring is forged by Sauron in Mordor.
  1550. The war of Sauron and the Elves begins. The 'Dark Years'
        follow, the time of the dominion of Sauron. Many of the
        remaining Eldar depart west over Sea. The great voyages of the
        Numenoreans begin.

 1600.  Eregion is laid waste.  The gates  of Moria  are shut.  The forces
       of Sauron  overrun Eriador.  Imladris is  besieged, but  holds out
       under   the   command   of  Elrond   Earendil's  son,   sent  from
       Lindon.   The   forces  of   Sauron  overrun   Eriador.  Gil-galad
       defends Lindon and the Grey Havens.                               
 1603. A   Numenorean   navy    comes   to    the   Grey    Havens.   The
       Numenoreans  aid  Gil-galad,  and   Sauron's  forces   are  driven
       out  of  Eriador  and  Sauron  retreats  from  Eriador.  The West-
       lands have peace for some while.                                  
          From  the  time  of  the  defeat  in  Eriador  Sauron  does not
       molest  the  Westlands  for many  years, but  plots in  secret. He
       slowly  extends  his  dominion  eastward,  since  he  is  withheld
       from  the  coasts  by the  Numenoreans. He  nurses his  hatred for
       them, but cannot yet challenge them openly.                       
 1700. Barad-dur is completed with the power of the Ruling Ring.         
 1200. Sauron  seeks  the  friendship of  the Elves  (in hope  to subject
       them).  He is  still fair  to look  on, and  the Elves  become en-
       amoured of the knowledge he can impart.                           
 1300. The Elves begin the forging of the Rings of Power. It is said that
       this  took  many long  years. S[auron]  secretly makes  the forges
       [sic]                                                             
 1500. The  Three  Great  Rings  are  made by  Celebrimbor of  the Silver
       Grasp (celebrin  'silver', paur  'the fist  or closed  hand'). The
       Ruling Ring is made secretly by Sauron in Mordor.                 
                                                                        
 1000. Sauron begins the building of Barad-dur in Mordor.                
 1200. Sauron courts the  friendship of  the Elves,  hoping to  get them,
       the  chief  obstacle to  his dominion,  into his  power. Gil-galad
       refuses to treat with him. But Sauron is still fair to look on and
       the Elves of Eregion are  won over  by their  desire of  skill and
       knowledge.                                                        
 1500. The  Elves  of  Eregion  under  the guidance  of Sauron  begin the
       forging  of  the  Rings  of  Power.  This  takes many  long years.
       Sauron secretly forges the One Ring in Orodruin.                  
 1690. The  Three   Rings  are   completed.  Celebrimbor   becomes  aware
       of  the  designs  of  Sauron.  Barad-dur  is  completed  with  the
       power of [sic]                                                    
 1695. The  War  of  the  Elves and  Sauron begins.  Many of  the remain-
       ing Eldar depart west over Sea.                                   
 1696. Elrond Earendil's son is sent to Eregion by Gil-galad.            
 1697. Eregion  is  laid  waste.  The  gates  of  Moria are  shut. Elrond
       retreats with the remnant of the Eldar to Imladris.               
                                                                        
 1600. The great voyages of the Numenoreans begin. The ships are         
       welcomed by Gil-galad and Cirdan.                                 
 1699. Imladris is besieged but holds out under the command of           
       Elrond. Sauron overruns Eriador. Gil-galad defends Lindon         

       and the Grey Havens.                                                    
 1700. A great navy of the Numenoreans comes to the Grey Havens.          
                                                                        
 Here this  text seems  to have  been abandoned  and replaced  by another
 and  more  coherent  version,  with  entries  further reduced  and dates
 following the latest formulations in  the text  just given.  These dates
 from  1500  to  1700  were  then  corrected  on  the  typescript,  being
 reduced  (advanced)  by  a  hundred  years,  and  so  moving  them  away
 from those in Appendix B, as  seen in  the following  table (in  which I
 give only brief indications of the actual entries).                     
                                                                        
                                                  Appendix B
 1500 [> 1400] (Forging of the Three Rings begun)   c.1500                 
 1600 [> 1500] (Forging of the One Ring)            c.1600                        
 1690 [> 1590] (Three Rings completed)              c.1590                          
 1690 [> 1590] (Barad-dur completed)                c.1600                            
 1695 [> 1595) (War of Elves and Sauron begins)       1693                    
 1697 [> 1597] (Eregion laid waste)                   1697                                
 1699 [> 1599] (Sauron overruns Eriador)              1699                           
 1700 [> 1600] (Coming of Numenorean navy)            1700                         
                                                                        
 At this stage Imladris was still founded in the year 750. The correction
 of all the entries  from 1500  to 1700  was subsequently  abandoned; the
 dates before correction were now those of the  final chronology  or very
 close to them, with  the exception  of the  completion of  Barad-dur and
 the  completion  of the  Three Rings.  In this  text, by  either dating,
 the Three Rings were not achieved for a further  ninety years  after the
 forging of the One Ring, whereas  in the  final chronology  (by adopting
 in this  one case  the revised  date, 1590)  the One  Ring was  made ten
 years after the Three.                                                  
 This second text then continues:                                        

 1869. Tar-Ciryatan, twelfth king of Numenor, receives the sceptre.
       The first shadow falls on Numenor. The Kings become
       greedy of wealth and power.
 2060-2251. Reign of Tar-Atanamir the Great, thirteenth King of
       Numenor.(19) The shadow deepens. The King's ships exact
       heavy tribute from Men on the coasts of Middle-earth. The
       Numenoreans become jealous of the immortality of the
       Eldar; and the King speaks openly against [the] command of
       the Valar that they should not sail west from their land.
 2250-3000. During this time the power and splendour of the
       Numenoreans continues to increase; and they build many
       fortresses on the west shores of Middle-earth. Sauron
       extends his power eastward, being withheld from the coasts,
       and nurses his hatred of Numenor. But the Numenoreans
       become divided against
 Here the entry breaks off, and is immediately followed by a long

  account  (more  than  2000 words)  of the  Numenoreans, of  their origin,
  their division, the coming of Sauron, and the Downfall.                  
    I believe that this strange development can be  explained in  this way.
  At  that  time, as  things stood,  The Lord  of the  Rings would  be pub-
  lished  without  any  account, however  brief, of  the story  of Numenor.
  In the  manuscript T  4 my  father had  written (pp.  174-6) what  I have
  called 'a condensed history rather than a list of dates'; for it is to be
  remembered that in the narrative of The  Lord of  the Rings,  despite all
  the  many  mentions  of  the  names  Numenor  and  Westernesse,   he  had
  told nothing of its history, and of the Downfall  no more  than Faramir's
  words  in  Minas  Tirith, when  he told  Eowyn that  he was  thinking 'of
  the  land  of  Westernesse  that foundered,  and of  the great  dark wave
  climbing  over  the  green  lands  and  above  the  hills'.  He  must now
  attempt  to contract  even what  he had  written in  T 4,  and as  a com-
  parison of the last entries in the present text just given with  those in
  T 4 (pp. 174 -  5) shows,  he was  not succeeding.  The reduction  into a
  mere chronological scheme of  a large  history that  could not  be under-
  stood by a recital of events was  a task  profoundly uncongenial  to him.
  He despaired of it, and broke off in mid-sentence.                       
    It may well have been at that point,  having typed  the words  'But the
  Numenoreans  become  divided  against',  that  he  decided that  The Lord
  of  the  Rings must  contain some  account of  the story  of Westernesse,
  separate from the Tale of Years, and set it down  there and  then, begin-
  ning  with  the  words  'As  a reward  for their sufferings in  the cause
  against Morgoth, the Valar, the Guardians  of the  World, granted  to the
  Edain a  land to  dwell in,  removed from  the dangers  of Middle-earth.'
  Removed  from  the  Tale  of  Years,  it  found  a  place in  Appendix A,
  Annals of the Kings and Rulers, RK pp. 315 - 18.(20)                     
    There  are  in  fact  two typescripts  of this  text, both  composed ab
  initio on the typewriter; the second of  these my  father described  in a
  pencilled note as a 'variant' of the first, and it was this that he used,
  with  many  minor  alterations   of  wording   and  some   omissions,  in
  Appendix  A. Neither  version has  the list  of the  Kings and  Queens of
  Numenor  (RK  p.  315),  and  both have  a more  detailed account  of the
  rebellion against Tar-Palantir and  the marriage  of Miriel  his daughter
  to Pharazon (said  in both  texts to  have been   'by force'),  which was
  omitted  in  Appendix  A.  Both  versions,  also,  have  an   account  of
  Sauron's policy in his attack on the coastal  fortresses and  harbours of
  the  Numenoreans  which was  likewise omitted,  and is  not found  in the
  Akallabeth. I cite here two passages from the first version of the text.
                                                                          
    Proudest   of   all  the   Kings  was   Ar-Pharazon  the   Golden,  and
  no less than the  kingship of  all the  world was  his desire.  But still
  he  retained  enough  wisdom  to  fear  the  Lords   of  the   West,  and
  turned   therefore   his   thoughts    to   Middle-earth.    Now   Sauron
  knowing   of   the   dissension   in   Numenor   thought  how   he  might

 use it  to achieve  his revenge.  He began  therefore to  assail the
 havens  and  forts  of  the  Numenoreans,  and  invaded  the  coast-
 lands  under  their  dominion.  As  he  foresaw  this   aroused  the
 great  wrath  of  the  King,  who   resolved  to   challenge  Sauron
 the  Great  for  the lordship  of Middle-earth.  For five  years Ar-
 Pharazon prepared,  and at  last he  himself set  sail with  a great
 navy  and  armament,  the  greatest  that  had  yet appeared  in the
 world.                                                             
   If  Sauron  had  thought thus  to decoy  the King  to Middle-earth
 and  there  destroy  him,  his  hope  deceived him.  And Ar-Pharazon
 landed  at  Umbar,  and  so  great  was the  splendour and  might of
 the  Numenoreans  at  the  noon of  their glory  that at  the rumour
 of  them  alone   all  men   flocked  to   their  summons   and  did
 obeisance;  and  Sauron's  own  servants  fled  away.  The  land  of
 Mordor  he  had indeed  fortified and  made so  strong that  he need
 fear no  assault upon  it; but  he was  in doubt  now, and  even the
 Barad-dur seemed no longer secure.                                 
   Sauron  therefore  changed  his  design,   and  had   recourse  to
 guile.  He  humbled  himself,  and  came  himself  on   foot  before
 Ar-Pharazon,  and  did  him  homage  and   craved  pardon   for  his
 offences. And Ar-Pharazon  spared his  life; but  took from  him all
 his titles, and made him prisoner,  and carried  him at  length back
 to  Numenor  to  be  hostage  for  the submission  and faith  of all
 who had before owed him allegiance.                                
   'This is a hard  doom,' said  Sauron, 'but  great kings  must have
 their  will',  and he  submitted as  one under  compulsion, conceal-
 ing his delight; for things had fallen out according to his design.
   Now   Sauron   had   great   wisdom   and  knowledge,   and  could
 find  words  of seeming  reason for  the persuasion  of all  but the
 most  wary;  and  he  could  still  assume  a fair  countenance when
 he  wished.  He  was  brought  as  a  prisoner  to Numenor  in 3261,
 but he had not been there five years  before he  had the  King's ear
 and was deep in his counsel.                                       
   'Great kings must have  their will':  this was  the burden  of all
 his advice; and whatever  the King  desired he  said was  his right,
 and devised plans whereby he might gain it.                        
   Then   darkness   came   upon  the   minds  of   the  Numenoreans,
 and  they  held  the  Guardians  in  hatred,  and openly  denied the
 One  who  is  above  all;  and  they  turned to  the worship  of the
 Dark,  and  of  Morgoth  the  Lord  of  the  Darkness.  They  made a
 great temple  in the  land and  there did  evil; for  they tormented
 the  remnant  of  the  faithful,  and  there  slew  them  or  burned

 them.  And  the like  they did  in Middle-earth,  and filled  the west
 coasts  with  tales  of  dread,  so  that men  cried 'Has  then Sauron
 become King of Numenor?'                                              
   So  great  was  his  power  over  the  hearts  of  the most  of that
 people   that  maybe   had  he   wished  he   could  have   taken  the
 sceptre;  but  all  that  he  wished  was  to  bring Numenor  to ruin.
 Therefore  he  said  to  the  King: 'One  thing only  now you  lack to
 make  you  the  greatest  King  in  the world,  the undying  life that
 is  withheld  from  you  in  fear  and  jealousy  by the  lying Powers
 in  the  West.  But great  kings take  what is  their right.'  And Ar-
 Pharazon  pondered   these  words,   but  for   long  fear   held  him
 back.                                                                 
   But  at   last  even   Ar-Pharazon  the   Golden,  King   of  kings,
 having  lived   one  hundred   and  ninety-two   years,(21)  felt  the
 waning  of  his  life  and  feared  the  approach  of  death  and  the
 going  out  into  the  darkness  that  he  had  worshipped.  Therefore
 he  began  to   prepare  a   vast  armament   for  the   assault  upon
 Valinor,  that  should  surpass  the  one  with which  he had  come to
 Umbar  even  as  a  great  galleon  of  Numenor  surpassed  a  fisher-
 man's boat.                                                           
                                                                      
   There follows a brief account of the expulsion of those  of doubtful
 loyalty  from the  western coasts  of Numenor,  the voyage  of Amandil
 into the West,(22) the sailing of  the Great  Armament, and  the cataclysm
 of the Downfall. At the end of this, following the words  'But Elendil
 and his sons escaped with nine ships, and were borne  on the  wings of
 a great storm and cast up on the shores of Middle-earth', is a notable
 statement of the destruction caused by the drowning of Numenor:       
                                                                      
   These  were  much  changed  in  the  tumult  of  the winds  and seas
 that  followed  the  Downfall;  for  in  some places  the sea  rode in
 upon  the  land,  and in  others it  piled up  new coasts.  Thus while
 Lindon  suffered  great  loss,  the  Bay of  Belfalas was  much filled
 at the east and  south, so  that Pelargir  which had  been only  a few
 miles  from  the  sea was  left far  inland, and  Anduin carved  a new
 path  by  many  mouths  to  the  Bay.  But  the  Isle of  Tolfalas was
 almost  destroyed,  and  was  left at  last like  a barren  and lonely
 mountain in the water not far from the issue of the River.            
                                                                      
   No  such  statement  is  found  elsewhere.(23) In  the  Akallabeth (The
 Silmarillion p. 280), in a passage taken virtually without change from
 The Drowning of Anadune (IX.374, $52),  there is  no reference  to any
 named region or river.(24)                                            
                                                                      
      There is no further text of the Tale of Years extant before the

 typescript from which Appendix B was printed. Of this it may be
 noted that in the preamble to the entries for the Second Age the refer-
 ence to mithril reads:
   This they did because they learned that mithril had been discovered
   in Moria. It had been believed before that this could only be got in
   the Ered Luin; but no more could now be found there in the old
   dwarf-mines.
 My father struck out the second sentence on the proof.

                              NOTES.                                      
                                                                         
  1. Against  this  opening   statement  concerning   the  Three   Ages  my
     father  later scribbled  'These Ages  are called  the Elder  Days'. On
     this see p. 173 and note 7.                                          
  2. T 1 has the more natural 'Arising of Sauron'.                        
  3. Imladrist  was  corrected  at once  to Imladris.  In T  1 the  form is
     Imladris, as also in T 2 in the  entry for  1600, so  that this  was a
     mere casual reversion to the earlier form.                           
  4. It is plain that in the 'Scheme' the death-date of one  king indicates
     also the  accession of  the next,  and thus  the interval  between two
     death-dates is the length of the reign of the  king: for  example, the
     fourth king died in 1347, and the fifth  in 1568,  and thus  the fifth
     king reigned for 221 years.                                          
        It  certainly  seems  most  natural  to  suppose that  the 'Scheme'
     was precisely that, and that the representation of  the reigns  as all
     of  the  same  length  (differing  only  by  one  year)  was   a  mere
     formula  of  convenience  for   working  out   the  chronology   as  a
     whole.  But  Atanamir  reigned  for  50 years  longer than  any other,
     and  his son  for 50  years less;  and this  obviously relates  to the
     passage  in  the  Akallabeth  (SA  $24,  going  back  to  the original
     manuscript):                                                         
        And Atanamir  lived to  a great  age, clinging  to his  life beyond
     the  end  of  all  joy; and  he was  the first  of the  Numenoreans to
     do  this,  refusing  to  depart  until  he  was witless  and unmanned,
     and denying to his son the kingship at the height of his days.       
     The  much  greater  age  of  Atanamir  must imply  that all  the other
     kings died  by act  of their  own will  long before  the end  of their
     physical span, and thus  allowed their  sons a  period of  rule equiv-
     alent  to their  own. It  would be  mistaken to  press this  early and
     experimental  text  too  closely  on  the  matter,  but  it  certainly
     suggests  a  difference  from  the  developed  conception in  The Line
     of Elros, where it is said (Unfinished Tales p. 218)  that it  was the
     custom  'until the  days of  Tar-Atanamir that  the King  should yield
     the  sceptre  to  his  successor before  he died';  there were  thus a
     number  of  years  (recorded  in  the  entries of  The Line  of Elros)

      between the king's surrender of the sceptre and his death.            
  5.  With  this  sentence  cf.  the  original  version  of  the Akallabeth,
      p. 143, $3.                                                           
  6.  It is notable that  here and  subsequently Avallon  is still  the name
      of the whole Isle of  Eressea, as  it was  in the  original manuscript
      A  of  the  Akallabeth,  although  the  later  form  Avallone  and the
      later  meaning  (the  Haven)  entered   before  that   manuscript  was
      completed (see p. 146, $12).                                          
  7.  Cf.  the  preamble  to  the  Tale  of  Years  in  Appendix B:  'In the
      Fourth Age  the earlier  ages were  often called  the Elder  Days; but
      that  name  was properly  given only  to the  days before  the casting
      out  of  Morgoth.'  In  the  Akallabeth  'the  Elder Days'  was appar-
      ently used of the earlier part of the Second Age (p. 156, $53).       
  8.  For  other references  to the  abandoned idea  that Gil-galad  was the
      son of Felagund see XI.242 - 3, and pp. 349 - 50.                     
  9.  It  looks  as  if  the  added  passage  concerning  the   Dwarves  was
      rejected  and  replaced  immediately.  It  is  strange that  my father
      should  have  written  first that  Durin founded  Moria at  the begin-
      ning  of the  Second Age,  with 'his  folk' coming  from the  ruins of
      Nogrod and Belegost.                                                  
 10.  With  this  entry  compare  the   headnote  to   the  Second   Age  in
      Appendix  B.  -  The  words  'the  Lady   Galadriel  of   the  Noldor,
      sister  of  Gil-galad'  were  not, as  might be  thought, a  slip, but
      record a stage in her entry into the legends of the First Age.  In one
      of  the  earliest texts  of the  work Of  the Rings  of Power  and the
      Third  Age  my  father  wrote  of  Galadriel:  'A  Queen  she  was and
      lady of the  woodland elves,  yet she  was herself  of the  Noldor and
      had  come  from  Beleriand  in  the  days  of the  Exile.' To  this he
      added  subsequently: 'For  it is  said by  some that  she was  a hand-
      maid  of  Melian  the  Immortal   in  the   realm  of   Doriath';  but
      striking this out at once he substituted: 'For it is said by some that
      she was a daughter of Felagund the Fair and escaped from              
      Nargothrond  in the  day of  its destruction.'  In the  following text
      this  was  changed  to  read:  'And some  have said  that she  was the
      daughter  of  Felagund  the  Fair  and  fled  from  Nargothrond before
      its  fall,  and  passed  over  the  Mountains  into  Eriador  ere  the
      coming  of Fionwe';  this in  turn was  altered to:  'For she  was the
      daughter  of  Felagund  the Fair  and the  elder sister  of Gil-galad,
      though  seldom  had  they  met,  for  ere  Nargothrond  was   made  or
      Felagund  was  driven  from  Dorthonion,  she  passed  east  over  the
      mountains  and  forsook  Beleriand,  and  first  of  all   the  Noldor
      came  to  the  inner  lands;  and too  late she  heard the  summons of
      Fionwe.'  -  In  the  Annals  of  Aman  and  the  Grey Annals  she had
      become, as she remained, the sister of Felagund.                      
 11.  In  the  Akallabeth  the  Elendili  dwelt  mostly   in  the   west  of
      Numenor,  and  were  forced  to  remove  into the  east (p.  152); but

       the statement here  that they  dwelt mainly  in the  east may  be due
       simply to compression.                                               
  12.  This  is the  first reference  to the  establishment of  a Numenorean
       settlement  at  Umbar   before  the   landing  of   Ar-Pharazon  (see
       p. 156, $41).                                                        
  13.  On the name  Valandil for  Amandil (as  in the  first version  of the
       Akallabeth) see p. 156, $44.                                         
  14.  It is curious that all the texts of the Akallabeth have twelve ships,
       and  only  on  the late  amanuensis typescript  did my  father change
       the number to nine (see  p. 157,  $80); whereas  in the  present text
       T 4, certainly no later than the earliest text of the Akallabeth, the
       number is nine as first written.                                     
  15.  The statement in  this entry  concerning the  division of  the palan-
       tiri appeared first in additions to the preceding text T 3; and there
       they  are called  Gwahaedir, while  the Tower  Hills are  called Emyn
       Gwahaedir,  replaced  by  Emyn  Hen  Dunadan,   and  then   again  by
       Emyn  Beraid.  This  last  name  does  not   appear  in   the  actual
       narrative of The Lord of the Rings.                                  
  16.  This  was  probably  the  first  appearance  of  Amon  Amarth,  which
       only occurs in Appendix A (I, i, at end, RK p. 317).                 
  17.  All the material in  these last  entries first  appears as  rough and
       complex  marginal  additions  to  the  manuscript  T  3, but  at this
       point there is an addition in T 3 which  my father  did not  take up,
       perhaps because he missed it:                                        
         The  shards  of  the  Sword  of  Elendil  are  brought  to Valandil
       Isildur's  heir  at  Imladris.  He  becomes king  of the  North King-
       dom of Arnor, and dwells at Fornost.                                 
       The name Valandil  of Isildur's  heir thus  does not  appear in  T 4;
       but  the  entry for  3310 was  not added  to T  3, and  thus Valandil
       as the name of Elendil's father does not appear in that text.        
  18.  On the ending of the Second  Age with  the death  of Isildur  and the
       loss of the One Ring in the Anduin see p. 170.                       
  19.  In  Appendix  B  the  entry for  S.A.2251 begins  'Tar-Atanamir takes
       the  sceptre.  Rebellion  and  division  of the  Numenoreans begins.'
       In Unfinished Tales  (p. 226,  note 10)  I discussed  this, concluding
       that the entry was certainly an error,  although at  that time  I was
       apparently  unaware  of  the  present text,  or at  any rate  did not
       consult it,. I  suggested that  the correct  reading should  be: 2251
       Death  of  Tar-Atanamir.  Tar-Ancalimon  takes  the  sceptre.  Rebel-
       lion  and division  of the  Numenoreans begins.'  No further  text is
       extant  before  the  final  typescript  from  which  Appendix  B  was
       printed,  and  it cannot  be said  how the  error arose,  moving from
       '2060-2251   Reign   of    Tar-Atanamir'   to    '2251   Tar-Atanamir
       takes the sceptre'.                                                  
  20.  I have found  nothing in  the correspondence  of that  'time touching

  on  Appendix  A,  and  I  cannot   answer  the   question  how   it  was
  possible,  if the  Tale of  Years had  to be  so contracted  for reasons
  of space, to include a  further long  section in  that Appendix  at that
  stage.                                                                 
 21. 'having  lived  one  hundred  and ninety-two  years': from  3118 to
  3310.  In  the  text  T  4  3118 was  the year  of his  accession, cor-
  rected in the later  revision of  the typescript  T 5  (p. 178)  to the
  year of his birth.                                                     
 22. The date of  Amandil's voyage  is given  in this  text, 3316;  it was
  added also in the revision of the typescript T 5, entry 3310.          
 23. This appears to be the sole reference in any text to Tolfalas, apart
  from  a  mention  of  its capture  by Men  of the  South in  an outline
  made  in  the  course  of  the  writing of  The Two  Towers (VII.435).
  The  isle  and  its  name  appeared  already  on   the  First   Map  of
  Middle-earth  (VH.298,  308),  but  on  all  maps  its  extent  appears
  much greater than in the description of it here.                       
 24. On  the  extremely difficult  question of  the relation  between the
  destruction  caused  in  Middle-earth in  the Great  Battle at  the end
  of  the  First  Age,  and  that  caused  by  the  Drowning  of Numenor,
  see V.22 - 3, 32 - 3, 153-4.                                           

                                     VII.                                   
                                                                           
                             THE HEIRS OF ELENDIL.                          
                                                                           
 While   the   development   of   the   Appendices  as   a  whole,   and  the
 Prologue,  was  to  some  degree  an  interconnected   work,  the   Tale  of
 Years   was   of   its   nature   (since   chronology  became   a  paramount
 concern  of  my  father's)  closely  interwoven  with  the evolution  of the
 history   of   Numenor   and  the   Numenorean  kingdoms   in  Middle-earth,
 as  has  been  seen already  in the  relation of  the Tale  of Years  of the
 Second  Age  to  the  development  of  the Akallabeth.  For the  history and
 chronology  of  the  Realms  in  Exile  the  primary  document  is   a  sub-
 stantial work entitled The Heirs of Elendil.                               
  The textual  history of  this is  not easy  to fathom.  It is  divided into
 two  parts,  the  Northern  Line  (the  Kings  and  the Chieftains)  and the
 Southern  Line  (the  Kings  and  the  Stewards).  The   oldest  manuscript,
 which  I  will call  A, is  headed The  Heirs of  Elendil The  Southern Line
 of Gondor; it is clearly if rapidly written for  the most  part, but  in the
 concluding  section  recounting  the  names  and   dates  of   the  Stewards
 of  Gondor  becomes  very  rough  and  is  obviously in  the first  stage of
 composition.                                                               
  The  second  manuscript,  B,  has  both  the  Northern  and   the  Southern
 Lines,  in  that  order;  but  though  my father  fastened the  two sections
 together, they are distinct in appearance.  I believe  that the  second part
 began  as  a  fair  copy of  A, but  quickly developed  and expanded  into a
 much  fuller  (and increasingly  rough) text.  To this  he added  the North-
 ern Line. This section in B seems to be  in the  first stage  of composition
 (a  rejected  page  shows the  names of  the later  kings and  chieftains in
 the  process  of emergence)  - and  there is  no trace  of any  earlier work
 on  the  Northern  Line,  a companion  text to  A. On  the other  hand there
 are clear indications that  the Northern  Line and  its history  did already
 exist when A was set down.                                                 
  Heavily  emended,  the  composite  text  B  paved  the   way  for   a  fine
 manuscript,  C;  this  in  turn  was  much  emended  in  the  Northern Line,
 less  so  in  the  remainder,  and  an  amanuensis  typescript  D  was  made
 (much later) from the corrected text (see p. 190).                         
  There is as  usual no  hint or  trace of  external dating  for any  of this
 work on  The Heirs  of Elendil,  and the  most that  can be  done is  to try
 to relate it to other texts. The relative  date of  B is  shown by  the fact
 that  the  North  Kingdom  was  still  called  Arthedain  and  that  Anarion
 was still the elder son of Elendil, for this was also the case in  the third

                                                            
                                                                        
 text of the Tale of Years, T 3 (p. 172). The  name of  the tenth  king of
 the Northern Line is in B Earendil, which is found in the early  texts F
 1, F 2 of the Appendix on Languages  as that  of the  tenth king  (p. 32,
 footnote to $9). In the fourth text T 4 of the Tale of Years the  name of
 the realm is Amor, Isildur is the  elder son,  and King  Earendur enters.
 There  can  be  no  doubt  therefore that  all the  fundamental structure
 and chronology of the Realms in Exile reached written  form in  the first
 phase  of the  work on  what would  become the  Appendices (cf.  p. 177).
 That the final text C, and  many at  least of  the corrections  and addi-
 tions made to it, belongs to the same  time is  equally clear.  One might
 suppose this to be the case on general  grounds: from  the care  and calm
 that are evident in the  fine manuscript  as it  was originally  made, in
 contrast to the latter  ragged and  chaotic work  on the  Appendices, and
 from  the  fact  that  corrections  to  the  preceding  text B  were made
 (according  to  my father's  constant practice)  in preparation  for this
 further version. But the occurrence on the first page of  C of  the names
 Valandil  of  Elendil's  father and  of Avallon  for Eressea  (the latter
 remaining  uncorrected)  shows  that  it  belongs  to  the time  when the
 original text of the Akallabeth still stood and T 4 of the Tale  of Years
 had  not yet  been revised,  for both  of these  have Valandil  (pp. 156,
 175) and Avallon (p. 173 and note 6).  To this  may be  added the  use of
 'Noldorin' for 'Sindarin'.                                              
   Work on The Heirs of Elendil gave rise  to alterations  in the  text of
 The Lord of the Rings. A good  example of  this is  found in  the passage
 of the  chapter A  Knife in  the Dark  (FR p.  197) where  Strider speaks
 of the history of Weathertop. As this passage  stood at  the end  of work
 on the chapter  (scarcely differing  from the  original text,  VI.169) he
 said:                                                                   
   There  is  no  barrow on  Weathertop, nor  on any  of these  hills. The
 Men  of  the  West  did  not  live  here.  I  do not  know who  made this
 path,  nor  how  long  ago,  but  it  was  made  to  provide a  road that
 could  be  defended,  from  the  north  to the  foot of  Weathertop; some
 say  that  Gil-galad  and Elendil  made a  fort and  a strong  place here
 in the ancient days, when they marched into the East.                   
 This was altered and expanded, in a  late typescript,  to the  passage in
 FR,  where Strider's  account of  the great  tower of  Amon Sul  that was
 burned  and  broken  derives  from  the  addition made  to the  entry for
 Arveleg I (eighteenth king of the Northern Line) in  Heirs of  Elendil B,
 reappearing in the  final text  C (see  pp. 194,  209). But  the addition
 made to C in the entry for Argeleb I,  seventeenth king,  'Argeleb forti-
 fies the Weather Hills', belongs with the  alteration of  Strider's words
 about the path, which now became:                                       
                                                                        
   The Men  of the  West did  not live  here; though  in their  latter days
   they defended the hills for a while against  the evil  that came  out of
   Angmar. This path was made to serve the forts along the walls.        

    The  date  of  the making  of the  typescript D,  however, is  very much
  later. It is a good text, in top copy and carbon,  made by  an experienced
  typist, which fact alone  would strongly  suggest that  it comes  from the
  time after the publication of The Lord of  the Rings;  but in  addition it
  was  made  on  the  same  machine  as that  used for  the Annals  of Aman,
  the  Grey  Annals,  the  text  LQ 2  of the  Quenta Silmarillion,  and the
  Akallabeth,  about 1958  (see pp.  141-2). It  is remarkable  (seeing that
  all the essential material  of C  had been  taken up  into Appendix  A, if
  presented there in a totally different  form) that  my father  should have
  selected this text as one of those to be copied  'as a  necessary prelimi-
  nary to "remoulding" [of The Silmarillion]', as he said  in his  letter to
  Rayner  Unwin  of  December  1957  (X.141).  He  did  indeed  make  use of
  it later still, writing on the folded newspaper that contains the texts of
  The Heirs of Elendil 'Partly revised  August 1965'  - i.e.  in preparation
  for  the  Second  Edition  of  The Lord  of the  Rings published  in 1966:
  from  this time  comes a  long insertion  in typescript  greatly expanding
  the account of the events leading to  the Kin-strife  in Gondor,  which in
  somewhat  contracted  form  was   introduced  into   Appendix  A   in  the
  Second Edition (see further p. 259).                                      
                                                                           
    It has  been difficult  to find  a satisfactory  way of  presenting this
  complex  material, especially  in view  of the  lack of  correspondence in
  the  texts  of  the  Northern  and  Southern Lines  (B-C; A-B-C).  As with
  the two texts F 1 and  F 2  of the  Appendix on  Languages, it  has seemed
  best to give first the full text of C, with the corrections and expansions
  noted  as such  (though without  any attempt  to distinguish  the relative
  times of their making), and to  indicate significant  differences in  B in
  the  Commentary  following the  text. In  addition, I  give an  account of
  the  brief  manuscript  A of  the Southern  Line at  the beginning  of the
  Commentary on that part of the work (p. 211).                             
    As  I  have already  mentioned, there  is no  writing extant  before the
  manuscript A. It will be  seen, however,  that the  names of  the southern
  kings  and  their  dates were  already very  largely fixed  in A  as first
  written  down, and  that (although  the historical  notes are  very scanty
  and brief by  comparison with  the final  form) such  matters as  the Kin-
  strife and the claim of Arvedui (last king in the  North) to  the southern
  crown were fully if  not very  substantially present;  it may  be supposed
  therefore that initial notes and lists have not survived (see also p. 216,
  under  Ondohir).  It  is  generally  impossible  to  say  how much  of the
  matter that entered at  each successive  stage had  newly arisen,  and how
  much  was  present  but  at  first,  when the  scope of  the work  was not
  yet fully realised, held in abeyance. But  there is  reason to  think (see
  p.  213)  that  a  firm  if undeveloped  structure of  the history  of the
  Realms in Exile had  arisen a  good while  before the  first texts  of The
  Heirs  of  Elendil  were composed.  There are  cases in  text B  where the
  actual  working  out  of  the  history  can  be  clearly seen,  but always
  within that structure.                                                    

                            The Heirs of Elendil.                          
                                                                          
 Summary of the Annals in the 'Book  of the  Kings' and  the 'Roll         
 of Stewards of Gondor'. The  dates are  corrected to  the reckon-         
 ing of the Ages according to the Eldar, as also used in Arnor. In         
 Gondor   the  dates   were  reckoned   from  the   foundation  of         
 Osgiliath,  Second  Age 3320.  Twenty-one years  thus have  to be         
 added to the year-numbers  here given  to find  the dates  of the         
 first Gondor era.                                                         
                                                                          
                         Elendil of Numenor                                
                                                                          
        Isildur                                      Anarion
                                                                           
                                                                          
   Kiryandil   Earnur    Veandur     Valandil        Meneldil
                                     of Arnor       of Gondor
                                                                          
 Year.                                                                 
 Second Age.                                                           
 3119. Elendil   born   in   Numenor.   His   father    was   Valandil
       [> Amandil) chief of the party of the Elf-friends.                   
 3209. Isildur, elder son of Elendil, born in Numenor.                      
 3219. Anarion, second son of Elendil, born in Numenor.                     
 3299. Kiryandil, son of Isildur, born in Numenor.                          
 3318. Meneldil,  son  of  Anarion,  born.  He  was  the  last  man  to
       be born in Numenor.                                                  
 3319. Downfall of Numenor.                                            
 3320. Establishment   of   the  Numenorean   'realms  in   exile'  in
      the  west  of  Middle-earth:  Arnor  in  the  north of  the west-
      lands  (with  chief  city  at   Annuminas)  by   Elendil;  Gondor
      in  the  south  (with  chief  city  at  Osgiliath)  by  his sons.
      Isildur  planted  a  seedling  of  the  White  Tree  of  Avallon,
      gift  of  the  Eldar,  in  Minas Ithil.  The Palantiri,  or Seven
      Stones  of  Sight,  were  divided,  and set  up in  towers: three
      in  Arnor,  at  Annuminas,  and  at  Amon   Sul,  and   upon  the
      Emyn  Beraid  looking  towards  the  Sea;   four  in   the  realm
      of  Gondor,  at  Osgiliath,  at  Minas  Ithil,  at   Minas  Anor,
      and at Orthanc in Angrenost (Isengard).                              
 3339. Earnur, second son of Isildur, born in Gondor.                       
 3379. Veandur, third son of Isildur, born in Minas Ithil.             
 3429. Sauron   attacks   Gondor   from   the  neighbouring   land  of
      Mordor.   He   destroys   Minas   Ithil   and  burns   the  White

       Tree.  Isildur  escapes  by  ship   down  Anduin,   and  sails
       north  from  Anduin's  Mouths  to   Elendil  in   Arnor,  with
       his  wife  and  sons;  he  bears  with him  a seedling  of the
       White  Tree,  grown  from  its  first  fruit  in Middle-earth.
       Anarion holds out in Osgiliath.                              
 3430. The last  Alliance is  begun. Elendil  and Isildur  obtain the
       help  of  Gil-galad  and  Elrond  and  gather   great  forces.
       They  march  east  to  Imladris.   Valandil  son   of  Isildur
       born in Imladris.                                            
 3434. The  Battle  of  Dagorlad.  Gil-galad  and  Elendil  are  vic-
       torious. The Siege of Barad-dur is begun.                    
 3440. Anarion is slain before Barad-dur.                           
 3441. Fall  of  Barad-dur  and  overthrow  of  Sauron.  Elendil  and
       Gil-galad  are  slain.  Isildur  delivers  Gondor  to Meneldil
       son  of   Anarion.  He   plants  the   White  Tree   again  in
       Minas  Anor  in  memory  of  his   brother,  and   marches  up
       Anduin, intending to return to Arnor.                        
          Isildur and his three elder sons are slain  by Orcs  in the
       Gladden   Fields.   His  fourth   son  Valandil   succeeds  to
       Arnor,  but  being  a  child  remains for  a time  with Elrond
       at Imladris.                                                 
                                                                   
                                                          

                 The Second Age ends and the Third Age begins.              
                                                                           
 Here follows the roll  of the  Kings of  the Northern  Line, and           
 after the ending of the kings the names of the chieftains of the           
 Dunedain  of  the  North  who  maintained  throughout  this  Age           
 the line of Valandil son of Isildur unbroken.                              
 In  the  tenth  year  of the  Third Age  Valandil being  come to           
 manhood  took  up  the kingship  of Arnor  and dwelt  at Annumi-           
 nas by Lake Nenuial.                                                       
                                                                           
                             The Heirs of Elendil.                          
                 The Northern Line of Arnor: the Isildurioni.               
 1. Elendil.    born S.A.3119     lived 322 years    +slain 3441           
                                                     or T.A.1      
                                                                       
 2. Isildur              3209           232          +slain 3441
                                                     or T.A.1      
 3. Valandil             3430           260          died T.A.249
 4. Eldakar           T.A. 87           252                   339
 5. Arantar               185           250                   435
 6. Tarkil                280           235                   515
 7. Tarondor              372           230                   602

  8. Valandur   462       190     +slain  652                             
  9. Elendur    552       225     died    777                              
 10. Earen dur  640       221                                        861
     After  Earendur  the  Northern  Kingdom  of  Arnor  was  broken  up.
     The  sons  of  the  king  established smaller  independent kingdoms.
     The  direct  line of  the eldest  son ruled  the realm  of Arthedain
     in  the  north-west;  their  city  was  Fornost.   Annuminas  became
     deserted  owing  to  the  dwindling  of  the  people.  The  chief of
     the  lesser  realms  were  [Cardolan  east  of  the  Baranduin;  and
     Rhudaur  north  of the  Bruinen. Arthedain  still claimed  the over-
     lordship,  but this  was disputed.  >] Cardolan  south of  the Great
     Road  and  east of  the Baranduin;  and Rhudaur  north of  the Great
     Road  between  the  Weather  Hills  and   the  Bruinen.   There  was
     often  strife  between  the  kingdoms;  the  chief matter  of debate
     was  the  possession  of  the  Weather Hills  and the  land westward
     thence  towards  Bree.  For  both  Rhudaur  and Cardolan  desired to
     control  Amon  Sul  (which  stood  upon  their borders),  because of
     the  Tower  built  there  by Elendil,  in which  was kept  the chief
     palantir of the North. /  From this  time on  the official  names of
     the kings  were no  longer given,  after the  manner of  Numenor, in
     High-elven  or  'Quenya'  form;  but  the  kings  of  Arthedain used
     Elvish names  of Noldorin  form and  still maintained  their friend-
     ship with the Eldar of Lindon and Imladris.                         
 11. Amlaith of.     born 726    lived 220 years         died 946                        
      Fornost.                                                          
                                                                        
 12. Beleg                811          218                   1029
 13. Mallor               895          215                   1110                                                
     In  his  time  an  evil shadow  fell upon  Greenwood the  Great, and
     it  became   known  as   Mirkwood.  The   Sorcerer  of   Dol  Guldur
     (later  known  to  be  Sauron  returned)  begins  to work  evil. The
     Periannath cross the Mountains and come into Arnor.                 
 14. Celepharn.      born 979    lived 212 years        died 1191                        
 15. Celebrindol                                                         
                                                                        
      [> Celebrindor]    1062          210                   1272                                   
                                                                        
 16  Malvegil            1144          205                   1349
                                                                        
     In  the  days  of  Malvegil Orcs  again became  a menace,  and in-
     vaded the lands of Arnor. The Ulairi or Ringwraiths began  to stir
     again. The chief of the  Olairi comes  north and  establishes him-
     self as a king of evil men in Angmar in the far north regions. The
     Witch-king  makes  war  on  the  realms  of  the  Dunedain,  which
     are disunited. The lesser realms resist the claim  of the  King at
     Fornost to be overlord of all the former lands of Arnor.  In token
     of this claim all the kings of Arthedain, and the chieftains after
     them,  take  names with  the prefix  aran, ar(a)  signifying 'high
     king'.  [Added:  The  purpose  of  the  Witch-king  is  to destroy

       Arnor, for there is more  hope of  success in  the North  (where the
       realm  is  disunited)  than  in  the  South  while   Gondor  remains
       strong. At this  time no  descendants of  Isildur remain  in Rhudaur
       or  Cardolan;  therefore the  kings of  Arthedain again  claim over-
       lordship in all Arnor. The claim  is rejected  by Rhudaur,  in which
       power  has  been  seized  by  men  in  secret  league  with Angmar.]
       [Struck  out:  The  kings of  Arthedain also  claim to  be guardians
       of the palantir of Amon Sul, though this is outside their territory,
       standing   on   the   borders  of   Cardolan  and   Rhudaur  between
       whom also it is a matter of bitter dispute.]                        
 17.   Argeleb   I.  born   1226   lived   130    years   +    slain   1356
       [He was slain in battle with Cardolan in the strife of  the palantir
       of Amon Sul. >] Argeleb fortifies  the Weather  Hills. He  was slain
       in  battle  with  Rhudaur  (with  secret aid  of Angmar);  the enemy
       tries to seize the palantir of Amon Sul.                            
 18.   Arveleg   I.  born   1309   lived   100    years   +    slain   1409
       The  Witch-king  of  Angmar  taking  advantage  of  war  among  [the
       Numenoreans   or   Dunedain   >]   the   Dunedain  comes   down  out
       of  the  North.   He  overruns   Cardolan  and   Rhudaur.  [Cardolan
       is  ravaged  and  destroyed  and  becomes  desolate.  The  Tower  of
       Amon Sul  is razed  and the  palantir is  broken. Evil  spirits come
       and take up  their abode  in the  mounds of  the hills  of Cardolan.
       In Rhudaur an  evil folk,  workers of  sorcery, subjects  of Angmar,
       slay  the  remnants  of  the Dunedain  and build  dark forts  in the
       hills. But the Dunedain of Fornost, in spite of  the death  of their
       king, hold out,  and repel  the forces  of Angmar  with the  help of
       Cirdan  of  Lindon.  >]  Cardolan  is  ravaged;  the  Tower  of Amon
       Sul is  razed and  the palantir  is removed  to Fornost.  In Rhudaur
       an evil folk ... [as above] build dark forts in the hills, while the
       remaining  Dunedain  of  Cardolan  hold  out  in  the  Barrow  Downs
       and  the  Forest;  the  Dunedain  of Arthedain  repel the  forces of
       Angmar from Fornost with the help of Cirdan of Lindon.              
 19.   Araphor.    born     1391    lived     198    years     died    1589
 20.   Argeleb II           1473              197                      1670
                                                                          
       In  his day  the people  of the  old lands  of Arnor  become further
       diminished  by  the  coming  of  the  plague  out  of the  south and
       east,  which  also  devastated  Gondor.  [The  plague does  not pass
                                                                          
       beyond  the Baranduin.  >] The  plague lessens  in deadliness  as it
       goes north;  but Cardolan  becomes desolate.  Evil spirits  come out
       of  Angmar  and  take  up  their  abode  in   the  mounds   of  Tyrn
       Goerthaid. / It  was Argeleb  II who  granted the  land west  of the
       Baranduin  to  the Periannath;  they crossed  the river  and entered
       the land in 1601.                                                   
 21.   Arvegil.    born     1553     lived 190 years      died 1743  
 22.   Arveleg II           1633           180                 1813

  23. Araval                              1711      180  1891             
                                                                         
      With  the  help  of  Lindon  and  Imladris  he  won  a  victory  over
      Angmar  in  1851,  and  sought  to  reoccupy  Cardolan, but  the evil
      wights terrify all who seek to dwell near.                          
  24. Araphant. born 1789 lived 175 years died 1964.                       
      Angmar   recovers   and   makes   war   on  the   Dunedain.  Araphant
      seeks  to  renew  ancient  alliance  and  kinship  with   Gondor.  In
      1940  his  heir  Arvedui  wedded  Firiel  daughter  of  King  Ondohir
      [>  Ondonir]  of  Gondor.  But  Gondor  is engaged  in the  long Wars
      of  the  Wainriders,  and  sends  little  help.  Ondohir  [> Ondonir]
      and  his  sons  fell  in  battle  in  1944,  and Arvedui  claimed the
      crown  of Gondor,  on behalf  of Firiel  and himself  as representing
      'the elder  line of  Isildur', since  no close  male claimant  to the
      throne in  Gondor could  at first  be found.  The claim  was rejected
      by  Gondor,  but  Arvedui  and  his  descendants  continued  to  con-
      sider themselves as the true heirs of Anarion as well as  of Isildur.
  25. Arvedui.                                                              
      born    1864    lived    110   years    +drowned   1974    [>   1975]
      He  was the  last king  at Fornost.  In [added:  the winter  of] 1974
      the  Witch-king   destroyed  Fornost,   laid  Arthedain   waste,  and
      scattered  the  remnants  of  the  Dunedain.  Arvedui   escaped  from
      Fornost  and  fled  north,  taking  the  palantiri  of  Annuminas and
      Emyn  Beraid.  He  attempted  to   go  by   ship  from   Forochel  to
      Gondor  but  was  wrecked  and  the  Stones  were  lost. The  sons of
      Arvedui  took  refuge  with  Cirdan  of  Lune.  The   following  year
      Elrond  and  Cirdan,  with  some  belated  help  from   Gondor,  sent
      by  sea,  defeated  the   forces  of   Angmar.  The   Witch-king  was
      overthrown  by  Elrond,  and  his  realm  brought  to  an   end.  The
      northern  lands  though   desolate  were   now  made   somewhat  more
      wholesome  again.  But  it was  found later  that the  Witch-king had
      fled  away  secretly  southwards,  and had  entered Minas  Ithil (now
      called Minas Morgul) and become Lord of the Ringwraiths.            
         The  remnants  of  the  Dunedain  of  the  North   become  rangers
      and errants, living largely in  hiding, but  waging ceaseless  war on
      all evil things that still are abroad in the land. The sons  of their
      chieftains  are  usually  fostered  in Imladris  by Elrond,  to whose
      keeping  are  given  the  chief remaining  heirlooms of  their house,
      especially the shards of Elendil's sword, Narsil.                    
                                                                         
                          End of the North Kingdom                        
          Here follows the rail of the Chieftains of the Dunedain         
                        of Eriador, heirs of Isildur                      
       Little is preserved of the tale of their wanderings and deeds,     
                      until the end of the Third Age.                     

                                        
                                                                     
                The Chieftains of the Dunedain.                       
 26. (and 24th heir of Isildur)                                        
     1. Aranarth.   born 1938    lived 168 years    died 2106
 27. 2. Arahail          2012          165               2177
                                                                     
 28. 3. Aranuir          2084          163               2247
 29. 4. Aravir           2156          163               2319
 30. 5. Aragorn I        2227          100        +slain 2327                               
                                                                     
       Aragorn was slain by wolves which infested eastern Eriador.
                                                                     
 31.  6. Araglas.   born 2296    lived 159 years    died 2455                  
 32.  7. Arahad I        2365          158               2523
 33.  5. Aragost         2431          157               2588
 34.  9. Aravorn         2497          157               2654
 35. 10. Arahad II       2563          156               2719
 36. 11. Arassuil        2628          156               2784
                                                                     
       In his time there  was much  war with  Orcs that  infesting the
       Misty  Mountains  harried  Eriador. The  chief battles  were in
       2745-8. In 2747 the Periannath (Halflings) defeated  a westerly
       ranging force of  the invaders  that came  down from  the north
       into their land west of Baranduin.                             
                                                                     
 37. 12. Arathorn I. born 2693    lived 155 years    died 2848                
 38. 13. Argonui         2757          155               2912
 39. 14. Arador          2820          110        +slain 2930                                
       He was slain by trolls in the mountains north of Imladris.     
 40. 15.Arathorn II. born 2873     lived 60 years  +slain 2933.             
       He wedded Gilrain daughter of Dirhael, a descendant also, but
       by a younger branch, of Arathorn I. He was  slain by  an orc-
       arrow  when  hunting  Orcs  in  the  company  of  Elladan and
       Elrohir, the sons of Elrond. He wedded in 2929. His infant son
       (aged 2 at his father's death) was fostered and brought up at
       Imladris.                                                      
 41. 16.  Aragorn  II.  born   2931  lived   190  years   died  3121
                                                                     
                                               or the Fourth Age 100
       Aragorn  became  King  of  Arnor  and  Gondor  in  the  name of
       Elessar. He played a great part in the War of the Ring in which
       at  last  Sauron  and  the  power of  Mordor was  destroyed. He
       wedded  Arwen  Undomiel  daughter  of  Elrond and  restored the
       majesty  and  blood  of  the Numenoreans.  The Third  Age ended
       with the  departure of  Elrond in  3022 [>  3021]; and  the de-
       scendants of  Elessar through  Arwen became  also heirs  of the
       elf-realms of the westlands.                                   
                                                                     
                             The Heirs of Elendil                     
                   The Southern Line of Gondor: the Anarioni          

  1. Elendil.                                                         
          born S.A.3119    lived 322 years    +slain 3441 = T.A.1           
  2. Anarion.      3219          221          +slain 3440                                    
  3. Meneldil.     3318          280           died T.A.158                                   
     [added: 4th child]                                               
                                                                     
  4. Kemendur.     3399          279                  238       
  5. Earendil.  T.A. 48          276                  324      
  6. Anardil.       136          275                  411       
  7. Ostohir [> Ostonir]                                              
                                                                     
                    222          270                  492      
                                                                     
     He rebuilt  and enlarged  Minas Anor,  where afterwards  the kings
     dwelt always in summer rather than at Osgiliath.                 
  8. Romendakil I. born 310 lived [231] years f-slain 541.              
     His  original name  was Tarostar.  In his  father's time  wild men
     out of the East first assailed Gondor. Tarostar defeated  them and
     drove  them  out, and  took the  name Romendakil,  East-slayer. He
     was, however, later slain in battle with  fresh hordes  of Easter-
     lings.                                                           
  9. Turambar. born 397 lived 270 years died 667                       
     He  avenged his  father, and  conquered much  territory eastwards.
 10. Atanatar I.    born 480    lived 268 years    died 748                    
 11. Siriondil           570          260               830
 12. Falastur            654          259               913
                                                                     
     He  was  first  called  Tarannon.  He took  the name  Falastur, on
     coming  to  the  throne,  to  commemorate  his victories  that had
     extended the sway of Gondor  far along  the shore-lands  on either
     side of the Mouths of Anduin. He was the first childless  king. He
     was succeeded by the son of his brother Tarkiryan.               
                                                                     
 13. Earnil I.  born 736 lived 200 years                               
                                                                     
                                                     +drowned 936.     
                                                                     
     He began the building of a  great navy,  and repaired  the ancient
     havens of Pelargir [added: and seized  and fortified  Umbar, 933].
     He  was  lost  with  many  ships  and  men  in  a great  storm off
     Umbar.                                                           
 14. Kiryandil.  born   820    lived   195    years   f    slain   1015
     He continued to increase the fleets of  Gondor; but  he fell  in a
     battle  with  the  Men  of  Harad  [who  contested the  designs of
     Gondor  to  occupy  Umbar  and  there  make   a  great   fort  and
     haven.  >]  They  contested the  designs of  Gondor to  occupy the
     coast-lands  beyond  R.  Harnen;  they  therefore  tried  to  take
     Umbar, where Gondor maintained a great fort and haven.           
 15  Hyarmendakil I.                                                   
                                                                     
                         born 899      lived 250 years died 1149      

       At first called Kiryahir, he avenged his father, defeated the kings
       of   Harad,  and   made  them   acknowledge  the   overlordship  of
       Gondor,  1050.  Gondor  occupied   all  the   land  south   of  the
       Mouths  of  Anduin   up  to   [Umbar  and   the  borders   of  Near
       Harad;  >]  the  River  (Poros >)  Harnen and  the borders  of Near
       Harad;  and  also  all  the coast-lands  as far  as Umbar.  / Umbar
       became  a great  fortress and  haven of  fleets. After  his victory
       Kiryahir  took   the  name   of  Hyarmendakil   'South-slayer'.  He
       reigned  134  years,  the  longest  of  all save  Tarondor (twenty-
       seventh king).                                                     
  16.  Atanatar    II.   born    977   lived    249   years    died   1226.
       Surnamed Alkarin, the Glorious. In  his time,  owing to  the vigour
       of  the  'Ship-kings',  the  line  from  Falastur  onwards,  Gondor
       reached the height of its power.  This extended  in direct  rule as
       far north as  Celebrant and  the south-eaves  of Mirkwood,  east to
       the  Sea  of  [Runaer  >] Rhunaer,  and south  to Umbar,  and west-
       ward  to the  River Gwathlo  or Greyflood.  In addition  many other
       regions  were  tributary:  the  Men of  Anduin Vale  as far  as its
       sources, and the folk of Harad in the South.  But Atanatar  in fact
       did nothing to increase this power, and  lived mostly  in splendour
       and  ease.  The  waning  of Gondor  began before  he died,  and the
       watch on the borders was neglected.                                
  17.  Narmakil    I.   born    1049   lived    245   years    died   1294.
       The  second  childless  king.  He  was  succeeded  by  his  younger
       brother.                                                           
  18.  Kalmakil.   born    1058    lived     246    years     died    1304
  19.  Romendakil II.      1126              240                      1366
  20.  Valakar             1194              238                      1432
                                                                         
       In his time there  broke out  the disastrous  civil war  called the
       Kin-strife. After  the death  of Atanatar  the Glorious  the North-
       men  of  Mirkwood  and   the  Upper   Anduin,  who   had  increased
       much  in  the  peace  brought  by  the  power  of   Gondor,  became
       powerful.  Though these  people were  ultimately related  in speech
       and  blood  to  the  Atani (and  so to  the Numenoreans),  and were
       usually  friendly,  they  now   became  restless.   Romendakil  was
       forced  to  withdraw  his  northern  border east  of Anduin  to the
       Emyn Muil.  He there  built the  Gates of  Argonath with  images of
       Isildur  and  Anarion  beyond  which  no  stranger  was  allowed to
       come  south  without  leave.  But  Romendakil  being  at  this time
       much  troubled  by  assaults  of Easterlings  sought to  attach the
       Northmen  more closely  to his  allegiance. He  took many  into his
       service  and  gave  them  high  rank.  His  son Valakar  dwelt long
       among  them  in  the  house  of  [added:  Vidugavia]  the  King  of
       Rhovannion.   Romendakil   permitted   him   to   wed   the  king's
       daughter. The marriage of the heir to  a woman  of an  alien people

       and  without  any  Numenorean  blood  had  never  occurred before,
       and  caused  great  displeasure.  Before  Valakar  died  there was
       already open rebellion in the southern fiefs. Various claimants to
       the  crown  appeared,  descendants  of   Atanatar  II.   The  most
       favoured especially by the  fleet, and  ship-folk of  the southern
       shores,  was  the  Captain  of  the Ships,  Kastamir [great-grand-
       son >] grandson of Kalmakil's second son Kalimehtar.              
 21(a). Eldakar.  born 1255  deposed 1437.                                   
                                                                        
      When   Valakar  died   his  son,   who  had   the  alien   name  of
      Vinitharya,  took  the  name  Eldakar, and  succeeded. At  first he
      held  Osgiliath,  and  Minas  Anor,  but  he  was  driven  out  and
      deposed by Kastamir, and fled to the north.  In this  war Osgiliath
      suffered  much  damage,  and   the  tower   of  the   palantir  was
      destroyed and the palantir lost.                                   
 22.  Kastamir.   born    1259   seized    throne   1437    +slain   1447.
      After  ten years  Eldakar defeated  Kastamir with  the help  of his
      mother's kin. Kastamir was slain  [added: by  Eldakar in  battle in
      Lebennin, at Ethraid Erui], but his sons  and many  of his  kin and
      party fled to Umbar, and long held  it as  an independent  realm at
      war with Gondor.                                                   
                                                                        
 21(b) Eldakar                                                           
                                                                        
      regained   the   kingdom   1447   lived   235   years   died   1490
      After Eldakar's return the blood  of the  kingly house  and kindred
      became  more  mixed,  for  many  Northmen  settled  in  Gondor, and
      became great in the land, and high officers in its armies.  But the
      friendship  with  the  Northmen,  which  continued  as part  of the
      policy of the kings, proved of great service in later wars.        
 23.  Aldamir.   born    1330    lived    210    years     +slain    1540.
      He  was  the  second  son  and  third child  of Eldakar.  His elder
      brother Ornendil was slain in  the wars  of the  Kin-strife (1446).
      Aldamir fell in  battle with  the rebelling  kings of  Harad allied
      with the rebels of Umbar.                                          
 24.  Vinyarion.   born    1391    lived    230    years     died    1621.
      He  later  (1551)  took  the  name Hyarmendakil  II, after  a great
      victory over Harad in vengeance for his father.                    
 25.  Minardil.   born    1454    lived    180    years    +slain    1634.
      The  rebels  of  Umbar  had  never  ceased  to  make war  on Gondor
      since the death of Kastamir,  attacking its  ships and  raiding its
      coast  at  every   opportunity.  They   had  however   become  much
      mixed  in  blood  through  admission  of  Men  of  Harad,  and only
      their  chieftains,  descendants  of  Kastamir,  were  of Numenorean
      race. Learning through spies  that Minardil  was at  Pelargir, sus-
      pecting  no  peril since  the crushing  of Harad  and Umbar  by his
      father,  Angomaite  and  Sangahyanda,  leaders  of the  Corsairs of
      Umbar,  great-grandsons  of  Kastamir,  made  a  raid   up  Anduin,

       slew the king, ravaged Pelargir  and the  coasts, and  escaped with
       great booty.                                                      
  26.  Telemnar.   born    1516    lived     120    years     died    1636.
       Telemnar immediately began to fit out a fleet for the  reduction of
       Umbar.  But a  deadly plague  or sickness,  coming with  dark winds
       out of the East, fell on  the land.  Great numbers  of the  folk of
       Gondor, especially those that dwelt in Osgiliath, and  other cities
       and  towns,  took  sick  and  died.  The White  Tree of  Minas Anor
       withered  and  died. Telemnar  and all  his children  perished. The
       crown was taken by his nephew.                                    
  27.  Tarondor.   born    1577    lived     221    years     died    1798.
       He  was  the eldest  son of  Minastan, second  son of  Minardil. He
       removed  the  king's  house  permanently to  Minas Anor,  and there
       replanted a seedling of the White Tree in  the citadel.  During the
       plague in Osgiliath those folk that survived fled from the  city to
       the  western  dales or  into the  woods of  Ithilien, and  few were
       willing  to return.  Osgiliath became  largely deserted  and partly
       ruinous.  Tarondor  had  the  longest  reign  of  all the  Kings of
       Gondor  (162  years), but  was unable  to do  more than  attempt to
       re-establish life and order within his borders.  Owing to  the few-
       ness  of  his  people  the watch  on Mordor  was neglected  and the
       fortresses guarding the passes became emptied.                    
  28.  Telumehtar.   born    1632    lived    218    years    died    1850.
       He took  the title  Umbardakil after  the storming  and destruction
       of  the  haven  and  stronghold  of the  Corsairs of  Umbar (1810).
       But this was later reoccupied  and rebuilt  in the  troublous times
       that later befell Gondor.                                         
  29.  Narmakil   II.  born   1684   lived   172   years   +slain  1856.
       In his time it is said that the  Ulairi or  Ringwraiths re-entered
       Mordor,  owing  to  the ceasing  of the  vigilance, and  there they
       secretly  prepared in  the darkness  for the  return of  their Dark
       Lord.  Men  out  of  the  East  appeared of  a new  sort, stronger,
       better armed, journeying in huge wains,  and fighting  in chariots.
       Stirred  up  maybe  by  Sauron  they  made   a  great   assault  on
       Gondor, and  continued to  be a  great peril  for very  many years.
       Narmakil  was  slain  in  battle  with  their  host  beyond Anduin,
       north-east of the Morannon.                                       
  30.  Kalimehtar.   born    1736    lived    200    years    died    1936.
       He  continued  the  War  of  the  Wainriders,  and  in  1899  won a
       great  victory  over   them  on   Dagorlad,  which   checked  their
       attacks  for  some time.  He built  the White  Tower in  Minas Anor
       to house the palantir.                                            
  31.  Ondohir.                                                          
                                                                        
        [> Ondonir) born 1787 lived 157 years +slain 1944.               

  War   continued   with   the   Wainriders.   In  1940   Ondohir  [>
  Ondonir]  gave the  hand of  his daughter  Firiel (born  1896), his
  third  child,  to  Arvedui  heir  of Araphant,  King of  the North-
  kingdom;  but  he  was  unable  to  send  any  help  to  the  north
  against the  evil realm  of Angmar,  because of  his own  peril. In
  1944  Ondohir   [>  Ondonir]   and  both   his  sons   Faramir  and
  Artamir fell in battle against  an alliance  of the  Wainriders and
  the Haradrim. The king and  his sons  fell in  battle in  the north
  and  the enemy  poured into  Ithilien. But  in the  meantime Earnil
  Captain  of  the  southern army  won a  victory in  South Ithilien,
  destroyed  the  army of  Harad, and  hastening north  succoured the
  retreating  remnants  of  the  northern army,  and drove  the Wain-
  riders off. In the great rout that followed most of the  enemy were
  driven into the Dead Marshes.                                      
     On  the  death  of  Ondohir  [>  Ondonir]  and his  sons Arvedui
  of  the  North  claimed  the  crown  of Gondor  as the  'direct de-
  scendant  of  Elendil',  and as  husband of  Firiel. The  claim was
  rejected  by  Gondor.  At  length  Earnil  the  victorious  Captain
  received the crown (in 1945), since he was of the royal house.     
  32   Earnil   II   born   1883   lived   160   years    died   2043
  He was son of  Siriondil, son  of Kalimmakil,  son of  Narmakil II.
  In  his  time  the  North-kingdom  came  to an  end with  the over-
  throw  and  death  of  Arvedui,  claimant to  both crowns.  He sent
  [some help north by sea >] his son Earnur north  with a  fleet, and
  so aided in the  destruction of  the realm  of Angmar.  But, though
  not revealed until later, the Witch-king fled south and  joined the
  other  Ringwraiths  in  Mordor,  becoming  their  Lord.  When  they
  were ready the  Ulairi suddenly  issued from  Mordor over  the pass
  of  Kirith  Ungol.  They  took  Minas Ithil,  and were  never again
  expelled from it during that Age. It became a place of  great fear,
  and  was  renamed  Minas  Morgul.  Few  people  were   willing  any
  longer to dwell in Ithilien, but this was still held and garrisoned
  by Gondor. At this time probably  the palantir  of Minas  Ithil was
  captured and so came to the hands of Sauron.                       
33. and last of the Third Age.                                       
  Earnur.   born    1928    lived    122    years       +slain   2050.
  He  renamed  Minas  Anor  Minas  Tirith,  as  the  city   on  guard
  against the evil of Minas  MorguL On  the death  of his  father the
  Lord  of  the  Ringwraiths  challenged  Earnur  to   single  combat
  to  make  good  his  claim  to  the  throne.  Mardil   the  Steward
  restrained him.                                                    
     The  challenge  was repeated  with taunts  in 2050,  seven years
  later,  and  against  the  counsel  of  Mardil Earnur  accepted. He
  rode with a small escort of  knights to  Minas Morgul,  but neither
  he nor his company were ever heard  of again.  It was  thought that

 the  faithless  enemy  had  merely  decoyed  him  to  the  gates  and
 then  trapped him  and either  slain him  or kept  him in  torment as
 a prisoner.                                                          
    Since  his  death  was  not  certain   Mardil  the   Good  Steward
 ruled  Gondor  in  his  name  for  many  years. In  any case  no male
 descendants  of  the  royal  line,  among   those  whose   blood  was
 little mixed, could be found.                                        
    For  a  long  time  before  Mardil's   day  the   Stewardship  had
 usually  been  held  by  a  member  of  his family  (the Hurinionath,
 descended   from   Hurin,   Steward   to   King  Minardil).   It  now
 became  hereditary  like  a  kingship;  but  each  new  Steward  took
 office with the formula: 'to  hold rule  and rod  in the  King's name
 and  until  the  King's  return'.  Though  this  soon  became  a mere
 formality  and  the  Stewards exercised  all the  power of  kings, it
 was  believed  by  many  in  Gondor  that  a  king would  return, and
 the  Stewards  never sat  on the  ancient throne  nor used  the royal
 standard  and  emblems.  The  banner  of   the  Stewards   was  plain
 white. The royal standard  was sable  with a  silver tree  in blossom
 beneath seven stars.                                                 
34. Elessar.                     born 2931 lived 190 years died 3121.
                                               or the Fourth Age 100.
 After a  lapse of  969 years  Aragorn, son  of Arathorn,  16th chief-
 tain of the Dunedain of the North, and  41st heir  of Elendil  in the
 direct line through Isildur, being also in the direct line a descend-
 ant  of   Firiel  daughter   of  Ondohir   [>  Ondonir]   of  Gondor,
 claimed  the  crown  of  Gondor  and  of Arnor,  after the  defeat of
 Sauron,  the  destruction  of  Mordor,  and  the  dissolution  of the
 Ringwraiths.  He  was  crowned  in  the  name  of  Elessar  at  Minas
 Tirith  in  3019.  A  new  era  and calendar  was then  begun, begin-
 ning with  25 March  (old reckoning)  as the  first day.  He restored
 Gondor  and  repeopled  it, but  retained Minas  Tirith as  the chief
 city.  He  wedded  Arwen  Undomiel,   daughter  of   Elrond,  brother
 of  Elros  first King  of Numenor,  and so  restored the  majesty and
 high  lineage  of  the  royal  house,  but  their  life-span  was not
 restored  and  continued to  wane until  it became  as that  of other
 men.                                                                 
                                                                     
 The  Third  Age  ended  according to  the reckoning  of the  Eldar in
 3021  and  the  same  year  Elrond  departed.  In  3022   the  Fourth
 Age started and the Elder Days and their Twilight were over.         
 The  son  of  Elessar  and  Arwen  was  Eldarion,  first king  of the
 Fourth  Age,  whose  realm  was  great  and  long-enduring,  but this
 roll does not contain the names of the Fourth Age.                   
                                                                     
            Here follows the roll of the Stewards of Gondor           
       that ruled the realm and city between the going of Earnur      

                       and the coming of Elessar.                      
                     The Ruling Stewards of Gondor.                    
                                                                      
 The  names  of   these  rulers   are  here   added;  for   though  the
 Hurinionath  were  not  in the  direct line  of descent  from Elendil,
 they  were  ultimately  of  royal  origin,  and had  in any  case kept
 their blood more pure than most other families in the later ages.     
  They  were  descended,  father  to  son,   from  Hurin,   Steward  to
 King  Minardil,  who  had  laboured  greatly for  the ordering  of the
 realm  in  the  disastrous  days  of  the  plague, when  King Telemnar
 died  within  two  years  of  the  slaying  of  King  Minardil  by the
 Corsairs.  From   that  time   on  the   kings  usually   chose  their
 steward  from  this  family,   though  a   son  did   not  necessarily
 succeed a father.  But in  fact it  had descended  from father  to son
 since  Pelendur,  Steward  to  King  Ondohir,  and  after  the  ending
 of  the  kings  it  became  hereditary,  though if  a Steward  left no
 son, the office might pass in the female line, that is to  his sister-
 son, or to his father's sister-son.                                   
  The   choice   was   made   according  to   their  worth   among  the
 near  kin  by  the  Council  of  Gondor.  But   the  Council   had  no
 power of choice if there was a son living.                            
  The  Stewards  belonged  to  a  family  of  the  ancient  Elf-friends
 who   used   (beside   the   Common   Speech)   the   Noldorin  tongue
 after  the  fashion of  Gondor.* Their  official names  (after Mardil)
 were  in  that  tongue  and  drawn  mostly  from  the  ancient legends
 of the Noldor and their dealings with the Edain.                      
  All  the  time  of  the  Stewards  was  one  of  slow  dwindling  and
 waning  both  of  the  power  and  numbers  of  the  Men   of  Gondor,
 and  of  the  lore and  skill of  Numenor among  them. Also  the life-
 span  of  those  even  of  the  purer  blood steadily  decreased. They
 were never  free from  war or  the threat  of war  with the  evil that
 dwelt   in   Minas   Morgul   and  watched   them.  They   counted  it
 glory  and  success  to  hold  that  threat  at bay.  Osgiliath became
 a  ruin,  a  city  of  shadows,  often  taken  and  re-taken  in petty
 battles.  For  a  while,  during  the  300  years  peace,   after  the
                                                                      
 (* Since this had long ceased to be a  'cradle-tongue' in  Gondor, but
 was  learned  in early  youth (by  those claiming  Numenorean descent)
 from loremasters, and used by them as a mark of  rank, it  had changed
 very little since the Downfall; and though the  Men of  Gondor altered
 a little some of the sounds, they could still understand the Eldar and
 be  understood  by them.  In the  later days,  however, they  saw them
 seldom.)                                                              

 formation  of  the  White  Council,  Ithilien  was  reoccupied   and  a
 hardy  folk  dwelt  there,  tending  its  fair  woods  and  fields, but
 after  the  days  of  Denethor I  (2435 -  77) most  of them  fled west
 again.  But  it  is  true  that  but  for  Minas  Tirith  the  power of
 Mordor   would   much   sooner   have  grown   great  and   would  have
 spread  over  Anduin  into  the  westlands.  After  the days  of Earnur
 the  White  Tree  waned  and  seldom  flowered.  It  slowly   aged  and
 withered and bore no fruit, so far as men knew.                          
                                                                         
      Pelendur.    born     1879     lived     119    years     died    1998.
      He  was  steward  to  King Ondohir  and advised  the rejection  of the
      claim  of  Arvedui,  and  supported  the  claim  of Earnil  who became
      king  in  1945.  He  remained  steward  under  Earnil,  and  was  suc-
      ceeded by his son.                                                  
      Vorondil.    boin     1919     lived     110    years     died    2029.
      He  was  succeeded  by  his   son.  [Added:   Vorondil  was   a  great
      hunter and he  made a  great horn  out of  the horn  of the  wild oxen
      of Araw, which then still roamed near the Sea of Rhun.]             
  1. Mardil Voronwe ('steadfast').                                         
                                   born 1960 lived 120 years died 2080.
      He  became  steward to  King Earnil  in his  later days,  and then
      to King Earnur.  After the  disappearance of  Earnur he  ruled the
      realm for thirty years  from 2050,  and is  reckoned the  first of
      the line of Ruling Stewards of Gondor.                              
  2. Eradan.    born 1999   lived 117 years    died 2116                            
  3. Herion.         2037         111               2148
  4. Belegorn.       2074         130               2204
  5. Hurin I.        2124         120               2244
  6. Turin I.        2165         113               2278
      He  was the  third child  of Hurin.  He was  wedded twice  and had
      several children (a thing  already rare  and remarkable  among the
      nobles of Gondor); but only the last, a child born in his old age,
      was a son.                                                          
  7. Hador.   born     2245    lived     150    years     died    2395.
      The  last  recorded  Man  of Gondor  to reach  such an  age. After
      this  time  the  life-span  of  those  of  Numenorean  blood waned
      more rapidly.                                                       
  8. Barahir.   born    2290    lived    122    years     died    2412.
  9. Dior.              2328             107                      2435.
      He was childless  and was  succeeded by  the son  of his  sister Rian.
 10. Denethor I.  born  2375   lived    102   years    died   2477.
      Great  troubles  arose  in his  day. The  Morgul-lords having  bred in
      secret a fell race of black Orcs in Mordor  assail Ithilien  and over-
      run  it.  They  capture  Osgiliath  and  destroy its  renowned bridge.

      Boromir son of Denethor in 2475 defeated the host of Morgul     
      and recovered Ithilien for a while.                             
 11.  Boromir.                                                        
        born 2410 lived [89 >] 79 years died [2499 >] 2489.           
      He was third child of Denethor. His life was shortened by the
      poisoned wounds he received in the Morgul-war.                  
                                                                     
 12.  Cirion. born 2449 lived 118 years died 2567.                    
                                                                     
      In his time there came a great assault from the North-east. Wild
      men out of the East crossed Anduin  north of  the Emyn  Muil and
      joining with Orcs out of the Misty  Mountains overran  the realm
      (now  sparsely populated)  north of  the White  Mountains, pour-
      ing into the wold and plain  of Calenardon.  Eorl the  Young out
      of Eotheod brings great help of horsemen and the  great victory
      of the Field of Celebrant (2510) is won. Eorl's people settle in
      Calenardon, which is after called Rohan, a free folk but in per-
      petual alliance with the Stewards of Gondor. (According  to some
      Eorl was a descendant of the Northmen that were allied  with the
      royal house in the days of Eldakar.) [Added:  Eorl was  slain in
      battle in the 'Wold of Rohan' (as it was later called), 2545.]
                                                                     
 13.  Hallas.      born 2480     lived 125 years     died 2605                     
 14.  Hurin II.         2515           113                2628
 15.  Belecthor I.      2545           110                2655
 16.  Orodreth.         2576           109                2685
 17.  Ecthelion I.      2600            98                2698.
      He repaired and rebuilt the White Tower  in Minas  Tirith, which
      was afterwards often called Ecthelion's Tower.  He had  no chil-
      dren and  was followed  by Egalmoth,  grandson of  Morwen sister
      of Orodreth.                                                    
 18.  Egalmoth.   born    2626    lived    117    years    died   2743.
      In this time there was renewed war with the Orcs.               
 19.  Beren.   born    2655    lived     108    years     died    2763
      In  his  time  [there  was  a  renewed attack  on Gondor  by the
      pirates of Umbar. o] there was a great  attack on  Gondor (2758)
      by three fleets of the pirates of Umbar. All the coasts were in-
      vaded.  I Gondor  received no  help from  Rohan, and  could send
      no  help  thither. Rohan  was invaded  from the  North-east, and
      also from the West (by rebelling  Dunlendings). The  Long Winter
      2758-9. Rohan  lies for  five months  under snow.  [Added: Saru-
      man comes to Orthanc.]                                          
 20.  Beregond.   born    2700    lived    111    years    died  2811.
      In his time the War of the Dwarves and Orcs  in the  Misty Moun-
      tains occurred [(2766 - 9) >] (2793-9).  Many Orcs  flying south
      are slain and they are prevented from establishing themselves in
      the White Mountains.                                            
 21.  Belecthor II.  born   2752   lived   120   years   died   2872.

       Only child, late-born, of  Beregond. The  last of  his line  to pass
       the age of 100 years. At his death  the White  Tree finally  dies in
       the citadel, but is left standing 'until the King come'. No seedling
       can be found.                                                       
  22.  Thorondir.   born    2782    lived     100    years     died    2882
  23.  Turin II.            2815               99                      2914.
       In  his  time  [folk  finally fled  >] many  more folk  removed west
       over  Anduin  from  Ithilien,  which  became  wild  and  infested by
       Mordor-orcs.  But  Gondor   makes  and   keeps  up   secret  strong-
       holds there,  especially in  North Ithilien.  The ancient  refuge of
       Henneth  Annun  is  rebuilt  and  hidden.  The  isle of  Cair Andros
       in  Anduin is  fortified. The  Men of  Harad are  stirred up  by the
       servants  of  Sauron  to  attack  Gondor.  In  2885  Turin  fought a
       battle  with  the  Haradrim  in  South  Ithilien  and  defeated them
       with  aid  from  Rohan;  but  the  sons of  King Folcwine  of Rohan,
       Folcred and Fastred, fell in this battle. Turin paid Folcwine a rich
       weregild of gold.                                                   
  24.  Turgon.    born     2855     lived     98     years     died    2953.
       In the last year of his rule Sauron declared himself again,  and re-
       entered  Mordor,  long  prepared  for  him.  Barad-dur  rose  again.
       Mount   Doom   long   dormant   bursts   into   smoke   and   flame.
       [Added: Saruman takes possession of Orthanc, and fortifies it.]     
  25.  Ecthelion II.   born    2886   lived    98   years    died   2984.
       He  is  visited  by  Mithrandir  (Gandalf) to  whom he  is friendly.
       Aragorn  of  the  North  serves  as  a  soldier  in  his  forces. He
       suengthens Pelargir again, and refortifies Cair Andros.             
  26.  Denethor  II.
       born     2930     lived    89     years    +slew     himself    3019.
       He  was  first son  and third  child of  Ecthelion and  more learned
       in lore  than any  Steward for  many generations.  He was  very tall
       and   in   appearance   looked  like   an  ancient   Numenorean.  He
       wedded  late (for  his time)  in 2976  Finduilas daughter  of Prince
       Adrahil  of  Dol  Amroth,  a  noble  house  of  southern  Gondor  of
       Numenorean   blood,   reputed   also   to   have   Elven-blood  from
       ancient  days:  the  Elven-folk  of  Amroth of  Lorien dwelt  in the
       region of  Dol Amroth  before they  sailed over  sea. His  elder son
       Boromir  (2978)  was  slain  by  orcs  near  Rauros  in   3019.  His
       younger  son  Faramir  (2983)  became   the  last   Ruling  Steward.
       His wife Finduilas died untimely in 2987.                           
         In his  time the  peril of  Gondor steadily  grew, and  he awaited
       always  the  great  assault of  Sauron that  he knew  was preparing.
       It is said that he dared  to use  the palantir  of the  White Tower,
       which  none  since  the  kings  had looked  in, and  so saw  much of
       the  mind  of  Sauron (who  had the  Stone of  Ithil), but  was aged
       prematurely by this combat, and fell into despair.                  

    The  attack  began  in  the  summer  of 3018.  The Ringwraiths
 issued  once  more  from  Minas  Morgul  in  visible   form.  The
 sons of Denethor  resisted them  but were  defeated by  the Black
 Captain,  and  retreated over  Anduin; but  they still  held West
 Osgiliath.                                                       
    Boromir departed to Imladris soon after on  a mission  to seek
 the counsel of Elrond. He was slain as he returned.  Minas Tirith
 was  besieged in  March 3019,  and Denethor  burned himself  on a
 pyre in the Tomb of the Stewards.                                
27. Faramir.  born    2983   lived    120   years    died   3103.
                                                 = Fourth Age 82.
                                                                 
 He succeeded by right on the death of his father, but in the same
 year surrendered rod and  rule to  the King  Elessar, and  so was
 the last Ruling Steward. He  retained the  title of  Steward, and
 became Prince of the restored land of  Ithilien, dwelling  in the
 Hills  of  Emyn Arnen  beside Anduin.  He wedded  in 3020  Eowyn
 sister of King Eomer of Rohan.                                   

                            So ends the tale of                           
                                the Ruling                                
                            Stewards of Gondor.                           
                                                                         
 The manuscript C of The Heirs of Elendil ends here, but clipped to it
 is a genealogy of the line of Dol Amroth: for this see p. 220.           
                                                                         
                                Commentary.                               
                                                                         
 As I have explained (p. 188), the manuscript B is  for the  Northern Line
 the earliest text, and the commentary to this part is largely a record of
 significant differences from the text printed (C).  Corrections to  B are
 not as a rule noticed if they merely bring it to the form  in C  (in sub-
 stance: usually not in the precise expression), nor are additions to B as
 first written necessarily noticed as such.                               
  References  to  the historical  accounts following  the names  and dates
 of the  kings and  rulers are  made simply  by the  name, with  the page-
 reference to the C text. A  notable feature  of The  Heirs of  Elendil is
 the  record  of  the  birthdates  of  the  rulers,  which  were  excluded
 from  Appendix  A; other  dates are  in all  cases the  same as  those in
 Appendix A unless the contrary is noted.                                 
                                                                         
  The  preamble  concerning  dates  in  C  (p.  191)  is  absent  from  B,
 which begins with the genealogy.  This differs  from that  in C  in show-
 ing  Anarion as  the elder  son of  Elendil, and  in naming  'Valandil of
 Arthedain': thus B belongs with the early texts of the Tale of  Years, as
 already noted (pp. 188 - 9).                                             
  Only  Isildur's  youngest son,  Valandil, is  named in  The Lord  of the
 Rings.  In the  very late  work The  Disaster of  the Gladden  Fields the

                                                                         
                                                                         
 three  elder  are  named  Elendur, Aratan,  and Ciryon  (Unfinished Tales
 p. 271 and note 11); on one of the copies  of the  typescript D  (p. 190)
 my  father  pencilled  a  note  remarking  on this,  and saying  that the
 names found in 'Gladdenfields' were to be accepted.                      
   In the chronological outline that follows in B as in C,  the birth-date
 of  Anarion  is  3209 and  of Isildur  3219; Meneldil  was born  in 3299,
 and it was Kiryandil son of Isildur who was the  last man  to be  born in
 Numenor  (3318).  Arthedain  appears  for  Arnor  in  3320;   the  birth-
 dates  of  Earnur  and  Veandur  are  3349  and  3389;  and  Valandil was
 born in Annuminas, not Imladris.                                         
   In both texts Isildur died in 3441 (which in the  list of  the Northern
 kings that follows  is made  equivalent to  Third Age  1), the  same year
 as the overthrow of Sauron (see pp. 170, 177).                           
                                                                         
   Following  the  words  'The  Second Age  ends and  the Third  Begins' B
 continues  at once  with the  naming of  the kings  of the  Northern Line
 (without the name Isildurioni). The list of these kings up to  the disin-
 tegration  of  the  North Kingdom  was the  same in  B as  in C  with the
 sole difference (apart from the different date of Isildur's  birth, 3219)
 that the tenth king Earendur is named Earendil in B: on this see  p. 189.
 Valandil  (p.  192). In  B  there was  a note  here: 'Removed  to Fornost
 and  Annuminas  was  deserted';  this  was  struck  out,  and  'Annuminas
 became deserted' added to the note following King Earendil.              
                                                                         
 Earendur  (p.  193). The  note in  B begins  'After Earendil  the Northern
 Kingdom  of  Arthedain  disintegrated',  and  the  north-western  kingdom
 ruled by Amlaith is referred to by  the name  of the  city of  its kings:
 'Fornost  still  claimed the  overlordship, but  this was  disputed.' The
 other realms are thus described in  B: 'Cardolan  (where later  were Bree
 and  the  Barrowdowns)  and  Rhudaur  north  of  the  R.  Bruinen  (where
 later were the Trollshaws).'                                             
                                                                         
 Mallor  (p.  193). In  B  the  corresponding   note  follows   Beleg  the
 twelfth  king:  'In his  reign Sauron  took shape  again in  Mirkwood and
 evil things began again to multiply.'                                    
                                                                         
 Celebrindor  (p.  193). The  name  of the  fifteenth king  in B  as first
 written was  Celem...gil, perhaps  Celemenegil; this  was struck  out and
 replaced by Celebrindol, as in C before correction to Celebrindor.       
                                                                         
 Malvegil (p. 193). The note in B is, as generally, briefer but has all the
 essentials of that in C; here it is said that 'Fornost is at war with the
 lesser  kingdoms,  the  chief dispute  being about  the palantir  of Amon
 Sul'. The  conclusion of  the note  in C,  concerning this,  was rejected
 when  the  disputed claim  to Amon  Sul was  introduced much  earlier, at
 the disintegration of Arnor after the death  of Earendur.  - On  the name
 Ulairi see p. 153.                                                       
                                                                         
 The kings from Argeleb I  to Arvedui  (pp. 194  - 5). An earlier  form of
 the page in B that begins with the  last sentence  of the  note following

  Malvegil, the taking of the prefix aran, ar(a) by the kings  at Fornost,
  is extant, and  here the  names of  these kings  are seen  evolving. The
  original names were as follows (it is curious that despite the  words at
  the head of the page the first three kings do not have the prefix Ar):
    17. Celebrindol (> Argeleb I)                                          
    18. Beleg H (> Arveleg I)                                              
    19. Malvegil II (> Araphor)                                            
    20. Arveleg (> Argeleb II)                                             
    21. Arvegil                                                            
    22. Argeleb (> Arveleg II)                                             
    23. Arvallen (> Araval)                                                
    24. Araphant                                                          
    25. Arvedui                                                            
  But the  dates of  these kings  underwent no  change. The  original name
  of the seventeenth king, Celebrindol, was given to the  fifteenth, orig-
  inally Celemenegil (?), as noted above.                                 
  Argeleb I (p. 194). On the  rejected page  of B  the note  following this
  king states only: 'slain in battle  1356. Angmar  is repulsed  but turns
  upon the lesser kingdoms.' The  replacement page  has: 'Slain  in battle
  with  subkingdoms  of  Cardolan  and  Rhudaur'.  Neither text  refers to
  the palantir of Amon Sul. On the  mention in  the altered  text in  C of
  Argeleb's fortifying of the Weather Hills see p. 189.                   
  Arveleg I (p.  194). The  rejected page  of B  has no  note here;  in the
  replacement page it reads:                                              
    Angmar   taking  advantage   of  war   among  the   Numenoreans  comes
  down   and   overruns   Cardolan  and   Rhudaur.  These   realms  become
  subject  to  the  Sorcerer-king  and  full  of  evil  things, especially
  Cardolan.  But  Fornost  in  spite of  death of  King Arveleg  holds out
  with aid from Lindon and Imladrist.                                     
  An addition concerning the palantir of Amon Sul was made to this:       
    The  tower  of  the  palantir  on Amon  Sul is  destroyed, but  na one
  knows  what  became  of  the  Stone. Maybe  it was  taken by  the Witch-
  king.                                                                   
  This addition was probably made  in revision  of the  original statement
  in C that the palantir was broken.                                      
  Argeleb II (p. 194). In B there was  no note  here and  so no  mention of
  the plague, but the following was added in: 'He gave "the Shire"  to the
  Hobbits.' This is stated in an addition to an early text of the Prologue
  (p.  9):  'In  the Year  1 ...  the brothers  Marco and  Cavallo, having
  obtained formal permission from the king Argeleb II  in the  waning city
  of Fornost, crossed the wide brown river Baranduin.'                    
  Araval  (p. 195). The statement  in B  reads: 'With  help of  Lindon and
  Imladrist Araval wins  great victory  over Angmar,  and drives  the evil
  wights north. He reoccupies Cardolan.' In  the rejected  page of  B this
  victory is ascribed to  the next  king, Araphant,  who 'drives  back the

  Sorcerer-king  and  in  1900  destroys  Cardolan.'  There  is  no reference
  to  the  victory  of  Araval  in  the  history  of  the  North  Kingdom  in
  Appendix A.                                                                
  Araphant (p. 195). More briefly, B has here:                                
    Angmar   recovers,  and   makes  war   again.  Araphant   seeks  alliance
  with  Gondor  and  weds  his  son  Arvedui  to   daughter  of   King  Ondo-
  hir  of  Gondor;  so  that  his  descendants  come  also from  the southern
  line  of  Anarion.  But  Gondor  is  waning  and fallen  on evil  days, and
  sends little help.                                                         
  The  original  note  to  Araphant  has  been  given  under  Araval,  but an
  addition  to  this  mentions  the  marriage  of  Araphant's son  Arvedui to
  Ondohir's  daughter,  and  here  she  is  named:  Ilmare  (see  further pp.
  215-16,  Ondohir).  The  change  of  Ondohir  to  Ondonir  in  C  was  made
  also at all occurrences of the  name in  the Southern  Line, and  also that
  of  the  seventh king  of Gondor,  Ostohir, was  altered to  Ostonir. These
  changed  names  appear  in  the  late  typescript  D,  where my  father let
  them  stand;  but  Ostohir,  Ondohir  reappear  in   Appendix  A.   In  the
  Second  Edition  he  changed  them  to  Ostoher,  Ondoher(  and also  the
  original   name  of   Hyarmendacil  I,   Ciryahir  (Kiryahir),   which  was
  altered to Ciryaher). In an  isolated note  on these  changes he  said that
  Ondohir  was  a  hybrid  name:  in  pure  Quenya   it  should   be  Ondoher
  (Q.  heru,  her- 'lord'),  and -hir  seems to  be due  to the  influence of
  Sindarin  hir  'lord',  and  also  that  of  other  names  ending  in  -ir,
  especially -mir, -vir.                                                     
  Arvedui (p. 195). The statement in  B here  lacks very  little that  is told
  in  C,  although  as  my  father  first wrote  it there  was no  mention of
  Arvedui's fate: his death is given as 'slain 1974'.  In a  subsequent addi-
  tion the same is said of his flight by ship and drowning as  in C,  and the
  loss  of the  palantiri in  the shipwreck  is mentioned,  but they  are not
  identified: they are called simply 'the two that remain'. In this text that
  of  Amon  Sul  was  lost  when  the  tower  was  destroyed  ('Maybe it was
  taken by the Witch-king', p. 209, Arveleg I).  So also  in C  the palantiri
  taken  by  Arvedui  are those  of Annuminas  and Emyn  Beraid, for  in that
  text  the  Stone  of  Amon  Sul  was  said  to  have  been broken  (p. 194,
  Arveleg  I).  C  was  emended  to  say  that  it was  saved and  removed to
  Fornost (ibid.): this was the final version of the history, with the Stones
  lost  in  the  sea becoming  those of  Annuminas and  Amon Sul,  while that
  of  Emyn  Beraid,  which  had a  special character,  remained in  the North
  (see  RK p.  322, footnote,  and Unfinished  Tales p.  413, note  16). But
  the C text was not emended in the present passage.                         
    Of  the  tale  told  in  Appendix  A  of  Arvedui's  sojourn   among  the
  Lossoth, the Snowmen of Forochel, there is here no trace.                  
  The  Chieftains  of  the  Dunedain  (p.  195). The   rejected  page   of  B
  carries the names of the  Chieftains, and  some of  these as  first written
  were corrected on the manuscript, thus:                                    

                                       
                                                                          
 27. Araha[n]til (sixth letter illegible) ) Arahail                         
 28. Aranuil > Aranuir                                                      
 31. Arallas > Araglas                                                      
 33. Arandost > Aragost                                                     
 35. Arangar > Arahad II                                                    
 36. Arasuil > Arassuil                                                     
 39. Arv[or]eg (fifth and sixth letters uncertain) > Arador.                
                                                                          
 The dates were also different from  the final  chronology, save  for those
 of Aranarth and Aragorn II,  in both  versions of  B; they  were corrected
 on the  replacement page  of B  to those  of C.  The original  dates were:
 Arahail    2011-2176                            Aravorn     2490-2647     
 Aranuir    2083-2246                            Arahad II   2555-2711     
 Aravir     2154-2316                            Arassuil    2619-2775     
 Aragorn I  2224-2324                            Arathorn I  2683-2838     
 Araglas    2292-2451                            Argonui     2746-2901     
 Arahad I   2359-2517                            Arador      2808-2912     
 Aragost    2425-2583                            Arathorn II 2870-2933     
 These  changes  of  date  were carefully  made, in  several cases  in more
 than one stage; in the result the length  of the  lives of  the Chieftains
 remained the same, except  in the  cases of  Aravir, Aragost,  Arador, and
 Arathorn II.                                                              
                                                                          
 Aragorn I (p.  196). In  the rejected  page of  B he  was 'lost  in wilder-
 ness while hunting'; in the replacement page he was  'lost in  the wilder-
 ness; probably slain by orcs [> wolves].'                                 
                                                                          
 Arassuil  (p.  196). The victory  of the  Hobbits in  2747 was  the Battle
 of Greenfields.                                                           
                                                                          
 Arador (p. 196). Arador's death  is referred  to at  the beginning  of the
 tale of  Aragorn and  Arwen in  Appendix A,  as also  is that  of Arathorn
 II (RK pp. 337-8).                                                        
                                                                          
 Aragorn  II  (p.  196). B  has here:  'Became King  Elessar of  Gondor and
 Arthedain,  aided  in  the  overthrow  of  Sauron  with  which  Third  Age
 ended  in  3019.  He  wedded  Arwen  Undomiel,  daughter  of  Elrond.  His
 descendants  became  thus  heirs   of  the   Numenorean  realms,   and  of
 Luthien  and  the  Elf-kingdoms  of  the  West.' The  statement in  C that
 'The  Third  Age  ended  with  the  departure  of  Elrond  in   3022'  was
 presumably  a  mere  slip,  since  the  date of  Aragorn's death  is given
 immediately  above  as  3121  =   Fourth  Age   100,  which   assumes  the
 beginning  of  that  Age  in  3022. Later  in C,  when Aragorn  appears at
 the end of the roll of the kings of the Southern Line (p. 202), the depar-
 ture of Elrond is given  as 3021,  the Fourth  Age is  said to  have begun
 in 3022, and 3121 is again equated with Fourth Age 100.                   
                                                                          
                       The Southern Line of Gondor.                        
   The earliest extant list of the rulers of Gondor is the manuscript A
   briefly described on p. 188. This has precisely the same form as the

                     
                                                                         
 two later  texts of  The Heirs  of Elendil,  with the  dates of  birth and
 death (and the manner of death) of each king, and the length of  his life.
 There is only one difference of  name in  A, that  of the  fourteenth king
 (p.  197),  who  was  first  called  Kiryahir  but   subsequently  renamed
 Kiryandil  (at  the same  time Kiryahir  entered as  the original  name of
 Hyamendakil  I). There  are only  two differences  in the  succession, the
 first being in that  following the  sixteenth king  Atanatar II  (p. 198),
 which in A as first written went:                                        
    16. Atanatar II 977 - 1226                                             
    17. Alkarin 1049-1294                                                  
    18. Narmakil I.                                                         
 It was evidently at  this point  that my  father stopped,  moved 'Alkarin'
 to  stand  beside Atanatar  II with  the words  'also named',  and changed
 Narmakil I from 18 to  17, entering  as his  dates those  previously given
 to 'Alkarin'. The  next king,  Kalmakil, was  then entered  as 18.  I have
 no  doubt  whatever  that  this  was  a  mere   slip,  Alkarin   being  an
 honorific name; and this is significant, for it shows  that my  father was
 copying from an existing text, or existing  notes. There  is no  trace now
 of  anything  of  the  sort,  and it  must be  concluded that  the written
 origin of the history of the rulers of Gondor is lost.                   
    The other difference in the succession occurs after the  thirtieth king
 Kalimehtar (p. 200), where A has:                                        
    31. Ostohir II 1787-1985, lived 198 years                              
    32. Ondohir 1837 - 1944 (slain), lived 107 years.                       
 Earnil II  and Earnur  the last  king are  numbered 33  and 34.  The death
 of  Ostohir  II  is  thus  placed  41  years after  that of  his successor
 Ondohir.  How  this  peculiar  anomaly  arose  can  only be  surmised: the
 likeliest explanation is that  there were  variant and  contradictory con-
 ceptions in  the text  that my  father was  using, and  that he  failed to
 observe it. It  was not  corrected in  A, and  indeed the  same succession
 survived  into  B,  with  Earnur  numbered  the  thirty-fourth  king. When
 he did observe it he resolved  it by  simply striking  out Ostohir  II and
 giving his birth-date of 1787 to  Ondohir, so  that he  lived for  157 and
 not 107 years.                                                           
    A also differed from the  final chronology  in the  dates of  the kings
 from Anarion to Anardil (see p. 197), which were:                        
    Anarion S.A. 3209-3440                                                
    Meneldil S.A.3299 - T.A.139                                           
    Kemendur S.A.3389-T.A.228                                             
    Earendil T.A.40-316                                                   
    Anardil T.A.132-407                                                    
 The dates of these five kings remained in B as  they were  in A,  but were
 then corrected  to those  found in  C; after  correction the  life-span of
 each king  remained the  same as  before, with  the exception  of Anarion,
 since he became the younger son  of Elendil  while the  date of  his death
 was fixed. All other dates in A were retained  into the  final chronology.

   The notes in A were brief and scanty until Valakar the twentieth     
 king (and those to Romendakil I and Hyarmendakil I were subsequent     
 additions):                                                            
    7. Ostohir I Rebuilt and enlarged Minas Anor.                        
    8. Romendakil I At this time Easterlings assailed kingdom.           
   13. Earnil I Began rebuilding the neglected navy. Lost at sea in a
       storm.                                                           
   15. Hyarmendakil I Defeated Harad and made them subject.              
   16. Atanatar II In his day Gondor reached its widest extent           
       owing to the vigour of the 'line of Earnil'. But he loved life of
       ease and began to neglect the guards in the East. Waning of      
       Gondor began.                                                    

  There are also some notes on the nature of  the succession:  Falastur had
  no son, and  his successor  Earnil I  was the  son of  Falastur's brother
  Tarkiryan;  Narmakil  I  had  no  children,  and  his  successor Kalmakil
  was his brother.                                                         
    It seems plain that a firm structure  at least  in outline  had already
  arisen: that my father  had in  his mind  a clear  picture of  the chron-
  ology, the major events, the triumphs and vicissitudes of the  history of
  Gondor, whether or not it was committed to writing now lost.             
    From  Valakar  the  notes in  the A  text as  written become  more fre-
  quent and some  of them  much fuller,  a pattern  still reflected  in the
  entries in the greatly expanded C text. Some of  these entries  are given
  in the commentary on the Southern Line in C that now follows.            
                                                                          
  Ostohir (p. 197). In all three texts Ostohir  is the  first of  that name,
  but the figure I was struck out in C: see p.  212. On  the change  of the
  name to Ostonir see p. 210, Araphant.                                    
                                                                          
  Romendakil  1   (p.  197).  In  Appendix   A  Romendakil   is  translated
  'East-victor', but in texts B and C 'East-slayer'; so also in the case of
  Hyarmendakil, translated 'South-slayer' in B and C.                      
                                                                          
  Falastur  (p.  197). This king's  former name  Tarannon first  appears in
  C, though the reason for Falastur is recorded in B.                      
                                                                          
  Kiryandil (p. 197). B has only  'Continued to  increase fleets,  but fell
  in a sea-battle against the Kings of Harad'. The  alterations to  C under
  Earnil  I and  Kiryandil bring  the history  to its  form in  Appendix A,
  where it was Earnil who captured Umbar.                                  
                                                                          
  Valakar  (p.  198). As  the  first  extant account  of the  Kin-strife in
  Gondor I give here the entry in A, where the whole  history of  the civil
  war is placed in the note following Valakar:                             
    In  1432  broke  out  the  Kin-strife.  Valakar  had  wedded as  wife a
  daughter  of  the  King  of  Rhovannion,  not  of  Dunedain   blood.  The
  succession  of  his  son Eldakar  was contested  by other  descendants of
  Kalmakil  and  Romendakil  II.  In  the  end  Eldakar  was   driven  into
  exile   and   Kastamir,   great-grandson   of   Kalmakil's   second   son

                                           
                                                                         
 Kalimehtar,  became  king.  But   Eldakar  drove   him  out   again,  and
 after  that  time  the  blood  of  the  kingly  house became  more mixed,
 for  Eldakar  had   the  assistance   of  the   Northmen  of   the  Upper
 Anduin  his  mother's  kin,  and  they  were   favoured  by   the  kingly
 house  afterwards,  and  many  of  them  served in  the armies  of Gondor
 and became great in the land.                                            
 Thus nothing was told of  the political  and military  circumstances that
 led to the marriage of Valakar to the  daughter of  the (as  yet unnamed)
 King of Rhovannion. In B something is said of this:                      
 Since  the  days  of  Atanatar  II  the  Northmen  of Mirkwood  and upper
 Anduin  had   been  increasing   greatly  in   numbers  and   power,  and
 in   Romendakil's   time   hardly   acknowledged   the   overlordship  of
 Gondor.  Romendakil  having   enough  to   do  with   Easterlings  sought
 to  attach   the  Northmen   more  closely   to  their   allegiance,  and
 arranged  that  his  son  Valakar  should  wed the  daughter of  the King
 of Rovannion (Wilderland).                                               
 B then follows A in placing the whole  history of  the Kin-strife  in the
 note following  Valakar, and  makes only  the additional  statements that
 such  a  marriage  was  unheard of,  and that  Valakar's son  bore before
 his accession the alien name Vinthanarya. In both texts  it is  said that
 Kastamir  was  slain  by  Eldakar  in 1447,  but there  is no  mention in
 either of the flight to Umbar by his defeated  adherents and  the arising
 there of an independent pirate realm (see below under Minardil).         
 Aldamir (p. 199). In A it is said that 'his elder  son Ornendil  was slain
 with him in battle with  rebels of  Harad'; B  is the  same as  C, making
 Ornendil the brother of  Aldamir who  had been  slain in  the Kin-strife,
 but  without  the  reference  to  'the  rebels   of  Umbar'   (see  under
 Minardil).                                                               
 Vinyarion  (p.  199). The  victory  of  Vinyarion  in Harad  in vengeance
 for his father, mentioned in almost the same words in all three texts, is
 not referred to in the account  in Appendix  A, and  thus the  reason for
 his  taking  the  name Hyarmendakil  II is  not given;  but the  event is
 recorded in the Tale of Years, Third Age 1551.                           
 Minardil (p. 199). In A the  story of  the founding  of the  hostile lord-
 ship  of the  Corsairs of  Umbar by  the followers  of Kastamir  does not
 appear and had probably not  yet arisen:  this is  suggested by  the fact
 that in B it first enters long after the event in the note on Minardil:
 The  sons  of  Kastamir  and  others  of  his   kin,  having   fled  from
 Gondor  in  1447,  set  up  a  small  kingdom  in  Umbar, and  there made
 a  fortified  haven.  They  never  ceased  to   make  war   upon  Gondor,
 attacking  its  ships  and  coasts  when they  had opportunity.  But they
 married  women  of  the  Harad  and  had in  three generations  lost most
 of  their  Numenorean  blood;  but they  did not  forget their  feud with
 the house of Eldakar.                                                    
 The entry in B then  continues with  the account  (much fuller  than that

               
                                                                         
 in  Appendix  A)  of  the  slaying  of  Minardil  at  Pelargir,  which was
 repeated almost exactly in C.                                            
  The   names   Angomaite   and   Sangahyanda   were   changed   to   Anga-
 maite and Sangahyando in the Second Edition.                             
 Telemnar,  Tarondor,  Telumehtar  (p.  200). In  B   the  text   of  these
 entries closely  approached those  in C;  but most  of the  entry concern-
 ing  Tarondor, including  the account  of the  desertion of  Osgiliath and
 the removal of the king's house to Minas Anor, was a later addition.     
 Narmakil  II  (p.  200). The  note  in  A  read:  'Battle  with  the Ring-
 wraiths who seized Mordor. Osgiliath ceases to  be the  chief seat  of the
 kings'. In B this was somewhat developed:                                
  At this  time the   Ulairi (or  Ringwraiths) who  had seized  Mordor long
 before  began  to  assail Ithilien.  Narmakil was  slain by  the Sorcerer-
 king. Osgiliath ceased to be the seat of the kings.                      
 This was roughly rewritten to read:                                      
  In his time it is said that the Ulairi (or  Ringwraiths) arose  again and
 re-entered  Mordor  secretly.  There  they  prepared  in the  darkness for
 the  return  of their  Dark Lord.  Men out  of the  East, a  fierce people
 riding  in  great  wains,  came  against Gondor,  doubtless stirred  up by
 Sauron and  Ulairi. Narmakil slain in battle.                            
 This was the first appearance of the Wainriders.                         
 Kalimehtar  (p.  200). The  note  in  A  recorded  only   that  Kalimehtar
 'built  the  White Tower  of Minas  Anor and  removed his  court thither'.
 B  repeated  this,  and  continued:  'Minas  Anor  becomes   called  Minas
 Tirith, since Minas Ithil is lost and becomes a stronghold of  the Ulairi,
 and  is  called  Minas  Morgul.'  This  was  struck  out  immediately, and
 the  fall  of  Minas Ithil  postponed to  the time  of King  Ondohir; sub-
 sequently the entry was replaced by the following:                       
  Built  the  White  Tower  of  Minas  Anor.  Continued  war   against  the
 Wainriders, and defeated them before the Morannon.                       
 The  building  of  the White  Tower by  Kalimehtar is  not referred  to in
 Appendix  A,  but is  recorded in  the Tale  of Years,  Third Age  1900. -
 For  Ostohir  II  who  followed  Kalimehtar in  A and  (before correction)
 in B see p. 212.                                                         
 Ondohir  (pp.  200-1). A  has  here  a  more  substantial   entry,  though
 very largely concerned with the claim of Arvedui:                        
  His  sons  Faramir  and  Artamir  were  both  slain   in  the   war  with
 Mordor.  Minas  Ithil  fell  and   became  Minas   Morgul.  In   1940  his
 daughter   (third   child),   born   1896,   wedded   Arvedui    (son   of
 Araphant)  last  king  of  the   North.  Arvedui   in  1944   claimed  the
 Southern  crown,  but  this  was  refused.  There   was  a   time  without
 a  king  and  the  steward  Pelendur  governed.   The  claim   of  Arvedui
 lapsed with  his death  in battle  in 1974,  but though  too weak  ever to
 press  their  claim  the  descendants  of Arvedui  and Firiel  daughter of
 Ondohir,  chieftains  of  the   Dunedain  of   the  North,   continued  to

 claim  the  Southern  crown;  though  in  fact  it  passed after  an inter-
 regnum  to  Earnil  II,  a  descendant  (great-grandson)  of  Narmakil II's
 second son Kalimmakil.                                                     
 The omission  in the  note of  the death  of Ondohir  was a  mere oversight
 in  rapid  writing: he  is marked  as 'slain'  in 1944.  Ondohir's daughter
 is  here named  Firiel, as  in B  and C;  the name  Ilmare in  the rejected
 page  of  B in  the section  on the  Northern Line  (p. 210,  Araphant) can
 then only  be explained  as a  passing change  of name.  The fact  that the
 Northern  kings  Araphant  and  Arvedui  are  named  in  A  (and  the  date
 of Arvedui's death  given) shows  that work  on the  history of  the North-
 ern Line existed before the writing of B, the earliest extant text for that
 part (see p. 188).                                                         
 In B the entry for Ondohir, as first written, began thus:                  
 War  continued  with  the  Ulairi. Minas  Ithil fell  and became  a strong-
 hold   of   the   enemy,  and   was  renamed   Minas  Morgul.   Minas  Anor
 became Minas Tirith.                                                       
 This  followed the  original entry  in B  under Narmakil  II, in  which the
 assault of the Ulairi on Ithilien was recorded (before  the entry  into the
 history  of  the  Wainriders).  The fall  of Minas  Ithil and  the renaming
 of  the  two  cities was  now moved  on from  its placing  in the  reign of
 Kalimehtar (and thus returns to the text of A, given above).               
 The  opening  of  B  was  subsequently  struck  out,  apart from  the first
 sentence,  which  was  corrected  to 'War  continued with  the Wainriders',
 as in C. The rest of the original entry in  B records  the fall  of Ondohir
 and his sons 'in battle in Ithilien' (which as  written referred  to battle
 with  the  Ringwraiths,  but which  was subsequently  extended to  read 'in
 battle in  Ithilien against  an alliance  of the  Wainriders and  the Harad
 that  assailed eastern  Gondor from  north and  south'), and  then recounts
 the  claim  of  Arvedui,  closely  following  A. The  statements in  A that
 'there  was  a time  without a  king' when  the Steward  Pelendur governed,
 and  that  the  crown  passed  to  Earnil  after  an   'interregnum',  were
 retained but then struck out  (see below  under Earnil  II). There  is thus
 no mention in B of the great victory of Earnil  in South  Ithilien followed
 by his rout of the Wainriders, which led to his accession as king.         
 On the correction of Ondohir to Ondonir see p. 210, Araphant.             
 Earnil II (p. 201). In A  it is  said only  that he  was 'son  of Kiryandil
 son  of  Siriondil  son  of  Kalimmakil son  of Narmakil  II', and  that he
 came  to  the  throne  in  1960  (thus  after  an  interregnum  of  sixteen
 years).  This  was  repeated  without change  in B,  and allowed  to stand,
 although  my  father  had  rejected  the  references  to   an  interregnum,
 when  Pelendur  governed,  in the  entry for  Ondohir. Kiryandil  was later
 removed, and  Siriondil became  the father  of Earnil.  In all  three texts
 Kalimmakil  was  the  son   of  Narmakil   II,  but   in  Appendix   A  (RK
 p. 330) the son of Arciryas the brother of Narmakil.                       
 Nothing further is said of Earnil  in B  as originally  written, but  in an
 addition  the  flight of  the Sorcerer-king  out of  the North  is recorded

  (though  without  any  mention  of  the  great  fleet  from  Gondor  under
  Earnil's  son Earnur  which in  large part  brought about  the destruction
  of Angmar), and the fall of Minas Ithil moves  to its  final place  in the
  history:                                                                  
    In his time the Sorcerer-king of Angmar, chief of the  Ulairi, fled from
  the  North  and  came  to  Mordor,  and  built  up  a  new   power.  Under
  his leadership the  Ulairi took Minas Ithil,  and made  it their  city and
  stronghold,  from  which  they  were  never  expelled.  S.  Ithilien aban-
  doned  by  Gondor,  but  a  garrison  holds  the  bridges   of  Osgiliath.
  Minas   Ithil   becomes   called   Minas   Morgul,   and  Minas   Anor  is
  renamed Minas Tirith.                                                     
  In C, as  in Appendix  A (RK  p. 332),  the  renaming  of Minas  Anor took
  place in the time of Earnur. - A further, later addition in B  notes: 'The
  Nazgul seize the Ithil-stone'.                                            
  Earnur (p. 201). This final note in A reads:                              
    The  last  king.  He  went  to  war  with  Minas  Ithil  and  Mordor and
  never  returned;  nor  was  his  body  ever  recovered.  Some said  he was
  carried  off  alive  by  the  evil  king.  He  left  no children.  No male
  descendants of  clear title  (or nearly  pure blood)  of Elendil  could be
  discovered.   Mardil   the   Steward,   grandson  of   Pelendur,  governed
  nominally  'until  the  King's  return',  and  this  became   an  habitual
  formula.  There  had  been  a  tendency  (but  no  rule) for  the Steward-
  ship  to  be  hereditary  or  at  least  chosen  from  one family.  It now
  became hereditary like a kingship.                                        
  Here the A text of the Southern  Line ends.  In B  this note  was repeated
  without change  of substance,  but continues  after the  words 'hereditary
  like a kingship':                                                         
    But  the  Stewards no  longer took  official names  of Quenya  form, and
  their names  were all  of Noldorin  origin, that  tongue still  being used
  by the noble houses of Gondor.                                            
      After  the  time  of  Earnur  the  White Tree  never [>  seldom] again
  bore fruit, and ever its blossom  grew less  as it  slowly died  [> aged].
  It is clear that the story of the challenge to Earnur by  the Lord  of the
  Ringwraiths  had  not  emerged.  Later, the  opening of  the passage  in B
  was rejected and the following substituted:                               
    He accepted the challenge [added: to fight for  the palantir  of Ithil?]
  of the Lord of the  Ulairi and  rode over  the bridge  of Osgiliath  [> to
  the  gates  of  Morgul] to  meet him  in single  combat, but  was betrayed
  and taken, and was never again seen by men.                               
  The two  challenges to  Earnur, and  the restraint  on the  king exercised
  by Mardil the Steward, did not appear until the text C.                   
  Elessar (p. 202). The text in B is very close to its form  in C,  but lacks
  the  reference  to  the  continued waning  of the  life-span of  the royal
  house. After the  words 'and  so restored  the majesty  and high  blood of
  the royal house' B concludes:                                             

 Here  ends  the  Red  Book.  But it  was foretold  that Eldarion  the son
 of Elessar should rule a great  realm, and  it should  endure for  a hun-
 dred  generations  of  men;  and  from  him  should  come  the  kings  of
 many realms in after days.                                               
                                                                         
 I have said (p. 190) that  'it is  generally impossible  to say  how much
 of the matter that  entered at  each successive  stage had  newly arisen,
 and how much was present  but at  first ...  held in  abeyance.' Nonethe-
 less, from this (inevitably complex)  account of  the development  of the
 history  of the  kings of  Gondor recorded  in increasing  detail through
 the  texts,  new  elements  can  be  seen  emerging  and  becoming estab-
 lished, as the founding of  the corsair-kingdom  of Umbar,  the invasions
 of the Wainriders,  or the  sending of  the fleet  from Gondor  to assail
 Angmar.                                                                  
                                                                         
                          The Stewards of Gondor.                         
                                                                         
 The  earliest  text  recording  the names  and dates  of the  Stewards of
 Gondor  is  constituted  by  two  pages  attached  to  the  manuscript  A
 of  the  Southern  Line.  These  pages  were  obviously  written  on con-
 tinuously from the  preceding section,  but the  text becomes  very rapid
 and rough in its latter part and ends in a scrawl of confused dates.     
 For the C-text of  the Stewards  see pp.  202 ff.  The B-text  is headed:
 'Appendix. The Stewards of Gondor', with a brief preamble:               
 These  may  be  added,  for  though not  in the  direct line,  the Hurin-
 ionath,  the  family  to  which  Pelendur  and  Mardil belonged,  were of
 Numenorean  blood  hardly  less  pure  than  that   of  the   kings,  and
 undoubtedly  had  some  share  in  the  actual   blood  of   Elendil  and
 Anarion.                                                                 
 To this was added later:                                                 
 During  all  the   days  of   the  Stewards   there  was   unceasing  war
 between  Minas  Morgul  and  Minas  Anor.   Osgiliath  was   often  taken
 and retaken.  In North  Ithilien a  hardy folk  still dwelt  as borderers
 and  defenders,  but  slowly  they  dwindled and  departed west  over the
 River.                                                                   
 The notes in  B as  originally written  were few,  and those  mostly con-
 cerned (as in A) with individual Stewards as  their lives  and life-spans
 affected the nature of the  succession. References  to other  events were
 in nearly all cases subsequent additions.                                
 Pelendur. B  has  here,  almost  exactly  following  A:  'Became  Steward
 1940;  ruled  the  realm  during  the  interregnum  1944-1960,   when  he
 surrendered authority to Earnil II.' On this see Earnil II, p. 216. That
 Pelendur did become briefly the ruler of Gondor  is not  stated in  C (as
 it is in Appendix A, RK p. 319), but  that there  was an  interregnum for
 a year is implied by the revised dating (Ondohir slain in  1944, Earnil's
 accession in 1945).                                                      
 Vorondil. There  is no  note on  Vorondil in  A and  B. With  the addition

  in C cf. the chapter Minas Tirith, RK p. 27, where it is not  said (though
  no doubt implied)  that Vorondil  was the  actual maker  of the  horn last
  borne  by  Boromir:  'since  Vorondil  father  of  Mardil hunted  the wild
  kine of Araw in  the far  fields of  Rhun' (on  this passage  see VIII.281
  and note 14).                                                             
  Mardil  Voronwe.  A  has  a  note  here,  which  was  not  repeated  in B,
  'After  his  time  the  names  are  usually Noldorin  not Quenya.  Few are
  left  who  know  Quenya.'  Cf.  Appendix  A (RK  p. 319):  'His successors
  ceased to use High-elven names.'                                          
  Belegorn. In  A  the  name  of  the  fourth  Ruling  Steward  was Bardhan,
  later changed to Belgorn; Belegorn in B.                                  
  Turin I. The same note is present in all three texts.                      
  Hador. In  A  the  name  of  the  seventh Ruling  Steward was  Cirion, and
  Hador that of the  twelfth; this  was retained  in B,  but the  names were
  later reversed. A has simply 'lived to great age 150'; B is as C,  but the
  note ends 'the life-span of the nobles is waning steadily.'               
  Dior. In A and B the same is said as in C,  but Dior's  sister (Rian  in C)
  is not named.                                                             
  Denethor  I. The   note  in   A  reads:   'Great  troubles   arose.  Enemy
  destroyed  Osgiliath.  Boromir son  (third child)  of the  Steward defeats
  them, and for a time recovers Ithilien.' B repeated this, but the text was
  altered to read:  'Enemy overran  all Ithilien  and destroyed  the bridges
  of Osgiliath.'                                                            
  Boromir. A  has:  'Death  hastened  by  wounds  got in  the war';  B: 'His
  life  was  shortened  by  wounds  received  from  the poisoned  weapons of
  Morgul.'                                                                  
  Cirion. In  neither  A  nor  B was  there a  note following  Cirion (first
  written  Hador),  but  the  following  was  added  in  B:  'War  with Orcs
  and Easterlings.  Battle of  Celebrant' (with  the date  2510 put  in sub-
  sequently), and also:                                                     
    Sauron stirs up mischief, and there is  a great  attack on  Gondor. Orcs
  pour  out  of  the  Mountains  and  of  Mirkwood  and  join  with  Easter-
  lings.  Hador  [>  Cirion]  gets  help  from  the  North.  Eorl  the Young
  wins  the  victory  of  the  Field  of Celebrant  and is  given Calenardon
  or Rohan.                                                                 
  Since  the mentions  of the  Field of  Celebrant in  the narrative  of The
  Lord of the Rings were all  late additions  (see e.g.  IX.72, note  16) it
  may be that  the story  was evolving  at the  time of  the writing  of The
  Heirs of Elendil.                                                         
  Ecthelion I.  A's  note here  makes Egalmoth,  successor of  the childless
  Ecthelion,  the  grandson  of Morwen  sister of  Belecthor I.  This intro-
  duces  a  generation  too  many,  and  was  obviously  due to  the mention
  of  Egalmoth  under  his  predecessor  Ecthelion  -  a  testimony  to  the

 rapidity with  which my  father sketched  out the  dates and  relations of
 the later Stewards in this  earliest text.  In B  Morwen becomes  the sis-
 ter of Orodreth, Ecthelion's father.                                      
                                                                          
 Egalmoth. In  B  a  note  was  added  (repeated  in  C):   Orc-wars  break
 out'.  This  is referred  to in  the Tale  of Years  in Appendix  B: '2740
 Orcs renew their invasions of Eriador.' A later pencilled  note in  B says
 'Dwarf   and   Orc   war   in   Misty   Mountains'  (see   under  Beregond
 below).                                                                   
                                                                          
 Beren. There  was  no  note  in  B,  but these  were added:  'Long winter
 2758', and  'In his  reign there  is an  attack on  Gondor by  [Pirates >]
 Corsairs of Umbar [2758 >] 2757'.                                         
                                                                          
 Beregond. In  A  and  B  his  name  was  Baragond, with  the note  that he
 was the third child of Beren.  A pencilled  note in  B repeats  the notice
 of  the  War  of  the  Dwarves  and the  Orcs from  the entry  under Egal-
 moth, with the date '2766-'.                                              
                                                                          
 The  Stewards  from  Belecthor  II  to Ecthelion II. By  this point  A has
 become no  more than  a working-out  of dates;  and the  brief notes  in B
 can be collected together. That to Belecthor II is  the same  as in  C but
 without  mention  of the  death of  the White  Tree; that  to Turin  II is
 'Bilbo was  born in  the Shire  during his  rule'; and  that to  Turgon is
 'Aragorn born  in Eriador  during his  rule'. Very  rough and  hasty addi-
 tions were made later in preparation for the much fuller notes in C.      
   The  statement  in  C  under  Ecthelion  II that  'Aragorn of  the North
 serves as a soldier in his forces' is the first mention of Aragorn's years
 of service in disguise in Rohan and Gondor.                               
                                                                          
 Denethor  II. B  has  only  a  statement   of  dates   and  relationships,
 including that  of Denethor's  marriage to  Finduilas daughter  of Adrahil
 of  Dol  Amroth:  this  is seen  in A  (where the  father of  Finduilas is
 named Agrahil) at the moment of its emergence.                            
                                                                          
 Faramir. The note in B is  the same  in substance  as that  in C,  but adds
 that as the Prince of Ithilien he 'dwelt in a fair new house in  the Hills
 of  Emyn  Arnen,   whose  gardens   devised  by   the  Elf   Legolas  were
 renowned.'                                                                
                                                                          
                          The Line of Dol Amroth.                          
                                                                          
 Arising from the  reference to  Denethor's marriage  to Finduilas,  at the
 foot of the last  page of  the B  manuscript my  father began  working out
 the  genealogy  of  the  descendants  of  Adrahil  of  Dol  Amroth;  and a
 carefully  made  table  beginning  with  Angelimir  the  twentieth  prince
 was  attached  by  my  father  to  the  manuscript  C  of  The   Heirs  of
 Elendil.  This  I  have redrawn  on p.  221 (the  Princes are  marked with
 crosses as in the original). Beneath the table is a note on the origins of
 the  house of  Dol Amroth,  telling that  Galador the  first lord  was the
 son  of  Imrazor  the  Numenorean,  who  dwelt  in  Belfalas,   and  Mith-

                                     
                                                                                 
 rellas   one   of  the   companions  of   Nimrodel.  This   note  is   printed  in
 Unfinished   Tales,   p.   248,   with  the   unaccountable  error   of  Angelimar
 for  Angelimir  (an  editorial  mistake,  since  it  occurs  twice  in   the  text
 and again in the index).                                                         
  The   page  obviously   belongs  with   the  writing   of  C   to  which   it  is
 attached,  since  on  the  reverse  are the  first entries  for the  Southern Line
 in  exactly  the  same  form  as  they  appear  in  the  text,  but  abandoned, as
 it  appears,  simply  because  of  an error  in the  writing out  of the  dates in
 what was designed to be a fine manuscript.                                       
  Another  briefer  account  of  the  origin  of   the  Line   of  Dol   Amroth  is
 found  on  a  page  attached  by  my  father  to  the   (as  I   believe,  contem-
 porary)  manuscript  T  4  of  the  Tale  of  Years,  followed  by  a list  of the
 dates  of  the  Princes,  those  from  the  second   to  the   eighteenth  without
 names.  This,  however,  is  much  later;  for  there  is  another  form   of  the
 same  list  written  on  the  back  of  a  college   document  from   the  earlier
 part of 1954, and this is plainly the earlier of the two (see p. 223).           
                                                                                 
                              The House of Dol Amroth.                            
                                                                                 
  Amroth  brother  of  Celeborn   flies  from   northern  Lorien   when  the      
  Balrog drives out the Dwarves about 1980 T.A.                                   
     Mithrellas,  one  of  the  companions  of  Nimrodel,  is  lost  in  the      
  woods  of   Belfalas,  and   is  harboured   by  Imrazor   the  Numenorean      
  [added   in   margin:   Imrazor   1950-2076],  who   takes  her   to  wife      
  (according  to  the  legends  and  traditions   of  Dol   Amroth);  though      
  after  a  few  years  she  vanishes,  whether  to wander  in the  woods or      
  seek  the  havens.  The  son  of  the  union  of  Mithrellas  and  Imrazor      
  received  the  elven-name  of  Galador;   from  him   the  lords   of  Dol      
  Amroth  traced  their  descent.  After  the  ending  of  the   kings  they      
  became  virtually  independent  princes,  ruling  over Belfalas,  but they      
  were  at  all  times  loyal  to  the Steward  as representing  the ancient      
                                                                                 
  crown.                                                                       
                                                                                 
       1.Galador        2004-2129              (125)                              
       2   ...          2060-2203              (143)                              
       3   ...          2120-2254              (134)                              
       4   ...          2172-2299              (127)                              
       5   ...          2225-2348              (123)                              
       6   ...          2274-2400              (126)                              
       7   ...          2324-2458              (134)                              
       8   ...          2373-2498              (125)                              
       9   ...          2418-2540              (122)                              
      10   ...          2463-2582              (119)                              
     11    ...          2505-2623              (118)                              
     12    ...          2546-2660              (114)                              
     13    ...          2588-2701              (113)                              
     14    ...          2627-2733              (106)                              
     15    ...          2671-+2746             (75) slain by Corsairs of Umbar

    16    ...           2709-f2799 ([90]) slain in battle                  
    17    ...           2746-2859 (113)                                    
    18    ...           2785-2899 (114)                                    
    19  Aglahad         2827-2932 (105)                                    
    20 Angelimir        2866-2977 (111)                                    
    21 Adrahil          2917-3010 (93)                                     
    22 Imrahil          2955-3054  (99)                                    
    23 Elphir           2987-(3087 =) F.A.57 (100)                         
    24 Alphros          3017-(3115 =) F.A.95 (98)                          
                                                                          
 In contrast to this carefully  written page,  the other  form of  this list
 (that  written  on  the  back  of  the  document  of  1954) has  a scrawled
 note at its head, the same as  that in  the text  just given  but extending
 only  to  the  words  'harboured  by  Imrazor  the  Numenorean,   who  weds
 her';  and  the  dates  are  written  in  pencil,  with  some  corrections.
 Imrazor is numbered 1, so that  Angelimir is  the twenty-first  prince; but
 this was  corrected. The  life-span of  the sixteenth  prince was  given as
 91 years instead of 90, and  my father  followed this  in the  second text;
 and where the second text has 'slain in battle' the first has  'Battle with
 Orcs'.                                                                    
  The   statement   here   that   Amroth   was   the  brother   of  Celeborn
 appears  to  be  unique  (for  other  accounts  of him  see The  History of
 Galadriel  and  Celeborn  in Unfinished  Tales:  but  all the  material con-
 cerning Amroth collected there  comes from  after, much  of it  long after,
 the  publication  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings).  On  both  forms  of  the
 present  text  the  words  were  struck out,  and on  the second  my father
 pencilled  'was  a  Sinda  from  Beleriand'.  With  the  time  of  Amroth's
 flight  from Lorien  cf. the  entry for  1981 in  Appendix B:  'The Dwarves
 flee  from  Moria.  Many  of  the  Silvan  Elves  of  Lorien   flee  south.
 Amroth and Nimrodel are lost'; also Unfinished Tales pp. 240, 245.        
  No  events  are  recorded  elsewhere  in  the  years  2746  and  2799 that
 cast light on the deaths in battle of the  fifteenth and  sixteenth Princes
 of Dol Amroth.                                                            
  The  dates  of  the  deaths  of Prince  Imrahil and  of Faramir  Prince of
 Ithilien  in  the  genealogy  redrawn  on  p.  221 (3054  = Fourth  Age 34,
 and  3103  =  F.A.83)  place  the  beginning  of  the  Fourth Age  in 3021;
 similarly in the list of the princes given  above the  dates of  the deaths
 of  Elphir  and  Alphros,  3087  and  3115,  and  equated  with  F.A.67 and
 95.  In  text  C of  The Heirs  of Elendil  the Fourth  Age began  in 3022,
 and in text B the Third Age ended in 3019 (see pp. 196, 211).             
  The   Princes   Aglahad,   Angelimir,   Elphir,   and  Alphros   are  only
 recorded in  these texts,  as also  are other  members of  the line  of Dol
 Amroth  in  the  genealogical  table,  Ivriniel,  Erchirion,  and Amrothos.
 Faramir's  son  Elboron  likewise only  appears in  this genealogy.  In him
 an  old  name  reappears:  Elboron  and  Elbereth  were the  original names
 of  the  young  sons  of  Dior  Thingol's  Heir  who  were murdered  by the

 followers of Maidros (IV.307, V.142). Later the sons of  Elrond were
 named Elboron and Elbereth, before they  became Elladan  and Elrohir
 (VIII.297, 301, 370).                                               
   The  further  development of  Appendix A  is postponed  to Chapter
 IX.                                                                

                                   VIII.                                 
                                                                        
                           THE TALE OF YEARS OF                          
                               THE THIRD AGE.                            
                                                                        
 The earliest text of the Tale of Years of the Third Age is a  brief manu-
 script apparently closely associated with the very early form of  that of
 the Second Age which I have  called T  2 (see  pp. 168-70);  and although
 they are separate texts and not continuous it is  convenient to  refer to
 this likewise as T 2.                                                   
  Though   subsequently   covered    with   somewhat    haphazard   accre-
 tions,  for  the  most  part  obviously  associated  with  work   on  the
 chronology of the Realms in Exile, it is possible to extricate  with fair
 certainty the text of T 2 as originally set down, and I  give it  in this
 form here.                                                              

                          Of the History of the Third Age           
                                  little is known.                  
                                                                   
 0 If we reckon from the death of Isildur.                          
 Years of Third Age.                                                
                                                                   
 1000-     Sauron   wakes   again,   and   enters   Mirkwood.  Estab-
           lishes a stronghold at Dol Dugul (1) and slowly grows.      
 c.1100.   Deagol  finds  the  One  Ring  and  is slain  by Smeagol.(2)
           Smeagol becomes Gollum.                                  
 c.1105.   Gollum enters eaves of Misty Mountains.                  
 c.1300.   The  people  of  Smeagol  grow  and  begin   to  multiply.
           They  cross   the  Misty   Mountains  and   journey  west-
           ward.  They  become  Hobbits.(3) Orcs  begin  to  reappear.
 c. 1500.  Hobbits settle at Bree.                                  
 c. 1600.  (S.R.1)(4) Marco   and   Cavallo   cross   the   Baranduin
           (Brandywine) and are given 'the Shire' to  live in  by the
           king   at   Northworthy (5) (Fornost).   'Shire-reckoning'
           begins.                                                  
 c.1900.   Last  'king  at  Northworthy'.  The  Dunedain  or  Rangers
           (last  of  the  Numenoreans  in the  North) wander  in the
           wild; but the heirs of the kings live at  Imladris (Riven-
           dell) with Elrond.                                       
 c. 2000.  The  line  of  the  Kings of  Gondor becomes  extinct with
           death of  Earnur.(6) The  Line of  the Stewards  begins with
           Mardil the Good Steward.                                 

 c.2500.   Elrond who had never before been wed, wedded Cele-                
           brian daughter of Galadriel of Lorien.(7) His children              
           were Elrohir and Elladan and a daughter Finduilas (8)             
           in whom the likeness of Luthien reappeared. These                 
           children are of men's stature but Elven-blood.(9)                 
 c. 2600.  Celebrian is slain by Orcs on the road over the Moun-             
           tains to visit Galadriel.                                         
 c. 2620.  Isengrim Took the First establishes the Took family in            
           the Shire.                                                        
 c.2890.   Bilbo born.                                                       
  2910.    Aragorn son of Arathorn heir of Isildur born.                     
   2940.   Bilbo goes on his adventures.                                     
   2950.   Sauron re-enters Mordor.                                          
   3001.   Bilbo's Farewell Party.                                           
   3018.   Frodo sets out.                                                   
                                                                            
 Whatever  may  have  been  the  reasons  for  the  selection  of  these par-
 ticular events, it is striking  that there  are no  entries referring  to the
 history of  Arnor and  Gondor except  those to  the last  king in  the North
 and  to  the last  king in  the South  (Earnur), with  the beginning  of the
 line  of  Stewards;  and  the  dates of  these entries  show that  this text
 preceded the earliest extant forms of The Heirs of Elendil.                 
                                                                            
   The  next  version  was  the manuscript  T 3  (see p.  172), which  in the
 part of it treating the Second Age, as I  have said,  was 'little  more than
 a copy  of T  2, with  a number  of entries  expanded'. This  is not  at all
 the case, however, with the Third  Age. It  was here  that my  father intro-
 duced  a  comprehensive  and  coherent  chronology  of  the  Age,   and  set
 his course, in this work that he called 'the Tale of Years', in  a direction
 remarkably  unlike  its  ultimate  appearance  in  Appendix  B  to  The Lord
 of  the Rings.  That it  was closely  associated with  The Heirs  of Elendil
 is  very   plain.  The   manuscript  was   covered  with   alterations,  ex-
 pansions  and  additions,  and  became  a  working   draft  for   the  major
 text T 4 which I have no doubt soon followed it.                            
   As  will  be  seen  subsequently, T  4 was  and remained  for a  long time
 the  form  of  the Tale  of Years  that my  father thought  appropriate, and
 was  indeed  proposed  to the  publishers in  1954. I  shall here  pass over
 the text T 3,  though with  some reference  to it  in the  notes at  the end
 of the chapter, and give that of T 4 in its entirety.                       
   This  is a  very clear  manuscript with  a notable  lack of  hesitation or
 second  thoughts.  That  it  was  intended  to  be  a final  and publishable
 text  is  shown  also by  the fact  that, when  my father  came to  the con-
 clusion  that  the  establishment  of  the  White  Council  was  placed four
 hundred  years  too  early,  he  rejected  two  pages  and  wrote   two  new
 ones in such a way that they fitted precisely into the original text. I give
 it here as it was written, say in the years 1949  - 50  (as I  believe), but

                                     
                                                                         
 with the text of the substituted pages, since it seems probable  that they
 were written  before the  manuscript was  completed, or  at any  rate soon
 after. It was a good deal altered later, chiefly  with respect  to certain
 matters:  the  migrations  of  the  Stoors;  the machinations  of Saruman;
 and the movements  of Gollum.  I have  not included  any revisions  in the
 text, but give an account of them at the end of the chapter (p. 250).
  The  opening  statement  concerning  the  Four  Ages,  and   the  entries
 for the Second Age, have been given on pp. 172-7.                        
                                                                         
                               The Third Age                              
                                                                         
 These  were  the  Fading  Years.  Of  this  Age  in its  beginnings little
 is  now  known,  save  for  the  traditions  of   the  realm   of  Gondor.
 For  a  thousand  years  and   more  the   Eldar  in   Middle-earth,  pro-
 tected   by  the   Three  Rings,   were  content   and  at   peace,  while
 Sauron  slept;  but   they  attempted   no  great   deeds,  and   made  no
 new  things  of  wonder,  living  mostly  in  memory   of  the   past.  In
 all  this  time  the  things  of old  were slowly  fading, and  new things
 were stirring, though few observed the signs.                            
  The   Dwarves   became   ever   more   secretive,   and   hid  themselves
 in  deep  places,  guarding  their  hoards   from  their   chief  enemies,
 the  dragons  and  the  Orcs.   One  by   one  their   ancient  treasuries
 were   plundered,   and   they   became   a   wandering    and   dwindling
 people.  In  Moria  the   Dwarves  of   the  race   of  Durin   long  held
 out,  but  this  people   once  numerous   steadily  waned,   until  their
 vast mansions became dark and empty.                                     
  The   might   and   lore   and   the   life-span   of   the   Numenoreans
 (or  Dunedain  as  they  were  called   by  the   Elves)  also   waned  as
 the   years   passed   and   their   blood   became   mingled   with  that
 of   lesser   Men.(10)   More  swift   was  the   waning  in   the  North-
 kingdom,   for   the   lands   of   Eriador,  as   that  region   was  now
 called,  became  colder   and  less   friendly  to   Men  in   that  time.
 There  the  Dunedain  became  ever   less.  After   the  days   of  Earen-
 dur (11) of  Arnor   the   North-kingdom   became   divided    into  petty
 realms,  and  the  Heirs of  Isildur of  the direct  line ruled  only over
 Arthedain   in  the   far  North-west.   In  Gondor   the  power   of  the
 kings  of  Anarion's  line  endured  longer,   and  their   sway  extended
 over  many  lands  of  Men;  but  there  was   little  coming   and  going
 between the realms except in times of need.                              
                                                                         
 1.  Ohtar  Isildur's  esquire  escapes  with  two  other  men         
     only  from  the  slaughter  of  the  Gladden   Fields.(12) He         
     brings  the  shards  of   Elendil's  sword,   Narsil,  which         
     Isildur had saved, and delivers it to Valandil Isildur's son         

          in Imladris. Valandil was a child, fourth son of Isildur.
          His brothers perished with their father.
  10.     Valandil Isildur's son becomes King of Arnor and dwells
          at Annuminas.
 420-30.  Ostohir King of Gondor rebuilds and enlarges
                                                                 
          Minas Anor.                                             
 490.     First invasion of Gondor by Easterlings.                
 500.     Tarostar defeats the Easterlings and takes the  name of
          Romendakil, East-slayer.                                
 541.     Romendakil slain in  battle with  a second  invasion of
          Easterlings, who are driven out by his son Turambar.
 861.     Death of  Earendur last  and tenth  king of  Arnor. The
          North-kingdom   becomes   divided    among   Earendur's
          sons. The  direct line  of the  eldest son,  Amlaith of
          Fornost,  rules  the realm  of Arthedain.  Annuminas is
          deserted. The other realms  were Cardolan  (where later
          was  Bree and  the Barrowdowns)  and Rhudaur,  north of
          the River Baranduin. From this time the  official names
          of the kings at Fornost were no  longer given  in High-
          elven form, but in Noldorin.  Amlaith and  his descend-
          ants maintained friendship  with the  Eldar, especially
          with Cirdan at the Havens.(13)                             
 c. 1000.  About this time the Istari,  that is  the Wise  Men or
                                                                 
          wizards, appeared in the  westlands of  Middle-earth. It
          was not  known whence  they came  (unless to  Cirdan and
          Elrond). But afterwards, when it  was revealed  that the
          shadow of Sauron had first  begun to  take new  shape at
          this same time, it was said by many  that they  came out
          of the Far West, and were messengers sent to contest the
          power of Sauron, if he should arise  again, and  to move
          all good folk and kindly creatures to resist him.       
           The  Wizards  appeared nonetheless  in the  likeness of
          Men, and resembled Men  in most  things, save  that they
          were  never  young  and  aged but  slowly, and  had many
          powers of  mind and  hand. For  long they  journeyed far
          and  wide  among  Elves and  Men and  all speaking-folk,
          and held converse also with beasts  and birds.  They did
          not reveal  their true  names, but  used those  that the
          peoples  of  Middle-earth  gave to  them, and  they were
          many.  The chief  of this  order were  the two  whom the
          Eldar  called  Mithrandir  and Curunir,  but Men  in the
          North  named   Gandalf  and   Saruman.  Of   them  Mith-

 randir  was  closest  in  counsel  with  the  Eldar  and  with
 Elrond;  he   wandered  far   in  the   North  and   West  and
 never  made  for  himself  any  lasting  abode.   But  Curunir
 journeyed  often  far  into  the  East,  and when  he returned
 he dwelt at Orthanc in the Ring of Isengard.(14)             
           About this time also the  Periannath, of  whom there
 are  no  earlier  accounts  among  Elves  or  Men,  are  first
 mentioned  in  ancient  tales.  These  were  a  strange  small
 people,  called   by  Men (15) Halflings,  but   by  themselves
 (later  in  the  west  of Eriador)  Hobbits. They  are thought
 to  have  long  dwelt  in  Greenwood  the  Great  or  near its
 western  eaves,  and  in  the  vale of  the upper  Anduin. But
 at  this  time  they  began  to move  westward over  the Misty
 Mountains  into  Eriador.  It  is  said  that they  moved from
 their  earlier  dwellings  because   Men  increased   much  at
 that   time;  and   because  a   shadow  fell   on  Greenwood,
 and  it  became  darkened,  and   was  called   Mirkwood,  for
 an evil  spirit stirred  there.(16) The Harfoots were  the first
 clan       of       Hobbits      to       enter   Eriador.(17)
c.1100.  It becomes known to the Wise  (being the  chieftains of
 the  Eldar  and  the  Istari)  that an  evil power  had arisen
 in  Mirkwood  and   had  established   a  stronghold   on  the
 hill  of  Dol  Guldur  in  the  southern  forest.  But  it was
 still some time  before they  knew for  certain that  this was
 the  shadow  of  Sauron   himself  and   that  he   was  awake
 again.                                                        
c.1150.  The Fallohides, a clan of the Periannath, crossed into
 Eriador  and  came  down  from  the  North  along   the  River
 Hoarwell.  About  the  same  time  the  Stoors,  another clan,
 came   over  the   Redhorn  Pass   and  moved   south  towards
 Dunland.(18)                                                     
c.1200.  Under  Atanatar  the   Glorious  Gondor   reaches  the
 height  of  its  power,   and  its   sway  extends   from  the
 Greyflood  in  the West  to the  Sea of  Rhunaer in  the East,
 and  from  the  south-eaves  of  Mirkwood  in  the   North  to
 the  land  of  the  Haradrim  in   the  South.   The  Haradrim
 acknowledge    the   overlordship    of   Gondor    for   many
 years.                                                        
c.1300.  The  western  Periannath,  now   for  the   most  part
 mingled   together,   move   westward   from  the   region  of
 Amon   Sul   (Weathertop),   and    begin   to    make   small
 settlements  among  the  remnants  of   the  peoples   of  the

          old  North-kingdom.  Their  chief  settlement  was  on and
          about the Hill of Bree.                                    
 c.1350.  Evil things begin to multiply again. Orcs increase
                                                                    
          rapidly  and  delve  in  the  Misty Mountains,  and attack
          the  Dwarves. The  Ringwraiths stir  once more.  The chief
          of  these,  the wielders  of the  Nine Rings,  becomes the
          Witch-king  of  the realm  of Angmar  in the  North beyond
          Arnor,  and  makes war  on the  remnants of  the Dunedain.
 1356.    Argeleb king at Fornost is slain in battle with the realms
          of  Cardolan  and  Rhudaur,  which  resist  his  claim  to
          overlordship.                                              
 c.1400.   About  this  time,  owing  to  dissensions  and  to  the
          unfriendliness of the lands and clime of  eastern Eriador,
          some  of  the  Stoors  return  to  Wilderland   and  dwell
          beside  the  R.  Gladden  that  flows  into  Anduin.  They
          become  a  riverside  people, fishers  and users  of small
          boats.  Others  of  the  Stoors  move  north and  west and
          join with the Harfoots and Fallohides.                     
 1409.    The  Witch-king of  Angmar taking  advantage of  the civil
          war  among  the  Dunedain  comes  out  of  the  North  and
          overwhelms  the  petty  realms  of  Cardolan  and  Rhudaur
          and  destroys  the  remnants   of  the   Numenoreans  that
          dwelt  there.  Cardolan is  forsaken. The  deserted mounds
          of  Cardolan  become  filled with  deadly spirits;  but in
          Rhudaur for long  there dwelt  an evil  people out  of the
          North,  much given  to sorcery.  The Men  of Bree  and the
          Periannath  of  the  same  region maintain  their indepen-
          dence.                                                     
            In this year 1409 King  Arveleg I  of Fornost  was slain
          in battle by the Witch-king, but the Heirs of Isildur still
          hold  out  at  Fornost  with aid  from Lindon.  Arveleg is
          succeeded by Araphor.                                      
            In  this  war the  Palantir of  Amon Sul  was destroyed.
          Help  did  not  come  from  the  South-kingdom  for  their
          peace  also  was  troubled  by  dissensions.  King Valakar
          took to wife the daughter of an alien king of  the North-
          men  of  Anduin,  with  whom  Gondor  had  sought alliance
          and  aid in  their war  with the  Easterlings. No  king or
          heir  to  the  throne  of  Gondor had  before done  such a
          thing.                                                     
 1432.    War of the Kin-strife breaks out  in Gondor.  Valakar dies
          and the succession of his son, half of alien blood, is con-

       tested  by  other  descendants  of Atanatar  the Glorious.
       The  war  lasts  till  1447. Kastamir  who had  driven out
       Valakar's son Eldakar  was ejected  by Eldakar  and slain.
       The  sons  of  Kastamir  flee  from  Gondor  and set  up a
       pirate  fortress  at  Umbar,  and remain  at war  with the
       king.                                                     
 1601. (S.R.1)(19) A host of Periannath migrates from Bree west-
                                                                
       ward,  and  crosses  the  R.  Baranduin  (Brandywine). The
       land  beyond,  between  the  Baranduin  and  Emyn  Beraid,
       had  been  a  demesne of  the Kings  of Arnor,  where they
       had  both  chases  and  rich  farms;  but  they  were  now
       untended  and  falling into  wilderness. The  king Argeleb
       II therefore allowed the Periannath  to settle  there, for
       they   were   good  husbandmen.(20) They became  his  sub-
       jects  in name  but were  virtually independent  and ruled
       by  their own  chieftains. Their  numbers were  swelled by
       Stoors  that  came  up from  southern Eriador  and entered
       the  land  from  the south  and dwelt  mostly near  to the
       Baranduin. This  land the  Periannath or  Halflings called
       'The Shire'. Shire-reckoning begins  with the  crossing of
       the Baranduin in this year.                               
 1634. The  Corsairs  of  Umbar  slew  King Minardil  and ravaged
       Pelargir.  They  were  led  by  Angomaite  and Sangahyanda
       grandsons of Kastamir.(21)                                
 1636. A  great  plague  comes  out of  the East,  and devastates
       Gondor.  King  Telemnar  and  all  his children  died. The
       White Tree  of Isildur  in Minas  Anor withered  and died.
       The power of Gondor dwindles.                             
 1640. King  Tarondor  removed  the king's  house to  Minas Anor.
       He  planted  there  again  a seedling  of the  White Tree.
       Osgiliath  becomes  deserted  owing  to  the   fewness  of
       the people, and  begins to  fall into  ruin. The  watch on
       Mordor  is  relaxed,  and  the  fortresses  at  the passes
       become empty.                                             
          The  plague spreads  north and  west, and  wide regions
       of  Eriador  become  desolate.  But  the virulence  of the
       plague decreases as it passes west  and the  Periannath in
       the Shire suffer little loss.(22)                         
                                                                
 c.1700. Mordor  being now  left unguarded  evil things  enter in
       again  and  take  up  their   abode  there   secretly.  Communi-
       cation   between   the   North   and   South   kingdoms   ceases
       for a long while.                                               

 1850. Assault  of  the Wainriders  out of  the East  upon Gondor.
       War lasts for many years.                                 
 1900. Kalimehtar  of  Gondor  builds  the  White  Tower  in Minas
       Anor.                                                     
 1940. Messengers  pass  between  the  two  kingdoms,  since  both
       are in peril: the South  from the  Wainriders of  the East,
       and   the   North   from   renewed   attacks   of   Angmar.
       Arvedui  heir  of  Araphant of  Arthedain weds  Firiel, the
       daughter of King Ondohir of Gondor.                       
 1944. Ondohir  with  both  his sons,  Faramir and  Artamir, slain
       in battle against a  great alliance  of the  Wainriders and
       the  Men  of  Harad.  Arvedui  of  the  North   claims  the
       southern  crown,  both  on  his  wife's  behalf and  on his
       own as representing 'the elder line of Isildur'.  The claim
       is  refused  by  Gondor  and  lapses  with  the   death  of
       Arvedui;  but  all  his  descendants,  though  too  weak to
       press their claim, continue to maintain that they  are also
       by  rights  kings  of  Gondor,  being  descended  both from
       Isildur and Anarion (through Firiel).                     
 1960. Pelendur  the  king's  steward  for  a  time  ruled Gondor,
       but after a while  Earnil, descendant  of a  previous king,
       receives the crown.(23)                                   
 1974. End   of   the   North-kingdom.  The   Witch-king  destroys
       Fornost,  lays the  land waste,  and scatters  the remnants
       of the Dunedain. Arvedui flies  north taking  the Palantiri
       (the two that  remain). He  attempts to  escape by  ship to
       Gondor from Forochel, but is  lost at  sea, and  the Stones
       disappear. His sons take refuge with Cirdan.(24)          
 1975. Cirdan  of  Lune  and  Elrond,  with  belated help  sent by
       sea  from  King  Earnil, defeat  Angmar. The  Witch-king is
       overthrown  and  his  realm destroyed.  He flies  south and
       comes at last to Mordor.                                  
 1976. Aranarth  son  of  Arvedui  takes  refuge  with  Elrond  at
       Imladris. He  abandons the  title of  'king', since  he now
       has  no  people,  but  the   chieftains  of   the  Dunedain
       descended  from  him  continue  to  bear  names   with  the
       royal prefix Ar, Ara.  The Periannath  sent archers  to the
       Battle of Fornost, but after  the end  of the  kingdom they
       claim the Shire as their own.  They elect  a Thain  to take
       the  place  of the king.(25) According to  their  tradition
       the  first  independent  Shire-thain was  one Bucca  of the
       Marish,  from  whom  later   the  Oldbuck   family  claimed

         descent. The beginning of his office dated  from S.R.379.
 1980-2000. The Witch-king gathers the other  eight Ring-
         wraiths to him and they issue from Mordor, and  folk flee
         from Ithilien in terror. The Ulairi captured  Minas Ithil
         and made it their  stronghold, from  which they  were not
         again expelled while the Third  Age lasted.  The Palantir
         of  Minas  Ithil  is  captured.  Minas Ithil  is re-named
         Minas  Morgul  (Tower  of  Sorcery),  and  Minas  Anor is
         called Minas Tirith (the Tower of Guard).                
            About this time also other evil things were  roused. A
         terror  of  the  Elder  Days,  a Balrog  of Thangorodrim,
         appeared  in  Moria.  Some say  that the  Dwarves delving
         too deep in their search for mithril or  true-silver dis-
         turbed this evil creature  from its  sleep far  under the
         world. The remnants of Durin's folk are slain by the Bal-
         rog  or  driven  out  of  Moria.  Many  of  them wandered
         into the far North, as far as the  Grey Mountains  or the
         Iron Hills.                                              
                                                                 
 c.2000.   Curunir (Saruman), returning out of the East, takes up
                                                                 
          his  abode  in  the  Tower  of  Orthanc  in  the  Ring  of  Isen-
          gard.(26) This had   been  an   ancient  stronghold   of  Gondor,
          guarding   their   north-west   frontier,   but    the   northern
          parts   of   the   realm   were  now   largely  empty   and  King
          Earnil  was  glad  to  have  the  aid  of  Curunir   against  the
          Ringwraiths, and gave Isengard to him for his own.               
            About this time it  is thought  that Deagol  the Stoor
          found  the  Ring  in  Anduin  near   the  Gladden   Fields  where
          Isildur  was   slain  as   he  swam.   Deagol  was   murdered  by
          his      friend     Smeagol,      who     took      the     Ring.
 c.2010?  Smeagol,  now  called  Gollum,  is cast  out by  his own
                                                                 
         people,  and hides  in the  Misty Mountains.  He vanishes
         out of all knowledge taking the Ring with him.(27)       
 2043.   Death of King Earnil. His  son Earnur  (the Last  King of
         Gondor  in that  Age) comes  to the  throne. The  Lord of
         the Ringwraiths challenged him to battle.                
 2050.   Against  the counsel  of Mardil  his Steward  King Earnur
         accepts the renewed challenge  of the  Lord of  Morgul to
         single combat.  He rides  to the  gates of  Minas Morgul,
         but he was  betrayed and  taken and  never again  seen by
         mortal  men. Earnur  left no  children. No  male descend-
         ants (of  clear title  or nearly  pure blood)  of Anarion
         could  be  discovered. Mardil  the good  Steward governed

       the realm, nominally 'until the King's return'. For  a long
       time  previously  the  stewardship  had  usually  been held
       by  a  member  of  the  same  family  (one  of  nearly pure
       Numenorean  descent).  It  now  became hereditary  in that
       family like a kingship. But each  Steward took  office with
       the  formula 'to  hold the  rule and  rod until  the King's
       return'; and  they did  not take  official names  of Quenya
       or   High-elven   form.   Their   names   were   mostly  of
       Noldorin  kind,  that  tongue  being  still  used  by those
       descended from the Elf-friends of Numenor.                
          After  the  disappearance  of Earnur  and the  ending of
       the  kings  the  White  Tree seldom  again bore  fruit, and
       each year its blossom grew less as it slowly aged.        
 2060. The fear  of the  Ringwraiths, or  Ulairi, spreads  far and
       wide.  The  Elves  deem  that  the Power  in Dol  Guldur is
       one of these; but in the hearts of  Elrond and  Gandalf the
       fear  grows  that  the  darkness  in Mirkwood  should prove
       to be the shadow of Sauron himself awakening.(28)         
 2063. Gandalf goes  alone to  Dol Guldur  in secret,  to discover
       the  truth  concerning  the Sorcerer.  But the  Sorcerer is
       aware  of  him;  and being  not yet  grown to  great power,
       he  fears  the  eyes of  Gandalf, and  the strength  of the
       Wise,  and  he  deserts Dol  Guldur and  hides in  the East
       again for a while.                                        
          Here begins a time  that is  called the  Watchful Peace.
       For there was a long quiet, but  no certainty.  During that
       time  the  Ringwraiths  never  again  appeared  in  visible
       shape  beyond  the  walls  of  Minas  Morgul; but  the Wise
       were  in  doubt  what   should  yet   come  to   pass,  and
       Gandalf  made   great  journeys   to  discover   the  plans
       and devices of their enemies.                             
 2300. Elrond,   who   had   remained   unwed   through   all  his
       long  years,  now  took  to  wife  Celebrian,  daughter  of
       Galadriel  and  Celeborn  of  Lorien.  His   children  were
       the  twin   brethren,  Elladan   and  Elrohir,   and  Arwen
       Undomiel,  the  fairest  of  all the  maidens of  the Third
       Age,  in  whom  the  likeness  of  Luthien  her  foremother
       returned  to  Middle-earth.   These  children   were  three
       parts of  Elven-race, but  the doom  spoken at  their birth
       was that  they should  live even  as the  Elves so  long as
       their father remained in Middle-earth;  but if  he departed
       they should have then the  choice either  to pass  over the

        Sea  with  him,  or  to  become  mortal,  if   they  remained
        behind.                                                     
 2340.  Isumbras  I,  head  of   the  Took   family  in   the  Shire,
        becomes thirteenth Thain, the first of the Took line.(29)   
        After  his  day the  office became  hereditary in  the family
        of  the  Tooks  of  the  Great  Smials.  About this  time the
        Oldbucks   occupied   the   Buckland,   east  of   the  River
        Brandywine and on the edge of the Old Forest.               
 2349.  Birth   of   Elladan   and  Elrohir,   sons  of   Elrond,  in
        Imladris.(30)                                               
 2349.  Birth of Arwen Undomiel.                                    
 2460.  After  a  space  of  nearly four  hundred years  the Watchful
        Peace  ends,  and  the  powers  of   evil  move   again.  The
        Sorcerer  returns  to  Dol  Guldur  with  increased strength,
        and gathers all evil things under his rule.                 
 2463.  The  White  Council  is  formed  to  unite  and   direct  the
        forces  of  the West,  in resistance  to the  shadow. Curunir
        (or  Saruman  the  White)  is chosen  to be  the head  of the
        Council,  since  he  has  studied  all the  arts and  ways of
        Sauron  and  his  servants most  deeply. Galadriel  of Lorien
        wishes  Gandalf  to  be  made  chief,  but he  refuses. Saru-
        man  begins  his  study  of  the  Rings  of  Power  and their
        uses and history.                                           
 2475.  The   attack   upon   Gondor   is   begun   again   with  new
        vigour, in the days  of Denethor  I, son  of Dior,(31) the tenth
        Steward.  His  son  Boromir  defeats  the  enemy  before East
        Osgiliath, but Osgiliath is finally ruined  in this  war, and
        the  ancient  and  marvellous  stone-bridge  is  broken.  The
        Men  of  Gondor  still  maintain  their  hold  upon Ithilien,
        but little by little its people desert it and pass  west over
        Anduin to the valleys of the White Mountains.               
                                                                   
 2480. onwards Orcs again multiply in secret and occupy many         
                                                                   
        deep  places   (especially  those   anciently  made   by  the
        Dwarves)   in   the   Misty  Mountains.   They  do   this  so
        stealthily that none are aware of it,  until they  have great
        forces  hidden  and  are  ready  to bar  all the  passes from
        Eriador  into  Anduin's  vales,  according  to  the  plan  of
        their  master  in Dol  Guldur. Orcs  and Trolls  occupy parts
        of the now empty Mines of Moria.                            
 2509.  Celebrian,  wife  of  Elrond,  journeys  to  Lorien  to visit
        Galadriel,  her  mother;  but  she  is taken  by Orcs  in the
        passes  of  the  mountains.  She  is  rescued  by  Elrond and

       his  sons,  but  after  fear  and  torment  she is  no longer
       willing to  remain in  Middle-earth, and  she departs  to the
       Grey Havens and sails over Sea.(32)                         
 2510. A great host of Orcs, with Easterlings as allies,  assail the
       northern  borders  of  Gondor,  and   occupy  a   great  part
       of  Calenardon.  Gondor  sends  for  help.  Eorl   the  Young
       leads  his  people, the  Eotheod or Rohirrim, out  of  the
       North  from  the  sources of  Anduin, and  rides to  the help
       of  Cirion,  Steward  of  Gondor.  With  his  aid  the  great
       victory  of  the  Field  of  Celebrant  is  won.  Elladan and
       Elrohir rode also in that  battle. From  that time  forth the
       brethren  never  cease  from  war   with  the   Orcs  because
       of Celebrian. Eorl  and his  people are  given the  plains of
       Calenardon  'to  dwell  in,  and  that  land  is  now  called
       Rochann  (Rohan).  There  the  Rohirrim  live  as   free  men
       under  their  own  kings,  but  in  perpetual  alliance  with
       Minas Tirith.                                               
 2569. The  Golden  Hall  of  Meduseld  is  built  by  Brego  son of
       Eorl.                                                       
 2570. Baldor  son  of  Brego  takes a  rash vow  to enter  the For-
       bidden Door in Dunharrow, and is never seen again.          
 2590. Thror  the  Dwarf  (of  Durin's  race)  founds  the  realm of
       Erebor   (the   Lonely    Mountain),   and    becomes   'King
       under  the  Mountain'.(33) He  lives  in  friendship   with  the
       Men of Dale, who are nearly akin to the Rohirrim.           
 2620. Isengrim  II,  tenth  Thain  of  the  Took-line, born  in the
       Shire.                                                      
 2698. Ecthelion  I,  Steward  of Gondor,  repairs and  rebuilds the
                                                                  
       White Tower of Minas Tirith, afterwards often called        
       the Tower of Ecthelion.(34)                                 
 2740- Wars with the Orcs break out again.                   
 2747. Orcs passing far to the north raid  down into  Eriador. A
       large force  invades the  Shire. Bandobras  Took, second
       son of Isumbras III, defeats them at  the Battle  of the
       Greenfields in the Northfarthing and slays the Orc-chief
       Golfimbul.  This was  the last  battle in  which Hobbits
       (Periannath)  were engaged  until the  end of  the Third
       Age.                                                        
                                                                  
 2757. Rohan is overrun by Orcs and Easterlings. At the same       
       time Gondor is attacked by the Corsairs of Umbar.           
                                                                  
 2758-9. The Long Winter. Helm of Rohan takes refuge from     
       his enemies in Helm's Deep in the White Mountains.          

 2763. New  line  of  kings  in  Rohan  is  begun   with  Frealaf
       Hildeson (sister-son of  Helm). The  second row  of King's
       Mounds is begun.                                         
 2765. Smaug  the  Dragon  descends  on  Erebor and  destroys the
       realm  of Thror  the Dwarf,  and lays  waste the  town and
       lordship of  Dale. Thror  and his  son Thrain  escape with
       a few only of their people.                              
 2766. Thror   the   Dwarf,  descendant   of  Durin,   being  now
       homeless  and  robbed  of  his  treasure,   ventures  into
       Moria, but  is slain  by an  Orc in  the dark.  Thrain and
       Thorin escape. In vengeance for Thror and  in hope  of re-
       establishing a  kingdom the  scattered Dwarves  of Durin's
       race  gather together  out of  the North  and make  war on
       the  Orcs  of  the  Misty  Mountains.   The  War   of  the
       Dwarves  and  Orcs  was  long  and  terrible   and  fought
       largely in the dark in deep places.                      
 2769. The  War  of  Orcs  and  Dwarves  comes  to  an  end  in a
       great battle before the East-gate of Moria: the  Battle of
       the  Dimrill  Dale  (Nanduhirion).  The  Orcs  were almost
       annihilated,  and  Moria  is  once  more emptied,  but the
       Dwarves also lost  very heavily  and were  too few  at the
       end  to  reoccupy Moria  or face  the hidden  terror. Dain
       returns to the Iron  Hills; but  Thrain and  Thorin become
       wanderers.(35)                                           
 2790. Birth  of  Gerontius  Took:  later  the  fourteenth Thain,(36)
       and  known  as  'the Old  Took' because  of his  great age
       (he lived to be 130 years old).                          
 2850. Gandalf  visits  Dol  Guldur  again  to discover  the pur-
       poses of  the Sorcerer.  He finds  there Thrain  the Dwarf
       son  of  Thror  and receives  from him  the secret  key of
       Erebor. Thrain  had come  thither seeking  for one  of the
       Seven  Rings,.  but he  dies in  Dol Guldur.(37) Gandalf dis-
       covers  beyond  doubt  that  the  Sorcerer  is  none other
       than Sauron himself, and  that he  is gathering  again all
       the Rings of Power, and seeking to learn  the fate  of the
       One, and the dwelling of Isildur's Heirs.                
 2851. Gandalf  urges  the  White Council  to assail  Dol Guldur,
       but  he  is overruled  by Saruman.  For Saruman  has begun
       to lust for power and desires himself to discover  the One
       Ring. He thinks that it will come to light  again, seeking
       its Master, if Sauron is let be for a  while. He  does not
       reveal his  thought to  the Council,  but feigns  that his

         studies have led  him to  believe that  the Ring  has been
         rolled  down Anduin  and into  the deeps  of the  Sea. But
         Saruman  himself  keeps  a  watch  upon  Anduin   and  the
         Gladden Fields and he fortifies Isengard.                
 2872.   Belecthor II,  twenty-first Steward  of Gondor, dies.(38) The
         White Tree dies in the court of Minas Tirith.  No seedling
         can be found. The dead tree is left standing in  the court
         under the White Tower.                                   
 c.2880.   Ithilien becomes desolate and  untilled and  the remnant
         of  its  people  remove  west  over  Anduin  to Lossarnach
         and  Lebennin.  But  the  Men of  Minas Tirith  still hold
         Ithilien  as  a border  country and  patrol it;  they keep
         forces in the ruins of Osgiliath and  in secret  places in
         Ithilien.(39)                                            
 2885.   In  the  days  of  Turin  II,  twenty-third  Steward,  the
         Haradrim   attack  Gondor   and  ravage   South  Ithilien.
         The  Rohirrim  send  help.  Folcred  and  Fastred  sons of
         King Folcwine of Rohan fall  in battle  in the  service of
         Gondor.                                                  
 2891.   Bilbo born in the Shire (his mother was a daughter  of the
         Old Took).                                               
 2911.   The Fell Winter. White  Wolves invade  the Shire  over the
         frozen   Brandywine   River.   About  this   time  Saruman
         discovers that  Sauron's servants  are also  searching the
         Great  River  near  the  Gladden  Fields.  He  knows  then
         that  Sauron  has  learned  the  manner  of  Isildur's end
         (maybe  from  Orcs),  and  he is  afraid. He  withdraws to
         Isengard  and  fortifies it,  but he  says nothing  to the
         Council.                                                 
 2920.   Death of Gerontius Took at age of 130.                   
 2929.   Arathorn,  son  of  Arador  chieftain  of   the  Dunedain,
         weds Gilrain daughter of Dirhoel [> Dirhael].            
 2930.   Arador slain by Trolls.                                  
 2931.   Aragorn son of Arathorn born.                            
 2933.   Arathorn  II  chief  of  the Dunedain  slain by  Orcs when
         riding with Elladan  and Elrohir.  His infant  son Aragorn
         is fostered by Elrond. Elrond keeps  the heirlooms  of his
         father, but his ancestry  is kept  secret, since  the Wise
         know that Sauron is seeking for the Heir of Isildur.     
 2940.   Thorin  Oakenshield  the  Dwarf,  son  of  Thrain,  son of
         Thror of Erebor visits Bilbo in the  Shire in  the company
         of Gandalf. Bilbo sets out for Dale  with Gandalf  and the

       Dwarves.    Bilbo    meets   Smeagol-Gollum    and   becomes
       possessed  of  the  Ring; but  it is  not guessed  what Ring
       this is.                                                   
          Meeting  of  the  White  Council.  Saruman, since  he now
       wishes  to prevent  the Sorcerer  from searching  the River,
       agrees  to  an  attack  on  Dol  Guldur.  The   Sorcerer  is
       driven  out  of  Mirkwood.  The  Forest  for a  time becomes
       wholesome again. But  the Sorcerer  flies east,  and returns
       in secret.                                                 
          Battle of the Five  Armies fought  in Dale.  Thranduil of
       Mirkwood,   the   Men   of   Esgaroth;   and   the  Dwarves,
       with  the  help  of  the  Eagles  of  the  Misty  Mountains,
       defeat  a  great  host  of  Orcs.  Bard  of  Esgaroth  slays
       Smaug  the  Dragon.  Thorin  Oakenshield  dies   of  wounds.
       Dain  of  the  Iron  Hills  re-enters  Erebor   and  becomes
       'King under the Mountain'.                                 
 2941. Bilbo returns to the Shire with a share  of the  treasure of
       Smaug, and the Ring.                                       
 2948. Theoden  son  of  Thengel king  of the  Rohirrim is  born in
       Rohan.                                                     
 2953. Aragorn   returns   from   errantry   in   the   company  of
       Elladan  and  Elrohir.  Elrond reveals  to him  his ancestry
       and destiny and delivers to  him the  Shards of  Narsil, the
       Sword of Elendil. Elrond foretells that  in his  time either
       the  last  remnant  of  Numenor  shall  pass  away,  or  the
       kingdoms   of  Arnor   and  Gondor   shall  be   united  and
       renewed.  He bids  Aragorn prepare  for a  hard life  of war
       and wandering.                                             
          Arwen  Undomiel  had  now   long  dwelt   with  Galadriel
       in Lorien, but she desired to see her father again,  and her
       brethren,  Elladan  and  Elrohir,  brought her  to Imladris.
       On  the  day  in  which  his  ancestry  was revealed  to him
       Aragorn  met  her  at  unawares walking  under the  trees in
       Rivendell,  and  so began  to love  her. Elrond  is grieved,
       for he foresees  the choice  that will  lie before  her; and
       says that at least Aragorn must wait until he  has fulfilled
       his  task.  He  reveals  that as  one of  the pure  blood of
       Numenor,  born  to  a  high  purpose,  Aragorn  will  have a
       long  life-span.  Aragorn  says  farewell  to  Rivendell and
       goes out into the world.                                   
          At  this  time  Sauron,  having  gathered   fresh  power,
       declares   himself  and   his  true   name  again,   and  he

        re-enters  Mordor  which  the  Ringwraiths  have prepared
        for  him,  and  rebuilds Barad-dur.  This had  never been
        wholly  destroyed,  and  its  foundations  were  unmoved;
        for they  were made  by the  Power of  the One  Ring. But
        Mithrandir  (Gandalf)  journeys far  and wide  to counter
        the plans of  Sauron and  prepare Elves  and Men  for war
        against the Lord of Barad-dur.                          
 2954.  Orodruin   (Mount  Doom),   long  dormant,   bursts  into
        smoke and flame again, and fear falls on Minas Tirith.
 2956.  Aragorn  meets  Gandalf,   and  their   great  friendship
        begins. Aragorn undertakes great journeys, even  far into
        the East and deep into the South, exploring  the purposes
        of  Sauron  and   all  his   movements.  As   an  unknown
        warrior he fights in the service of Gondor and  of Rohan.
        Because of his high race, the  noblest among  mortal men,
        his  fostering  by  Elrond, and  his learning  from Mith-
        randir, and his many  deeds and  journeys he  becomes the
        most hardy of Men, both Elven-wise  and skilled  in craft
        and lore.                                               
 2980.  Aragorn returning on a time to  Rivendell from  perils on
        the borders of  Mordor passes  through Lorien,  and there
        again  meets  Arwen  Undomiel.  He  is  now a  mighty man
        and she returns his love. They plight their troth  on the
        hill  of  Cerin  Amroth in  Lorien. Theoden  becomes King
        of Rohan.                                               
 2984.  Denethor   II   becomes   the  twenty-sixth   Steward  of
        Gondor  on  the  death  of  his  father Ecthelion  II. He
        married (late) Finduilas daughter  of Adrahil,  Prince of
        Dol  Amroth.  His  elder  son Boromir  was born  in 2978.
        His  younger  son  Faramir  was  born  in 2983.  His wife
        Finduilas died untimely in 2987.                        
 2989.  In the spring of this year Balin the  Dwarf with  Oin and
        Ori  and  other  folk  of Erebor  went south  and entered
        Moria.                                                  
 2993.  Eomer  Eomundsson  born  in   Rohan.  His   mother  was
        Theodwyn      youngest      sister       of      Theoden.
 2996.  Eowyn sister of Eomer born.                             
                                                               
 c.3000.  onwards   The   Shadow  of   Mordor  creeps   over  the
        lands,  and  the hearts  of all  the folk  in the  Westlands are
        darkened.   About  this   time  it   is  thought   that  Saruman
        dared  to  use  the  Palantir  of  Orthanc,  but   was  ensnared
        thus   by   Sauron   who   had  possession   of  the   Stone  of

       Minas  Ithil  (captured  long before  by the  Ulairi). Saru-
       man  becomes  a  full  traitor  to   the  Council   and  his
       friends;  but still  schemes to  acquire power  for himself,
       and  searches all  the more  eagerly for  the One  Ring. His
       thought  turns  towards Bilbo  and the  Shire, and  he spies
       on that land.                                              
 3001. Bilbo  gives  a  farewell  feast  and  banquet  in  Hobbiton
       and  vanishes  from  the  Shire. He  goes, after  some jour-
       neying and a visit to Erebor, back  in secret  to Rivendell,
       and there is given a home  by Elrond.  Gandalf at  last also
       suspects  the  nature  of  the Ring  of Gollum,  which Bilbo
       has handed on to his kinsman and heir, Frodo.              
 3002. Gandalf  begins  to  explore  the  history of  Bilbo's Ring,
       and  with  the  aid   of  Aragorn   searches  for   news  of
       Gollum.                                                    
 3004. Gandalf visits the Shire again,  and continues  to do  so at
       intervals, to observe Frodo, for some years.               
 3009. Last  visit  of  Gandalf  to  Frodo  before  the   end.  The
       hunt  for  Gollum begins.  Aragorn goes  to the  confines of
       Mordor.                                                    
 3016. Elrond  sends  for  Arwen  and  she  returns  to  Rivendell;
       for  the  Misty  Mountains and  all lands  east of  them are
       becoming full of peril and threat of war.                  
 3018. Gandalf  visits  Frodo and  reveals the  true nature  of the
       Ring  that  he  possesses.  Frodo  decides  to fly  from the
       Shire to Rivendell, but will wait till the autumn,  or until
       Gandalf   returns.  Saruman   the  traitor   decoys  Gandalf
       and  takes  him  prisoner  in  Isengard (shortly  after mid-
       summer).   The   Ringwraiths   appear   again.   At  midsum-
       mer   Sauron   makes   war   on   Gondor.   The   Witch-king
       appears  again  in  person  as  the  Black  Captain  of  the
       hosts  of  Mordor.  The  sons  of  Denethor  hold   off  the
       attack.  Words in  a dream  bid Denethor  to seek  for coun-
       sel in Imladris where Isildur's Bane  shall be  revealed and
       strength  greater  than  that  of  Morgul  shall  be  found.
       Boromir sets out for Imladris from Minas Tirith.           
         Gandalf  is  aware  of  the  coming  of  the  Ringwraiths,
       but  being  imprisoned  in   Orthanc  cannot   send  warning
       or help to Frodo.                                          
         Frodo  leaves  the  Shire  in  autumn, but  barely escapes
       the  Ringwraiths  that  in  the shape  of Black  Riders have
       come  north  to  hunt  for  the  Ring.  Assisted  by Aragorn

 he  and  his  companions  reach  Rivendell  at the  end of
 October.  At  the  same  time  Boromir arrives  there, and
 also  messengers  from  Erebor (Gloin  and his  son Gimli)
 and  from  Thranduil  of   Mirkwood  (his   son  Legolas).
 Gandalf escapes from Isengard and reaches Rivendell.     
    A great council is held in the House  of Elrond.  It is
 resolved to attempt the destruction of  the Ring  by send-
 ing it to the fire of Orodruin in Sauron's  despite. Frodo
 the Halfling accepts the perilous office of Ringbearer.
    At the end of the year  the Company  of the  Ring ('The
 Nine Walkers') leave Rivendell.                          
3019.   The War of the  Ring begins,  between Sauron  and his
 creatures, and their allies in the  East and  South (among
 all Men that  hate the  name of  Gondor), and  the peoples
 of  the Westlands.  Saruman plays  a treacherous  part and
 attacks Rohan.  Theodred son  of Theoden  is slain  in war
 with Saruman.  Boromir son  of Denethor  is slain  by Orcs
 near  the  Falls of  Rauros. Minas  Tirith is  besieged by
 great  forces  led  by  the Black  Captain, and  is partly
 burnt.  Denethor  slays himself  in despair.  The Rohirrim
 by  a great  ride break  the siege,  but Theoden  is slain
 by  the  Witch-king.  The  Battle  of the  Pelennor Fields
 followed, of which the  full tale  is told  elsewhere. The
 greatest  deed  of  that  day  was   the  deed   of  Eowyn
 Eomund's daughter. She for love of the  King rode  in dis-
 guise with the  Rohirrim and  was with  him when  he fell.
 By  her  hand  the Black  Captain, the  Lord of  the Ring-
 wraiths, the Witch-king of Angmar, was destroyed.        
    Even so the  battle would  have been  lost but  for the
 coming  of  Aragorn.  In  the  hour of  need he  sailed up
 Anduin  from  the south,  in the  fleet which  he captured
 from  the Corsairs  of Umbar,  bringing new  strength; and
 he unfurled the banner of the kings.                     
    After taking counsel the  Host of  the West  marches to
 the Black Gate  of Mordor.  There it  is trapped  and sur-
 rounded by the forces of  Sauron. But  in that  hour Frodo
 the  Halfling  with  his  faithful  servant  reached Mount
 Doom  through  perils  beyond  hope  and  cast   the  Ring
 into  the  Fire.  Then  Sauron  was  unmade and  his power
 passed  away  like  a  cloud  and the  Dark Tower  fell in
 utter ruin.  This is  that Frodo  who was  long remembered
 in the  songs of  Men as  Frodo of  the Nine  Fingers, and

 renowned  as  one  of  the  greatest  heroes  of   Gondor;  but
 though  often  later  this  was  forgotten  he  was  not  a Man
 of Gondor but a Halfling of the Shire.                         
    The  Host  of  the  West  enters  Mordor  and  destroys  all
 the  Orc-holds.  All  Men  that  had  allied   themselves  with
 Sauron were slain or subjugated.                               
    In   the   early   summer  Aragorn   was  crowned   King  of
 Gondor  in  Minas  Tirith  taking  the  name  of  Elessar  (the
 Elfstone).   He   became   thus   King   both   of   Arnor  and
 Gondor,  and  overlord  of  the  ancient  allies  of  Mordor to
 whom   he   now   granted   mercy   and   peace.  He   found  a
 seedling of the White Tree and planted it.                     
    At     midsummer    Arwen     came    with     Elrond    and
 Galadriel   and  her   brethren,  and   she  was   wedded  with
 Aragorn Elessar, and made the choice of Luthien.               
    In  Gondor  a  new  era  and  a   new  calendar   was  made,
 to  begin  with the  day of  the fall  of Barad-dur,  March 25,
 3019.  But  the  Third  Age  is  not  held  to  have  ended  on
 that day,  but with  the going  of the  Three Rings.  For after
 the  destruction  of  the  Ruling  Ring  the  Three   Rings  of
 the  Eldar  lost  their  virtue. Then  Elrond prepared  at last
 to depart from Middle-earth and follow Celebrian.              
3021.   In  the  autumn  of  this  year  Elrond,  Galadriel,  and
 Mithrandir,  the  guardians  of  the  Three  Rings,  rode west-
 ward  through  the  Shire  to  the   Grey  Havens.   With  them
 went,  it is  said, the  Halflings Bilbo  and Frodo,  the Ring-
 bearers.  Cirdan  had  made   ready  a   ship  for   them,  and
 they  set  sail  at  evening  and  passed  into  the  uttermost
 West.   With   their   passing   ended   the  Third   Age,  the
 twilight   between   the   Elder   Days   and   the  Afterworld
 which then began.                                              
                                                               
 Here ends the main matter of the Red  Book. But  more is  to be
 learned both from notes and additions in later hands in the Red
 Book (less trustworthy than the earlier parts which are said to
 have been derived from the Halflings that were actual witnesses
 of the deeds); and from the Annals of the House of  Elessar, of
 which parts of a Halfling translation (made it  is said  by the
 Tooks) are preserved.                                          
 So  much  may  here  be noted.  The reign  of King  Aragorn was
 long and glorious.  In his  time Minas  Tirith was  rebuilt and
 made  stronger and  fairer than  before; for  the king  had the

 assistance  of  the  stone-wrights  of  Erebor.  Gimli Gloin's  son of
 Erebor  had  been  his  companion and  had fought  in all  the battles
 of  the  War  of  the  Ring,  and  when  peace  was  made  he  brought
 part  of  the  dwarf-folk  and  they  dwelt  in  the  White  Mountains
 and   wrought   great  and   wonderful  works   in  Gondor.   And  the
 Dwarves  also  forged  anew  great  gates  of  mithril  and  steel  to
 replace  those  broken  in  the  siege.  Legolas  Thranduil's  son had
 also  been  one  of  the  king's  companions  and  he   brought  Elves
 out   of   Greenwood   (to   which   name   Mirkwood   now   returned)
 and they dwelt in Ithilien, and it  became the  fairest region  in all
 the  Westlands.  But  after  King  Elessar  died  Legolas  followed at
 last the yearning of his heart and sailed over Sea. It is said  in the
 Red  Book  that  he  took  Gimli  Gloin's  son  with  him  because  of
 their  great  friendship,  such as  had never  else been  seen between
 Elf  and Dwarf.  But this  is scarcely  to be  believed: that  a dwarf
 should be  willing to  leave Middle-earth  for any  love, or  that the
 Elves  should  admit  him  to  Avallon  if  he would  go, or  that the
 Lords  of  the  West  should permit  it. In  the Red  Book it  is said
 that  he  went  also out  of desire  to see  again the  Lady Galadriel
 whose  beauty  he  revered;  and  that  she  being  mighty  among  the
 Eldar  obtained  this  grace  for  him.  More cannot  be said  of this
 strange matter.                                                      
   It  is  said  also  that  in  3020  Eowyn Eomund's  daughter wedded
 Faramir,  last  Steward  of Gondor  and first  Prince of  Ithilien, in
 the  king's  house  of  Rohan.  Eomer her  brother received  the king-
 ship  upon  the  field of  battle from  Theoden ere  he died.  In 3022
 (or  Fourth  Age  1)  he  wedded  Lothiriel  daughter  of  Imrahil  of
 Dol  Amroth,  and  his  reign  over  Rohan   was  long   and  blessed,
 and he was known as Eomer Eadig.                                     
   King   Elessar   and  Queen   Arwen  reigned   long  and   in  great
 blessedness;  but  at  the  last  the  weariness  came upon  the King,
 and then, while  still in  vigour of  mind and  body, he  laid himself
 down  after  the  manner  of  the  ancient   kings  of   Numenor,  and
 died,  in  the  hundred  and  second  year  of   his  reign   and  the
 hundred and ninetieth year of his life.                              
   Then   Arwen   departed  and   dwelt  alone   and  widowed   in  the
 fading  woods  of  Loth-lorien;  and  it  came  to  pass  for  her  as
 Elrond  foretold  that she  would not  leave the  world until  she had
 lost all for which  she made  her choice.  But at  last she  laid her-
 self to rest on  the hill  of Cerin  Amroth, and  there was  her green
 grave until the shape of the world was changed.                      
   Of  Eldarion  son of  Elessar it  was foretold  that he  should rule

 a  great  realm,  and  that  it  should  endure  for  a  hundred  gener-
 ations  of  Men after  him, that  is until  a new  age brought  in again
 new   things;   and   from   him   should   come   the  kings   of  many
 realms in long days  after. But  if this  foretelling spoke  truly, none
 now  can  say,  for  Gondor  and  Arnor  are  no  more;  and   even  the
 chronicles  of  the  House  of  Elessar  and all  their deeds  and glory
 are lost.                                                               
                                                                        
 The  account  of the  history of  the Realms  in Exile  in The  Heirs of
 Elendil, where it is set out in the framework of  the succession  of the
 kings and rulers, necessarily overlaps with that in  the Tale  of Years,
 where it forms part of a general chronology of  the Westlands.  It would
 therefore  be interesting  to know  whether my  father wrote  the latter
 before  or  after the  final (unrevised)  manuscript C  of The  Heirs of
 Elendil; but the evidence on this question is strangely  conflicting. On
 the one hand, the entry in T 4 for the year 1960 seems to establish that
 it preceded C, where  the interregnum  after the  death of  King Ondohir
 was only of one year and Earnil II came to the throne  in 1945,  and the
 correction to the text (see note 23)  was plainly  made after  the manu-
 script was completed. There are other pointers  to the  same conclusion;
 thus  the  passage  under  2050  concerning   the  Stewards   was  taken
 straight from the B text of The Heirs of  Elendil (see  p. 217).  On the
 other hand, there are a  number of  features in  T 4  that seem  to show
 that my  father had  C in  front of  him: as  for example  the statement
 under  1409  that  the  palantir  of  Amon  Sul  was destroyed,  where C
 (before correction) had 'the palantir is broken', but B (in an addition)
 had 'no one knows what became  of the  Stone' (pp.  194, 209);  or again
 the two challenges made by  the Lord  of the  Ringwraiths to  Earnur, in
 2043 and 2050, which  very clearly  first entered  The Heirs  of Elendil
 in C (pp. 201,  217). Close  similarities of  wording are  found between
 entries in T 4 and both B and C.                                        
   One might suppose that the writing of T 4  and the  writing of  C pro-
 ceeded together; but the two manuscripts  are at  once very  distinct in
 style,  and  very homogeneous  throughout their  length. Each  gives the
 impression that it was written from start to finish connectedly.  On the
 other hand, there can be little doubt that T 3  and T  4 belong  to very
 much the same time as The Heirs of Elendil.                             
   My  father  may  not  have  precisely  intended  such  near-repetition
 between the two works as occurs, but it is possible to regard it  as the
 necessary consequence  of his  design at  that time.  This long  Tale of
 Years,  ample  in  expression,  seems  to  me  to  show that  he wished,
 having at long last brought the  story to  its end,  to provide  for the
 reader a clear and accessible (still in the manner  of the  story) 'con-
 spectus' of all the diverse threads and histories that came  together in
 the War of the Ring: of the Hobbits,  the Wizards,  the Dunedain  of the
 North, the rulers  of Gondor,  the Rohirrim,  the Ringwraiths,  the Dark

  Lord;  the  High-elves  of  Rivendell  and  Lindon  also, the  Dwarves of
  Erebor  and  Moria,  and  further back  the lost  world of  Numenor. This
  account (a chronology,  but with  a narrative  view and  tone) was  to be
  read at the end of the book, a Tale of Years  in which  the story  of the
  Fellowship  and  the  quest  of the  Ringbearer could  be seen,  when all
  was  over,  as  the  culmination  of a  great and  many-rooted historical
  process - for which chronology  was a  prime necessity.  And so  also, at
  the end of this Tale of Years, he moved 'outside the frame' of the story,
  and  looked  further  on  to  the later  lives of  Gimli and  Legolas, of
  Faramir  and  Eowyn  and  Eomer,  the  reign  and  the deaths  of Elessar
  and Arwen, and the realm of their son Eldarion in 'the Afterworld'.      
    I  have  mentioned  when  discussing the  Tale of  Years of  the Second
  Age (p. 177) that an amanuensis  typescript in  two copies  (T 5)  - very
  intelligently  and  professionally done  - was  made from  the manuscript
  T  4; and  that one  of them  was emended  in a  most radical  fashion by
  my father, chiefly if by no means exclusively in order to  abbreviate the
  text by the omission of phrases that  could be  regarded as  not strictly
  necessary.  This  cutting out  of phrases  ceases altogether  towards the
  end, at the beginning of the entry for 3019.                             
    There is  no certain  evidence to  show when  the typescript  was made,
  but I think that it was a long while after the writing of the manuscript.
  The question is in any case not of much importance,  for what  is certain
  is that the typescript was sent to the publishers in 1954; in a letter of
  22 October in that year Rayner Unwin said:                               
    The  Tale  of  Years  which  I am  returning herewith  was interesting,
  but  as you,  I think,  agree, probably  too long  for the  appendices as
  it  stands.  I  suggest  that  considerable  reduction  be  made  in  the
  accounts  of  events  already  told  in  The  Lord  of  the Rings,  and a
  somewhat  more  staccato  style  be  adopted  (make  less of  a narrative
  of the events of the Third Age).                                         
  It was of course the typescript in its unrevised form  that he  had sent:
  the revision (in so far as it entailed abbreviation) was obviously under-
  taken in response to Rayner Unwin's criticism.                           
    If my interpretation of my father's intention for the Tale of  Years is
  at all near the truth, it may be supposed that he  carried out  this work
  of shortening with reluctance; certainly, in the result, the  amount lost
  from  the  original  text was  not proportionately  very great,  the long
  concluding  passage  was  not  touched,  and  the   rounded,  'narrative'
  manner was little diminished. But after  this time  there is  no external
  evidence  that  I  know  of to  indicate whether  there was  further dis-
  cussion of the  matter -  whether, for  instance, my  father was  given a
  more express limitation with regard  to length.  There is  indeed nothing
  actually  to  show  that  the  subsequent  far  more  drastic compression
  was not his own idea. But there is also nothing to bridge the  gap before
  the  next  text, a  typescript (from  which the  entries before  1900 are

  missing, and which breaks off  in the  middle of  that for  2941) already
  in full 'staccato' mode, and approaching  (after a  good deal  of correc-
  tion) closely the text in Appendix B. After this the only  further extant
  text is the typescript from which Appendix B was printed.               
                                                                         
                                    NOTES.                                
                                                                         
   1.  On  the  name  Dol  Dugul  for  later  Dol  Guldur see  VIII.122. In
       the manuscripts of  The Lord  of the  Rings it  is always  spelt Dol
       Dughul (replacing original Dol Dugol).                             
   2.  On the date of Deagol's finding the One Ring see pp. 166-7.        
   3.  'They  become  Hobbits':  cf.  the  passage  in  The  Shadow  of the
       Past, later revised, cited on p. 66, $20.                          
   4.  From this point all the dates  are given  also in  the years  of the
       Shire Reckoning, but I do not include these in  the text.  Here 1600
       is made S.R.1, but in all the following annals  the final  figure of
       the year corresponds in  both reckonings,  as '2940  (S.R.1340)', as
       if  S.R.1 =  1601. The  correction to  1601 was  not made  until the
       third text, T 4.                                                   
   5.  On Northworthy see p. 5 and note 3.                                
   6.  King Earnur is named in the text of The  Lord of  the Rings,  in the
       chapter The Window  on the West  (TT p.  278), where  it was  a late
       change from Elessar (VIII.153).                                    
   7.  In  Appendix  B  Elrond  wedded  Celebrian  2400  years  before,  in
       Third Age 100 (changed to 109 in the Second Edition).              
   8.  Finduilas, earlier name of Arwen: see VIII.370, etc.               
   9.  This was changed later to 'three parts Elven-blood'.               
  10.  To  this  point the  text was  retained in  abbreviated form  in the
       preamble to the annals of the Third Age in Appendix B.             
  11.  Earendur: T 3 has here Earendil (see p. 189).                      
  12.  In  this text  Isildur's death  had been  recorded under  Second Age
       3441 (p. 177).                                                     
  13.  In T 3 there are no entries at all before the  coming of  the Istari
       c.1000,  but my  father noted  on that  manuscript that  more should
       be said here of Gondor and Arnor.                                  
  14.  This   entry  concerning   the  Istari   was  preserved   with  some
       alteration  in  the  preamble  to  the  annals of  the Third  Age in
       Appendix B.                                                        
  15.  T  3  had  here  '(of  whose  kindred they  were maybe  a branch)',
       which was struck out.                                              
  16.  With  this  passage  concerning  the  region  in  which  the Hobbits
       anciently dwelt  and the  reasons for  their westward  migration cf.
       the Prologue, FR p. 12.                                            
  17.  T  3  has here:  'The families  of the  Harfoots, the  most numerous
       of the Periannath (though this  people were  ever small  in number),

       crossed  the  Misty  Mountains  and  came  into   eastern  Eriador.
       The  Fallowhides,  another  and  smaller  clan,  moved  north along
       the eaves of the Forest, for the shadow was deeper in  its southern
       parts. The Stoors tarried still beside the River.'                 
  18.  In  T  3 the  same is  said concerning  the 'Fallowhides',  but the
       Stoors  'came  over  the  Redhorn  Pass into  the desolate  land of
       Hollin'.                                                           
  19.  On  the  date 1601  see note  4. Subsequent  entries for  some dis-
       tance are given also in  Shire-reckoning, but  I have  not included
       these dates in the text printed.                                   
  20.  With this passage cf. the Prologue text given on p. 9. The entry in
       T 3  here begins:  'Owing to  an increase  in their  numbers, which
       became too great for the  small Bree-land,  many of  the Periannath
       crossed the R. Baranduin'; the text is then as in T 4,  but without
       the reference to the Stoors.                                       
  21.  In both the B and C  texts of  The Heirs  of Elendil  Angomaite and
       Sangahyanda  were  the  great-grandsons  of  Kastamir  (so  also in
       Appendix A, RK p. 328).                                            
  22.  T 3 ends the  entry for  1640 'The  Periannath were  little harmed,
       for they mingled little with other folk.'                          
  23.  This  entry  belongs to  the stage  in the  history of  Gondor when
       there was an  interregnum of  sixteen years  before Earnil  II came
       to the throne,  during which  time Pelendur  the Steward  ruled the
       realm (see p. 216). It was later corrected  to read:  '1945 Earnil,
       descendant of a previous king, receives the crown of Gondor.'      
  24.  In T 3 it is said that Arvedui  was slain  by the  Witch-king; this
       apparently  agrees  with the  original form  of the  B text  of The
       Heirs of Elendil (p. 210).                                         
  25.  T 3 has here: 'but after  the end  of the  kingdom they  claim "The
       Shire"  as  their  own land,  and elect  a "Shire-king"  from among
       their  own  chieftains.'  On  the  name  Shireking or  Shirking see
       pp. 5-6, 87, 107. It seems to have been in this entry  in T  3 that
       Bucca of the Marish first emerged.                                 
  26.  This record of Saruman's coming to Orthanc is  far earlier  than in
       the  additions  made  to  text  C  of The  Heirs of  Elendil, where
       (pp.  205-6)  'Saruman  comes to  Orthanc' during  the rule  of the
       Steward  Beren  (2743-63),  and  in  that  of  the  Steward  Turgon
       (2914-53)  'Saruman  takes  possession  of  Orthanc,  and fortifies
       it'. In  Appendix B  'Saruman takes  up his  abode in  Isengard' in
       2759.                                                              
  27.  These  two  entries  concerning  the  finding   of  the   Ring  and
       Gollum's  disappearance  in  the  Misty  Mountains  are  nine  hun-
       dred years later than in the earliest text (p. 225).               
  28.  With the entry for 2060  the substituted  pages (see  pp. 226  - 7)
       begin. The original entry for this year began:                     
                                                                         
         The White Council is formed to unite and direct the resistance

      to  the  growing  forces  of evil,  which the  Wise perceive  are all
      being  governed and  guided in  a plan  of hatred  for the  Eldar and
      the  remnants  of  Numenor.  The  Council  believe  that  Sauron  has
      returned.  Curunir,  or  Saruman  the  White,  is  chosen to  be head
      of the White Council ...                                             
                                                                          
      The  original  text  was  then  the same  as that  in the  entry that
      replaced it under the year 2463.                                     
  29. The opening of this entry in T 3  seems to  have been  written first:
      'Isumbras I, head  of the  rising Took  family, becomes  first Shire-
      king  (Shirking)  of  the  Took-line',  then  changed  immediately to
      'becomes  seventeenth  [>  thirteenth]  Shire-king  and first  of the
      Took-line.'                                                          
  30. The dates of the births of Elladan and Elrohir,  and of  Arwen, are
      given thus as  two separate  entries for  the same  year 2349  in the
      replacement  text,  with  Arwen's   birth  subsequently   changed  to
      2359. In  the rejected  version her  birth was  placed in  2400. Con-
      comitantly with the far earlier  date introduced  much later  for the
      wedding  of  Elrond  and  Celebrian  (see  note  7),  in  Appendix  B
      Elladan  and  Elrohir  were  born  in  139  (changed  to  130  in the
      Second Edition) and Arwen in 241.                                    
  31. In  The  Heirs of  Elendil Denethor  I was  the son  not of  Dior the
      ninth Steward but of Dior's sister (called in the  C text  Rian): pp.
      204,  219.  -  The  rejected text  having placed  the forming  of the
      White  Council  four  hundred  years earlier,  under 2060  (note 28),
      at this point it moved directly from  the end  of the  Watchful Peace
      and the  return of  Sauron to  Dol Guldur  in 2460  to the  attack on
      Gondor  in  the  days  of  Denethor  I.   The  postponement   of  the
      establishment  of  the  White  Council  was  the  primary  reason for
      the  rejection  and  replacement  of  the two  pages in  the original
      manuscript,  and  the  entries  following   2463  were   copied  with
      little change into the new  text to  the point  where it  rejoins the
      old, near the end of the entry for 2510.                             
  32. As in the earliest text (p. 226), T 3 states that Celebrian was slain
      by the Orcs.                                                         
  33. 'Thror  ...  founds  the  realm  of Erebor':  the history  of Thror's
      ancestors had not yet emerged.                                       
  34. The year 2698 was the date of the death of Ecthelion  I in  the texts
      of The Heirs of Elendil.                                             
  35. The War of the Dwarves  and Orcs  entered the  history at  this time.
      In very difficult scribbled notes at the end of T  3 my  father asked
      himself:   'When   were  the   Dwarf  and   Goblin  wars?   When  did
      Moria  become  finally  desolate?'  He  noted  that  since  the  wars
      were  referred  to  by  Thorin  in  The Hobbit  they 'must  have been
      recent',  and suggested  that there  was 'an  attempt to  enter Moria
      in  Thrain's  time', perhaps  'an expedition  from Erebor  to Moria'.
      'But  the  appearance  of  the  Balrog  and  the desolation  of Moria

       must  be  more  ancient,  possibly  as far  back as  c.1980-2000'. He
       then wrote:                                                          
         'After fall of Erebor  Thror tried  to visit  Moria and  was killed
       by  a  goblin.  The  dwarves  assembled  a  force  and   fought  Orcs
       on  east  side  of  Moria  and  did  great  slaughter, but  could not
       enter  Moria  because  of  "the  terror".  Dain  returns to  the Iron
       Hills, but Thorin and Thrain wander about.'                          
       Entries  were  then  added  to  the  text  of  T  3 which  were taken
       up  into  T 4.  At this  time the  story was  that Thrain  and Thorin
       accompanied  Thror,  but  made  their  escape.   -  Much   later  the
       dates of the war were changed from 2766-9 to 2793-9.                 
  36.  'the fourteenth Thain': that is, of the Took line.                   
  37.  The  statement  here  that  Thrain  had  come  to Dol  Guldur seeking
       for one of the Seven Rings is strange, for the story that he received
       Thror's  ring  and  that it  was taken  from him  in the  dungeons of
       Sauron  goes  back  to  the earliest  text of  The Council  of Elrond
       (VI.398,  403). It  seems to  be a  lapse without  more significance;
       see further p. 252.                                                  
  38.  The date of the death of the Steward Belecthor II in all  three texts
       of The Heirs of Elendil is  2872. The  date 2852  in the  later type-
       scripts  of  the  Tale  of  Years and  in Appendix  B is  evidently a
       casual error.                                                        
  39.  In  text C  of The  Heirs of  Elendil (p.  206) the  final desolation
       of  Ithilien,   where  however   Gondor  keeps   hidden  strongholds,
       is placed  in the  time of  the Steward  Turin II  (2882 -  2914). In
       Appendix B the corresponding entry is given under 2901.              

                  Note on changes made to the manuscript T 4                
                             of the Tale of Years.                          
                                (i) The Stoors.                             
                                                                           
c.1150.  The  original  entry  was  covered  by  a  pasted  slip  that cannot
 be  removed,  but  the  underlying  text  as  printed (p.  229) can  be read
 with  fair  certainty.  The  replacement  differs  only  in   the  statement
 concerning  the   Stoors:  after   coming  into   Eriador  by   the  Redhorn
 Pass  'some  then  moved  south   towards  Dunland;   others  dwelt   for  a
 long  time  in  the  angle   between  the   Loudwater  and   the  Hoarwell.'
c.1400.  This  entry  was  struck  out  and  replaced  by  another  under the
 year  1600,  but  the  date  was  then  changed  to  1550.  This  was almost
 the  same  as  the  rejected form,  but for  'some of  the Stoors  return to
 Wilderland'  has  'the  northern  Stoors  leave  the  Angle  and  return  to
 Wilderland'.                                                               
     On the evolution of the  early history  of the  Stoors see  pp. 66  - 7,
 $$22-3.                                                                    

                        (ii) Saruman.                                 
                                                                     
  c.2000. The far earlier coming of Saruman to Isengard (see note 26)
    was allowed to stand, but the reference to his becoming the head
    of the White Council in 2060 (note 28) was removed with the
    displacement of its forming to four hundred years later (2463). See
    p. 262, note 5.
  2851. Saruman next appears in this entry, which was changed to
    read:
      He does not reveal his thought to the Council, but sets a watch
      upon Anduin and the Gladden Fields, where he himself secretly
      searches for the One Ring.
    The words of the original text 'and he fortifies Isengard' were pre-
    sumably struck out while the manuscript was in progress, since they
    reappear under 2911 (where they were again removed).
  2911. The last sentence in the original text was altered to 'He re-
    doubles the search for the Ring, but he says nothing to the Council.'
  2940. This entry was not changed.
  2953. The conclusion of this long entry, after the words 'the Power
    of the One Ring', was expanded thus:
     The White Council meets and debates concerning the Rings, fear-
     ing especially that Sauron may find the One. Saruman feigns that
     he has discovered that it passed down Anduin to the Sea. He then
     withdraws to Isengard and fortifies it, and consorts no more with
     members of the Council. But Mithrandir (Gandalf) journeys far
     and wide ...
    The new text then returns to the original. (Saruman's pretence that
    he knew that the Ring had gone down Anduin to the Sea had been
    cut out of the entry for 2851, and the reference to his fortifying
    Isengard from that for 2911.)
  c.3000. The last sentence of the original text was replaced thus:
      His spies bring him rumours of Smeagol-Gollum and his ring,
      and of Bilbo of the Shire. He is angry that Gandalf should have
      concealed this matter from him; and he spies upon Gandalf, and
      upon the Shire.
                                                                     
                              (iii) Gollum.                           
                                                                     
c.2000 and c.2010.  These entries  concerning the  finding of  the Ring
 and  Gollum's  disappearance  were  struck out  and replaced  by addi-
 tions  under  2463  and  2470 (the  dates in  Appendix B).  Many other
 additions  were  made  concerning  Gollum,   but  these   are  closely
 similar to those in Appendix  B. There  is no  mention of  his 'becom-
 ing  acquainted  with  Shelob'  under  2980,  but  an addition  to the
 original  entry for  3001 says  'About this  time Gollum  was captured
 and taken to Mordor and there held in prison.'                       

                    (iv) The return of Sauron to Mordor.                                     
  In the original text of T 4 it was said in the entry for 2953 that Sauron
  declared  himself  and  his  true  name,  re-entered Mordor  prepared for
  him  by  the  Ringwraiths,  and  rebuilt Barad-dur.  In the  revision, an
  addition was  made to  2941: 'The  Sorcerer returns  in secret  to Mordor
  which  the  Ringwraiths  have  prepared for  him'; and  at the  same time
  the entry for  2953 was  altered to  read: 'At  this time  Sauron, having
  gathered fresh power, openly declares  himself and  his true  name again,
  and claims Lordship over the West. He rebuilds Barad-dur ...'            
    The corresponding dates in Appendix B are 2942 and 2951.               
                                                                          
                               (v) The Dwarves.                            
                                                                          
  The  statement  under  2850  that  Thrain  went  to  Dol  Guldur  seeking
  one  of the  Seven Rings  (see note  37) was  replaced thus:  'Thrain was
  the  possessor  of  the  last  of  the  Seven Rings  of Power  to survive
  destruction  or  recapture;  but  the  ring  was  taken  from him  in Dol
  Guldur with torment, and he died  there.' At  the same  time a  new entry
  was  added  for  the  year  2840:  'Thrain the  Dwarf goes  wandering and
  is captured by the Sorcerer (about 2845?)'.                              
    The  entry  for  2590  recording the  founding of  the realm  of Erebor
  was changed  to read:  'In the  Far North  dragons multiply  again. Thror
  ... comes south and re-establishes the realm of Erebor  ...' At  the same
  time,  at  the end  of the  entry, this  addition was  made: 'He  was the
  great-great-grandson  of  Thrain  I  Nain's  son'  (which does  not agree
  with the genealogical table in Appendix A, RK p. 361: see  pp. 276  - 7).
                                                                          
    For the correction of the entry for  1960 (the  accession of  Earnil II
  to the throne of Gondor after a long interregnum) see note 23.           
                                                                          
    All the  revisions of  T 4  given above  were taken  up into  the type-
  script T 5 as it was first made.                                         

                                    IX.                                 
                                                                       
                         THE MAKING OF APPENDIX A.                      
                                                                       
                         (I) THE REALMS IN EXILE.                       
                                                                       
 As with the major manuscript T 4 of the Tale of Years given in  the last
 chapter, I believe that years passed after the making of  the manuscript
 C of The Heirs of Elendil (pp.  191 ff.)  before my  father took  up the
 matter again, with a view to its  radical alteration,  when The  Lord of
 the Rings was assured  of publication.  His later  work on  this, almost
 entirely in typescript, is extremely difficult to explain.             
  The earliest text, which I will call I, of the later  period is  a very
 rough typescript which begins thus:                                    
                                                                       
                           The Heirs of Elendil                         
                                                                       
 There is no  space here  to set  out the  lines of  the kings  and lords
 of  Arnor  and  Gondor,  even  in  such  brief  form  as they  appear in
 the  Red  Book.  For  the   compiling  of   these  annals   the  Hobbits
 must  have  drawn  both  on  the  books  of   lore  in   Rivendell,  and
 on  records  made  available  to  them  by  King  Elessar,  such  as the
 'Book  of  the  Kings'  of  Gondor,  and  the  'House of  the Stewards';
 for  until  the  days  of  the  War of  the Ring  they had  known little
 of  such  matters,  and  afterwards  were  chiefly  interested  in  them
 in  so  far  as  they  concerned  Elessar, or  helped in  the correction
 of the dating of their own annals.                                     
  The  line  of  Arnor,  the Heirs  of Isildur.  After Elendil  and Isil-
 dur  there  were  eight  high  kings  in  Arnor,  ending  with Earendur.
 The  realm  of  Arnor  then  became  divided,   and  the   kings  ceased
 to  take  names  in  High-elven  form.  But  the  line   was  maintained
 by Amlaith son of Earendur, who ruled at Fornost.                      
  After  Amlaith  there  were  thirteen  kings (1) at Fornost,   of  whom
 the  last  was  Arvedui,  the  twenty-fifth  of  the  line. When  he was
 lost  at  sea,  the  kingship  came  to  an  end   in  the   North,  and
 Fornost  was  deserted;  but  the  line  was  continued  by   the  Lords
 of the Dunedain, who were fostered by Elrond.                          
  Of  these  the  first  was  Aranarth  son  of  Arvedui,  and  after him
 there  followed  fifteen  chieftains,  ending   with  Aragorn   II,  who
 became king again both of Arnor and Gondor.                            

   It  was  the  token  and  the   marvel  of   the  Northern   line  that,
 though  their   power  departed   and  their   people  dwindled   to  few,
 through   all   the   many   generations   the  succession   was  unbroken
 from  father  to  son.  Also,  though  the  length  of  the  lives  of the
 Dunedain  grew   ever  less   in  Middle-earth,   and  their   waning  was
 swifter  in  the  North,  while  the  kings   lasted  in   Gondor,  after-
 wards  it  was  otherwise;  and  many  of  the  chieftains  of  the  North
 lived  still  to  twice  the  age  of  the  oldest  of other  Men. Aragorn
 indeed  lived  to  be  one  hundred  and  ninety  years  of   age,  longer
 than  any  of  his  line  since  Arvegil son  of King  Argeleb II;  but in
 Aragorn  the  dignity  of   the  kings   of  old   was  renewed,   and  he
 received in some measure their former gifts.                              
                                                                          
   In his opening words 'There is no  space here  to set  out the  lines of
 the  kings and  lords of  Arnor and  Gondor' my  father was  surely think-
 ing of The Heirs of Elendil in the elaborate  form it  had reached  in the
 manuscript  C.  Merely  to  set  out  the  names and  dates of  the rulers
 would take little enough  space, yet  that would  serve little  purpose in
 itself. It seems plain  that he  either knew  or feared  that he  would be
 under severe constraint in the  telling of  the history  of the  Realms in
 Exile;  but  it  seems  extraordinary  that he  should have  felt impelled
 to  reduce  the  history of  Arnor and  the later  petty realms  almost to
 vanishing point.                                                          
   After  the  passage  given above,  however, he  continued with  The line
 of  Gondor,  the Heirs  of Anarion,  and here  he adopted  another course:
 to give 'excerpts' from the  history of  Gondor. He  began with  a passage
 that  remained  with  little  change  as  the  opening  paragraph  of  the
 section  Gondor  and  the  Heirs  of Anarion  in Appendix  A (I,  iv); but
 then passed at once to 'the first great evil' that  came upon  Gondor, the
 civil war of the Kin-strife, thus omitting the first fourteen centuries of
 its history. This  was quite  briefly told,  and was  followed by  a short
 account of 'the second and  greatest evil',  the plague  that came  in the
 reign  of Telemnar;  and that  by 'the  third evil',  the invasion  of the
 Wainriders. He had recounted  the marriage  of Arvedui,  last king  in the
 North,  to  the  daughter  of  King  Ondohir,  and  the  great  victory of
 Earnil in 1944, when he abandoned the text.                               
   One might suppose that  he perceived  that, in  so short  a space  as he
 had  determined  was  necessary,  this  would  not  work.  The  'excerpts'
 could  not  stand  in isolation  without further  explanation. At  the end
 of  this  text  he  had  written  that  the  northern  kingdom  could send
 no  aid  to  Gondor  'for  Angmar  renewed  its  attack  upon  Arthedain':
 yet  neither   Angmar  nor   Arthedain  had   been  mentioned.   What  was
 required (one might  think) was  a brief  precis of  the whole  history of
 the two kingdoms; but as will be seen  in a  moment, this  was not  at all
 what he had in mind.                                                      

    It is notable that at this stage he said very little about the sources for
  the history; and it seems  probable that  his conception  of them  was still
  very undeveloped.                                                           
                                                                             
    In  a second  text, H,  still with  the same  title, he  substantially ex-
  panded the opening passage:                                                 
                                                                             
  Until  the War  of the  Ring the  people of  the Shire  had little          
  knowledge of the history  of the  Westlands beyond  the traditions          
  of their  own wanderings;  but afterwards  all that  concerned the          
  King Elessar became of deep interest to them,  while in  the Buck-          
  land  the  tales  of  Rohan were  no less  esteemed. Thus  the Red          
  Book  from  its  beginning  contained  many  annals,  genealogies,          
  and traditions of  the realms  of the  South, drawn  through Bilbo          
  from  the  books  of  lore  in  Rivendell,  or  through  Frodo and          
  Peregrin from the  King himself,  and from  the records  of Gondor          
  that  he  opened  to  them:  such as  'The Book  of the  Kings and          
  Stewards' (now lost), and  the Akallabeth,  that is  'The Downfall          
  of  Numenor'.(2) To this matter  other notes  and tales  were added          
  at a later date by other hands, after the passing of Elessar.               
    There is no space here to set out this matter, even in the brief          
  forms  in  which  it  usually  appears  in  the  Book;   but  some          
  excerpts are given that may serve to illustrate  the story  of the          
  War of the Ring, or to fill up some of the gaps in the account.             
                                                                             
  My  father  now  expressly  referred  to  'excerpts' from  the Red  Book. He
  retained  from  text  I  the  very brief  statement concerning  the Northern
  Line; and in the  section on  the Southern  Line he  did as  he had  done in
  I, omitting all the history  of Gondor  before the  Kin-strife. But  when he
  came to the story of the civil war he expanded  it to  ten times  its length
  in  I.  One  may  wonder  what  his  intention  now  was  in respect  of the
  shape  and  length  of  this  Appendix; but  I doubt  whether he  was think-
  ing  of  such  questions  when  he  wrote  it.   The  historian   of  Gondor
  reasserted himself, and he told the story as he wished to tell it.          
    The  remarkable  thing  is  that  this text  was the  immediate forerunner
  of the story of the Kin-strife as  it was  published in  Appendix A  (in the
  First  Edition:  in  the  Second  Edition  the  events  leading  to  it were
  altered  and  expanded,  see p. 258).(3) And  at the  words 'Eldakar  ... was
  king for fifty-eight years, of which ten were  spent in  exile' (RK  p. 328)
  text II was abandoned in its turn.(4)                                        
                                                                             
    In a  third text,  HI, my  father retained  the actual  first page  of II,
  carrying  the  opening  remarks  on  the  sources  and the  scanty statement
  on  the  Northern  Line.  For  the  Southern  Line  he  entered,  as before,
  immediately  into  the  history  of  the  Kin-strife,  and brought  the text
  virtually word for word  to its  form in  Appendix A  in the  First Edition.
  Then,  having  recounted  the  plague  and  the  invasion of  the Wainriders

 without much enlarging what was said in text  I, he  wrote a  very full
 account of the claim of  Arvedui on  the southern  crown: and  this was
 for most of its length word  for word  the text  in Appendix  A, begin-
 ning 'On the death of Ondohir and his sons ...' (RK  p. 329),  with the
 record  of the  exchanges between  Arvedui and  the Council  of Gondor,
 and  the  appearance  of  Malbeth  the  Seer who  named him  Arvedui at
 his birth. The only difference is the absence of  the reference  to the
 Steward Pelendur, who in the Appendix A  text is  said to  have 'played
 the chief part' in the rejection of the claim.                         
   He  then went  on, in  a passage  that was  again retained  in Appen-
 dix A (RK pp. 330-1),  to describe  the message  of Earnil  to Arvedui,
 the fleet sent into  the North  under Earnur,  and the  destruction of
 Arthedain by  Angmar. The  story of  the defeat  of the  Witch-king (RK
 pp. 331-2) had not yet been written; and with a brief reference  to the
 overthrow  of  Angmar  my  father continued  with 'It  was thus  in the
 reign  of  King  Earnil,  as  later became  clear, that  the Witch-king
 escaping from the North came  to Mordor  ...' With  the account  of the
 character of Earnur (RK p. 332) text III ends.(5)                      
                                                                       
   By now it can be seen how  the long  account of  the Realms  in Exile
 in Appendix A came into being. Strange as it seems, the evidence of the
 texts  described  above  can lead  only to  this conclusion:  that what
 began as an attempt (for whatever reason) to  reduce the  rich material
 of The Heirs of Elendil  in a  more than  drastic fashion  developed by
 steps into a long and finely  written historical  essay taking  up some
 twenty  printed  pages.  What  considerations  made this  acceptable in
 relation to the requirements of brevity, in the absence of any evidence
 external to the texts themselves I am entirely unable to explain.      
                                                                       
   There are three versions of a brief text, which I will call IV for it
 certainly  followed III,  in which  the opening  section of  Appendix A
 (I  The  Numenorean  Kings.  (i)  Numenor),  RK  pp.  313 ff.,  is seen
 emerging.  The  opening  paragraph  'Feanor  was  the  greatest  of the
 Eldar in arts and lore ...', very briefly recounting the history of the
 Silmarils, the rebellion of Feanor,  and the  war against  Morgoth, was
 not present in the First  Edition, where,  as here  in IV,  the section
 opened  with  the  words  'There  were  only three  unions of  the High
 Elves and Men ...'; but at this stage my father had not  yet introduced
 the brief history of Numenor (RK pp.  315 ff.,  beginning 'As  a reward
 for their sufferings in the  cause against  Morgoth ...'),  which arose
 from  his attempt  to curtail  and compress  the Tale  of Years  of the
 Second  Age  (see  pp. 180-1),  and the  passage concerning  the Choice
 of  Elros  and  Elrond,  here  called  i-Pheredhil, differed  from that
 published.                                                             
                                                                       
   At the end of the First Age an irrevocable choice was given          
 to the Half-elven, to which kindred they would  belong. Elros          

 chose  to  be  of  Mankind,  and  was  granted  a  great   life-span;  and
 he   became   the   first   King   of   Numenor.   His   descendants  were
 long-lived   but   mortal.   Later   when   they   became   powerful  they
 begrudged   the   choice   of  their   forefather,  desiring   the  immor-
 tality  within  the life  of the  world that  was the  fate of  the Elves.
 In  this  way  began  their  rebellion  which,  under  the  evil  teaching
 of   Sauron,   brought   about   the   Downfall   of   Numenor   and   the
 ruin of the ancient world.                                                
   Elrond  chose  to  be  of  Elvenkind,  and  became  a  master   of  wis-
 dom.  To  him  therefore  was  granted   the  same   grace  as   to  those
 of  the  High  Elves  that  still  lingered  in  Middle-earth:  that  when
 weary  at  last  of  the  mortal  lands  they  could  take  ship  from the
 Grey   Havens   and   pass   into   the   Uttermost   West,  notwithstand-
 ing  the  change  of  the  world.  But  to  the   children  of   Elrond  a
 choice  was  also  appointed:  to  pass  with  him  from  the  circles  of
 the  world;  or  if   they  wedded   with  one   of  Mankind,   to  become
 mortal   and   die   in   Middle-earth.   For   Elrond,   therefore,   all
 chances of the War of the Ring were fraught with sorrow.                  
   Elros   was   the   first   king   of   Numenor,   and   was  afterwards
 known by the royal name of Tar-Minyatur.                                  
   The    fourth   king    of   Numenor    was   Tar-Elendil.    From   his
 daughter  Silmarien  came   the  line   of  the   Lords  of   Andunie,  of
 whom Amandil the Faithful was the last.                                   
   Elendil  the  Tall  was  the  son  of  Amandil.  He  was  the  leader of
 the   remnant   of   the   Faithful   who   escaped   from   the  Downfall
 with   the  Nine   Ships,  and   established  realms   in  exile   in  the
 North-west   of  Middle-earth.   His  sons   were  Isildur   and  Anarion.
                                                                          
   Then follows in IV the lists of the kings,  chieftains, and  stewards of
 the  Realms  in  Exile  much  as  they  are  given in  Appendix A  (RK pp.
 318-19).  The  references to  Numenor in  the passage  just given  were of
 course removed when the much longer account was introduced.               
   The Choice  of the  Children of  Elrond as  stated here  differs notably
 from that in  the final  form, in  the express  statement that  they would
 choose  mortality  if  they chose  to wed  a mortal.  In the  text T  4 of
 the Tale of Years (p. 234, entry for the year 2300), as also  in T  3, the
 choice  is  (as here  in Appendix  A): 'if  [Elrond] departed  they should
 have then the choice either to pass over the  Sea with  him, or  to become
 mortal, if they remained behind.'(6)                                      
   After  the  abandoned text  III, in  which the  account of  the Northern
 Line was still confined to half a  page, there  is scarcely  any rejected,
 preliminary  material  before  the  final  typescript  from  which section
 I  (iii)  of  Appendix A  was printed,  Eriador, Arnor,  and the  Heirs of
 Isildur. On the evidence of the extant texts this final typescript was the

  very one  in which  my father  first set  down the  history of  the North
  Kingdom  in  continuous  narrative  form.  The story  of Arvedui  and the
  Lossoth,  the  Snowmen  of  Forochel,  RK  pp.  321-2, 'wrote  itself' in
  precisely the form in which it was printed. But this is scarcely credible
  (see p. 279).                                                            
    At the end of  the story  of the  Lossoth, however,  my father  is seen
  in rejected pages taking a  course that  he decided  against. At  the end
  of the  penultimate paragraph  of this  section (concerning  the journeys
  of  King  Elessar  to  Annuminas and  the Brandywine  Bridge, RK  p. 324)
  he continued: 'Arador was  the grandfather  of the  king', and  typed out
  part  of  a  new  text of  the story  of Aragorn  and Arwen,  which after
  some  distance  was abandoned.  On this  matter see  the next  section of
  this chapter, pp. 268 ff.                                                
    The  next  section  of  Appendix  A, I  (iv), Gondor  and the  Heirs of
  Anarion, is a fearful complex of typescript pages. Though it  is possible
  to unravel the textual history up  to a  point,(7) it defies presentation,
  which  is  in  any case  unnecessary. The  whole complex  clearly belongs
  to one time. It was now that  new elements  entered the  history, notably
  the  story  of  the  overthrow  of  the  Witch-king  of  Angmar  (RK  pp.
  331-2),  and  the  account  of  the  service  of  Aragorn under  the name
  Thorongil with  the Steward  Ecthelion II  (only referred  to in  a brief
  sentence in The  Heirs of  Elendil, p.  206), and  of his  relations with
  Denethor (RK pp. 335-6).                                                 
                                                                          
             Note on the expansion of the tale of the Kin-strife           
                            in the Second Edition.                         
                                                                          
  In the First Edition of The Lord  of the  Rings the  account of  the Kin-
  strife (or more accurately of the events leading to it) was  much briefer
  than that in the Second Edition,  and read  as follows  (RK pp.  325-6 in
  both editions):(8)                                                       
      Nonetheless  it  was not  until the  days of  Romendacil II  that the
  first great evil came upon Gondor: the  civil war  of the  Kin-strife, in
  which great loss and ruin was caused and never fully repaired.           
      'The  Northmen  increased  greatly  in  the  peace  brought   by  the
  power  of  Gondor.  The  kings  showed  them  favour,  since   they  were
  the nearest in kin  of lesser  Men to  the Dunedain  (being for  the most
  part  descendants  of  those  peoples  from  whom  the  Edain of  old had
  come);  and  they   gave  them   wide  lands   beyond  Anduin   south  of
  Greenwood  the  Great,  to  be  a defence  against men  of the  East. For
  in  the past  the attacks  of the  Easterlings had  come mostly  over the
  plain between the Inland Sea and the Ash Mountains.                      
      'In the days of Romendacil II  their attacks  began again,  though at
  first with little force; but it was learned by the  King that  the North-
  men  did  not  always  remain  true  to  Gondor,  and  some   would  join
  forces with the Easterlings, either  out of  greed for  spoil, or  in the
  furtherance of feuds among their princes.                                

 'Romendacil  therefore  fortified  the west  shore of  Anduin as  far as
 the  inflow  of  the  Limlight, and  forbade any  stranger to  pass down
 the River beyond the  Emyn Muil.  He it  was that  built the  pillars of
 the  Argonath  at  the  entrance  to  Nen Hithoel.  But since  he needed
 men,  and  desired  to  strengthen  the  bond  between  Gondor  and  the
 Northmen,  he  took  many  of  them into  his service  and gave  to some
 high rank in his armies.                                               
       'In  return he  sent his  son Valacar  to dwell  for a  while with
 Vidugavia,  who  called  himself   the  King   of  Rhovanion,   and  was
 indeed the  most powerful  of their  princes, though  his own  realm lay
 between   Greenwood   and   the   River   Running.  There   Valacar  was
 wedded to  Vidugavia's daughter,  and so  caused later  the evil  war of
 the Kin-strife.                                                        
       'For  the  high  men  of  Gondor  already  looked  askance  at the
 Northmen among them ...                                                
 From here the text of the Second Edition returns to  that of  the First,
 but there  was a  further alteration  in the  next paragraph,  where the
 First Edition had: 'To the lineage of his father  he added  the fearless
 spirit  of the  Northmen. When  the confederates  led by  descendants of
 the kings rose against him ...',  inserting the  sentence 'He  was hand-
 some and valiant, and showed  no sign  of ageing  more swiftly  than his
 father.'                                                               
   As I have mentioned earlier  (p. 190),  in 1965,  the year  before the
 publication of  the Second  Edition, my  father wrote  a new  version of
 this account; this he inserted into the  late typescript  copy D  of The
 Heirs of Elendil. It is  remarkable that  though this  new text  was in-
 corporated, in more  concise form,  into Appendix  A, he  actually wrote
 it as an addition to  the text  of The  Heirs of  Elendil, to  be placed
 beneath  the nineteenth  king Romendakil  II, whose  entry (see  p. 198)
 he emended, on the typescript D, thus (the dates  refer to  birth, life-
 span, and death):                                                      
   19  Romendakil   II    1126         240          1366                 
           (Minalkar) (Lieutenant of the King 1240, King 1304)          
 In the text of  the First  Edition there  was no  reference to  the name
 Romendacil  as having  been taken  by Calmacil's  son after  his victory
 over the Easterlings in 1248,  and indeed  there was  no mention  of the
 victory. In the Second Edition, in the list of the  Kings of  Gondor (RK
 p.  318),  the  original  text  'Calmacil  1304,  Romendacil   II  1366,
 Valacar'  was altered  to 'Calmacil  1304, Minalcar  (regent 1240-1304),
 crowned as Romendacil II 1304, died 1366, Valacar'.                    
   There is  no need  to give  the whole  of the  new version,  since the
 substance of it was largely retained in the revised text of  Appendix A,
 but there are some portions of it  that may  be recorded.  As originally
 composed, it opened:                                                   
   Narmakil (9) and  Kalmakil  were  like their  father Atanatar  lovers of

  ease;  but  Minalkar  elder  son  of Kalmakil  was a  man of  great force
  after   the  manner   of  his   great-grandsire  Hyarmendakil,   whom  he
  revered. Already at the end of  Atanatar's reign  his voice  was listened
  to  in  the  councils  of  the realm;  and in  1240 Narmakil,  wishing to
  be relieved  of cares  of state,  gave him  the new  office and  title of
  Karma-kundo  'Helm-guardian',  that   is  in   terms  of   Gondor  Crown-
  lieutenant  or  Regent.  Thereafter  he  was  virtually  king,  though he
  acted  in  the  names  of  Narmakil  and  Kalmakil,  save  in  matters of
  war  and  defence  over  which he  had complete  authority. His  reign is
  thus  usually  dated  from  1240,  though  he  was  not  crowned  in  the
  name  of  Romendakil  until  1304  after  the  death  of his  father. The
  Northmen  increased  greatly  in  the  peace  brought  by  the  power  of
  Gondor....                                                              
                                                                         
 In the long version there is a footnote to the name Vinitharya: 'This, it
 is  said,  bore much  the same  meaning as  Romendakil.' After  the birth
 of Vinitharya this version continues:                                    
  Romendakil  gave  his  consent  to  the  marriage.  He could  not forbid
 it or refuse to  recognize it  without earning  the enmity  of Vidugavia.
 Indeed  all  the  Northmen  would  have  been   angered,  and   those  in
 his  service  would  have  been  no  longer to  be trusted.  He therefore
 waited  in  patience  until 1260,  and then  he recalled  Valakar, saying
 that it was  now time  that he  took part  in the  councils of  the realm
 and  the  command  of  its  armies.  Valakar  returned  to   Gondor  with
 his  wife  and  children;  and  with  them  came  a  household  of  noble
 men  and  women  of  the  North.   They  were   welcomed,  and   at  that
 time  all  seemed well.  Nonetheless in  this marriage  lay the  seeds of
 the first great evil that befell Gondor: the civil war of the Kin-strife,
 which  brought  loss  and  ruin  upon  the  realm  that  was  never fully
 repaired.                                                                
    Valakar  gave  to  his  son  the  name  Eldakar,  for  public  use  in
 Gondor; and  his wife  bore herself  wisely and  endeared herself  to all
 those  who  knew  her.  She  learned  well  the  speech  and  manners  of
 Gondor,  and  was  willing  to  be  called  by   the  name   Galadwen,  a
 rendering  of  her  Northern  name  into  the  Sindarin  tongue.  She was
 a  fair  and  noble  lady  of  high  courage, which  she imparted  to her
 children;  but though  she lived  to a  great age,  as such  was reckoned
 among  her  people,  she  died in  1344 [in  one copy  > 1332].  Then the
 heart  of  Romendakil  grew  heavy,  foreboding  the  troubles  that were
 to  come.  He  had  now  long  been  crowned  king,  and  the end  of his
 reign  and   life  were   drawing  nearer.   Already  men   were  looking
 forward  to  the  accession   of  Valakar   when  Eldakar   would  become
 heir  to   the  crown.   The  high   men  of   Gondor  had   long  looked
 askance  at   the  Northmen   among  them,   who  had   borne  themselves
 more  proudly   since  the   coming  of   Vidumavi.  Already   among  the
 Dunedain  murmurs  were  heard  that  it  was a  thing unheard  of before

  that the heir to the  crown, or  any son  of the  King should  wed one
  of lesser race, and short-lived; it was to be feared that her descend-
  ants would prove the same and fall from  the majesty  of the  Kings of
  Men.                                                                  
                                                                       
  20 Valakar 1194 238 crowned 1366 1432                                 
                                                                       
  Valakar  was  a  vigorous  king,  and  his  son Eldakar  was a  man of
  great  stature, handsome  and valiant,  and showed  no sign  of ageing
  more swiftly than  his father.  Nonetheless the  disaffection steadily
  grew during his reign; and  when he  grew old  there was  already open
  rebellion  in  the  southern  provinces. There  were gathered  many of
  those who declared that they  would never  accept as  king a  man half
  of foreign race, born in an  alien country.  'Vinitharya is  his right
  name,' they said. 'Let him go back to the land where it belongs!'     

                            NOTES.                                    
                                                                     
 1.  'thirteen kings' is an error for 'fourteen kings'.
 2.  This was almost exactly retained as the opening to Appendix A in
     the First Edition, as far as the reference to the Akallabeth, but The
     Book of the Kings and Stewards was separated into two works,
     which were not said to be lost. (The old opening to Appendix A
     was replaced in the Second Edition by an entirely new text, and the
     Note on the Shire Records was added at the end of the Prologue.)
     The published text then continued:
       From Gimli no doubt is derived the information concerning the
       Dwarves of Moria, for he remained much attached to both Pere-
       grin and Meriadoc. But through Meriadoc alone, it seems, were
       derived the tales of the House of Eorl; for he went back to
       Rohan many times, and learned the language of the Mark, it is
       said. For this matter the authority of Holdwine is often cited,
       but that appears to have been the name which Meriadoc himself
       was given in Rohan. Some of the notes and tales, however, were
       plainly added by other hands at later dates, after the passing of
       King Elessar.
         Much of this lore appears as notes to the main narrative, in
       which case it has usually been included in it; but the additional
       material is very extensive, even though it is often set out in brief
       and annalistic form. Only a selection from it is here presented,
       again greatly reduced, but with the same object as the original
       compilers appear to have had: to illustrate the story of the War
       of the Ring and its origins and fill up some of the gaps in the
       main account.
     The absence in the present text of the references to Gimli and
     Meriadoc as sources possibly suggests that my father had not yet
     decided to include sections on Rohan and the Dwarves in this

      Appendix  (although brief  texts entitled  The House  of Eorl  and Of
      Durin's Race were in existence).                                     
  3.  This version lacked the account (RK pp. 327 - 8)  of the  great white
      pillar above the haven of  Umbar set  up in  memorial of  the landing
      of  Ar-Pharazon  in  the  Second  Age.  The  name  of  the   King  of
      Rhovanion  was  Vinitharya;  this  was  corrected  on  the typescript
      to  Vidugavia,  and  the  name  Vinitharya  made  that of  Eldakar in
      his youth.                                                           
  4.  At  the  top  of  the  page on  which this  account begins  my father
      wrote, then or later, 'Hobbit-annal of the Kin-strife'.              
  5.  After the words 'Many of the people that  still remained  in Ithilien
      deserted it' text III continues 'It was at this time that King Earnil
      gave  Isengard to  Saruman.' This  agrees with  the statement  in the
      text T 4 of the Tale of Years  in the  entry c.2000:  see p.  233 and
      note 26, and p. 251.                                                 
  6.  In the two earlier versions of text IV the conclusion of  the passage
      was extended, that of the first reading:                             
        Therefore  to  Elrond  all  chances of  the War  of the  Ring would
      bring  grief:  to  fly  with  his  kin from  ruin and  the conquering
      Shadow,  or  to  be  separated  from  Arwen  for  ever.   For  either
      Aragorn  would  perish  (and  he loved  him no  less than  his sons);
      or  he  would  wed  Arwen  his  daughter  when  he  had  regained his
      inheritance,  according  to  the  condition  that Elrond  himself had
      made when first their love was revealed. (See III.252, 256).         
  7.  My  father's  almost  exclusive  use  of  a  typewriter at  this time
      greatly increases the difficulty of elucidating the  textual history.
      His  natural  method  of  composition  in  manuscript  was inhibited;
      and  he  constantly  retyped  portions  of  pages  without  numbering
      them.                                                                
  8.  The  quotation  marks  indicated  'actual  extracts  from  the longer
      annals and tales that are found in the Red Book'.                    
  9.  My father reverted to the use of k instead of c in this text.        

                     (II) THE TALE OF ARAGORN AND ARWEN.                   
                                                                          
 Of  the  texts  of Aragorn  and Arwen  the earliest  in succession  is also
 very plainly the first actual setting down of the tale. It was not  'a part
 of  the  tale',  as it  came to  be called  in Appendix  A, and  was indeed
 quite  differently  conceived. It  is a  rough, much  corrected manuscript,
 which I will call 'A', and a portion of it is in typescript  (not separate,
 but  taking up  from manuscript  and returning  to it  on the  same pages).
 Unless this peculiarity itself suggests that it belongs with the  late work
 on  the Appendices,  there seems  to be  no clear  and certain  evidence of
 its relative date; but its  peculiar subsequent  history may  indicate that

  it had been in existence for  some time  when my  father was  working on
  the narrative of the Realms in Exile described in the preceding section.
    The  manuscript,  which  bears   the  title   Of  Aragorn   and  Arwen
  Undomiel, begins thus.                                                  
                                                                         
  In  the  latter  days  of  the  last  age  [>  Ere  the Elder  Days were
  ended],(1) before the  War  of  the   Ring,  there   was  a   man  named
  Dirhael   [>   Dirhoel],   and   his  wife   was  Evorwen   [>  Ivorwen]
  daughter  of  Gilbarad,  and  they  dwelt  in a  hidden fastness  in the
  wilds  of  Eriador;  for  they  were  of  the  ancient  people   of  the
  Dunedain,  that  of  old  were  kings  of  men,  but  were   now  fallen
  on  darkened  days.  Dirhael  [>  Dirhoel]  and  his  wife were  of high
  lineage, being of  the blood  of Isildur  though not  of the  right line
  of  the  Heirs.  They  were  both  foresighted  in  many  things.  Their
  daughter  was  Gilrain, a  fair maid,  fearless and  strong as  were all
  the  women  of  that  kin.  She  was  sought  in  marriage  by Arathorn,
  the  son  of  Arador  who  was  the  Chieftain  of  the Dunedain  of the
  North.                                                                  
    Arathorn  was  a  stern  man  of full  years; for  the Heirs  of Isil-
  dur,  being  men  of  long  life (even  to eight  score years  and more)
  who  journeyed  much  and  went  often  into  great  perils,   were  not
  accustomed  to  wed  until  they  had  laboured   long  in   the  world.
  But  Gilrain  was  younger  than  the   age  at   which  women   of  the
  Dunedain  were  wont  at  that  time  to  take  husbands;  and  she  did
  not  yet  desire  to  be  a  wife,  and  sought   the  counsel   of  her
  parents.  Then  Dirhael  said:  'Arathorn  is  a  mighty  man,   and  he
  will  be  Lord  of  the  Dunedain  sooner  than men  look for,  yet soon
  again  he  will  be  lord  no  longer; for  I forebode  that he  will be
  short-lived.'  But  Evorwen  said:  'That  may  well  be,  yet  if these
  two  wed,  their  child  shall  be  great  among   the  great   in  this
  age  of  the  world,  and  he  shall  bring  the  Dunedain  out  of  the
  shadows.'                                                               
    Therefore   Gilrain   consented   and   was   wedded    to   Arathorn;
  and  it  came  to  pass  that  after  one  year  Arador  was   taken  by
  trolls  and  slain  in  the  Coldfells,  and  Arathorn  became  Lord  of
  the  Dunedain;  and  again  after  one  year  his  wife  bore a  son and
  he  was  named  Aragorn.  And  Aragorn   being  now   the  son   of  the
  Heir  of  Isildur  went  with  his  mother  and  dwelt  in the  House of
  Elrond  in  Imladris,  for  such  was  the  custom  in  that   day,  and
  Elrond  had  in  his  keeping  the  heirlooms  of  the  Dunedain,  chief
  of  which  were  the  shards  of  the  sword  of  Elendil  who  came  to
  Middle-earth  out   of  Numenor   at  its   downfall.  In   his  boyhood
  Arathorn  also  had  been  fostered  in  that  house,   and  he   was  a

 friend  of  Elladan  and  Elrohir,  the  sons  of  Elrond,  and  often  he
 went  a-hunting  with  them.  Now  the  sons  of   Elrond  did   not  hunt
 wild  beasts,  but  they  pursued  the  Orcs  wherever  they   might  find
 them;   and   this   they   did   because   of  Celebrian   their  mother,
 daughter of Galadriel.                                                    
   On  a  time  long  ago,  as  she  passed  over  the  Mountains  to visit
 her  mother  in  the  Land  of   Lorien,  Orcs   waylaid  the   road,  and
 she   was  taken   captive  by   them  and   tormented;  and   though  she
 was   rescued   by   Elrond   and   his   sons,   and  brought   home  and
 tended,  and  her  hurts  of  body  were  healed,  she  lay under  a great
 cloud  of  fear  and  she  loved  Middle-earth  no  longer;  so   that  at
 the  last  Elrond  granted  her  prayer,  and  she  passed  to   the  Grey
 Havens and went into the West, never to return.                           
   Thus  it  befell  that  when  Aragorn   was  only   two  years   of  age
 Arathorn  went  riding   with  the   sons  of   Elrond  and   fought  with
 Orcs  that  had  made  an  inroad   into  Eriador,   and  he   was  slain,
 for  an  orc-arrow  pierced  his  eye;  and  so  he  proved  indeed short-
 lived  for  one  of  his  race,  being  no  more  than sixty  winters when
 he fell.                                                                  
   But  the   child  Aragorn   became  thus   untimely  Chieftain   of  the
 Dunedain,   and   he   was   nurtured   in  the   House  of   Elrond,  and
 there  he  was  loved  by   all,  and   Elrond  was   a  father   to  him.
 Straight  and  tall  he  grew  with  grey  eyes   both  keen   and  grave,
 and  he  was  hardy  and  valiant  and  strong  of   wit,  and   eager  to
 learn all lore of Elves and Men.                                          
   And  when  he  was  still  but  a  youth,  yet  strong  withal,  he went
 abroad   with   Elladan   and   Elrohir  and   learned  much   of  hunting
 and  of  war,  and  many  secrets  of  the  wild.   But  he   knew  naught
 of  his  own  ancestry,  for  his  mother did  not speak  to him  of these
 things,  nor  any  else  in  that  House;  and  it was  at the  bidding of
 Elrond  that  these  matters  were  kept  secret.  For  there was  at that
 time  a  Shadow  in  the  East  that  crept  over  many lands,  and filled
 the  Wise   with  foreboding,   since  they   had  discovered   that  this
 was   indeed   the   shadow   of   Sauron,   the   Dark   Lord   that  had
 returned  to  Middle-earth  again,  and  that  he  desired  to   find  the
 One  Ring  that  Isildur  took,  and  sought  to  learn  if  any  heir  of
 Isildur yet lived upon earth; and the spies of Sauron were many.          
   But   at   length,   when   Aragorn   was  twenty   years  of   age,  it
 chanced that he returned to Imladris ...                                  
                                                                          
   I leave the original manuscript here, for this is sufficient to show the
 nature of its relation to the published text: the latter being marked by
 a  general  reduction,  compression  of  what  was  retained  and omission

  of  allusive  passages,  notably  the story  of Celebrian.(2) But as will be
  seen, the reason for this was not,  or was  not primarily,  the result  of a
  critical view taken by my father of the telling of the tale, but of  the use
  to which he later thought of putting it.                                    
    From  this  point  the  final  version  offers  no  contradiction  to  the
  original text, and in fact remains closer to it than in the part that I have
  cited,(3) until  the  plighting of  troth by  Aragorn and  Arwen on  the hill
  of  Kerin  Amroth  (RK  p.  341);  soon  after  this,  however,  it diverges
  altogether.                                                                 
                                                                             
  And  there  upon  that  hill they  looked east  to the  shadow and          
  west to the twilight, and they plighted their troth and were glad.          
  Yet many years still lay between them.(4)                                   
    For when Elrond learned the choice  of his  daughter he  did not          
  forbid it; but  he said  to Aragorn:  'Not until  you are  come to          
  your  full  stature  shall you  wed with  Arwen Undomiel,  and she          
  shall not be the bride of any less than a king of both  Gondor and          
  Arnor.'                                                                     
    But  the  days  darkened  in  Middle-earth,  as  the   power  of          
  Sauron  grew,  and  in  Mordor  the Dark  Tower of  Barad-dur rose          
  ever  taller  and  stronger.  And  though  Aragorn  and  Arwen  at          
  times met briefly  again their  days were  sundered. For  the time          
  drew on now to the War of the Ring at the end of  that age  of the          
  world ...                                                                   
                                                                             
    There  follows  now  a  long  passage  (more  than   500  words,   with  a
  part of it rejected  and replaced  by a  new version)  in which  the history
  of  the  war  is   given  in   summary:  telling   of  Mithrandir   and  the
  Halflings,  the  doubts  of  the  Wise,  the  Ringwraiths,  the  Company  of
  the  Ring,  and  the quest  of the  Ringbearer; and  then more  expressly of
  Aragorn,  of  the  Paths  of  the  Dead,  the  Pelennor  Fields,  the battle
  before  the  Morannon,  and  his  crowning  at  the  gates of  Minas Tirith.
  At the end of this the tale moves quickly to its conclusion.                
                                                                             
  And   when   all   this   was   done   Elrond   came  forth   from  Imladris
  and   Galadriel   from   Lorien,   and   they   brought   with   them  Arwen
  Undomiel   Evenstar   of   her   people.   And  she   made  the   choice  of
  Luthien,   to   become   mortal   and   abide   in  Middle-earth,   and  she
  was    wedded    to    Aragorn    Arathornsson,    King   of    Gondor   and
  Arnor, and she was Queen and Lady of Elves and Men.                         
    Thus  ended  the  Third  Age. Yet  it is  said that  bitterest of  all the
  sorrows  of   that  age   was  the   parting  of   Arwen  and   Elrond.  For
  they   were  sundered   by  the   Sea  and   by  a   doom  beyond   the  end
  of   the   world.   For   when  the   Great  Ring   was  unmade   the  Three
  Rings  of  the  Elves  failed  also,  and  Elrond   was  weary   of  Middle-

 earth  at  last  and   departed  seeking   Celebrian,  and   returned  never
 again.   But   Arwen   became   a  mortal   woman,  and   yet  even   so  it
 was  not  her  lot  to  die  until  she had  lost all  that she  gained. For
 though   she   lived   with  Aragorn   for  five   score  years   after  and
 great  was  their  glory  together,  yet at  the last  he said  farewell and
 laid   him   down   and   died   ere   old   age   unmanned  him.   But  she
 went  from   the  city   and  from   her  children,   and  passed   away  to
 the  land  of   Lothlorien,  and   dwelt  there   alone  under   the  fading
 trees:   for   Galadriel   also   was   gone   and  Lorien   was  withering.
 And  then  at  last,  it  is  said,  she  laid  herself  to rest  upon Kerin
 Amroth;  and  there  was  her  green   grave,  until   all  the   world  was
 changed,  and  all  the  days  of   her  life   utterly  forgotten   by  men
 that   came  after,   and  elanor   and  nifredil   bloomed  no   more  east
 of the Sea.(5)                                                              
                                                                            
   This  earliest  manuscript  was followed  by a  fair copy  of it  in type-
 script  ('B'),  in  which  only a  few and  minor changes  were introduced.(6)
 But the whole of the latter part of it,  from the  beginning of  the account
 of  the War  of the  Ring and  its origins,  was struck  out, and  my father
 clipped  to  the typescript  new pages,  in which  he extended  that account
 to  nearly twice  its original  length. Most  of this  new version  was then
 again rewritten, at  even greater  length, and  attached as  a rider  to the
 typescript. It was  now much  less of  a resume  than it  was at  first, and
 its purpose in the work as  a whole  is clearly  seen. 'It  was the  part of
 Aragorn,'  my  father wrote,  'as Elrond  foresaw, to  be the  chief Captain
 of the West,  and by  his wisdom  yet more  than his  valour to  redress the
 past and the folly of his forefather Isildur.' I cite a part of it from this
 final form.                                                                 
                                                                            
   Thus the War of the  Ring began;  and the  shards of  the sword           
 of Elendil  were forged  anew, and  Aragorn Arathorn's  son arose           
 and fulfilled his part, and his valour  and wisdom  were revealed           
 to  Men.  Songs  were  made  after in  Gondor and  Arnor concern-           
 ing his deeds in that time  which long  were remembered,  but are           
 not here full-told. It was not his task to bear the burden of the           
 Ring, but to be a leader  in those  battles by  which the  Eye of           
 Sauron  was  turned far  from his  own land  and from  the secret           
 peril which crept upon him in the dark. Indeed,  it is  said that           
 Sauron  believed  that  the  Lord Aragorn,  heir of  Isildur, had           
 found the Ring and had  taken it  to himself,  even as  his fore-           
 father  had  done,  and  arose  now  to  challenge the  tyrant of           
 Mordor and set himself in his place.                                        
   But it was  not so,  and in  this most  did Aragorn  reveal his           
 strength; for though the Ring  came indeed  within his  grasp, he           

 took  it  not,  and  refused to  wield its  evil power,  but surrendered
 it   to   the  judgement   of  Elrond   and  to   the  Bearer   whom  he
 appointed.  For  it  was  the  hard  counsel   of  Elrond   that  though
 their  need  might  seem  desperate  and  the  time  overlate,  nonethe-
 less  the  Ring should  even now  be taken  in secret,  if it  might be,
 to  the  land  of  their Enemy  and there  cast into  the fire  of Mount
 Doom  in  Mordor   where  it   was  made.   Aragorn  guided   the  Ring-
 bearer  on  the  long  and  perilous  journey   from  Imladris   in  the
 North,  until  he  was  lost  in the  wild hills  and passed  beyond the
 help  of  his  friends.  Then  Aragorn  turned  to  war and  the defence
 of   the  City   of  Gondor,   Minas  Tirith   upon  Anduin,   the  last
 bulwark of the westlands against the armies of Sauron.                  
   In  all  this  time,  while  the  world   darkened  and   Aragorn  was
 abroad   in   labour   and   danger,  Arwen   abode  in   Imladris;  and
 there  from  afar  she  watched  over  him  in  thought,  and   in  hope
 under  the  Shadow  she  wrought  for  him  a  great  and   royal  stan-
 dard,  such  as  only  one  might  display  who  claimed   the  lordship
 of  the  Numenoreans  and  the  inheritance  of  Elendil   and  Isildur.
 And this she  sent to  him by  the hands  of his  kinsfolk, the  last of
 the  Dunedain  of  the  North;  and  they  came  upon  Aragorn   on  the
 plain  of  Rohan,  after  the  battles  in  which  Saruman  the  traitor
 was   overcome   and   Isengard   destroyed,   and  they   delivered  to
 Aragorn  the  standard  of  Arwen   and  her   message;  for   she  bade
 him  look  to  the  peril  from  the  sea,  and  to  take  the  Paths of
 the  Dead.  Now  this  was  a  way  beneath   the  White   Mountains  of
 Gondor  that  no  man  dared  to  tread,  because  of  the  fell wraiths
 of  the  Forgotten  Men  that  guarded  it.  But  Aragorn dared  to take
 that  way  with  the  Grey  Company   of  the   North,  and   he  passed
 through,  and  so  came  about  by  the  shores  of  the  sea, unlooked-
 for  by  foe or  by friend.  Thus he  captured the  ships of  the Enemy,
 and  came  up  out  of  the  deep  by  the  waters  of  Anduin   to  the
 succour  of  Gondor  in  the  hour  of  its  despair;  for  the  city of
 Minas   Tirith   was   encircled   by   the   armies   of   Mordor   and
 was   perishing   in   flame.   Then   was   fought   and   won   beyond
 hope  the  great  battle  of  the  Fields  of  Pelennor,  and  the  Lord
 of  the   Black  Riders   was  destroyed;   but  Aragorn   unfurled  the
 standard  of  Arwen,  and  in  that  day  men  first  hailed  Aragorn as
 king.                                                                   
                                                                        
   At the end  of this  account of  Aragorn's commanding  significance in
 the War of the Ring, the revised ending of the story in the typescript B
 concludes with his farewell to Arwen at his death  almost exactly  as it
 stands in Appendix A.(7) The  original  manuscript  pages  in  which my

  father  first  set  down this  inspired passage  are preserved.  He wrote
  them  so  fast  that  without  the later  text scarcely  a word  would be
  interpretable.                                                           
    The revised text in  B ends  with the  words 'Here  endeth the  tale of
  the Elder Days'. My  father altered  this in  manuscript to  'Here endeth
  the Tale, and with the passing of the Evenstar all is  said of  the Elder
  Days.'                                                                   
    Briefly to recapitulate, the typescript B as  originally made  had been
  scarcely  more  than a  clear text  of the  original rough  manuscript A.
  The latter part of it was rewritten and expanded  (Aragorn's part  in the
  War  of  the  Ring,  his dying  words with  Arwen) and  incorporated into
  the typescript. My  father then  made a  further typescript  ('C'), which
  was a fair copy of  the text  as it  now stood  in B,  much of  it indeed
  scarcely necessary.  At this  stage, therefore,  none of  the compression
  and  small  stylistic  changes that  distinguish the  original manuscript
  from the final form in Appendix A had  yet entered.  It still  began 'Ere
  the Elder Days were ended', still  included the  story of  Celebrian, and
  of course the major element of  Aragorn's part  in the  War of  the Ring;
  in relation to the final version all it lacked was Aragorn's parting from
  his mother Gilrain (RK p. 342).                                          
    It is hard to say how my  father saw  Aragorn and  Arwen at  that time,
  when he clearly felt that it  was in  finished form,  or where  it should
  stand. He took great pains  with the  story of  Aragorn which  was after-
  wards lost. He ended it with great finality: 'Here  endeth the  Tale, and
  with the passing of the Evenstar all is said of the  Elder Days.'  Can it
  have been his intention that it should stand as the final element  of The
  Lord of the Rings?                                                       
    The  subsequent  history  is very  curious. I  have mentioned  (p. 258)
  that  when  writing  the  narrative  of  the  North  Kingdom  he  experi-
  mented  with  the  introduction  of  the  story  of  Aragorn  and  Arwen.
  This  was  to  follow  the  account  of  how, when  King Elessar  came to
  the  North,  Hobbits  from  the  Shire would  visit him  in his  house in
  Annuminas  (RK  p.  324);  and  it  enters  on  the typescript  page with
  extraordinary  abruptness  (even  allowing  for  the  device  of supposed
  extracts  from  written  sources  to   account  for   such  transitions):
  ...  and  some  ride away  with him  and dwell  in his  house as  long as
  they  have  a  mind.  Master  Samwise  the   Mayor  and   Thain  Peregrin
  have been there many times.                                              
      Arador was the grandfather of the King....                           
  It may seem that my father did not  know what  to do  with the  story, or
  perhaps rather, did not know what  it might  be possible  to do  with it.
  But  it  was  here,  strangely  enough,  that  the abbreviation  and com-
  pression and stylistic 'reduction' that distinguishes  the final  form of
  Aragorn and Arwen from the original  version first  entered. The  text in
  these abandoned pages of 'The Realms in Exile'  is (if  not quite  at all

  points) that of the story in Appendix A.(8) It extended  only to  the words
  'She shall not be the bride of any  Man less  than the  King of  both Gon-
  dor  and  Arnor'  (RK  p. 342);  but in  manuscript notes  accompanying it
  my  father sketched  out a  reduction of  the story  of Aragorn's  part in
  the War of the Ring to a few lines: for this element in the original story
  was  obviously  wholly  incompatible  with such  a placing  of it  - which
  would  seem  in  any  case  unsuitable  and  unsatisfactory.  He obviously
  thought so too. But it is interesting to see that in the  final typescript
  from which  the story  as it  stands in  Appendix A  was printed  the page
  on which it  begins still  carries at  the top  the words  'Master Samwise
  the  Mayor  and Thain  Peregrin have  been there  many times',  struck out
  and  replaced  by  'Here  follows  a  part  of  the  Tale  of  Aragorn and
  Arwen'. 'A part', presumably, because so much had gone.                   
    A  few changes  were made  to this  last typescript  of the  tale, among
  them the substitution of Estel for Amin  (see note 8) at  all occurrences,
  and  the  introduction  of  the  departure of  Gilraen from  Rivendell (RK
  p.  342)  and  her  parting  with  Aragorn,  with  the words  Onen i-Estel
  Edain, u-chebin estel anim.                                               
    Thus  the original  design of  the tale  of Aragorn  and Arwen  had been
  lost;  but  the actual  reason for  this was  the abandoned  experiment of
  inserting it into the  history of  the North  Kingdom. I  can say  no more
  of this strange matter.                                                   

                             NOTES.                                      
                                                                        
 1. So also  Aragorn declared  to Arwen  on his  deathbed that  he was
    'the latest King of the Elder Days' (RK p.  343), and  at the  end of
    text B of the primary version 'with the passing  of the  Evenstar all
    is said of the Elder Days' (p. 268). See p. 173 and note 7.          
 2. On the  other hand,  while the  concealment of  Aragorn's ancestry
    from him in his youth was present in the original  form of  the tale,
    the giving to him of another name  (Estel in  the final  version, see
    note 8) was not.                                                     
 3. The  distinction between  'thou' and  'you' was  clearly made  in the
    original  manuscript,  though  sometimes  blurred  inadvertently, and
    it was retained and made precise in the text  that followed  it: thus
    Aragorn uses 'you' to Elrond, and  to Arwen  at their  first meeting,
    whereas Elrond and Arwen address him with 'thou, thee'.              
 4. Thus  their  words  together  on  Kerin  Amroth,   concerning  the
    Shadow and the Twilight, were not yet present; see note 6.           
 5. The last sentences are put in the present tense in the published text.
    But  when  my  father  wrote Aragorn  and Arwen  he did  not conceive
    it as a citation from an  ancient source,  and did  not place  it all
    within quotation marks.                                              
 6. To this text were  added in  a rider  the words  of Aragorn  and Arwen
    on Kerin Amroth (see  note 4);  but after  Arwen's words  the passage

 ended: 'For very great was her love for her father; but not  yet did
 Aragorn understand the fullness of her words.'                      
7.   There  were a  few differences  from the  final form.  When Arwen
 spoke of  'the gift  of Eru  Iluvatar' which  is bitter  to receive,
 Aragorn answered: 'Bitter in truth. But let us not be  overthrown at
 the final test,  who fought  the Shadow  of old.  In sorrow  we must
 go, for sorrow is appointed to us; and  indeed by  sorrow we  do but
 say that that which is ended is good. But let us not go in despair.'
 He named himself 'the latest King of the Elder  Days' (see  note 1),
 but when he was dead 'long there he lay, an  image of  the splendour
 of  the  Kings  of  Men  in  glory undimmed,  before the  passing of
 the Elder Days and the  change of  the world':  this was  altered on
 the  typescript  to  'before  the  breaking  of  the world'.  And at
 the moment of his death Arwen did not cry  'Estel, Estel!',  for the
 name given  to him  in his  youth had  not yet  arisen (see  notes 2
 and 8).                                                             
8.  It was in this text that Aragorn's name in Rivendell  entered, but
 here  it  was Amin,  not Estel,  though likewise  translated 'Hope'.
 Here  Aragorn's mother's  name became  Gilraen for  earlier Gilrain,
 and Ivorwen's father Gilbarad disappeared.                          

                           (III) THE HOUSE OF EORL.                         
                                                                           
 The  history  of  Appendix A  II, The  House of  Eorl, has  no perplexities.
 From  the  early  period of  my father's  work on  the Appendices  there are
 three brief texts, which I will refer to as I, II, and HI,  probably written
 in  close  succession,  and  with  the  third  he  had evidently  achieved a
 satisfactory formulation of all that he wished to say of  the rulers  of the
 Mark. As I judge, he then put it aside for a long time.                    
  It  seems that  the names  of the  Kings of  the Mark  were first  set down
 on  paper  in the  course of  the writing  of the  chapter The  Last Debate:
 when  Gimli in  his story  of the  Paths of  the Dead  (at that  time placed
 at  this  point  in the  narrative) spoke  of the  mailclad skeleton  by the
 closed  door  and  Aragorn's  words  'Here  lies  Baldor  son of  Brego', my
 father  interrupted the  story with  the list  of names,  to which  he added
 dates  in  the  Shire-reckoning  (see  VIII.408).  I  concluded that  it was
 only  the  dates  of  Fengel,  Thengel,  and  Theoden  that belong  with the
 writing of the manuscript; but it is a  striking fact  that already  at that
 time  the dates  of those  kings were  not greatly  different from  those in
 Appendix  A  (RK  p.  350).  Particularly  noteworthy is  that of  the birth
 of  Theoden, S.R.1328  = 2928.  In text  I it  remains 2928  (in both  I and
 II the dates were all still given in  Shire-reckoning, but  it is  more con-
 venient to convert them); so also in II,  but corrected  to 2948  (the final
 date). In the draft manuscript T 3 of  the Tale  of Years  it was  2928, but
 in T 4 (p. 239) it was 2948.  This is  sufficient to  show that  these early

  texts of The  House of  Eorl were  contemporary with  those texts  of the
  Tale of Years.                                                           
    In the first two texts my father was chiefly  concerned with  the elab-
  oration of the chronology in detail, and they consist  only of  the names
  of the kings and their dates,(1) with notes added to a few  of them.  In I,
  which was written very rapidly  on a  small sheet,  under Eorl  the Field
  of Celebrant and the gift of  Rohan are  mentioned, and  it is  said that
  he began  the building  of Meduseld  and died  in battle  against Easter-
  lings in the  Wold in  2545; of  Brego that  he drove  them out  in 2546,
  completed Meduseld, and  died of  grief for  his son  Baldor in  2570; of
  Aldor the Old that 'he first established Dunharrow as a  refuge-fort'. In
  the note on Helm, however, is seen the first appearance of the  tale told
  in Appendix A, very hastily written and still undeveloped:               
    In  his  day  there  was  an invasion  from west  of Dunlanders  and of
  S.  Gondor  by  pirates  and  by  Easterlings  and Orcs.  In 2758  in the
  Long  Winter  they  took  refuge  in  Helm's  Deep.(2) Both his sons Hama
  and Haeleth were killed (lost in  snow). At  his death  there was  in the
  kingdom  an  upstart  king Wulf  not of  Eorl's line  [who] with  help of
  Dunlanders  tried to  seize throne.  Eventually Frealaf  son of  Hild his
  sister  and  nearest  heir  was victorious  and became  king. A  new line
  of mounds was started to symbolize break in direct line.                 
  There  are  no notes  on the  Kings of  the Second  Line save  Fengel, of
  whom it is recorded that he  was the  youngest son  of Folcwine,  for his
  elder  brothers,  named  here  Folcwalda  and  Folcred,  were  'killed in
  battle in service of Gondor against Harad'.  The final  note in  I states
  that  Eomer  was the  son of  Theoden's sister  Theodwyn (who  does not
  appear  in  the  narrative),  and  that  'he  wedded  Morwen  daughter of
  Hurin  of  Gondor'.  This  is  Hurin  of  the  Keys,  who was  in command
  of Minas Tirith when the  host of  the West  rode to  the Black  Gate (RK
  p. 237); I do not think that there is any other reference to the marriage
  of Eomer with his daughter, who was  corrected on  the text  to Lothiriel
  daughter of Prince Imrahil.                                              
                                                                          
    The second text II was a fair copy of  I, with  scarcely any  change in
  content other than in detail of dates. Where in I it  was said  only that
  Eorl was 'born  in the  North', in  II he  was 'born  in Irenland  in the
  North'.  This  name  was  struck out  and replaced  by Eotheod,  and this
  is very probably  where that  name first  appeared (it  is found  also in
  both texts of the original 'Appendix on Languages', p.  34, $14).  It was
  now further said of Eomer that he 'became a great king and extended
  his  realm  west of  the Gap  of Rohan  to the  regions between  Isen and
  Greyflood, including Dunland.'(3)                                        
                                                                          
    The last  text (III)  of this  period was  a finely  written manuscript
  which begins with a brief account of the  origin of  the Rohirrim  in the
  Men of Eotheod and their southward migration.                            

                           The House of Eorl.                         
                                                                     
 Eorl  the  Young  was  lord  of  the  Men of  Eotheod. This  land lay
 near  the  sources of  the Anduin,  between the  upper ranges  of the
 Misty   Mountains   and   the   northernmost   parts   of   Mirkwood.
 Thither   the   Eotheod   had   removed   some   hundreds   of  years
 before  from  lands  further  south  in  the  vale  of  Anduin.  They
 were  originally  close  kin  of  the  Beornings and  the men  of the
 west-eaves of the forest;  but they  loved best  the plains  and wide
 fields, and they delighted in horses  and in  all feats  of horseman-
 ship.  In  the  days  of  Garman  father  of Eorl  they had  grown to
 a  numerous  people  somewhat  straitened  in   the  land   of  their
 home.                                                                
  In  the  two  thousand  five  hundred  and tenth  year of  the Third
 Age a great  peril threatened  the land  of Gondor  in the  South and
 wild  men  out  of the  East assailed  its northern  borders, allying
 themselves  with  Orcs  of  the   mountains.  The   invaders  overran
 and  occupied  Calenardon,  the  great  plains  in  the north  of the
 realm.  The  Steward of  Gondor sent  north for  help, for  there had
 ever  been  friendship  between  the  men  of  Anduin's vale  and the
 people  of  Gondor.  Hearing  of  the  need   of  Gondor   from  afar
 Eorl set out with a great host of riders; and it  was chiefly  by his
 valour  and  the  valour  of  the horsemen  of Eotheod  that victory
 was  obtained.  In the  great battle  of the  Field of  Celebrant the
 Easterlings  and  Orcs  were  utterly  defeated  and the  horsemen of
 Eorl  pursued  them  over  the  plains  of  Calenardon until  not one
 remained.                                                            
  Cirion  Steward  of  Gondor  in  reward  gave  Calenardon   to  Eorl
 and  his  people,  and  they  sent  north for  their wives  and their
 children  and  their  goods,  and  they  settled  in that  land. They
 named  it  anew  the  Mark  of  the   Riders,  and   themselves  they
 called  the  Eorlingas;  but  in  Gondor the  land was  called Rohan,
 and  the people  the Rohirrim  (that is  the Horse-lords).  Thus Eorl
 became the first  King of  the Mark,  and he  chose for  his dwelling
 a  green  hill before  the feet  of the  White Mountains  that fenced
 in that land at the south.                                           
                                                                     
  This is the origin of the opening, greatly expanded, of The House of
 Eorl in Appendix A (RK pp. 344-5). In the remainder of the  text, the
 line of the Kings of the Mark, there was very little further develop-
 ment:  the  story of  Helm Hammerhand  remained in  substance exactly
 as it was, and nothing further was said  of any  of the  kings except
 Thengel, Theoden,  and Eomer. Of  Thengel it  is recorded  that he

  married  late,  and  had  three  daughters  and  one  son,  but   his  long
  sojourn  in Gondor  (and the  character of  his father  Fengel that  led to
  it)  had  not  emerged.  The  death  of  Eomund chief  Marshal of  the Mark
  in an Orc-raid in 3002 is recorded, with the note that  'Orcs at  this time
  began often  to raid  eastern Rohan  and steal  horses', and  the fostering
  of his children Eomer and Eowyn in  the house of  Theoden. The note
  on  Theoden  that  entered  in  III  was   retained  almost   unchanged  in
  Appendix A.(4)                                                             
    A  long  note  was  now  appended  to  Eomer,  with  the same  passage as
  is  found  in  Appendix  A   (RK  p.   351,  footnote)   concerning  Eowyn,
  'Lady  of  the  Shieldarm',  and  the  reference  to Meriadoc's  name Hold-
  wine  given  to  him  by Eomer;  and  the  statement   of  the   extent  of
  his  realm  appearing  in  II  (p.  271)  was  rewritten: 'In  Eomer's time
  the  realm  was  extended  west  beyond  the  Gap  of   Rohan  as   far  as
  the  Greyflood  and the  sea-shores between  that river  and the  Isen, and
  north  to  the  borders  of  Lorien,  and  his  men  and  horses multiplied
  exceedingly.'                                                              
                                                                            
  There  is  no  other  writing  extant  before the  final typescript  of The
  House  of  Eorl  from  which  the  text  in  Appendix  A was  printed, save
  for a single typescript page. This is the first page of the text, beginning
  'Eorl was the lord of the Men of Eotheod', and my father wrote it  with
  the old version III, given  above, before  him; but  he expanded  it almost
  to  the  form  that  it  has  in  Appendix A.(5) It includes,  however, the
  following  passage  (struck  out on  the typescript)  after the  words 'the
  Riders hunted them over the plains of Calenardhon':                        
    In  the forefront  of the  charge they  saw two  great horsemen,  clad in
  grey,  unlike  all  the others,  and the  Orcs fled  before them;  but when
  the  battle  was  won  they  could  not  be  found,  and  none  knew whence
  they  came  or  whither  they  went.  But  in  Rivendell  it  was  recorded
  that these were the sons of Elrond, Elladan and Elrohir.(6)                
  There is also the curious point that where in  Appendix A  it is  said that
  'Cirion  ...  gave  Calenardhon  between Anduin  and Isen  to Eorl  and his
  people' this  text had  (before correction)  'Cirion ...  gave Calenardhon,
  and  Dor  Haeron  between  Entwash  and  Isen,  to  Eorl  and  his people'.
  I  do  not  know of  any other  occurrence of  this name,  or of  any other
  suggestion  that  the  name  Calenardhon  applied only  to the  region east
  of the Entwash.                                                            
    The  father  of  Eorl  was  still  named  Garman, as  in the  old version
  III  (p.  272), and  that name  appeared in  the final  text, where  it was
  emended to Leod.                                                           
    It  is,  once  again,  possible  and  indeed  probable  that   this  page
  survived  for  some  reason  from  a  complete  or  more   complete  draft,
  which has been lost;  for if  no text  has been  lost it  would have  to be
  concluded  that  my  father  composed  ab  initio  on  the  typewriter  the

 whole  narrative of  The House  of Eorl,  with the  stories of  Leod and
 the  horse  Felarof, and  of Helm  Hammerhand, exactly  as it  stands in
 Appendix A.                                                             
                                                                        
                                  NOTES.                                 
                                                                        
 1. As far as Folcwine the fourteenth king the dates were already  in I
    almost  the  same  as  those  in  Appendix  A,  though in  many cases
    differing by a year; it was only with the last  kings that  there was
    much movement in the dates.                                          
 2. Cf. the entry in the text T 4 of  the Tale  of Years,  entry 2758-9
    (p. 236):  'Helm of  Rohan takes  refuge from  his enemies  in Helm's
    Deep  in  the  White  Mountains'; and  also the  note to  the Steward
    Beren in The Heirs of Elendil, p. 205.                               
 3. In text II Helm's  son Haeleth  became Haleth;  and the  eleventh king
    Leof  was  replaced probably  at the  time of  writing by  Brytta (on
    this see  IX.68 and  note 11).  The sons  of Folcwine  (Folcwalda and
    Folcred in I)  were not  named in  II, but  my father  changed Fengel
    to  Fastred;  he  then  added  in  the  names  of Folcwine's  sons as
    Folcred  and  Fastred  and  changed  that  of  the king  to Felanath,
    before finally reverting to Fengel. In the manuscript T 4 of the Tale
    of Years (p. 238, year  2885) the  death of  Folcwine's sons  'in the
    service of Gondor'  is recorded,  and there  their names  are Folcred
    and Fastred.                                                         
 4. The  note on  Theoden in  III ends  with the  statement that  his only
    child  and  son  was  Theodred  'whose  mother  Elfhild  of  Eastfold
    died  in  childbirth',  and a  record of  Theodred's death  in battle
    against   Saruman.   Theoden's   name   Ednew  ('Renewed')   is  here
    given in  the Old  English form  Edniwe; and  Minas Tirith  is called
    Mundberg  (although  text  II  has  Mundburg:  on which  see VII.449,
    note 7, and VIII.356, note 9).                                       
 5. In the First Edition there were no notes, in the list of the  Kings of
    the Mark,  to the  eleventh, twelfth,  and thirteenth  kings, Brytta,
    Walda, and Folca.                                                    
 6. Cf. p. 236, annal 2510.                                               
                                                                        
                            (IV) DURIN'S FOLK.                           
                                                                        
 My  father's  original  text of  what would  become the  section Durin's
 Folk  in  Appendix A  is extant:  a brief,  clear manuscript  written on
 scrap  paper  entitled  Of  Durin's  Line,  accompanied  by  a genealogy
 forming a part of the text. It was corrected  in a  few points,  and one
 substantial passage was added; these changes were made,  I think,  at or
 soon after the writing of the manuscript. I give this text in full, with
 the changes shown where they are of any significance.                   

 Durin was the name of  one of  the fathers  of all  the race  of the
 Dwarves.  In  the deeps  of time  and the  beginning of  that people
 he came to Azanulbizar,  the Dimrill  Dale, and  in the  caves above
 Kibil-nala [>  Kheled-zaram],(1) the Mirrormere, in  the east  of the
 Misty  Mountains,  he  made  his  dwelling,  where  after  were  the
 Mines  of  Moria  renowned  in song.  There long  he dwelt:  so long
 that  he  was  known far  and wide  as Durin  the Deathless.  Yet he
 died  indeed at  the last  ere the  Elder Days  were ended,  and his
 tomb was in Moria; but his line  never failed,  from father  to son,
 and  ever  and  anon [> thrice](2) there  was born  an heir  to that
 house  so  like unto  his Forefather  that he  received the  name of
 Durin,  being  held  indeed  by  the  Dwarves  to  be  the Deathless
 that returned. It was after the end of the First Age that  the great
 power  and  wealth  of  Moria  began,  for it  was enriched  by many
 folk and  much lore  and craft,  when the  ancient cities  of Nogrod
 and  Belegost  were  ruined  in  the  change  of  the  western world
 and the  breaking of  Morgoth. And  it came  to pass  that I  at the
 height of  the glory  of Moria  [> in  the midst  of the  Third Age,
 while  the  wealth  of  Moria  was  still  undiminished]  Durin  was
 the name of its  king, being  the second  since the  Forefather that
 had  borne  that title.  And the  Dwarves delved  deep in  his days,
 seeking  ever for  mithril, the  metal beyond  price that  was found
 in  those  mines  alone,  beneath  Barazinbar,  the  mighty  Redhorn
 Mountain. But they roused  thus from  sleep a  thing of  terror that
 had  lain  hidden  at  the foundations  of the  world, and  that was
 a  Balrog  of  Morgoth.  And  Durin  was  slain  by the  Balrog, and
 after him Nain his son  was slain,  and the  glory of  Moria passed,
 and its people were destroyed or fled  far away.  For the  most part
 they  passed  into the  North; but  Thrain Nain's  son, the  king by
 inheritance,  came  to  Erebor,  the  Lonely  Mountain, nigh  to the
 eastern  eaves  of  Mirkwood,  and  established  his  realm   for  a
 while.                                                             
   But  Gloin   his  grandson   [>  Thorin   his  son]   removed  and
 abandoned  Erebor,  and  passed  into  the   far  North   where  the
 most  of  his  kin  now  dwelt.  But  it came  to pass  that dragons
 arose  and  multiplied  in  the  North,  and   made  war   upon  the
 Dwarves,  and  plundered  their  works  and  wealth;  and   many  of
 the  Dwarves  fled   again  southward   and  eastward.   Then  Thror
 Dain's  son,  the  great-great-grandson   of  Thrain,   returned  to
 Erebor   and    became   King-under-the-Mountain,    and   prospered
 exceedingly,  having  the  friendship  of   all  that   dwelt  near,
 whether Elves or Men or the birds and beasts of the land.          

   But  Smaug  the   Golden  heard   rumour  of   his  treasure   and  came
 upon   him  at   unawares,  and   he  descended   upon  the   Mountain  in
 flame,  and  destroyed  all  that   region,  and   he  entered   the  deep
 halls  of  the  Dwarves  and  lay  there  long  upon  a  bed  of  gold.  I
 And   it   is   elsewhere   told   how    the   Dwarves    were   avenged,
 [>   From   the   sack   and   the  burning   Thror  escaped,   and  being
 now   homeless   he   returned   to   Moria,  but   there  was   slain  in
 the  dark   by  an   Orc.  Thrain   his  son   and  Thorin   his  grandson
 gathered  then  the  scattered  folk   of  Durin's   race  and   made  war
 on  the  Orcs  of  the  Misty  Mountains  in   revenge  for   Thror.  They
 were  victorious   but  their   people  were   so  diminished   that  they
 could   not   and   dared   not   re-enter   Moria.  Dain   their  kinsman
 went   away   to   the   Iron   Hills,  but   Thrain  and   Thorin  became
 wanderers.  Thrain,  it  is said,  was the  possessor of  the last  of the
 Seven  Rings  of  the  Dwarf-lords  of  old,  but   he  was   captured  by
 the   Sorcerer  and   taken  to   Dol  Guldur,   and  there   perished  in
 torment.  Elsewhere   is  told   of  the   wanderings  of   Thorin  Oaken-
 shield,  last  of  the  direct  line of Durin,(3) in  search of  revenge and
 the  restoration  of  his  fortune;  and  how  by  the  help   of  Gandalf
 the  Grey  he  was  indeed  avenged  at  last,](4) and  Smaug   was  slain,
 and   after   the   Battle  of   Five  Armies   the  kingship   under  the
 Mountain   was   restored.   Yet    Thorin   Oakenshield,    grandson   of
 Thror,  was  slain  in  that  battle,  and  the  right  line  was  broken,
 and  the   crown  passed   to  Dain,   a  kinsman   of  Thorin.   And  the
 line  of  Dain  and  the  wealth  and  renown  of  the   kingship  endured
 in  Erebor  until  the  world  grew  old,  and  the  days  of  the Dwarves
 were ended.                                                               
                                                                          
   In  this  text  and its  accompanying genealogical  table (which  I have
 here  redrawn)  it  is  seen  that  an  important  advance  had  been made
 from the text T 4 of the Tale of Years, where it was  told under  the year
 2590 that  Thror 'founded  the realm  of Erebor'  (p. 236):  as I  said in
 a  note  on  that entry,  'the history  of Thror's  ancestors had  not yet
 emerged'.(5) Here that history is present, but not yet precisely in the final
 form; for the names of  'the kings  of Durin's  folk' in  the genealogical
 table  here  run  Thorin I:  Gloin: Dain  I, whereas  in that  in Appendix
 A they are Thorin I:  Gloin: Oin:  Nain II:  Dain I;  thus in  the present
 text Thror is called 'the great-great-grandson of  Thrain [I]'.  While the
 history  was  at this  stage the  corrections and  additions were  made to
 T 4: see p. 252, The Dwarves.                                             
   Various  names found  in the  later genealogy  are absent  here, Thror's
 brother  Fror  and  Thorin  Oakenshield's  brother  Frerin;  most notably,
 the brother of Dain I is not Borin but  Nar (and  of his  descendants only
 Oin  and  Gloin  are  shown).  Nar  was  the  name  of the  sole companion

  of  Thror  on  his  ill-fated  journey  to Moria  (RK pp.  354 -  5), who
  brought to Thrain the news of his father's slaying by Azog; he  is called
  'old', but there is no suggestion that  he was  Thror's uncle.  Since Nar
  is  an  Old  Norse  dwarf-name  (occurring  in  the  Voluspa),  and since
  there is no evidence that  the story  of Thror's  death (apart  of course
  from the fact  of his  having been  killed in  Moria by  an Orc)  had yet
  emerged,  it seems  unlikely that  there was  any connection  between the
  two. - It will also be seen that while Thorin III appears, Durin the Last
  does not.                                                                
                                                                          
    This  text  was  followed  by  a  second  version,  a  well-written and
  scarcely  corrected  manuscript  with  the  title  Of Durin's  Race, very
  similar in  appearance to  text III  of The  House of  Eorl (p.  272) and
  probably  contemporary with  it. So  closely did  my father  preserve the
  original text (as emended and expanded) that  I think  that it  must have
  followed at once, or at any rate after no long interval.                 
    The passage  added to  the first  version was  slightly filled  out and
  improved, but the only difference worth  noticing here  lies in  the sen-
  tences  following the  words 'made  war on  the Orcs  of the  Misty Moun-
  tains  in  revenge  for  Thror',  which  now read:  'Long and  deadly was
  that war, and it  was fought  for the  most part  in dark  places beneath
  the earth; and at the last the Dwarves had the victory, and in the Battle
  before  the  Gate  of  Moria  ten  thousand  Orcs  were  slain.  But  the
  Dwarves  suffered  also grievous  loss and  his folk  were now  so dimin-
  ished  that  Thrain  dared  not  to  enter  Moria,  and  his  people were
  dispersed again.' The only really significant  difference from  the first
  version, however, lies in the final sentence, which became:              
                                                                          
       And the line of Dain prospered, and the wealth and renown           
    of the kingship was renewed, until there arose again for the           
    last time an heir of that House that bore the name of Durin,           
    and he returned to Moria; and there was light again  in deep           
    places, and the ringing of hammers and the harping of harps,           
    until the world grew old and the Dwarves failed and the days           
    of Durin's race were ended.                                            
                                                                          
    Thus it was here that 'Durin the Last' emerged, and it  is said  of him
  that he returned from Erebor to Moria and re-established  it (as  is said
  in  the  accompanying  genealogical  table).  To  this  my  father  never
  referred  again;  as  Robert  Foster  noted  in  The  Complete  Guide  to
  Middle-earth,  'There  is  no  mention  of  a  recolonization  of Khazad-
  dum in the Fourth Age, despite the death  of the  Balrog.' It  is imposs-
  ible  to discover  whether my  father did  in fact  reject this  idea, or
  whether it simply became 'lost' in  the haste  with which  the Appendices
  were finally prepared for publication. The  fact that  he made  no refer-
  ence  to 'Durin  VII and  Last', though  he appears  in the  genealogy in
  Appendix A, is possibly a pointer to the latter supposition.             

    There  are  two  copies  of  the  genealogical  table  accompanying  the
  second version,  but they  are essentially  the same:  my father  made the
  second one simply because he had not left  enough space  in the  first and
  the names on the  right-hand side  had to  be cramped  (as with  the other
  'finished' manuscripts  of that  time he  clearly intended  this to  be in
  publishable form as it stood, or at any rate to  be in  a form  from which
  a perfectly accurate typescript  could be  made). In  these tables  he did
  little  more  than  copy  the preceding  version (p.  277), but  there are
  certain  differences. He  retained 'seven  generations' between  Durin the
  Deathless  and  Durin  III  of  Moria,  but  carefully erased  'seven' and
  replaced it by 'twelve'  (later pencilling  'many'). The  name Nar  of the
  brother of Dain  I was  replaced by  Borin, and  where the  original table
  only  marks  'two  generations'  between  Nar  and Oin  and Gloin  this is
  now filled out as in the final table, with Fundin the father of  Balin and
  Dwalin and Groin the father of Oin and Gloin;  but a  space is  left blank
  for Borin's son Farin. The notes and  dates in  the original  table remain
  the  same,  with  no  additions  that  need   be  recorded,   save  'Balin
  returned  to  Moria and  there perished  (2994)', and  the same  note con-
  cerning  Ori,  Nori,  Dori,  Bifur, Bofur,  and Bombur  as appears  in the
  final  genealogy. Thorin  III is  now called  'Stonehelm', and  'Durin the
  Last'  is  shown  as  his son,  'who re-established  the Realm  of Moria';
  beneath his name is a dotted  arrow (as  beneath Thorin  III in  the orig-
  inal table) indicating unnamed descendants.                               
                                                                           
    There  is no  other writing  on this  subject from  the early  period of
  work on the Appendices. But unlike the  textual situation  in the  case of
  the Northern Line  of the  Realms in  Exile and  of The  Home of  Eorl, in
  which  the  final  typescripts  have  virtually  no  antecedents  (see pp.
  257-8, 273-4), a substantial part  of Durin's  Folk is  extant in  a draft
  typescript leading directly to  that sent  to the  printer. My  father did
  indeed achieve in that  draft a  form that  required little  further work,
  but  it  was achieved  through much  rewriting as  he typed.(6) This under-
  lines,  I think,  the extreme  improbability that  those other  texts came
  into being at once in a form  that required  scarcely any  further change;
  and  therefore  supports  the  conclusion  that  a good  deal of  the late
  drafting in typescript has been lost.                                     
    But in this case, at any rate, the  loss of  the draft  typescript would
  have  done  little  more  than  distort  the  textual development  in some
  details; it would have  deprived this  history only  of the  Dwarvish name
  Zigilnad of the Silverlode (cf. Zirak-zigil 'Silvertine',  VII.174-5, note
  22) - in itself surprising, in view of Kibil-nala in The Lord of the Rings
  (see note 1).                                                             
    The  draft   typescript,  however,   became  rough   manuscript,  though
  still closely approaching the final form  (RK pp.  356-7), with  the story
  of the great burning of the dead at the end of the Battle  of Azanulbizar,
  and  the  departure  of  Thrain  and  Thorin  Oakenshield  to  Dunland and

 afterwards to a  new home  in exile  in the  Blue Mountains,  where they
 prospered, though forced to  work with  iron. This  section ends,  as in
 the published text, 'But, as  Thror had  said, the  Ring needed  gold to
 breed gold, and of that or any other precious metal  they had  little or
 none.' My father drew a line here, as  if the  text were  completed; but
 the  mention of  the Ring  of Thrain  led him  to say  something further
 about it.  From this  point the  manuscript becomes  rougher, and  as it
 proceeded he wrote so fast that it is only barely legible and  with much
 difficulty; and from  this point  also the  published text  soon departs
 from it altogether.                                                    
                                                                       
 This  Ring was  the last  of the  Seven. It  may well  be that  this was
 known   to   Sauron,   and   that  the   singular  misfortunes   of  his
 House  were  due  to  that.  For  the  days  were  passed when  it would
 bring  profit,  but   demanded  payment   rather,  and   its  possession
 brought  only  the  hate  of   Sauron.  For   the  Dwarves   had  proved
 hard  to  tame.  They  were  too  tough,  being  made  of  a  purpose to
 resist  such  onslaughts  of  evil  will  and  power,  and  though  they
 could  be  slain  or  broken  they  could  not  be  made   into  shadows
 or  slaves  of  any other  will; and  for like  reason their  lives were
 little  affected,  to  live  either  longer  or  shorter because  of the
 Ring.(7) The   more   did   Sauron   hate   them.  Nonetheless   each  pos-
 sessor  kept  his  ring  as  a  secret  unless  he  surrendered  it; and
 though   those   about  him   doubtless  guessed   it,  none   knew  for
 certain that Thrain had the Ring.                                      
   Partly  by  the  very  power  of  the  Ring  therefore   Thrain  after
 some  years  became  restless  and  discontented.   He  could   not  put
 the  thought  of  gold  and  gems  out  of his  mind. Therefore  at last
 when  he  could  bear  it  no longer  his heart  turned again  to Erebor
 and  he  resolved  to  return.  He  said  little to  Thorin of  what was
 in  his  heart.  But  with  Balin  and  Dwalin  and  a  few   others  he
 arose and said farewell and departed (2841).                           
   Little  indeed  is  known   of  what   happened  to   him  afterwards.
 It   would   seem   (from   afterknowledge)  that   no  sooner   was  he
 abroad   with   few  companions   (and  certainly   after  he   came  at
 length  back   into  Rhovanion)   he  was   hunted  by   the  emissaries
 of  Sauron.   Wolves  pursued   him,  orcs   waylaid  him,   evil  birds
 shadowed  his  path,  and  the  more  he  tried  to  go  north  the more
 he  was  driven  back.  One  dark  night,  south  of  Gladden   and  the
 eaves  of  Mirkwood,  he  vanished   out  of   their  camp,   and  after
 long  search  in  vain  his  companions  gave  up  hope   (and  returned
 to  Thorin).  Only  long  after  was  it  known that  he had  been taken
 alive  and  brought  to  the  pits  of  Dol  Guldur  (2845).   There  he

 was  tormented  and  the  Ring  taken  from him;  and there  at last
 (2850) he died.(8)                                                 
   So  it would  seem that  Moria had  ended and  the line  of Durin.
 After  the  sack  of  Erebor  Thorin  Oakenshield  was  but  24 (and
 not  yet  war-worthy  according  to  Dwarf-custom);  but  he  was 53
 at Nanduhirion,  and there  fought in  the van  of the  assault. But
 as  has  been told  the first  assault was  thrown back,  and Thrain
 and Thorin were  driven for  refuge in  a thicket  that grew  in the
 valley  not  far   from  Kheledzaram   before  the   great  burning.
 There  Frerin  Thrain's  son  fell  and Fundin  his cousin  and many
 others,  and  both   Thrain  and   Thorin  were   wounded.  Thorin's
 shield  was  cloven  and he  cast it  away, and  hewing with  an axe
 a branch of an oak tree he held it in his left hand to ward  off the
 strokes of his foes or to wield  as a  club. Thus  he got  his name,
 or also because in memory of  this he  bore ever  after at  his back
 a  shield  made  of  oak wood  without colour  or device,  and vowed
 to do so until he was hailed again as king.(9)                     
   When  Thrain  went  away  Thorin   was  95,   a  great   dwarf  of
 proud  bearing  and  full   manhood.  Maybe   because  rid   of  the
 Ring,  Thorin  long  remained  in  Ered  Luin,  labouring  and jour-
 neying  and  gathering  such wealth  as he  could, until  his people
 had fair houses in the hills, and were not  [? ill  content], though
 in  their  songs  they  spoke ever  of the  Lonely Mountain  and the
 wealth  and bliss  of the  Great Hall  and the  light of  the Arken-
 stone.  But  the  years  lengthened,  and  the  embers of  his heart
 began  to  grow  hot  as  Thorin  brooded  on  the  wrongs   of  his
 house  and  people.  Remembering  too  that  Thror  had   lain  upon
 him the vengeance due to Smaug.                                    
   But  Erebor  was  far away  and his  people only  few; and  he had
 little  hope  that  Dain  Ironfoot  would help  in any  attempt upon
 the  dragon.  For  Thorin  thought  ever  after  the  manner  of his
 kingly   forefathers,   counting   forces   and   weapons   and  the
 chances of war, as his hammer fell on the red iron in his forge.
   It was  at this  point that  Mithrandir entered  the story  of the
 House  of  Durin.  He  had  before  troubled  himself   little  with
 Dwarves.  He was  a friend  to those  of good  will, and  liked well
 the exiles of Durin's Folk that  dwelt in  the west.  But on  a time
 it  happened  that  Mithrandir  was  passing  west  through  Eriador
 (journeying  to  see  Cirdan,  maybe,  or to  visit the  Shire which
 he  had  not  entered  for  some  years)  when   he  fell   in  with
 Thorin  Oakenshield  going  the  same  way,  and  they   spoke  much
 together on the road, and at Bree where they rested.               

   In  the  morning Mithrandir  said to  Thorin: 'I  have thought          
 much in the night. Now if  that seems  good to  you I  will come          
 home with you for a while and  we will  talk further  in greater          
 privacy.'  From  this meeting  there came  many events  of great          
 moment in the matter of the War of  the Ring.  Indeed it  led to          
 the finding of the Ring and to the involvement of the Shire-folk          
 and the means  whereby the  Ring was  at last  destroyed. Where-          
 fore many have supposed  that all  this Mithrandir  purposed and          
 foresaw. But we believe  that is  not so.  For Frodo  wrote this          
 passage in the first copy of the Red Book, which because  of its          
 length was not included in the tale of the War: Those  were glad          
 days  when  after the  crowning we  dwelt in  the fair  house in          
 Minas Tirith with Gandalf ...                                             
                                                                          
   I have given the text  thus far  in order  to make  clearer than  I did,
 or  indeed  was  able  to  do,  in  the  section  The  Quest of  Erebor in
 Unfinished  Tales  how  my  father  originally  introduced  the  story  of
 Gandalf  and  Thorin,  and  the  taking  of  Bilbo on  the journey  to the
 Lonely  Mountain,  into  the  appendix  on  Durin's Folk.  At that  time I
 was unaware of  this text,  and have  only recently  put it  together from
 its  dismembered  parts,  not having  realised what  they were.  I assumed
 that  the  manuscript   which  I   called  A   in  Unfinished   Tales  was
 the  original text;  but the  story that  follows from  the point  where I
 have  left it  above was  my father's  first expression  of the  idea, and
 A  was  a  (moderately)  fair  copy,  much  rewritten  if  not essentially
 changed.(10)                                                              
   He did a great deal of work on this story before 'it had  to go',  as he
 said  years  later (Unfinished  Tales  p.  11).  From  the manuscript  A he
 developed  the  typescript B  (of which  long extracts  were given  in Un-
 finished  Tales), and  B was  clearly designed  to fit  into the  text of
 Durin's Folk as it existed by then (see Unfinished Tales pp. 327-8).(11) I
 shall not follow here the  evolution in  expression and  structure through
 the  texts,  but  I give  two notes  that belong  with the  original manu-
 script, the first of which shows my father's initial thoughts on the story
 before he wrote it.                                                       
                                                                          
   From   2842   onwards   Thorin  lives   in  exile,   but  a   good  many
 of  Durin's  Folk  gather  to  him   in  Ered   Luin.  They   are  reduced
 to  poverty  (since   mines  are   poor)  and   travel  about   as  metal-
 workers.   Thorin   begins   to   think   of   vengeance   on   Smaug  and
 recovery  of  his  wealth,  but  he  can  only envisage  this in  terms of
 war  -  a  gathering  of   all  his   people  and   an  attempt   to  slay
 Smaug.  But  it  is  difficult  to  do.  The  Iron  Hills  are a  long way
 away and elsewhere Durin's Folk are widely scattered.                     
   Gandalf  now  takes  a  hand.  (Since  his  action  led   ultimately  to

 the  finding  of  the  Ring,  and  the  successful  part played  by the
 Hobbits  in  its destruction,  many suppose  that all  this was  in his
 conscious  purpose.  Probably  not.  He  himself   would  say   he  was
 'directed',  or  that  he  was  'meant'  to  take  this course,  or was
 'chosen'.(12) Gandalf was incarnate,  in  [?real] flesh,  and therefore
 his  vision  was  obscured:  he  had  for  the most  part (at  any rate
 before his  'death') to  act as  ordinary people  on reason,  and prin-
 ciples  of  right   and  wrong.)   His  immediate   conscious  purposes
 were  probably  various.  Largely  strategic.  He  knows  it  is Sauron
 in  Dol  Guldur.(13) Knowing  the  situation  in  Gondor  he   may  very
 well  have  feared  the  reoccupation  of  Mordor  (but  not  yet).  At
 present  he  is  concerned  with  Lorien  and  Rivendell -  Sauron will
 certainly  proceed  to  war.  The  presence  of  Smaug and  the depres-
 sion  of  Men  in   the  North   makes  an   attack  that   way  toward
 Angmar   and   against   Rivendell   likely.    Also   he    knew   and
 approved  of  Durin's  Folk.  Also  he  was  very  fond  of  the Shire-
 folk  and  appreciated  .....  Bilbo.  He  wished  the   Shire-folk  to
 be 'educated' (14) before evil   days  came,   and  chose   Bilbo  (un-
 attached) as an instrument.                                            
                                                                       
         In the second passage he was revolving questions arising from
 Gandalf's finding of Thrain dying in Dol Guldur.                       
                                                                       
    'Your  plan  is  grandiose  and belongs  to an  earlier day.  If you
 wish to regain  your wealth  or any  part of  it, you  will have  to go
 yourself  -  with  a  small  band  of your  most faithful  kinsfolk and
 following.'  [Struck  out:  He  then  reveals to  Thorin that]  Why did
 he  not  then  (or  much  earlier)  reveal  to Thorin  that he  had met
 Thrain   in   Dol   Guldur?   Two   answers.   He   had  not   met  him
 [Thorin]  and  did  not  even  know   where  he   was.  From   2850  on
 his  chief  concern  had  been  with  Dol  Guldur  (Saruman)   and  the
 Council.  He  had  not  been  west   for  a   long  time   (Hobbit  pp.
 13-14.  The  Old  Took  died  in  2920,  so  Gandalf  had  not  in 2942
 been  in  the Shire  for 22  years and  then probably  only briefly).(15)
 He   was  probably   unaware  who   the  Dwarf   was  in   Dol  Guldur,
 since   the   7th   Ring   would   be   no   clue  (Dwarves   kept  the
 possession  of  Rings  very  secret),  and  Thrain  did  not  know  his
 own  name  (Hobbit  p.  35).  It  was   probably  only   from  Thorin's
 conversation   that   he   guessed   -   and   produced   the  evidence
 characteristically at a suitable chance.                               
                                                                       
    In the earliest version of the story (and also in the second text A)
 Gandalf made no mention of his finding Thrain in Dol Guldur until       
 the very end of the text, in response  to a  question from  Merry about

 the  map and  the key;  and my  father clearly  introduced it  when the
 problem discussed in this note presented itself.                       
                                                                       
    'But  about  that  map  and  key,'  said  Merry. 'They  proved use-
 ful,  but  you  never  said  anything  to  Thorin  about  this before-
 hand.  Why,  you  must  have  kept  them  by  your  own   account  100
 years without a word!'                                                 
                                                                       
    'I did,' said Gandalf, 'very nearly. 91  to be  exact. But  I assure
 you  I  could  have  done  little  else.  Thrain did  not know  his own
 name  when  I  found  him;  and  I  certainly  did  not  know  his.  By
 what   toughness  of   resistance  he   had  kept   the  key   and  map
 hidden  in  his  torments  I  don't  know.  Maybe  having got  the Ring
 Sauron  troubled  no  further,  but  left  him  to  rave  and  die. But
 of  course  the  map  told  me  the  key  had  something  to   do  with
 Erebor.  But  it  was  far  from  my  concerns  at  the  time.  And for
 long  after  I  was   concerned  with   other  matters,   with  Saruman
 and  his  strange  reluctance   to  disturb   Sauron  in   Dol  Goldur.
 It  was  not  until  my  meeting  with  Thorin  and  conversation  that
 I  suddenly  guessed  who  the  dying  Dwarf  must  have   been.  Well,
 well,  after  that  I kept  the things  back to  the last  moment. They
 just  turned  the  scale,  and   began  to   make  Thorin   accept  the
 idea.'(16)                                                              
                                                                       
    Among  other  material  for Durin's  Folk are  many versions  of the
 genealogical table, beginning with one associated with the  draft type-
 script in which the original form (see pp. 276 - 8) was still retained,
 with only five generations between  Durin VI  (formerly Durin  III) and
 Thror.  The  addition  of (the  first) Oin  and Nain  II arose  when my
 father formulated a specific pattern of aging and  life-span on  a page
 headed 'Notes on Chronology of Durin's  Line', from  which I  cite some
 extracts, very slightly edited for clarity.                            
                                                                       
 Dwarves  of  different  'breeds'  vary  in  their   longevity.  Durin's
 race  were  originally  long-lived  (especially  those   named  Durin),
 but  like  most  other  peoples  they  had  become  less so  during the
 Third  Age.  Their  average  age  (unless  they  met  a  violent death)
 was  about  250  years,  which  they  seldom  fell  far  short  of, but
 could  occasionally  far  exceed (up  to 300).(17) A Dwarf  of  300 was
 about as rare and aged as a Man of 100.                                
    Dwarves  remained  young  -   e.g.  regarded   as  too   tender  for
 really  hard  work  or  for  fighting -  until they  were 30  or nearly
 that  (Dain  II  was  very  young  in  2799  (32)  and  his  slaying of
 Azog  was  a  great feat).  After that  they hardened  and took  on the
 appearance  of  age  (by  human  standards)  very  quickly.   By  forty
 all  Dwarves  looked  much  alike  in  age,  until  they  reached  what

 they  regarded  as  old  age,  about  240.  They then  began to  age and
 wrinkle   and   go   white   quickly   (baldness  being   unknown  among
 them),  unless  they  were  going to  be long-lived,  in which  case the
 process   was   delayed.   Almost  the   only  physical   disorder  they
 suffered  from  (they   were  singularly   immune  from   diseases  such
 as  affected  Men,  and  Halflings)  was  corpulence.  If   in  prosper-
 ous  circumstances,  many  grew  very   fat  at   or  before   200,  and
 could  not  do  much   (save  eat)   afterwards.  Otherwise   'old  age'
 lasted  not  much  more  than ten  years, and  from say  40 or  a little
 before  to  near  240  (two  hundred  years)   the  capacity   for  toil
 (and for fighting) of most Dwarves was equally great.                   
                                                                        
   This is  followed by  the information  attributed to  Gimli concerning
 the  Dwarf-women,  which  was  preserved  in  Appendix  A (RK  p. 360).
 There is no difference in substance in the present text, except  for the
 statements that they are never forced to wed  against their  will (which
 'would of course be impossible'), and that they have beards. This latter
 is said also in the 1951 revision of  the Quenta  Silmarillion  (XI.205,
                                                                        
 $5).                                                                    
   It  is  then  said  that Dwarves  marry late,  seldom before  they are
 ninety or more,(18) that they  have few  children (so many as four being
 rare), and continues:                                                   
                                                                        
 To these  they are  devoted, often  rather fiercely:  that is,  they may
 treat  them  with  apparent  harshness  (especially  in  the  desire  to
 ensure  that  they  shall  grow  up   tough,  hardy,   unyielding),  but
 they  defend  them  with  all  their  power,  and  resent   injuries  to
 them  even  more  than  to  themselves. The  same is  true of  the atti-
 tude  of  children  to  parents.  For  an  injury  to  a father  a Dwarf
 may  spend  a  life-time  in  achieving  revenge.  Since the  'kings' or
 heads  of  lines  are  regarded  as  'parents'  of  the whole  group, it
 will  be  understood  how  it  was  that  the  whole  of   Durin's  Race
 gathered and marshalled itself to avenge Thror.                         
                                                                        
   Finally,  there  is a  note on  the absence  of record  concerning the
 women of the Dwarves:                                                   
                                                                        
 They   are   seldom  named   in  genealogies.   They  join   their  hus-
 bands'  families.  But  if  a  son  is  seen  to  be  110  or  so  years
 younger  than  his  father,  this usually  indicates an  elder daughter.
 Thorin's  sister  Dis  is  named  simply  because  of the  gallant death
 of  her  sons  Fili  and  Kili in  defence of  Thorin II.  The sentiment
 of  affection  for  sister's children  was strong  among all  peoples of
 the  Third  Age,  but  less  so   among  Dwarves   than  Men   or  Elves
 among whom it was strongest.                                            

   The   concluding   passage   in   Appendix   A,   concerning   Gimli  and
 Legolas, was  derived from  the old  text of  the Tale  of Years  (p. 244),
 which had now of course been abandoned.                                    
                                                                           
                                    NOTES.                                   
                                                                           
  1. Since   Kheled-zaram   and   Kibil-nala  as   the  Dwarvish   names  of
     Mirrormere  and  Silverlode  entered  early  in  the  history   of  the
     writing of The Lord of  the Rings  (see VII.167,  174), it  seems clear
     that  the  naming  of  Mirrormere  Kibil-nala here  was a  slip without
     significance,  and  is  unlikely  to  have  any  connection   with  the
     curious  appearance  of  the  name  Zigilnad  for  Silverlode   in  the
     draft typescript of Durin's Folk (p. 279).                             
  2. 'thrice':  the Durin  who was  slain by  the Balrog  in Moria  is named
     in the accompanying genealogical table 'Durin III'.                    
  3. Thorin Oakenshield  was not  the 'last  of the  direct line  of Durin';
     no  doubt  my  father  meant  that  he  was  the  last in  the unbroken
     descent  of  the  kings from  father to  son (cf.  'the right  line was
     broken' a few lines below).                                            
  4. This  addition  was  roughly  written  in  the  margins, with  a number
     of  corrections,  and  the  passage  from  'They  were  victorious ...'
     to 'Dain  their kinsman  went away  to the  Iron Hills'  is put  in the
     present tense.                                                         
  5. The  extension  of  the  line  beyond  Thror  appears  to have  had its
     starting-point  in  my  father's  explanation of  the words  on Thror's
     Map  in.  The  Hobbit  ('Here  of  old  was   Thrain  King   under  the
     Mountain')  as  referring  not  to  Thrain  son  of  Thror  but   to  a
     remote ancestor also named Thrain: see VII.160.                        
  6. My  father's  method  of  composition  at  this  time  was  to continue
     typing,  without  rejecting  anything,  as  the sentences  developed. A
     characteristic if extreme case  is seen  in Dain's  words to  Thrain at
     the end of the Battle of Azanulbizar:                                  
         Only  I  have  passed  seen  looked  through  the  Shadow   of  the
     Gate.  Beyond  the  Shadow  it  waits  for  you  still. The  world must
     change   and   some   other   power  than   ours  must   come,  Durin's
     Bane   before   Some   other   power   must   come   than   ours   must
     come, before Khazad-dum Durin's folk walk again in                     
     By  crossing  out  unwanted  words  and   putting  directions   on  the
     typescript  he  produced  the  passage  that   stands  in   Appendix  A
     (RK p. 356).                                                           
  7. In  a  draft  for  this  passage  my  father  wrote  at this  point the
     following,  which  was  not  repeated:  'The  Ring-wearer  became  rich
     especially in gold:  that is  his dealings  brought him  wealth accord-
     ing to what he traded in: if in lead, lead, if in silver, silver, if in
     gems, then gems more abundant and of greater size and worth.'          

  8.  This  is  where  the  story  of how  Thrain came  to Dol  Guldur was
      first told.                                                         
  9.  The  deaths  of  Frerin  and  Fundin,  and the  retreat to  the wood
      where  Thorin  cut  the  oak-bough from  which he  got his  name (RK
      p. 355  and footnote),  had not  been mentioned  in the  draft type-
      script in the account of the Battle of  Azanulbizar. The  story that
      Thorin carried an unpainted shield of oak wood disappeared.         
 10.  The tone  and total  effect of  the original  version, as  my father
      dashed  it down,  is rather  different from  that of  the subsequent
      texts,  where  the  expression  becomes a  little more  reserved. To
      give a single example, when Thorin (later  Gloin) sneered  at 'those
      absurd  little  rustics  down  in  the  Shire' (cf. Unfinished  Tales
      p.  333),  Gandalf  riposted:  'You  don't  know  much  about  those
      folk, Thorin. If you  think them  all that  simple because  they pay
      you whatever you ask for your bits  of iron  and don't  bargain hard
      like  some  Men,  you're  mistaken.  Now  I  know  one that  I think
      is just  the fellow  for you.  Honest, sensible,  and very  far from
      rash - and brave.'                                                  
 11.  A  begins  with   the  words   'In  the   morning  Thorin   said  to
      Mithrandir  ...',  and  continues  as  in the  third version  B (Un-
      finished  Tales  p.  328): here  it was  Thorin who  invited Gandalf
      to his  home in  the Blue  Mountains, whereas  in the  earliest text
      (p.  282)  it  was  Gandalf who  proposed it.  I do  not know  why A
      should have begun at this point.                                    
 12.  There is here a direction to 'see LR I 65171' (read '70'), which was
      thus already in print.                                              
 13.  From  this  was derived  a passage  in the  earliest version  of the
                                                                         
      story:                                                              
                                                                         
         'Well then, I was I suppose "chosen". But as far as I  was aware,
         I had my reasons for what I did. Don't be abashed  if I  say that
         the  chief  in my  mind was  unconcerned with  you: it  was, well
         "strategic".  When  I  met  Thorin  at  Bree  I  had  long  known
         that  Sauron  was arisen  again in  Dol Guldur,  and every  day I
         expected him to declare himself.'                                
                                                                         
 14.  'Educated' is the  word that  Gandalf used  in the  original version
      of the passage given from the text B in Unfinished Tales p. 331.
         'In 2941 I already  saw that  the Westlands  were in  for another
      very bad time  sooner or  later. Of  quite a  different sort.  And I
      would like the Shire-folk to survive it, if possible. But to do that
      I  thought  they  would  want  something  a   bit  more   than  they
      had had before.  What shall  I say  - the  clannish sort  of stocky,
      sturdy  family  feeling  was  not  quite  enough.  They  were become
      a  bit  parochial,  forgetting their  own stories,  forgetting their
      own  beginnings,  forgetting  what  little  they  had   known  about
      the greatness and peril of the  world -  or of  the allies  they had

      in  it.  It  was not  buried deep,  but it  was getting  buried: memory
      of  the  high  and  noble  and  beautiful. In  short, they  needed edu-
      cation!  I  daresay  he  was  "chosen",  and  I  was  chosen  to choose
      him,  but  I  picked  on  Bilbo  as  an  instrument. You  can't educate
      a whole people at once!'                                               
                                                                            
  15. The  reference  is  to Gandalf's  first appearance  in The  Hobbit: 'He
      had  not  been  down  that  way  under  The  Hill  for  ages  and ages,
      not  since  his  friend the  Old Took  died, in  fact, and  the hobbits
      had  almost  forgotten  what he  looked like.'  - On  the date  of 'The
      Quest of Erebor' given here, 2942, see the Note below.                 
  16. It  was  not  until  text  B  of  The  Quest  of Erebor  that Gandalf's
      account  of  his  finding  Thrain  in  Dol  Guldur  was  moved  back in
      the story (see Unfinished Tales p. 324), though  still in  that version
      Gandalf returned to it again at the end (ibid. p. 336).                
  17. It will be found in the genealogical  table that  the life-span  of all
      the  'kings  of  Durin's  Folk'  from Thrain  I to  Nain II varied only
      between  247  and  256  years,  and  no  Dwarf  in  the  table exceeded
      that,  save  Borin  (261)  and  Dwalin, who  lived to  the vast  age of
      340 (the date of his death appears in all the later texts of the table,
      although the first to give dates seems  - it  is hard  to make  out the
      figures - to make him 251 years old at his death).                     
  18. In  the  genealogical  table  all  the  'kings  of  Durin's  Folk' from
      Nain  I  to  Thorin  Oakenshield  were  born  either  101  or  102  (in
      one case 100) years after their fathers.                               

               Note on the date of the Quest of Erebor.
    Among the papers associated with the original manuscript of the story
    my father set down some notes headed 'Dates already fixed in printed
    narrative are these.'
       Bilbo born 2891 (1291). He was visited in 2942 by Thorin II, since
       that autumn he was 51 (Lord of the Rings Chapter I): therefore
       Battle of Five Armies was in same year, and Thorin II died then.
         Thrain must have 'gone off' (to seek Erebor) in 2842 ('a hundred
       years ago', Hobbit p. 35). (It is thus assumed that after wandering
       he was caught in 2845 and died in dungeons 2850.)
         Dain II is said (LR I p. 241) 'to have passed his 250th year' in
       3018. He was then, say, 251, therefore he was born in 2767 [the
       date given in the genealogy, RK p. 361].
   My father had given the date of Bilbo's birth in 2891 in the Tale of
   Years (p. 238), and he here referred to it as a date 'fixed in printed
   narrative' (The Fellowship of the Ring was published in July 1954,
   and The Two Towers in November). But without Volume III the date
   is fixed in the following way: Frodo left Bag End in September 3018
   (Gandalf's letter that he finally received at Bree was dated 'Midyear's
   Day, Shire Year, 1418'), and he left on his fiftieth birthday (FR p. 74),

 which  was  seventeen  years  after Bilbo's  farewell party  (when Frodo
 was 33); the date of the party was therefore 3001. But that  was Bilbo's
 111th  birthday; and  therefore he  was born  in -  2890. It  seems only
 possible to explain this as a simple miscalculation on my  father's part
 which he never  checked, -  or rather  never checked  until now,  for in
 another  note  among  these  papers  he  went  through the  evidence and
 arrived  at  the date  2890 for  Bilbo's birth,  and therefore  2941 for
 Thorin's visit to him  at Bag  End. This  new date  had been  reached by
 the time that the earliest version of The Quest  of Erebor  was written.
