    PART TWO.
             
 LATE WRITINGS.

                               LATE WRITINGS.                              
                                                                         
 It is a  great convenience  in this  so largely  dateless history  that my
 father  received  from Allen  and Unwin  a quantity  of their  waste paper
 whose blank sides he used for  much of  his late  writing; for  this paper
 consisted  of  publication  notes,  and  many  of  the  pages  bear dates:
 some  from  1967,  the  great  majority  from  1968,  and some  from 1970.
 These dates provide, of course, only a terminus  a quo:  in the  case, for
 instance, of a long essay on the names of the  rivers and  beacon-hills of
 Gondor  (extensively  drawn  on  in  Unfinished  Tales) pages  dated 1967
 were  used,  but  the  work  can be  shown on  other and  entirely certain
 grounds  to have  been written  after June  1969. This  was the  period of
 The  Disaster  of the  Gladden Fields,  Cirion and  Eorl, and  The Battles
 of the Fords of Isen, which I published in Unfinished Tales.             
  It  was  also  a  time  when my  father was  moved to  write extensively,
 in a more  generalised view,  of the  languages and  peoples of  the Third
 Age  and  their  interrelations,  closely  interwoven  with  discussion of
 the  etymology  of  names.  Of this  material I  made a  good deal  of use
 in  the  section  The History  of Galadriel  and Celeborn  (and elsewhere)
 in Unfinished Tales; but I had, of course, to relate it to  the structure
 and content  of that  book, and  the only  way to  do so,  in view  of the
 extremely diffuse and  digressive nature  of my  father's writing,  was by
 the extraction of relevant passages. In this book I give  two of  the most
 substantial of these 'essays', from neither of  which did  I take  much in
 Unfinished Tales.                                                        
  The  first  of  these,  Of  Men and  Dwarves, arose,  as my  father said,
 'from  consideration  of the  Book of  Mazarbul' (that  is, of  his repre-
 sentations  of  the  burnt  and  damaged  leaves, which  were not  in fact
 published  until  after  his  death) and  the inscription  on the  tomb of
 Balin  in  Moria,  but  led far  beyond its  original point  of departure.
 From  this  essay  I  have  excluded the  two passages  that were  used in
 Unfinished  Tales,  the account  of the  Druedain, and  that of  the meet-
 ing  of  the  Numenorean  mariners  with the  Men of  Eriador in  the year
 600  of  the  Second  Age (see  pp. 309,  314). The  second, which  I have
 called  The  Shibboleth  of  Feanor,  is  of a  very different  nature, as
 will  be  seen, and  from this  only a  passage on  Galadriel was  used in
 Unfinished Tales; I have included  also a  long excursus  on the  names of
 the  descendants  of  Finwe,  King of  the Noldor,  which was  my father's
 final,  or  at any  rate last,  statement on  many of  the great  names of

  Elvish legend,  and which  I used  in the  published Silmarillion.  I have
  also given  a third  text, which  I have  called The  Problem of  Ros; and
  following these are some of his last writings, probably  in the  last year
  of his life (p. 377).                                                     
    A word  must be  said of  these 'historical-philological'  essays. Apart
  from  the  very  last, just  referred to,  they were  composed on  a type-
  writer. These texts are, very clearly,  entirely ab  initio; they  are not
  developments  and  refinements of  earlier  versions,  and  they  were not
  themselves  subsequently  developed  and  refined.  The  ideas,   the  new
  narrative  departures,  historical  formulations,  and  etymological  con-
  structions, here first appear in  written form  (which is  not to  say, of
  course,  that they  were not  long in  the preparing),  and in  that form,
  essentially, they  remain. The  texts are  never obviously  concluded, and
  often end in chaotic and illegible or  unintelligible notes  and jottings.
  Some  of  the  writing was  decidedly experimental:  a notable  example is
  the  text  that  I  have called  The Problem  of Ros,  on which  my father
  wrote  'Most  of  this  fails',  on  account  of  a  statement  which  had
  appeared in print, but which he had overlooked  (see p.  371). As  in that
  case, almost all of this work was etymological  in its  inspiration, which
  to a large extent accounts for its extremely discursive nature; for  in no
  study  does  one thing  lead to  another more  rapidly than  in etymology,
  which also of its nature leads out of itself in the attempt to find expla-
  nations  beyond the  purely linguistic  evolution of  forms. In  the essay
  on  the  river-names  of  Gondor  that of  the Gwathlo  led to  an account
  of  the  vast destruction  of the  great forests  of Minhiriath  and Ened-
  waith  by  the  Numenorean  naval  builders  in  the  Second Age,  and its
  consequences  (Unfinished  Tales  pp.  261-3);   from  the   name  Gilrain
  in  the  same  essay  arose  the recounting  of the  legend of  Amroth and
  Nimrodel (ibid. pp. 240 - 3).                                             
    In  the  three  texts  given  here will  be found  many things  that are
  wholly 'new',  such as  the long  sojourn of  the People  of Beor  and the
  People of  Hador on  opposite sides  of the  great inland  Sea of  Rhun in
  the course of their long  migration into  the West,  or the  sombre legend
  of the twin sons  of Feanor.  There will  also be  found many  things that
  run  counter  to  what  had  been  said  in earlier  writings. I  have not
  attempted  in  my  notes to  make an  analysis of  every real  or apparent
  departure of this  kind, or  to adduce  a mass  of reference  from earlier
  phases of the  History; but  I have  drawn attention  to the  clearest and
  most  striking  of  the discrepancies.  At this  time my  father continued
  and intensified his practice  of interposing  notes into  the body  of the
  text as they arose, and they are  abundant and  often substantial.  In the
  texts that follow they are numbered in  the same  series as  the editorial
  notes and are collected at the end of each, the editorial notes being dis-
  tinguished by placing them in square brackets.                            

                                     X.                                  
                                                                        
                            OF DWARVES AND MEN.                          
                                                                        
 This long essay has no title, but on a covering page my father wrote:
  An  extensive  commentary  and  history  of  the  interrelation  of  the
 languages  in  The  Silmarillion  and  The  Lord  of  the  Rings, arising
 from   consideration   of   the   Book   of   Mazarbul,   but  attempting
 to  clarify  and  where necessary  to correct  or explain  the references
 to  such  matters  scattered  in  The  Lord of  the Rings,  especially in
 Appendix F and in Faramir's talk in LR II.                              
 'Faramir's talk'  is a  reference to  the conclusion  of the  chapter The
 Window  on  the  West  in  The  Two Towers.  To a  rough synopsis  of the
 essay he gave the title Dwarves and Men, which I have adopted.          
  The  text was  begun in  manuscript, but  after three  and a  half pages
 becomes typescript for the remainder of its length (28 pages in  all). It
 was  written  on printed  papers supplied  by Allen  and Unwin,  of which
 the latest date  is September  1969. A  portion of  the work  was printed
 in Unfinished Tales, Part Four,  Section 1,  The Druedain,  but otherwise
 little use of it was made in that book. Unhappily the  first page  of the
 text  is  lost  (and  was  already  missing when  I received  my father's
 papers), and  takes up  in the  middle of  a sentence  in a  passage dis-
 cussing knowledge of the Common Speech.                                 
  In relation to the first part of the essay, which is concerned  with the
 Longbeard  Dwarves,  I  have  thought that  it would  be useful  to print
 first what is  said concerning  the language  of the  Dwarves in  the two
 chief antecedent sources. The following is  found in  the chapter  on the
 Dwarves  in  the  Quenta  Silmarillion  as revised  and enlarged  in 1951
 (XI.205, $6):                                                           
                                                                        
  The  father-tongue  of  the  Dwarves  Aule  himself  devised  for  them,
  and  their  languages have  thus no  kinship with  those of  the Quendi.
  The Dwarves do not gladly  teach their  tongue to  those of  alien race;
  and in use they have made it harsh and intricate, so  that of  those few
  whom  they have  received in  full friendship  fewer still  have learned
  it well But they  themselves learn  swiftly other  tongues, and  in con-
  verse  they  use  as  they may  the speech  of Elves  and Men  with whom
  they deal. Yet in secret they use their  own speech  only, and  that (it
  is said) is slow to change; so that  even their  realms and  houses that
  have  been  long  and  far  sundered  may  to  this day  well understand
  one  another.  In  ancient  days  the  Naugrim  dwelt in  many mountains

 of Middle-earth, and there they met  mortal Men  (they say)  long ere
 the  Eldar knew  them; whence  it comes  that of  the tongues  of the
 Easterlings  many  show  kinship with  Dwarf-speech rather  than with
 the speeches of the Elves.                                           
                                                                     
 The second passage is from Appendix F, Dwarves  (with which  cf. the
 original version, p. 35, 515).                                       
    But in  the Third  Age close  friendship still  was found  in many
 places  between  Men  and  Dwarves;  and  it  was  according  to  the
 nature  of  the Dwarves  that, travelling  and labouring  and trading
 about the lands, as they did after the  destruction of  their ancient
 mansions,  they  should  use  the  languages of  men among  whom they
 dwelt. Yet in secret (a secret which, unlike the Elves, they  did not
 willingly unlock, even to their friends) they used their  own strange
 tongue, changed little by the years; for  it had  become a  tongue of
 lore rather than a cradle-speech, and they tended  it and  guarded it
 as a treasure of the past. Few of other race have succeeded in learn-
 ing it. In this history it appears only in such place-names  as Gimli
 revealed to his companions; and  in the  battle-cry which  he uttered
 in the siege of the Hornburg. That at least was  not secret,  and had
 been  heard  on  many  a  field  since  the  world  was  young. Baruk
 Khazad!  Khazad  ai-menu!  'Axes  of  the  Dwarves!  The  Dwarves are
 upon you!'                                                           
    Gimli's own name, however, and the names  of all  his kin,  are of
 Northern  (Mannish)  origin.  Their  own  secret  and  'inner' names,
 their  true  names, the  Dwarves have  never revealed  to any  one of
 alien race. Not even on their tombs do they inscribe them.           
 Here follows the text of the essay which I have called Of Dwarves and
 Men.                                                                 
                                                                     
 ...  only  in talking  to others  of different  race and  tongue, the
 divergence  could  be   great,  and   intercommunication  imperfect.(1)
 But  this was  not always  the case:  it depended  on the  history of
 the  peoples  concerned  and  their   relations  to   the  Numenorean
 kingdoms.   For  instance,   among  the   Rohirrim  there   can  have
 been   very   few  who   did  not   understand  the   Common  Speech,
 and  most must  have been  able to  speak it  fairly well.  The royal
 house,  and  no  doubt  many  other   families,  spoke   (and  wrote)
 it correctly and  familiarly. It  was in  fact King  Theoden's native
 language:  he  was  born  in  Gondor,  and  his  father  Thengel  had
 used  the  Common  Speech  in  his  own  home  even after  his return
 to  Rohan.(2) The Eldar used  it with  the care  and skill  that they
 applied  to  all linguistic  matters, and  being longeval  and reten-
 tive  in  memory  they  tended   indeed,  especially   when  speaking
 formally  or  on  important  matters,  to  use  a   somewhat  archaic
 language.(3)                                                          

   The  Dwarves  were  in  many  ways  a  special  case. They  had an
 ancient  language  of  their  own  which  they  prized  highly;  and
 even  when,  as  among  the  Longbeard  Dwarves  of  the   West,  it
 had  ceased  to  be  their  native  tongue and  had become  a 'book-
 language',  it  was  carefully  preserved  and  taught to  all their
 children  at  an  early  age.  It  thus  served  as a  lingua franca
 between  all  Dwarves  of  all  kinds;  but  it  was also  a written
 language used in all important  histories and  lore, and  in record-
 ing  any  matters  not  intended to  be read  by other  people. This
 Khuzdul  (as  they  called  it),  partly  because  of  their  native
 secretiveness, and partly because of  its inherent  difficulty,(4) was
 seldom learned by those of other race.                             
   The  Dwarves  were  not,  however,  skilled  linguists  -  in most
 matters  they   were  unadaptable   -  and   spoke  with   a  marked
 'dwarvish'  accent.  Also  they  had  never  invented  any  form  of
 alphabetic writing.(5) They   quickly,   however,   recognized  the
 usefulness  of  the  Elvish  systems,  when  they  at   last  became
 sufficiently  friendly with  any of  the Eldar  to learn  them. This
 occurred  mainly  in  the  close  association  of Eregion  and Moria
 in  the  Second  Age.  Now  in  Eregion   not  only   the  Feanorian
 Script,  which  had  long become  a mode  of writing  generally used
 (with  various  adaptations)  among all  'lettered' peoples  in con-
 tact  with  the  Numenorean  settlements,(6) but  also   the  ancient
 'runic'  alphabet  of  Daeron  elaborated  [>  used]  by  the Sindar
 was  known  and  used.  This  was,  no doubt,  due to  the influence
 of  Celebrimbor,  a   Sinda  who   claimed  descent   from  Daeron.(7)
 Nonetheless  even  in  Eregion the  Runes were  mainly a  'matter of
 lore'  and  were  seldom  used  for  informal  matters.  They,  how-
 ever,  caught  the  fancy  of  the  Dwarves;  for while  the Dwarves
 still lived  in populous  mansions of  their own,  such as  Moria in
 particular, and went on journeys only to visit  their own  kin, they
 had  little   intercourse  with   other  peoples   except  immediate
 neighbours,  and  needed  writing  very  little;  though  they  were
 fond of inscriptions, of all kinds, cut in stone. For  such purposes
 the Runes were convenient, being originally devised for them.      
   The   Longbeard   Dwarves   therefore   adopted  the   Runes,  and
 modified  them  for  their  own uses  (especially the  expression of
 Khuzdul); and  they adhered  to them  even far  into the  Third Age,
 when  they  were   forgotten  by   others  except   the  loremasters
 of  Elves  and  Men.  Indeed  it  was  generally  supposed   by  the
 unlearned  that  they  had been  invented by  the Dwarves,  and they
 were widely known as 'dwarf-letters'.(8)                           
   Here  we  are  concerned   only  with   the  Common   Speech.  Now

 the  Common  Speech,  when  written  at  all,  had  from  its begin-
 ning  been  expressed  in the  Feanorian Script.(9) Only occasionally
 and  in  inscriptions  not  written with  pen or  brush did  some of
 the Elves of Sindarin  descent use  the Runes  of Daeron,  and their
 spelling  was  then  dependent  on  the  already  established usages
 of  the  Feanorian Script.  The Dwarves  had originally  learned the
 Common  Speech  by  ear  as  best  they could,  and had  no occasion
 to write  it; but  in the  Third Age  they had  been obliged  in the
 course  of  trade and  other dealings  with Men  and Elves  to learn
 to  read  the  Common  Speech  as  written,  and  many had  found it
 convenient  to  learn  to  write  it according  to the  then general
 customs  of  the  West.  But  this  they only  did in  dealings with
 other  peoples.  For  their  own  purposes they  (as has  been said)
 preferred the Runes and adhered to them.                           
   Therefore  in  such  documents  as  the  Book  of  Mazarbul  - not
 'secret'   but   intended  primarily   for  Dwarves,   and  probably
 intended  later  to  provide  material for  chronicles (10) - they used
 the  Runes. But  the spelling  was mixed  and irregular.  In general
 and  by intention  it was  a transcription  of the  current spelling
 of  the  Common  Speech  into  Runic  terms;  but  this   was  often
 'incorrect',  owing  to  haste  and   the  imperfect   knowledge  of
 the  Dwarves;  and  it  was  also  mingled  with  numerous  cases of
 words  spelt  phonetically  (according to  the pronunciation  of the
 Dwarves) - for  instance, letters  that had  in the  colloquial pro-
 nunciation  of  the  late  Third  Age  ceased  to have  any function
 were sometimes omitted.(11)                                        
   In   preparing   an  example   of  the   Book  of   Mazarbul,  and
 making  three  torn and  partly  illegible pages,(12) I followed the
 general   principle   followed   throughout:   the   Common   Speech
 was to be represented as  English of  today, literary  or colloquial
 as  the  case  demanded.  Consequently  the   text  was   cast  into
 English spelt as at present, but modified as it might be  by writers
 in  haste  whose familiarity  with the  written form  was imperfect,
 and  who were  also (on  the first and third  pages) transliterating
 the  English  into  a  different  alphabet  - one  that did  not for
 instance  employ  any  letter  in  more  than  one  distinct  value,
 so that  the distribution  of English  k, c  - c,  s was  reduced to
 k  -  s;  while the  use of  the letters  for s  and z  was variable
 since English uses s  frequently as  = z.  In addition,  since docu-
 ments of  this kind  nearly always  show uses  of letters  or shapes
 that  are  peculiar  and  rarely  or  never  found elsewhere,  a few
 such  features are  also introduced:  as the  signs for  the English

 vowel pairs ea, oa, ou (irrespective of their sounds).              
   This is all very well,  and perhaps  gives some  idea of  the kind
 of  text Gandalf  was trying  to read  in great  haste in  the Cham-
 ber  of  Mazarbul.  It also  accords with  the general  treatment of
 the  languages  in  The  Lord of  the Rings:  only the  actual words
 and  names  of  the  period  that  are   in  Elvish   languages  are
 preserved  in  what  is  supposed  to  have  been their  real form.(13)
 Also,  this  treatment  was  imposed  by the  fact that,  though the
 actual  Common  Speech  was  sketched  in  structure   and  phonetic
 elements,  and  a  number of  words invented,  it was  quite imposs-
 ible to translate  even such  short extracts  into its  real contem-
 porary form, if they were visibly represented. But  it is  of course
 in  fact  an erroneous  extension of  the general  linguistic treat-
 ment. It is one thing to represent all the dialogue of the  story in
 varying  forms  of  English:  this must  be supposed  to be  done by
 'translation'  -  from   memory  of   unrecorded  sounds,   or  from
 documents  lost  or  not  printed,  whether this  is stated  or not,
 whenever  it  is  done  in  any  narrative  dealing with  past times
 or foreign lands. But it is quite another  thing to  provide visible
 facsimiles or representations  of writings  or carvings  supposed to
 be of the date of the events in the narrative.(14)                  
   The true parallel in such a case  is the  glimpse of  Quenya given
 in Galadriel's Farewell - either in a transcription into  our alpha-
 bet  (to make  the style  of the  language more  easily appreciated)
 or  in  the  contemporary script  (as in  The Road  Goes Ever  On) -
 followed  by  a  translation.  Since,  as  noted,  the  provision of
 a  contemporary   text  in   the  actual   Common  Speech   was  not
 possible, the  only proper  procedure was  to provide  a translation
 into  English of  the legible  words of  the pages  hastily examined
 by Gandalf.(15) This was  done  in  the  text; and  short of  a con-
 struction  of  the  actual  Common  Speech  sufficient to  allow the
 text to be in its contemporary  form, all  that can  legitimately be
 done.                                                               
                                                                    
   A special difficulty is  presented by  the inscription  on Balin's
 tomb. This is effective in its place: giving an idea of the style of
 the  Runes  when  incised  with  more  care  for  a  solemn purpose,
 and providing  a glimpse  of a  strange tongue;  though all  that is
 really necessary for the tale is the  six lines  on I.334 (16)(with the
 translation of the inscription in bigger and bolder  lettering). The
 actual  representation  of  the  inscription  has however  landed in
 some absurdities.(17)                                               
   The  use  in  the  inscription  of  the  older and  more 'correct'

 values and  shapes of  the Angerthas,  and not  the later  'usage of
 Erebor',  is  not  absurd  (though  possibly an  unnecessary elabor-
 ation); it is in accord with the  history of  the Runes  as sketched
 in  the  Appendix  E.  The  older  Runes  would be  used for  such a
 purpose, since  they were  used in  Moria before  the flight  of the
 Dwarves,  and  would  appear in  other inscriptions  of like  kind -
 and  Balin  was  claiming  to  be   the  descendant   and  successor
 of  the  former  Lords  of  Moria.  The  use  of   the  Dwarf-tongue
 (Khuzdul) is possible in so short an inscription, since  this tongue
 has  been  sketched  in  some detail  of structure,  if with  a very
 small  vocabulary.  But the  names Balin  and Fundin  are in  such a
 context  absurd.  The  Dwarves,  as  is   stated in III.411,(18) had
 names  in  their  own  language;  these they  only used  among them-
 selves (on  solemn occasions)  and kept  strictly secret  from other
 peoples,  and  therefore  never  spelt  them   out  in   writing  or
 inscriptions meant for or likely to be seen  by strangers.  In times
 or  places where  they had  dealings, in  trade or  friendship, with
 their neighbours, they adopted 'outer names' for convenience.(19)  
 These  names  were  in  form  generally suited  to the  structure of
 the  Common   Speech  [>   the  structure   of  the   language  from
 which  they  were   derived].  Very   frequently  they   had  recog-
 nizable  meanings in  that language,  or were  names current  in it;
 sometimes  they  were  names  [>  current in  it, being  names] used
 by   neighbouring   Men   among   whom   they   dwelt,    and   were
 derived  from  the  local  Mannish  language  in  which  they  might
 have  a  still known  meaning, though  this was  not often  the case
 [this  phrase  struck out].(20) Whether   the  adopted   names  that
 had  meanings  were  selected  because   these  meanings   had  some
 relation  to  their  secret  'inner'  names  cannot  be  determined.
 The  adopted   names  could   be  and   sometimes  were   changed  -
 usually  in  consequence  of some  event, such  as the  migration of
 either the Dwarves or their friends that separated them.           
   The  case  of  the  Dwarves  of  Moria  was  an  example  of adop-
 tion  of  names  from  Mannish  languages  of  the  North,  not from
 the  Common Speech.(21) It  might have  been better  in that  case to
 have  given  them in  their actual  forms. But  in carrying  out the
 theory  (necessary  for  the  lessening  of  the  load  of invention
 of  names  in  different  styles  of  language), that  names derived
 from  the  Mannish  tongues  and dialects  of the  West historically
 related  to  the  Common  Speech  should  be  represented  by  names
 found  (or  made  of  elements  found   in)  languages   related  to
 English,  the  Dwarvish  names  were  taken  from  Norse:  since the

 Mannish  language  from  which  they  were  adopted   was  closely
 related  to  the more  southerly language  from which  was derived
 the  language  of Rohan  (represented as  Old English,  because of
 its greater archaism in form  as compared  with those  elements in
 the  Common  Speech  derived  from  the  languages  of   the  same
 kinship).  In  consequence  such  names as  Balin, etc.  would not
 have  appeared  in  any  contemporary  inscription   using  actual
 Khuzdul.(22)                                                      
                                                                  
            Relations of the Longbeard Dwarves and Men.(23)        
                                                                  
 In  the  Dwarvish traditions  of the  Third Age  the names  of the
 places  where  each  of  the Seven  Ancestors had  'awakened' were
 remembered;  but  only  two  of  them  were  known  to  Elves  and
 Men of the West:  the most  westerly, the  awakening place  of the
 ancestors of the Firebeards and  the Broadbeams;  and that  of the
 ancestor of  the Longbeards,(24) the eldest  in making  and awaken-
 ing. The first had been in the north of the Ered Lindon, the great
 eastern  wall of  Beleriand, of  which the  Blue Mountains  of the
 Second  and  later  ages  were  the remnant;  the second  had been
 Mount  Gundabad  (in  origin  a  Khuzdul  name), which  was there-
 fore  revered  by  the Dwarves,  and its  occupation in  the Third
 Age by the Orks of Sauron was one of the  chief reasons  for their
 great  hatred of  the Orks.(25) The other two places were eastward,
 at  distances  as  great  or  greater than  that between  the Blue
 Mountains and Gundabad: the  arising of  the Ironfists  and Stiff-
 beards,  and  that  of  the  Blacklocks  and   Stonefoots.  Though
 these  four  points  were  far sundered  the Dwarves  of different
 kindreds  were  in  communication,  and  in  the early  ages often
 held  assemblies  of  delegates  at  Mount  Gundabad. In  times of
 great need even the most distant would send help  to any  of their
 people; as was the case in the great War  against the  Orks (Third
 Age  2793  to 2799).  Though they  were loth  to migrate  and make
 permanent  dwellings  or  'mansions'   far  from   their  original
 homes,  except  under great  pressure from  enemies or  after some
 catastrophe such as  the ruin  of Beleriand,  they were  great and
 hardy travellers and skilled road-makers;  also, all  the kindreds
 shared a common language.(26)                                     
    But  in  far distant  days the  Dwarves were  secretive [struck
 out:  -  and  none  more  so than  the Longbeards  -] and  had few
 dealings  with the  Elves. In  the West  at the  end of  the First
 Age  the  dealings of  the Dwarves  of the  Ered Lindon  with King
 Thingol  ended in  disaster and  the ruin  of Doriath,  the memory

 of  which  still  poisoned  the  relations of  Elves and  Dwarves in
 after ages. At that time  the migrations  of Men  from the  East and
 South   had   brought  advance-guards   into  Beleriand;   but  they
 were  not  in  great  numbers,  though further  east in  Eriador and
 Rhovanion  (especially  in  the northern  parts) their  kindred must
 already   have   occupied   much   of   the  land.   There  dealings
 between  Men  and  the   Longbeards  must   soon  have   begun.  For
 the  Longbeards,  though  the  proudest   of  the   seven  kindreds,
 were  also  the  wisest  and the  most farseeing.  Men held  them in
 awe  and  were  eager  to  learn  from  them;  and   the  Longbeards
 were very  willing to  use Men  for their  own purposes.  Thus there
 grew up in those regions  the economy,  later characteristic  of the
 dealings  of  Dwarves  and  Men  (including  Hobbits):   Men  became
 the  chief  providers  of  food, as  herdsmen, shepherds,  and land-
 tillers,  which  the  Dwarves  exchanged   for  work   as  builders,
 roadmakers,  miners,  and  the  makers  of  things  of  craft,  from
 useful  tools  to  weapons  and  arms  and  many  other   things  of
 great cost and skill. To the great profit of  the Dwarves.  Not only
 to  be  reckoned  in  hours  of  labour, though  in early  times the
 Dwarves  must  have  obtained  goods  that   were  the   product  of
 greater and longer toil than the things or  services that  they gave
 in  exchange  -  before  Men  became  wiser  and   developed  skills
 of  their  own. The  chief advantage  to them  was their  freedom to
 proceed  unhindered  with  their  own  work  and  to   refine  their
 arts, especially in metallurgy, to the marvellous skill  which these
 reached before the decline and dwindling of the Khazad.            
                                                                   
   This  system  developed  slowly,  and  it  was  long   before  the
 Longbeards  felt  any  need to  learn the  language of  their neigh-
 bours,  still  less  to  adopt names  by which  they could  be known
 individually to 'outsiders'. This  process began  not in  barter and
 trade,  but  in  war;  for  the  Longbeards  had   spread  southward
 down  the  Vales  of  Anduin  and  had  made  their  chief 'mansion'
 and  stronghold  at  Moria;  and  also eastward  to the  Iron Hills,
 where  the  mines  were  their  chief   source  of   iron-ore.  They
 regarded the Iron Hills,  the Ered  Mithrin, and  the east  dales of
 the  Misty  Mountains  as  their  own  land.  But  they  were  under
 attack  from  the  Orks  of Morgoth.  During the  War of  the Jewels
 and   the   Siege   of   Angband,  when   Morgoth  needed   all  his
 strength,  these  attacks   ceased;  but   when  Morgoth   fell  and
 Angband  was  destroyed  hosts  of  the  Orks  fled  eastwards seek-
 ing  homes.  They  were  now  masterless  and  without  any  general
 leadership,  but  they  were  well-armed  and very  numerous, cruel,

 savage, and reckless in assault. In the battles that  followed the
 Dwarves  were  outnumbered,   and  though   they  were   the  most
 redoubtable warriors of all  the Speaking  Peoples they  were glad
 to make alliance with Men.(27)                                  
   The  Men  with  whom  they  were  thus  associated were  for the
 most  part  akin in  race and  language with  the tall  and mostly
 fair-haired  people  of the  'House of  Hador', the  most renowned
 and  numerous  of the  Edain, who  were allied  with the  Eldar in
 the War  of the  Jewels. These  Men, it  seems, had  come westward
 until  faced  by  the  Great  Greenwood,  and  then  had  divided:
 some  reaching  the  Anduin  and passing  thence northward  up the
 Vales;  some  passing  between  the  north-eaves  of the  Wood and
 the Ered Mithrin. Only a small part of  this people,  already very
 numerous and divided  into many  tribes, had  then passed  on into
 Eriador and  so come  at last  to Beleriand.  They were  brave and
 loyal folk, truehearted, haters of Morgoth  and his  servants; and
 at  first  had  regarded  the Dwarves  askance, fearing  that they
 were under the  Shadow (as  they said).(28) But they were  glad of
 the alliance, for they were more vulnerable to the attacks  of the
 Orks:  they dwelt  largely in  scattered homesteads  and villages,
 and if they drew together  into small  townships they  were poorly
 defended,  at  best  by dikes  and wooden  fences. Also  they were
 lightly armed, chiefly with bows,  for they  had little  metal and
 the few smiths among  them had  no great  skill. These  things the
 Dwarves  amended  in  return  for  one  great  service   that  Men
 could  offer.  They  were  tamers  of beasts  and had  learned the
 mastery of horses, and many were skilled and fearless riders.(29)
 These would  often ride  far afield  as scouts  and keep  watch on
 movements  of their  enemies; and  if the  Orks dared  to assemble
 in the open for  some great  raid, they  would gather  great force
 of  horsed archers  to surround  them and  destroy them.  In these
 ways  the  Alliance of  Dwarves and  Men in  the North  came early
 in  the  Second  Age to  command great  strength, swift  in attack
 and valiant and well-protected in  defence, and  there grew  up in
 that  region  between  Dwarves  and  Men  respect and  esteem, and
 sometimes warm friendship.                                       
   It  was  at  that time,  when the  Dwarves were  associated with
 Men both in war and in  the ordering  of the  lands that  they had
 secured,(30) that the Longbeards  adopted  the  speech  of Men for
 communication  with  them.  They  were  not  unwilling   to  teach
 their  own  tongue  to  Men  with  whom  they had  special friend-
 ship,  but  Men found  it difficult  and were  slow to  learn more

 than  isolated words,  many of  which they  adapted and  took into
 their  own  language.  But  on  one point  the Longbeards  were as
 rigidly secretive as all other Dwarves. For reasons  which neither
 Elves  nor Men  ever fully  understood they  would not  reveal any
 personal names to people of other kin,(31) nor later when they had
 acquired  the  arts of  writing allow  them ever  to be  carved or
 written.  They  therefore  took  names  by  which  they  could  be
 known  to their  allies in  Mannish forms.(32) This custom endured
 among  the  Longbeards  into  the  Fourth   Age  and   beyond  the
 view of these  histories. It  would appear  that when  speaking to
 Men  with  whom  they  had  close  friendship,  and   would  speak
 together  of  the histories  and memories  of their  peoples, they
 also  gave  similar names  to Dwarves  remembered in  their annals
 long  before  the  meeting  of  Dwarves  and  Men.  But  of  these
 ancient  times  only  one  name  was in  the Third  Age preserved:
 Durin,  the  name they  gave to  the prime  ancestor of  the Long-
 beards  and  by  which  he  was  known  to  Elves  and   Men.  (It
 appears to  have been  simply a  word for  'king' in  the language
 of the  Men of  the North  of the  Second Age.)(33) The names of the
 Longbeards  otherwise  are not  known in  lists going  back before
 the  ruin of  Moria (Khazad-dum),  Third Age  1980;  but  they are
 all of the same kind, sc. in a long 'dead' Mannish language.      
   This  can  only  be  explained  by  supposing  that  these names
 from  the  early  Second  Age  had  been  adopted by  the Dwarves,
 and preserved with  as little  change as  their own  language, and
 continued  to  be given  (and often  repeated) for  something like
 four  thousand  years  or  more since  the Alliance  was destroyed
 by the power  of Sauron!  In this  way they  soon became  to later
 Men  specially  Dwarvish  names,(34) and  the  Longbeards  acquired
 a vocabulary of  traditional names  peculiar to  themselves, while
 still keeping their true 'inner' names completely secret.         
                                                                  
   Very  great  changes  came  to  pass  as  the  Second  Age  pro-
 ceeded.  The  first  ships  of  the  Numenoreans appeared  off the
 coasts  of  Middle-earth  about  Second  Age  600,  but  no rumour
 of  this  portent  reached the  distant North.  At the  same time,
 however,  Sauron  came  out  of  hiding  and  revealed  himself in
 fair form. For  long he  paid little  heed to  Dwarves or  Men and
 endeavoured  to win  the friendship  and trust  of the  Eldar. But
 slowly he reverted again to  the allegiance  of Morgoth  and began
 to  seek  power  by  force,  marshalling  again and  directing the
 Orks and other evil things of the First  Age, and  secretly build-
 ing his great fortress in the mountain-girt land in the South that

  was  afterwards  known  as  Mordor.  The  Second  Age  had reached
  only  the  middle  of  its  course  (c. Second  Age 1695)  when he
  invaded  Eriador  and  destroyed  Eregion,  a  small  realm estab-
  lished  by the  Eldar migrating  from the  ruin of  Beleriand that
  had formed an  alliance also  with the  Longbeards of  Moria. This
  marked  the  end of  the Alliance  of the  Longbeards with  Men of
  the  North.  For  though  Moria  remained  impregnable   for  many
  centuries,  the  Orks  reinforced  and  commanded  by  servants of
  Sauron  invaded  the  mountains  again.  Gundabad   was  re-taken,
  the   Ered   Mithrin  infested   and  the   communication  between
  Moria  and  the Iron  Hills for  a time  cut off.  The Men  of the
  Alliance were involved in war not  only with  Orks but  with alien
  Men  of  evil  sort. For  Sauron had  acquired dominion  over many
  savage tribes in the East (of  old corrupted  by Morgoth),  and he
  now  urged  them  to seek  land and  booty in  the West.  When the
  storm  passed,(35) the  Men  of the  old Alliance  were diminished
  and scattered, and  those that  lingered on  in their  old regions
  were impoverished, and  lived mostly  in caves  or in  the borders
  of the Forest.                                                     
                                                                    
    The Elvish loremasters held that  in the  matter of  language the
  changes in speech (as in all the ways of their lives) of the Speak-
  ing  Peoples  were far  slower in  the Elder  Days than  they later
  became.  The tongue  of the  Eldar changed  mainly by  design; that
  of  the  Dwarves  resisted  change  by  their  own  will;  the many
  languages  of  Men  changed  heedlessly  in  the  swift  passing of
  their  generations.  All  things  changed  in  Arda,  even  in  the
  Blessed  Realm  of  the  Valar; but  there the  change was  so slow
  that it could not be observed (save  maybe by  the Valar)  in great
  ages  of  time.  The  change  in  the language  of the  Eldar would
  thus have  been halted  in Valinor;(36) but in their early  days the
  Eldar  continued  to  enlarge  and  refine  their language,  and to
  change  it,  even in  structure and  sounds. Such  change, however,
  to  remain  uniform  required  that  the  speakers   should  remain
  in  communication.  Thus  it  came  about  that  the  languages  of
  the  Eldar  that  remained  in   Middle-earth  diverged   from  the
  language  of  the  High Eldar  of Valinor  so greatly  that neither
  could  be  understood  by  speakers  of  the  other;  for  they had
  been  separated  for a  great age  of time,  during which  even the
  Sindarin, the  best preserved  of those  in Middle-earth,  had been
  subject to  the heedless  changes of  passing years,  changes which
  the Teleri  were far  less concerned  to restrain  or to  direct by
  design than the Noldor.                                            

                                  II.                              
                   The Atani and their Languages.(37)              
                                                                  
 Men  entered  Beleriand  late  in  the First  Age. Those  with whom
 we  are  here  concerned  and  of  whose  languages   some  records
 later were preserved  belonged mostly  to three  peoples, differing
 in speech and in  race, but  known in  common to  the Eldar  as the
 Atani (Sindarin Edain).(38) These Atani were  the vanguard  of far
 larger  hosts  of  the  same  kinds  moving  westwards.   When  the
 First  Age  ended  and  Beleriand  was destroyed,  and most  of the
 Atani  who  survived  had  passed  over   sea  to   Numenor,  their
 laggard kindred were either  in Eriador,  some settled,  some still
 wandering,  or  else  had  never  passed  the  Misty  Mountains and
 were scattered in the lands between the Iron Hills  and the  Sea of
 Rhun  eastward  and  the  Great  Forest, in  the borders  of which,
 northward and eastward, many were already settled.                
  The  Atani  and  their  kin  were the  descendants of  peoples who
 in  the  Dark  Ages  had  resisted  Morgoth  or had  renounced him,
 and  had  wandered  ever  westward  from  their  homes far  away in
 the  East  seeking  the  Great  Sea,  of  which distant  rumour had
 reached  them.  They  did not  know that  Morgoth himself  had left
 Middle-earth;(39) for they were ever  at war  with the  vile things
 that  he  had  bred,  and  especially  with  Men  who had  made him
 their  God  and  believed  that  they  could  render  him  no  more
 pleasing service than to  destroy the  'renegades' with  every kind
 of cruelty. It was  in the  North of  Middle-earth, it  would seem,
 that  the 'renegades'  survived in  sufficient numbers  to maintain
 their independence as brave and  hardy peoples;  but of  their past
 they preserved only legends,  and their  oral histories  reached no
 further back than a few generations of Men.                       
  When  their  vanguards  at  last reached  Beleriand and  the West-
 ern  Shores  they  were  dismayed.  For they  could go  no further,
 but  they  had  not  found peace,  only lands  engaged in  war with
 Morgoth  himself,  who  had  fled  back  to  Middle-earth. 'Through
 ages forgotten,' they said,  'we have  wandered, seeking  to escape
 from  the  Dominions  of  the  Dark  Lord and  his Shadow,  only to
 find him here before  us.(40) But  being  people  both  brave  and
 desperate they at once became allies  of the  Eldar, and  they were
 instructed   by   them   and  became   ennobled  and   advanced  in
 knowledge and in arts. In the final years of the War of  the Jewels
 they  provided  many  of  the  most  valiant warriors  and captains
 in the armies of the Elvish kings.                                

   The  Atani  were  three  peoples,  independent   in  organisation
 and  leadership,  each  of  which  differed in  speech and  also in
 form  and  bodily features  from the  others -  though all  of them
 showed traces  of mingling  in the  past with  Men of  other kinds.
 These  peoples  the  Eldar  named  the  Folk of  Beor, the  Folk of
 Hador, and the Folk of Haleth,  after the  names of  the chieftains
 who  commanded  them  when  they  first  came  to  Beleriand.(41) The
 Folk of Beor  were the  first Men  to enter  Beleriand -  they were
 met in the dales of  East Beleriand  by King  Finrod the  Friend of
 Men,  for  they  had  found  a  way over  the Mountains.  They were
 a  small  people, having  no more,  it is  said, than  two thousand
 full-grown  men;  and  they  were poor  and ill-equipped,  but they
 were  inured  to  hardship  and  toilsome  journeys  carrying great
 loads, for they had no beasts of burden. Not  long after  the first
 of  the  three  hosts  of  the Folk  of Hador  came up  from south-
 ward,  and  two  others   of  much   the  same   strength  followed
 before the  fall of  the year.  They were  a more  numerous people;
 each host  was as  great as  all the  Folk of  Beor, and  they were
 better  armed  and  equipped;  also  they  possessed  many  horses,
 and  some  asses  and  small flocks  of sheep  and goats.  They had
 crossed  Eriador  and  reached  the eastern  feet of  the Mountains
 (Ered  Lindon) a  year or  more ahead  of all  others, but  had not
 attempted  to  find  any  passes,  and  had  turned away  seeking a
 road   round  the   Mountains,  which,   as  their   horsed  scouts
 reported,  grew  ever  lower  as they  went southwards.  Some years
 later, when  the other  folk were  settled, the  third folk  of the
 Atani  entered  Beleriand.(42) They  were  probably   more  numerous
 than  the  Folk  of Beor,  but no  certain count  of them  was ever
 made;  for  they  came  secretly in  small parties  and hid  in the
 woods  of  Ossiriand  where  the Elves  showed them  no friendship.
 Moreover  they  had  strife  among  themselves,  and  Morgoth,  now
 aware  of  the  coming  of  hostile  Men  into Beleriand,  sent his
 servants  to  afflict  them.  Those  who eventually  moved westward
 and  entered  into  friendship  and  alliance  with the  Eldar were
 called  the  Folk  of  Haleth,  for  Haleth was  the name  of their
 chieftainess  who  led  them to  the woods  north of  Doriath where
 they were permitted to dwell.                                     
   The  Folk  of  Hador  were ever  the greatest  in numbers  of the
 Atani,  and  in  renown (save  only Beren  son of  Barahir descend-
 ant of Beor). For the most part they were tall people,  with flaxen
 or  golden  hair  and  blue-grey  eyes,  but there  were not  a few
 among  them  that had  dark hair,  though all  were fair-skinned.(43)

 Nonetheless they  were akin  to the  Folk of  Beor, as  was shown
 by their speech. It needed no  lore of  tongues to  perceive that
 their  languages were  closely related,  for although  they could
 understand one another only  with difficulty  they had  very many
 words  in  common.  The  Elvish  loremasters (44) were of opinion
 that both  languages were  descended from  one that  had diverged
 (owing  to  some division  of the  people who  had spoken  it) in
 the course of, maybe, a thousand  years of  the slower  change in
 the First Age.(45) Though the time might well have been less, and
 change quickened by a mingling  of peoples;  for the  language of
 Hador  was  apparently less  changed and  more uniform  in style,
 whereas  the  language  of  Beor  contained  many  elements  that
 were alien  in character.  This contrast  in speech  was probably
 connected with  the observable  physical differences  between the
 two  peoples.  There  were  fair-haired men  and women  among the
 Folk of  Beor, but  most of  them had  brown hair  (going usually
 with brown eyes), and many were  less fair  in skin,  some indeed
 being  swarthy.  Men  as  tall  as  the Folk  of Hador  were rare
 among them, and most were broader and more heavy in build.(46)  
 In association with the Eldar, especially  with the  followers of
 King  Finrod,  they  became  as  enhanced  in  arts  and  manners
 as the Folk of Hador, but  if these  surpassed them  in swiftness
 of mind and body, in daring and noble generosity,(47) the  Folk of
 Beor were  more steadfast  in endurance  of hardship  and sorrow,
 slow to tears or to laughter; their fortitude  needed no  hope to
 sustain it. But these differences  of body  and mind  became less
 marked as  their short  generations passed,  for the  two peoples
 became  much  mingled by  intermarriage and  by the  disasters of
 the War.(48)                                                    
   The Folk of Haleth were  strangers to  the other  Atani, speak-
 ing  an  alien  language; and  though later  united with  them in
 alliance  with  the Eldar,  they remained  a people  apart. Among
 themselves  they  adhered to  their own  language, and  though of
 necessity  they  learned  Sindarin  for  communication  with  the
 Eldar and the other Atani, many spoke it  haltingly, and  some of
 those  who  seldom  went beyond  the borders  of their  own woods
 did not use it at all.(49) They did not willingly adopt new things
 or customs, and retained  many practices  that seemed  strange to
 the Eldar and the other Atani,  with whom  they had  few dealings
 except in  war. Nonetheless  they were  esteemed as  loyal allies
 and  redoubtable warriors,  though the  companies that  they sent
 to  battle beyond  their borders  were small.  For they  were and

 remained  to  their  end  a  small  people,  chiefly  concerned  to pro-
 tect  their  own  woodlands,  and  they  excelled  in   forest  warfare.
 Indeed  for  long  even  those  Orks  specially  trained for  this dared
 not  set  foot  near  their  borders.  One  of  the   strange  practices
 spoken  of  was  that  many  of  their   warriors  were   women,  though
 few  of  these  went  abroad  to  fight  in  the  great   battles.  This
 custom   was   evidently   ancient;(50) for their   chieftainess  Haleth
 had   been   a   renowned   amazon   with   a   picked    bodyguard   of
 women.                                                                  
                                                                        
   At  this  point  a  heading  is  pencilled  on  the typescript:  m The
   Druedain (Pukel-men); after this there are  no further  divisions with
   sub-titles  inserted.  Together  with  the  concluding   paragraph  of
   section  II  printed  above,  the  account  of  the Druedain  that now
   follows  is  given  in Unfinished Tales,  pp. 377-82,  concluding with
   the story called The Faithful Stone; and  there is  no need  to repeat
   this here.(51) At the end  of the  story is  a passage  contrasting Drugs
   and  Hobbits,  which  since  it  was  given in  curtailed form  in Un-
   finished Tales (p. 382) is printed here in full; the present text then
   continues to the end, or rather abandonment, of the essay.            
                                                                        
 This  long  account  of  the  Druedain  has   been  given,   because  it
 throws  some  light  on  the  Wild Men  still surviving  at the  time of
 the  War  of  the  Ring  in  the  eastern  end  of the  White Mountains,
 and  on  Merry's  recognition  of  them  as living  forms of  the carved
 Pukel-men   of   Dun   Harrow.   The   presence   of   members   of  the
 same   race   among   the   Edain  in   Beleriand  thus   makes  another
 backward   link   between   The  Lord   of  the   Rings  and   The  Sil-
 marillion,   and   allows  the   introduction  of   characters  somewhat
 similar  to  the  Hobbits  of The  Lord of  the Rings  into some  of the
 legends  of  the  First  Age  (e.g.  the old  retainer (Sadog)  of Hurin
 in the legend of Turin).(52)                                            
                                                                        
   The  Drugs  or  Pukel-men  are  not  however   to  be   confused  with
 or  thought  of  as  a  mere  variant  on  the  hobbit theme.  They were
 quite  different  in  physical  shape  and  appearance.   Their  average
 height  (four  feet)  was  only  reached  by  exceptional  hobbits; they
 were  of  heavier  and  stronger  build;   and  their   facial  features
 were   unlovely   (judged  by   general  human   standards).  Physically
 they  shared  the  hairlessness  of  the  lower  face;  but   while  the
 head-hair  of  the  hobbits   was  abundant   (but  close   and  curly),
 the  Drugs  had  only  sparse  and   lank  hair   on  their   heads  and
 none  at  all  on  their  legs  and feet.  In character  and temperament
 they  were  at  times  merry  and  gay,  like  hobbits,  but they  had a

 grimmer side to  their nature  and could  be sardonic  and ruthless;
 and  they  had  or  were  credited with  strange or  magical powers.
 (The  tales,  such  as  'The  Faithful Stone',  that speak  of their
 transferring part of their 'powers' to  their artefacts,  remind one
 in  miniature  of  Sauron's  transference  of  power to  the founda-
 tion  of  the  Barad-dur  and to  the Ruling Ring.)(53) Also the Drugs
 were a frugal folk, and  ate sparingly  even in  times of  peace and
 plenty,  and  drank  nothing  but  water.  In  some  ways  they  re-
 sembled  rather  the  Dwarves:  in build  and stature  and endurance
 (though not in hair); in their skill in carving  stone; in  the grim
 side  of  their  character;  and  in  ',strange powers'.  Though the
 'magic'  skills  with  which  the Dwarves  were credited  were quite
 different;  also  the  Dwarves  were  much  grimmer;  and  they were
 long-lived,  whereas  the  Drugs  were  short-lived   compared  with
 other kinds of Men.                                                
   The  Drugs  that  are  met in  the tales  of the  First Age  - co-
 habiting  with  the  Folk  of  Haleth,  who  were a  woodland people
 - were content to live in tents or shelters lightly built  round the
 trunks of large trees, for they were a hardy  race. In  their former
 homes,  according  to  their  own  tales,  they  had  used  caves in
 the  mountains,  but  mainly  as   store-houses  only   occupied  as
 dwellings   and   sleeping-places  in   severe  weather.   They  had
 similar  refuges  in  Beleriand  to  which  all  but the  most hardy
 retreated in times  of storm  and bitter  weather; but  these places
 were  guarded  and  not even  their closest  friends among  the Folk
 of Haleth were welcomed there.                                     
   Hobbits  on  the  other hand  were in  nearly all  respects normal
 Men, but of very short  stature. They  were called  'halflings'; but
 this  refers  to  the  normal  height of  men of  Numenorean descent
 and  of  the  Eldar  (especially those  of Noldorin  descent), which
 appears to  have been  about seven  of our  feet.(54) Their  height at
 the  periods concerned  was usually  more than  three feet  for men,
 though  very  few  ever  exceeded  three  foot  six;   women  seldom
 exceeded  three  feet.  They  were  not as  numerous or  variable as
 ordinary  Men,  but  evidently  more   numerous  and   adaptable  to
 different  modes  of  life  and  habitat  than  the Drugs,  and when
 they are first encountered  in the  histories already  showed diver-
 gences in colouring, stature, and build, and in  their ways  of life
 and preferences for different types of country to dwell in  (see the
 Prologue  to  The Lord  of the  Rings, p.  12). In  their unrecorded
 past  they  must  have  been  a  primitive, indeed  'savage' people,(55)
 but  when  we  meet  them  they  had  (in varying  degrees) acquired

 many  arts  and  customs  by  contact  with  Men,  and  to  a less
 extent  with  Dwarves  and  Elves.  With  Men  of  normal  stature
 they  recognized their  close kinship,  whereas Dwarves  or Elves,
 whether  friendly  or hostile,  were aliens,  with whom  their re-
 lations  were  uneasy  and  clouded by fear.(56) Bilbo's  statement
 (The  Lord  of  the Rings 1.162)(57) that  the cohabitation  of Big
 Folk and Little Folk in one  settlement at  Bree was  peculiar and
 nowhere else to be found was probably  true in  his time  (the end
 of the Third Age);(58) but it would seem  that actually  Hobbits had
 liked to live with or near to Big Folk of friendly kind,  who with
 their  greater  strength  protected  them  from  many  dangers and
 enemies  and  other  hostile  Men, and  received in  exchange many
 services. For it is remarkable that the western  Hobbits preserved
 no trace  or memory  of any  language of  their own.  The language
 they  spoke  when  they  entered  Eriador  was  evidently  adopted
 from the Men of the Vales of Anduin  (related to  the Atani,  / in
 particular  to those  of the  House of  Beor [>  of the  Houses of
 Hador  and  of  Beor]);  and  after their  adoption of  the Common
 Speech they  retained many  words of  that origin.  This indicates
 a close association with Big  Folk; though  the rapid  adoption of
 the  Common  Speech  in  Eriador (59) shows Hobbits  to have  been
 specially adaptable in this respect. As  does also  the divergence
 of  the  Stoors,  who had  associated with  Men of  different sort
 before they came to the Shire.                                   
   The vague tradition preserved by the Hobbits  of the  Shire was
 that they had dwelt once in lands by a Great  River, but  long ago
 had  left  them,  and  found  their  way  through  or  round  high
 mountains,  when  they  no longer  felt at  ease in  their homes
 because of the multiplication of the Big Folk and  of a  shadow of
 fear that had fallen on  the Forest.  This evidently  reflects the
 troubles  of  Gondor in  the earlier  part of  the Third  Age. The
 increase  in  Men  was  not  the  normal  increase  of  those with
 whom  they had  lived in  friendship, but  the steady  increase of
 invaders from the  East, further  south held  in check  by Gondor,
 but  in  the  North  beyond  the bounds  of the  Kingdom harassing
 the  older  'Atanic'  inhabitants,  and  even in  places occupying
 the  Forest  and  coming through  it into  the Anduin  valley. But
 the shadow  of which  the tradition  spoke was  not solely  due to
 human  invasion.  Plainly  the  Hobbits  had  sensed,  even before
 the  Wizards  and  the  Eldar had  become fully  aware of  it, the
 awakening of Sauron and his occupation of Dol Guldur.(60)        

 On  the  relations of  the different  kinds of  Men in  Eriador and
 Rhovanion to the  Atani and  other Men  met in  the legends  of the
 First Age  and the  War of  the Jewels  see The  Lord of  the Rings
 II.286-7  [in  the  chapter   The  Window   on  the   West].  There
 Faramir gives a  brief account  of the  contemporary classification
 in  Gondor  of  Men  into  three  kinds:  High  Men,   or  Numenor-
 eans  (of  more  or  less  pure  descent); Middle  Men; and  Men of
 Darkness.  The  Men  of  Darkness  was  a  general term  applied to
 all  those  who  were  hostile to  the Kingdoms,  and who  were (or
 appeared  in   Gondor  to   be)  moved   by  something   more  than
 human greed for  conquest and  plunder, a  fanatical hatred  of the
 High  Men  and  their  allies as  enemies of  their gods.  The term
 took  no account  of differences  of race  or culture  or language.
 With   regard   to  Middle   Men  Faramir   spoke  mainly   of  the
 Rohirrim,  the only  people of  this sort  well-known in  Gondor in
 his time, and  attributed to  them actual  direct descent  from the
 Folk  of  Hador  in the  First Age.  This was  a general  belief in
 Gondor at that  time,(61) and was  held to  explain (to  the comfort
 of  Numenorean  pride)  the  surrender of  so large  a part  of the
 Kingdom to the people of Eorl.                                    
   The  term  Middle  Men, however,  was of  ancient origin.  It was
 devised  in   the  Second   Age  by   the  Numenoreans   when  they
 began to  establish havens  and settlements  on the  western shores
 of  Middle-earth.  It  arose  among  the  settlers  in   the  North
 (between  Pelargir  and  the  Gulf  of  Lune), in  the time  of Ar-
 Adunakhor; for the settlers in this region had  refused to  join in
 the  rebellion  against the  Valar, and  were strengthened  by many
 exiles  of  the  Faithful  who  fled  from  persecution by  him and
 the  later  Kings  of  Numenor.  It was  therefore modelled  on the
 classification by the Atani of the Elves: the High Elves  (or Elves
 of Light) were  the Noldor  who returned  in exile  out of  the Far
 West; the  Middle Elves  were the  Sindar, who  though near  kin of
 the  High Elves  had remained  in Middle-earth  and never  seen the
 light  of  Aman;  and  the  Dark  Elves  were  those who  had never
 journeyed to the Western  Shores and  did not  desire to  see Aman.
 This was not the  same as  the classifications  made by  the Elves,
 which  are not  here concerned,  except to  note that  'Dark Elves'
 or 'Elves of  Darkness' was  used by  them, but  in no  way implied
 any evil, or subordination to Morgoth; it  referred only  to ignor-
 ance of  the 'light  of Aman'  and included  the Sindar.  Those who
 had never  made the  journey to  the West  Shores were  called 'the
 Refusers' (Avari). It is doubtful if any of the Avari  ever reached

 Beleriand (62) or were actually known to the Numenoreans.            
   In  the days  of the  earlier settlements  of Numenor  there were
 many  Men  of  different  kinds  in  Eriador  and   Rhovanion;  but
 for the most part they dwelt far  from the  coasts. The  regions of
 Forlindon  and  Harlindon  were  inhabited  by  Elves and  were the
 chief part  of Gil-galad's  kingdom, which  extended, north  of the
 Gulf  of  Lune, to  include the  lands east  of the  Blue Mountains
 and west  of the  River Lune  as far  as the  inflow of  the Little
 Lune.(63) (Beyond  that  was  Dwarf  territory.)(64) South  of  the  Lune
 it had no clear bounds,  but the  Tower Hills  (as they  were later
 called)  were  maintained as  an outpost.(65) The Minhiriath  and the
 western  half  of  Enedhwaith  between the  Greyflood and  the Isen
 were still  covered with dense forest.(66) The shores  of the  Bay of
 Belfalas were still mainly desolate, except for  a haven  and small
 settlement  of Elves  at the  mouth of  the confluence  of Morthond
 and Ringlo.(67) But it was  long  before  the  Numenorean settlers
 about  the  Mouths  of  Anduin  ventured   north  of   their  great
 haven  at  Pelargir  and  made  contact  with  Men  who   dwelt  in
 the  valleys  on  either side  of the  White Mountains.  Their term
 Middle  Men  was  thus originally  applied to  Men of  Eriador, the
 most  westerly  of  Mankind  in  the  Second Age  and known  to the
 Elves of Gil-galad's realm.(68) At  that time  there were  many men
 in Eriador, mainly, it would  seem, in  origin kin  of the  Folk of
 Beor,  though  some  were  kin  of  the Folk  of Hador.  They dwelt
 about  Lake   Evendim,  in   the  North   Downs  and   the  Weather
 Hills, and  in the  lands between  as far  as the  Brandywine, west
 of  which  they  often wandered  though they  did not  dwell there.
 They were friendly with  the Elves,  though they  held them  in awe
 and  close  friendships between  them were  rare. Also  they feared
 the  Sea  and  would not  look upon  it. (No  doubt rumours  of its
 terror  and  the  destruction  of  the  Land  beyond  the Mountains
 (Beleriand)  had  reached  them,  and some  of their  ancestors may
 indeed  have  been  fugitives  from  the  Atani  who did  not leave
 Middle-earth but fled eastward.)                                  
   Thus  it  came  about  that  the   Numenorean  term   Middle  Men
 was confused in its  application. Its  chief test  was friendliness
 towards  the  West  (to  Elves  and  to  Numenoreans),  but  it was
 actually   applied   usually   only  to   Men  whose   stature  and
 looks  were  similar  to  those of  the Numenoreans,  although this
 most important distinction of  'friendliness' was  not historically
 confined to peoples of one racial kind. It was a mark of  all kinds
 of  Men  who  were  descendants  of  those  who  had   abjured  the

 Shadow   of   Morgoth   and   his   servants  and   wandered  westward
 to  escape  it  -  and  certainly  included  both  the races  of small
 stature,  Drugs  and  Hobbits. Also  it must  be said  that 'unfriend-
 liness'  to  Numenoreans  and  their  allies  was  not  always  due to
 the  Shadow,  but  in  later days  to the  actions of  the Numenoreans
 themselves.  Thus  many  of  the  forest-dwellers  of  the  shorelands
 south  of  the  Ered  Luin,  especially in  Minhiriath, were  as later
 historians  recognized  the  kin  of  the  Folk  of  Haleth;  but they
 became   bitter  enemies   of  the   Numenoreans,  because   of  their
 ruthless  treatment  and their  devastation of  the forests,(69) and this
 hatred  remained  unappeased  in   their  descendants,   causing  them
 to  join  with  any  enemies  of  Numenor.  In  the  Third  Age  their
 survivors  were  the  people  known  in  Rohan  as   the  Dunlendings.
                                                                      
   There  was  also  the  matter  of  language.  It  was   six  hundred
 years after the departure  of the  survivors of  the Atani  oversea to
 Numenor  that  a  ship  came first  to Middle-earth  again out  of the
 West and passed up the Gulf of Lune.(70)                              
                                                                      
 The  story  that  follows,  recounting  the  meeting  of  the Numenor-
 ean mariners  with twelve  Men of  Eriador on  the Tower  Hills, their
 mutual  recognition  of  an  ancient  kinship,  and   their  discovery
 that  their  languages  though  profoundly  changed  were   of  common
 origin, has been given in Unfinished Tales, pp. 213-14.(71) Following
 the  conclusion of  that extract  (ending with  the words  'they found
 that  they  shared  very  many words  still clearly  recognizable, and
 others that could  be understood  with attention,  and they  were able
 to converse haltingly about  simple matters')  the essay  continues as
 follows.                                                              
 Thus  it  came  about that  a kinship  in language,  even if  this was
 only  recognizable  after   close  acquaintance,   was  felt   by  the
 Numenoreans to be one of the marks of 'Middle-men'.(72)               
   The  loremasters  of  later  days  held  that  the languages  of Men
 in  Middle-earth,  at  any  rate  those   of  the   'unshadowed'  Men,
 had  changed  less  swiftly  before  the  end  of  the Second  Age and
 the  change  of  the  world  in  the  Downfall  of   Numenor.  Whereas
 in  Numenor  owing  to  the  longevity  of  the  Atani it  had changed
 far  more  slowly  still.  At  the  first meeting  of the  Shipmen and
 the  Men  of  western  Eriador  it  was only  six hundred  years since
 the  Atani  went  oversea,  and  the  Adunaic  that  they   spoke  can
 hardly  have  changed  at all;  but it  was a  thousand years  or more
 since  the  Atani  who  reached  Beleriand   had  parted   from  their
 kin.  Yet  even  now  in  a  more   changeful  world   languages  that
 have  been  separated  for  fifteen  hundred  years  and   longer  may

 be  recognized  as  akin  by  those  unlearned  in the  history of
 tongues.                                                         
   As  the  long years  passed the  situation changed.  The ancient
 Adunaic  of  Numenor   became  worn   down  by   time  -   and  by
 neglect. For owing  to the  disastrous history  of Numenor  it was
 no longer held in honour by the 'Faithful' who controlled  all the
 Shorelands  from  Lune to  Pelargir. For  the Elvish  tongues were
 proscribed by  the rebel  Kings, and  Adunaic alone  was permitted
 to  be  used,  and  many  of  the  ancient books  in Quenya  or in
 Sindarin were destroyed. The  Faithful, therefore,  used Sindarin,
 and in  that tongue  devised all  names of  places that  they gave
 anew   in-Middle-earth.(73) Adunaic was  abandoned   to  unheeded
 change and corruption as the language of daily life, and  the only
 tongue of the unlettered. All men  of high  lineage and  all those
 who were taught to read and write used Sindarin,  even as  a daily
 tongue among themselves. In  some families,  it is  said, Sindarin
 became  the  native  tongue,  and  the  vulgar  tongue  of Adunaic
 origin  was  only  learned  casually  as  it  was   needed.(74) The
 Sindarin was not  however taught  to aliens,  both because  it was
 held  a  mark  of  Numenorean  descent   and  because   it  proved
 difficult to acquire - far more so than the 'vulgar  tongue'. Thus
 it  came  about that  as the  Numenorean settlements  increased in
 power  and  extent  and  made  contact  with  Men  of Middle-earth
 (many  of  whom  came  under  Numenorean  rule  and  swelled their
 population)  the  'vulgar  tongue'  began to  spread far  and wide
 as  a  lingua  franca  among  peoples  of  many  different  kinds.
 This process began in the  end of  the Second  Age, but  became of
 general  importance  mainly  after  the  Downfall  and  the estab-
 lishment  of  the  'Realms in  Exile' in  Arnor and  Gondor. These
 kingdoms  penetrated  far  into  Middle-earth,  and   their  kings
 were recognized  beyond their  borders as  overlords. Thus  in the
 North  and  West  all  the  lands  between the  Ered Luin  and the
 Greyflood   and   Hoarwell (75)  became   regions   of  Numenorean
 influence in which the 'vulgar tongue'  became widely  current. In
 the  South  and  East  Mordor  remained  impenetrable;  but though
 the  extent  of  Gondor  was  thus  impeded  it was  more populous
 and  powerful  than  Arnor.  The  bounds  of  the  ancient kingdom
 contained  all  those  lands  marked  in  maps of  the end  of the
 Third  Age  as  Gondor,  Anorien,  Ithilien,  South  Ithilien, and
 Rohan  (formerly  called  Calenardhon)  west  of   the  Entwash.(76)
 On its extension at the height  of its  power, between  the reigns
 of  Hyarmendacil  I  and Romendacil  II (Third  Age 1015  to 1366)

 see  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  Appendix  A  p.325.(77) The  wide lands
 between  Anduin  and  the  Sea  of  Rhun  were  however   never  effec-
 tively  settled  or  occupied,  and  the  only  true north  boundary of
 the  Kingdom  east  of  Anduin  was  formed  by   the  Emyn   Muil  and
 the   marshes   south   and   east   of   them.   Numenorean  influence
 however   went  far   beyond  even   these  extended   bounds,  passing
 up  the  Vales  of  Anduin  to  its  sources,  and  reaching  the lands
 east  of  the  Forest,  between  the  River  Celon (78) (Running) and the
 River Carnen (Redwater).                                                
   Within   the   original   bounds   of   the   Kingdoms   the  'vulgar
 speech'   soon   became   the  current   speech,  and   eventually  the
 native  language  of  nearly  all the  inhabitants of  whatever origin,
 and   incomers   who  were   allowed  to   settle  within   the  bounds
 adopted  it.  Its  speakers  generally  called  it   Westron  (actually
 Aduni,  and  in  Sindarin  Annunaid).  But  it  spread far  beyond the
 bounds  of  the  Kingdoms  -  at  first in  dealings with  'the peoples
 of  the  Kingdoms',  and   later  as   a  'Common   Speech'  convenient
 for    intercourse    between    peoples    who    retained    numerous
 tongues  of  their  own.  Thus  Elves  and  Dwarves  used  it  in deal-
 ings with one another and with Men.                                     
                                                                        
   The text ends here abruptly (without a full stop after the last word,
 though this may not be significant), halfway down a page.               
                                                                        
                                  NOTES.                                 
                                                                        
  1.  A notable case is that of the conversation between Ghan chieftain
      of  the  Wild  Men and  Theoden. Probably  few if  any of  the Wild
      Men  other  than  Ghan  used  the  Common  Speech  at  all,  and he
      had  only  a  limited  vocabulary  of words  used according  to the
      habits of his native speech.                                       
  2.  The Kings and their descendants after Thengel also knew  the Sin-
      darin  tongue -  the language  of nobles  in Gondor.  [Cf. Appendix
      A (II), in the list of the Kings of the Mark, on  Thengel's sojourn
      in Gondor. It is said  there that  after his  return to  Rohan 'the
      speech of Gondor was used  in his  house, and  not all  men thought
      that good.']                                                       
  3.  The  effect  on  contemporary  speakers  of  the  Common  Speech  of
      Gondor  being  comparable  to  that  which  we  should  feel  if  a
      foreigner, both  learned and  a skilled  linguist, were  when being
      courteous or dealing with high matters to  use fluently  an English
      of  say  about  1600  A.D.,  but  adapted  to  our  present pronun-
      ciation.                                                           
  4.  Structurally  and grammatically  it differed  widely from  all other

 languages of the West at that  time; though  it had  some features
 in  common  with  Adunaic,  the   ancient  'native'   language  of
 Numenor. This gave rise  to the  theory (a  probable one)  that in
 the  unrecorded  past  some of  the languages  of Men  - including
 the  language  of  the dominant  element in  the Atani  from which
 Adunaic was derived - had been influenced by Khuzdul.             
5.  They had,  it is  said, a  complex pictographic  or ideographic
 writing or carving  of their  own. But  this they  kept resolutely
 secret.                                                           
6.  Including their enemies such as Sauron, and his  higher servants
 who were in fact partly of Numenorean origin.                     
7.  [Like Gil-galad, Celebrimbor was a figure first appearing in The
 Lord  of  the  Rings  whose  origin  my  father changed  again and
 again. The earliest statement on the subject is found in the post-
 Lord  of  the  Rings  text  Concerning  Galadriel   and  Celeborn,
 where it is said (cf. Unfinished Tales p. 235):                   
    Galadriel  and  Celeborn  had  in  their  company   a  Noldorin
 craftsman  called  Celebrimbor.  He  was  of Noldorin  origin, and
 one  of  the  survivors  of  Gondolin,  where he  had been  one of
 Turgon's  greatest  artificers  -  but he  had thus  acquired some
 taint of pride and an almost 'dwarvish' obsession with crafts.
 He reappears as a jewel-smith of Gondolin in the text  The Elessar
 (see Unfinished Tales  pp. 248  ff.); but  against the  passage in
 Concerning  Galadriel  and  Celeborn  just  cited my  father noted
 that it  would be  better to  'make him  a descendant  of Feanor'.
 Thus in the Second Edition  (1966) of  The Lord  of the  Rings, at
 the  end of  the prefatory  remarks to  the Tale  of Years  of the
 Second  Age,  he  added  the  sentence:  'Celebrimbor was  lord of
 Eregion  and  the greatest  of their  craftsmen; he  was descended
 from Feanor.'                                                     
    On one of his copies of The  Return of  the King  he underlined
 the  name Feanor  in this  sentence, and  wrote the  following two
 notes on  the opposite  page (the  opening of  the first  of these
 means,  I  think:  'What  then  was  his  parentage? He  must have
 been  descended  from one  of Feanor's  sons, about  whose progeny
 nothing has been told').                                          
    How  could  he  be?  Feanor's only  descendants were  his seven
 sons,  six  of  whom reached  Beleriand. So  far nothing  has been
 said of their  wives and  children. It  seems probable  that Cele-
 brinbaur  (silverfisted, >  Celebrimbor) was  son of  Curufin, but
 though inheriting his  skills he  was an  Elf of  wholly different
 temper (his mother had refused to  take part  in the  rebellion of
 Feanor  and  remained  in  Aman  with  the  people  of Finarphin).
 During  their  dwelling   in  Nargothrond   as  refugees   he  had
 grown   to  love   Finrod  and   "  his   wife,  and   was  aghast

 at  the  behaviour  of his  father and  would not  go with  him. He
 later became a great friend of Celeborn and Galadriel.             
    The second note reads:
      Maedros the eldest appears to have been unwedded, also the
      two youngest (twins, of whom one was by evil mischance
      burned with the ships); Celegorm also, since he plotted to take
      Luthien as his wife. But Curufin, dearest to his father and chief
      inheritor of his father's skills, was wedded, and had a son who
      came with him into exile, though his wife (unnamed) did not.
      Others who were wedded were Maelor, Caranthir.
    On the form Maelor for Maglor see X.182, $41. The reference in
 the first of these notes to the wife of Finrod Felagund is notable,
 since long before, in the Grey Annals, the story had emerged that
 Felagund had no wife, and that 'she whom he had loved was
 Amarie of the Vanyar, and she was not permitted to go with him
 into exile'. That story had in fact been abandoned, or forgotten,
 but it would return: see the note on Gil-galad, p. 350.
       These notes on Celebrimbor son of Curufin were the basis of
 the passages introduced editorially in the  published Silmarillion,
 p. 176 (see V.300-1), and in Of the Rings of Power, ibid. p. 286.
 But in late writing (1968 or later) on the subject of Eldarin words
 for 'hand' my father said this:                                    
 Common   Eldarin  had   a  base  KWAR  'press   together,  squeeze,
 wring'.  A  derivative  was  *kwara:  Quenya  quar,  Telerin  par,
 Sindarin paur. This may be translated 'fist', though its  chief use
 was in reference to the tightly closed hand as  in using  an imple-
 ment or a craft-tool rather than to  the 'fist'  as used  in punch-
 ing.  Cf.  the  name  Celebrin-baur  >  Celebrimbor.  This   was  a
 Sindarized  form  of  Telerin  Telperimpar   (Quenya  Tyelpinquar).
 It  was  a  frequent  name  among  the Teleri,  who in  addition to
 navigation  and  ship-building  were   also  renowned   as  silver-
 smiths.  The  famous  Celebrimbor,  heroic  defender of  Eregion in
 the  Second  Age  war  against  Sauron,  was  a  Teler, one  of the
 three  Teleri  who   accompanied  Celeborn   into  exile.   He  was
 a  great  silver-smith,  and  went  to  Eregion  attracted  by  the
 rumours  of  the  marvellous  metal  found in  Moria, Moria-silver,
 to  which  he  gave the  name mithril.  In the  working of  this he
 became  a  rival  of  the Dwarves,  or rather  an equal,  for there
 was  great  friendship  between  the  Dwarves  of  Moria  and Cele-
 brimbor, and  they shared  their skills  and craft-secrets.  In the
 same way Tegilbor was used  for one  skilled in  calligraphy (tegil
 was  a  Sindarized form  of Quenya  tekil 'pen',  not known  to the
 Sindar until the coming of the Noldor).                            
 When  my  father  wrote  this  he  ignored  the addition  to Appen-
 dix  B  in  the  Second  Edition,  stating  that  Celebrimbor  'was

 descended  from  Feanor';  no  doubt  he   had  forgotten   that  that
 theory  had  appeared  in  print, for  had he  remembered it  he would
 undoubtedly  have  felt  bound  by  it.  -   On  the   statement  that
 Celebrimbor   was   'one   of   the   three  Teleri   who  accompanied
 Celeborn into exile' see Unfinished Tales, pp. 231-3.                 
       Yet here in the present essay, from much the  same time  as that
 on  Eldarin  words  for  'hand'  just  cited,  a  radically  different
 account  of  Celebrimbor's  origin  is  given:  'a  Sinda  who claimed
 descent from Daeron'.]                                                
8.  They  did  not,  however, appear  in the  inscriptions on  the West
 Gate  of  Moria.  The  Dwarves  said that  it was  in courtesy  to the
 Elves that  the Feanorian  letters were  used on  that gate,  since it
 opened  into  their  country  and  was  chiefly  used  by   them.  But
 the  East  Gates,  which  perished in  the war  against the  Orks, had
 opened  upon  the  wide  world,  and  were  less  friendly.  They  had
 borne  Runic inscriptions  in several  tongues: spells  of prohibition
 and  exclusion  in  Khuzdul,  and  commands  that  all  should  depart
 who  had  not  the  leave  of  the  Lord of  Moria written  in Quenya,
 Sindarin,  the  Common  Speech,   the  languages   of  Rohan   and  of
 Dale and Dunland.                                                     
       [In the margin against the paragraph in the  text at  this point
 my father pencilled:                                                  
       N.B. It is actually said by Elrond in The Hobbit that  the Runes
 were  invented  by  the   Dwarves  and   written  with   silver  pens.
 Elrond  was  half-elven  and  a  master  of   lore  and   history.  So
 either  we  must  tolerate  this  discrepancy  or  modify  the history
 of  the  Runes,  making   the  actual   Angerthas  Moria   largely  an
 affair of Dwarvish invention.                                         
    In notes associated with this essay he is seen pondering the latter
 course,  considering the  possibility that  it was  in fact  the Long-
 beard  Dwarves  who  were  the  original begetters  of the  Runes; and
 that  it  was  from  them  that  Daeron  derived  the idea,  but since
 the  first  Runes  were  not  well  organised  (and differed  from one
 mansion  of  the  Dwarves  to another)  he ordered  them in  a logical
 system.                                                               
       But of course in Appendix E (II) he  had stated  very explicitly
 the origin of the Runes: 'The  Cirth were  devised first  in Beleriand
 by  the  Sindar'.  It  was  Daeron  of   Doriath  who   developed  the
 'richest  and  most  ordered  form'  of  the  Cirth,  the  Alphabet of
 Daeron, and its  use in  Eregion led  to its  adoption by  the Dwarves
 of  Moria,  whence  its   name  Angerthas   Moria.  Thus   the  incon-
 sistency,  if  inconsistency  there  was,  could scarcely  be removed;
 but  in  fact  there  was none.  It was  the 'moon-runes'  that Elrond
 declared  (at  the  end  of  the chapter  A Short  Rest) to  have been
 invented  by  the  Dwarves  and  written  by  them  with  silver pens,
 not  the  Runes  as  an  alphabetic  form  -  as  my father  at length

      noted with relief. I mention all this as an illustration of his intense
      concern  to  avoid  discrepancy  and  inconsistency,  even   though  in
      this  case  his  anxiety  was unfounded.  - For  an earlier  account of
      the origin of the Runes see VII.452-5.]                                
 9.   [At this point the text in  manuscript ends,  and the  typescript takes
                                                                            
      up.]                                                                   
 10.  As  things  went  ill in  Moria and  hope even  of escaping  with their
      lives  faded the  last pages  of the  Book can  only have  been written
      in  the  hope  that  the  Book  might  be later  found by  friends, and
      inform  them  of  the  fate  of  Balin  and  his  rash   expedition  to
      Moria - as indeed happened.                                            
 11.  Cases  were  the  reduction  of  double  (long)  consonants  to  single
      ones  medially  between  vowels,  or  the  alteration of  consonants in
      certain   combinations.  Both   are  exemplified   in  the   Third  Age
      colloquial tunas 'guard', i.e.  a body  of men  acting as  guards. This
      was  a  derivative  of  the  stem  run  watch,  guard  +   nas  people:
      an  organized  group  or  gathering  of   people  for   some  function.
      But tudnas, though  it was  often retained  in 'correct'  spelling, had
      been  changed  to  tunnas  and  usually  was  so  spelt:   tunas  which
      occurred in the first  line of  the preserved  three pages  was 'incor-
      rect' and represented the colloquial. (Incidentally  this nas  is prob-
      ably  an   example  of   the  numerous   loanwords  from   Elvish  that
      were  found  in  Adunaic  already  and  were  increased  in   the  Com-
      mon  Speech  of  the  Kingdoms.  It  is  probably  <  Quenya  nosse  or
      Sindarin nos,  'kindred, family'.  The short  o of  Elvish became  a in
      such borrowed words.)                                                  
 12.  [The  three  pages were  reproduced in  Pictures by  J. R.  R. Tolkien,
      1979, no.23 (second edition, 1992, no.24).]                            
 13.  Exceptions  are  a  few  words  in   a  debased   form  of   the  Black
      Speech;  a  few  place-names  or  personal  names   (not  interpreted);
      the  warcry  of  the  Dwarves.  Also  a  few  place-names  supposed  to
      be  of  forgotten  origin  or   meaning;  and   one  or   two  personal
      names of the same kind (see Appendix F, p. 407).                       
 14.  The   sherd   of   Amenartas   was   in   Greek  (provided   by  Andrew
      Lang)  of  the  period  from which  it was  supposed to  have survived,
      not in English spelt as well  as might  be in  Greek letters.  [For the
      sherd of Amenartas see H. Rider Haggard, She, chapter 3.]              
 15.  The first song of Galadriel is treated in  this way:  it is  given only
      in translation (as is all the rest of her speech in  dialogue). Because
      in this case a  verse translation  was attempted,  to represent  as far
      as  possible  the  metrical  devices  of  the  original -  a considered
      composition  no  doubt  made  long  before  the  coming  of  Frodo  and
      independent  of  the arrival  in Lorien  of the  One Ring.  Whereas the
      Farewell  was  addressed  direct  to  Frodo,   and  was   an  extempore
      outpouring  in  free  rhythmic   style,  reflecting   the  overwhelming
      increase  in  her  regret  and  longing,   and  her   personal  despair

       after she  had survived  the terrible  temptation. It  was translated
       accurately.  The  rendering  of the  older song  must be  presumed to
       have  been  much  freer  to  enable  metrical  features to  be repre-
       sented. (In the event it  proved that  it was  Galadriel's abnegation
       of pride and trust in  her own  powers, and  her absolute  refusal of
       any  unlawful  enhancement  of  them,  that  provided  the   ship  to
       bear her back to  her home.)  [Cf. the  passage in  a letter  from my
       father of 1967  cited in  Unfinished Tales,  p. 229;  Letters no.297,
       at end.]                                                             
  16.  [This refers to the last six lines (which include  the interpretation
       of  the inscription  on the  tomb) of  the chapter  A Journey  in the
       Dark,  beginning  '"These  are  Daeron's  Runes,  such  as  were used
       of  old in  Moria," said  Gandalf', which  in the  three-volume hard-
       back edition of The Lord  of the  Rings alone  appear on  that page.]
  17.  Possibly  observed  by  the  more  linguistically   and  historically
       minded; though I have received no comments on them.                  
  18.  [This refers to the end of Appendix  F, I  ('Gimli's own  name ...'),
       cited above, p. 296.]                                                
  19.  In  later  times,  when  their   own  Khuzdul   had  become   only  a
       learned   language,   and   the  Dwarves   had  adopted   the  Common
       Speech  or  a  local  language  of  Men,  they  naturally  used these
       'outer' names also for all colloquial purposes.  [Khuzdul is  in this
       case spelt with a circumflex accent on the second vowel.]            
  20.  [At the same  time as  the alterations  shown were  made to  the text
       of  this passage  my father  wrote in  the margin:  'But see  on this
       below  -  they  were  derived from  a long  lost Mannish  language in
       the North.' See pp. 303-4, and note 23 below.]                       
  21.  The  references  (in  Appendix  A [beginning  of III,  Durin's Folk])
       to  the  legends  of  the  origin  of  the Dwarves  of the  kin known
       as  Longbeards  (Khuzdul  Sigin-tarag,  translated  by  Quenya  Anda-
       fangar,  Sindarin  Anfangrim)  and  their  renowned  later 'mansions'
       in  Khazad-dum  (Moria)  are  too  brief   to  make   the  linguistic
       situation clear. The 'deeps of time' do not refer (of course) to geo-
       logical  time  - of  which only  the Eldar  had legends,  derived and
       transmuted   from   such   information   as  their   loremasters  had
       received  from  the  Valar.  They  refer  to legends  of the  Ages of
       Awakening  and  the  arising  of  the  Speaking  Peoples:  first  the
       Elves,  second  the  Dwarves  (as  they  claimed),  and   third  Men.
       Unlike  Elves  and  Men  the Dwarves  appear in  the legends  to have
       arisen  in  the  North  of  Middle-earth.  [This  note  continued  as
       follows,  but  the  continuation  was  subsequently struck  out.] The
       most  westerly  point, the  place of  the birth  or awakening  of the
       ancestor  of  the  Longbeards,  was  in the  traditions of  the Third
       Age a valley in the Ered Mithrin. But this was  in far  distant days.
       It  was  long  before  the migrations  of Men  from the  East reached
       the  North-western  regions.  And  it  was  long  again   before  the

       Dwarves  -  of   whom  the   Longbeards  appear   to  have   been  the
       most  secretive and  least concerned  to have  dealings with  Elves or
       Men  - still  felt any  need to  learn any  languages of  their neigh-
       bours,  still  less  to take  names by  which they  could be  known to
       'outsiders'.                                                          
  22.  [My  father's  point  was  that  Balin  and  Fundin  are   actual  Old
       Norse  names   used  as   'translations'  for   the  purpose   of  The
       Lord  of  the  Rings.  What  he should  have done  in a  visual repre-
       sentation  of the  tomb-inscription was  to use,  not of  course their
       'inner'  names  in  Khuzdul,  but  their real  'outer' names  which in
       the  text  of  The  Lord  of the  Rings are  represented by  Balin and
       Fundin.]                                                             
  23.  [It  seems  that  it  was  when my  father reached  this point  in the
       essay that he made  the alterations  to the  text on  p. 300  with the
       marginal  observation  given  in note  20, and  struck out  the latter
       part of note 21.]                                                     
  24.  He  alone  had  no companions;  cf. 'he  slept alone'  (III.352). [The
       reference  is  to the  beginning of  Appendix A,  III. The  passage in
       the text  is difficult  to interpret.  My father  refers here  to four
       places  of  awakening  of the  Seven Ancestors  of the  Dwarves: those
       of  'the  ancestors  of  the  Firebeards  and  the  Broadbeams',  'the
       ancestor  of  the  Longbeards', 'the  Ironfists and  Stiffbeards', and
       'the  Blacklocks  and  Stonefoots'.  (None  of  these  names   of  the
       other  six  kindreds  of  the  Dwarves  has  ever  been  given before.
       Since  the  ancestors  of  the  Firebeards  and  the  Broadbeams awoke
       in  the  Ered  Lindon,  these  kindreds  must  be  presumed to  be the
       Dwarves  of  Nogrod  and  Belegost.)  It  seems   that  he   was  here
       referring to Durin's  having 'slept  alone' in  contrast to  the other
       kindreds, whose Fathers were laid to sleep in pairs. If this is so, it
       is a different conception from  that cited  in XI.213,  where Iluvatar
       'commanded  Aule  to  lay  the  fathers  of  the Dwarves  severally in
       deep  places,  each  with  his  mate,  save Durin  the eldest  who had
       none.' On the subject of  the 'mates'  of the  Fathers of  the Dwarves
       see  XI.211-13.  - In  the margin  of the  typescript my  father wrote
       later  (against  the   present  note):   'He  wandered   widely  after
       awakening:  his  people  were  Dwarves  that  joined  him  from  other
       kindreds west and  east'; and  at the  head of  the page  he suggested
       that  the  legend  of  the  Making  of the  Dwarves should  be altered
       (indeed  very  radically  altered) to  a form  in which  other Dwarves
       were laid to sleep near to the Fathers.]                              
  25.  [In the  rejected conclusion  of note  21 the  place of  the awakening
       of  the  ancestor  of  the  Longbeards  was  'a  valley  in  the  Ered
       Mithrin'  (the  Grey  Mountains  in  the  far  North).  There  has  of
       course  been  no  previous  reference  to  this  ancient  significance
       of  Mount  Gundabad.   That  mountain   originally  appeared   in  the
       chapter The Clouds  Burst in  The Hobbit,  where it  is told  that the

      Goblins  'marched and  gathered by  hill and  valley, going  ever by
      tunnel  or  under  dark, until  around and  beneath the  great moun-
      tain Gundabad of the  North, where  was their  capital, a  vast host
      was assembled'; and  it is  shown on  the map  of Wilderland  in The
      Hobbit as a great isolated  mass at  the northern  end of  the Misty
      Mountains   where  the   Grey  Mountains   drew  towards   them.  In
      The  Lord  of  the  Rings,  Appendix  A  (III), Gundabad  appears in
      the account of the War of  the Dwarves  and Orcs  late in  the Third
      Age,  where  the Dwarves  'assailed and  sacked one  by one  all the
      strongholds  of the  Orcs that  they could  [find] from  Gundabad to
      the  Gladden'  (the  word  'find'  was  erroneously  dropped  in the
      Second Edition).]                                                  
  26. According to their legends their begetter, Aule  the Vala,  had made
      this for them and had  taught it  to the  Seven Fathers  before they
      were laid to sleep until the time for  their awakening  should come.
      After  their  awakening  this  language  (as  all languages  and all
      other  things  in  Arda)  changed  in time,  and divergently  in the
      mansions  that were  far-sundered. But  the change  was so  slow and
      the  divergence  so  small  that  even  in  the  Third  Age converse
      between all  Dwarves in  their own  tongue was  easy. As  they said,
      the change  in Khuzdul  as compared  with the  tongue of  the Elves,
      and  still  more  with  those of  Men, was  'like the  weathering of
      hard rock compared with the melting of snow.'                      
  27. The  Dwarves  multiplied  slowly;  but Men  in prosperity  and peace
      more swiftly than even the Elves.                                  
  28. For  they  had  met  some far  to the  East who  were of  evil mind.
      [This was a later pencilled note. On the previous page of  the type-
      script  my  father  wrote at  the same  time, without  indication of
      its  reference  to  the text  but perhaps  arising from  the mention
      (p. 301) of the awakening of  the eastern  kindreds of  the Dwarves:
      'Alas, it  seems probable  that (as  Men did  later) the  Dwarves of
      the  far  eastern  mansions  (and  some  of  the nearer  ones?) came
      under the Shadow of Morgoth and turned to evil.']                  
  29. No  Dwarf  would  ever  mount a  horse willingly,  nor did  any ever
      harbour animals, not even dogs.                                    
  30. For  a  time. The  Numenoreans had  not yet  appeared on  the shores
      of  Middle-earth,  and  the  foundations  of  the Barad-dur  had not
      yet been built. It  was a  brief period  in the  dark annals  of the
      Second  Age, yet  for many  lives of  Men the  Longbeards controlled
      the Ered Mithrin, Erebor, and the Iron Hills, and all the  east side
      of the Misty Mountains as far as the confines  of Lorien;  while the
      Men of the North dwelt in  all the  adjacent lands  as far  south as
      the Great Dwarf Road  that cut  through the  Forest (the  Old Forest
      Road  was  its  ruinous  remains  in  the Third  Age) and  then went
      North-east  to  the  Iron  Hills.  [As  with  so  much else  in this
      account,  the  origin of  the Old  Forest Road  in 'the  Great Dwarf

       Road',  which  after  traversing  Greenwood  the  Great  led  to  the
       Iron Hills, has never been met before.]                              
  31.  Only  the  personal  names of  individuals. The  name of  their race,
       and the  names of  their families,  and of  their mansions,  they did
       not conceal.                                                         
  32.  Either  actual  Mannish  names  current   among  the   Northern  Men,
       or  names  made  in  the  same ways  out of  elements in  the Mannish
       tongue,  or  names  of  no  meaning  that  were  simply  made  of the
       sounds used  by Men  put together  in ways  natural to  their speech.
  33.  [My  father  might  seem to  write here  as if  Durin was  the 'real'
       Mannish  name  of  the  Father of  the Longbeards;  but of  course it
       is a name derived from Old Norse, and thus a 'translation'.]         
  34.  Somewhat similar to the  way in  which the  'runes' of  Elvish origin
       were  widely  regarded  by  Men  in  the  Third  Age  as  a  Dwarvish
       mode of writing.                                                     
  35.  Sauron  was  defeated  by  the  Numenoreans  and  driven   back  into
       Mordor,  and  for  long  troubled  the West  no more,  while secretly
       extending his dominions eastward.                                    
  36.  Though  such  changes   and  divergence   as  had   already  occurred
       before  they  left  Middle-earth  would  have endured  - such  as the
       divergence of the speech of the Teleri from that of the Noldor.      
  37.  [This  and  the  subsequent  section-heading,  together   with  their
       numbers, were pencilled in later. The title of section I is lost with
       the loss of the first page of the essay.]                            
  38.  The  name  is  said  to  have  been  derived  from  atan  'man, human
       being  as  distinct  from  creatures',  a word  used by  that kindred
       which  the  Eldar  first  encountered  in  Beleriand.  This  was bor-
       rowed  and  adapted  to  Quenya  and  Sindarin;  but  later  when Men
       of  other  kinds  became  known  to  the Eldar  it became  limited to
       Men  of  the  Three Peoples  who had  become allies  of the  Eldar in
       Beleriand.                                                           
         [A  typewritten  draft  for  the page  of the  essay on  which this
       second  section  begins  is  preserved  (though without  the section-
       heading  or  number, see  note 37):  in this  draft the  present note
       begins in  the same  way, but  diverges after  the words  'adapted to
       Quenya and Sindarin' thus:                                           
                                                                           
           It  was  however  associated  by  the Eldar  with their  own word
         atar  (adar)  'father'  and  often  translated  'Fathers  of  Men',
         though this title, in full atanatar, properly belonged only  to the
         leaders and chieftains of the peoples  at the  time of  their entry
         into Beleriand. In Sindarin adan  was still  often used  for 'man',
         especially in names of races with  a preceding  prefix, as  in Dun-
         adan,   plural   Dunedain,   'Men   of   the   West',  Numenoreans;
         Dru-edain 'Wild-men'.                                              
                                                                           
              The statement here that Atani was derived from a word in the

       Beorian  language,  atan  'man',  contradicts  what  was said  in the
       chapter  Of  the  Coming  of  Men  into  the West  that was  added to
       the  Quenta  Silmarillion,  XI.219,  footnote:  'Atani  was  the name
       given  to Men  in Valinor,  in the  lore that  told of  their coming;
       according  to the  Eldar it  signified "Second",  for the  kindred of
       Men  was  the second  of the  Children of  Iluvatar'; cf.  Quendi and
       Eldar, XI.386, where essentially the  same is  said (the  devising of
       the name Atani is there ascribed to the Noldor in Valinor).]         
  39.  [This  refers to  Morgoth's captivity  in Aman.  See X.423,  note 3.)
  40.  [Cf.  the  words  of  Andreth,  X.310,  and  of  Bereg   and  Amlach,
       XI.220, $18).]                                                       
  41.  [Haleth  was  not  the  name  of  the  chieftain  who  commanded  the
       Folk  of  Haleth  when  they  first came  to Beleriand:  see XI.221-2
       and  the genealogical  tree, XI.237.  But this  is probably  not sig-
       nificant, in view of what is said at the end of the  paragraph: these
       people  'were  called the  Folk of  Haleth, for  Haleth was  the name
       of their  chieftainess who  led them  to the  woods north  of Doriath
       where  they  were  permitted  to  dwell.'  On  the  other  hand,  the
       statement  that  Hador  was  the  name  of  the  chieftain   who  led
       the  Folk  of  Hador  into  Beleriand  seems  to ignore  that greatly
       enlarged  and  altered  history that  had entered  in the  chapter Of
       the  Coming  of  Men  into  the  West  (cf.  note  38),  according to
       which  it  was  Marach  who  led  that  people  over  the  Mountains,
       and  Hador  himself,  though  he  gave  his name  to the  people, was
       a descendant  of Marach  in the  fourth generation  (see XI.218  - 19
       and  the genealogical  tree, XI.234).  In that  work the  division of
       the Folk of Hador into three hosts, referred to a little later in the
       present  paragraph, does  not appear  - indeed  it was  said (XI.218,
       $10)  that  Beor  told  Felagund  that 'they  are a  numerous people,
       and  yet  keep  together  and  move  slowly, being  all ruled  by one
       chieftain whom they call Marach.']                                   
  42.  [In other  accounts the  Folk of  Haleth were  the second  kindred of
       the  Edain  to  enter  Beleriand,  not  the  last;  thus  in  QS $127
       (V.275),  when  Haleth  was  still  Haleth  the  Hunter  and  had not
       been  transformed  into  the  Lady  Haleth,  'After Beor  came Haleth
       father  of  Hundor,  and   again  somewhat   later  came   Hador  the
       Goldenhaired',  and  in  Of  the  Coming  of  Men  into the  West $13
       (XI.218)  'First  came  the  Haladin  ...  The  next  year,  however,
       Marach  led  his  people  over  the  Mountains'.  In that  text ($10)
       Beor  told  Felagund that  the people  of Marach  'were before  us in
       the  westward  march,  but  we  passed  them', and  there is  no sug-
       gestion of the story told here that they reached Eredlindon  first of
       all the Edain, but  that 'seeking  a road  round the  Mountains' they
       'came  up  from  southward'  into  Beleriand.  -  Of  internal strife
       among  the Folk  of Haleth,  referred to  a few  lines later  in this
       paragraph, there has been no previous mention.]                      

  43.  No doubt this was due to  mingling with  Men of  other kind  in the
       past; and it was noted that the dark hair ran in families  that had
       more skill and interest in crafts and lore.                            
  44.  With  a knowledge  of the  language of  the Folk  of Beor  that was
       later lost, save for a few names  of persons  and places,  and some
       words  or  phrases  preserved  in  legends.   One  of   the  common   
       words was atan. [With the last sentence cf. note 38.]                  
  45.  [With  this  is  perhaps  to  be  compared  what  my  father  wrote
       elsewhere  at  this  time  (p.  373, note  13) concerning  the long
       period  during  which  the  'Beorians'  and the  'Hadorians' became
       separated in the course of  their westward  migration and  dwelt on
       opposite sides of a great inland sea.]                                 
  46.  Beren  the  Renowned  had  hair of  a golden  brown and  grey eyes;
       he was taller than  most of  his kin,  but he  was broad-shouldered
       and very strong in his limbs.                                          
  47.  The Eldar said, and recalled in the songs they still sang  in later
       days, that they could not easily be distinguished from the  Eldar -
       not while their youth lasted, the swift fading of which was  to the
       Eldar a grief and a mystery.                                           
  48.  [With this account of the Folk of Beor  and the  Folk of  Hador may
       be  compared  the  description  that  my  father  wrote  many years
       before in the Quenta Silmarillion, V.276, $130.]                       
  49.  [On the alteration of the relationship between the  three languages
       of the  Atani, whereby  that of  the Folk  of Haleth  replaced that
       of the Folk of Hador as the  tongue isolated  from the  others, see
       p. 368 and note 4.]                                                    
  50.  Not due to their special situation in  Beleriand, and  maybe rather
       a cause of their small numbers than its  result. They  increased in
       numbers  far more  slowly than  the other  Atani, hardly  more than
       was sufficient to replace  the wastage  of war;  yet many  of their
       women (who were fewer than the men) remained unwed.                    
  51.  [Apart from some  slight and  largely unnecessary  modifications to
       the original text (in no case altering the sense)  there are  a few
       points to mention about that printed in  Unfinished Tales.  (1) The
       spelling  Ork(s)  was  changed  to  Orc(s), and  that of  the river
       Taiglin to Teiglin (see XI.228,  309-10). (2)  A passage  about the
       liking of the Drugs for  edible fungus  was omitted  in view  of my
       father's pencilled note beside it: 'Delete all this about funguses.
       Too  like  Hobbits'  (a  reference  of course  to Frodo  and Farmer
       Maggot's  mushrooms).  This  followed  the  account  of  the  know-
       ledge of the Drugs concerning plants, and reads:                       
         To  the astonishment  of Elves  and other  Men they  ate funguses
       with  pleasure,   many  of   which  looked   to  others   ugly  and
       dangerous;  some  kinds  which  they  specially  liked  they caused
       to  grow  near  their  dwellings.  The  Eldar  did  not  eat  these
       things.  The  Folk  of  Haleth,  taught   by  the   Druedain,  made

      some use of them at need;  and if  they were  guests they  ate what
      was  provided  in  courtesy,  and  without  fear.  The  other Atani
      eschewed  them,  save  in  great  hunger when  astray in  the wild,
      for  few  among  them   had  the   knowledge  to   distinguish  the
      wholesome  from  the  bad,  and  the  less  wise  called  them ork-
      plants  and  supposed  them  to  have been  cursed and  blighted by
      Morgoth.]                                                          
                                                                        
  52. [See Unfinished  Tales, p.  386, note  8. Elsewhere  Hurin's serving-
      man is named Sador, not Sadog.]                                    
  53. [This sentence is cited in Unfinished Tales, p. 387, note 11.]      
  54. See the discussion of lineal measurements  and their  equation with
      our measures in the legend of The Disaster  of the  Gladden Fields.
      [This discussion (which, with the work itself, belongs to  the very
      late period - 1968 or later) is found in Unfinished Tales,  pp. 285
      ff., where a note on the stature of Hobbits is also given.]        
  55. In the original sense of 'savage';  they were  by nature  of gentle
      disposition, neither cruel nor vindictive.                         
  56. Of  different  kinds:  Dwarves  they  found  of   uncertain  temper
      and  dangerous  if  displeased;  Elves  they  viewed with  awe, and
      avoided.  Even  in the  Shire in  the Third  Age, where  Elves were
      more often  to be  met than  in other  regions where  Hobbits dwelt
      or had dwelt, most of the  Shire-folk would  have no  dealings with
      them. 'They wander in  Middle-earth,' they  said, 'but  their minds
      and hearts are not there.'                                         
  57. ['Nowhere  else  in  the  world was  this peculiar  (but excellent)
      arrangement to be found':  opening of  the chapter  At the  Sign of
      the Prancing Pony. This observation is here attributed to  Bilbo as
      the ultimate author of the Red Book of Westmarch.]                 
  58. Indeed it is probable that only at Bree  and in  the Shire  did any
      communities  of  Hobbits  survive at  that time  west of  the Misty
      Mountains.  Nothing  is  known  of the  situation in  lands further
      east,  from  which  the  Hobbits must  have migrated  in unrecorded
      ages.                                                              
  59. When  they  entered  Eriador (early  in the  second century  of the
      Third  Age)  Men  were  still  numerous  there,   both  Numenoreans
      and  other  Men  related  to  the  Atani,  beside  remnants  of Men
      of  evil  kinds,  hostile  to  the  Kings.  But  the  Common Speech
      (of  Numenorean  origin)  was  in  general  use  there,  even after
      the decay  of the  North Kingdom.  In Bilbo's  time great  areas of
      Eriador  were  empty  of  Men.  The  desolation  had  begun  in the
      Great Plague  (soon after  the Hobbits'  occupation of  the Shire),
      and was hastened by the final fall and  disappearance of  the North
      Kingdom. In  the Plague  it would  seem that  the only  Hobbit com-
      munities to survive were those in  the far  North-west at  Bree and
      in the Shire. [The opening sentence of this note, placing the entry
      of the Hobbits into  Eriador 'early  in the  second century  of the

       Third  Age',  is  plainly  a  casual   error:  presumably   my  father
       intended 'millennium' for  'century' (in  Appendix B  the date  of the
       coming  of  the  Harfoots  is  given  under Third  Age 1050,  and that
       of the Fallohides and the Stoors under 1150).]                        
  60.  The invasions were  no doubt  also in  great part  due to  Sauron; for
       the 'Easterlings' were  mostly Men  of cruel  and evil  kind, descend-
       ants  of  those  who  had  served  and  worshipped  Sauron  before his
       overthrow at the end of the Second Age.                               
  61.  Though   the   native   traditions  of   the  Rohirrim   preserved  no
       memories  of  the  ancient  war  in   Beleriand,  they   accepted  the
       belief,   which  did   much  to   strengthen  their   friendship  with
       Gondor  and  their  unbroken  loyalty   to  the   Oath  of   Eorl  and
       Cirion. [In relation to this note and to  the passage  in the  text to
       which it refers my father wrote in the margin of the typescript:      
         It  may  have  been  actually  true  of  those  Men  in Middle-earth
       whom   the   returning   Numenoreans  first   met  (see   below);  but
       other   Men   of   the   North   resembling   them  in   features  and
       temper  can  only  have  been  akin  as  descending  from  peoples  of
       which the Atani had been the vanguard.]                               
  62.  [In  Quendi  and Eldar  (XI.377) there  is a  reference to  Avari 'who
       had  crept  in  small  and  secret  groups  into  Beleriand  from  the
       South',  and  to  rare  cases  of  an  Avar  'who  joined with  or was
       admitted  among  the  Sindar';  while  in  that   essay  Eol   of  Nan
       Elmoth was an Avar (XI.409 and note 33).]                             
  63.  [The  Little  Lune  was  first  marked  on  the third  and last  of my
       father's  general  maps  of the  West of  Middle-earth (that  on which
       my  original  map   published  with   The  Lord   of  the   Rings  was
       closely based), but this appears to be the first time that it has been
       named.]                                                               
  64.  [With  this  statement  that  the  region  beyond  the  inflow  of the
       Little Lune was 'Dwarf territory' cf.  Appendix A  (I, iii),  where it
       is told that Arvedui, the last king of Arthedain, 'hid in  the tunnels
       of the old dwarf-mines near the far end of the Mountains'.]           
  65.  Gil-galad's  people  were  mainly  Noldorin;  though  in   the  Second
       Age  the  Elves  of  Harlindon  were mainly  Sindarin, and  the region
       was a fief under the rule of Celeborn. [In the  prefatory note  to the
       annals  of  the  Second  Age  in  Appendix  B it  is said:  'In Lindon
       south   of  the   Lune  dwelt   for  a   time  Celeborn,   kinsman  of
       Thingol';  see  Unfinished  Tales  p.  233  and  note  2,   where  the
       present note is referred to.]                                         
  66.  [See Unfinished Tales, pp.  262-3 (extract  from a  late essay  on the
       names  of  the  rivers  and beacon-hills  of Gondor).  - The  name was
       typed  Enedwaith  with  the h  added subsequently,  but later  in this
       essay  (note 76)  the form  typed is  Enedhwaith; so  also in  that on
       river-names  just  mentioned,  although  in  the  extracts   given  in

      Unfinished  Tales  I  printed  Enedwaith  for agreement  with pub-
      lished texts.]                                                    
  67. This according to the traditions of Dol  Amroth had  been estab-
                                                                       
      lished by seafaring Sindar from the west havens of Beleriand who
      fled  in  three  small  ships  when the  power of  Morgoth over-
      whelmed the Eldar and the Atani; but it  was later  increased by
      adventurers of the  Silvan Elves  seeking for  the Sea  who came
      down the Anduin. The  Silvan Elves  were Middle  Elves according
      to the Numenorean  classification, though  unknown to  the Atani
      until later days: for they were like the Sindar Teleri, but were
      laggards in  the hindmost  companies who  had never  crossed the
      Misty Mountains and established small realms  on either  side of
      the Vales of Anduin. (Of these Lorien and the realm of Thranduil
      in  Mirkwood were  survivors in  the Third  Age.) But  they were
      never wholly free of an unquiet and a yearning for the Sea which
      at times  drove some  of them  to wander  from their  homes. [On
      this haven (Edhellond) see Unfinished Tales, pp. 246 - 7  and note
      18 on p. 255.]                                                    
                                                                       
  68. The first sailings of the Numenoreans to Middle-earth were to the
      lands of Gil-galad, with whom their great mariner  Aldarion made
      an alliance.                                                      
  69. As  the  power  of Numenor  became more  and more  occupied with
                                                                       
      great navies, for which their own land could not supply sufficient
      timber without ruin, their felling of trees and  transportation of
      wood to  their shipyards  in Numenor  or on  the coast  of Middle-
      earth (especially at  Lond Daer,  the Great  Harbour at  the mouth
      of the Greyflood) became reckless. [See Unfinished Tales,  p. 262,
      on  the  tree-felling  of  the   Numenoreans  in   Minhiriath  and
      Enedhwaith.  Of  the  kinship  of  the  forest-dwellers  of  those
      regions with the People of Haleth there is no suggestion elsewhere
      (see also note 72 below). With the following sentence in the text,
      'In  the  Third  Age  their  survivors  were  the people  known in
      Rohan  as  the Dunlendings'  cf. Unfinished  Tales, p.  263: 'From
      Enedwaith  they  [the  native  people  fleeing  from  the Numenor-
      eans] took refuge in  the eastern  mountains where  afterwards was
      Dunland'.]                                                        
  70. [This was  the voyage  of Veantur  the Numenorean,  grandfather of
      Aldarion the Mariner: see Unfinished Tales, pp. 171, 174-5.]        
  71. [At the words in the text printed in Unfinished Tales 'as if
      addressing friends and kinsmen after a long parting' there is a
      note in the essay which I did not include:
          The Atani had learned the Sindarin tongue in Beleriand and
          most of them, especially the high men and the learned, had
          spoken it familiarly, even among themselves: but always as
          a learned language, taught in early childhood; their native

      language  remained  the   Adunaic,  the   Mannish  tongue   of  the
      Folk of Hador (except in  some districts  of the  west of  the Isle
      where the rustic folk used  a Beorian  dialect). Thus  the Sindarin
      they   used   had   remained  unchanged   through  many   lives  of
      Men.                                                               
                                                                        
      With this cf. Unfinished Tales, p. 215 note 19. I  do not  know how
      the mention here of 'a Beorian  dialect' surviving  in the  west of
      Numenor is to be related to the total loss of  the language  of the
      Folk of Beor referred to in note 44; see also p. 368 and note 5.]
  72. This  may  have  been  one  of  the  reasons  why  the  Numenoreans
      failed  to recognize  the Forest-folk  of Minhiriath  as 'kinsmen',
      and  confused  them  with  Men  of  the  Shadow;  for  as  has been
      noted the native language  of the  Folk of  Haleth was  not related
      to the language of the Folks of Hador and Beor.                    
  73. And those  that they  adopted from  older inhabitants  they usually
      altered to fit the Sindarin style. Their names of persons also were
      nearly all of Sindarin form, save  a few  which had  descended from
      the legends of the Atani in the First Age.                         
  74. It  thus  became  naturally  somewhat   corrupted  from   the  true
      Sindarin  of  the Elves,  but this  was hindered  by the  fact that
      Sindarin was held in  high esteem  and was  taught in  the schools,
      according to forms and grammatical structure of ancient days.      
  75. The Elf-realm  became diminished  in the  wars against  Sauron, and
      by the establishment of Imladris,  and it  no longer  extended east
      of the Ered Luin.                                                  
  76. The  Enedhwaith  (or   Central  Wilderness)   was  shared   by  the
      North  and  South  Kingdoms,  but  was  never  settled  by Numenor-
      eans  owing  to  the  hostility  of  the  Gwathuirim (Dunlendings),
      except  in  the  fortified town  and haven  about the  great bridge
      over  the  Greyflood  at  Tharbad.  [The  name  Gwathuirim  of the
      Dunlendings has not occurred before.]                              
  77. [It was said in Appendix A (I, iv) that at the height of  its power
      the  realm  of  Gondor 'extended  north to  Celebrant', and  a long
      note in the  essay at  this point,  beginning 'But  for "Celebrant"
      read "Field of Celebrant"', is an  exposition of  the significance
      of  the  latter  name  (Parth  Celebrant).  This  note is  given in
      Unfinished Tales, p. 260.]                                         
  78. [The  River  Running  is  named  Celduin  in  Appendix  A,  III (RK
      p. 353). Celon was the river that in the First Age rose in the Hill
      of  Himring  and  flowed  past  Nan  Elmoth to  join the  Aros; and
      since  Celduin  as the  name of  the River  Running appears  in the
      very  late text  Cirion and  Eorl (Unfinished  Tales p.  289) Celon
      here  is  presumably  no  more  than  a  casual  confusion  of  the
      names.]                                                            

                                        XI.                                      
                                                                                
                             THE SHIBBOLETH OF FEANOR.                           
                                                                                
                          With an excursus on the name of                        
                             the descendants of Finwe.                           
                                                                                
 In  all  my  father's  last  writings  linguistic  history  was   closely  inter-
 twined  with  the  history  of  persons  and  of  peoples,   and  much   that  he
 recounted  can  be  seen  to  have  arisen  in  the  search  for  explanations of
 linguistic  facts  or  anomalies.  The  most  remarkable   example  of   this  is
 the  following  essay,  arising  from  his  consideration  of  a problem  of his-
 torical   phonology,   which   records  how   the  difference   in  pronunciation
 of  a  single  consonantal  element  in  Quenya  played  a  significant  part  in
 the  strife of  the Noldorin  princes in  Valinor. It  has no  title, but  I have
 called  it  The  Shibboleth  of  Feanor,  since  my  father  himself   used  that
 word in the course of the essay (p. 336).                                       
    Like  Of  Dwarves   and  Men,   it  was   written  (composed   in  typescript
 throughout)   on   paper   supplied   by   Allen   and   Unwin,   in   this  case
 mostly  copies  of  a  publication  note  of  February  1968;  and  as   in  that
 essay  there  are  very  many  notes  interpolated  into  the  body  of  the text
 in  the  process  of  composition.  Appended   to  it   is  a   lengthy  excursus
 {half  as  long  again  as  the  essay  from  which  it  arose)  on the  names of
 Finwe's  descendants,  and  this  I  give  also;  but   from  both   The  Shibbo-
 leth of  Feanor  proper  and  from  this   excursus  I   have  excluded   a  num-
 ber  of  notes,  some  of  them  lengthy,  of  a  technical  phonological nature.
 The  work  was  not  finished,  for  my  father  did  not   reach,  as   was  his
 intention,  discussion  of  the   names  of   the  Sons   of  Feanor;   but  such
 draft  material  as there  is for  this part  is given  at the  end of  the text.
 All  numbered  notes,  both  my  father's   and  mine,   are  collected   on  pp.
 356 ff.                                                                         
    This  work  was  scarcely  used  in  Unfinished  Tales  except   for  a      
 passage  concerning  Galadriel,  which  is here  repeated in  its original      
 context; but elements were used in the published Silmarillion.                  
                                                                                
                        The Shibboleth of Feanor.                           
              The case of the Quenya change of p to s.(1)                 
 The history of the Eldar is now fixed and the adoption of           
 Sindarin by the Exiled Noldor cannot be altered. Since Sindarin        
 made great use of p, the change p > s must have occurred in          
 Noldorin Quenya in Valinor before the rebellion and exile of          
 the Noldor, though not necessarily long before it (in Valinorian

 reckoning  of  time).  The  change   cannot  therefore   be  explained
 as  a  development  (that  is  a  sound-substitution of  s for  an un-
 familiar  p)  in  Quenya of  the Third  Age: either  due to  the Elves  ]
 themselves,  since  they  were  familiar  with  p;  or to  such people
 as  the  Numenorean  scholars  in  Gondor,  since  p  occurred  in the  l
 Common  Speech,  and  also  in  the  Sindarin  which  was  still  used
 as  a  spoken  language  among  the   upper  classes,   especially  in
 Minas Tirith.                                                             
   The  use  by  Galadriel,  as  reported  in  The  Lord of  the Rings,
 must  therefore  be  normal.  It  is  not however  an obstacle  to the
 use  of  p in  representing the  classical book-Quenya,  pre-Exilic or
 post-Exilic, in grammars, dictionaries or transcripts.  It is  in fact
 desirable,  since  the  older p  was always  kept distinct  in writing
 from  original  s.  This  in Exilic  conditions, which  made necessary
 the  writing  down  anew  from  memory  of  many  of   the  pre-Exilic
 works  of  lore  and  song,(2) implies  a continuing  memory   of  the
 sound  p,  and  the  places  in  which  it  had  previously  occurred;
 also  probably  a  dislike  of  the  change  to  s  in  the colloquial
 Quenya  on the  part of  the scholars.  It is  in any  case impossible
 to  believe  that  any  of  the  Noldor  ever  became  unfamiliar with
 the  sound  p  as  such.  In  Valinor  they  dwelt between  the Vanyar
 (Ingwi)  and  the  Teleri (Lindar),(3) with whom  they  were  in com-
 munication    and   sometimes    intermarried.   The    Vanyar   spoke
 virtually  the  same  language  (Quenya)  and  retained  p   in  daily
 use; the Teleri spoke a closely related language still  largely intel-
 ligible to the  Noldor,(4) and it also  used p. The Noldor  were, even
 compared  with  other  Eldar,  talented  linguists, and  if p  did not
 occur  in  the  language  that  they  learned  in  childhood  -  which
 could  only  be  the  case  with  the  youngest  generations  of those
 who  set  out  from  Aman  -  they  would  have  had no  difficulty in
 acquiring it.                                                             
   The   change  p   >  s   must  therefore   have  been   a  conscious
 and  deliberate  change  agreed  to  and  accepted  by  a  majority of
 the  Noldor,  however  initiated,  after   the  separation   of  their
 dwellings  from  the  Vanyar. It  must have  occurred after  the birth
 of  Miriel, but  (probably) before  the birth  of Feanor.  The special
 connexion  of  these  two  persons  with  the  change  and  its  later
 history needs some consideration.                                         
   The  change  was  a  general  one,   based  primarily   on  phonetic
 'taste'  and  theory,  but  it had  not yet  become universal.  It was
 attacked  by  the loremasters,(5) who  pointed  out  that  the  damage
 this  merging  would  do  in  confusing  stems  and  their derivatives

 that  had  been  distinct  in  sound  and  sense  had  not  yet been
 sufficiently considered. The chief of  the linguistic  loremasters at
 that  time  was  Feanor.  He insisted  that p  was the  true pronun-
 ciation for all who cared  for or  fully understood  their language.
 But  in  addition  to  linguistic  taste  and  wisdom  he  had other
 motives. He was the eldest  of Finwe's  sons and  the only  child of
 his  first  wife  Miriel.  She was  a Noldorin  Elda of  slender and
 graceful form, and of gentle disposition, though  as was  later dis-
 covered  in  matters  far  more  grave, she  could show  an ultimate
 obstinacy   that   counsel   or   command   would  only   make  more
 obdurate.  She  had  a  beautiful  voice  and  a delicate  and clear
 enunciation,  though  she  spoke  swiftly  and  took  pride  in this
 skill.  Her  chief talent,  however, was  a marvellous  dexterity of
 hand.  This  she  employed  in  embroidery,  which  though  achieved
 in  what  even  the Eldar  thought a  speed of  haste was  finer and
 more  intricate  than  any  that  had  before  been  seen.  She  was
 therefore  called  Perinde   (Needlewoman)  -   a  name   which  she
 had  indeed  already  been  given  as  a 'mother-name'.(6) She adhered
 to the pronunciation p (it had still been  usual in  her childhood),
 and she desired that all her kin should  adhere to  it also,  at the
 least in the pronunciation of her name.                            
   Feanor  loved  his  mother  dearly,  though  except  in  obstinacy
 their  characters  were  widely  different.  He  was not  gentle. He
 was  proud  and  hot-tempered,  and  opposition to  his will  he met
 not  with  the  quiet steadfastness  of his  mother but  with fierce
 resentment.  He  was  restless  in  mind   and  body,   though  like
 Miriel  he  could  become  wholly  absorbed in  works of  the finest
 skill  of  hand;  but he  left many  things unfinished.  Feanaro was
 his  mother-name,  which  Miriel  gave  him  in  recognition  of his
 impetuous character  (it meant  'spirit of  fire'). While  she lived
 she did much with gentle counsel to soften and restrain him.(7)    
 Her  death  was a  lasting grief  to Feanor,  and both  directly and
 by its further  consequences a  main cause  of his  later disastrous
 influence on the history of the Noldor.                            
   The  death  of Miriel  Perinde -  death of  an 'immortal'  Elda in
 the  deathless  land  of Aman  - was  a matter  of grave  anxiety to
 the  Valar, the  first presage  of the  Shadow that  was to  fall on
 Valinor.  The  matter  of Finwe  and Miriel  and the  judgement that
 the Valar after long debate finally delivered  upon it  is elsewhere
 told.(8) Only those points that  may explain  the conduct  of Feanor
 are here recalled. Miriel's death was of free will: she  forsook her
 body  and  her  fea went  to the  Halls of  Waiting, while  her body

 lay as if asleep in a garden. She said that she  was weary  in body
 and  spirit  and  desired  peace.  The cause  of her  weariness she
 believed  to  be  the  bearing of  Feanor, great  in mind  and body
 beyond  the   measure  of   the  Eldar.   Her  weariness   she  had
 endured  until  he  was  full  grown,  but she  could endure  it no
 longer.                                                           
   The  Valar  and  all  the  Eldar  were grieved  by the  sorrow of
 Finwe,  but  not  dismayed:  all  things could  be healed  in Aman,
 and  when  they  were  rested  her fea  and its  body could  be re-
 united and return  to the  joy of  life in  the Blessed  Realm. But
 Miriel was reluctant, and to all the pleas of  her husband  and her
 kin that were reported to her, and  to the  solemn counsels  of the
 Valar, she would say no  more than  'not yet'.  Each time  that she
 was  approached  she  became  more  fixed  in   her  determination,
 until at  last she  would listen  no more,  saying only:  'I desire
 peace.  Leave  me  in peace  here! I  will not  return. That  is my
 will.'                                                            
   So  the  Valar  were  faced  by  the  one  thing that  they could
 neither change nor heal: the free will  of one  of the  Children of
 Eru, which  it was  unlawful for  them to  coerce -  and in  such a
 case useless, since force could not achieve its purpose.  And after
 some  years  they  were  faced  by  another grave  perplexity. When
 it became clear at last  that Miriel  would never  of her  own will
 return to life in the body within any span of time that  could give
 him  hope,  Finwe's  sorrow  became  embittered.  He   forsook  his
 long vigils by  her sleeping  body and  sought to  take up  his own
 life again; but he wandered far  and wide  in loneliness  and found
 no joy in anything that he did.                                   
   There  was  a  fair lady  of the  Vanyar, Indis  of the  House of
 Ingwe.  She  had  loved  Finwe in  her heart,  ever since  the days
 when  the  Vanyar  and  the  Noldor  lived  close together.  In one
 of his  wanderings Finwe  met her  again upon  the inner  slopes of
 Oiolosse,  the  Mountain  of  Manwe  and  Varda;  and her  face was
 lit by the golden light of Laurelin that was  shining in  the plain
 of Ezellohar below.(9) In that hour Finwe perceived  in her eyes the
 love  that had  before been  hidden from  him. So  it came  to pass
 that  Finwe  and  Indis  desired  to  be  wedded, and  Finwe sought
 the counsel of the Valar.                                         
   The  long  debate  that  they held  on the  matter may  be passed
 over  briefly.  They were  obliged to  choose between  two courses:
 condemning  Finwe  to  bereavement of  a wife  for ever,  or allow-
 ing  one of  the Eldar  to take  a second  wife. The  former seemed

 a  cruel  injustice, and  contrary to  the nature  of the  Eldar. The
 second  they  had  thought  unlawful,  and  some  still held  to that
 opinion.(10) The end of  the Debate  was that  the marriage  of Finwe
 and  Indis  was  sanctioned.  It  was  judged  that  Finwe's bereave-
 ment  was  unjust,  and  by  persisting  in  her  refusal  to  return
 Miriel had forfeited all rights that she had in the case;  for either
 she  was now  capable of  accepting the  healing of  her body  by the
 Valar, or  else her  fea was  mortally sick  and beyond  their power,
 and  she  was  indeed  'dead',  no longer  capable of  becoming again
 a living member of the kindred of the Eldar.                        
   'So  she  must  remain until  the end  of the  world. For  from the
 moment  that  Finwe  and  Indis  are  joined  in marriage  all future
 change  and  choice  will  be  taken  from  her  and  she  will never
 again  be  permitted  to  take  bodily shape.  Her present  body will
 swiftly wither  and pass  away, and  the Valar  will not  restore it.
 For  none  of  the  Eldar  may  have  two  wives  both  alive  in the
 world.'  These  were  the  words  of  Manwe,  and  an  answer  to the
 doubts that some had felt. For  it was  known to  all the  Valar that
 they  alone  had  the  power  to  heal  or restore  the body  for the
 re-housing of a fea that  should in  the later  chances of  the world
 be  deprived;  but  that  to  Manwe  also  was  given  the  right  to
 refuse the return of the fea.                                       
   During  the  time  of  his  sorrow  Finwe  had little  comfort from
 Feanor. For a  while he  also had  kept vigil  by his  mother's body,
 but  soon  he  became  wholly  absorbed  again   in  his   own  works
 and  devices.  When  the  matter  of  Finwe  and  Indis arose  he was
 disturbed,  and  filled  with  anger  and  resentment;  though  it is
 not  recorded  that  he  attended  the  Debate  or  paid heed  to the
 reasons  given  for  the  judgement, or  to its  terms except  in one
 point:  that  Miriel  was  condemned to  remain for  ever discarnate,
 so that he  could never  again visit  her or  speak with  her, unless
 he  himself  should die.(11) This grieved  him,  and  he  grudged the
 happiness  of  Finwe  and   Indis,  and   was  unfriendly   to  their
 children, even before they were born.                               
   How this  ill will  grew and  festered in  the years  that followed
 is the main matter of the first part of  The Silmarillion:  the Dark-
 ening  of  Valinor.  Into the  strife and  confusion of  loyalties in
 that time this seemingly trivial matter, the  change of  p to  s, was
 caught  up  to  its  embitterment,  and to  lasting detriment  to the
 Quenya  tongue.   Had  peace   been  maintained   there  can   be  no
 doubt  that  the advice  of Feanor,  with which  all the  other lore-
 masters  privately  or  openly  agreed,  would  have  prevailed. But

 an  opinion in  which he  was certainly  right was  rejected because
 of the follies and evil deeds into which he was  later led.  He made
 it  a  personal  matter:  he  and his  sons adhered  to p,  and they
 demanded  that  all  those  who  were   sincere  in   their  support
 should  do  the  same.  Therefore  those  who  resented   his  arro-
 gance,  and  still  more  those  whose   support  later   turned  to
 hatred, rejected his shibboleth.                                   
   Indis  was a  Vanya, and  it might  be thought  that she  would in
 this point at least have  pleased Feanor,  since the  Vanyar adhered
 to  p.  Nonetheless  Indis  adopted  s.  Not  as Feanor  believed in
 belittlement  of  Miriel,  but in  loyalty to  Finwe. For  after the
 rejection  of  his  prayers  by  Miriel  Finwe  accepted  the change
 (which  had  now   become  almost   universal  among   his  people),
 although  in  deference  to  Miriel he  had adhered  to p  while she
 lived.  Therefore  Indis  said:  'I  have joined  the people  of the
 Noldor, and  I will  speak as  they do.'  So it  came about  that to
 Feanor  the  rejection  of  p became  a symbol  of the  rejection of
 Miriel, and of himself, her  son, as  the chief  of the  Noldor next
 to  Finwe.  This,  as  his  pride  grew  and  his mood  darkened, he
 thought was a 'plot' of the Valar, inspired by  fear of  his powers,
 to oust him  and give  the leadership  of the  Noldor to  those more
 servile.  So  Feanor  would  call  himself Son  of the  Perinde, and
 when  his  sons  in  their  childhood  asked  why  their kin  in the
 house  of  Finwe  used  s  for  p  he  answered:  'Take no  heed! We
 speak  as is  right, and  as King  Finwe himself  did before  he was
 led  astray. We  are his  heirs by  right and  the elder  house. Let
 them sa-si, if they can speak no better.'                          
   There  can  thus  be  no  doubt  that the  majority of  the Exiles
 used s for p in their daily speech; for in the event  (after Morgoth
 had  contrived  the  murder  of  Finwe)   Feanor  was   deprived  of
 the  leadership,  and  the greater  part of  the Noldor  who forsook
 Valinor  marched  under  the  command   of  Fingolfin,   the  eldest
 son  of  Indis.  Fingolfin  was  his father's  son, tall,  dark, and
 proud,  as  were most  of the  Noldor, and  in the  end in  spite of
 the  enmity  between  him  and Feanor  he joined  with full  will in
 the  rebellion  and  the  exile,  though he  continued to  claim the
 kingship of all the Noldor.                                        
   The  case  of  Galadriel  and  her  brother  Finrod   is  somewhat
 different.(12) They  were  the children  of Finarfin,  Indis' second
 son.  He  was  of his  mother's kind  in mind  and body,  having the
 golden  hair  of  the  Vanyar,  their noble  and gentle  temper, and
 their love of the  Valar. As  well as  he could  he kept  aloof from

 the strife of his brothers  and their  estrangement from  the Valar,
 and  he  often  sought peace  among the  Teleri, whose  language he
 learned.  He  wedded  Earwen,  the  daughter  of  King   Olwe,  and
 his  children  were  thus  the kin of King Elwe Pindikollo (13) (in
 Sindarin  Elu  Thingol)  of  Doriath  in  Beleriand,  for   he  was
 the brother  of Olwe;  and this  kinship influenced  their decision
 to  join  in the  Exile, and  proved of  great importance  later in
 Beleriand. Finrod was like his father in his  fair face  and golden
 hair,  and  also in  noble and  generous heart,  though he  had the
 high courage of the  Noldor and  in his  youth their  eagerness and
 unrest; and he had also from his Telerin mother a  love of  the sea
 and  dreams  of far  lands that  he had  never seen.  Galadriel was
 the  greatest  of  the  Noldor,  except  Feanor  maybe,  though she
 was  wiser  than  he,  and  her  wisdom  increased  with  the  long
 years.                                                            
   Her   mother-name   was   Nerwen   'man-maiden',  and   she  grew
 to be tall  beyond the  measure even  of the  women of  the Noldor;
 she  was  strong  of body,  mind, and  will, a  match for  both the
 loremasters and  the athletes  of the  Eldar in  the days  of their
 youth.  Even  among  the  Eldar  she  was accounted  beautiful, and
 her  hair  was  held  a marvel  unmatched. It  was golden  like the
 hair of her father and her foremother Indis, but richer  and more
 radiant,  for  its gold  was touched  by some  memory of  the star-
 like silver of her mother;  and the  Eldar said  that the  light of
 the  Two  Trees,  Laurelin and  Telperion, had  been snared  in her
 tresses. Many thought  that this  saying first  gave to  Feanor the
 thought of imprisoning  and blending  the light  of the  Trees that
 later took shape in his hands as the  Silmarils. For  Feanor beheld
 the  hair of  Galadriel with  wonder and  delight. He  begged three
 times  for  a  tress,  but Galadriel  would not  give him  even one
 hair. These two kinsfolk, the greatest of  the Eldar  of Valinor,(14)
 were unfriends for ever.                                          
   Galadriel was born in the bliss of Valinor, but it was  not long,
 in  the reckoning  of the  Blessed Realm,  before that  was dimmed;
 and thereafter she had no peace  within. For  in that  testing time
 amid the strife  of the  Noldor she  was drawn  this way  and that.
 She was proud, strong, and  self-willed, as  were all  the descend-
 ants of Finwe save Finarfin; and  like her  brother Finrod,  of all
 her kin the nearest to her heart, she had dreams  of far  lands and
 dominions  that  might  be  her  own  to order  as she  would with-
 out tutelage. Yet deeper  still there  dwelt in  her the  noble and
 generous spirit (ore) of the Vanyar, and a reverence for  the Valar

 that  she  could  not  forget. From  her earliest  years she  had a
 marvellous gift of  insight into  the minds  of others,  but judged
 them  with  mercy  and  understanding,  and  she withheld  her good
 will  from  none save  only Feanor.  In him  she perceived  a dark-
 ness that she hated and feared,  though she  did not  perceive that
 the shadow of the same evil had fallen  upon the  minds of  all the
 Noldor, and upon her own.                                          
   So it came to pass  that when  the light  of Valinor  failed, for
 ever as the Noldor thought,  she joined  the rebellion  against the
 Valar  who  commanded  them  to  stay;  and once  she had  set foot
 upon that road of  exile, she  would not  relent, but  rejected the
 last  message  of the  Valar, and  came under  the Doom  of Mandos.
 Even after the merciless assault upon  the Teleri  and the  rape of
 their ships, though she fought fiercely  against Feanor  in defence
 of  her  mother's  kin,  she  did  not  turn  back.  Her  pride was
 unwilling  to  return,  a  defeated suppliant  for pardon;  but now
 she burned with desire  to follow  Feanor with  her anger  to what-
 ever lands he might come, and to thwart  him in  all ways  that she
 could. Pride still moved her  when, at  the end  of the  Elder Days
 after the final  overthrow of  Morgoth, she  refused the  pardon of
 the  Valar  for all  who had  fought against  him, and  remained in
 Middle-earth.  It  was  not until  two long  ages more  had passed,
 when at last all  that she  had desired  in her  youth came  to her
 hand,  the  Ring  of  Power  and  the  dominion of  Middle-earth of
 which  she  had  dreamed,  that  her  wisdom  was  full  grown  and
 she rejected it, and passing  the last  test departed  from Middle-
 earth for ever.                                                    
                                                                   
   The  change  to  s  had  become  general  among  the  Noldor long
 before the birth of  Galadriel and  no doubt  was familiar  to her.
 Her  father  Finarfin,  however,  loved  the  Vanyar  (his mother's
 people)  and  the Teleri,  and in  his house  p was  used, Finarfin
 being  moved  by  Feanor  neither one  way or  the other  but doing
 as he wished.  It is  clear nonetheless  that opposition  to Feanor
 soon  became  a  dominant  motive with  Galadriel, while  her pride
 did  not take  the form  of wishing  to be  different from  her own
 people. So  while she  knew well  the history  of their  tongue and
 all the reasons of the loremasters, she certainly used s in her own
 daily  speech.  Her  Lament  -  spoken  before  she  knew   of  the
 pardon  (and  indeed  honour)  that  the  Valar  gave  her  - harks
 back to the days of her  youth in  Valinor and  to the  darkness of
 the years of Exile while the Blessed  Realm was  closed to  all the

       
                                                                       
 Noldor   in   Middle-earth.   Whatever  she   may  have   done  later,
 when  Feanor  and  all  his   sons  had   perished,  and   Quenya  was
 a   language  of   lore  known   and  used   only  by   the  dwindling
 remnant  of  the  High  Elves  (of  Noldorin  descent),  she  would in
 this song certainly have used s.                                       
  The  s  was   certainly  used   in  Beleriand   by  nearly   all  the
 Noldor.(15) And  it  was  in  this  form  (though  with knowledge  of its
 history  and  the  difference  in  spelling)  that  Quenya  was handed
 on  to  the  loremasters  of  the  Atani, so  that in  Middle-earth it
 lingered  on  among  the  learned,  and  a  source  of high  and noble
 names in Rivendell and in Gondor into the Fourth Age.                  
                                                                       
  The essay is followed by three 'notes'. Note 1 is a substantial devel-
 opment of the words in the  essay (p.  332) 'The  change was  ... based
 primarily  on  phonetic  "taste"  and theory',  which is  here omitted.
 Note 2, given below, is an account of  Elvish name-giving  that differs
 in  some  important  respects  from  the earlier  and far  more complex
 account  in  Laws  and  Customs among  the Eldar,  X.214-17. Note  3 is
 the long account of the names of Finwe's descendants.                  
                                                                       
                          Note on Mother-names.                         
                                                                       
 The Eldar  in Valinor  had as  a rule  two names,  or essi.  The first-
 given  was  the  father-name,  received at  birth. It  usually recalled
 the  father's  name,  resembling  it  in  sense  or form;  sometimes it
 was  simply  the  father's  name,  to  which  some  distinguishing pre-
 fix  in the  case of  a son  might be  added later  when the  child was
 full-grown.  The  mother-name  was  given   later,  often   some  years
 later, by  the mother;  but sometimes  it was  given soon  after birth.
 For  the  mothers  of  the  Eldar  were gifted  with deep  insight into
 their  children's  characters  and  abilities,  and  many had  also the
 gift of prophetic foresight.                                           
  In  addition  any  of  the  Eldar  might  acquire  an  epesse ('after-
 name'),  not  necessarily  given  by  their  own  kin,  a   nickname  -
 mostly  given  as  a  title  of  admiration   or  honour.   Later  some
 among  the   exiles  gave   themselves  names,   as  disguises   or  in
 reference  to  their  own  deeds  and  personal  history:   such  names
 were  called  kilmessi  'self-names'   (literally  names   of  personal
 choice).(16)                                                           
  The  'true  names'  remained  the  first  two, but  in later  song and
 history  any  of  the  four  might  become  the  name   generally  used
 and  recognized.  The  true  names  were   not  however   forgotten  by
 the  scribes  and  loremasters  or  the  poets,  and  they  might often
 be   introduced   without  comment.   To  this   difficulty  -   as  it

 proved to those who in  later days  tried to  use and  adapt Elvish
 traditions  of  the First  Age as  a background  to the  legends of
 their  own  heroes  of  that  time  and  their descendants (17) - was
 added  the  alteration  of the  Quenya names  of the  Noldor, after
 their  settlement  in  Beleriand  and  adoption  of   the  Sindarin
 tongue.                                                            
                                                                   
                  The names of Finwe's descendants.                
                                                                   
 Few of the oldest  names of  the Eldar  are recorded,  except those
 of the four leaders of the hosts on the  Great Journey:  Ingwe of
 the  Vanyar;  Finwe  of  the  Noldor;  and  the brothers  Elwe and
 Olwe of the  Teleri. It  is not  certain that  these names  had any
 'meaning',  that  is  any  intentional  reference  to  or connexion
 with  other  stems already  existing in  primitive Eldarin;  in any
 case  they  must  have  been  formed  far  back  in the  history of
 Elvish speech. They consist each of a stem  (ing-, fin-,  el-, ol-)
 followed by a 'suffix' -we. The suffix appears frequently  in other
 Quenya  names  of  the First  Age, such  as Voronwe,  generally but
 not  exclusively masculine.(18) This  the loremasters  explained as
 being not in origin  a suffix,  though it  survived in  Quenya only
 as a final element in names, but an old word for  'person', deriva-
 tive  of  a  stem  EWE. This  took as  a second  element in  a com-
 pound  the  form  we;  but  as an  independent word  ewe, preserved
 in  Telerin  as  eve  'a  person,   somebody  (unnamed)'.   In  Old
 Quenya  it  survived  in  the  form  eo  ((  ew  +  the  pronominal
 suffix -o 'a person, somebody'), later replaced  by namo;  also in
 the  Old Quenya  adjective wera,  Quenya vera  'personal, private,
 own'.                                                              
   The  first  elements  were  often later  explained as  related to
 Quenya inga 'top, highest point' used adjectivally as a  prefix, as
 in  ingaran  'high-king',  ingor  'summit of  a mountain';  to Com-
 mon Eldarin PHIN 'hair', as in Quenya fine  'a hair',  finde 'hair,
 especially of the head', finda 'having hair,  -haired'; and  to the
 stem el, elen 'star'. Of these the most probable is the relation to
 inga; for  the Vanyar  were regarded,  and regarded  themselves, as
 the leaders and principal kindred of  the Eldar,  as they  were the
 eldest;  and  they  called themselves  the Ingwer  - in  fact their
 king's proper title was Ingwe lngweron  'chief of  the chieftains'.
 The  others are  doubtful. All  the Eldar  had beautiful  hair (and
 were especially attracted by hair  of exceptional  loveliness), but
 the  Noldor  were  not  specially remarkable  in this  respect, and
 there is no reference to Finwe  as having  had hair  of exceptional

 length,   abundance,   or   beauty  beyond   the  measure   of  his
 people.(19) There is nothing  known  to  connect Elwe  more closely
 with  the  stars  than  all  the  other Eldar;  and the  name seems
 invented to go  as a  pair with  Olwe, for  which no  'meaning' was
 suggested.  OL  as  a  simple stem  seems not  to have  occurred in
 Eldarin, though  it appears  in certain  'extended' stems,  such as
 olos/r  'dream',  olob  'branch'  (Quenya  olba); neither  of which
 seems to be  old enough,  even if  suitable in  sense, to  have any
 connexion  with  the  name of  the Ciriaran  (mariner king)  of the
 Teleri of Valinor.(20)                                            
   It  must  be  realized  that  the  names  of  the Eldar  were not
 necessarily  'meaningful',  though  composed to  fit the  style and
 structure  of  their  spoken  languages;  and  that even  when made
 or  partly  made  of  stems with  a meaning  these were  not neces-
 sarily  combined  according  to  the  normal  modes  of composition
 observed in ordinary  words. Also  that when  the Eldar  arrived in
 Aman  and  settled  there they  had already  a long  history behind
 them,  and  had  developed  customs  to  which  they  adhered,  and
 also  their  languages  had  been elaborated  and changed  and were
 very different from  their primitive  speech as  it was  before the
 coming   of   Orome.  But   since  they   were  immortal   or  more
 properly  said  'indefinitely  longeval' many  of the  oldest Eldar
 had   names  devised   long  before,   which  had   been  unchanged
 except  in  the  accommodation  of  their  sounds  to  the  changes
 observed in their language as compared with Primitive Eldarin.
   This   accommodation   was   mainly   of  the   'unheeded'  kind:
 that is, personal  names being  used in  daily speech  followed the
 changes  in  that  speech  -  though  these  were   recognized  and
 observed.  The  changes  from  the  Quenya  names  of   the  Noldor
 to  Sindarin  forms  when  they  settled  in  Beleriand  in Middle-
 earth  were  on  the  other  hand  artificial and  deliberate. They
 were  made  by  the  Noldor  themselves. This  was done  because of
 the sensitiveness of the Eldar to languages and their  styles. They
 felt it absurd  and distasteful  to call  living persons  who spoke
 Sindarin in daily  life by  names in  quite a  different linguistic
 mode.(21)                                                         
   The  Noldor  of  course fully  understood the  style and  mode of
 Sindarin,  though  their  learning of  this difficult  language was
 swift; but they did not  necessarily understand  the detail  of its
 relation to Quenya. At  first, except  in the  few words  which the
 great  changes  in  the  Sindarin form  of Telerin  in Middle-earth
 had  left  unaltered or  plainly similar,  none of  them understood

 or were yet interested in the linguistic history. It was at  this early
 period  that  the  translation  of  most  of  their  Quenya  names took
 place.  In  consequence  these  translations,  though  fitted  entirely
 to  Sindarin  in  form  and  style,  were  often  inaccurate:  that is,
 they  did  not  always  precisely  correspond  in  sense; nor  were the
 equated   elements   always   actually   the  nearest   Sindarin  forms
 of   the   Quenya  elements   -  sometimes   they  were   not  histori-
 cally  related  at  all,  though  they  were  more  or less  similar in
 sound.                                                                
   It  was,  however,  certainly  the  contact  with  Sindarin  and  the
 enlargement  of  their  experience  of  linguistic  change  (especially
 the   much  swifter   and  more   uncontrolled  shifts   observable  in
 Middle-earth)  that  stimulated  the  studies  of the  linguistic lore-
 masters,  and  it  was  in  Beleriand  that theories  concerning Primi-
 tive  Eldarin  and  the  interrelation  of  its known  descendants were
 developed.  In  this Feanor  played little  part, except  in so  far as
 his  own  work  and  theories  before  the  Exile  had  laid  the foun-
 dations  upon  which   his  successors   built.  He   himself  perished
 too  early  in  the  war  against  Morgoth,  largely  because   of  his
 recklessness,  to  do  more  than  note  the  differences  between  the
 dialects  of  North  Sindarin  (which  was  the  only  one he  had time
 to learn) and the Western.(22)                                        
   The  learning  of  the  loremasters  was  available  to all  who were
 interested;  but  as  the  hopeless  war  dragged  on,  and  after  its
 earlier   and   deceptive   successes   passed   through   defeats  and
 disasters  to  utter  ruin  of  the  Elvish  realms,  fewer  and  fewer
 of  the  Eldar  had  opportunity  for  'lore' of  any kind.  An account
 of  the  years  of  the  Siege  of  Angband  in  chronicle  form  would
 seem to leave neither  place nor  time for  any of  the arts  of peace;
 but  the years  were long,  and in  fact there  were intervals  as long
 as  many  lives  of  Men  and  secure  places  long  defended  in which
 the  High  Eldar  in  exile  laboured  to  recover  what they  could of
 the  beauty  and  wisdom  of  their  former  home.  All  peace  and all
 strongholds  were  at  last  destroyed  by  Morgoth;  but  if  any won-
 der  how  any  lore  and  treasure  was  preserved  from  ruin,  it may
 be  answered:  of  the  treasure  little  was  preserved, and  the loss
 of  things  of beauty  great and  small is  incalculable; but  the lore
 of  the  Eldar  did  not  depend  on  perishable records,  being stored
 in   the  vast   houses  of   their  minds.(23) When  the   Eldar made
 records  in  written  form,  even  those  that  to  us would  seem vol-
 uminous,  they  did  only  summarise,  as  it  were,  for  the  use  of
 others  whose  lore  was   maybe  in   other  fields   of  knowledge,(24)

 matters  which  were  kept  for  ever  undimmed in  intricate detail
 in their minds.                                                     
                                                                    
   Here  are  some  of  the  chief  names of  Finwe and  his descend-
 ants.                                                               
 1.  Finwe  for  whom  no  other  names   are  recorded   except  his
 title  Noldoran  'King  of the  Noldor'. His  first wife  was Miriel
 (first  name)  Perinde  (mother-name).  The  names  of  her  kin are
 not  recorded.  Her  names  were  not  translated.  His  second wife
 was  Indis,  which  means  'great  or   valiant  woman'.   No  other
 names  are  recorded.  She  is  said  to have  been the  daughter of
 King Ingwe's sister.                                                
 2.  The  only  child  of  Miriel   was  afterwards   usually  called
 Feanor.  His  first  name  was  Finwe  (minya),  afterwards enlarged
 when  his  talents  developed  to  Kurufinwe.  His  mother-name  was
 in Quenya, as given by Miriel, Feanaro 'spirit  of fire'.  Feanor is
 the form  nearly always  used in  histories and  legends, but  is as
 it  stands  only  half  Sindarized:  the  genuine Sindarin  form was
 Faenor; the form Feanor (the e  is only  a device  of transcription,
 not  needed  in the  original) probably  arose through  scribal con-
 fusion,  especially  in  documents  written in  Quenya, in  which ea
 was frequent but ae did not normally occur.(25)                     
                                                                    
 3.  Finwe  had four  children by  Indis: a  daughter Findis,  a son,
 a  daughter  Irime,  and  a  son.(26) Findis  was  made   by  combining
 the names of her parents. Little is said of her in The Silmarillion.
 She  did  not  go into  exile, but  went with  her mother  after the
 slaying of  Finwe and  they abode  among the  Vanyar in  grief until
 such time as it seemed  good to  Manwe to  restore Finwe  to life.(27)
 His   second   daughter   was  named Irien (28) and  her  mother-name
 was  Lalwende  (laughing  maiden).  By  this  name, or  in shortened
 form  Lalwen,  she  was  generally  known.   She  went   into  exile
 with her brother  Fingolfin, who  was most  dear to  her of  all her
 kin; but her name  was not  changed, since  Lalwen fitted  the style
 of Sindarin well enough.(29)                                        
   To  his  sons  Finwe  gave  his  own  name  as  he  had   done  to
 Feanor. This maybe was done to assert their claim  to be  his legit-
 imate sons, equal  in that  respect to  his eldest  child Kurufinwe
 Fayanaro,   but  there   was  no   intention  of   arousing  discord
 among the  brothers,  since nothing  in the  judgement of  the Valar
 in any  way  impaired  Feanor's  position and  rights as  his eldest
 son. Nothing   indeed  was   ever  done   to  impair   them,  except
 by Feanor himself; and in spite of all that later happened his

 eldest son remained nearest to Finwe's heart.                     
    As with Feanor, Finwe later added prefixes  to their  name: the
 elder  he  called Nolofinwe,  and the  younger Arafinwe.  Nolo was
 the stem of words referring to wisdom,(30) and Ara, ar-  a prefixed
 form of the stem Ara- 'noble'. Feanor felt  aggrieved both  by the
 use of his father's name for his two  younger brothers,  and again
 by the prefixes that  were added;  for his  pride was  growing and
 clouding  his  reason: he  thought himself  not only  the greatest
 master  of  Kurwe  (which  was  true)  but  also  of  Nolme (which
 was  not true,  save in  matters of  language), and  certainly the
 noblest of the children of  Finwe (which  might have  proved true,
 if he had not become the proudest and most arrogant).             
                                                                  
    The Noldor in exile as a rule chose one only of their  names to
 be  given  a  Sindarin shape;  this was  the name,  usually, which
 each preferred (for various reasons), though  the ease  of 'trans-
 lation' and its fitting into Sindarin style was also considered.
    On  Feanor,  Faenor  see  above.  Nolofinwe  (one of  the first
 to  be  changed)  was  given  the  form  Fingolfin, that  is Finwe
 Nolofinwe  was  given  a  Sindarin style  in sounds,  and combined
 in one name. A  most unusual  procedure, and  not imitated  in any
 other name.(31) It was  not  a  translation.  The  element  Quenya
 nolo- was  merely given  its equivalent  Sindarin form  gol. Finwe
 was simply  reduced to  fin in  both places;  thus was  produced a
 name  very  much  in Sindarin  style but  without meaning  in that
 language.  (If  Finwe had  been treated  as a  word of  this form
 would have been, had it occurred anciently  in Sindarin,  it would
 have been Finu  - but  in the  Northern dialect  Fim, as  in Curu-
 fim.)(32)  Fingolfin  had  prefixed the  name Finwe  to Nolofinwe
 before  the  Exiles  reached Middle-earth.  This was  in pursuance
 of his claim to be the chieftain of all the Noldor after the death
 of  Finwe, and  so enraged Feanor (33) that it was no doubt one of
 the reasons for his treachery in  abandoning Fingolfin  and steal-
 ing away with all the ships. The prefixion in the case of Finarfin
 was made by Finrod  only after  the death  of Fingolfin  in single
 combat  with  Morgoth.  The  Noldor   then  became   divided  into
 separate  kingships  under  Fingon  son  of Fingolfin,  Turgon his
 younger  brother,  Maedros  son  of  Feanor,  and  Finrod  son  of
 Arfin; and the following of Finrod had become the greatest.       
                                                                  
 4. The children of Fingolfin. Fingolfin's  wife Anaire  refused to
 leave Aman,  largely because  of her  friendship with  Earwen wife
 of Arafinwe (though she was a Noldo  and not  one of  the Teleri).

 But  all  her  children  went  with  their  father:   Findekano,  Turu-
 kano,  Arakano,  and  Irisse   his  daughter and  third child;  she was
 under  the  protection  of  Turukano  who  loved  her  dearly,  and  of
 Elenwe  his  wife.(34) Findekano had no  wife or  child;(35) neither had
 Arakano.                                                              
   These    names   were    probably   father-names,    though   Arakano
 had  been  the  mother-name   of  Fingolfin.   Kano  meant   in  Quenya
 'commander', usually as  the title  of a  lesser chief,  especially one
 acting  as  the  deputy  of  one  higher   in  rank.(36) The Sindarizing
 of  these  names  as  Fingon   and  Turgon   shows  knowledge   of  the
 sound-changes   distinguishing   Sindarin   from   Telerin,   but  dis-
 regards   meaning.   If   these   names   had  actually   been  ancient
 Sindarin  names  they  would  at  the  time  of   the  coming   of  the
 Exiles  have  taken  the  forms  Fingon  and  Turgon,  but  they  would
 not  have  had  their  Quenya  meanings,   if  interpretable   at  all.
 Possibly   they   would   have   conveyed  'Hair-shout'   and  'Master-
 shout'  [see  note  36].  But  this  did  not  matter  much  since  old
 Sindarin  names  had  by  that  time  frequently  become   obscured  by
 sound-changes  and  were  taken  as  names   and  not   analysed.  With
 regard  to  Findekano  /  Fingon  it  may  be  noted  that   the  first
 element  was  certainly  Quenya  finde  'hair'  - a  tress or  plait of
 hair (37)(cf. findesse' a head of hair, a person's hair as a  whole), but
 this  is  not  conclusive  proof  that  the  name  Finwe  was  or  was
 thought  to  be  derived  from  this  stem. It  would have  been suffi-
 cient  for  Fingolfin  to  give  to  his  eldest  son a  name beginning
 with fin- as an  'echo' of  the ancestral  name, and  if this  was also
 specially  applicable   it  would   have  been   approved  as   a  good
 invention. In the  case of  Fingon it  was suitable;  he wore  his long
 dark hair in great plaits braided with gold.                          
   Arakano  was  the  tallest  of   the  brothers   and  the   most  im-
 petuous,  but  his  name  was  never  changed  to  Sindarin  form,  for
 he perished  in the  first battle  of Fingolfin's  host with  the Orks,
 the  Battle  of  the  Lammoth   (but  the   Sindarin  form   Argon  was
 often  later  given  as  a  name  by  Noldor  and  Sindar in  memory of
 his valour).(38)                                                      
   Irisse  who   went  ever  with  the  people  of  Turgon   was  called
 Ireth,(39) by substitution  of  Sindarin  -eth  (<  -itta)   frequent  in
 feminine   names   for  Quenya   -isse.  Elenwe   her  mother   had  no
 Sindarin  name,  for  she  never  reached  Beleriand.  She  perished in
 the  crossing  of  the  Ice;  and  Turgon  was  thereafter unappeasable
 in  his  enmity  for  Feanor  and his  sons. He  had himself  come near
 to  death  in  the  bitter  waters when  he attempted  to save  her and

 his  daughter  Itaril,  whom  the  breaking  of  treacherous  ice had
 cast into the cruel sea.  Itaril he  saved;(40) but  the body  of Elenwe
 was covered in fallen ice.                                           
   Itaril, or in longer form Itarille, was the only child in the third
 generation  from  Finwe  to  go  with the  exiles, save  only Arothir
 son  of  Angrod  brother  of Finrod.(41) Both   have  renown   in  the
 legends  of the  Silmarillion; but  Itaril had  a great  destiny, for
 she  was  the  mother  of  Ardamir.  Earendil.  Her name  in Sindarin
 form was Idril, but this  also was  only an  alteration of  form, for
 neither  of  the  Quenya  stems  that  the  name contains  were found
 in Sindarin.(42)                                                      
                                                                     
 5.   The   children   of   Finarfin.  These  were   named:  Findarato
 Ingoldo;   Angarato;   Aikanaro;    and   Nerwende    Artanis,   sur-
 named   Alatariel.  The   wife  of   Angarato  was   named  Eldalote,
 and  his  son  Artaher.  The most  renowned of  these were  the first
 and the fourth (the only  daughter), and  only of  these two  are the
 mother-names   remembered.   The   names   of   Sindarin    form   by
 which  they  were  usually  called  in  later  song  and  legend were
 Finrod,  Angrod  (with  wife  Edellos   and  son   Arothir),  Aegnor,
 and Galadriel.                                                       
   The  names  Findarato  and  Angarato  were  Telerin  in  form  (for
 Finarfin  spoke  the  language  of  his  wife's  people);   and  they
 proved  easy  to  render  into  Sindarin in  form and  sense, because
 of the  close relationship  of the  Telerin of  Aman to  the language
 of their kin, the Sindar of Beleriand, in spite of the  great changes
 that  it  had  undergone  in  Middle-earth.  (Artafinde  and  Artanga
 would  have  been  their  more  natural   Quenya  forms,   arta-  the
 equivalent of arata- preceding, as  in Artanis and Artaher.)(43) The
 order  of  the  elements  in  compounds,  especially  personal names,
 remained  fairly  free  in  all three  Eldarin languages;  but Quenya
 preferred  the  (older)  order  in  which adjectival  stems preceded,
 while  in  Telerin and  Sindarin the  adjectival elements  often were
 placed  second,  especially  in  later-formed  names,   according  to
 the  usual  placing  of adjectives  in the  ordinary speech  of those
 languages.  In  names  however  that  ended  in  old  words referring
 to status, rank, profession,  race or  kindred and  so on  the adjec-
 tival  element  still  in Sindarin,  following ancient  models, might
 be  placed  first. Quenya  Artaher (stem  artaher-) 'noble  lord' was
 correctly Sindarized as Arothir.                                     
   Edellos   translated   Eldalote   according   to    sense:   Elven-
 flower'.  Angarato  became  naturally  Angrod.  It  is  probable that
 both brothers first  received the  name Arato,  later differentiated.

 The Find- in  Findarato referred  to hair,  but in  this case  to the
 golden  hair  of  this  family  derived  from  Indis.  The   Ang-  in
 Angarato    was    from   Common    Eldarin   anga    iron   (Quenya,
 Telerin  anga,  Sindarin  ang).  Angrod  early  developed   hands  of
 great  strength  and  received  the  epesse  Angamaite 'iron-handed',
 so that ang- was used by Finarfin as a differentiating prefix.      
   Aikanaro  was  called   by  his   father  Ambarato.   The  Sindarin
 form  of  this  would  have  been  Amrod;  but  to  distinguish  this
 from  Angrod,  and  also  because  he  preferred  it,  he   used  his
 mother-name (44) (which was   however   given   in  Quenya   and  not
 Telerin  form).  Aika-nar-  meant  'fell  fire'.  It  was  in  part a
 'prophetic'  name;  for  he  was   renowned  as   one  of   the  most
 valiant of  the warriors,  greatly feared  by the  Orks: in  wrath or
 battle the  light of  his eyes  was like  flame, though  otherwise he
 was a generous and noble spirit. But in early  youth the  fiery light
 could  be  observed;  while  his  hair was  notable: golden  like his
 brothers and sister, but strong and stiff, rising upon his  head like
 flames.  The  Sindarin  form  Aegnor  that  he  adopted  was  however
 not  true  Sindarin.  There  was  no  Sindarin  adjective correspond-
 ing  to Quenya  aika 'fell,  terrible, dire',  though aeg  would have
 been its form if it had occurred.(45)                                
   Galadriel  was  chosen  by  Artanis  ('noble  woman')  to   be  her
 Sindarin  name;  for it  was the  most beautiful  of her  names, and,
 though  as  an  epesse, had  been given  to her  by her  lover, Tele-
 porno  of  the  Teleri,  whom  she  wedded  later  in Beleriand.(46) As
 he  gave it  in Telerin  form it  was Alatariel(le).  The Quenyarized
 form  appears  as  Altariel,  though  its true  form would  have been
 Naltariel.   It   was   euphoniously   and   correctly   rendered  in
 Sindarin   Galadriel.   The   name  was   derived  from   the  Common
 Eldarin   stem   NAL  'shine   by  reflection';   *nalata  'radiance,
 glittering  reflection' (from  jewels, glass  or polished  metals, or
 water)  >  Quenya  nalta,  Telerin  alata,  Sindarin  galad,   +  the
 Common  Eldarin  stem  RIG  'twine,  wreathe',  *riga  'wreath,  gar-
 land';  Quenya,  Telerin  ria, Sindarin  ri, Quenya,  Telerin rielle,
 -riel  'a  maiden  crowned  with  a festival  garland'. The  whole, =
 'maiden  crowned  with  a  garland  of  bright  radiance',  was given
 in reference to  Galadriel's hair.  Galad occurs  also in  the epesse
 of  Ereinion  ('scion  of  kings')  by  which  he was  chiefly remem-
 bered in legend, Gil-galad 'star of radiance': he  was the  last king
 Of the  Eldar  in  Middle-earth,  and  the  last  male  descendant of
 Finwe (47) except  Elrond  the  Half-elven.  The  epesse  was  given to
 him because his helm and mail, and his shield overlaid with

 silver and set with a device of white stars, shone from  afar like
 a star in sunlight or moonlight and could be  seen by  Elvish eyes
 at a great distance if he stood upon a height.                    
                                                                  
   There  were  other  descendants  of  Finwe remembered  in legend
 who  may  be noted  here, though  their names  were given  in Sin-
 darin or  in Quenya  at later  times when  Sindarin was  the daily
 language of  the Noldor,  and they  do not  offer the  problems of
 translation  or  more  formal  adjustment  which are  presented by
 the Quenya names given before the Exile.                          
   Itarilde (Idril) (48) daughter of  Turgon  was  the  mother  of
 Earendil; but his father was a Man of the Atani,  of the  House of
 Hador: Tuor  son of  Huor.(49) Earendil  was thus  the second  of the
 Pereldar (Half-elven),(50) the elder  being Dior,  son of  Beren and
 Luthien  Tinuviel  daughter  of  King   Elu  Thingol.   His  names
 were,  however,  given  in  Quenya;  for  Turgon  after  his foun-
 dation of the secret  city of  Gondolin had  re-established Quenya
 as the daily speech of his  household. Earendil  had this  name as
 father-name,  and  as  mother-name  he  was  called  Ardamire.  In
 this case both names were  'prophetic'. Tuor  in his  long journey
 by the west shores of Beleriand, after his escape  from captivity,
 had  been  visited  by  the great  Vala Ulmo  in person,  and Ulmo
 had  directed him  to seek  for Gondolin,  foretelling that  if he
 found  it  he  would there  beget a  son ever  afterwards renowned
 as a mariner.(51) Improbable as  this seemed  to Tuor,  since neither
 the Atani nor the Noldor had any love of the sea  or of  ships, he
 named  his  son  in  Quenya  'sea-lover'.  More  purely  prophetic
 was the name  Ardamire 'Jewel  of the  World'; for  Itarilde could
 not foresee in her waking mind  the strange  fate that  brought at
 last the Silmaril into the possession of Earendil, and enabled his
 ship to  pass through  all the  shadows and  perils by  which Aman
 was  at  that  time  defended  from  any  approach   from  Middle-
 earth.  These  names  were  not  given  Sindarin forms  in legend,(52)
 though  Sindarin  writers  sometimes  explained  that  they  meant
 mir  n'Ardon  and  Seron Aearon.  By the  marriage of  Earendil to
 Elwing daughter of Dior  son of  Beren the  lines of  the Pereldar
 (Peredil)  were  united.  Elros  and  Elrond  were  the   sons  of
 Earendil.  Elros  became  the  first  king  of  Numenor  (with the
 Quenya  title  Tar-Minyatur,   'high  first-ruler').   Elrond  was
 received  into  the  company  and  life-span  of  the  Eldar,  and
 became  esquire  and  banner-bearer  of  Ereinion  Gil-galad. When
 in  later  days  he  wedded Celebrian,  daughter of  Galadriel and
 Celeborn,  the  two  lines  of  descent  from Finwe,  from Fingol-

                                  
                                                                             
 fin   and   Finarfin,   were   united   and   continued   in   Arwen   their
 daughter.(53)                                                                
  The   names   Elros   and   Elrond,   the  last   of  the   descendants  of
 Finwe  born   in  the   Elder  Days,   were  formed   to  recall   the  name
 of  their  mother  Elwing.  The   meaning  of   wing  is   uncertain,  since
 it  occurs  in  no  other  personal  name,  nor  in  the  records  of either
 Sindarin   or   Quenya.   Some   of   the   loremasters,   remembering  that
 after  their  return  to  a  second   life  Beren   and  Luthien   dwelt  in
 Ossiriand,(54) and  that  there  Dior  dwelt  after   the  fall   of  Doriath
 among   the   Green   Elves   of   that   forest   country,   have  supposed
 that  suing  is  a  word  of  the  tongue  of  the  Green Elves;  but little
 was  preserved  of  that   tongue  after   the  destruction   of  Beleriand,
 and   the   interpretation   of   wing  as   meaning  'foam,   spume,  spin-
 drift'  as  of  water   blown  by   the  wind,   or  falling   steeply  over
 rocks,  is  but  a  likely  guess.  It  is supported,  however, by  the fact
 that  Ossiriand  was  a   land  cloven   by  seven   rivers  (as   its  name
 signifies),  and  that  these  fell   steeply  and   very  swift   from  the
 Mountains  of   Ered  Lindon.   Beside  one   great  waterfall,   called  in
 Sindarin   Lanthir   Lamath   ('waterfall   of   echoing    voices'),   Dior
 had   his    house.   Moreover    the   name    Elros   (in    Quenya   form
 Elerosse) means 'star foam', sc. starlit foam.(55)                           
                                                                             
 The  numbered  notes to  the preceding  text are  given on  pp. 356  ff., but
 the  following   editorial  notes   on  Gil-galad   and  Felagund   are  most
 conveniently placed here.                                                    
                                                                             
                          The parentage of Gil-galad.                         
                                                                             
 My  father  originally  supposed  that  Gil-galad  was  the  son  of Felagund
 King  of  Nargothrond.  This is  probably first  found in  a revision  to the
 text  FN  II  of  The  Fall  of Numenor  (V.33); but  it remained  his belief
 until after the completion of  The Lord  of the  Rings, as  is seen  from the
 major  early  text  of the  Tale of  Years (p.  173), and  from Of  the Rings
 of  Power,  where  in  the published  text (The  Silmarillion p.  286) Fingon
 is  an  editorial  alteration  of  Felagund. In  additions of  uncertain date
 made  to  the  Quenta  Silmarillion (XI.242)  it is  told that  Felagund sent
 away  his  wife  and  his  son  Gil-galad  from  Nargothrond  to  the  Havens
 of the Falas for their safety. It is to be noted also that in the text of the
 Tale  of  Years just  referred to  not only  was Gil-galad  the son  of Fela-
 gund  but  Galadriel  was  Gil-galad's sister  (and so  Felagund's daughter):
 see pp. 174 and 185 note 10.                                                 
  It  emerged,  however,  in  the  Grey  Annals  of  1951  (XI.44,  $108) that
 Felagund  had  no  wife,  for  the  Vanya  Amarie  whom  he  loved   had  not
 been permitted to leave Aman.                                                
  Here   something   must   be  said   of  Orodreth,   son  of   Finarfin  and

  brother  of  Felagund,  who  became  the  second  King   of  Nargothrond
  (for intimations of  the decline  in importance  of Orodreth  in earlier
  phases of the legendarium see III.91, 246, V.239; also  Unfinished Tales
  p, 255 note 20). In the genealogical tables of the descendants of Finwe,
  which can  be dated  to 1959  but which  my father  was still  using and
  altering  when  he  wrote  the  excursus  to  The  Shibboleth  of Feanor
  (see note 26), the curious  history of  Orodreth can  be traced.  Put as
  concisely as possible,  Finrod (Felagund)  was first  given a  son named
  Artanaro  Rhodothir  (so  contradicting  the  story  in the  Grey Annals
  that  he had  no wife)  the second  King of  Nargothrond, and  father of
  Finduilas.   Thus   'Orodreth'   was  now   moved  down   a  generation,
  becoming Finrod's  son rather  than his  brother. In  the next  stage my
  father (recalling, apparently, the story in the Grey Annals)  noted that
  Finrod 'had no child {he  left his  wife in  Aman)', and  moved Artanaro
  Rhodothir to become, still in the same generation,  the son  of Finrod's
  brother  Angrod  (who  with Aegnor  held the  heights of  Dorthonion and
  was slain in the Battle of Sudden Flame).                               
    The name of Angrod's son (still retaining the identity  of 'Orodreth')
  was  then  changed  from  Artanaro  to  Artaresto.  In an  isolated note
  found with  the genealogies,  scribbled at  great speed  but nonetheless
  dated,  August  1965,  my  father  suggested that  the best  solution to
  the  problem  of  Gil-galad's  parentage  was  to find  him in  'the son
  of  Orodreth',  who  is  here given  the Quenya  name of  Artaresto, and
  continued:                                                              
    Finrod left his wife in Valinor and had no children in exile. Angrod's
  son  was  Artaresto,  who  was  beloved  by  Finrod  and   escaped  when
  Angrod  was  slain,  and  dwelt  with  Finrod.   Finrod  made   him  his
  'steward'  and  he  succeeded  him  in  Nargothrond.  His  Sindarin name
  was  Rodreth  (altered  to  Orodreth because  of his  love of  the moun-
  tains  .......  His  children  were  Finduilas  and  Artanaro  = Rodnor
  later  called  Gil-galad.  (Their  mother  was  a  Sindarin lady  of the
  North.  She  called  her  son Gil-galad.)  Rodnor Gil-galad  escaped and
  eventually  came  to  Sirion's  Mouth  and  was   King  of   the  Noldor
  there.                                                                  
  The  words  that  I  cannot  read contain  apparently a  preposition and
  a proper name, and this  latter could  be Faroth  (the High  Faroth west
  of the river Narog). - In the last of  the genealogical  tables Artanaro
  (Rodnor) called Gil-galad appears, with  the note  that 'he  escaped and
  dwelt at Sirion's Mouth'. The only further change  was the  rejection of
  the name  Artaresto and  its replacement  by Artaher,  Sindarin Arothir;
  and  thus  in  the  excursus (note  23) Arothir  [Orodreth] is  named as
  Finrod's 'kinsman and steward', and (note 47) Gil-galad  is 'the  son of
  Arothir, nephew of Finrod'. The final genealogy was:                    

    Finrod Felagund                          Angrod                       
                                                                         
                                  Artaher/Arothir [Orodreth]              
                                                                         
                                  Artanaro/Rodnor/Gil-galad               
                                                                         
  Since  Finduilas  remained  without  correction  in  the  last   of  the
 genealogies as the daughter  of Arothir,  she became  the sister  of Gil-
 galad.                                                                   
  There  can  be  no  doubt that  this was  my father's  last word  on the
 subject; but nothing of this late and  radically altered  conception ever
 touched  the  existing  narratives,  and it  was obviously  impossible to
 introduce it into the published Silmarillion.  It would  nonetheless have
 been very much better to have left Gil-galad's parentage obscure.        
  I  should  mention  also  that  in  the   published  text   of  Aldarion
 and Erendis (Unfinished Tales  p. 199)  the letter  of Gil-galad  to Tar-
 Meneldur  opens  'Ereinion  Gil-galad  son of  Fingon', but  the original
 has 'Finellach Gil-galad of the House of  Finarfin' (where  Finellach was
 changed  from  Finhenlach,  and  that  from  Finlachen).  For   the  name
 Ereinion see p. 347 and note 47.  So also  in the  text of  A Description
 of  the  Island  of  Numenor (Unfinished  Tales p.  168) I  printed 'King
 Gil-galad of  Lindon' where  the original  has 'King  Finellach Gil-galad
 of  Lindon';  I  retained  however the  words 'his  kinswoman Galadriel',
 since Fingon and Galadriel were first  cousins. There  is no  trace among
 the  many  notes  and  suggestions written  onto the  genealogical tables
 of  a  proposed  descent  of  Gil-galad  from Finarfin;  but in  any case
 Aldarion  and  Erendis  and  the closely  related Description  of Numenor
 preceded by some time  (I would  now be  inclined to  date them  to about
 1960)  the  making of  Gil-galad into  the grandson  of Angrod,  with the
 name  Artanaro  Rodnor,  which  first appears  as a  new decision  in the
 note  of  August 1965  given above.  Much closer  analysis of  the admit-
 tedly  extremely  complex  material  than  I  had  made twenty  years ago
 makes it clear that Gil-galad as the son of Fingon  (see XI.56,  243) was
 an ephemeral idea.                                                       
                                                                         
                 The Dwarvish origin of the name Felagund.                
                                                                         
 Among   the  notes   accompanying  the   Elvish  genealogies   and  dated
 December 1959  (see note  26) the  following should  be recorded.  I have
 mentioned  (XI.179)  that  against the  name Felagund  in the  chapter Of
 the  Siege  of  Angband  in the  Quenta Silmarillion  (where it  was said
 that 'the Gnomes of the North, at first in jest, called him ... Felagund,
 or "lord of caverns" ') my father noted on the late typescript: 'This was
 in  fact  a  Dwarfish  name; for  Nargothrond was  first made  by Dwarves
 as is later recounted.' The statement in the 1959 notes is as follows:

 The  name  Felagund  was  of   Dwarvish  origin.   Finrod  had   help  of
 Dwarves   in   extending   the   underground  fortress   of  Nargothrond.
 It  is  supposed  originally  to have  been a  hall of  the Petty-dwarves
 (Nibinnogs),  but  the  Great   Dwarves  despised   these,  and   had  no
 compunction  in  ousting  them  -  hence  Mim's  special  hatred  for the
 Elves  -  especially  for  great  reward. Finrod  had brought  more trea-
 sure out of Tuna than any of the other princes.                          
   Felagund:  Dwarvish  v  felek  hew  rock,  felak a  tool like  a broad-
 bladed  chisel, or  small axe-head  without haft,  for cutting  stone; to
 use  this  tool. v gunud  equivalent  of  Eldarin  s-rot: (56) gundu  under-
 ground  hall.   felakgundu,  felaggundu   'cave-hewer'.  This   name  was
 given because of  Finrod's skill  in lighter  stone-carving. He  cut many
 of  the  adornments  of  the  pillars  and walls  in Nargothrond.  He was
 proud  of  the  name.  But  it  was  often   by  others   Eldarized  into
 Felagon, as if  it had  the same  ending (*-kano)  as in  Fingon, Turgon;
 and the  first element  was associated  with Sindarin  fael 'fair-minded,
 just,  generous',  Quenya  faila  (?  from v phaya  'spirit',  adjectival
 formation meaning 'having a good fea, or a dominant fea').               
                                                                         
 This  note  is  the  basis of  the brief  statement in  the index  to the
 published Silmarillion, entry Felagund.                                  
                                                                         
                      The names of the Sons of Feanor                     
                   with the legend of the fate of Amrod.                 
                                                                         
 My  father did  not fulfil  his intention  to give  in the  'excursus' an
 account  of  the names  of the  Sons of  Feanor (see  note 32),  but some
 pages of initial drafting are extant. The text begins legibly in ink, but
 at the end of the list of 'mother-names' changes  to ball-point  pen, and
 the  legend  of  Amrod  and  Amras  would be  too illegible  to reproduce
 had  not  my  father  gone  over  it  and  glossed  the worst  parts more
 clearly.  There  are   many  experimental   etymological  notes   on  the
 Eldarin words referring to red  colour and  copper, and  on the  names of
 the twin brothers, which are here omitted. In the first list I have added
 the Sindarin names for clarity.                                          
                                                                         
 (1)  [Maedros] Nelyafinwe 'Finwe third' in succession.(57)          
       (Nelyo)                                                            
 (2)    [Maglor]    Kanafinwe   'strong-voiced    or   ?commanding'.      
       (Kano) (58)                                                        
 (3)  [Celegorm]  Turkafinwe  'strong,  powerful  (in  body)'.      
       (Turko)                                                           
 (4)  [Curufin]  Kurufinwe  Feanor's  own   name;  given   to  this,      
       his  favourite  son,   because  he   alone  showed   in  some      
       degree  the  same  temper  and  talents.  He  also  resembled      
       Feanor very much in face. (Kurvo)                                  

 (5) [Caranthir] Morifinwe 'dark' - he was black-haired as                   
 his grandfather. (Moryo)                                                   
 (6) [Amrod] Pityafinwe 'Little Finwe'. (Pityo) (59)                       
 (7) [Amras] Telufinwe Last Finwe'. (Telvo) (60)                             
 Their 'mother-names' are recorded (though never used in                    
 narrative) as:                                                             
                                                                           
 (1)   Maitimo   'well-shaped   one':   he   was  of   beautiful  bodily
         form.  But  he,  and  the  youngest,  inherited  the   rare  red-
         brown  hair  of  Nerdanel's  kin,  Her  father  had   the  epesse
         of  rusco  'fox'.  So  Maitimo  had  as  an  epesse given  by his
         brothers and other kin Russandol 'copper-top'.(61)                 
 (2)   Makalaure    Of    uncertain    meaning.     Usually    interpreted
         (and   said   to   have  been   a  'prophetic'   mother-name)  as
         'forging  gold'.  If  so,  probably  a  poetic  reference  to his
         skill  in  harping,  the  sound  of  which  was  'golden'  (laure
         was  a  word  for  golden  light  or colour,  never used  for the
         metal).                                                            
 (3)   Tyelkormo  'hasty-riser'.  Quenya   tyelka  'hasty'.   Possibly  in
         reference  to  his  quick  temper,  and his  habit of  leaping up
         when suddenly angered.                                             
 (4)   Atarinke  'little  father'  -  referring  to his  physical likeness
 (5)     to Feanor, later found to be also seen in his mind.                
       Carnistir  'red-face'  -  he  was  dark  (brown)  haired,  but  had
         the ruddy complexion of his mother.                                
 (6)   Ambarto (62)                                                        
 (7)   Ambarussa                                                            
                                                                           
                          

 These two names  of [the]  twins (i  Wenyn) were  evidently meant
 to begin similarly. Ambarussa 'top-russet' must have  referred to
 hair: the first and last of Nerdanel's  children had  the reddish
 hair  of  her  kin.  Around  the  name  Ambarto  [>   Umbarto]  -
 which  one  might expect  to begin  with an  element of  the same
 sense  as (7)  - much  legend and  discussion gathered.  The most
 authentic seems to be thus:                                     
   The  two  twins  were  both  red-haired.  Nerdanel   gave  them
 both  the  name  Ambarussa  -  for  they  were  much   alike  and
 remained  so  while  they  lived. When  Feanor begged  that their
 names  should  at  least  be  different Nerdanel  looked strange,
 and  after  a while  said: 'Then  let one  be called  [Ambarto >]
 Umbarto, but which, time will decide.'                          
   Feanor   was   disturbed  by   this  ominous   name  ('Fated'),
 and  changed  it  to  Ambarto  -  or  in  some  versions  thought

 Nerdanel  had  said  Ambarto,  using  the same  first element  as in
 Ambarussa   (sc.  amba   +  Quenya   arta  'exalted,   lofty').  But
 Nerdanel  said:  Umbarto  I  spoke,.  yet  do as  you wish.  It will
 make no difference.'                                               
   Later,  as  Feanor  became  more  and more  fell and  violent, and
 rebelled  against  the  Valar,  Nerdanel,  after  long  endeavouring
 to  change  his  mood,  became  estranged.  (Her  kin  were  devoted
 to Aule, who counselled her  father to  take no  part in  the rebel-
 lion. 'It will in the end only lead Feanor and all your  children to
 death.')  She  retired  to her  father's house;  but when  it became
 clear that Feanor and  his sons  would leave  Valinor for  ever, she
 came  to  him  before  the  host  started  on  its  northward march,
 and  begged  that  Feanor  should  leave her  the two  youngest, the
 twins, or one at least of them. He replied: 'Were  you a  true wife,
 as  you  had  been  till  cozened  by  Aule, you  would keep  all of
 them,  for you  would come  with us.  If you  desert me,  you desert
 also all of our children. For they are determined  to go  with their
 father.'  Then  Nerdanel  was  angry  and  she  answered:  'You will
 not keep all of them. One at least  will never  set foot  on Middle-
 earth.'  'Take  your evil  omens to  the Valar  who will  delight in
 them,' said Feanor. 'I defy them'. So they parted.                 
   Now  it is  told how  Feanor stole  the ships  of the  Teleri, and
 breaking  faith  with  Fingolfin  and  with  those  faithful  to him
 sailed away in them to Middle-earth,  leaving the  rest of  his host
 to make their way on  foot with  great travail  and loss.  The ships
 were anchored off the shore, in the Firth of  Drengist, and  all the
 host of Feanor went on land and camped there.                      
   In  the  night Feanor,  filled with  malice, aroused  Curufin, and
 with  him  and  a few  of those  most close  to Feanor  in obedience
 he went  to the  ships and  set them  all aflame;  and the  dark sky
 was  red  as  with a  terrible dawn.  All the  camp was  roused, and
 Feanor returning said: 'Now  at least  I am  certain that  no faint-
 heart  or  traitor  among you  will be  able to  take back  even one
 ship to the succour of  Fingolfin and  his folk.'  But all  save few
 were  dismayed,  because  there  were   many  things   still  aboard
 that  they  had not  yet brought  ashore, and  the ships  would have
 been useful for further journeying.  They were  still far  north and
 had purposed to sail southward to some better haven.               
   In  the  morning  the  host  was mustered,  but of  Feanor's seven
 sons  only  six  were  to  be  found. Then  Ambarussa (6)  went pale
 with  fear.   'Did  you   not  then   rouse  Ambarussa   my  brother
 (whom  you   called  Ambarto)?'   he  said.   'He  would   not  come

 ashore to sleep  (he said)  in discomfort.'  But it  is thought  (and no
 doubt  Feanor  guessed  this  also)  that   it  was   in  the   mind  of
 Ambarto   to   sail   his   ship    back   [?afterwards]    and   rejoin
 Nerdanel;   for  he  had  been  much  [?shocked](63) by  the  deed  of  his
 father.(64)                                                             
   'That  ship  I  destroyed  first,'  said Feanor  (hiding his  own dis-
 may).  'Then  rightly  you  gave  the  name  to  the  youngest  of  your
 children,'   said  Ambarussa,   'and  Umbarto   "the  Fated"   was  its
 true  form.  Fell  and  fey  are  you  become.'  And  after that  no one
 dared speak again to Feanor of this matter.(65)                         
                                                                        
 For the mention, in  a note  on the  typescript of  the Annals  of Aman,
 of the story of the death of one of the twin-brothers in the  burning of
 the ships at Losgar see  X.128, $162;  and for  the account  of Nerdanel
 and  her  estrangement  from  Feanor  in  late  rewriting of  the Quenta
 Silmarillion see X.272-3, 279.                                          
   The material concerning  the names  of the  twin brothers  is confused
 and  confusing,  clearly  because  it was  only as  my father  worked on
 them that the strange and sinister story  emerged. It  seems to  me very
 probable  that  when  he  gave  the  mother-names  (6)  Ambarto  and (7)
 Ambarussa  it  had  not  yet  arisen,  nor  yet when  he began  the note
 that follows the list of the  mother-names, saying  that 'the  first and
 last of Nerdanel's children had the reddish hair of her  kin' -  that is
 Maedros  with  his  nickname  Russandol  and  the  younger of  the twins
 Ambarussa (Amras).                                                      
   The story first emerged, I think, with the  words 'The  most authentic
 seems to  be thus:  The two  twins were  both red-haired.  Nerdanel gave
 them  both  the  name  Ambarussa  ...' It  was then,  no doubt,  that my
 father changed the name  Ambarto to  Umbarto in  the list  and reversed
 the  names  of  the  twin  brothers  (see  note  62), so  that Ambarussa
 becomes  the  elder  of  the  two  and  Ambarto/Umbarto the  youngest of
 Feanor's children, as he is in the legend told here.                    
   At the head of the first page of this text concerning the names of the
 Sons of Feanor my father wrote, when the story was now in being:        
   All  the  sons  save  Curufin  preferred  their mother-names  and were
 ever  afterwards  remembered  by  them.  The  twins  called  each  other
 Ambarussa.   The   name   Ambarto/Umbarto   was   used  by   [?no  one].
 The  twins  remained  alike,  but  the  elder grew  darker in  hair, and
 was more dear  to his  father. After  childhood they  [?were not  to be]
 confused....                                                            
 Thus  in  the legend  'Ambarussa (6)'  asked Feanor  whether he  had not
 roused 'Ambarussa my brother' before setting fire to the ships.         

                              NOTES.                                      
                                                                         
  1. [This  heading  is  derived from  the opening  sentence of  the essay,
     which is in fact 'The case of p  > s  is more  difficult.' I  have not
     been able to discover the reference of this. The typescript  is extant
     as a separate whole, paginated consecutively from A to T.)           
  2. Few  of  these can  have been  carried from  Valinor, and  fewer still
     can  have  survived  the  journey  to  Middle-earth;  but  the  memory
     of the loremasters was prodigious and accurate.                      
  3. [The  term  Ingwi  seems  not  to  have been  used since  the Lhammas
     of  the  1930s,  where  Ingwelindar  or Ingwi' appears  as   the  name
     of  the  house  and  people of  Ingwe, chief  among the  First Kindred
     of  the  Elves (then  called the  Lindar), V.171.  For the  much later
     application of the term Lindar see XI.381-2.]                        
  4. Without  special   study.  But   many  of   the  Noldor   could  speak
     Telerin  and  vice  versa.  There  were in  fact some  borrowings from
     one  to another;  of which  the most  notable was  the general  use of
     the  Telerin  form  telpe 'silver'  for pure  Quenya tyelpe.  [For the
     substitution of telpe see Unfinished Tales p. 266.]                  
  5. They  continued  to deplore  it, and  were able  to insist  later that
     the  distinction  between  older  p and  s should  at least  always be
     preserved in writing.                                                
  6. [See the Note on  Mother-names at  the end  of the  essay, p.  339. It
     is  not  stated  elsewhere that  Serinde was  Miriel's 'mother-name'.]
  7. [It  had  been  said several  times in  the later  Quenta Silmarillion
     texts that Feanaro  was a  'name of  insight' given  to him  by Miriel
     at his birth; moreover in the story of Miriel  when it  first appeared
     her  spirit  passed  to  Mandos  soon  after  Feanor  was   born,  and
     it  is  expressly   said  in   Laws  and   Customs  among   the  Eldar
     that  he  never  saw  his  mother  (X.217).  The  story  has  now been
     altogether  changed  in  this  aspect:  Miriel  named  him  with  this
     name 'in  recognition of  his impetuous  character'; 'while  she lived
     she did  much with  gentle counsel  to soften  and restrain  him'; and
     subsequently  'her  weariness  she  had  endured  until  he  was  full
     grown,  but she  could endure  it no  longer'. After  Miriel's 'death'
     or  departure 'for  a while  he also  had kept  vigil by  his mother's
     body,  but  soon  he  became   wholly  absorbed   again  in   his  own
     works and devices' (p. 335).]                                        
  8. [A  full  account  of  other  texts  bearing on  this matter  is given
     in  X.205-7,  225  -  7,  233  -  71.  These  texts  are substantially
     earlier  than  the present  essay (see  X.300), which  is by  no means
     entirely congruent with them.]                                       
  9. [Elsewhere Ezellohar is the name  not of  the plain  but of  the Green
     Mound  on  which   grew  the   Two  Trees   (X.69,  etc.);   while  in
     Quendi  and  Eldar (XI.399,  401) Korollaire  is said  to be  a trans-
     lation  of  the  Valarin name  Ezellohar, of  which the  first element

       ezel,  ezella meant  'green'. But  perhaps by  'the plain  of Ezello-
       har'  my  father  meant  'the  plain  in  which  stood  the  mound of
       Ezellohar'.]                                                         
  10.  Doubting that the test of a  few years  could show  that the  will of
       any  one  of  the  Children  was  fixed  immovably;   and  foreboding
       that breaking the law would have evil consequences.                  
  11.  Death  by  free  will,  such  as  Miriel's,  was beyond  his thought.
       Death  by  violence  he  thought  impossible  in  Aman; though  as is
       recorded in The Silmarillion this proved otherwise.                  
  12.  [With  a  necessary  change  in the  opening sentence,  the following
       passage, as far as 'and passing the last  test departed  from Middle-
       earth  for  ever' on  p. 338,  was printed  in Unfinished  Tales, pp.
       229-31 - since it is of great importance in the history  of Galadriel
       - but with no indication of  its context:  it seems  desirable there-
       fore to give it again here.]                                         
  13.  [Elwe's  name  Pindikollo  (elsewhere  Sindikollo,   Sindicollo)  was
       omitted from the text in Unfinished Tales.]                          
  14.  Who together with the greatest  of all  the Eldar,  Luthien Tinuviel,
       daughter of  Elu Thingol,  are the  chief matter  of the  legends and
       histories of the Elves.                                              
  15.  It is not  even certain  that all  Feanor's sons  continued to  use p
       after his death  and the  healing of  the feud  by the  renowned deed
       of  Fingon  son  of  Fingolfin  in  rescuing  Maedhros   [>  Maedros]
       from the torments of Morgoth.                                        
  16.  [The  wholly  different  account  of  'Chosen  Names'  in   Laws  and
       Customs   among   the   Eldar   (X.214-15)   appears  to   have  been
       abandoned.)                                                          
  17.  As is seen in The Silmarillion. This is not an Eldarin title or work.
       It  is  a  compilation,  probably  made  in  Numenor,  which includes
       (in prose) the four great tales or lays of the  heroes of  the Atani,
       of   which   'The   Children   of   Hurin'   was   probably  composed
       already in Beleriand in the  First Age,  but necessarily  is preceded
       by an account of Feanor  and his  making of  the Silmarils.  All how-
       ever  are  'Mannish' works.  [With this  cf. X.373  and p.  390, note
       17 in this book.]                                                    
  18.  Notably  in  Manu  e,  the  Quenya  name  of  the  'Elder  King', the
       chief of the Valar. This is said to have been of the same age  as the
       names  Ingwe,  etc.,  and to  contain the  Valarin element  aman, man
       'blessed,  holy'  learned  from  Orome,  and  of  course  unconnected
       with the Eldarin interrogative element ma, man. [See XI.399.]        
  19.  He had black hair, but brilliant grey-blue eyes.                     
  20.  Connexion  with  Telerin  vola  'a  roller,  long  wave',  which  was
       sometimes  made  by  the  Teleri  themselves,   was  not   a  serious
       'etymology'  but  a  kind  of  pun;  for  the  king's  name  was  not
       normally  Volwe  (Common   Eldarin  *wolwe)   but  Olwe   in  Telerin
       as  in Quenya,  and w  was not  lost before  o in  Telerin as  it was

       in  Quenya.  Also  the  connexion  of  the  Teleri  with sea-faring
       developed long after the naming of Olwe.                           
  21.  It was otherwise  in written  histories (which  were by  the Noldor
       in  any  case  mostly  composed  in  Quenya).  Also  the  names  of
       'foreign persons' who did not  dwell in  Beleriand and  were seldom
       mentioned in  daily speech  were usually  left unaltered.  Thus the
       names of the Valar which they had  devised in  Valinor were  not as
       a  rule changed,  whether they  fitted Sindarin  style or  not. The
       Sindar knew little of the Valar and had no names  for any  of them,
       save  Orome  (whom  all  the  Eldar  had   seen  and   known);  and
       Manwe  and  Varda  of  whose  eminence  they  had  been  instructed
       by   Orome;   and   the   Great  Enemy   whom  the   Noldor  called
       Melkor.  For  Orome  a  name  had  been  made in  Primitive Eldarin
       (recalling the  sound of  his great  horn) of  which Orome  was the
       Quenya form,  though in  Sindarin it  had become  Araw, and  by the
       Sindar he was  later more  often called  (Aran) Tauron  'the (king)
       forester'.  Manwe  and  Varda they  knew only  by the  names 'Elder
       King'  and  'Star-queen':  Aran  Einior  and Elbereth.  Melkor they
       called  Morgoth  'the Black  Enemy', refusing  to use  the Sindarin
       form  of  Melkor:  Belegur 'he  that arises  in might',  save (but
       rarely)  in a  deliberately altered  form Belegurth  'Great Death'.
       These  names  Tauron,  Aran  Einior,  Elbereth,  and   Morgoth  the
       Noldor adopted and used when speaking Sindarin.                    
         [For the association of the name  Orome' with  that of  his great
       horn  see  XI.400 -  1. -  The names  Belegur, Belegurth  have been
       mentioned in the index  to the  published Silmarillion,  which here
       derives from the  present note.  Very many  years before,  the name
       Belegor  is  found  as  an  ephemeral  name of  Morgoth in  The Lay
       of the Children of Hurin (III.21, note 22).]                       
  22.  His  sons  were  too  occupied in  war and  feuds to  pay attention
       to  such  matters, save  Maglor who  was a  poet, and  Curufin, his
       fourth  and  favourite  son  to  whom  he  gave  his own  name; but
       Curufin was most interested in the alien  language of  the Dwarves,
       being the only one of the Noldor  to win  their friendship.  It was
       from  him  that  the  loremasters obtained  such knowledge  as they
       could of the Khuzdul.                                              
  23.  Nor  were  the 'loremasters'  a separate  guild of  gentle scribes,
       soon  burned  by  the  Orks of  Angband upon  pyres of  books. They
       were  mostly  even  as  Feanor,  the  greatest, kings,  princes and
       warriors,  such  as  the  valiant captains  of Gondolin,  or Finrod
       of   Nargothrond  and   Rodothir  [>   Arothir]  his   kinsman  and
       steward. [For Arothir see the note on  the parentage  of Gil-galad,
       pp. 349-51.]                                                       
  24.  And  as  some  insurance against  their own  death. For  books were
       made  only in  strong places  at a  time when  death in  battle was
       likely to befall any of the Eldar, but it was not yet believed that

       Morgoth could ever capture or destroy their fortresses.              
  25.  [In an addition to the Annals of  Aman Feanor's  first name  is given
       as  'Minyon  First-begotten'  (X.87);  in  Laws  and   Customs  among
       the Eldar his first  name was  Finwe, in  the second  version Finwion
       (X.217  and  note  20).  For  previous  references  to  Kurufinwe see
       the index  to Vol.X  (Curufinwe); and  with the  mention here  of the
       form Faenor cf. X.217, footnote.]                                    
  26.  [In The War of the Jewels I referred to a set of  Elvish genealogies
       with a clear resemblance to those of  the Edain  given in  that book:
       see  XI.229,  where I  noted that  the former  are followed  by notes
       expressly   relating  to   them  and   dated  December   1959.  These
       genealogies  are  almost  exclusively  concerned  with  the  descend-
       ants of Finwe, and are set out  in four  separate tables,  all appar-
       ently  belonging  to  much  the  same  time,  and  showing  the  same
       sort of development in stages as is seen  in those  of the  houses of
       the  Edain.  At  least  eight  years  and  probably more  divide them
       from the present 'excursus', whose date is fixed as not  earlier than
       February  1968;  but  my  father  clearly  had them  in front  of him
       when he wrote this, and alterations made  to the  latest of  the four
       agree with statements made in it. In all these tables there are still
       three daughters of Finwe and  Indis: Findis,  Faniel, and  Irime (see
       X.207,  238,  and  also  X.262,  where  Finvain  appears  for Irime),
       and  no  correction  was  made.  In  the  excursus  Faniel  has  dis-
       appeared,  and  the  younger  daughter  appears  both  as  Irime  and
       Irien (see note 28).]                                                
  27.  If he ever  did so.  Little has  been ever  heard in  Middle-earth of
       Aman  after  the  departure  of  the   Noldor.  Those   who  returned
       thither  have  never come  back, since  the change  of the  world. To
       Numenor in its  first days  they went  often, but  small part  of the
       lore  and  histories  of  Numenor  survived  its Downfall.  [With the
       words  in  the  text  at  this  point concerning  Indis cf.  Laws and
       Customs  among  the  Eldar  (X.249  and  note  17),  where  Finwe  in
       Mandos  said  to  Vaire:  'But  Indis parted  from me  without death.
       I  had  not  seen  her  for  many  years, and  when the  Marrer smote
       me  I  was  alone....  Little  comfort  should  I  bring  her,  if  I
       returned.']                                                          
  28.  [It is strange  that my  father should  give the  name of  the second
       daughter of Finwe  as both  Irime and  Irien within  the space  of a
       few lines. Possibly  he intended  Irien at  the first  occurrence but
       inadvertently  wrote  Irime, the  name found  in all  the genealogies
       (note 26).]                                                          
  29.  But   the   true   equivalent   in   Sindarin  was   Gladwen  (Common
       Eldarin  stem  g-lada-  >  Quenya  lala-,  Telerin   glada,  Sindarin
       glad-).                                                              
  30.  'Wisdom'  -  but  not  in  the   sense  'sagacity,   sound  judgement
       (founded  on  experience  and  sufficient   knowledge)';  'Knowledge'

  would  be  nearer,  or  'Philosophy'  in  its  older  applications which
  included  Science.  Nolme  was  thus  distinct  from   Kurwe  'technical
  skill  and  invention',  though  not  necessarily practised  by distinct
  persons.  The  stem   appeared  in   Quenya  (in   which  it   was  most
  used)   in   forms   developed   from   Common  Eldarin   ngol-, ngolo-,
  with   or  without   syllabic  n:   as  in   *Ngolodo  >   Quenya  Noldo
  (Telerin  golodo,  Sindarin  golod)  -  the  Noldor  had  been  from the
  earliest  times  most  eminent  in  and  concerned  with  this  kind  of
  'wisdom';  nolme  a   department  of   wisdom  (science   etc.);  Ingole
  (ngole)   Science/Philosophy   as   a  whole;   nolmo  a   wise  person;
  ingolemo  one  with  very  great  knowledge,   a  'wizard'.   This  last
  word  was  however  archaic  and  applied  only  to  great sages  of the
  Eldar  in  Valinor  (such  as  Rumil). The  wizards of  the Third  Age -
  emissaries from the Valar - were called Istari 'those who know'.        
    The  form  Ingoldo  may  be  noted:  it  is  a  form  of   Noldo  with
  syllabic  n,  and  being  in  full  and  more  dignified  form  is  more
  or  less  equivalent  to  'the Noldo,  one eminent  in the  kindred'. It
  was  the  mother-name  of  Arafinwe  [Finarfin],   and  like   the  name
  Arakano  'high  chieftain'  that  Indis  gave  to  Nolofinwe [Fingolfin]
  was  held  to  be  'prophetic'.  Earwen  gave  this  name  [Ingoldo]  to
  her eldest child Artafinde  (Finrod), and  by it  he was  usually called
  by  his  brothers  and  sister  who  esteemed  him  and  loved  him.  It
  was  never  Sindarized  (the  form  would  have   been  Angolod  ).  The
  name   spread   from  his   kin  to   many  others   who  held   him  in
  honour,  especially  to  Men  (the  Atani)  of  whom  he was  the great-
  est  friend  among  the  Eldar.  Thus  later  it  became  frequent  as a
  given   name   in   Numenor,  and   continued  to   be  so   in  Gondor,
  though   reduced   in   the   Common   Speech   to   Ingold.   One  such
  Ingold  appears  in  The  Lord  of  the  Rings as  the commander  of the
  guard of the North Gate into the Pelennor of Gondor.                    
    [In  earlier  texts  (see  X.265  note  10) the  name Ingoldo  was the
  mother-name  of   Nolofinwe  (Fingolfin),   'signifying  that   he  came
  of both  the kin  of the  Ingar and  of the  Noldor'; while  the mother-
  name  of  Arafinwe  (Finarfin)  was  Ingalaure  'for  he had  the golden
  hair  of  his  mother's  people'.   Apart  from   the  first   one,  the
  genealogical  tables  give  Fingolfin  and  Finarfin   the  mother-names
  Arakano and Ingoldo as here.]                                           
 31.  Except for  Finarfin as  the name  of his  younger brother.  This was
  also  the  only  name  of  a  Noldo  who  did  not  come  into  exile to
  receive  a  Sindarin   form.  This   was  because   Arafinwe's  children
  had  a  special  position among  the exiles,  especially in  relation to
  King  Thingol  of  Doriath,  their  kinsman,  and  were  often  referred
  to  collectively  by the  Sindar as  'the children  of Finarfin'  or the
  Nothrim [> Nost] Finarfin, 'the house/family of Finarfin'.              
 32.  [In the text at this point there is a reference forward to discussion
  of  the  names  of  the  Sons  of  Feanor,  but  this  was  not  reached

       in the typescript before it was abandoned; see pp. 352 ff.]          
  33.  As he said with  some justice:  'My brother's  claim rests  only upon
       a decree of the Valar; but of what force is that  for those  who have
       rejected  them  and  seek  to  escape  from  their  prison-land?' But
       Fingolfin  answered:  'I  have  not  rejected  the  Valar,  nor their
       authority in all matters where it is just for them to use it.  But if
       the Eldar  were given  free choice  to leave  Middle-earth and  go to
       Aman, and accepted it  because of  the loveliness  and bliss  of that
       land,  their  free  choice to  leave it  and return  to Middle-earth,
       when  it  has  become  dark  and  desecrated,  cannot be  taken away.
       Moreover  I  have  an  errand  in Middle-earth,  the avenging  of the
       blood  of  my  father  upon  Morgoth,  whom   the  Valar   let  loose
       among us. Feanor seeks first his stolen treasures.'                  
          [It is said in the text at this point that Fingolfin claimed to be
       'the chieftain of all the Noldor after the death  of Finwe',  and the
       same  was said  in the  essay proper  (p. 336).  All the  texts agree
       that  after  the  banishment of  Feanor from  Tirion, and  the depar-
       ture  of  Finwe  with  him  to Formenos,  Fingolfin ruled  the Noldor
       in Tirion; and it  was said  in the  Quenta Silmarillion  (see IV.95,
       V.235)  that  afterwards,  when  the  Flight  of  the  Noldor  began,
       those   of   Tirion  'would   not  now   renounce  the   kingship  of
       Fingolfin'.  On  the other  hand, in  the final  story of  the events
       leading  to  the  Flight,  when  Feanor  and  Fingolfin   had  become
       half-brothers, they were reconciled  'in word'  before the  throne of
       Manwe at the fateful festival; and  in that  reconciliation Fingolfin
       said  to  Feanor:  Thou  shalt  lead  and I  will follow  (see X.197,
       287).]                                                               
  34.  [On  Anaire  wife  of  Fingolfin  and  Elenwe  wife  of   Turgon  see
       XI.323, $12; and on Arakano, Sindarin Argon, see note 38.]           
  35.  [In  all  the genealogical  tables Fingon's  Quenya name  is Finicano
       except in the last, in which it is Findicano (altered  to Findecano).
       In all the tables he is marked as having  a wife,  though she  is not
       named;  in  the  first,  two  children are  named, Ernis  and Finbor,
       Ernis  subsequently  becoming  Erien,  but  in  the final  table they
       were  struck  out,  with  the  note  that  Fingon  'had  no  child or
       wife'.]                                                              
  36.  It  was  a  derivative  of  Common  Eldarin KAN 'cry,   call  aloud',
       which developed  divergent meanings  (like 'call'  in English  or the
       Germanic  stem  hait-)  depending on  the purposes  for which  a loud
       voice would be used: e.g. to  take an  oath, make  a vow  or promise;
       to  announce  important  news,  or  messages  and  orders;  to  issue
       orders and commands in person; to  'call for'  - to  name a  thing or
       person  desired,  to  summons;  to call  a person  by name,  to name.
       Not  all  of  these  were  found in  any one  of the  later languages
       (Quenya,  Telerin,  Sindarin).  In  Quenya  the  sense   command  had
       become  the  usual  one:  to  issue  orders  in  person,  whether  by

  derived  authority  or  one's  own;  when applied  to things  it meant
  demand.  In  archaic  language  the  older  and simplest  agental form
  *kano > kano still had  the sense  'crier, or  herald', and  kanwa 'an
  announcement'  as  well  as 'an  order' -  later terkano  (one through
  whom  orders  or  announcements  are  made)  was  used  for  'herald'.
  In Telerin  cano meant  'herald', and  the verb  can- was  mostly used
  in  the  sense  'cry  aloud,  call', but  also 'to  summons or  name a
  person'. In Sindarin can- was used  for 'cry  out, shout,  call', with
  implications supplied by the  context; it  never meant  either 'order'
  or  'name';  caun  (*kana)  meant 'outcry,  clamour', often  in plural
  form  conath  when  referring  to  many  voices,  and   often  applied
  to lamentation (though  not as  English 'cry'  to weeping  tears): cf.
  naergon 'woeful lament'.                                             
37.  Common Eldarin  *phini- a  single hair,  *phinde a  tress; Sindarin
 fin; find, finn-.                                                     
38.  When the onset  of the  Orks caught  the host  at unawares  as they
 marched  southwards  and  the  ranks  of  the  Eldar were  giving way,
 he  sprang  forward  and  hewed  a  path  through  the  foes,  daunted
 by his stature and the terrible  light of  his eyes,  till he  came to
 the  Ork-captain  and  felled   him.  Then   though  he   himself  was
 surrounded  and  slain,  the  Orks  were  dismayed,  and   the  Noldor
 pursued them with slaughter.                                          
    [The  third  son   of  Fingolfin,   Arakano  (Argon),   emerged  in
 the  course  of  the  making  of  the  genealogies.  A  pencilled note
 on the last of the four tables says that  he fell  in the  fighting at
 Alqualonde;  this  was  struck  out,  and  my  father  noted   that  a
 preferable story was that he perished in the Ice.  It is  curious that
 this  third  son, of  whom there  had never  before been  any mention,
 entered (as it seems) without  a story,  and the  manner of  his death
 was   twice  changed   before  the   remarkable  appearance   here  of
 'the first battle of Fingolfin's host with the Orks, the Battle of the
 Lammoth',  in  which  he  fell.  In  the  account  in the  Grey Annals
 (XI.30)  Fingolfin,  after  the  passage  of  the  Helkaraxe, 'marched
 from  the  North  unopposed  through  the  fastness  of  the  realm of
 Morgoth,  and  he  passed  over  Dor-Daedeloth,   and  his   foes  hid
 beneath  the  earth';  whereas  in  the  present  note  his  host  was
 attacked  in  Lammoth  'at  unawares   as  they   marched  southwards'
 (see the map, XI.182).]                                               
39.  [All the genealogical tables give the name of  Fingolfin's daughter
 as Irisse (frith); in the last of them frith was changed to Ireth, the
 form  found  here,  but  later still  both names  were struck  out and
 replaced  by (Ar)  Feiniel 'White  Lady' (on  this see  XI.317-18, and
 409 with note 34).                                                    
    There  is  a  strange  confusion  in  this  paragraph.   Above,  my
 father  said  that  Irisse  was  'under  the  protection  of' Turukano
 (Turgon)  her  brother and  his wife  Elenwe; but  here Irisse  is the

       daughter   of  Elenwe   who  perished   in  the   Ice.  This   cannot  be
       rectified  by  the  substitution   of  the   correct  name   (Anaire  for
       Elenwe,  or  Itaril  for  Irisse,  Ireth),   because  he   was  expressly
       writing of Elenwe and expressly writing of Irisse.]                      
  40.  [Turgon's  saving  of  his  daughter  Idril  Celebrindal  from  death  in
       the Helkaraxe has not been referred to before.]                          
  41.  [Arothir  has  been  named  earlier  (note  23)   as  the   'kinsman  and
       steward' of Finrod; see also note 47.]                                   
  42.  (1) it in itila 'twinkling, glinting', and ita 'a  flash', ita-  verb 'to
       sparkle'. (2) ril- 'brilliant light': cf. silmaril(le), the name given by
       Feanor  to  his three  Jewels. The  first was  especially applied  to the
       bright  lights  of the  eyes, which  were a  mark of  all the  High Eldar
       who  had  ever  dwelt  in  Valinor,  and  at  times  in  later  ages  re-
       appeared   in   their   descendants  among   mortal  men,   whether  from
       Itaril or Luthien.                                                       
  43.  *arat-  was  an  extended  form  of  the stem  ara- 'noble'.  The deriva-
       tive  arata  was  much  used  as  an  adjective  in Telerin  and Sindarin
       (Telerin  arata,  Sindarin  arod).  In  Quenya  it  had  become  special-
       ized,  and  mainly  used  in  Aratar  'the  Exalted',  the  Nine  of  the
       chief Valar. It was however still used in noble names.                   
  44.  [On  p.  346  my  father  said  that  of  the  children  of  Finarfin the
       mother-names   were   remembered   only   in   the   cases    of   Finrod
       (Ingoldo)   and   Galadriel   (Nerwende);   he   omitted   to  mention
       Aikanaro.]                                                               
  45.  Quenya   aika   was   derived   from   a   Common   Eldarin   stem   GAYA
       'awe,  dread';  but  the   adjectival  form   *gayaka  from   which  aika
       descended  was  not  preserved  in  Telerin  or  Sindarin.  Other deriva-
       tives  were  *gaya  'terror,  great  fear':  Telerin gaia,  Sindarin goe,
       Quenya  aya.  Adjectives  formed  on   this,  Telerin   gaiala,  Sindarin
       goeol,  replaced  Quenya  aika.  In  a  name  of  this  sort  in Sindarin
       the  noun   would  most   naturally  have   been  used,   producing  goe-
       naur  >  Goenor.  Also  *Gayar-  'the  Terrifier',  the  name   made  for
       the  Sea,  the  vast  and  terrifying  Great  Sea of  the West,  when the
       Eldar  first  came  to  its  shores:  Quenya  Ear, Earen,  Telerin gaiar;
       Sindarin  gaear,  gae(a)ron,  Belegaer.  This  word  is  also   found  in
       the Quenya name Earendil, the mariner (sea-lover); see p. 348.           
          The  stem  acquired  in  Quenya  a  specially  high  and  noble  sense
       -  except  in  ear, though  that was  also majestic  in its  vastness and
       power;  and  aika,  though  that  was  seldom  applied  to  evil  things.
       Thus   Quenya   aya   meant   rather   'awe'   than    'fear',   profound
       reverence  and  sense  of  one's  own  littleness  in  the   presence  of
       things  or  persons  majestic  and  powerful.  The  adjective   aira  was
       the  nearest  equivalent  to  'holy';  and the  noun aire  to 'sanctity'.
       Aire  was  used  by the  Eldar as  a title  of address  to the  Valar and
       the  greater  Mayar.  Varda  would  be  addressed  as  Aire   Tari.  (Cf.
       Galadriel's  Lament,  where  it  is  said  that  the  stars  trembled  at

       the  sound of  the holy  queen's voice:  the prose  or normal  form of
       which  would  have  been  tintilar  lirinen  omaryo  Aire-tario.) This
       change, though  possible to  have occurred  (as it  has in  our 'awe')
       without  extraneous  influence, was  said by  the loremasters  to have
       been partly due to  the influence  of the  Valarin language,  in which
       ayanu- was  the name  of the  Spirits of  Eru's first  creation. [With
       the last sentence of this note cf. XI.399.]                           
  46.  [On    the    remarkable    change   whereby    Celeborn   (Teleporno)
       became  a  Telerin  Elf  of  Aman  see  Unfinished  Tales  pp.  231-3,
       where  the  present  passage  is  cited.  The  etymology  of Galadriel
       that follows  in the  text was  used for  the account  of the  name in
       the Appendix to The Silmarillion, entry kal-.]                        
  47.  He was the son  of Arothir,  nephew of  Finrod. [See  the note  on the
       parentage  of  Gil-galad, pp.  349 ff.  - From  this work  was derived
       Gil-galad's name Ereinion introduced into The Silmarillion.]          
  48.  [Earlier (p. 346) the name is Itarille; Itarilde appears in  the first
       three genealogical tables, but the fourth has ltarille'.]             
  49.  These  names  were  given  in   the  language   of  that   kindred  of
       the  Atani  (Edain)  - but  adapted to  Sindarin -  from which  in the
       main  the   Adunaic  or   native  Atanic   language  of   Numenor  was
       descended. Their explanation is not here attempted.                   
  50.  [The   term  Pereldar   'Half-eldar'  was   originally  used   of  the
       Nandor  or  Danas (see  V.200, 215),  but it  is here  used as  is the
       Sindarin  form  Peredhil in  Appendix A  (I, i)  of Elrond  and Elros;
       cf. i-Pheredhil p. 256, Peredil p. 348.]                              
  51.  [In  the account  of Ulmo's  words to  Tuor on  the coast  at Vinyamar
       in the later Tale  of Tuor  the Vala  did indeed  allude prophetically
       to  Earendil,  but  in  a  manner  far  more  veiled  and  mysterious:
       'But it is not for thy valour only that I send thee, but to bring into
       the  world a  hope beyond  thy sight,  and a  light that  shall pierce
       the darkness' (Unfinished Tales p. 30).]                              
  52.  Forms  affected  by  Sindarin  in   manuscripts,  such   as  Aerendil,
       Aerennel, etc. were casual and accidental.                            
  53.  When   Aragorn,   descended   in   long   line   from   Elros,  wedded
       Arwen  in  the third  union of  Men and  Elves, the  lines of  all the
       Three  Kings  of  the  High  Elves  (Eldar),  Ingwe,  Finwe,  and Olwe
       and  Elwe  were  united  and  alone  preserved in  Middle-earth. Since
       Luthien  was  the noblest,  and the  most fair  and beautiful,  of all
       the  Children  of  Eru  remembered in  ancient story,  the descendants
       of that union were  called 'the  children of  Luthien'. The  world has
       grown old in long  years since  then, but  it may  be that  their line
       has  not  yet  ended.  (Luthien  was   through  her   mother,  Melian,
       descended  also  from  the  Mayar,  the  people  of  the  Valar, whose
       being  began  before the  world was  made. Melian  alone of  all those
       spirits  assumed  a  bodily  form,  not  only  as a  raiment but  as a
       permanent  habitation  in  form  and  powers  like  to  the  bodies of

       the Elves. This she did for love of Elwe; and  it was  permitted, no
       doubt because this  union had  already been  foreseen in  the begin-
       ning  of  things,  and  was  woven  into  the  Amarth of  the world,
       when Eru first conceived the being of his  children, Elves  and Men,
       as  is told  (after the  manner and  according to  the understanding
       of  his  children)  in  that  myth that  is named  The Music  of the
       Ainur.)                                                             
          [As is said in the text at  this point  Arwen was  descended from
       Finwe both  in the  line of  Fingolfin (through  Elrond) and  in the
       line of  Finarfin (through  Celebrian); but  she was  also descended
       from   Elwe   (Thingol)   through   Elrond's   mother   Elwing,  and
       through  Galadriel's   mother  Earwen   from  Olwe   of  Alqualonde.
       She  was  not  directly  descended from  Ingwe, but  her fore-mother
       Indis was (in earlier texts) the sister of Ingwe (X.261-2, etc.), or
       (in the present work, p. 343) the daughter of his sister. It is hard
       to  know  what  my  father  had in  mind when  he wrote  the opening
       of this note.]                                                      
  54.  Until they died the  death of  mortal Men,  according to  the decree
       of the Valar, and left this world for ever.                         
  55.  [Here the typescript stops, not at the foot of a  page; and  at this
       point my father wrote:                                              
          Alter  this  to:  Wing.  This  word,  which  the  loremasters ex-
       plained  as  meaning  'foam,  spindrift',  only  actually  occurs in
       two  names  of  the  Earendil  legend:  Elwing  the  name   of  his
       wife,  and  (in  Quenya  form)  Vingilote  (translated   in  Adunaic
       as  Rothinzil)  'Foam-flower',  the  name  of  Earendil's  ship. The
       word  is  not  otherwise  known  in  Quenya  or  Sindarin  -  nor in
       Telerin  despite  its  large  vocabulary of  sea-words. There  was a
       tradition  that  the  word  came  from  the  language  of  the Green
       Elves of Ossiriand.]                                                
  56.  [Elsewhere in these notes the stem rot, s-rot  is given  the meaning
       'delve   underground,   excavate,   tunnel',  whence   Quenya  hrota
       'dwelling underground, artificial cave or  rockhewn hall',  rotto 'a
       small grot or tunnel'.]                                             
  57.  ['Finwe  third':  his grandfather  was Finwe,  and his  father Kuru-
       finwe, first named Finwe also (p. 343).]                           
  58.  [Kano: see note 36.]                                                
  59.  [The  P  of  Pityafinwe,  but  not  of  the  short form  Pityo, was
       changed to N.]                                                      
  60.  [Pityafinwe   and   Telufinwe   are   bracketed   with   the   words
       'Twins Gwenyn'.]                                                   
  61.  [On  a  separate page  written at  the same  time is  a note  on the
       father of Nerdanel (Feanor's wife);                                 
          Nerdanel's  father   was  an   'Aulendil'  [>   'Aulendur'],  and
       became  a  great  smith.  He loved  copper, and  set it  above gold.

      His  name was  [space; pencilled  later Sarmo?],  but he  was most
      widely  known  as  Urundil  'copper-lover'.  He  usually   wore  a
      band  of  copper  about  his  head. His  hair was  not as  dark or
      black  as  was  that of  most of  the Noldor,  but brown,  and had
      glints  of  coppery-red in  it. Of  Nerdanel's seven  children the
      oldest, and  the twins  (a very  rare thing  among the  Eldar) had
      hair of this kind. The eldest also wore a copper circlet.          
                                                                        
      A note is appended to Aulendur:                                    
                                                                        
      'Servant of Aule': sc. one who was  devoted to  that Vala.  It was
      applied  especially  to  those  persons,  or  families,  among the
      Noldor  who  actually entered  Aule's service,  and who  in return
      received instruction from him.                                     
                                                                        
      A second note on this page comments on the name Urundil:           
                                                                        
     v RUN   'red,  glowing',   most  often   applied  to   things  like
      embers, hence adjective runya, Sindarin ruin  ' "fiery"  red'. The
      Eldar   had  words   for  some   metals,  because   under  Orome's
      instruction   they   had   devised   weapons   against   Morgoth's
      servants especially on the March,  but the  only ones  that appear
      in  all  Eldarin  languages  were  iron,  copper, gold  and silver
      (ANGA, URUN> MALAT> KYELEP).                                       
                                                                        
      Earlier  Nerdanel's  father,  the  great  smith,  had  been  named
      Mahtan (see X.272, 277),  and he  was so  called in  the published
      Silmarillion. For earlier statements concerning the arming  of the
      Eldar on the Great Journey see X.276 - 7, 281.]                    
  62. [Ambarto  was  changed  to  Umbarto,  and  the  positions  of  Um-
      barto and Ambarussa were reversed: see p. 355.]                    
  63. ['shocked' was an uncertain interpretation on my father's  part of
      the illegible word.]                                               
  64. [The deed of his father: the treacherous taking of all the Telerian
      ships for the passage of the Feanorians to Middle-earth.]          
  65. [The text ends with brief notes on the 'Sindarizing' of the Quenya
      names of the Sons of Feanor, but these are too  rapid, elliptical,
      and  illegible  to be  reproduced. It  may be  mentioned, however,
      that  Sindarin  Maedros  is  explained  as containing  elements of
      Nelyafinwe's   mother-name   Maitimo   (Common    Eldarin   magit-
      'shapely',  Sindarin  maed)  and of  his epesse  Russandol (Common
      Eldarin russa, Sindarin ross); and also that the Sindarin  form of
      Ambarussa (numbered 6,  i.e. the  elder twin)  is here  Amros, not
      Amras.]                                                            

                                     XII.                                    
                                                                            
                              THE PROBLEM OF ROS.                            
                                                                            
 In  his  last  years  my father  attached the  utmost importance  to finding
 explanations,  in  historical  linguistic  terms,  of  names  that  went far
 back  in  the  'legendarium'  (see for  example his  discussion of  the very
 old  names  Isfin  and  Eol  in  XI.317-18,  320),  and  if  such  names had
 appeared  in  print  he  felt  bound  by them,  and went  to great  pains to
 devise  etymologies  that  were  consonant  with  the  now  minutely refined
 historical  development  of  Quenya  and  Sindarin.   Most  taxing   of  all
 was the case of  the name  Elros, and  others associated  with it  either in
 form  or  through  connection  in  the  legends;  but,   equally  character-
 istically,  his  writings  on  this  matter  contain  many  observations  of
 interest  beyond  the  detail  of phonological  history: for  the linguistic
 history and the 'legendarium' became less and less separable.               
    In  the long  excursus on  the names  of the  descendants of  Finwe given
 in  the  last  chapter  he  had  said (p.  349) that  Elros and  Elrond were
 'formed  to  recall  the  name  of their  mother Elwing',  and he  had noted
 that  the  element  wing  occurs only  in that  name and  in the  name of
 Earendil's ship Vingilote (p. 365, note  55): he  referred to  a speculation
 of  loremasters  that  wing  was  a word  of the  tongue of  the Green-elves
 of  Ossiriand,  whose  meaning  was  guessed  with  some  probability  to be
 'foam,  spindrift'. The  name Elros  he stated  there without  hesitation to
 mean  'star(lit)  foam',  in Quenya  form Elerosse  (but earlier,  in Quendi
 and  Eldar  (XI.414),  he  had  said  that  the meaning  was 'star-glitter',
 while Elrond meant 'star-dome', as still in the present essay).             
    But this was not the last of his  speculations on  the matter,  and there
 are  several  typewritten  texts  that return  to the  problem (all  of them
 belonging  to  the  same  period,  1968  or  later,  as  The  Shibboleth  of
 Feanor,  but  certainly  following  that  work). The  most notable  of these
 I give in full. It has no title, but  begins with  a statement  defining the
 content:                                                                    
                                                                            
    The best solution of the difficulty  presented by  the name  Elros, fixed
    by  mention  in  The Lord  of the  Rings, and  the names  of the  sons of
    Feanor:  Maedros,  the  eldest,  and  Amros,  now  proposed  as  the name
    of both the twins  (sixth and  seventh) -  to which  a story  is attached
    that it is desirable to retain.                                          
                                                                            
 This  is a  reference to  the very  rough manuscript  text (appended  to the
 list of father-names  and  mother-names  of  the  Sons  of Feanor)  in which

  the extraordinary story of the twin brothers is told (pp. 353-5); for the
  form Amros (not Amras) see p. 366, note 65.                              
    The  typescript  was  made  very  rapidly  (with  the  usual  number of
  interspersed  notes,  among  them  two  of  great  interest), and  it has
  required some editing, of a very minor kind, for the sake of clarity.
                                                                          
  The  one  -ros  was  supposed  (at  its  adoption)  in  Elros  to contain
  a  Sindarin  stem  *ross-  from  base  ROS  'spray, spindrift'  (as scat-
  tered  by  a  wind  from  a  fountain,  waterfall,  or  breaking waves).(1)
  The  other  is  supposed  to  be  a  colour word,  referring to  the red,
  red-brown  hair  of  the  first,  sixth,  and  seventh  sons  of  Feanor,
  descending   to  them   from  their   maternal  grandfather,   father  of
  Nerdanel,  Feanor's  wife,  a  great  craftsman,  devoted  to   the  Vala
  Aule.                                                                    
    It   is   difficult  to   accept  these   two  homophonic   elements  -
  of   unconnected,   indeed   unconnectable,   meanings   -  as   used  in
  Sindarin,  or  Sindarized  names.(2) It is  also  unfortunate   that  the
  first   appears   too  reminiscent   of  Latin   ros  ['dew']   or  Greek
  drosos,   and   the  latter   too  close   to  well-known   modern  Euro-
  pean  'red'  words:  as  Latin  russus,  Italian rosso,  English russet,
  rust,  etc.  However,  the  Elvish  languages  are  inevitably   full  of
  such reminiscences, so that this is the lesser difficulty.               
    Proposed  solution.  Associate  the  name  Elros   with  that   of  his
  mother  Elwing:  both  contain  final  elements  that  are   isolated  in
  the  legendary  nomenclature  (see  note  on   wing  in   the  discussion
  of  the  Sindarizing  of  the  Noldorin   heroic  names).(3) But  instead
  of   deriving   them   from   the    Nandorin   (or    Green-elvish)   of
  Ossiriand,   it   would   be   an   improvement   to  derive   them  from
  the   Mannish   tongues:   the   language  of   Beren  father   of  Dior;
  both  *ros  and  *wing  could   thus  be   removed  from   Eldarin.  The
  Adunaic  of  Numenor   was  mainly   derived  from   that  of   the  most
  powerful   and   numerous   people   of  'the   House  of   Hador'.  This
  was  related  to  the  speech   of  Beor's   people  who   first  entered
  Beleriand   (probably   about   as   nearly   as   Noldorin   Quenya   to
  Telerin   of   Valinor):   communication   between   the    two   peoples
  was  possible  but   imperfect,  mainly   because  of   phonetic  changes
  in  the  Beorian  dialect. The  language of  the Folk  of Haleth,  so far
  as  it  was  later  known,  appears  to  have  been unrelated  (unless in
  remote origin) and unintelligible to the other two peoples.(4)            
    The  folk  of  Beor  continued   to  speak   their  own   tongue  among
  themselves    with    fair   purity,    though   many    Sindarin   words
  were   borrowed  and   adapted  by   them.(5) This   was  of   course  the
  native  tongue  of  Beren,  lineal  descendant  of   Beor  the   Old.  He

 spoke  Sindarin  after  a  fashion   (probably  derived   from  North
 Sindarin);  but  his  halting and  dialectal use  of it  offended the
 ears of King Thingol.(6) But it  was told  in the  legend of  Beren and
 Luthien  that  Luthien  learned  Beren's  native tongue  during their
 long  journeys  together  and  ever  after  used  it in  their speech
 together.  Not  long before  they came  at last  back to  the borders
 of  Doriath  he  asked  her  why  she  did so,  since her  own tongue
 was  richer  and  more   beautiful.  Then   she  became   silent  and
 her  eyes  seemed  to  look  far  away  before  she  answered:  'Why?
 Because  I  must  forsake  thee, or  else forsake  my own  people and
 become  one  of  the  children  of  Men. Since  I will  never forsake
 thee,  I must  learn the  speech of  thy kin,  and mine.'  Dior their
 son, it is said, spoke both tongues: his father's, and  his mother's,
 the Sindarin of Doriath. For he said: 'I am the first of  the Peredil
 (Half-elven),. but I am also the heir of King Elwe, the Eluchil.'(7)
   He gave to his  elder son  the name  Elured, that  is said  to have
 the same significance,  but ended  in the  Beorian word  reda 'heir';
 to  his  second  son  he  gave  the  name Elurin,(8) but  his daughter
 the name Elwing. For  she was  born on  a clear  night of  stars, the
 light of which glittered in the spray of the  waterfall by  which his
 house  was built.(9) The   word  wing   was  Beorian,   meaning  fine
 rain  or  the  spray  from  fountains  and  waterfalls  blown   by  a
 wind; but he  joined this  to Elvish  el- 'star'  rather than  to the
 Beorian,(10) because  it  was  more  beautiful, and  also went  with the
 names   of   her  brothers:   the  name   Elwe  (Sindarin   Elu)  was
 believed to be and probably was derived from el 'star'.(11)         
   Elured  and  Elurin,  before  they  came  to  manhood,   were  both
 slain  by  the  sons  of  Feanor,(12) in the last and  most abominable
 deed  brought  about  by  the   curse  that   the  impious   oath  of
 Feanor  laid  upon  them.  But  Elwing  was saved  and fled  with the
 Silmaril  to  the  havens  of the  surviving Eldar  at the  Mouths of
 Sirion.  There  she  later  wedded  Earendil, and  so joined  the two
 Half-elven  lines.  Her  sons  she  named   Elros  and   Elrond;  and
 after  the  manner  of  her  brothers  the first  ended in  a Beorian
 word,  and  the  second  in  an  Elvish.  Elros  was indeed  close in
 meaning  to  her  own  name:  it  contained  the  Beorian   word  for
 'foam'  and  the  white  crest of  waves: (13) ros.  Its older  form [was]
 roth  (rop). This  was  used  in  Adunaic  songs  and   legends  con-
 cerning  the  coming  of  the Atani  to Numenor  in a  translation of
 the name of Earendil's ship.  This they  called Rothinzil.(14) Also in
 Numenor  their  first  king  was  usually  given  the   name  Elroth.
 The word wing(a) was not known in Adunaic. It was maybe an           

 invention of the Lesser Folk,(15) for in their steep shores  there had
 been waterfalls, whereas  in the  wooded land  of the  Greater Folk
 that went down in gentle slopes there had been none.              
   In  this  way  also  may  be  explained  the  name  that Earendil
 gave to his ship in which he at last succeeded in passing  over the
 Great  Sea.  He  himself called  it Wingalote,  which like  his own
 names  were  Quenya  in  form;  for  Quenya  was   his  childhood's
 speech,  since  in  the  house  of  his  mother's  father, Turukano
 (Turgon),  King of  Gondolin, that  speech was  in daily use.(16) But
 Vinga-  was  not  a  Quenya  word:  it   was  a   Quenyarized  form
 of  the  Beorian  wing  that  appeared  in   Elwing  the   name  of
 his  spouse.  The  form  given  to  this   name  in   Sindarin  was
 Gwingloth, but  as said  above it  was in  the Adunaic  of Numenor
 translated as Rothinzil.                                          
   In  the havens  of refuge,  when Morgoth's  conquest was  all but
 complete,  there were  several tongues  to be  heard. Not  only the
 Sindarin, which was chiefly  used, but  also its  Northern dialect;
 and  among  the  Men  of the  Atani some  still used  their Mannish
 speeches;  and  of  all these  Earendil had  some knowledge.  It is
 said  that  before  Manwe  he  spoke  the errand  of Elves  and Men
 first  in Sindarin,  since that  might represent  all those  of the
 suppliants  who  had  survived  the  war   with  Morgoth;   but  he
 repeated  it  in  Quenya,  since  that  was  the  language  of  the
 Noldor,  who  alone  were  under  the  ban  of  the  Valar;  and he
 added  a  prayer  in  the  Mannish  tongues  of  Hador  and  Beor,(17)
 pleading  that  they  were  not under  the ban,  and had  aided the
 Eldar only in their war against  Morgoth, the  enemy of  the Valar.
 For the  Atani had  not rebelled  against the  Valar; they  had re-
 jected  Morgoth  and  fled  Westward  seeking  the  Valar   as  the
 representatives  of  the  One.  This plea  Manwe accepted,  and one
 voice alone spoke aloud the  doubt that  was in  the hearts  of all
 the  Valar.  Mandos  said:  Nonetheless  they  are  descendants  of
 Men,  who  rejected  the  One himself.  That is  an evil  seed that
 may  grow  again.  For  even  if  we  under Eru  have the  power to
 return  to  Middle-earth  and  cast  out  Morgoth  from  the  King-
 dom  of Arda,  we cannot  destroy all  the evil  that he  has sown,
 nor seek out  all his  servants -  unless we  ravaged the  whole of
 the  Kingdom  and  made an  end of  all life  therein; and  that we
 may not do.'                                                      
                                                                  
   The  names  Elros  and  Elrond  that  Elwing  gave  to  her  sons
 were  held  prophetic,  as  many  mother-names  among  the  Eldar.(18)

 For after the  Last Battle  and the  overthrow of  Morgoth, when           
 the Valar gave to  Elros and  Elrond a  choice to  belong either           
 to the kin of the Eldar or to the kin of Men,  it was  Elros who           
 voyaged  over  sea to  Numenor following  the star  of Earendil;           
 whereas  Elrond  remained  among  the Elves  and carried  on the           
 lineage of King Elwe.(19) Now Elrond  was a  word for  the firma-           
 ment, the starry dome as it appeared like a roof to Arda; and it           
 was given by Elwing in memory of  the great  Hall of  the Throne           
 of Elwe in the  midst of  his stronghold  of Menegroth  that was           
 called the Menelrond,(20) because by the arts and aid of  Melian its           
 high arched roof had been adorned  with silver  and gems  set in           
 the order and figures of the stars in the  great Dome  of Valmar (21)      
 in Aman, whence Melian came.                                               
                                                                           
 But alas! This explanation fell foul  of a  small fact  that my  father had
 missed; and it was fatal. He noted on the text that  'most of  this fails',
 because  of  the  name  Cair  Andros  (a Sindarin  name, as  were virtually
 all  the  place-names  of  Gondor),  the  island  in  the  Anduin  north of
 Minas  Tirith,  of  which  it  had  been  said  in Appendix  A (RK  p. 335,
 footnote)  that  it 'means  "Ship of  Long-foam"; for  the isle  was shaped
 like  a great  ship, with  a high  prow pointing  north, against  which the
 white  foam  of  Anduin  broke  on  sharp  rocks.'  So  he  was  forced  to
 accept that the element -ros  in Elros  must be  the same  as that  in Cair
 Andros,  the  word  must  be  Eldarin,  not  Atanic  (Beorian),  and  there
 could  be  no  historical  relationship  between  it  and   the  Numenorean
 Adunaic Rothinzil.(22)                                                     
   Evidently  following  this  is  another  note,  from  which   it  emerges
 that he still  held to  the view  that the  word wing  ('spray, spindrift')
 was  of  Beorian  origin;  and  while  noting   that  the   name  Wingalote
 [>  Wingelote]  of  Earendil's  ship   had  not   appeared  in   print,  he
 observed that it 'must be  retained, since  it is  connected with  the name
 Elwing,  and  is  in  intention  formed  to  resemble  and   "explain"  the
 name  of  Wade's  ship  Guingelot.'(23) On Guingelot  and  Wingelot  see my
 discussion  in  III.142-4  (in  which I  overlooked this  remarkable state-
 ment).  Concerning  wing  he  said again  that Earendil  named his  ship in
 Quenya  form,  since  that  language  had  been  his childhood  speech, and
 that  he  intended  its  meaning  to  be  'Foam-flower';  but   he  adopted
 the  element  wing  from  the  name  of  Elwing  his  wife. That  name was
 given  to  her  by  her  father  Dior,  who  knew  the Beorian  tongue (cf.
 p 369).(24)                                                                  
                                                                           
                                  NOTES.                                    
                                                                           
 1. [Cf.  the  Etymologies,   V.384,  stem Ros (1), 'distil,   drip':  Quenya
    rosse  'fine rain,  dew', Noldorin  rhoss 'rain',  seen also  in Celebros

      'Silver-rain'  (when  Celebros was  the name  of the  waterfall rather
      than the stream, XI.151).]                                            
  2.  [Added  in  the  margin:  'Though  Maedros  is  now  so   long  estab-
      lished that it would be difficult to alter'. In a later note, however,
      my  father  declared  that  he  would  change  Maedros   to  Maedron.]
  3.  [See p. 365, note 55.]                                                
  4.  This was the reason,  in addition  to their  admiration of  the Eldar,
      why  the  chieftains,  elders,  and wise  men and  women of  the Atani
      learned  Sindarin.   The  Halethian   language  was   already  failing
      before Turin's time,  and finally  perished after  Hurin in  his wrath
      destroyed  the  small  land  and  people.  [Cf.  Of  Dwarves  and Men,
      pp.  307-8  and note  49. In  the chapter  Of the  Coming of  Men into
      the  West  added  to  the  Quenta  Silmarillion Felagund  learned from
      Beor  that  the  Haladin  (the  Folk  of   Haleth)  'speak   the  same
      tongue  as  we',  whereas  the  People  of  Marach  (the  'Hadorians')
      were  'of  a  different  speech'  (XI.218, $10).  This was  changed in
      the  published  Silmarillion:  see XI.226.  - With  what is  said here
      of  the  decline  of the  'Halethian' language  cf. The  Wanderings of
      Hurin  (XI.283  and  note  41):  'the  old  tongue  of the  Folk which
      was now out of daily use'.]                                           
  5.  Not  necessarily  confined  to  names  of things  that had  not before
      [been]  known.  In  the  nomenclature  of  later  generations assimil-
      ation to  the Eldarin  modes, and  the use  of some  elements frequent
      in Eldarin  names, can  be observed.  [It has  been stated  many times
      that  the  'Beorians'  forsook  their own  language in  Beleriand: see
      V.275  (footnote),  XI.202,  217  (first  footnote),  226;  Unfinished
      Tales p. 215, note 19.]                                               
  6.  He  [Thingol]  had  small  love  for  the Northern  Sindar who  had in
      regions  near  to  Angband  come  under   the  dominion   of  Morgoth,
      and  were  accused  of  sometimes  entering  his  service  and provid-
      ing  him with  spies. The  Sindarin used  by the  Sons of  Feanor also
      was of the Northern dialect; and they were hated in Doriath.          
  7.  [Eluchil (Thingol's Heir): see XI.350.]                               
  8.  'Remembrance   of   Elu':   containing   Sindarin   rin   from  Common
      Eldarin  rene  <  base  REN  'recall,  have  in  mind'.  [These  names
      Elured and  Elurin  replace  Eldun   and  Elrun   (originally  Elboron
      and Elbereth);  and the  story that  Dior's sons  were twins  had been
      abandoned   (see  XI.300,   349-50).  From   this  passage   and  note
      were  derived  the  names  in  the  published  Silmarillion   and  the
      statements in the index concerning them.]                             
  9.  [Cf.  The  Shibboleth  of  Feanor,  p. 349:  'Beside one  great water-
      fall,  called  in  Sindarin  Lanthir  Lamath  ("waterfall  of  echoing
      voices"),  Dior  had  his  house.' From  these passages  the reference
      in the published Silmarillion (p. 235) was derived.]                  
 10.  Which  is  not  recorded,  but  was  probably  similar to  the Adunaic
      azar.  [In  The  Notion  Club  Papers,  IX.305,  the  Adunaic  name of

 Earendil,  Azrubel,  was said  to be  'made of  azar "sea"  and the
 stem bel- (azra, IX.431).]                                         
11.  [This opinion is referred to  in The  Shibboleth of  Feanor (pp.
 340-1), but regarded as improbable.]                               
12.  [The original story was that Dior's sons 'were slain by the evil
 men  of  Maidros'  host'  (see  IV.307).  Subsequently   they  were
 'taken  captive by  the evil  men of  Maidros' following,  and they
 were left to starve in the woods' (V.142); in a version of the Tale
 of Years  the perpetrators  were 'the  cruel servants  of Celegorn'
 (XI.351).]                                                         
13.  The Atani had never seen the Great Sea before they came  at last
 to Beleriand; but according to their own legends and  histories the
 Folk  of  Hador  had  long  dwelt  during their  westward migration
 by the shores of a sea too wide to see across; it had no tides, but
 was visited by great storms. It  was not  until they  had developed
 a craft of boat-building that  the people  afterwards known  as the
 Folk  of  Hador  discovered  that a  part of  their host  from whom
 they  had  become  separated  had  reached  the  same   sea  before
 them, and dwelt at the feet of  the high  hills to  the south-west,
 whereas they [the Folk of Hador]  lived in  the north-east,  in the
 woods  that  there came  near to  the shores.  They were  thus some
 two hundred miles apart,  going by  water; and  they did  not often
 meet  and  exchange  tidings. Their  tongues had  already diverged,
 with  the  swiftness  of  the  speeches  of  Men in  the 'Unwritten
 Days',  and continued  to do  so; though  they remained  friends of
 acknowledged  kinship,  bound  by  their  hatred  and  fear  of the
 Dark   Lord   (Morgoth),   against   whom   they    had   rebelled.
 Nonetheless they did not know that  the Lesser  Folk had  fled from
 the  threat  of  the  Servants of  the Dark  and gone  on westward,
 while  they  had lain  hidden in  their woods,  and so  under their
 leader Beor reached Beleriand at last many years before they did.
    [There  has  of  course never  been any  previous trace  or hint
 of this story of the long sojourn of the 'Beorians' and the 'Hador-
 ians' ('the People of Marach', a name not mentioned in  this essay,
 see p. 325, note 41) by the shores of a great  inland sea.  In this
 account of their dwellings my father  first wrote  'south-east' and
 'north-west', changing them at once; and the particularity  of this
 suggests that he had a  specific geographical  image in  mind. This
 must surely be the Sea of Rhun, where (features  going back  to the
 First Map to The Lord  of the  Rings, VII.305)  there are  hills on
 the  south-western  side  and a  forest coming  down to  the north-
 eastern  shores;  moreover  the  distance  of  two   hundred  miles
 across the sea agrees  with the  map. -  It is  said here  that the
 'Beorians' reached Beleriand 'many  years' before  the 'Hadorians'.
 According  to  the  later  Quenta   Silmarillion  chapter   Of  the
 Coming  of  Men into  the West  Felagund met  Beor in  Ossiriand in

      310,  and  the  People  of  Marach  came  over  the  Blue  Mountains
      in  313  (XI.218,  $13  and  commentary).  In  Of  Dwarves  and  Men
      (p. 307) 'the first of the three hosts  of the  Folk of  Hador' came
      into Beleriand 'not long  after' the  Folk of  Beor, having  in fact
      reached the eastern foothills of the  Ered Lindon  first of  all the
      kindreds of the Edain. In that text there is  mention of  an opinion
      that  a  long  period of  separation between  the two  peoples would
      account  for  the  divergence  of their  languages from  an original
      common tongue (p. 308 and note 45).]                               
  14. [The  name  Rothinzil  'Flower   of  the   Foam'  appeared   in  The
      Drowning of Anadune, IX.360 (Rothinzil).]                          
  15. ['The Lesser Folk': the People of Beor. This sentence refers  to the
      content of note 13.]                                               
  16. Though for most of its  people it  had become  a language  of books,
      and  as  the other  Noldor they  used Sindarin  in daily  speech. In
      this way there arose  several blended  forms, belonging  strictly to
      neither language. Indeed, the name of  the great  city of  Turgon by
      which  it  was  best known  in legend,  Gondolin(d), is  an example.
      It  was  given  by  Turgon  in Quenya  Ondolinde, but  generally its
      people  turned  it   towards  Sindarin,   in  which   Eldarin  *gon,
      *gondo  'stone,  rock'  had  retained  the g-  lost in  Quenya. [See
      XI.201.)                                                           
  17. The  language  of  the Folk  of Haleth  was not  used, for  they had
      perished  and  would  not  rise  again.  Nor  would their  tongue be
      heard  again,  unless  the  prophecy   of  Andreth   the  Wise-woman
      should  prove  true,  that Turin  in the  Last Battle  should return
      from the Dead, and before he left the Circles of the World  for ever
      should  challenge  the  Great  Dragon  of  Morgoth,   Ancalagon  the
      Black, and deal him the death-stroke.                              
          [This remarkable saying has  long roots,  extending back  to the
      prophecy  at  the  end  of  the  old  Tale of  Turambar (II.115-16),
      where  it  was  told  that  the  Gods  of  Death (Fui  and Vefantur)
      would  not  open their  doors to  Turin and  Nienori, that  Urin and
      Mavwin  (Hurin  and  Morwen)   went  to   Mandos,  and   that  their
      prayers                                                             
      came  even  to  Manwe,  and  the  Gods  had   mercy  on   their  un-
      happy  fate,  so  that those  twain Turin  and Nienori  entered into
      Fos'Almir,  the  bath  of  flame,  even as  Urwendi and  her maidens
      had done in ages past before  the first  rising of  the Sun,  and so
      were  all  their  sorrows  and  stains washed  away, and  they dwelt
      as  shining  Valar  among  the  blessed  ones, and  now the  love of
      that  brother and  sister is  very fair;  but Turambar  indeed shall
      stand  beside  Fionwe  in  the  Great  Wrack,  and  Melko   and  his
      drakes shall curse the sword of Mormakil.                          
      In the Sketch  of the  Mythology or  'earliest Silmarillion'  of the

                                
                                                                    
 1920s the prophecy  with which  it ends  (IV.40) declares  that when
 Morgoth returns, and 'the last battle of all' is fought,            
   Fionwe  will  fight  Morgoth  on  the  plain  of Valinor,  and the
 spirit of Turin  shall be  beside him;  it shall  be Turin  who with
 his  black  sword  will  slay  Morgoth,  and  thus  the  children of
 Hurin shall be avenged.                                             
 The development of this  in the  Quenta (IV.165)  tells that  in the
 day of the last battle, on the fields of Valinor,                   
   Tulkas  shall  strive  with Melko,  and on  his right  shall stand
 Fionwe   and   on   his   left   Turin   Turambar,  son   of  Hurin,
 Conqueror  of  Fate;  and  it  shall  be  the  black sword  of Turin
 that deals unto  Melko his  death and  final end;  and so  shall the
 children of Hurin and all Men be avenged.                           
 And  the final  passage of  the Quenta,  concerning the  prophecy of
 the recovery of the Two Trees, ends with the words (ibid.):         
   But of Men  in that  day the  prophecy speaks  not, save  of Turin
 only, and him it names among the Gods.                              
 These  passages  reappear in  the revised  conclusion of  the Quenta
 that  belongs  with the  Quenta Silmarillion  of 1937  (see V.323-4,
 333),  with two  changes: Turin  in the  Last Battle  is said  to be
 'coming  from  the  halls  of  Mandos',  and  in the  final sentence
 concerning  the  prophecy  'no Man  it names,  save Turin  only, and
 to him a place is given among the sons of the Valar.' In the cursory
 corrections  that  my  father  made  much  later to  this conclusion
 (see  XI.245-7)  he  changed  'Turin  ... coming  from the  halls of
 Mandos'  to  'Turin  ...  returning  from  the  Doom  of Men  at the
 ending  of  the  world*,  and  against  the concluding  passage (in-
 cluding the reference to Turin as 'a son of the Valar') he  placed a
 large X.                                                            
   Another  reference  is  found in  the Annals  of Aman  (X.71, 76),
 where it is  said of  the constellation  Menelmakar (Orion)  that it
 'was  a  sign of  Turin Turambar,  who should  come into  the world,
 and a foreshowing of the Last  Battle that  shall be  at the  end of
 Days.'                                                              
   In this last reappearance of the  mysterious and  fluctuating idea
 the  prophecy  is  put  into  the mouth  of Andreth,  the Wise-woman
 of the House of Beor: Turin will 'return from  the Dead'  before his
 final departure, and his last deed within the  Circles of  the World
 will  be  the  slaying  of  the Great  Dragon, Ancalagon  the Black.
 Andreth prophesies of the Last Battle at the end  of the  Elder Days
 (the sense in which the term  'Last Battle'  is used  shortly after-
 wards in this text, p. 371); but in all the early texts (the Quenta,
 IV.160;  the  Annals  of  Beleriand,   IV.309,  V.144;   the  Quenta
 Silmarillion, V.329) it was Earendil who destroyed Ancalagon.]      

 18. They  had no  other names  that are  recorded; for  Earendil was
    nearly always at sea in many  fruitless voyages,  and both  his sons
    were born in his absence.                                           
 19. And also  that of  Turgon; though  he preferred  that of  Elwe, who
    was not under the ban that was laid on the Exiles.                  
 20. Menelrond: 'heaven-dome'.                                        
 21. [On the Dome of Varda above Valinor see X.385-8.]                   
 22. [Another note among these  papers derives  the Adunaic  word roth
    (as  in  Rothinzil)  from  a  stem  RUTH, 'not  originally connected
    to  foam. Its  basic sense  was "scar,  score, furrow",  and yielded
    words  for  plough  and   ploughing;  when   applied  to   boats  it
    referred to their track on water, especially to the curling water at
    the  prow  (obroth  "fore-cutting",  whereas  the  wake  was  called
    nadroth "hind-track", or the smooth roth).']                        
 23. [He  also  said  here  that  though Rothinzil  had not  appeared in
    print he wished to retain it.]                                      
 24. [This  'Beorian'  explanation  of  wing  seems  to have  been aban-
    doned  also,  since  in  what  seems  to be  the latest  among these
    discussions  my  father  said  that  both  elements in  Elwing were
    Sindarin:   he   proposed   an   etymology  whereby   Quenya  winge,
    Sindarin gwing  'appears  to be  related' to  the Quenya  verb winta
    'scatter, blow about' (both transitive and  intransitive), comparing
    Quenya lassewinta as a variant of lasselanta,  'leaf-fall, autumn'.]

                                    XIII.                                  
                                                                          
                               LAST WRITINGS.                              
                                                                          
                           Of Glorfindel, Cirdan,                          
                             and other matters.                            
                                                                          
 There is a small collection of very late manuscripts,  preserved together,
 closely  similar  in appearance,  and all  written on  the blank  sides of
 publication  notices  issued  by  Allen  and  Unwin.  Most  of  these  are
 copies  of  the  same  notice  dated  19  January  1970  (used also  by my
 father for his late  work on  the story  of Maeglin,  XI.316), but  one of
 these  writings  was  stated  by him  to be  developed from  a reply  to a
 correspondent  sent  on  9  December  1972,  and another  is dated  by him
 20  November  1972. I  think it  very probable  that the  whole collection
 belongs to that time, the last year of his life: he died on the  second of
 September,  1973,  at  the age  of eighty-one.  There are  clear evidences
 of confusion (as he  said at  one point,  'my memory  is no  longer reten-
 tive');  but there  are elements  in them  that are  of much  interest and
 should be recorded.                                                       
  Though  writing  in manuscript  he retained  his practice  of interspers-
 ing notes into the body of the  text, distinguishing  them by  a different
 (italic)  script.  All the  numbered notes,  authorial and  editorial, are
 collected at the end of the chapter.                                      
                                                                          
                                 GLORFINDEL.                               
                                                                          
 In  the  summer  of  1938,  when  my  father  was  pondering  The  Council
 of Elrond in The Lord of  the Rings,  he wrote:  'Glorfindel tells  of his
 ancestry  in  Gondolin'  (VI.214). More  than thirty  years later  he took
 up  the  question  of  whether  Glorfindel of  Gondolin and  Glorfindel of
 Rivendell  were  indeed  one and  the same,  and this  issued in  two dis-
 cussions,  together  with  other  brief  or  fragmentary  writings closely
 associated with them. I will refer to these as  'Glorfindel I'  and 'Glor-
 findel II'. The first page of Glorfindel I is missing, and the second page
 begins with the words 'as guards or assistants.' Then follows:            
                                                                          
 An  Elf  who  had  once  known Middle-earth  and had  fought in           
 the long  wars against  Melkor would  be an  eminently suitable           
 companion for Gandalf.  We could  then reasonably  suppose that           
 Glorfindel (possibly as one of a small party,(1) more probably as           
 a  sole  companion) landed  with Gandalf  - Olorin  about Third           
 Age  1000.  This supposition  would indeed  explain the  air of           
 special  power and  sanctity that  surrounds Glorfindel  - note           

 how  the  Witch-king  flies  from  him,   although  all   others  (such
 as  King  Earnur)  however   brave  could   not  induce   their  horses
 to  face  him  (Appendix  A  (I,  iv),  RK  p.  331). For  according to
 accounts  (quite  independent   of  this   case)  elsewhere   given  of
 Elvish  nature,  and  their  relations  with  the  Valar,   when  Glor-
 findel  was  slain  his  spirit  would  then  go   to  Mandos   and  be
 judged,  and  then  would  remain  in  the   Halls  of   Waiting  until
 Manwe  granted  him  release.  The  Elves  were   destined  to   be  by
 nature  'immortal',  within  the  unknown  limits  of  the life  of the
 Earth   as   a  habitable   realm,  and   their  disembodiment   was  a
 grievous thing. It was  the duty,  therefore, of  the Valar  to restore
 them,  if they  were slain,  to incarnate  life, if  they desired  it -
 unless  for  some  grave  (and  rare)  reason: such  as deeds  of great
 evil,  or  any  works  of  malice  of  which  they  remained obdurately
 unrepentant.  When  they   were  re-embodied   they  could   remain  in
 Valinor,  or  return  to  Middle-earth  if their  home had  been there.
 We  can  therefore  reasonably  suppose  that  Glorfindel,   after  the
 purging or  forgiveness of  his part  in the  rebellion of  the Noldor,
 was   released   from   Mandos   and   became   himself    again,   but
 remained  in   the  Blessed   Realm  -   for  Gondolin   was  destroyed
 and  all  or  most  of  his kin  had perished.  We can  thus understand
 why  he  seems  so  powerful  a  figure  and  almost 'angelic'.  For he
 had  returned  to  the  primitive  innocence  of  the  First-born,  and
 had  then  lived  among  those  Elves  who  had  never   rebelled,  and
 in  the  companionship  of  the Maiar (2) for ages: from the last years
 of the  First Age,  through the  Second Age,  to the  end of  the first
 millennium  of   the  Third   Age:  before   he  returned   to  Middle-
 earth.(3) It is indeed  probable  that  he  had  in   Valinor  already
 become  a  friend   and  follower   of  Olorin.   Even  in   the  brief
 glimpses  of  him  given  in  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  he  appears as
 specially  concerned  for  Gandalf,  and  was  one  (the   most  power-
 ful,  it  would  seem)  of  those  sent  out  from  Rivendell  when the
 disquieting   news   reached   Elrond  that   Gandalf  had   never  re-
 appeared to guide or protect the Ring-bearer.                          
                                                                       
   The second essay, Glorfindel II, is a text  of five  manuscript pages
 which undoubtedly followed the first at no long interval; but a slip of
 paper  on  which  my  father  hastily  set  down  some thoughts  on the
 matter  presumably came  between them,  since he  said here  that while
 Glorfindel  might have  come with  Gandalf, 'it  seems far  more likely
 that he was sent in the crisis of the Second  Age, when  Sauron invaded
 Eriador, to assist Elrond, and that though not  (yet) mentioned  in the
 annals recording Sauron's defeat he  played a  notable and  heroic part

 in the war.' At the end of this note he wrote the  words 'Numenorean
 ship', presumably indicating how Glorfindel  might have  crossed the
 Great Sea.                                                         
                                                                   
 This  name  is  in  fact  derived  from  the  earliest  work  on the
 mythology:   The  Fall   of  Gondolin,   composed  in   1916-17,  in
 which  the  Elvish  language  that  ultimately  became  that  of the
 type called  Sindarin  was  in  a  primitive  and  unorganized form,
 and its relation with  the High-elven  type (itself  very primitive)
 was  still  haphazard.  It was  intended to  mean 'Golden-tressed',(4)
 and  was  the name  given to  the heroic  'Gnome' (Noldo),  a chief-
 tain  of  Gondolin,  who  in the  pass of  Cristhorn ('Eagle-cleft')
 fought  with  a  Balrog  [>  Demon],  whom  he slew  at the  cost of
 his own life.                                                      
    Its use in  The Lord  of the  Rings is  one of  the cases  of the
 somewhat  random  use  of  the  names  found  in the  older legends,
 now  referred  to  as  The  Silmarillion, which  escaped reconsider-
 ation  in  the  final  published  form  of  The  Lord of  the Rings.
 This is unfortunate, since  the name  is now  difficult to  fit into
 Sindarin,  and  cannot  possibly  be  Quenyarin.  Also  in  the  now
 organized  mythology,   difficulty  is   presented  by   the  things
 recorded  of  Glorfindel  in The  Lord of  the Rings,  if Glorfindel
 of  Gondolin  is supposed  to be  the same  person as  Glorfindel of
 Rivendell.                                                         
    As for the former: he was slain in  the Fall  of Gondolin  at the
 end of the First  Age, and  if a  chieftain of  that city  must have
 been a Noldo,  one of  the Elf-lords  in the  host of  King Turukano
 (Turgon);  at  any  rate  when  The  Fall  of  Gondolin  was written
 he  was  certainly thought  to be  so. But  the Noldor  in Beleriand
 were  exiles  from  Valinor, having  rebelled against  the authority
 of  Manwe  supreme   head  of   the  Valar,   and  Turgon   was  one
 of  the  most  determined  and  unrepentant  supporters  of Feanor's
 rebellion.(5) There  is  no  escape  from  this.  Gondolin is  in The
 Silmarillion said to have  been built  and occupied  by a  people of
 almost  entirely  Noldorin  origin.(6) It might be  possible, though
 inconsistent, to suppose that  Glorfindel was  a prince  of Sindarin
 origin  who  had  joined  the  host  of Turgon,  but this  would en-
 tirely contradict what  is said  of Glorfindel  in Rivendell  in The
 Lord  of  the Rings:  most notably  in The  Fellowship of  the Ring,
 p  235, where  he is  said to  have been  one of  the 'lords  of the
 Eldar from  beyond  the  furthest  seas  ... who  have dwelt  in the
 Blessed Realm.' The Sindar had never left Middle-earth.            
    This difficulty, far more  serious than  the linguistic  one, may

 be considered first. At any rate what  at first  sight may  seem the
 simplest  solution  must  be abandoned:  sc. that  we have  merely a
 reduplication  of  names,  and  that  Glorfindel  of   Gondolin  and
 Glorfindel  of  Rivendell  were  different persons.  This repetition
 of  so striking  a name,  though possible,  would not  be credible.(7)
 No  other  major  character  in  the Elvish  legends as  reported in
 The  Silmarillion  and  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  has a  name borne
 by  another  Elvish  person  of  importance.  Also  it may  be found
 that acceptance  of the  identity of  Glorfindel of  old and  of the
 Third Age  will actually  explain what  is said  of him  and improve
 the story.                                                         
   When   Glorfindel  of   Gondolin  was   slain  his   spirit  would
 according to  the laws  established by  the One  be obliged  at once
 to return  to the  land of  the Valar.  Then he  would go  to Mandos
 and  be  judged, and  would then  remain in  the 'Halls  of Waiting'
 until  Manwe  granted  him  release.  Elves  were  destined   to  be
 'immortal', that is  not to  die within  the unknown  limits decreed
 by the One, which at the most  could be  until the  end of  the life
 of the Earth as a habitable realm. Their  death -  by any  injury to
 their bodies so severe that it could not  be healed  - and  the dis-
 embodiment  of  their  spirits  was  an  'unnatural'   and  grievous
 matter.  It  was  therefore  the duty  of the  Valar, by  command of
 the One, to restore them to incarnate life, if they desired  it. But
 this  'restoration' could be delayed (8) by Manwe, if the  fea while
 alive  had  done  evil  deeds  and  refused  to  repent of  them, or
 still  harboured  any  malice  against  any  other person  among the
 living.                                                            
   Now  Glorfindel  of  Gondolin  was  one  of  the   exiled  Noldor,
 rebels  against  the  authority of  Manwe, and  they were  all under
 a  ban  imposed  by him:  they could  not return  in bodily  form to
 the  Blessed  Realm.  Manwe,  however,  was  not  bound  by  his own
 ordinances,  and being  still the  supreme ruler  of the  Kingdom of
 Arda  could  set  them aside,  when he  saw fit.  From what  is said
 of Glorfindel in The Silmarillion and The  Lord of  the Rings  it is
 evident that he was an Elda  of high  and noble  spirit: and  it can
 be  assumed  that, though  he left  Valinor in  the host  of Turgon,
 and so incurred the ban, he  did so  reluctantly because  of kinship
 with  Turgon  and  allegiance  to  him,  and  had  no  part  in  the
 kinslaying of Alqualonde.(9)                                       
   More  important:  Glorfindel  had sacrificed  his life  in defend-
 ing  the  fugitives  from  the  wreck  of  Gondolin against  a Demon
 out  of  Thangorodrim,(10) and  so  enabling  Tuor  and  Idril  daugh-

 ter of Turgon and their child  Earendil to  escape, and  seek refuge
 at  the  Mouths  of  Sirion.  Though  he   cannot  have   known  the
 importance  of  this  (and  would  have   defended  them   even  had
 they been fugitives of  any rank),  this deed  was of  vital import-
 ance to the designs of the Valar.(11) It is therefore entirely in keep-
 ing  with the  general design  of The  Silmarillion to  describe the
 subsequent  history  of Glorfindel  thus. After  his purging  of any
 guilt that he had incurred in  the rebellion,  he was  released from
 Mandos,  and   Manwe  restored him.(12) He   then  became   again  a
 living  incarnate  person,  but  was  permitted  to  dwell   in  the
 Blessed  Realm;  for  he  had regained  the primitive  innocence and
 grace  of  the  Eldar.  For long  years he  remained in  Valinor, in
 reunion  with  the  Eldar  who had  not rebelled,  and in  the com-
 panionship  of  the  Maiar.  To  these he  had now  become almost
 an  equal,  for  though  he  was  an  incarnate  (to  whom  a bodily
 form  not made  or chosen  by himself  was necessary)  his spiritual
 power  had  been  greatly  enhanced by  his self-sacrifice.  At some
 time,  probably  early  in  his  sojourn  in  Valinor,  he  became a
 follower, and a friend, of Olorin (Gandalf), who as  is said  in The
 Silmarillion  had  an  especial  love and  concern for  the Children
 of Eru.(13) That Olorin, as  was possible  for one  of the  Maiar, had
 already  visited   Middle-earth  and   had  become   acquainted  not
 only  with  the Sindarin  Elves and  others deeper  in Middle-earth,
 but also with Men, is likely, but nothing is [>  has yet  been] said
 of this.                                                           
    Glorfindel remained in the Blessed  Realm, no  doubt at  first by
 his  own  choice:  Gondolin  was  destroyed,  and  all  his  kin had
 perished,  and  were still  in the  Halls of  Waiting unapproachable
 by the living. But his  long sojourn  during the  last years  of the
 First  Age,  and  at least  far into  the Second  Age, no  doubt was
 also in accord with the wishes and designs of Manwe.               
    When  did  Glorfindel  return  to  Middle-earth? This  must prob-
 ably  have  occurred  before  the  end  of the  Second Age,  and the
 'Change  of  the  World'   and  the   Drowning  of   Numenor,  after
 which  no  living embodied  creature, 'humane'  or of  lesser kinds,
 could  return  from  the  Blessed  Realm  which  had  been  'removed
 from the  Circles of  the World'.  This was  according to  a general
 ordinance  proceeding  from  Eru  Himself;  and  though,  until  the
 end  of  the  Third  Age,  when  Eru  decreed  that the  Dominion of
 Men  must  begin,  Manwe   could  be   supposed  to   have  received
 the  permission of  Eru to  make an  exception in  his case,  and to
 have  devised  some  means  for  the  transportation  of  Glorfindel

 to Middle-earth, this  is improbable  and would  make Glorfindel          
 of greater power and importance than seems fitting.                       
    We may then best suppose that Glorfindel returned  during the          
 Second Age, before the 'shadow' fell on  Numenor, and  while the          
 Numenoreans  were  welcomed  by  the  Eldar as  powerful allies.          
 His return must have been for the purpose of  strengthening Gil-          
 galad and Elrond,  when the  growing evil  of the  intentions of          
 Sauron were at last perceived by them. It might, therefore, have          
 been as early as  Second Age  1200, when  Sauron came  in person          
 to Lindon, and attempted to deceive Gil-galad, but  was rejected          
 and dismissed.(14) But it  may have  been, perhaps  more probably,          
 as  late  as  c.1600,  the  Year  of  Dread, when  Barad-dur was          
 completed  and  the  One  Ring forged,  and Celebrimbor  at last          
 became aware of the trap into which he had fallen. For  in 1200,          
 though he was filled with anxiety,  Gil-galad still  felt strong          
 and able to treat Sauron with contempt.(15) Also at that time his          
 Numenorean  allies  were  beginning  to  make  strong  permanent          
 havens for their great ships, and also many of them had actually          
 begun to dwell there permanently. In 1600 it became clear to all          
 the  leaders  of  Elves  and  Men  (and  Dwarves)  that  war was          
 inevitable  against  Sauron, now  unmasked as  a new  Dark Lord.          
 They therefore began to prepare  for his  assault; and  no doubt          
 urgent messages  and prayers  asking for  help were  received in          
 Numenor (and in Valinor).(16)                                              
                                                                          
    The  text  ends  here,  with  no  indication  that  it  was unfinished,
 although the 'linguistic difficulty' referred to on p.  379 was  not taken
 Up.                                                                       
    Written at the same time as the 'Glorfindel' texts  is a  discussion of
 the question of Elvish reincarnation. It is  in two  versions, one  a very
 rough draft (partly written  in fact  on the  manuscript of  Glorfindel I)
 for the other. This text is not included here,(17) except in its concluding
 part,  which  concerns  the Dwarves'  belief in  the rebirth  or reappear-
 ance of their  Fathers, most  notably Durin.  I give  this passage  in the
 form  that  it  has  in  the  original draft.  It was  written at  a speed
 (with  punctuation  omitted,  and  variant forms  of phrases  jostling one
 another) that the printed form that follows  does not  at all  convey; but
 it  is a  record of  emerging thought  on a  matter concerning  which very
 little is to be found in all my father's writings.                        
                                                                          
    It is possible that this false notion (18) was in some ways             
 connected with the various strange ideas which both Elves and             
 Men  had concerning  the Dwarves,  which were  indeed largely             
 derived by them from the Dwarves themselves. For  the Dwarves             

 asserted  that  the  spirits  of  the  Seven  Fathers  of their  races were
 from  time  to  time  reborn  in  their  kindreds.  This  was  notably  the
 case   in   the   race   of  the   Longbeards  whose   ultimate  forefather
 was  called  Durin,  a   name  which   was  taken   at  intervals   by  one
 of  his  descendants,  but  by  no  others but  those in  a direct  line of
 descent  from  Durin  I.  Durin  I,  eldest  of  the  Fathers,  'awoke' far
 back  in  the  First  Age  (it  is  supposed,  soon  after   the  awakening
 of   Men),   but   in   the   Second   Age   several   other   Durins   had
 appeared   as   Kings  of   the  Longbeards   (Anfangrim).  In   the  Third
 Age  Durin  VI  was  slain  by  a  Balrog  in   1980.  It   was  prophesied
 (by   the   Dwarves),   when   Dain   Ironfoot   took   the   kingship   in
 Third  Age  2941  (after  the  Battle   of  Five   Armies),  that   in  his
 direct  line  there  would  one   day  appear   a  Durin   VII  -   but  he
 would be the last.(19) Of   these  Durins   the  Dwarves   reported  that
 they  retained  memory  of  their  former  lives  as  Kings,  as  real, and
 yet   naturally   as   incomplete,   as  if   they  had   been  consecutive
 years of life in one person.(20)                                           
   How   this   could   come   to  pass   the  Elves   did  not   know;  nor
 would  the  Dwarves  tell  them  much   more  of   the  matter.(21) But the
 Elves   of  Valinor   knew  of   a  strange   tale  of   Dwarvish  origins,
 which   the   Noldor   brought   to   Middle-earth,   and   asserted   that
 they  had  learned  it  from  Aule  himself.  This  will  be   found  among
 the  many  minor   matters  included   in  notes   or  appendices   to  The
 Silmarillion,  and  is  not here  told in  full. For  the present  point it
 is  sufficient  to  recall  that  the  immediate  author  of  the  Dwarvish
 race was the Vala Aule.(22)                                                
                                                                           
   Here  there  is  a  brief  version  of  the  legend  of  the Making  of the
   Dwarves,  which  I  omit;  my  father  wrote  on  the  text:  'Not  a place
   for  telling the story  of Aule  and the  Dwarves.'(23) The conclusion then
   follows:                                                                 
                                                                           
   The  Dwarves  add  that  at  that  time  Aule   gained  them   also  this
 privilege  that   distinguished  them   from  Elves   and  Men:   that  the
 spirit  of  each  of  the  Fathers  (such  as  Durin)  should,  at  the end
 of  the  long  span  of  life allotted  to Dwarves,  fall asleep,  but then
 lie  in  a  tomb  of  his  own  body,(24) at rest,  and there  its weariness
 and   any   hurts   that   had   befallen  it   should  be   amended.  Then
 after long years he should arise and take up his kingship again.(25)        
                                                                           
   The  second  version  is  very  much  briefer,  and  on  the  question of
 the 'rebirth'  of the  Fathers says  only: '...  the reappearance,  at long
 intervals, of the person of one of the Dwarf-fathers, in the lines of their
 kings - e.g.  especially  Durin  - is  not when  examined probably  one of

  rebirth,  but of  the preservation  of the  body of  a former  King Durin
  (say) to which at intervals his spirit would return. But the relations of
  the Dwarves  to the  Valar and  especially to  the Vala  Aule are  (as it
  seems) quite different from those of Elves and Men.'                     
                                                                          
                              THE FIVE WIZARDS.                            
                                                                          
  Another  brief  discussion,  headed  'Note  on  the  landing of  the Five
  Wizards  and  their  functions  and operations',  arose from  my father's
  consideration of the matter of Glorfindel,  as is  seen from  the opening
  words: 'Was in  fact Glorfindel  one of  them?' He  observed that  he was
  'evidently  never  supposed  to  be  when  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  was
  written', adding  that there  is no  possibility that  some of  them were
  Eldar 'of the highest order of power', rather than  Maiar. The  text then
  continues  with the  passage given  in Unfinished  Tales, p.  394, begin-
  ning 'We must assume that they were all Maiar ...';  but after  the words
  with which that  citation ends  ('... chosen  by the  Valar with  this in
  mind')  there  stands  only  'Saruman  the  most  powerful', and  then it
  breaks  off, unfinished.  Beside these  last words  is a  pencilled note:
  'Radagast  a  name  of  Mannish  (Anduin  vale)  origin  -  but  not  now
  clearly interpretable' (see Unfinished Tales p. 390 and note 4).         
    On  the  reverse  of  the  page  are  some notes  which I  described in
  Unfinished Tales  as uninterpretable,  but which  with longer  scrutiny I
  have been largely able to make out. One of them reads as follows:        
                                                                          
    No names are recorded for  the two  wizards. They  were never          
  seen or  known in  lands west  of Mordor.  The wizards  did not          
  come  at  the  same time.  Possibly Saruman,  Gandalf, Radagast          
  did,  but  more  likely  Saruman  the  chief (and  already over          
  mindful of  this) came  first and  alone. Probably  Gandalf and          
  Radagast  came  together, though  this has  not yet  been said.          
  (what is most probable) ... Glorfindel also met Gandalf  at the          
  Havens. The other two are only known to (have)  exist(ed) [sic]          
  by Saruman,  Gandalf, and  Radagast, and  Saruman in  his wrath          
  mentioning five was letting out a piece of private information.          
                                                                          
    The reference of the last sentence  is to  Saruman's violent  retort to
  Gandalf at the door of Orthanc, in  which he  spoke of  'the rods  of the
  Five  Wizards'  (The Two  Towers p.  188). Another  note is  even rougher
  and more difficult:                                                      
                                                                          
    The  'other  two'  came  much  earlier,  at  the  same   time  probably
  as   Glorfindel,   when   matters   became   very   dangerous    in   the
  Second  Age.(26) Glorfindel was sent  to  aid   Elrond  and   was (though
  not  yet  said)  pre-eminent  in  the  war  in  Eriador.(27) But the other
  two  Istari   were  sent   for  a   different  purpose.   Morinehtar  and

 Romestamo.(28) Darkness-slayer   and   East-helper.   Their   task  was
 to  circumvent  Sauron:  to  bring  help  to  the  few  tribes  of  Men
 that  had  rebelled  from  Melkor-worship,  to  stir  up  rebellion ...
 and  after  his  first fall  to search  out his  hiding (in  which they
 failed)  and   to  cause   [?  dissension   and  disarray]   among  the
 dark  East  ...  They  must  have  had  very  great  influence  on  the
 history  of  the  Second  Age  and  Third  Age  in  weakening  and dis-
 arraying  the  forces  of  East  ...  who  would  both  in  the  Second
 Age and Third Age otherwise have ... outnumbered the West.             
                                                                       
   At  the  words in  the citation  from this  text in  Unfinished Tales
 (p. 394) 'Of the other two nothing is said in  published work  save the
 reference to the Five Wizards  in the  altercation between  Gandalf and
 Saruman' my father wrote:  'A note  made on  their names  and functions
 seems now  lost, but  except for  the names  their general  history and
 effect on the history of the Third  Age is  clear.' Conceivably  he was
 thinking of the sketched-out narrative of the choosing of the Istari at
 a council of  the Valar  (Unfinished Tales  p. 393),  in which  the Two
 Wizards  (or 'the  Blue Wizards',  Ithryn Luin)  were named  Alatar and
 Pallando.                                                              
                                                                       
                                 CIRDAN.                                
                                                                       
 This  brief  manuscript  is  also  associated  with  the  discussion of
 Glorfindel: rough drafting for it is found on the verso  of one  of the
 pages of the text Glorfindel II.                                       
                                                                       
 This  is  the  Sindarin  for  'Shipwright',(29) and describes his later
 functions in  the history  of the  First Three  Ages; but  his 'proper'
 name,   sc.  his   original  name   among  the   Teleri,  to   whom  he
 belonged,  is  never used.(30) He  is said  in the  Annals of  the Third
 Age  (c.1000)  to  have  seen  further  and  deeper  into   the  future
 than  anyone  else  in Middle-earth.(31) This does  not   include  the
 Istari  (who  came  from  Valinor),  but  must  include   even  Elrond,
 Galadriel, and Celeborn.                                               
   Cirdan  was  a  Telerin Elf,  one of  the highest  of those  who were
 not  transported   to  Valinor   but  became   known  as   the  Sindar,
 the  Grey-elves;(32) he was  akin  to  Olwe,  one  of  the two kings of
 the  Teleri,  and  lord  of  those  who  departed  over the  Great Sea.
 He  was  thus  also  akin to Elwe,(33) Olwe  s  elder  brother, acknowl-
 edged  as  high-king  of  all the  Teleri in  Beleriand, even  after he
 withdrew  to  the  guarded  realm  of  Doriath.  But  Cirdan   and  his
 people  remained  in  many  ways   distinct  from   the  rest   of  the
 Sindar.  They  retained  the  old  name   Teleri  (in   later  Sindarin (34)
 Eorm  Telir,  or  Telerrim)  and  remained  in  many  ways  a  separate

 folk,  speaking  even  in  later  days  a more archaic language.(35) The
 Noldor   called   them   the   Falmari,   'wave-folk',  and   the  other
 Sindar Falathrim 'people of the foaming shore'.(36)                         
   It  was  during  the  long  waiting of  the Teleri  for the  return of
 the  floating  isle,  upon  which  the  Vanyar   and  Noldor   had  been
 transported   over   the  Great   Sea,  that   Cirdan  had   turned  his
 thoughts  and  skill  to  the  making  of  ships,  for  he  and  all the
 other  Teleri  became  impatient.  Nonetheless  it  is  said   that  for
 love  of  his  kin  and  allegiance  Cirdan  was  the  leader  of  those
 who  sought  longest  for  Elwe  when  he  was  lost  and  did  not come
 to  the  shores  to  depart  from  Middle-earth.  Thus he  forfeited the
 fulfilment  of  his  greatest  desire:  to  see  the  Blessed  Realm and
 find  again  there  Olwe  and  his  own  nearest kin.  Alas, he  did not
 reach  the  shores  until  nearly  all  the  Teleri of  Olwe's following
 had departed.                                                           
   Then, it is said,  he stood  forlorn looking  out to  sea, and  it was
 night,  but  far  away  he  could see  a glimmer  of light  upon Eressea
 ere  it vanished  into the  West. Then  he cried  aloud: 'I  will follow
 that  light,  alone  if  none will  come with  me, for  the ship  that I
 have  been  building  is now  almost ready.'  But even  as he  said this
 he  received  in  his  heart  a  message,  which  he  knew to  come from
 the  Valar,  though  in  his  mind   it  was   remembered  as   a  voice
 speaking  in  his  own  tongue.  And  the  voice   warned  him   not  to
 attempt  this  peril;  for  his  strength  and skill  would not  be able
 to  build  any  ship  able  to  dare the  winds and  waves of  the Great
 Sea  for  many  long  years  yet.  'Abide  now   that  time,   for  when
 it  comes  then  will  your  work  be  of  utmost  worth,  and  it  will
 be  remembered  in  song  for  many  ages   after.'  'I   obey,'  Cirdan
 answered,  and  then  it  seemed  to  him  that  he  saw  (in  a  vision
 maybe)  a  shape  like  a  white  boat, shining  above him,  that sailed
 west  through the  air, and  as it  dwindled in  the distance  it looked
 like a star of so great a  brilliance that  it cast  a shadow  of Cirdan
 upon the strand where he stood.                                         
   As  we  now  perceive,  this  was  a  foretelling  of the ship (37) which
 after  apprenticeship  to  Cirdan,   and  ever   with  his   advice  and
 help,  Earendil  built,  and  in  which  at last  he reached  the shores
 of  Valinor.  From  that  night  onwards  Cirdan  received  a  foresight
 touching  all  matters  of  importance,  beyond   the  measure   of  all
 other Elves upon Middle-earth.                                          
                                                                        
   This text is remarkable in that on the one hand nothing is said of the
 history and importance of Cirdan as it appears  elsewhere, while  on the

  other hand almost  everything that  is told  here is  unique. In  the Grey
  Annals it was said (XI.8, $14):                                           
    Osse  therefore  persuaded  many  to  remain  in  Beleriand,   and  when
  King  Olwe  and  his  host  were  embarked  upon   the  isle   and  passed
  over  the  Sea  they  abode  still  by  the  shore;  and Osse  returned to
  them,  and  continued  in  friendship  with  them. And  he taught  to them
  the  craft  of  shipbuilding and  of sailing;  and they  became a  folk of
  mariners, the first in Middle-earth ...                                   
  But  of  Osse  there  is  now no  mention; shipbuilding  on the  coasts of
  Beleriand  is  said  to  have  begun in  the long  years during  which the
  Teleri awaited Ulmo's return, and  is indeed  spoken of  (see note  29) as
  the  further  evolution  of  a  craft already  developed among  the Teleri
  during the Great Journey.                                                 
    Other features of  this account  that appear  nowhere else  (in addition
  of course to the story of Cirdan's desire to cross the Sea to Valinor, and
  his vision  of the  white ship  passing westward  through the  night above
  him) are that the Teleri delayed long  on the  shores of  the Sea  of Rhun
  on the  Great Journey  (note 29;  cf. p.  373, note  13); that  Cirdan was
  the  leader  of  those  who  sought  for  Elwe  Thingol, his  kinsman; and
  that Earendil was 'apprenticed'  to Cirdan,  who aided  him in  the build-
  ing of Vingilot.                                                          
                                                                           
                                    NOTES.                                  
                                                                           
  1.   It  may  be  noted  that  Galdor is  another name  of similar  sort and
       period  of  origin,  but  he  appears  as  a  messenger  from  Cirdan  and
       is  called  Galdor  of  the  Havens.  Galdor  also  appeared  in  The Fall
       of  Gondolin,  but  the  name  is  of  a  more   simple  and   usual  form
       [than  Glorfindel]  and  might  be  repeated.  But  unless  he is  said in
       The  Fall  of  Gondolin  to  have  been  slain,   he  can   reasonably  be
       supposed  to  be  the  same  person,  one  of   the  Noldor   who  escaped
       from  the  siege   and  destruction,   but  fled   west  to   the  Havens,
       and  not  southwards  to  the  mouths  of  Sirion,  as  did  most  of  the
       remnant  of  the  people  of  Gondolin  together  with  Tuor,  Idril,  and
       Earendil.  He  is   represented  in   The  Council   of  Elrond   as  less
       powerful  and   much  less   wise  than   Glorfindel;  and   so  evidently
       had not returned to Valinor, and been purged, and reincarnated.      
         [See  note  3.  -  The  words  'the name  [Galdor] is  of a  more simple
       and   usual   form  [than   Glorfindel]  and   might  be   repeated'  show
       that  on  the  lost  first  page  my  father  had  discussed (as  he would
       do  in  the  following  text)  the  possibility that  there were  two dis-
       tinct  persons   named  Glorfindel,   and  had   concluded  that   it  was
       too  improbable  to  be  entertained.  -  'But  unless he  is said  in The
       Fall  of  Gondolin  to  have  been  slain':   my  father   would  probably
       have  been  hard  put  to  it to  lay his  hand on  The Fall  of Gondolin,

      and  without  consulting it  he could  not say  for certain  what had
      been Galdor's fate (this, I take it, is his meaning). In fact, Galdor
      was  not  slain, but  led the  fugitives over  the pass  of Cristhorn
      while  Glorfindel  came  up  at  the rear  (II.191 -  2), and  in the
      'Name-list to The Fall of Gondolin' (II.215) it is said that  he went
      to Sirion's  mouth, and  that 'he  dwelleth yet  in Tol  Eressea'. He
      was the lord of the people of  the Tree  in Gondolin,  and of  him it
      was said in the old tale that he 'was  held the  most valiant  of all
      the Gondothlim save Turgon alone' (II.173).]                         
  2.  That  angelic  order  to  which  Gandalf originally  belonged: lesser
      in  power  and  authority  than the  Valar, but  of the  same nature:
      members of the first order of  created rational  beings, who  if they
      appeared  in visible  forms ('humane'  or of  other kind)  were self-
      incarnated,  or  given  their forms  by the  Valar [added  later: and
      who  could  move/travel simply  by an  act of  will when  not arrayed
      in  a  body  -  which  they  could  assume  when  they   reached  the
      places that ... (illegible).]                                        
  3.  Galdor  in  contrast,  even  in  the  brief glimpses  we have  in the
      Council, is seen clearly as an inferior person,  and much  less wise.
      He, whether he appears  in The  Silmarillion or  not, must  be either
      (as his  name suggests)  a Sindarin  Elf who  had never  left Middle-
      earth  and  seen  the Blessed  Realm, or  one of  the Noldor  who had
      been exiled  for rebellion,  and had  also remained  in Middle-earth,
      and  had  not,  or  not  yet, accepted  the pardon  of the  Valar and
      returned  to  the  home  prepared  for  them in  the West,  in reward
      for their valour  against Melkor.  [The view  of Galdor  expressed in
      this note and in note 1 seems hardly justified by  the report  of his
      contributions  to  the  Council  of  Elrond;  and  if he  were indeed
      Galdor  of  Gondolin  he  had  had  long  ages  in  which  to acquire
      wisdom in  the hard  world of  Middle-earth. But  there is  no reason
      to  suppose  that  when  my  father  wrote  the  chapter  The Council
      of  Elrond  he  associated  Galdor  of  the  Havens  with  Galdor  of
      Gondolin.]                                                           
  4.  [For  the  original  etymology  of  Glorfindel, and  the etymological
      connections of the elements of the name, see II.341.]                
  5.  [In the Annals of Aman (X.112, $135)  it is  told that  following the
      Oath  of  the Feanorians  'Fingolfin, and  his son  Turgon, therefore
      spoke  against  Feanor, and  fierce words  awoke'; but  later (X.118,
      $156), when it  is told  that even  after the  utterance of  the Pro-
      phecy of the North 'all Fingolfin's folk went  forward still',  it is
      said  that  'Fingon  and  Turgon  were  bold and  fiery of  heart and
      loath to abandon any task  to which  they had  put their  hands until
      the bitter end, if bitter it must be.']                              
  6.  [The  original  conception  that  Gondolin  was  peopled  entirely by
      Noldor  was  changed  in  many alterations  to the  text of  the Grey

     Annals (see the Index  to The  War of  the Jewels,  entry Gondolin,
     references under 'population'): it is  stated indeed  (XI.45, $113)
     that when Turgon sent  all his  people forth  from Nivrost  to Gon-
     dolin they constituted 'a third part of  the Noldor  of Fingolfin's
     House, and a yet greater host  of the  Sindar'. The  statement here
     that  Gondolin  was  'occupied  by  a  people  of  almost  entirely
     Noldorin  origin'  obviously  runs  entirely  counter to  that con-
     ception.]                                                         
  7. [In  the  margin  of the  page my  father asked  subsequently: 'Why
     not?'  The  question  seems to  be answered,  however, in  the fol-
     lowing sentence of the text - where  the emphasis  is of  course on
     the word 'Elvish': 'no other major character in the  Elvish legends
     ...  has  a  name borne  by another  Elvish person  of importance.'
     It  would  indeed  have  been  open  to  him  to  change  the  name
     of  Glorfindel  of  Gondolin,  who  had  appeared  in  no published
     writing, but he did not mention.this possibility.]                
  8. Or in gravest cases (such as that of Feanor) withheld  and referred
     to the One.                                                       
  9. Though he [Glorfindel] is not yet  named in  the unrevised  part of
     The Silmarillion treating of this matter, it is recorded  that many
     of the Noldor of  Turgon's following  were in  fact grieved  by the
     decision of their  king, and  dreaded that  evil would  soon result
     from it. In the Third Host, that of Finarfin, so many were  of this
     mind  that  when  Finarfin  heard  the  final  doom  of  Mandos and
     repented, the greater part of  that host  returned to  Valinor. Yet
     Finrod son of Finarfin, noblest of all the Noldor  in the  tales of
     Beleriand,  also  went away,  for Turgon  had been  elected supreme
     lord of the Noldorin hosts.                                       
        [In the Annals  of Aman  (X.113, $138)  there was  no suggestion
     that Finrod (= Finarfin) led a separate 'Third Host': 'Thus  at the
     last the  Noldor set  forth divided  in two  hosts. Feanor  and his
     following were in the van; but the greater  host came  behind under
     Fingolfin';  and  the  same  was  said  in the  Quenta Silmarillion
     (V.235, $68, not changed later). But this  note carries  an extreme
     departure from the tradition, in the entire omission  of Fingolfin.
     This has in fact been encountered before, in my father's  very late
     work - of this same period  - on  the story  of Maeglin,  where re-
     lationships  are  distorted  on  account  of a  defective genealogy
     making Turgon the son  of Finwe  (XI.327); but  here, in  a central
     story of The Silmarillion,  Turgon is  called 'king',  and 'supreme
     lord of the Noldorin  hosts', and  Fingolfin disappears.  Of course
     it is not to be  thought that  my father  actually intended  such a
     catastrophic disruption of  the narrative  structure as  this would
     bring about; and it is reassuring to see that in a  reference else-
     where in these papers Fingolfin reappears.]                       

  10.  [In  the  margin,  and  written  at the  same time  as the  text, my
       father  noted:  'The  duel  of  Glorfindel  and  the Demon  may need
       revision.']                                                         
  11.  This is one of the  main matters  of The  Silmarillion and  need not
       here be explained. But in that part  of The  Silmarillion as  so far
       composed  it  should  not  be  left  to  appear  that  Ulmo, chiefly
       concerned  in  the  coming  of Tuor  to Gondolin,  in any  way acted
       contrary  to  the  Ban,  against  Manwe  or  without  his knowledge.
       [My  father  perhaps  had  in  mind  Ulmo's  words  to  Tuor  on the
       shore at Vinyamar, Unfinished Tales p. 29.]                         
  12.  This implies that Glorfindel was  natively an  Elda of  great bodily
       and spiritual stature,  a noble  character, and  that his  guilt had
       been small:  sc. that  he owed  allegiance to  Turgon and  loved his
       own  kindred, and  these were  his only  reasons for  remaining with
       them, although he  was grieved  by their  obstinacy, and  feared the
       doom of Mandos.                                                     
  13.  [Cf. the Valaquenta (The Silmarillion, p. 31): 'In later days he was
       the friend of all the Children of Iluvatar, and  took pity  on their
       sorrows ...']                                                       
  14.  No  doubt  because  Gil-galad  had  by  then discovered  that Sauron
       was  busy  in  Eregion,  but  had  secretly  begun  the making  of a
       stronghold  in  Mordor.  (Maybe  already  an  Elvish  name  for that
       region, because of its volcano  Orodruin and  its eruptions  - which
       were  not  made  by  Sauron  but  were  a  relic of  the devastating
       works of Melkor in the long First Age.) [See note 15.]              
  15.  [This  passage  concerning  Gil-galad  and Sauron  in the  year 1200
       of  the Second  Age, with  the express  statement that  'Sauron came
       in person to Lindon', seems to conflict with what is said in  Of the
       Rings  of  Power  (The Silmarillion  p. 287),  that 'Only  to Lindon
       he  did  not  come,  for Gil-galad  and Elrond  doubted him  and his
       fair-seeming', and would not admit him to the land.]                
  16.  For the Valar were open to the hearing  of the  prayers of  those in
       Middle-earth, as ever before,  save only  that in  the dark  days of
       the Ban they  would listen  to one  prayer only  from the  Noldor: a
       repentant prayer pleading for pardon.                               
  17.  [My father here discussed again the  idea that  Elvish reincarnation
       might be achieved by 'rebirth' as a  child, and  rejected it  as em-
       phatically as he had  done in  the discussion  called 'Reincarnation
       of Elves',  X.363-4; here  as there  the physical  and psychological
       difficulties were addressed. He wrote  here that  the idea  'must be
       abandoned, or at least  noted as  a false  notion, e.g.  probably of
       Mannish origin, since nearly all the matter  of The  Silmarillion is
       contained  in  myths  and  legends  that  have passed  through Men's
       hands  and minds,  and are  (in many  points) plainly  influenced by
       contact  and  confusion  with  the myths,  theories, and  legends of
       Men' (cf. p. 357, note 17).                                         

          My discussion  of this  matter in  X.364 must  be corrected.  I said
       there that the idea  that the  'houseless' fea  was enabled  to rebuild
       its  hroa  from  its  memory  became  my  father's  'firm   and  stable
       view  of  the  matter',  'as  appears  from  very  late writing  on the
       subject  of  the  reincarnation  of  Glorfindel  of Gondolin'.  This is
       erroneous.  This last  discussion of  Elvish reincarnation  refers only
       to  the 'restoration'  or 'reconstitution'  of the  former body  by the
       Valar,  and makes  no mention  of the  idea that  it could  be achieved
       by the 'houseless fea' operating of itself.]                           
  18.  [The 'false notion' is that of Elvish rebirth as a child: see note 17.]
  19.  ['Durin  VII  &c Last'  is shown  in the  genealogical table  in Appen-
       dix A, III as a descendant  of Dain  Ironfoot. Nothing  is said  of him
       in that Appendix; but see p. 278 in this book.]                        
  20.  Yet  it is  said that  their memories  were clearer  and fuller  of the
       far-off days.                                                          
  21.  That  the  Elves  ever  came to  know so  much (though  only at  a time
       when  the  vigour  of  both their  races was  declining) is  thought to
       be  due  to  the  strange  and  unique  friendship which  arose between
       Gimli  and  Legolas.  Indeed  most  of   the  references   to  Dwarvish
       history in Elvish records are marked with 'so said Legolas'.           
  22.  Who   was  sometimes   called  Navatar,   and  the   Dwarves  Auleonnar
       'children of Aule'.                                                    
  23.  [This  brief  version  ends  with  these  remarkable  words:  'But  Eru
       did  not  give  them  the immortality  of the  Elves, but  lives longer
       than  Men.  "They  shall  be  the  third  children  and more  like Men,
       the second." ']                                                        
  24.  The  flesh of  Dwarves is  reported to  have been  far slower  to decay
       or  become  corrupted  than  that  of  Men.  (Elvish  bodies  robbed of
       their spirit quickly disintegrated and vanished.)                      
  25.  [A note at the end of the  text without  indication for  'its insertion
       reads:]  What  effect  would  this  have  on  the  succession? Probably
       this  'return'  would  only  occur  when  by some  chance or  other the
       reigning  king  had  no  son.  The  Dwarves  were  very  unprolific and
       this no doubt happened fairly often.                                   
  26.  [These  notes  go  with  the  text  Glorfindel II,  when my  father had
       determined  that  Glorfindel  came  to   Middle-earth  in   the  Second
       Age, probably about the year 1600 (p. 382).]                           
  27.  [With this reference to  Glorfindel's part  in the  war in  Eriador cf.
       the note cited on pp. 378-9.]                                          
  28.  [Elsewhere on this page this name is written Rome(n)star.]             
  29.  Before  ever  they  came  to  Beleriand  the  Teleri  had  developed  a
       craft of  boat-making; first  as rafts,  and soon  as light  boats with
       paddles  made  in  imitation  of  the water-birds  upon the  lakes near
       their  first  homes,  and  later  on  the  Great  Journey  in  crossing
       rivers, or especially during their long tarrying on  the shores  of the
       'Sea  of  Rhun',  where  their  ships became  larger and  stronger. But

      in  all  this  work  Cirdan  had  ever  been  the foremost  and most
      inventive and skilful. [On the significance  of the  Sea of  Rhun in
      the context of the Great Journey see XI.173-4.]                    
  30. Pengoloh   alone   mentions   a  tradition   among  the   Sindar  of
      Doriath  that  it  was in  archaic form  Nowe, the  original meaning
      of which was  uncertain, as  was that  of Olwe.  [On the  meaning of
      Olwe see p. 341 and note 20.]                                      
  31. [Cf.  Appendix  B  (head-note  to  the Third  Age): 'For  Cirdan saw
      further  and deeper  than any  other in  Middle-earth' (said  in the
      context  of  his  surrender  of Narya,  the Ring  of Fire,  to Mith-
      randir). The statement here that this is said 'in the Annals  of the
      Third Age (c.1000)'  is puzzling,  but is  presumably to  be related
      to  the  words  in  the  same passage  of Appendix  B 'When  maybe a
      thousand  years had  passed ...  the Istari  or Wizards  appeared in
      Middle-earth.']                                                    
  32. A  Quenya   name  given   by  the   exiled  Noldor,   and  primarily
      applied to the folk of Doriath, people of Elwe Grey-cloak.         
  33. [That  Cirdan  was  a  kinsman of  Elwe is  mentioned in  Quendi and
      Eldar (XI.384 and note 15).]                                       
  34. This is used as a general term for the  Telerian dialect  of Eldarin
      as it became in the changes of  long years  in Beleriand,  though it
      was not entirely uniform in its development.                       
  35. [Cf.  Quendi  and  Eldar,  XI.380:  'The  Eglain  became   a  people
      somewhat  apart  from  the  inland  Elves,  and at  the time  of the
      coming of the  Exiles their  language was  in many  ways different.'
      (The Eglain are the people of Cirdan.)]                            
  36. [For  Falathrim  see  Quendi  and  Eldar,  XI.378; and  with Falmari
      cf. X.163,  $27: 'The  Sea-elves therefore  they became  in Valinor,
      the Falmari, for they made music beside the breaking waves.']      
  37. Vingilote,  'Sprayflower'.  [Beside  'Spray' my  father subsequently
      wrote 'Foam', and noted also: 'winge,  Sindarin gwing,  is properly
      a flying spume or spindrift blown  off wavetops':  see p.  376, note
      24.]                                                               
