  PART THREE.
            
 TEACHINGS OF
   PENGOLOD.

                                    XIV.                                  
                                                                         
                             DANGWETH PENGOLOD.                           
                                                                         
 This  work,  example  and  record  of  the  instruction  of  AElfwine  the
 Mariner  by  Pengolod  the  Wise  of  Gondolin,   exists  in   two  forms:
 the first ('A') a good clear text  with (apart  from one  major exception,
 see note 6) very few changes made  either in  the act  of writing  or sub-
 sequently,  and  the  second  ('B')  a  superb  illuminated  manuscript of
 which  the  first page  is reproduced  as the  frontispiece of  this book.
 This latter, together with the  brief text  Of Lembas,  was enclosed  in a
 newspaper  of  5  January  1960,  on  which  my  father wrote:  'Two items
 from  the  lore  of  Pengolod',  and  also  'Danbeth to  question. How/Why
 did  Elvish   language  change?   Origin  of   Lembas.'  On   a  cardboard
 folder  enclosing  the  newspaper  he   wrote:  'Pengolod   items.  $Manen
 lambe   Quendion   ahyane   How   did  the   language  of   Elves  change?
 $Mana i-coimas Eldaron What is the "coimas" of the Eldar?'               
  Above  the  gw  of  Dangweth  on  the  illuminated manuscript  he lightly
 pencilled b; but on an isolated scrap of  paper found  with the  two texts
 are  some  jottings  of  which  the  following  are clear:  'Keep Dangweth
 "answer"  separate  from  -beth  =  peth  "word"'; 'v gweth  "report, give
 account  of,  inform  of  things  unknown  or  wished  to be  known"'; and
 'Ndangwetha S[indarin] Dangweth'.                                       
  The  Dangweth  Pengolod  cannot  be  earlier   than  1951,   while  from
 the date of the  newspaper (on  which the  two texts  are referred  to) it
 cannot be later than the  end of  1959. I  would be  inclined to  place it
 earlier rather than later in  the decade;  possibly the  second manuscript
 B is to be associated with the fine manuscript pages of the Tale  of Years
 of the First Age (see X.49), one of  which is  reproduced as  the frontis-
 piece to Morgoth's Ring.                                                 
  Version  B follows  A very  closely indeed  for the  most part  (which is
 probably an indication of their closeness in time):  a scattering  of very
 minor  changes  (small  shifts  in  word-order and  occasional alterations
 in  vocabulary), with  a very  few more  significant differences  (see the
 notes at the end of the  text). That  it was  a work  of importance  to my
 father is evident from his writing it again in a  manuscript of  such ele-
 gance; and an  aspect of  his thought  here, in  respect of  the conscious
 introduction  of  change by  the Eldar  on the  basis of  an understanding
 of the phonological  structure of  their language  in its  entirety, would
 reappear years later  in The  Shibboleth of  Feanor (see  p. 332  and note
 3 to the present essay).                                                 

   The text that follows is of course that of Version B, with alteration
 of a few points of punctuation for greater clarity.                    
                                                                       
                           Dangweth Pengolod                            
                                  the                                   
                                 Answer                                 
                                   of                                   
                                Pengolod                                
                   to Aelfwine who asked him how came                   
                it that the tongues of the Elves changed                
                           and were sundered.                           
                                                                       
 Now  you  question  me,  AElfwine,  concerning   the  tongues   of  the
 Elves,  saying  that  you  wonder  much  to  discover  that   they  are
 many,  akin  indeed  and  yet  unalike;  for seeing  that they  die not
 and  their  memories  reach  back  into  ages  long  past,  you  under-
 stand  not  why  all  the  race  of  the  Quendi  have  not  maintained
 the  language  that  they  had  of  old  in  common  still one  and the
 same  in  all  their  kindreds.  But  behold!  AElfwine, within  Ea all
 things  change,  even  the  Valar; for  in Ea  we perceive  the unfold-
 ing  of  a  History  in  the  unfolding:  as  a  man  may read  a great
 book,  and  when  it is  full-read it  is rounded  and complete  in his
 mind,  according  to  his  measure.  Then  at  last  he  perceives that
 some  fair  thing  that  long  endured:  as some  mountain or  river of
 renown,  some  realm,  or  some  great  city;   or  else   some  mighty
 being,  as  a  king,  or  maker,  or  a  woman  of beauty  and majesty,
 or  even  one, maybe,  of the  Lords of  the West:  that each  of these
 is, if at all, all that is said of them from the beginning even  to the
 end.  From  the  spring  in  the mountains  to the  mouths of  the sea,
 all is Sirion; and from its first  upwelling even  to its  passing away
 when the land  was broken  in the  great battle,  that also  is Sirion,
 and  nothing  less.  Though  we,  who  are  set  to  behold  the  great
 History,  reading  line by  line, may  speak of  the river  changing as
 it  flows  and  grows  broad,  or dying  as it  is spilled  or devoured
 by the  sea. Yea,  even from  his first  coming into  Ea from  the side
 of  Iluvatar,  and  from  the  young  lord  of the  Valar in  the white
 wrath  of  his  battle  with  Melkor  unto  the  silent  king  of years
 uncounted  that  sits  upon  the  vanished  heights  of   Oiolosse  and
 watches  but   speaks  no   more:  all   that  is   he  whom   we  call
 Manwe.                                                                 
   Now,  verily,  a  great  tree  may  outlive  many  a  Man,   and  may
 remember  the  seed  from  which  it  came  ere  all  the Men  that now
 walk  the  earth  were  yet  unborn,  but  the  rind  upon   which  you

 lay  your  hand,  and  the leaves  which overshadow  you, are  not as
 that seed was, nor  as the  dry wood  shall be  that decays  into the
 mould  or  passes  in  flame. And  other trees  there are  that stand
 about,  each  different  in  growth  and   in  shape,   according  to
 the chances of their lives, though all be akin, offspring of  one yet
 older tree  and sprung  therefore from  a single  seed of  long ago.(1)
 Immortal,  within  Ea,  are  the Eldar,  but since  even as  Men they
 dwell  in  forms  that  come  of  Ea,  they  are  no  more changeless
 than the great trees,  neither in  the forms  that they  inhabit, nor
 in  the  things  that  they  desire  or  achieve  by  means  of those
 forms.  Wherefore  should  they  not  then   change  in   speech,  of
 which one part is made with tongues and received by ears?           
   It  hath  been  said  by some  among our  loremasters that,  as for
 Men,  their  elders  teach to  their children  their speech  and then
 soon  depart,  so  that  their  voices  are  heard  no more,  and the
 children  have  no  reminder  of  the  tongue  of  their  youth, save
 their  own  cloudy  memories:  wherefore  in  each  brief  generation
 of  Men  change  may  be  swift  and  unrestrained.  But  this matter
 seemeth  to  me  less  simple.  Weak  indeed may  be the  memories of
 Men,  but  I  say  to  you,  AElfwine,  that  even  were  your memory
 of your own being as clear as that of the wisest of the  Eldar, still
 within  the  short  span  of  your  life  your  speech  would change,
 and were you to live on with the life  of the  Elves it  would change
 more,  until  looking  back  you  would perceive  that in  your youth
 you spake an alien tongue.                                          
   For  Men  change  both  their   old  words   for  new,   and  their
 former  manner  of  speaking  for  another   manner,  in   their  own
 lifetimes, and not only  in the  first learning  of speech;  and this
 change  comes  above all  from the  very changefulness  of Ea;  or if
 you  will,  from the  nature of  speech, which  is fully  living only
 when  it  is  born,  but  when  the  union  of  the  thought  and the
 sound  is  fallen  into  old  custom,  and  the  two  are  no  longer
 perceived apart, then  already the  word is  dying and  joyless,(2) the
 sound  awaiting  some  new  thought,  and   the  thought   eager  for
 some new-patterned raiment of sound.                                
   But  to  the  changefulness  of  Ea,  to   weariness  of   the  un-
 changed, to  the renewing  of the  union: to  these three,  which are
 one, the Eldar also are subject  in their  degree. In  this, however,
 they  differ  from  Men,  that  they  are  ever  more  aware  of  the
 words  that  they  speak.  As  a  silversmith  may remain  more aware
 than  others  of  the tools  and vessels  that he  uses daily  at his
 table, or a weaver of  the texture  of his  garments. Yet  this makes

 rather  for  change  among  the  Eldar  than  for  steadfastness;  for
 the Eldar  being skilled  and eager  in art  will readily  make things
 new, both for  delight to  look on,  or to  hear, or  to feel,  or for
 daily use: be it in vessels or raiment or in speech.                  
   A  man  may indeed  change his  spoon or  his cup  at his  will, and
 need ask  none to  advise him  or to  follow his  choice. It  is other
 indeed  with  words  or  the  modes  and  devices  of speech.  Let him
 bethink  him  of  a  new  word,  be  it to  his heart  howsoever fresh
 and fair, it will avail him little  in converse,  until other  men are
 of  like  mind or  will receive  his invention.  But among  the Eldar
 there  are  many  quick  ears and  subtle minds  to hear  and appraise
 such  inventions,  and  though  many  be  the  patterns   and  devices
 so  made that  prove in  the end  only pleasing  to a  few, or  to one
 alone,  many  others  are  welcomed  and   pass  swiftly   from  mouth
 to  mouth,  with  laughter  or  delight  or with  solemn thought  - as
 maybe  a  new   jest  or   new-found  saying   of  wisdom   will  pass
 among  men  of  brighter  wit.  For  to  the   Eldar  the   making  of
 speech is the oldest of the arts and the most beloved.                
   Wherefore,  AElfwine,  I  say  to  you:  whereas  the   change  that
 goes  long  unperceived,  as  the growth  of a  tree, was  indeed slow
 of  old  in  Aman  ere the  Rising of  the Moon,  and even  in Middle-
 earth  under  the  Sleep  of  Yavanna  slower  far  than  it   is  now
 among  Men,  yet  among  the  Eldar  this  steadfastness   was  offset
 by  the  changes  that  come  of  will  and  design:  many   of  which
 indeed  differ  little  in  outward  seeming  from those  of unwitting
 growth.  Thus  the  Eldar  would  alter  the  sounds  of  their speech
 at  whiles  to  other  sounds that  seemed to  them more  pleasant, or
 were  at  the  least  unstaled.  But this  they would  not do  at hap-
 hazard.  For  the  Eldar  know   their  tongue,   not  word   by  word
 only,  but  as  a  whole: they  know even  as they  speak not  only of
 what  sounds  is  that  word  woven  which  they  are   uttering,  but
 of  what  sounds  and  sound-patterns  is  their  whole speech  at one
 time    composed.*(3) Therefore   none    among   the    Eldar   would
 change  the  sounds  of  some  one  word   alone,  but   would  rather
 change  some  one  sound  throughout  the  structure  of  his  speech;
 nor  would  he  bring  into  one  word  only  some  sound or  union of
 sounds  that  had  not   before  been   present,  but   would  replace
                                                                      
   'And  these  are  for the  most part  few in  number, for  the Eldar
 being skilled in craft are not wasteful nor prodigal to small purpose,
 admiring in a tongue rather the skilled  and harmonious  use of  a few
 well-balanced sounds than profusion ill-ordered.                      

 some  former  sound  by  the  new  sound  in  all  words   that  con-
 tained it - or if not  in all,  then in  a number  selected according
 to  their shapes  and other  elements, as  he is  guided by  some new
 pattern  that  he  has  in  mind.  Even  as a  weaver might  change a
 thread  from  red  to  blue, either  throughout his  web, or  in such
 parts  thereof  as were  suitable to  the new  pattern, but  not ran-
 domly here and there nor only in one corner.(4)                      
   And lo!  AElfwine, these  changes differ  little from  like changes
 that  come  in  the speeches  of Men  with the  passing of  time. Now
 as  for  the  Eldar  we know  that such  things were  done of  old by
 choice,  full-wittingly,  and  the  names  of  those  who   made  new
 words  or  first  moved  great  changes  are  yet  often  remembered.
 For  which  reason  the  Eldar  do  not  believe  that  in  truth the
 changes  in  the  tongues  of  Men  are  wholly  unwitting;  for  how
 so,  say  they,  comes  the  order and  harmony that  oft is  seen in
 such changes?  or the  skill both  in the  devices that  are replaced
 and  the  new  that  follow  them?  And  some  answer that  the minds
 of  Men  are  half  asleep:  by  which  they mean  not that  the part
 whereof  Men  are  unaware   and  can   give  no   account  slumbers,
 but  the  other  part.  Others  perceiving  that  in nothing  do Men,
 and  namely  those  of  the West,(5) so nearly  resemble the  Eldar as
 in  speech,  answer  that  the teaching  which Men  had of  the Elves
 in their youth works on still as a seed in the dark. But in  all this
 maybe they err, AElfwine,  for despite  all their  lore least  of all
 things do they know the minds of Men or understand them.(6)         
   And  to  speak  of  memory, AElfwine:  with regard  to the  Elves -
 for  I  know  not  how  it  is  with  Men  - that  which we  call the
 coirea  quenya,  the  living  speech,  is  the  language wherethrough
 we think and imagine; for it is  to our  thought as  the body  to our
 spirit,  growing  and  changing  together  in  all  the  days  of our
 being.(7) Into  that  language  therefore  we  render at  once whatso-
 ever we recall out of the past that  we heard  or said  ourselves. If
 a  Man  remembers  some  thing  that  he said  in childhood,  doth he
 recall the  accents of  childhood that  he used  in that  moment long
 ago?  I  know  not.  But certainly  we of  the Quendi  do not  so. We
 may  know  indeed  how  children  not  yet  accomplished  in  speech,
 and how the 'fullspoken', as  we say,  spake at  times long  ago, but
 that  is  a  thing apart  from the  images of  life-memory, and  is a
 matter  of  lore.  For  we  have much  lore concerning  the languages
 of  old,  whether  stored in  the mind  or in  writings; but  we hear
 not ourselves speak again  in the  past save  with the  language that
 clothes our thought in  the present.  Verily, it  may chance  that in

 the  past  we  spake  with  strangers  in  an  alien tongue,  and remem-
 ber  what  was  then  said,  but  not  the  tongue  that  was  used. Out
 of  the  past  indeed  we  may  recall  the  sounds  of an  alien speech
 as  we  may  other  sounds:  the  song  of  birds   or  the   murmur  of
 water;  but  that  is  but  in  some  cry  or brief  phrase. For  if the
 speech  were  long  or  the  matter  subtle  then  we  clothe it  in the
 living  language  of  our  present   thought,  and   if  we   would  now
 relate  it  as  it was  spoken, we  must render  it anew,  as it  were a
 book,  into that  other tongue  - if  it is  preserved still  in learned
 lore. And  even so,  it is  the alien  voices that  we hear  using words
 in  our  memory,  seldom  ourselves  -  or  to  speak of  myself, never.
 It is true  indeed that  the Eldar  readily learn  to use  other tongues
 skilfully,  and  are  slow  to  forget  any  that  they   have  learned,
 but  these  remain  as  they  were  learned,  as  were  they  written in
 the  unchanging   pages  of a  book;*(8) whereas  the   coirea  quenya,
 the  language  of  thought,  grows  and  lives  within,  and   each  new
 stage  overlies  those  that  went   before,  as   the  acorn   and  the
 sapling are hidden in the tree.                                         
   Wherefore,  AElfwine,  if  thou  wilt  consider well  all that  I have
 said  to thee  at this  time, not  only what  is plainly  expressed, but
 also  what  is  therein  to  be  discovered  by  thought, thou  wilt now
 understand  that,  albeit  more  wittingly,  albeit  more   slowly,  the
 tongues  of  the  Quendi  change  in  a  manner  like  to   the  changes
 of  mortal  tongues.  And  that  if  one  of  the  Eldar  survives maybe
 the  chances  of  fifty  thousand  of  your  years,  then the  speech of
 his  childhood  will  be  sundered  from  the  speech  of  his  present,
 as  maybe  the  speech  of  some  city  or  kingdom   of  Men   will  be
 sundered  in  the  days of  its majesty  from the  tongue of  those that
 founded it of old.                                                      
   In this last  point also  our kindreds  are alike.  Greater as  is the
 skill  of the  Quendi to  mould things  to their  will and  delight, and
 to  overcome  the chances  of Ea,  yet they  are not  as the  Valar, and
 with  regard  to  the  might of  the World  and its  fate, they  are but
 weak  and  small.  Therefore  to  them  also  severance   is  severance,
 and  friends  and  kin  far  away  are  far  away.  Not even  the Seeing
                                                                        
  (* Save only in the strange event of the learning  by one  whole people
 of an alien speech, that thereafter they take into living and daily use,
 which  will  then  change  and  grow  with  them,  but their  own former
 tongue  pass away  or become  but a  matter of  lore. This  has happened
 only once in the history of  the Eldalie,  when the  Exiles took  up the
 speech  of  Beleriand,  the  Sindarin  tongue,  and  the   Noldorin  was
 preserved among them as a language of lore.)                            

 Stones  of  the  craftsmen  of  old  could  wholly unite  those that
 were  sundered,  and  they  and  the  masters  that could  make them
 were  few.  Therefore  change,  witting or  unwitting, was  not even
 long ages  ago shared,  nor did  it proceed  alike save  among those
 that  met  often  and  had converse  in labour  and in  mirth. Thus,
 swifter   or   slower,  yet   ever  inescapably,   the  far-sundered
 kindreds  of  the  Quendi were  sundered also  in speech:  the Avari
 from  the  Eldar;  and  the  Teleri  from the  other Eldar;  and the
 Sindar,  who abode  in Middle-earth,  from the  Teleri that  came at
 last  unto  Aman;  and  the  Exiles  of the  Noldor from  those that
 remained in the land of the Valar. And so still  it goes  in Middle-
 earth.                                                             
   Yet  long  since,  AElfwine,   the  fashion   of  the   World  was
 changed;  and  we   that  dwell   now  in   the  Ancient   West  are
 removed  from  the  circles  of  the  World,  and  in memory  is the
 greater  part  of our  being: so  that now  we preserve  rather than
 make   anew.   Wherefore,  though   even  in   Aman  -   beyond  the
 circles of Arda, yet still with Ea - change goes ever on,  until the
 End, be it slow  beyond perceiving  save in  ages of  time, nonethe-
 less here at last  in Eressea  our tongues  are steadfast;  and here
 over a wide sea of years we  speak now  still little  otherwise than
 we did - and those also that perished  - in  the wars  of Beleriand,
 when the Sun was young.                                            

                         Sin Quente Quendingoldo                       
                               Elendilenna.                            
                                                                      
                                  NOTES.                               
                                                                      
 1. The end of this sentence, from 'offspring of one yet older tree', is
    not found in version A.
 2. 'dying or dead' A.
 3. In the note to The Shibboleth of Feanor which I have omitted
    (p. 339) my father wrote:
      The Eldar had an instinctive grasp of the structure and sound-
      system of their speech as a whole, and this was increased by
      instruction; for in a sense all Eldarin languages were 'invented'
      languages, art-forms, not only inherited but also material engag-
      ing the active interest of their users and challenging awarely
      their own taste and inventiveness. This aspect was evidently still
      prominent in Valinor; though in Middle-earth it had waned, and
      the development of Sindarin had become, long before the arrival
      of the Noldorin exiles, mainly the product of unheeded change
      like the tongues of Men.

 4. Version A has here a footnote omitted in B:
      Thus it was that when the name Banyai of old was changed to
      Vanyar this was done only because the sound b was changed to
      v throughout the language (save in certain sequences) - and this
      change, it is recorded, began among the Vanyar; whereas for the
      showing of many the new device of r was brought in and used
      in all words of a certain shape - and this, it is said, was begun
      among the Noldor.
 5. namely is used here in the original but long lost sense of the word,
    'especially, above all'. The phrase is absent in A, which reads
    simply: 'Or some answer that the teaching ...'
 6. Here version A, as originally written, moves at once to the con-
    cluding paragraphs of the Dangweth, from 'But in this point at
    least our kindreds are alike ...' (p. 400) to its ending in the words
    'we speak now still little otherwise than they did who fought
    in Beleriand when the Sun was young.' These paragraphs were
    struck out, and all the intervening matter (from 'And to speak of
    memory, AElfwine ...') introduced, before they were reached again,
    somewhat changed in expression but not in content, and now
    virtually identical to the form in version B.
 7. This sentence, from 'for it is to our thought ...', is absent in A.
 8. The footnote here is absent in A.

                                    XV.                                 
                                                                       
                                OF LEMBAS.                              
                                                                       
 For the association of this brief work, extant  in a  single manuscript,
 with the Dangweth Pengolod see p. 395. It  is a  finely written  text of
 two pages, in style like  that of  the fine  manuscript of  the Dangweth
 which it accompanies, but not of the  same quality,  and on  thin paper.
 My father introduced  some illumination  at its  beginning in  red ball-
 point pen, and with the same pen wrote at  the head  of the  first page,
 above  the  title  Of  Lembas:  'Mana  i-coimas  in-Eldaron?' maquente
 Elendil (the same question as  appears on  the cardboard  folder enclos-
 ing the two texts, p. 395). At the  same time  he added  quotation marks
 at the beginning and end of the text, showing that it  is the  answer of
 Pengolod to AElfwine's question, 'What is the coimas  of the  Eldar?' It
 seems possible that these additions in ball-point pen were  added later,
 to make the text into a companion piece  to the  Dangweth; but  there is
 in any case no evidence for  date, beyond  the limits  of 1951  and 1959
 (p. 395).                                                              
                                                                       
                                Of Lembas.                              
                                                                       
 'This  food  the  Eldar  alone  knew  how  to  make.  It  was  made  for
 the  comfort  of  those  who  had  need  to  go  upon  a   long  journey
 in  the  wild,  or  of  the  hurt whose  life was  in peril.  Only these
 were  permitted  to  use  it. The  Eldar did  not give  it to  Men, save
 only to a few whom they loved, if they were in great need.*            
   The  Eldar  say  that  they first  received this  food from  the Valar
 in  the  beginning  of  their  days  in  the Great  Journey. For  it was
 made  of  a  kind   of  corn   which  Yavanna   brought  forth   in  the
 fields  of  Aman,  and  some   she  sent   to  them   by  the   hand  of
 Orome for their succour upon the long march.                           
                                                                       
 (* This was not done out of greed or  jealousy, although  at no  time in
 Middle-earth was there great store of this food;  but because  the Eldar
 had been commanded to  keep this  gift in  their own  power, and  not to
 make it common to the dwellers in mortal lands. For it is said  that, if
 mortals eat often of this bread, they become  weary of  their mortality,
 desiring to abide among the Elves, and longing for  the fields  of Aman,
 to which they cannot come.)                                            

 Since  it  came   from  Yavanna,   the  queen,   or  the   highest  among
 the  elven-women  of  any  people,  great  or  small,  had   the  keeping
 and  gift  of  the  lembas,  for  which  reason  she was  called massanie
 or besain: the Lady, or breadgiver.(1)                                   
   Now  this  corn  had  in  it  the  strong  life   of  Aman,   which  it
 could  impart  to  those  who  had  the  need  and   right  to   use  the
 bread.  If  it  was  sown  at  any  season,  save   in  frost,   it  soon
 sprouted   and  grew   swiftly,  though   it  did   not  thrive   in  the
 shadow   of   plants  of   Middle-earth  and   would  not   endure  winds
 that  came  out  of  the  North  while  Morgoth  dwelt  there.   Else  it
 needed  only  a  little  sunlight  to  ripen;  for  it  took  swiftly and
 multiplied all the vigour of any light that fell on it.                  
   The  Eldar  grew  it  in  guarded  lands  and  sunlit glades;  and they
 gathered  its  great  golden  ears,  each  one,  by  hand,  and   set  no
 blade  of  metal  to  it.  The  white  haulm  was  drawn  from  the earth
 in  like  manner,  and  woven  into  corn-leep (2) for the storing  of the
 grain:   no   worm   or   gnawing   beast   would  touch   that  gleaming
 straw,  and  rot  and  mould   and  other   evils  of   Middle-earth  did
 not assail it.                                                           
   From  the  ear  to  the  wafer  none  were  permitted  to  handle  this
 grain,   save    those   elven-women    who   were    called   Yavannildi
 (or  by  the  Sindar  the Ivonwin),(3) the   maidens  of   Yavanna;  and
 the  art  of  the  making  of  the  lembas,  which  they  learned  of the
 Valar, was a secret among them, and so ever has remained.'               
   Lembas  is  the  Sindarin  name,   and  comes   from  the   older  form
 lenn-mbass    'journey-bread'.    In   Quenya    it   was    most   often
 named coimas which is 'life-bread'.(4)                                    
                                                                         
                                              Quente Quengoldo.           
                                                                         
                                NOTES.                                    
                                                                         
 1. In the story of Turin it is said of Melian's gift of lembas to Beleg
    the  Bowman  (The  Silmarillion  p.  202)  that  it  was  'wrapped  in
    leaves of silver, and the  threads that  bound it  were sealed  at the
    knots with  the seal  of the  Queen, a  wafer of  white wax  shaped as
    a single  flower of  Telperion; for  according to  the customs  of the
    Eldalie  the  keeping  and  giving  of  lembas  belonged to  the Queen
    alone. In  nothing did  Melian show  greater favour  to Turin  than in
    this gift; for  the Eldar  had never  before allowed  Men to  use this
    waybread, and seldom did so again.'                                   
      With  'massanie  or  besain'  cf.  the  entry  in  the  Etymologies,
    V.372,  stem  MBAS  'knead':  Quenya  masta,  Noldorin  bast, 'bread';
    also the words lembas,  coimas, explained  at the  end of  the present

    text as 'journey-bread' and 'life-bread'. Above the  ain of  besain is
    faintly pencilled oneth. sc. besoneth.                                
       In  using  the word  Lady here  my father  no doubt  had an  eye to
    its origin in Old English hlaef-dige,  of which  the first  element is
    hlaf  (modern  English  loaf)  with  changed vowel,  and the  second a
    derivative  of the  stem dig-  'knead' (to  which dough  is ultimately
    related); cf. lord from hlaf-weard 'bread-keeper'.                    
 2. haulm: the stalks of cultivated plants  left when  the ears  or pods
    have been gathered;  corn-leeps: leep  (leap) is  an old  dialect word
    for a basket (Old English leap).                                      
 3. Ivonwin: the  Noldorin (i.e.  later Sindarin)  form Ivann  for Yavanna
    appears in the Etymologies, V.399, stem YAB 'fruit'.                  
 4. This was written at the same time as the rest of the manuscript, but
    set  in  as  printed,  and  was  excluded  from  the  quotation  marks
    added  later  to  the  body of  the text.  The words  Quente Quengoldo
    ('Thus spoke Pengolod') also belong to the time of writing.           
