     PART FOUR.
                
 UNFINISHED TALES.

                                     XVI.                                  
                                                                          
                               THE NEW SHADOW.                             
                                                                          
 This story, or fragment of a story, is  now published  for the  first time,
 though  its  existence has  long been  known.(1) The textual history is not
 complicated, but there is a surprising amount of it.                      
  There is, first, a collection  of material  in manuscript,  beginning with
 two sides of a page carrying the original opening of  the story:  this goes
 no  further  than  the  recollection of  the young  man (here  called Egal-
 moth)(2) of the  rebuke  and  lecture  that he  received from Borlas (3) when
 caught by him stealing  apples from  his orchard  as a  boy. There  is then
 a text, which I will call 'A', written in rapid but clear script,  and this
 extends  as  far  as  the  story  ever  went  (here  also  the  young man's
 name  is  Egalmoth).  This was  followed by  a typescript  in top  copy and
 carbon 'B', which  follows A  pretty closely  and ends  at the  same point:
 there  are  a  great  many small  changes in  expression, but  nothing that
 alters  the  narrative  in  even minor  ways (the  young man,  however, now
 bears  the  name  Arthael).   There  is   also  an   amanuensis  typescript
 derived from B, without independent value.(4)                              
  Finally,  there  is  another  typescript,  'C',  also  with  carbon  copy,
 which  extends  only  to  the  point  in the  story where  the young  man -
 here named Saelon (5) - leaves Borlas in  his garden  'searching back  in his
 mind  to  discover  how   this  strange   and  alarming   conversation  had
 begun' (p. 416). This text  C treats  B much  as B  treats A:  altering the
 expression (fairly radically in places), but in no way altering  the story,
 or giving to it new bearings.                                             
  It  seems  strange  that my  father should  have made  no less  than three
 versions,  each  showing  very  careful  attention  to  improvement  of the
 text  in detail,  when the  story had  proceeded for  so short  a distance.
 The  evidence  of  the  typewriters  used  suggests,  however,  that  C was
 made  very  substantially  later.  The  machine  on which  B was  typed was
 the one he used in the  1950s before  the acquisition  of that  referred to
 in  X.300, while  the italic  script of  A could  with some  probability be
 ascribed to that time; but the typewriter used for C was his last.(6)     
  In  his  Biography  (p.  228)  Humphrey  Carpenter  stated  that  in  1965
 my  father  'found  a  typescript  of  "The  New   Shadow",  a   sequel  to
 The  Lord  of  the  Rings  which  he  had  begun  a   long  time   ago  but
 had  abandoned  after  a  few  pages....  He  sat up  till four  a.m. read-
 ing it and thinking about  it.' I  do not  know the  source of  this state-
 ment;  but  further  evidence is  provided by  a used  envelope, postmarked

 8 January 1968,  on the  back of  which my  father scribbled  a passage
 concerning  Borlas,  developing  further  the  account  of  his circum-
 stances at the time of the opening of the story (see note 14).  This is
 certain evidence that he  was still  concerned with  The New  Shadow as
 late as 1968; and since the passage  roughed out  here would  follow on
 from the point reached in the typescript C (see note 14) it  seems very
 likely that C dates from that time.                                    
   Such as the evidence is, then, the original work (represented  by the
 manuscript A and the typescript B) derives from the 1950s. In  a letter
 of 13 May 1964 (Letters no.256) he wrote:                              
   I did begin a story  placed about  100 years  after the  Downfall [of
 Sauron],  but  it  proved both  sinister and  depressing. Since  we are
 dealing with  Men it  is inevitable  that we  should be  concerned with
 the  most  regrettable  feature  of their  nature: their  quick satiety
 with good. So  that the  people of  Gondor in  times of  peace, justice
 and  prosperity,  would become  discontented and  restless -  while the
 dynasts   descended   from   Aragorn  would   become  just   kings  and
 governors - like Denethor or worse. I  found that  even so  early there
 was  an  outcrop  of  revolutionary  plots,  about  a centre  of secret
 Satanistic  religion;  while  Gondorian  boys  were  playing  at  being
 Orcs and going round doing damage.  I could  have written  a 'thriller'
 about  the  plot  and its  discovery and  overthrow -  but it  would be
 just that. Not worth doing.                                            
 From the evidence given above, however, it is seen that his interest in
 the  story  was  subsequently  reawakened, and  even reached  the point
 of making  a new  (though incomplete)  version of  what he  had written
 of it years before. But in 1972,  fifteen months  before his  death, he
 wrote to his friend Douglas Carter (Letters no.338):                   
   I have written nothing beyond the first few years of the  Fourth Age.
 (Except  the  beginning  of  a  tale supposed  to refer  to the  end of
 the  reign  of Eldarion  about 100  years after  the death  of Aragorn.
 Then  I  of  course  discovered  that  the  King's Peace  would contain
 no  tales worth  recounting; and  his wars  would have  little interest
 after the overthrow of Sauron;  but that  almost certainly  a restless-
 ness  would  appear  about  then,  owing to  the (it  seems) inevitable
 boredom  of  Men  with  the  good:  there  would  be  secret  societies
 practising dark cults, and 'orc-cults' among adolescents.)             
 To form the text that now follows I print C so far as it goes, with the
 sinister young man given the name Saelon;  and from  that point  I give
 the text of B, changing the name from Arthael in B to Saelon.          
                                                                       
                             THE NEW SHADOW.                             
                                                                       
    This tale begins in the days of Eldarion, son of that Elessar of

 whom  the  histories  have  much  to  tell.  One  hundred  and five
 years had passed since the fall of the Dark  Tower,(7) and  the story
 of  that  time  was  little  heeded now  by most  of the  people of
 Gondor,  though  a  few were  still living  who could  remember the
 War  of  the  Ring  as  a  shadow upon  their early  childhood. One
 of  these  was old  Borlas of  Pen-arduin. He  was the  younger son
 of  Beregond, the  first Captain  of the  Guard of  Prince Faramir,
 who  had  removed  with  his  lord  from  the  City  to   the  Emyn
 Arnen.(8)                                                          
                                                                   
   'Deep indeed run the roots of Evil,' said Borlas, 'and  the black
 sap is strong in them. That tree will never be  slain. Let  men hew
 it as often as they may, it will thrust up shoots again as  soon as
 they turn aside. Not even at the  Feast of  Felling should  the axe
 be hung up on the wall! '                                          
   'Plainly you  think you  are speaking  wise words,'  said Saelon.
 'I guess that by the gloom  in your  voice, and  by the  nodding of
 your  head.  But  what  is  this  all about?  Your life  seems fair
 enough still, for  an aged  man that  does not  now go  far abroad.
 Where  have  you  found  a  shoot  of  your  dark tree  growing? In
 your own garden?'                                                  
   Borlas  looked  up,  and  as  he  glanced  keenly  at  Saelon  he
 wondered  suddenly  if  this  young  man,  usually  gay  and  often
 half  mocking,  had more  in his  mind than  appeared in  his face.
 Borlas  had  not  intended  to  open  his heart  to him,  but being
 burdened  in  thought  he had  spoken aloud,  more to  himself than
 his  companion.  Saelon  did  not  return his  glance. He  was hum-
 ming softly,  while he  trimmed a  whistle of  green willow  with a
 sharp nail-knife.                                                  
   The two were sitting in an  arbour near  the steep  eastern shore
 of Anduin where it flowed  about the  feet of  the hills  of Arnen.
 They  were  indeed  in  Borlas's  garden  and his  small grey-stone
 house  could  be seen  through the  trees above  them on  the hill-
 slope facing west. Borlas looked at the river, and at the  trees in
 their June leaves, and then far off to the towers of the City under
 the  glow  of  late  afternoon.  'No,  not in  my garden,'  he said
 thoughtfully.                                                      
   'Then  why  are you  so troubled?'  asked Saelon.  'If a  man has
 a fair garden with strong walls,  then he  has as  much as  any man
 can  govern  for  his  own  pleasure.'  He paused.  'As long  as he
 keeps the strength of  life in  him,' he  added. 'When  that fails,
 why trouble about any lesser ill? For then he  must soon  leave his
 garden at last, and others must look to the weeds.'                

   Borlas  sighed,  but  he  did  not  answer,  and Saelon  went on:
 'But  there are  of course  some who  will not  be content,  and to
 their life's end they trouble their hearts about  their neighbours,
 and  the  City,  and the  Realm, and  all the  wide world.  You are
 one of them, Master Borlas, and have  ever been  so, since  I first
 knew  you  as  a boy  that you  caught in  your orchard.  Even then
 you were not content to let ill alone: to deter me with  a beating,
 or  to  strengthen  your fences.  No. You  were grieved  and wanted
 to improve me. You had me into your house and talked to me.       
   'I  remember  it  well.  "Orcs'  work,"  you  said   many  times.
 "Stealing good fruit, well, I suppose that is  no worse  than boys'
 work,  if  they  are  hungry, or  their fathers  are too  easy. But
 pulling down unripe apples  to break  or cast  away! That  is Orcs'
 work. How did you come to do such a thing, lad?"                  
   'Orcs'  work!  I  was angered  by that,  Master Borlas,  and too
 proud  to  answer,  though it  was in  my heart  to say  in child's
 words: "If it was wrong for a boy to  steal an  apple to  eat, then
 it is wrong to steal one to play  with. But  not more  wrong. Don't
 speak to me of Orcs' work, or I may show you some!"               
   'It was a mistake, Master Borlas. For  I had  heard tales  of the
 Orcs and their doings,  but I  had not  been interested  till then.
 You  turned  my  mind  to  them.  I  grew out  of petty  thefts (my
 father was not too easy), but I did  not forget  the Orcs.  I began
 to feel hatred and  think of  the sweetness  of revenge.  We played
 at  Orcs,  I  and  my friends,  and sometimes  I thought:  "Shall I
 gather  my  band  and  go  and  cut  down his  trees? Then  he will
 think that  the Orcs  have really  returned." But  that was  a long
 time ago,' Saelon ended with a smile.                             
   Borlas  was  startled.  He  was  now  receiving  confidences, not
 giving  them.  And  there  was something  disquieting in  the young
 man's   tone,  something   that  made   him  wonder   whether  deep
 down, as deep as the roots of the dark trees, the  childish resent-
 ment did not still linger. Yes, even  in the  heart of  Saelon, the
 friend  of  his own  son, and  the young  man who  had in  the last
 few  years  shown  him  much  kindness in  his loneliness.(9) At any
 rate he resolved to say no more of his own thoughts to him.       
   'Alas!' he said, 'we all make mistakes. I  do not  claim wisdom,
 young man,  except maybe  the little  that one  may glean  with the
 passing  of  the  years.  From  which  I   know  well   enough  the
 sad  truth  that  those  who  mean  well  may  do  more  harm  than
 those who let things be.  I am  sorry now  for what  I said,  if it
 roused hate in your heart. Though I still think  that it  was just:

 untimely  maybe,  and  yet  true.  Surely  even  a  boy   must  under-
 stand that fruit is fruit, and does not reach its full being  until it
 is ripe; so that to misuse it unripe is to do worse  than just  to rob
 the  man  that  has  tended  it:  it  robs the  world, hinders  a good
 thing  from  fulfilment. Those  who do  so join  forces with  all that
 is amiss, with  the blights  and the  cankers and  the ill  winds. And
 that was the way of Orcs.'                                           
   'And  is  the  way  of Men  too,' said  Saelon. 'No!  I do  not mean
 of  wild  men  only,  or  those  who  grew  "under  the   Shadow",  as
 they  say.  I  mean  all  Men.  I  would not  misuse green  fruit now,
 but  only  because  I  have  no  longer  any  use  for  unripe apples,
 not  for  your  lofty  reasons,  Master  Borlas.  Indeed I  think your
 reasons  as  unsound  as an  apple that  has been  too long  in store.
 To  trees  all  Men  are  Orcs.  Do  Men  consider  the  fulfilment of
 the  life-story  of  a  tree  before  they cut  it down?  For whatever
 purpose: to have its room for  tilth, to  use its  flesh as  timber or
 as  fuel,  or  merely  to  open the  view? If  trees were  the judges,
 would  they  set  Men  above  Orcs,  or   indeed  above   the  cankers
 and  blights?  What  more  right,  they  might ask,  have Men  to feed
 on their juices than blights?'                                       
   'A  man,'  said  Borlas,  'who  tends  a  tree  and  guards  it from
 blights  and  many  other  enemies  does  not  act  like  an Orc  or a
 canker. If he eats its fruit, he does it no injury. It  produces fruit
 more  abundantly  than  it  needs  for  its  own  purpose:   the  con-
 tinuing of its kind.'                                                
   'Let him eat the fruit then, or play with it,'  said Saelon.  'But I
 spoke  of  slaying:  hewing  and  burning;  and  by  what   right  men
 do such things to trees.'                                            
   'You  did  not.  You  spoke  of  the  judgement  of  trees  in these
 matters.  But  trees  are  not  judges.  The children  of the  One are
 the  masters.  My  judgement  as  one  of   them  you   know  already.
 The evils  of the  world were  not at  first in  the great  Theme, but
 entered  with  the  discords  of  Melkor.  Men   did  not   come  with
 these  discords;  they  entered  afterwards  as  a  new  thing  direct
 from  Eru,  the  One,  and  therefore  they  are called  His children,
 and  all  that  was  in  the  Theme  they  have,  for their  own good,
 the right  to use  - rightly,  without pride  or wantonness,  but with
 reverence.(10)                                                       
   'If  the  smallest  child  of a  woodman feels  the cold  of winter,
 the proudest tree is not  wronged, if  it is  bidden to  surrender its
 flesh  to  warm  the  child  with  fire.  But the  child must  not mar
 the tree in play or spite,  rip its  bark or  break its  branches. And

 the  good  husbandman  will use  first, if  he can,  dead wood  or an
 old tree; he will not fell a young tree and leave it  to rot,  for no
 better reason than his pleasure in axe-play. That is orkish.         
   'But it is even as I said: the roots of Evil lie deep, and from far
 off  comes  the  poison  that  works  in  us, so  that many  do these
 things  -  at  times,  and become  then indeed  like the  servants of
 Melkor. But the Orcs did  these things  at all  times; they  did harm
 with  delight  to  all  things that  could suffer  it, and  they were
 restrained  only  by  lack  of  power,  not  by  either  prudence  or
 mercy. But we have spoken enough of this.'                           
   'Why!' said  Saelon. 'We  have hardly  begun. It  was not  of your
 orchard,  nor  your  apples,  nor  of  me,  that  you  were  thinking
 when  you  spoke  of  the  re-arising  of  the  dark  tree.  What you
 were  thinking of,  Master Borlas,  I can  guess nonetheless.  I have
 eyes and  ears, and  other senses,  Master.' His  voice sank  low and
 could  scarcely  be  heard  above  the  murmur  of  a   sudden  chill
 wind  in  the  leaves,  as  the  sun  sank  behind  Mindolluin.  'You
 have  heard  then  the  name?'  With  hardly  more  than   breath  he
 formed it. 'Of Herumor?'(11)                                         
   Borlas  looked  at  him   with  amazement   and  fear.   His  mouth
 made tremulous motions of speech, but no sound came from it.         
   'I  see  that  you  have,'  said Saelon.  'And you  seem astonished
 to learn  that I  have heard  it also.  But you  are not  more aston-
 ished than I was to see that  this name  has reached  you. For,  as I
 say,  I  have keen  eyes and  ears, but  yours are  now dim  even for
 daily  use,  and  the  matter  has  been  kept  as secret  as cunning
 could contrive.'                                                     
   'Whose   cunning?'   said  Borlas,   suddenly  and   fiercely.  The
 sight of his eyes might be dim, but they blazed now with anger.      
   'Why,  those  who  have  heard the  call of  the name,  of course,'
 answered  Saelon  unperturbed.  'They  are  not  many  yet,   to  set
 against  all  the  people  of  Gondor,  but  the  number  is growing.
 Not all are  content since  the Great  King died,  and fewer  now are
 afraid.'                                                             
   'So I  have guessed,'  said Borlas,  'and it  is that  thought that
 chills  the  warmth  of  summer  in  my  heart.  For  a man  may have
 a garden with strong walls,  Saelon, and  yet find  no peace  or con-
 tent there.  There are  some enemies  that such  walls will  not keep
 out; for his garden is only part of a guarded realm after all.  It is
 to the walls of the realm  that he  must look  for his  real defence.
 But  what is  the call?  What would  they do?'  he cried,  laying his
 hand on the young man's knee.                                        

   'I  will  ask you  a question  first before  I answer  yours,' said
 Saelon;  and  now  he  looked  searchingly  at  the  old   man.  'How
 have  you,  who  sit  here  in  the  Emyn  Arnen  and  seldom  go now
 even  to  the  City  -  how  have  you  heard  the  whispers  of this
 name?'                                                              
   Borlas  looked   down  on   the  ground   and  clasped   his  hands
 between  his  knees.  For some  time he  did not  answer. At  last he
 looked  up  again;  his  face  had  hardened and  his eyes  were more
 wary. 'I will not answer that, Saelon,'  he said.  'Not until  I have
 asked  you  yet  another question.  First tell  me,' he  said slowly,
 'are you one of those who have listened to the,call?'               
   A   strange   smile   flickered  about   the  young   man's  mouth.
 'Attack is the best defence,' he answered, 'or  so the  Captains tell
 us; but when both sides use this counsel there is a clash  of battle.
 So I will counter you. I will  not answer  you, Master  Borlas, until
 you tell me: are you one of those who have listened, or no?'        
   'How can you think it?' cried Borlas.                             
   'And how can you think it?' asked Saelon.                        
   'As  for  me,'  said  Borlas,  'do not  all my  words give  you the
 answer?'                                                            
   'But  as  for  me,  you would  say,' said  Saelon, 'my  words might
 make  me  doubtful?  Because  I  defended  a  small  boy   who  threw
 unripe  apples  at   his  playmates   from  the   name  of   Orc?  Or
 because  I  spoke  of the  suffering of  trees at  the hands  of men?
 Master  Borlas,  it  is  unwise  to  judge a  man's heart  from words
 spoken  in  an  argument  without  respect  for  your  opinions. They
 may  be  meant  to  disturb  you.  Pert  maybe,  but  possibly better
 than  a  mere echo.(12) I do not doubt  that many  of those  we spoke
 of  would  use  words  as solemn  as yours,  and speak  reverently of
 the  Great  Theme  and  such  things  - in  your presence.  Well, who
 shall answer first?'                                                
   'The  younger  it would  have been  in the  courtesy of  old,' said
 Borlas;  'or  between  men  counted  as  equals,  the  one   who  was
 first asked. You are both.'                                         
   Saelon  smiled.  'Very  well,'  he  said.  'Let  me see:  the first
 question  that  you  asked  unanswered  was: what  is the  call, what
 would  they  do? Can  you find  no answer  in the  past for  all your
 age  and lore?  I am  young and  less learned.  Still, if  you really
 wish  to  know,  I  could  perhaps  make  the  whispers   clearer  to
 you.'                                                              
   He  stood  up.  The  sun  had  set  behind  the  mountains; shadows
 were  deepening.  The  western wall  of Borlas's  house on  the hill-

 side was  yellow in  the afterglow,  but the  river below  was dark.
 He looked  up at  the sky,  and then  away down  the Anduin.  'It is
 a fair evening still,' he said, 'but the wind has  shifted eastward.
 There will be clouds over the moon tonight.'                       
   'Well, what of it?'  said Borlas,  shivering a  little as  the air
 chilled.  'Unless  you  mean  only  to  warn  an  old man  to hasten
 indoors  and  keep his  bones from  aching.' He  rose and  turned to
 the  path  towards  his  house,  thinking that  the young  man meant
 to  say  no  more;  but  Saelon  stepped  up beside  him and  laid a
 hand on his arm.                                                   
   'I warn  you rather  to clothe  yourself warmly  after nightfall,'
 he said. 'That is, if you wish  to learn  more; for  if you  do, you
 will come with me  on a  journey tonight.  I will  meet you  at your
 eastern gate behind your house; or at  least I  shall pass  that way
 as soon as it is full dark, and you shall come or  not as  you will.
 I  shall  be clad  in black,  and anyone  who goes  with me  must be
 clad  alike.  Farewell  now,  Master   Borlas!  Take   counsel  with
 yourself while the light lasts.'                                   
   With   that   Saelon   bowed   and   turned   away,   going  along
 another  path  that  ran  near  the  edge of  the steep  shore, away
 northward  to  the  house  of his father.(13) He disappeared  round a
 bend while his last words were still echoing in Borlas's ears.     
                                                                   
   For  some  while  after  Saelon  had  gone  Borlas   stood  still,
 covering his  eyes and  resting his  brow against  the cool  bark of
 a tree beside the path. As  he stood  he searched  back in  his mind
 to  discover  how  this  strange   and  alarming   conversation  had
 begun. What he would do after nightfall he did not yet consider.
   He had  not been  in good  spirits since  the spring,  though well
 enough  in  body  for  his  age,  which burdened  him less  than his
 loneliness.(14) Since his son, Berelach,(15) had  gone away  again in
 April - he  was in  the Ships,  and now  lived mostly  near Pelargir
 where  his  duty  was  -  Saelon had  been most  attentive, whenever
 he  was  at  home.  He  went much  about the  lands of  late. Borlas
 was  not  sure  of his  business, though  he understood  that, among
 other  interests,  he  dealt  in  timber. He  brought news  from all
 over the kingdom to his old friend. Or to  his friend's  old father;
 for  Berelach  had  been  his  constant   companion  at   one  time,
 though they seemed seldom to meet nowadays.                        
   'Yes, that was it,' Borlas said to himself. 'I spoke to  Saelon of
 Pelargir,  quoting  Berelach.  There  has  been some  small disquiet
 down  at  the  Ethir:  a few  shipmen have  disappeared, and  also a

 small vessel of the Fleet. Nothing much, according to Berelach.
   '"Peace makes things slack," he  said, I  remember, in  the voice
 of an  under-officer. "Well,  they went  off on  some ploy  of their
 own,  I  suppose -  friends in  one of  the western  havens, perhaps
 -  without  leave and  without a  pilot, and  they were  drowned. It
 serves them right. We get too few real sailors these days.  Fish are
 more profitable.  But at  least all  know that  the west  coasts are
 not safe for the unskilled."                                       
   'That was all. But I spoke of it to  Saelon, and  asked if  he had
 heard  anything  of  it  away  south.  "Yes," he  said, "I  did. Few
 were  satisfied   with  the   official  view.   The  men   were  not
 unskilled;  they  were  sons of  fishermen. And  there have  been no
 storms off the coasts for a long time.>                            
   As  he  heard  Saelon  say  this,  suddenly Borlas  had remembered
 the   other  rumours,   the  rumours   that Othrondir (16) had  spoken
 of. It  was he  who had  used the  word 'canker'.  And then  half to
 himself Borlas had spoken aloud about the Dark Tree.               
   He  uncovered  his  eyes   and  fondled   the  shapely   trunk  of
 the  tree  that  he  had  leaned  on,  looking  up  at  its  shadowy
 leaves  against the  clear fading  sky. A  star glinted  through the
 branches. Softly he spoke again, as if to the tree.                
   'Well, what is to be done  now? Clearly  Saelon is  in it.  But is
 it  clear?  There  was  the  sound  of  mockery  in  his  words, and
 scorn  of  the  ordered  life  of  Men.  He   would  not   answer  a
 straight question. The black  clothes! And  yet -  why invite  me to
 go with him? Not  to convert  old Borlas!  Useless. Useless  to try:
 no  one  would  hope  to  win  over  a man  who remembered  the Evil
 of old, however far  off. Useless  if one  succeeded: old  Borlas is
 of  no  use  any  longer as  a tool  for any  hand. Saelon  might be
 trying  to  play  the  spy,  seeking  to find  out what  lies behind
 the  whispers.  Black  might  be a  disguise, or  an aid  to stealth
 by  night.  But again,  what could  I do  to help  on any  secret or
 dangerous errand? I should be better out of the way.'              
   With  that  a  cold  thought  touched Borlas's  heart. Put  out of
 the  way -  was that  it? He  was to  be lured  to some  place where
 he  could disappear,  like the  Shipmen? The  invitation to  go with
 Saelon  had  been  given  only  after  he  had  been  startled  into
 revealing  that  he  knew  of  the  whispers  -  had even  heard the
 name. And he had declared his hostility.                           
   This   thought   decided  Borlas,   and  he   knew  that   he  was
 resolved now to stand robed in black at the gate  in the  first dark
 of  night.  He was  challenged, and  he would  accept. He  smote his

 palm  against  the  tree.  'I  am not  a dotard  yet, Neldor,'  he said;
 'but death is  not so  far off  that I  shall lose  many good  years, if
 I lose the throw.'                                                      
   He   straightened   his  back   and  lifted   his  head,   and  walked
 away  up  the  path,  slowly  but  steadily.  The  thought  crossed  his
 mind  even  as  he  stepped   over  the   threshold:  'Perhaps   I  have
 been  preserved  so  long  for  this  purpose:  that  one  should  still
 live,  hale  in  mind,  who  remembers  what   went  before   the  Great
 Peace. Scent has a  long memory.  I think  I could  still smell  the old
 Evil, and know it for what it is.'                                      
                                                                        
   The   door  under   the  porch   was  open;   but  the   house  behind
 was  darkling.   There  seemed   none  of   the  accustomed   sounds  of
 evening,  only  a  soft  silence,  a dead  silence. He  entered, wonder-
 ing a  little. He  called, but  there was  no answer.  He halted  in the
 narrow  passage  that  ran  through  the  house,  and  it   seemed  that
 he  was  wrapped  in  a  blackness:  not  a glimmer  of twilight  of the
 world  outside  remained  there.  Suddenly  he  smelt   it,  or   so  it
 seemed,  though  it  came  as  it  were  from  within  outwards  to  the
 sense: he smelt the old Evil and knew it for what it was.               
                                                                        
 Here,  both  in  A and  B, The  New Shadow  ends, and  it will  never be
 known what Borlas  found in  his dark  and silent  house, nor  what part
 Saelon  was  playing and  what his  intentions were.  There would  be no
 tales worth the telling in the days of the King's Peace, my father said;
 and he disparaged the story that he had begun: 'I  could have  written a
 "thriller"  about  the plot  and its  discovery and  overthrow -  but it
 would be just that.  Not worth  doing.' It  would nonetheless  have been
 a very remarkable 'thriller', and one may well  view its  early abandon-
 ment with regret. But it may be that  his reason  for abandoning  it was
 not only this - or perhaps rather that in saying this he  was expressing
 a deeper conviction: that the vast  structure of  story, in  many forms,
 that he had raised came to its true end  in the  Downfall of  Sauron. As
 he  wrote  (Morgoth's  Ring  p.  404):  'Sauron was  a problem  that Men
 had to deal with finally: the first of the  many concentrations  of Evil
 into definite power-points that  they would  have to  combat, as  it was
 also the last of  those in  "mythological" personalized  (but non-human)
 form.'                                                                  
                                                                        
                                  NOTES.                                 
                                                                        
 1.   It  has  also  been  read  publicly,  by myself  (Sheldonian Theatre,
      Oxford,  18  August  1992).  At  that  time,  not  having   studied  the
      papers  with  sufficient  care,  I  was under  the impression  that text
      B  was  the  latest,  and  it was  this that  I read  - the  young man's
      name being therefore Arthael.                                      

  2.  In the  original draft  of the  opening of  the story  (preceding A)
      the  name  was  first  written   Almoth,  but   changed  immediately
      to  Egalmoth.  The  original  Egalmoth  was the  lord of  the people
      of  the  Heavenly  Arch in  Gondolin; it  was also  the name  of the
      eighteenth Ruling Steward of Gondor.                                
  3.  Borlas was the name of the eldest son of  Bor the  Easterling, later
      changed to Borlad (XI.240);  he was  slain in  the Battle  of Unnum-
      bered Tears, faithful to the Eldar.                                 
  4.  The  first page  of this  was typed  on the  machine that  my father
      first  used  about the  end of  1958 (X.300),  and the  remainder on
      the previous one (that used for text B).                            
  5.  The name Saelon is  found in  drafting for  the Athrabeth  Finrod ah
      Andreth  as  a  name  of the  wise-woman Andreth  of the  Edain, who
      debated with Finrod; in the final text  this became  Saelind, trans-
      lated 'Wise-heart' (X.305, 351-2).                                  
  6.  This is the machine  on which  the very  late 'historical-etymologi-
      cal' essays were typed, and which I use to this day.                
  7.  A puzzling question is raised  by this  dating, concerning  the his-
      torical period in which the story is set.  In the  opening paragraph
      the original draft (preceding A) has:                               
         It  was in  the days  of Eldarion,  son of  that Elessar  of whom
      ancient  histories  have  much  to  tell,  that  this  strange thing
      occurred.  It  was  indeed less  than one  hundred and  twenty years
      since the fall of the Dark Tower ...                                
      The first complete  text, the  manuscript A,  has: 'Nearly  one hun-
      dred and ten years had  passed since  the fall  of the  Dark Tower',
      and this is repeated in B. My father typed the  opening page  of the
      late text C in two closely similar forms, and in the first  of these
      he  retained the  reading of  A and  B, but  in the  second (printed
      here) he wrote 'One hundred and five years'. In  the letter  of 1964
      cited  on  p.  410  he said  'about 100  years after  the Downfall',
      and in that  of 1972  (ibid.) 'about  100 years  after the  death of
      Aragorn'.  We  thus have,  in chronological  order of  their appear-
      ance,  the  following  dates  after  the  fall  of  the  Dark Tower:
      less   than   120   years   (original   opening   of   the   story);
      nearly 110  years (A and B);
      about  100  years (letter of 1964);
      nearly 110  years (first  copy of  the opening  page of  C, c.1968);
      105 years (second copy of the opening page of C).                   
      The  fall  of the  Dark Tower  took place  in the  year 3019  of the
      Third  Age, and  that Age  was held  to have  been concluded  at the
      end of 3021; thus the dates from the fall of the Tower (in  the same
      order, and  making them  for brevity  definite rather  than approxi-
      mate)  are  Fourth  Age  118,  108,  98, 108,  103. Thus  every date
      given in the texts (and that in the letter of 1964) places the story
      before  the  death  of  Aragorn  -  which took  place in  Fourth Age

      120  =  Shire  Reckoning  1541  (Appendix  B, at  end); yet  every one
      of the texts refers it to the days of his son Eldarion.               
         The solution of this must lie in the fact that in the First Edition
      of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  (ibid.)  Aragorn's  death   was  placed
      twenty  years  earlier,  in  Shire  Reckoning  1521,  i.e.  Fourth Age
      100. The date  given in  the letter  of 1964  ('about 100  years after
      the Downfall') is indeed  too early  even according  to the  dating of
      the First  Edition, but  that is  readily explained  as being  a rough
      approximation  appropriate  in  the  context.  More  puzzling  are the
      dates given in the two versions of the first page of the late  text C"
      which  do  not  agree  with  the  date  of  Aragorn's  death   in  the
      Second Edition (1966).  The first  of these  ('nearly 110  years') can
      be  explained as  merely taking  up the  reading of  text B,  which my
      father  was following;  but in  the second  version he  evidently gave
      thought  to  the  date, for  he changed  it to  '105 years':  that is,
      Fourth Age 103. I am at a loss to explain this.                       
         In  the  letter  of 1972  he gave  a much  later date,  placing the
      story  in about  Fourth Age  220 (and  giving to  Eldarion a  reign of
      at least 100 years).                                                  
  8.  See  The  Return  of  the King  (chapter The  Steward and  the King),
      p. 247.                                                               
  9.  Both  A  and  B  have  'sons'  for  'son',  and they  do not  have the
      words 'in his  loneliness'. With  the latter  difference cf.  the last
      sentence of the C text and its difference from B (note 14).           
 10.  This  passage  in  the  argument was  expressed rather  differently in
      B (which was following A almost exactly):                             
           'A  man,'  said  Borlas,  'who tends  a tree  and guards  it from
      blights,  and  eats  its  fruit  - which  it produces  more abundantly
      than  its  mere  life-need;  not  that eating  the fruit  need destroy
      the seed - does not act like a canker, nor like an Orc.               
           'But as for the cankers, I wonder. They live,  it might  be said,
      and yet their life  is death.  I do  not believe  that they  were part
      of  the Music  of the  Ainur, unless  in the  discords of  Melkor. And
      so with Orcs.'                                                        
           'And what of Men?' said Arthael.                                 
           'Why  do  you  ask?'  said  Borlas.  'You  know, surely,  what is
      taught?  They  were  not at  first in  the Great  Music, but  they did
      not  enter  with  the  discords  of  Melkor:  they came  from Iluvatar
      himself,  and  therefore  they  are  called the  Children of  God. And
      all that is in the Music they  have a  right to  use -  rightly: which
      is with reverence, not with pride or wantonness.'                     
 11.  The  name   Herumor  is   found  in   Of  the   Rings  of   Power  and
      the  Third  Age  (The  Silmarillion  p.  293)  as  that of  a renegade
      Numenorean   who   became   powerful   among   the  Haradrim   in  the
      time before the war of the Last Alliance.                             

                                                                     
                                                                           
  12. B  (exactly  repeating  A)  has  here:  'No, Master  Borlas, in  such a
      matter  one  cannot  judge  words  by  the shape  they are  spoken in.'
  13. A  has  here  'his  father  Duilin'.  This,  like Egalmoth,  is another
      name  from  the  story  of  Gondolin:  Duilin  was  the  leader  of the
      people  of  the  Swallow,  who  fell from  the battlements  when 'smit-
      ten by a fiery bolt of the Balrogs' (II.178). It was also  the original
      name  of  the  father  of  Flinding,  later  Gwindor,   of  Nargothrond
      (II.79, etc.): Duilin > Fuilin > Guilin.                              
  14. At this point C comes to an end, at  the foot  of a  page. B  has here:
      'He  had  not  been  in  good  health  since  the  spring; old  age was
      gaining  upon  him'  (see  note  9).  From   here  onwards,   as  noted
      earlier,  I  follow  text  B, changing  the name  Arthael to  Saelon. -
      The  passage  written  on  an  envelope  postmarked  8   January  1968,
      referred  to  on  pp. 409-10,  would follow  from this  point in  C; it
      reads (the last phrases being very difficult to make out):            
         For  he  lived  now  with only  two old  servants, retired  from the
      Prince's  guard,  in  which  he  himself  had  once  held  office. Long
      ago  his  daughter  had  married  and  now  lived  in distant  parts of
      the  realm,  and  then  ten  years  ago  his  wife  had died.  Time had
      softened  his  grief,  while Berelach  [his son]  was still  near home.
      He  was  his  youngest  child  and  only  son,  and  was in  the King's
      ships;  for  several  years  he  had  been  stationed  at  the  Harlond
      within   easy  reach   by  water,   and  spent   much  time   with  his
      father.  But  it  was  three  years  now  since  he  had  been  given a
      high  command,  and  was  often  long   at  sea,   and  when   on  land
      duty  still  held  him  at  Pelargir  far  away.  His  visits  had been
      few  and  brief.  Saelon,   who  formerly   came  only   when  Berelach
      [?  ...  been  his  old  friend]  was  with Borlas,  but had  been most
      attentive  when  he  was  in  Emyn   Arnen.  Always   in  to   talk  or
      bring news, or [?run] any service he could                           
      For  the  site  of  'the  quays and  landings of  the Harlond'  see The
      Return of the King (chapter Minas Tirith), p. 22.                     
  15. Borlas  is  described  at  the beginning  of the  story as  the younger
      son  of  Beregond,  and  he  was  thus  the   brother  of   Bergil  son
      of  Beregond   who  was   Pippin's  companion   in  Minas   Tirith.  In
      A  Borlas  gave  the  name  Bergil   to  his   own  son   (preceded  by
      Berthil ).                                                            
  16. For Othrondir A has Othrondor.                                        

                                    XVII.                                   
                                                                           
                                  TAL-ELMAR.                                
                                                                           
 The tale of Tal-Elmar, so far as it went, is preserved  in a  folded paper,
 bearing  dates  in  1968,  on  which  my father  wrote the  following hasty
 note:                                                                      
                                                                           
                                  Tal-Elmar.                                
                                                                           
   Beginnings  of  a  tale  that  sees  the  Numenoreans  from  the  point  of
   view  of  the  Wild  Men.  It  was  begun  without  much  consideration  of
   geography  (or  the  situation  as  envisaged  in The  Lord of  the Rings).
   But  either it  must remain  as a  separate tale  only vaguely  linked with
   the developed Lord of the Rings  history, or  - and  I think  so -  it must
   recount   the   coming   of  the   Numenoreans  (Elf-friends)   before  the
   Downfall,  and  represent  their  choice  of   permanent  havens.   So  the
   geography  must  be  made  to  fit  that  of  the  mouths  of   Anduin  and
   the Langstrand.                                                          
                                                                           
 But  that  was written  thirteen years  after he  had abandoned  the story,
 and there is no sign that he returned to it in his last years. Brief  as it
 is, and (as it seems)  uncertain of  direction, such  a departure  from all
 other  narrative  themes  within  the  compass  of  Middle-earth  will form
 perhaps a fitting conclusion to this History.                              
   The text is in two parts. The  first is  a typescript  of six  sides that
 breaks off in the middle of a sentence (p. 432); but the first part of this
 is extant  also in  a rejected  page, part  typescript and  part manuscript
 (see note 5). Beyond this point the entire story is in  the first  stage of
 composition.  The  second  part  is  a  manuscript   on  which   my  father
 wrote  'Continuation  of  Tal-Elmar' and  the date  January 1955;  there is
 no indication  of how  long a  time elapsed  between the  two parts,  but I
 believe that the typescript  belongs also  to the  1950s. It  is remarkable
 that  he  should  have  been  working  on  it  during  the time  of extreme
 pressure  between  the  publication  of  The  Two   Towers  and   that  of
 The  Return  of  the  King.  This manuscript  takes up  the story  from the
 point  where  it  was left  in the  typescript, but  does not  complete the
 unfinished  sentence;  it  becomes  progressively  more  difficult,  and in
 one section is at the very limit  of legibility,  with some  words uninter-
 pretable.  Towards  the  end  the  narrative  breaks  up  into experimental
 passages  and  questionings.  With  a  few  exceptions  I  do   not  record
 corrections to the text  and give  only the  later reading;  and in  one or
 two cases I have altered inconsistent uses of 'thou' and 'you'.            

 In the days of  the Dark  Kings, when  a man  could still  walk dry-
 shod from the Rising of the  Sun to  the Sea  of its  setting, there
 lived in the fenced town of his people  in the  green hills  of Agar
 an  old  man,  by  name  Hazad Longbeard.(1) Two prides he  had: in
 the number of his sons (seventeen in all), and in the length  of his
 beard (five feet without stretching); but his joy  in his  beard was
 the greater. For it remained  with him,  and was  soft, and  ruly to
 his  hand,  whereas  his  sons  for  the  most  part were  gone from
 him,  and  those  that  remained,  or came  ever nigh,  were neither
 gentle  nor  ruly.  They  were  indeed  much  as  Hazad  himself had
 been  in  the  days  of  his  youth:  broad, swarthy,  short, tough,
 harsh-tongued, heavy-handed, and quick to violence.                
   Save  one  only,  and  he  was the  youngest. Tal-elmar  Hazad his
 father  named  him.  He  was  yet  but  eighteen  years of  age, and
 lived with his father, and the two  of his  brothers next  elder. He
 was  tall,  and white-skinned,  and there  was a  light in  his grey
 eyes that would flash to  fire, if  he were  wroth; and  though that
 happened  seldom,  and  never without  great cause,  it was  a thing
 to  remember  and  be  ware  of.  Those  who  had  seen   that  fire
 called  him  Flint-eye, and  respected him,  whether they  loved him
 or  no.  For  Tal-elmar might  seem, among  that swart  sturdy folk,
 slender-built  and  lacking  in the  strength of  leg and  neck that
 they  praised,  but  a  man  that  strove  with  him soon  found him
 strong  beyond  guess,  and sudden  and swift,  hard to  grapple and
 harder to elude.                                                   
   A  fair  voice  he  had,  which  made  even  the  rough  tongue of
 that  people  more  sweet  to  hear,  but  he  spoke not  over much;
 and  he  would  stand  often  aloof,  when  others  were chattering,
 with a look on his face that men read rightly as  pride, yet  it was
 not the pride of  a master,  but rather  the pride  of one  of alien
 race,  whom  fate  has  cast  away  among  an  ignoble  people,  and
 there  bound  him  in  servitude.  For  indeed   Tal-elmar  laboured
 hard  and at  menial tasks,  being but  the youngest  son of  an old
 man, who had  little wealth  left save  his beard  and a  repute for
 wisdom.  But  strange to  say (in  that town)  he served  his father
 willingly, and loved him,  more than  all his  brothers in  one, and
 more than  was the  wont of  any sons  in that  land. Indeed  it was
 most often on his father's behalf that the  flint-flash was  seen in
 his eyes.                                                          
   For  Tal-elmar  had  a  strange  belief  (whence  it  came  was  a
 wonder) that the  old should  be treated  kindly and  with courtesy,
 and should be suffered to live out their life-days  in such  ease as

 they could. 'If  ye must  gainsay them,'  he said,  'let it  be done
 with  respect;  for  they  have  seen  many  years, and  many times,
 maybe,  have  they faced  the evils  which we  come to  untried. And
 grudge  not  their  food  and  their  room,  for they  have laboured
 longer than  have ye,  and do  but receive  now, belatedly,  part of
 the payment that is due  to them.'  Such plain  folly had  no effect
 on the manners of his people, but it was  law in  his house;  and it
 was  now  two  years  since  either  of  his  brothers had  dared to
 break it.(2)                                                       
   Hazad  loved this  youngest son  dearly, in  return for  his love,
 yet even more for another  cause which  he kept  in his  heart: that
 his  face  and  his  voice  reminded  him  of  another that  he long
 had  missed.  For  Hazad  also  had  been  the  youngest son  of his
 mother,  and  she  died in  his boyhood;  and she  was not  of their
 people.  Such  was  the  tale  that  he  had  overheard,  not openly
 spoken indeed, for  it was  held no  credit to  the house:  she came
 of  the  strange  folk,  hateful  and  proud,  of  which  there  was
 rumour  in  the west-lands,  coming out  of the  East, it  was said.
 Fair,  tall,  and  flint-eyed  they were,  with bright  weapons made
 by demons in  the fiery  hills. Slowly  they were  thrusting towards
 the  shores of  the Sea,  driving before  them the  ancient dwellers
 in the lands.                                                      
   Not   without   resistance.   There   were   wars  on   the  east-
 marches,  and  since  the  older  folk  were  yet numerous,  the in-
 comers  would  at  times  suffer  great  loss  and  be  flung  back.
 Indeed  little had  been heard  of them  in the  Hills of  Agar, far
 to the west, for more than a man's life, since that great  battle of
 which songs were yet sung.  In the  valley of  Ishmalog it  had been
 fought, the wise in lore told, and there  a great  host of  the Fell
 folk  had  been  ambushed  in  a  narrow  place  and  slaughtered in
 heaps.  And  in  that  day many  captives were  taken; for  this had
 been  no  affray on  the borders,  or fight  with advance  guards: a
 whole  people of  the Fell  Folk had  been on  the move,  with their
 wains and their cattle and their women.                            
   Now  Buldar,  father  of  Hazad,  had  been  in  the  army  of the
 North  King (3) that  went  to  the  muster of Ishmalog,(4) and  he
 brought  back  from  the  war  as booty  a wound,  and a  sword, and
 a  woman.  And  she  was  fortunate;  for the  fate of  the captives
 was short and cruel, but Buldar took her  as his  wife. For  she was
 beautiful,  and  having looked  on her  he desired  no woman  of his
 own  folk.  He was  a man  of wealth  and power  in those  days, and
 did as  he would,  scorning the  scorn of  his neighbours.  But when

 his  wife,  Elmar,  had  learned at  length enough  of the  speech of
 her  new kin,  she said  to Buldar  on a  day: I  have much  to thank
 thee for, lord; but think not ever to get my love  so. For  thou hast
 torn  me  from  my  own  people,  and  from  him  that  I  loved  and
 from the  child that  I bore  him. For  them ever  shall I  yearn and
 grieve, and give  love to  none else.  Never again  shall I  be glad,
 while  I  am  held  captive  among a  strange folk  that I  deem base
 and unlovely.'                                                       
   'So be it,' said Buldar. 'But it is not to be thought that I should
 let thee go free. For  thou art  precious in  my sight.  And consider
 well: vain is it to seek to escape from me.  Long is  the way  to the
 remnant of thy folk, if any still live; and thou  wouldst not  go far
 from  the  Hills of  Agar ere  thou met  death, or  a life  far worse
 than  shall  be  thine  in my  house. Base  and unlovely  thou namest
 us. Truly, maybe. Yet true is it also  that thy  folk are  cruel, and
 lawless,  and  the  friends  of  demons.  Thieves  are they.  For our
 lands  are  ours  from  of  old,  which  they  would  wrest  from  us
 with  their  bitter  blades.  White  skins  and  bright  eyes  are no
 warrant for such deeds.'                                             
   'Are they not?' said  she. 'Then  neither are  thick legs  and wide
 shoulders.  Or  by  what  means  did  ye  gain  these  lands  that ye
 boast of? Are there not, as I hear men  say, wild  folk in  the caves
 of  the  mountains,  who  once roamed  here free,  ere ye  swart folk
 came  hither  and  hunted  them  like  wolves?  But  I  spoke  not of
 rights, but of  sorrow and  love. If  here I  must dwell,  then dwell
 I  must, as  one whose  body is  in this  place at  thy will,  but my
 thought  far  elsewhere.  And  this  vengeance  I  will   have,  that
 while my body is kept here in exile, the lot of  all this  folk shall
 worsen,  and  thine  most;  but  when  my  body  goes  to  the  alien
 earth, and my thought is free of it, then in thy kin one  shall arise
 who  is  mine  alone.  And  with his  arising shall  come the  end of
 thy people and the downfall of your king.'                           
   Thereafter  Elmar  said  no  more  on  this  matter;  and  she  was
 indeed  a woman  of few  words while  her life  lasted, save  only to
 her  children.  To  them  she  spoke  much  when  none  were  by, and
 she  sang  to  them many  songs in  a strange  fair tongue;  but they
 heeded  her  not,  or  soon  forgot. Save  only Hazad,  the youngest;
 and though he  was, as  were all  her children,  unlike her  in body,
 he  was nearer  to her  in heart.  The songs  and the  strange tongue
 he  too forgot,  when he  grew up,  but his  mother he  never forgot;
 and  he  took  a  wife  late,  for no  woman of  his own  folk seemed
 desirable  to  him  that  knew  what  beauty  in  a woman  might be.(5)

 Not that many  were his  for the  wooing, for,  even as  Elmar had
 spoken, the people of  Agar had  waned with  the years,  what with
 ill weathers and with pests, and most of all  were Buldar  and his
 sons  afflicted;  and  they  had become  poor, and  other kindreds
 had  taken  their  power   from  them.   But  Hazad   knew  naught
 of the  foreboding of  his mother,  and in  her memory  loved Tal-
 elmar, and had so named him at birth.                             
                                                                  
   And  it  chanced  on  a morning  of spring  that when  his other
 sons went  out to  labour Hazad  kept Tal-elmar  at his  side, and
 they  walked  forth  together  and  sat  upon  the  green hill-top
 above the  town of  their people;  and they  looked out  south and
 west to where they could see far away the great  bight of  the Sea
 that drove in on the land, and it was shimmering like  grey glass.
 And  the  eyes  of  Hazad  were  growing  dim  with age,  but Tal-
 elmar's were keen, and he saw  as he  thought three  strange birds
 upon the water, white in the sun, and they were drifting  with the
 west  wind  towards  the  land;  and  he  wondered  that  they sat
 upon the sea and did not fly.                                     
   'I see three  strange birds  upon the  water, father,'  he said.
 'They are unlike any that I have seen before.'                    
   'Keen may  be thine  eyes in  youth, my  son,' said  Hazad, 'but
 birds on  the water  thou canst  not see.  Three leagues  away are
 the nearest shores of the Sea from where we  sit. The  sun dazzles
 thee, or some dream is on thee.'                                  
   'Nay, the sun is behind me,' said Tal-elmar. 'I see what  I see.
 And if they be not birds, what are they? Very great must  they be,
 greater  than  the  Swans  of Gorbelgod,(6) of which  legends tell.
 And lo! I see  now another  that comes  behind, but  less clearly,
 for its wings are black.'                                         
   Then Hazad was  troubled. 'A  dream is  on thee,  as I  said, my
 son,'  he  answered;  'but  an ill  dream. Is  not life  here hard
 enough, that when spring is come and winter is  over at  last thou
 must bring a vision out of the black past?'                      
   'Thou  forgettest,  father,'  said  Tal-elmar,  'that  I  am thy
 youngest  son,  and  whereas  thou  has  taught  much lore  to the
 dull ears of my brethren, to me thou hast given less of thy store.
 I know nothing of what is in thy mind.'                           
   'Dost  thou not?'  said Hazad,  striking his  brow as  he stared
 out towards the Sea. 'Yes, mayhap it is a long while since I spoke
 of it; it is but the shadow of a dream in the back of  my thought.
 Three  folk  we hold  as enemies.  The wild  men of  the mountains
 and the woods; but  these only  those who  stray alone  need fear.

 The  Fell  Folk of  the East;  but they  are yet  far away,  and they
 are  my  mother's  people,  though,  I  doubt  not,  they  would  not
 honour  the  kinship,  if  they  came  here  with  their  swords. And
 the High  Men  of  the  Sea.  These  indeed  we  may dread  as Death.
 For  Death  they  worship  and  slay  men  cruelly  in honour  of the
 Dark.  Out  of  the  Sea they  came, and  if they  ever had  any land
 of  their  own,  ere  they  came  to  the  west-shores,  we  know not
 where  it may  be. Black  tales come  to us  out of  the coast-lands,
 north  and  south,  where  they  have   now  long   time  established
 their  dark  fortresses  and their  tombs. But  hither they  have not
 come  since  my  father's  days,  and  then  only  to raid  and catch
 men  and  depart.  Now  this   was  the   manner  of   their  coming.
 They  came  in  boats,  but not  such as  some of  our folk  use that
 dwell nigh the great rivers or  the lakes,  for ferrying  or fishing.
 Greater  than  great  houses  are  the  ships  of the  Go-hilleg, and
 they  bear  store  of  men  and  goods,  and  yet  are wafted  by the
 winds;  for  the  Sea-men  spread  great cloths  like wings  to catch
 the airs, and bind them to tall poles like trees of the  forest. Thus
 they will come to the shore, where there  is shelter,  or as  nigh as
 they may;  and then  they will  send forth  smaller boats  laden with
 goods,  and  strange  things both  beautiful and  useful such  as our
 folk covet. These they will sell to us  for small  price, or  give as
 gifts,  feigning friendship,  and pity  for our  need; and  they will
 dwell a while, and  spy out  the land  and the  numbers of  the folk,
 and  then go.  And if  they do  not return,  men should  be thankful.
 For  if they  come again  it is  in other  guise. In  greater numbers
 they  come  then:  two  ships  or  more  together,  stuffed  with men
 and  not  goods,  and  ever  one  of  the  accursed ships  hath black
 wings. For that is the Ship of  the Dark,  and in  it they  bear away
 evil  booty,  captives  packed  like  beasts,  the fairest  women and
 children,  or  young  men  unblemished,  and   that  is   their  end.
 Some  say that  they are  eaten for  meat; and  others that  they are
 slain  with  torment  on  the  black  stones  in  the worship  of the
 Dark.  Both  maybe  are  true.  The  foul wings  of the  Sea-men have
 not  been  seen  in  these waters  for many  a year;  but remembering
 the shadow of fear in the past  I cried  out, and  cry again:  is not
 our  life  hard  enough  without  the  vision  of  a black  wing upon
 the shining sea?'                                                   
   'Hard  enough, indeed,'  said Tal-elmar,  'yet not  so hard  that I
 would  leave  it  yet.  Come!  If  what  you  tell  is good  sooth we
 should  run  to  the town  and warn  men, and  make ready  for flight
 or for defence.'                                                    

   'I come,' said Hazad.  'But be  not astonished,  if men  laugh at
 me  for  a dotard.  They believe  little that  has not  happened in
 their own days. And have a care, dear son! I  am in  little danger,
 save to starve in a town empty of all but the crazed and  the aged.
 But thee  the Dark  Ship would  take among  the first.  Put thyself
 not forward in any rash counsel of battle.'                        
   'We  will  see,'  answered  Tal-elmar.  'But  thou  art  my chief
 care in this town, where I have and  give little  love. I  will not
 willingly part from thy side. Yet this is the town of my  folk, and
 our home, and those who can are bound to defend it, I deem.'       
                                                                   
   So  Hazad  and  his  son  went  down  the  hill-side, and  it was
 noon; and in the  town were  few people,  but crones  and children,
 for all the able-bodied were abroad  in the  fields, busy  with the
 hard toil of  spring. There  was no  watch, for  the Hills  of Agar
 were  far  from  hostile  borders  where  the  power of  the Fourth
 King (7) ended. The town-master  sat by  the door  of his  house in
 the  sun, dozing  or idly  watching the  small birds  that gathered
 scraps of food from the dry  beaten mud  of the  open place  in the
 midst of the houses.                                               
   'Hail!  Master  of  Agar!' said  Hazad, and  bowed low,  but the
 master, a fat man with eyes like a lizard, blinked at him,  and did
 not return his greeting.                                           
   'Sit  hail, Master!  And long  may you  sit so!'  said Tal-elmar,
 and  there was  a glint  in his  eye. 'We  should not  disturb your
 thought,  or your  sleep, but  there are  tidings that,  maybe, you
 should  heed.  There  is no  watch kept,  but we  chanced to  be on
 the hill-top, and we saw the sea far off, and there - birds  of ill
 omen on the water.'                                                
   'Ships of the  Go-hilleg,' said  Hazad, 'with  great wind-cloths.
 Three white - and one black.'                                      
   The  master  yawned.  'As  for thee,  blear-eyed carl,'  he said,
 'thou couldst not tell the sea itself from a cloud. And as for this
 idle lad, what knows he of boats or wind-cloths,  or all  the rest,
 save  from  thy  crazed  teaching? Go  to the  travelling knappers (8)
 with thy crone-tales  of Go-hilleg,  and trouble  me not  with such
 folly. I have other matters of more weight to ponder.'             
   Hazad  swallowed  his   wrath,  for   the  Master   was  powerful
 and  loved  him  not;   but  Tal-elmar's   anger  was   cold.  'The
 thoughts of one so great must  needs be  weighty,' said  he softly,
 'yet  I  know  not  what  thought  of more  weight could  break his
 repose  than  the  care of  his own  carcase. He  will be  a master
 without people, or a bag of bones on the hillside, if he scorns the

 wisdom  of  Hazad  son  of  Buldar.  Blear  eyes  may  see  more  than
 those lidded with sleep.'                                            
   The  fat  face  of  Mogru  the  Master  grew  dark,  and   his  eyes
 were  blood-shot  with  rage.  He  hated  Tal-elmar, yet  never before
 had  the  youth  given  him  cause,  save  that he  showed no  fear in
 his  presence.  Now  he  should  pay  for   that  and   his  new-found
 insolence.  Mogru  clapped  his  hands,  but  even  as  he  did  so he
 remembered  that  there  were  none  within  call  that would  dare to
 grapple  with  the youth,  nay, not  three together;  and at  the same
 time he  caught the  glint of  Tal-elmar's eye.  He blanched,  and the
 words  that  he  had  been  about  to  speak,  'Slave's  son  and your
 brat',  died  on  his  lips.  'Hazad  uBuldar,  Tal-elmar  uHazad,  of
 this  town,  speak  not so  with the  master of  your folk,'  he said.
 'A  watch  is  set,  though ye  who have  not the  ruling of  the town
 in  hand may  know it  not. I  would wait  till I  have word  from the
 watchers,  whom  I  trust,  that  anything  ill-boding has  been seen.
 But if ye be anxious, then go summon the men from the fields.'       
   Tal-elmar  observed  him  closely  as  he  spoke  and  he  read  his
 thought  clearly.  'Now  I  must  hope  that my  father errs  not,' he
 said in his heart, 'for less peril will battle bring me than  the hate
 of  Mogru  from  this  day forth.  A watch!  Yea, but  only to  spy on
 the  goings  and  comings  of  the  townsfolk.  And  the  moment  I go
 forth to the field, a runner will go to fetch  his servants  and club-
 bearers. An ill turn  have I  done to  my father  in this  hour. Well!
 He  who  begins  with  the  hoe  should  wield it  to the  row's end.'
 He  spoke  therefore  still  in  wrath  and  scorn.  'Go  you  to  the
 knappers  yourself,'  he  said,  'for you  are wont  to use  these sly
 folk,  and heed  their tales  when they  suit you.  But my  father you
 shall  not  mock  while I  stand by.  It may  well be  that we  are in
 peril.  Therefore  you shall  come now  with us  to the  hill-top, and
 look  with  your  own  eyes.  And if  you see  there aught  to warrant
 it,  you  shall  summon  the  men  to  the Moot-hill.  I will  be your
 messenger.'                                                          
   And  Mogru  also  through  the  slits  of  his  eyelids  watched the
 face  of  Tal-elmar  as  he  spoke,  and  guessed  that  he was  in no
 danger of violence if he gave  way for  this time.  But his  heart was
 filled with venom; and it irked him also not a little  to toil  up the
 hill. Slowly he rose.                                                
   'I  will  come,' he  said. 'But  if my  time and  toil be  wasted, I
 shall  not  forgive  it.  Aid  my  steps, young  man; for  my servants
 are  in  the  fields.' And  he took  the arm  of Tal-elmar  and leaned
 heavily upon him.                                                    

   'My father is the  elder,' said  Tal-elmar; 'and  the way  is but
 short.  Let  the  Master  lead, and  we will  follow. Here  is your
 staff!'  And  he  released himself  from the  grasp of  Mogru, and
 gave  him  his  staff which  stood by  the door  of his  house; and
 taking the arm of his father he  waited until  the Master  set out.
 Sidelong  and  black  was  the  glance of  the lizard-eye,  but the
 gleam of the eye of Tal-elmar that it caught stung like a  goad. It
 was  long since  the fat  legs of  Mogru had  made such  speed from
 house to gate; and longer since they  had heaved  his belly  up the
 slippery  hill-sward  beyond  the  dike.  He  was blown,  and pant-
 ing like an old dog, when they came to the top.                   
   Then again Tal-elmar  looked out;  but the  high and  distant sea
 was  now  empty,  and  he  stood  silent.  Mogru  wiped  the  sweat
 from his eyes and followed his gaze.                              
   'For what reason, I ask, have ye  forced the  Master of  the town
 from  his  house,  and brought  him hither?'  he snarled.  'The sea
 lies where it lay, and empty. What mean ye?'                      
   'Have  patience  and look  closer,' said  Tal-elmar. Away  to the
 west highlands blocked the  view of  all but  the distant  sea; but
 rising  to  the broad  cap of  the Golden  Hill they  fell suddenly
 away, and in a  deep cleft  a glimpse  could be  seen of  the great
 inlet and the waters near its north shore.  'Time has  passed since
 we  were  here  before, and  the wind  is strong,'  said Tal-elmar.
 'They  have come  nearer.' He  pointed. 'There  you will  see their
 wings,  or their  wind-cloths, call  them what  you will.  But what
 is your counsel? And was  it not  a matter  that the  Master should
 see with his own eyes?'                                           
   Mogru  stared,  and  he  panted,  now  with fear  as much  as for
 the  labour  of  walking  uphill, for  bluster as  he might  he had
 heard  many  dark  tales  of the  Go-hilleg from  old women  in his
 youth.  But  his  heart was  cunning, and  black with  anger. Side-
 long he looked first at Hazad, and then at his  son; and  he licked
 his lips, but he let not his smile be seen.                       
   'You begged  to be  my messenger,'  he said,  'and so  shalt thou
 be.  Go  now  swiftly  and  summon  the men  to the  Moot-hill! But
 that will not end thy errand,'  he added,  as Tal-elmar  made ready
 to run. 'Straight from the fields thou shalt go  with all  speed to
 the Strand. For there the ships, if ships they be, will  halt, most
 likely, and set men ashore. Tidings  thou must  win there,  and spy
 out well what is afoot. Come  not back  at all,  unless it  is with
 news  that  will help  our counsels.  Go and  spare thyself  not! I
 command thee. It is time of peril to the town.'                   

   Hazad  seemed  about  to  speak  in  protest;  but he  bowed his
 head,  and  said  naught,  knowing  it  vain. Tal-elmar  stood one
 moment,  eyeing  Mogru,  as  one might  a snake  in the  path. But
 he saw well that the Master's cunning had  been greater  than his.
 He  had  made  his  own  trap,  and  Mogru  had  used  it.  He had
 declared a time of  peril to  the town,  and he  had the  right to
 command any  service. It  was death  to disobey  him. And  even if
 Tal-elmar  had  not  named  himself  as  messenger   (desiring  to
 prevent any secret word being passed to  servants of  the Master),
 all would say that the choice was  just. A  scout should  be sent,
 and who better than a strong bold  youth, swift  on his  feet? But
 there was  malice, black  malice, in  the errand  nonetheless. The
 defender  of  Hazad  would  be  gone.  There  was  no hope  in his
 brothers: strong louts, but with  no heart  for defiance,  save of
 their  old  father. And  it was  likely enough  that he  would not
 return. The peril was great.                                     
   Once  more  Tal-elmar  looked  at  the Master,  and then  at his
 father, and then his glance  passed to  Mogru's staff.  The flint-
 flash was in his eyes, and in his heart the desire to  kill. Mogru
 saw it and quailed.                                              
   'Go,  go!'  he  shouted.  'I  have  commanded  thee.   Thou  art
 quicker to cry wolf than to start on the hunt. Go at once!'      
   'Go,  my  son!'  said  Hazad.  'Do  not  defy  the  Master.  Not
 where  he  has  the  right. For  then thou  defiest all  the town,
 beyond thy  power. And  were I  the Master,  I would  choose thee,
 dear  though  thou  be;  for thou  hast more  heart and  luck than
 any of this folk. But come again, and let not  the Dark  Ship have
 thee. Be not over-bold! For  better would  be ill  tidings brought
 by thee living than the Sea-men without herald.'                 
   Tal-elmar  bowed  and  made  the  sign  of  submission,  to  his
 father  and  not to  the Master,  and strode  away two  paces. And
 then he turned. 'Listen, Mogru, whom  a base  folk in  their folly
 have  named  their  master,'  he  cried.  'Maybe  I  shall return,
 against thy hope. My father I leave in thy care. If I come,  be it
 with word of peace, or with  a foe  on my  heel, then  thy master-
 ship will be at an end, and thy life also, if I  find that  he has
 suffered  any  evil or  dishonour that  thou couldst  prevent. Thy
 knife-men and club-bearers will not  help thee.  I will  wring thy
 fat neck with my  bare hands,  if needs  be; or  I will  hunt thee
 through  the  wilds  to  the  black  pools.'  Then  a  new thought
 struck him, and he strode back to  the Master,  and laid  hands on
 his staff.                                                       

   Mogru  cringed,  and  flung  up  a  fat  arm,  as  if  to  ward  off  a
 blow.  'Thou  art  mad  today,'  he  croaked.  'Do  me  no  violence,  or
 thou  wilt  pay  for  it  with  death.  Heardest  thou  not the  words of
 thy father?'                                                             
   'I heard, and  I obey,'  said Tal-elmar.  'But first  errand is  to the
 men,  and  there  is  need  now  of  haste.  Little  honour have  I among
 them,  for  they  know  well  thy  scorn  of  us.  What  heed  will  they
 pay,  if  the  Slave's  bastards, as  thou namest  us when  I am  not by,
 comes (9) crying the summons  to   the  Moot-hill   in  thy   name  with-
 out  token.  Thy staff  will serve.  It is  well known.  Nay, I  will not
 beat thee with it yet!'                                                 
   With  that  he   wrested  the   staff  from   Mogru's  hand   and  sped
 down  the  hill,  his  heart  yet  too  hot  with  wrath to  take thought
 for  what  lay  before   him.  But   when  he   had  declared   the  sum-
 mons  to  the  startled  men  in  the  acres  on  the  south  slopes  and
 had  flung  down  the  staff   among  them,   bidding  them   hasten,  he
 ran  to  the  hill's  foot,  and out  over the  long grass-meads,  and so
 came  to  the  first thin  straggle of  the woods.  Dark they  lay before
 him in the valley between Agar and the downs by the shore.               
   It  was  still  morning,  and  more  than  an  hour  ere the  noon, but
 when  he  came  under  the  trees  he  halted   and  took   thought,  and
 knew  that  he  was  shaken  with  fear.  Seldom  had  he   wandered  far
 from  the  hills  of  his  home,  and  never  alone,  nor  deep  into the
 wood. For all his folk dreaded the forest (10)                           
                                                                         
   Here the typescript text breaks off, not at the foot of a page, and the
 manuscript  'Continuation  of  Tal-Elmar'  (as the  name is  now written)
 begins (see p. 422).                                                     
                                                                         
   It was swift for the eye to  travel to  the shore,  but slow  for feet;
 and  the  distance  was  greater  than  it  seemed.  The  wood  was  dark
 and   unwholesome,   for   there   were   stagnant  waters   between  the
 hills  of  Agar  and  the  hills  of  the  shoreland;  and   many  snakes
 lived  there.  It  was silent  too, for  though it  was spring  few birds
 built  there  or  even  alighted  as  they  sped on  to the  cleaner land
 by  the  sea.  There  dwelt  in  the  wood also  dark spirits  that hated
 men,  or  so  ran  the  tales  of  the  people.  Of  snake and  swamp and
 wood-demon   Tal-Elmar   thought   as   he   stood  within   the  shadow;
 but  it  needed  short  thought  to  come  to  the  conclusion  that  all
 three  were  less  peril  than  to  return,  with  lying  excuse  or with
 none, to the town and its master.                                        
   So,  helped  a  little  perhaps  by  his  pride,  he  went on.  And the
 thought  came  to  him  under  the  shadow  as  he   sought  for   a  way

 through  swamp  and  thicket:  What  do  I  know,  or  any  of  my
 people, even my father, of  these Go-hilleg  of the  winged boats?
 It  might  well  be  that I  who am  a stranger  in my  own people
 should  find them  more pleasing  than Mogru  and all  others like
 him.                                                             
   With this  thought growing  in him,  so that  at length  he felt
 rather as a  man who  goes to  greet friends  and kinsmen  than as
 one who  creeps out  to spy  on dangerous  foes, he  passed unhurt
 through  the  shadow-wood,  and  came  to  the   shore-hills,  and
 began to climb.  One hill  he chose,  because bushes  clambered up
 its slope and it was crowned with a  dense knot  of low  trees. To
 this cover he came, and creeping  to the  further brink  he looked
 down.  It  had  taken him  long, for  his way  had been  slow, and
 now  the  sun  had  fallen  from  noon  and  was  going  down away
 on his right towards the Sea. He  was hungry,  but this  he hardly
 heeded, for  he was  used to  hunger, and  could endure  toil day-
 long  without  eating  when  he must.  The hill  was low,  but ran
 down steeply to the water. Before its feet  were green  lands end-
 ing in gravels,  beyond which  the waters  of the  estuary gleamed
 in the westering sun. Out in the  midst of  the stream  beyond the
 shoals  three  great  ships -  though Tal-Elmar  had no  such word
 in  his  language  to  name  them  with  - were  lying motionless.
 They  were  anchored  and  the  sails  down.  Of  the  fourth, the
 black ship, there was no sign. But on the green near  the shingles
 there were tents, and  small boats  drawn up  near. Tall  men were
 standing  or  walking  among them.  Away on  the 'big  boats' Tal-
 Elmar  could  see  [?others]  on  watch;  every  now  and  then he
 caught  a  flash  as  some  weapon or  arms moved  in the  sun. He
 trembled, for  the tales  of the  'blades' of  the Cruel  Men were
 familiar to his childhood.                                       
   Tal-Elmar  looked  long,  and slowly  it came  to him  how hope-
 less was his mission. He might look until daylight failed,  but he
 could  not  count  accurately  enough  for any  use the  number of
 men  there  were;  nor could  he discover  their purpose  or their
 plans. Even if he had either the  courage or  the fortune  to come
 past their guards he  could do  nothing useful,  for he  would not
 understand a word of their language.                             
   He  remembered  suddenly  -  another  of  Mogru's schemes  to be
 rid of him, as he now saw, though at  the time  he had  thought it
 an  honour  -  how  only  a  year  ago,  when  the waning  town of
 Agar  was threatened  by marauders  from the  village of  Udul far
 inland,(11) all men feared  that  an assault  would come,  for Agar

 was a drier, healthier, and more defensible site  (or so  its towns-
 men  believed).  Then  Tal-Elmar  had  been  chosen  to  go  and spy
 out the land of Udul, as 'being  young, bold,  and better  versed in
 the  country round'.  So said  Mogru, truly  enough, for  the towns-
 folk of Agar were  timid and  seldom went  far afield,  never daring
 to  be  caught  by  dark  outside  their  homes.  Whereas  Tal-Elmar
 often, if he had chance and no labour  called (or  if it  did, some-
 times),  would walk  far afield,  and though  (being so  taught from
 babyhood)  he  feared  the  dark,  he  had   more  than   once  been
 benighted  far  from  the  town,  and was  even known  to go  out to
 the watch-hill alone under the stars.                              
   But  to  creep into  the unfriendly  fields of  Udul by  night was
 another and  far worse  thing. Yet  he had  dared to  do it.  And he
 had come  so close  to one  of the  huts of  watchmen that  he could
 hear the  men inside  speaking -  in vain.  He could  not understand
 the  purport of  their speech.  The tones  seemed mournful  and full
 of fear (12) (as men's voices were at night  in the  world as  he knew
 it), and a  few words  he seemed  to recognize,  but not  enough for
 understanding.  And  yet  the  Udul-folk  were  their   near  neigh-
 bours  -  indeed  though  Tal-Elmar  and  his  people  had forgotten
 it,  as they  had forgotten  so much,  their near  kin, part  of the
 same  people  in past  and better  years. What  hope then  was there
 that  he  would  recognize  any  single  word,  or   even  interpret
 rightly the tones, of the  tongue of  men alien  from his  own since
 the  beginning  of  the  world?  Alien  from  his  own? My  own? But
 they  are  not  my people.  Only my  father. And  again he  had that
 strange  feeling,  coming  from  where  he  knew  not to  this young
 lad, born and  bred in  a decaying  half-savage people:  the feeling
 that  he was  not going  to meet  aliens but  kinsmen from  afar and
 friends.                                                           
   And yet  he was  also a  boy of  his village.  He was  afraid, and
 it  was  long before  he moved.  At last  he looked  up. The  sun on
 his  right   was  now   going  down.   Between  two   tree-stems  he
 caught a glimpse of the sea, as the great round  fire, red  with the
 light sea-mist, sank level with his eye, and  the water  was kindled
 to fiery gold.                                                     
   He had seen the sun  sink into  the sea  before, yet  never before
 had he seen it so. He knew in a flash (as if it came from  that fire
 itself) that he had seen it  so, [? he was called,](13) that it meant
 something  more  than  the  approach  of  the  'King's   time',  the
 dark.(14) He rose  and as  if led  or driven  walked openly  down the
 hill and across the long sward to the shingles and the tents.      

 Could  he  have  seen  himself  he  would   have  been   struck  with
 wonder  no  less  than  those  who  saw  him  now  from   the  shore.
 His naked skin  - for  he wore  only a  loin-cloth, and  little cloak
 of  ...  fur  cast  back  and  caught by  a thong  to his  shoulder -
 glowed  golden  in  the  [?  sunset]  light,  his  fair hair  too was
 kindled, and his step was light and free.                           
    'Look!  '  cried one  of the  watchmen to  his companion.  'Do you
 - see what I see? Is it not one of the Eldar of the woods  that comes
 to speak with us?'                                                  
    'I see  indeed,' said  the other,  'but if  not some  phantom from
 the  edge  of  the  [?  coming]  dark  [? in  this land  accursed] it
 cannot  be  one  of  the  Fair.  We are  far to  the south,  and none
 dwell  here.  Would  indeed  we  were  [?  north  away near  to (the)
 Havens].'                                                           
    'Who  knows  all  the  ways  of  the  Eldar?'  said  the watchman.
 'Silence now! He approaches. Let him speak first.'                  
    So they  stood still,  and made  no sign  as Tal-Elmar  drew near.
 When  he  was  some  twenty  paces  away  his  fear returned,  and he
 halted,  letting  his  arms  fall  before him  and opening  his palms
 outwards  to  the  strangers  in  a  gesture  which  all   men  could
 understand.                                                         
    Then,  as  they  did  not  move,  nor  put hand  to any  weapon so
 far  as  he  could  see,  he  took courage  again and  spoke, saying:
 'Hail,  Men  of  the  sea and  the wings!  Why do  you come  here? Is
 it in  peace? I  am Tal-Elmar  uHazad of  the folk  of Agar.  Who are
 you?'                                                               
    His  voice  was  clear  and fair,  but the  language that  he used
 was  but  a  form  of  the  half-savage  language of  the Men  of the
 Dark,   as   the   Shipmen   called   them.  The   watchman  stirred.
 'Elda!' he said. 'The Eldar  do not  use such  a tongue.'  He called
 aloud,  and  at  once  men  tumbled  out  of  the  tents.  He himself
 drew  forth  a  sword,  while  his  companion   put  arrow   to  bow-
 string. Before Tal-Elmar had time even to feel terror, still  less to
 turn  and  run  -  happily,  for he  knew nothing  of bows  and would
 have  fallen  long  before  he  was  out  of  bowshot  - he  was sur-
 rounded  by  armed  men.  They  seized  him,   but  not   with  harsh
 handling,  when  they  found  he   was  weaponless   and  submissive,
 and led him to a tent where sat one in authority.                   
    Tal-Elmar  feels  the  language  to  be  known  and   only  veiled
 from him.                                                            
   The captain says Tal-Elmar must be of Numenorean race,            
 or of the people akin to them. He must be kindly treated. He        

 guesses  that  he  had  been  made captive  as a  babe, or  born of
 captives. 'He is trying to escape to us,' he says.                 
   'A  pity  he  remembers  nothing  of  the  language.'   'He  will
 learn.'  'Maybe, but  after a  long time.  If he  spoke it  now, he
 could  tell  us much  that would  speed our  errand and  lessen our
 peril.'                                                            
   They  make  Tal-Elmar  at  last understand  their desire  to know
 how  many  men  dwell  near;  are  they  friendly,  are  they  like
 he is?                                                             
   The object  of the  Numenoreans is  to occupy  this land,  and in
 alliance  with  the 'Cruels'  of the  North to  drive out  the Dark
 People and  make a  settlement to  threaten the  King. (Or  is this
 while Sauron is absent in Numenor?)                                
   The place is on estuary of Isen? or Morthond.                    
                                                                   
   Tal-Elmar  could  count  and  understand  high   numbers,  though
 his language was defective.                                        
   Or   does   he   understand   Numenorean?   [Added  subsequently:
 Eldarin  -  these  were  Elf-friends.]  He said  when he  heard the
 men  speak  to  one  another: 'This  is strange  for you  speak the
 language  of  my  long dreams.  Yet surely  now I  stand in  my own
 land  and  do  not  sleep?'  Then  they  were astonished  and said:
 'Why  did  you  not  speak  so  to  us before?  You spoke  like the
 people  of  the Dark  who are  our enemies,  being servants  of our
 Enemy.'  And  Tal-Elmar  answered:  'Because  this tongue  has only
 returned  to  my  mind  hearing  you  speak  it;  and  because  how
 should  I  have  known  that  you  would  understand  the  language
 of  my  dreams?  You are  not like  those who  spoke in  my dreams.
 Nay, a little like; but they were brighter and more beautiful.'
   Then  the men  were still  more astonished,  and said:  'It seems
 that  you  have  spoken  with  the  Eldar,  whether  awake   or  in
 vision.'                                                           
   'Who  are  the  Eldar?'  said  Tal-Elmar.  'That  name I  did not
 hear in my dream.'                                                 
   'If you rome with us you may perhaps see them.'                  
   Then  suddenly  fear  and  the  memory  of  old  tales  came upon
 Tal-Elmar again, and he quailed.'  What would you do to me?'
 he cried.  'Would you  lure me  to the  black-winged boat  and give
 me to the Dark?'                                                  
   'You  or  your kin  at least  belong already  to the  Dark,' they
 answered.  'But  why  do  you  speak  so  of  the black  sails? The
 black sails are to us a sign of honour, for they are the fair night
 before the coming  of the  Enemy, and  upon the  black are  set the

 silver  stars  of  Elbereth. The  black sails  of our  captain have
 passed further up the water.'                                      
   Still  Tal-Elmar  was  afraid  because  he  was  not yet  able to
 imagine black  as anything  but the  symbol of  the night  of fear.
 But  he looked  as boldly  as he  could and  answered: 'Not  all my
 kind.  We  fear  the  Dark, but  we do  not love  it nor  serve it.
 At least so do some of us. So  does my  father. And  him I  love. I
 would not be torn from him not even to see the Eldar.'              
   'Alas!' they said. 'Your time of dwelling in these hills  is come
 to an end. Here the men  of the  West have  resolved to  make their
 homes, and the folk of the dark must depart - or be slain.'        
   Tal-Elmar offers himself as a hostage.                           
                                                                   
   There  is  no  more.  At  the foot  of the  page my  father wrote
 'Tal-Elmar' twice, and his own name twice;  and also  'Tal-Elmar in
 Rhovannion', 'Wilderland', 'Anduin the Great River', 'Sea of Rhun',
 and 'Ettenmoors'.                                                  

                              NOTES.                                     
                                                                        
  1. In the rejected version of the opening section of the text  the story
     begins:  'In  the  days of  the Great  Kings when  a man  could still
     walk  dryshod  from  Rome  to York  (not that  those cities  were yet
     built or thought of) there lived  in the  town of  his people  in the
     hills  of  Agar  an  old  man,  by  name  Tal-argan  Longbeard',  and
     Tal-argan  remained  the  name  without  correction  in  the rejected
     page.  The  second  version  retained 'the  Great Kings',  the change
     to 'the Dark Kings' being made later on.                            
  2. This paragraph was later placed within square brackets.             
  3. Both  versions  had  'the  Fourth  King',  changed  on the  second to
     'the  North  King'  at  the  same  time  as  'the  Great  Kings'  was
     changed to 'the Dark Kings' (note 1).                               
  4. In  the  rejected  version  the  father  of  Tal-argan   (Hazad)  was
     named  Tal-Bulda,  and  the  place of  the battle  was the  valley of
     Rishmalog.                                                          
  5. At this  point the  rejected first  page ends,  and the  text becomes
     primary composition. A  pencilled note  at the  head of  the replace-
     ment  page  proposes  that  Buldar  father  of  Hazad  should  be cut
     out,  and  that it  should be  Hazad himself  who wedded  the foreign
     woman Elmar (who is unnamed in the rejected version).               
  6. The name typed was Dur nor-Belgoth, corrected to Gorbelgod.         
  7. 'the   Fourth   King'   was   not   corrected   here:  see   note  3.
  8. knappers:  a  'knapper'  was  one  who broke  stones or  flints. This
     word replaced 'tinkers', here and at its occurrence a little later.
  9. I have left the text here as it stands.                             

 10. A marginal  note here  says that  Tal-elmar had  'no weapon  but a
    casting-stone in a pouch'.                                            
 11. The text as written had 'far  inland, and  all men  feared', corrected
    to 'far inland. All men feared'. I  have altered  the text  to provide
    a complete  sentence, but  my father  (who was  here writing  at great
    speed)  doubtless  did  not  intend  this,  and  would  have rewritten
    the passage had he ever returned to it.                               
 12. In  the margin  my father  wrote that  the village  of Udul  was dying
    of  a  pestilence,  and  the marauders  were in  fact seeking  food in
    desperation.                                                          
 13. The conclusion of the text is in places in excruciatingly difficult
    handwriting,  and  the  words  I  have  given as  'he was  called' are
    doubtful: but I can see no other interpretation of them.              
 14. Against  the  words  on p.  434 'never  daring to  be caught  by dark
    outside  their  homes'  my  father wrote:  'Dark is  "the time  of the
    King".' As  is seen  from a  passage on  p. 436,  the King  is Sauron.
