PREFACE
The Red Book contains a large number of verses.
A few are included in the narrative of the Downfall
of the Lord of the Rings, or in the attached stories
and chronicles; many more are found on loose
leaves, while some are written carelessly in mar-
gins and blank spaces. Of the last sort most are
nonsense, now often unintelligible even when
legible, or half-remembered fragments. From
these marginalia are drawn Nos. 4, II, 13; though
a better example of their general character would
be the scribble, on the page recording Bilbo's
When winter first begins to bite'.
The wind so whirled a weathercock
He could not hold his tail up;
The frost so nipped a throstlecock
He could not snap a snail up.
'My case is hard' the throstle cried,
And 'All is vane' the cock replied;
And so they set their wail up.
The present selection is taken from the older
pieces, mainly concerned with legends and jests of
the Shire at the end of the Third Age, that appear
to have been made by Hobbits, especially by
Bilbo and his friends, or their immediate descendants. Their authorship is, however, seldom indi-
cated. Those outside the narratives are in various
hands, and were probably written down from
oral tradition.
In the Red Book it is said that No. 5 was made
by Bilbo, and No. 7 by Sam Gamgee. No. 8 is
marked SG, and the ascription may be accepted.
No. 12 is also marked SG, though at most Sam
can only have touched up an older piece of the
comic bestiary lore of which Hobbits appear to
have been fond. In The Lord of the Rings Sam
stated that No. 10 was traditional in the Shire.
No. 3 is an example of another kind which
seems to have amused Hobbits: a rhyme or story
which returns to its own beginning, and so may
be recited until the hearers revolt. Several specimens are found in the Red Book, but the others
are simple and crude. No. 3 is much the longest
and most elaborate. It was evidently made by
Bilbo. This is indicated by its obvious relationship
to the long poem recited by Bilbo, as his own
composition, in the house of Elrond. In origin a
'nonsense rhyme', it is in the Rivendell version
found transformed and applied, somewhat incongruously, to the High-elvish and Numenorean
legends of Earendil. Probably because Bilbo in-
vented its metrical devices and was proud of
them. They do not appear in other pieces in the
Red Book. The older form, here given, must
belong to the early days after Bilbo's return from his journey. Though the influence of Elvish traditions is seen, they are not seriously treated, and
the names used (Derrilyn, Thellamie, Belmarie,
Aerie) are mere inventions in the Elvish style, and
are not in fact Elvish at all.
The influence of the events at the end of the
Third Age, and the widening of the horizons of
the Shire by contact with Rivendell and Gondor,
is to be seen in other pieces. No. 6, though here
placed next to Bilbo's Man-in-the-Moon rhyme,
and the last item. No. 16, must be derived
ultimately from Gondor. They are evidently
based on the traditions of Men, living in shore-
lands and familiar with rivers running into the
Sea. No. 6 actually mentions Belfalas (the windy
bay of Bel), and the Sea-ward Tower, Tirith Aear,
or Dol Amroth. No. 16 mentions the Seven
Rivers' that flowed into the Sea in the South
Kingdom, and uses the Gondorian name, of
High-elvish form, Firiel, mortal woman. 2 In the
Langstrand and Dol Amroth there were many
traditions of the ancient Elvish dwellings, and of
the haven at the mouth of the Morthond from
which 'westward ships' had sailed as far back as
1 Lefnui, Morthond-Kiril-Ringlo, Gilrain-Sernui, and Anduin.
2 The name was borne by a princess of Gondor, through
whom Aragorn claimed descent from the Southern line. It was
also the name of a daughter of Elanor, daughter of Sam, but her
name, if connected with the rhyme, must be derived from it; it
could not have arisen in Westmarch.
the fall of Eregion in the Second Age. These two
pieces, therefore, are only re-handlings of Southern matter, though this may have reached Bilbo
by way of Rivendell. No. 14 also depends on the
lore of Rivendell, Elvish and Numenorean, concerning the heroic days at the end of the First Age;
it seems to contain echoes of the Numenorean tale
of Turin and Mim the Dwarf.
Nos. I and 2 evidently come from the Buck-
land. They show more knowledge of that country,
and of the Dingle, the wooded valley of the
Withywindle, than any Hobbits west of the
Marish were likely to possess. They also show
that the Bucklanders knew Bombadil,2 though,
no doubt they had as little understanding of his
powers as the Shirefolk had of Gandalf's: both
were regarded as benevolent persons, mysterious
maybe and unpredictable but nonetheless comic.
No. I is the earlier piece, and is made up of
various hobbit-versions of legends concerning
Bombadil. No. 2 uses similar traditions, though
1 Grindwall was a small hythe on the north bank of the
Withywindle; it was outside the Hay, and was so well watched
and protected by a grind or fence extended into the water.
Breredon (Briar Hill) was a little village on rising ground behind
the hythe, in the narrow tongue between the end of the High
Hay and the Brandywine. At the Mithe, the outflow of the
Shirebourn, was a landing-stage, from which a lane ran to
Deephallow and so on to the Causeway road that went through
Rushey and Stock.
Indeed they probably gave him this name (it is Bucklandish
in form) to add to his many older ones.
Tom's raillery is here turned in jest upon his
friends, who treat it with amusement (tinged with
fear); but it was probably composed much later
and after the visit of Frodo and his companions to
the house of Bombadil.
The verses, of hobbit origin, here presented
have generally two features in common. They are
fond of strange words, and of rhyming and
metrical tricks - in their simplicity Hobbits
evidently regarded such things as virtues or
graces, though they were no doubt mere imitations of Elvish practices. They are also at least on
the surface, lighthearted or frivolous, though
sometimes one may uneasily suspect that more is
meant than meets the ear. No. 15, certainly of
hobbit origin, is an exception. It is the latest piece
and belongs to the Fourth Age; but it is included
here, because a hand has scrawled at its head
Frodos Dreme. That is remarkable, and though the
piece is most unlikely to have been written by
Frodo himself, the title shows that it was associated with the dark and despairing dreams which
visited him in March and October during his last
three years. But there were certainly other traditions concerning Hobbits that were taken by the
'wandering-madness', and if they ever returned,
were afterwards queer and uncommunicable. The
thought of the Sea was ever-present in the back-
ground of hobbit imagination; but fear of it and
distrust of all Elvish lore, was the prevailing mood in the Shire at the end of the Third Age,
and that mood was certainly not entirely dispelled
by the events and changes with which that Age
ended.
