                                  I.                                
                                                                   
                           PROSE FRAGMENTS                          
                      FOLLOWING THE LOST TALES.                   
                                                                   
 Before  giving  the  'Sketch  of the  Mythology', the  earliest form
 of the prose 'Silmarillion', there are some  brief prose  texts that
 can be conveniently collected here.                                
                                                                   
                                 (i).                               
                                                                   
 Among  loose  papers  there  is  an  early  piece,  soon  abandoned,
 entitled Turlin and the  Exiles of  Gondolin. It  will be  seen that
 it  relates closely  to the  beginning of  the tale  of The  Fall of
 Gondolin (II.  149)  but  at  the  same time  contains much  that is
 new. That it was the beginning  of a  later version  of the  tale is
 clear  at  once  from  the  name  Mithrim,  for  this  only replaced
 Asgon  by  emendation  in  the final  text of  The Fall  of Gondolin
 (II. 202). This brief text reads as follows. At  the first  three oc-
 currences of the name Turlin in the  narrative (but  not in  the ti-
 tle)  it  was  emended  to Turgon;  at the  fourth and  fifth Turgon
 was so written from the first. I give Turgon throughout.           
                                                                   
   'Then'   said   Ilfiniol   son   of   Bronweg   'know   that  Ulmo
 Lord  of  Waters  forgot  never  the  sorrows  of  the   Elfin  kin-
 dreds  beneath  the  power  of  Melko,  but   he  might   do  little
 because   of  the   anger  of   the  other   Gods  who   shut  their
 hearts  against  the  race  of  the  Gnomes,  and  dwelt  behind the
 veiled  hills  of  Valinor  heedless  of  the  Outer World,  so deep
 was  their  ruth  and  regret  for  the  death  of  the  Two  Trees.
 Nor  did  any  save  Ulmo  only  dread  the  power  of   Melko  that
 wrought  ruin  and  sorrow  over  all  the   Earth;  but   Ulmo  de-
 sired  that  Valinor  should  gather  all  its  might to  quench his
 evil  ere it  be  too  late,  and  him  seemed  that  both  purposes
                                                                   
                                                                  

 might   perchance   be   achieved   if  messengers   from  the
 Gnomes  should win  to Valinor  and plead  for pardon  and for
 pity upon the Earth; for the  love of  Palurien and  Orome her
 son  for those  wide realms  did but  slumber still.  Yet hard
 and evil was the  road from  the Outer  Earth to  Valinor, and
 the  Gods  themselves  had  meshed  the  ways  with  magic and
 veiled the encircling  hills. Thus  did Ulmo  seek unceasingly
 to  stir  the  Gnomes  to  send  messengers unto  Valinor, but
 Melko  was  cunning  and  very  deep  in wisdom,  and unsleep-
 ing  was his  wariness in  all things  that touched  the Elfin
 kindreds,  and their  messengers overcame  not the  perils and
 temptations of that longest and  most evil  of all  roads, and
 many that dared to set forth were lost for ever.             
   Now  tells  the  tale  how  Ulmo despaired  that any  of the
 Elfin  race  should  surpass the  dangers of  the way,  and of
 the deepest and the latest design that he then  fashioned, and
 of those things which came of it.                            
   In  those  days  the greater  part  of  the kindreds  of Men
 dwelt after the  Battle of  Unnumbered Tears  in that  land of
 the North  that has  many names,  but which  the Elves  of Kor
 have  named  Hisilome  which  is  the  Twilit  Mist,  and  the
 Gnomes,  who  of  the  Elf-kin  know  it  best,  Dor-Lomin the
 Land  of  Shadows.  A  people  mighty  in numbers  were there,
 dwelling  about  the  wide  pale waters  of Mithrim  the great
 lake that lies  in those  regions, and  other folk  named them
 Tunglin or folk of the  Harp, for  their joy  was in  the wild
 music  and  minstrelsy of  the fells  and woodlands,  but they
 knew not and  sang not  of the  sea. Now  this folk  came into
 those places after the dread battle,  being too  late summoned
 thither  from  afar,  and  they  bore  no  stain  of treachery
 against  the  Elfin  kin;  but  indeed  many among  them clung
 to  such  friendship  with  the  hidden  Gnomes  of  the moun-
 tains and  Dark Elves  as might  be still  for the  sorrow and
 mistrust born of those ruinous deeds in  the Vale  of Niniach.
 Turgon was a man of  that folk,  son of  Peleg, son  of Indor,
 son of  [Ear >]  Fengel who  was their  chief and  hearing the
 summons had  marched out  of the  deeps of  the East  with all
 his  folk. But  Turgon dwelt  not much  with his  kindred, and

 loved  rather  solitude and  the friendship  of the  Elves whose
 tongues  he  knew,  and  he  wandered   alone  about   the  long
 shores  of  Mithrim,  now  hunting  in  its  woods,  now  making
 sudden  music  in  the  rocks  upon  his  rugged  harp  of  wood
 strung  with  the  sinews  of  bears.  But he  sang not  for the
 ears  of  Men,  and  many  hearing  the   power  of   his  rough
 songs  came  from  afar  to  hearken  to  his   harping;  [?but]
 Turgon left his  singing and  departed to  lonely places  in the
 mountains.                                                      
   Many  strange  things  he  learned  there,  broken  tidings of
 far  off  things,  and longing  came upon  him for  deeper lore,
 but as yet  his heart turned not  from the  long shores,  and the
 pale  waters  of  Mithrim  in the  mists. Yet  was he  not fated
 to dwell  for ever  in those  places, for  'tis said  that magic
 and  destiny led  him on  a day  to a  cavernous opening  in the
 rocks   down  which   a  hidden   river  flowed   from  Mithrim.
 And  Turgon  entered that  cavern seeking  to learn  its secret,
 but  having  entered  the  waters  of  Mithrim  drave  him  for-
 ward  into  the  heart of  the rock  and he  might not  win back
 into the  light. This  men have  said was  not without  the will
 of   Ulmo,   at   whose   prompting  may   be  the   Gnomes  had
 fashioned   that   deep   and   hidden   way.   Then   came  the
 Gnomes  to  Turgon  and  guided  him  along  the  dark  passages
 amid  the  mountains  until  he  came  out  once  more  into the
 light.                                                          
                                                                
   The text  ends here  (though manuscript  pages written  at the
 same time continue on another subject, see (ii) below).         
   Turlin must have been a passing shift from Tuor (cf.  the form
 Tur that appears in texts of The Fall of Gondolin, II. 148), and
 Turgon likewise; in the Tale Turgon is of course the name of the
 King of Gondolin. This  curious passing  transference of  a pri-
 mary name in the  legends may  be compared  with the  brief sub-
 stitution of Celegorm for Thingol  and Maglor  for Beren  in the
 Lay of Leithian (III. 159).                                      
   Particularly interesting is the account here of the origins of
 Tuor's people: they came out of the  East to  the Battle  of Un-
 numbered  Tears,  but  they came  too late.  This can  hardly be

  wholly  unconnected  with  the  coming  of the  Easterlings before
  the  battle  in  the later  story. The  genealogy of  Tuor (Turlin,
  Turgon) is here 'son of  Peleg son  of Indor  son of  Fengel'. In
  The  Fall  of  Gondolin  he  is  'son  of  Peleg  son   of  Indor'
  (II. 160); in the fragment of the Lay  of the  Fall of  Gondolin he
  is the son of  Fengel, and  in associated  notes Tuor  is himself
  called Fengel (III.  145). His  people are  here the  Tunglin, the
  folk  of  the Harp,  whereas in  The Fall  of Gondolin  (ibid.) he
  belongs  to  'the house  of the  Swan of  the sons  of the  Men of
  the North'.                                                       
    Also  noteworthy  is  the  opening  of  the  present  text where
  Ulmo's  desires  and  devisings ate  described: his  unceasing at-
  tempts  to  persuade  the  Gnomes to  send messengers  to Valinor,
  his isolation from the  other Valar,  his wish  that the  power of
  Valinor  should  go  against  Melko  in time.  There does  not ap-
  pear  to  Le  any  other  mention of  Ulmo's attempting  to arouse
  the  Gnomes  to  send  messages  to Valinor;  and though  his iso-
  lation  in  his pity  for the  Gnomes in  the Great  Lands appears
  strongly at the beginning  of the  tale of  The Hiding  of Valinor
  g.  209),  there  Manwe  and  Varda  beside  Ulmo were  opposed to
  the withdrawal of Valinor from the fate of 'the world'.           
    Lastly, 'the Vale of  Niniach' must  be the  site of  the Battle
  of  Unnumbered  Tears;  cf.  'the  Vale  (Valley)  of  Weeping Wa-
  ters'  in  the  outlines  for  Gilfanon's  Tale (I.230-40). Niniach
  never  occurs  again  in  this  application,  though  the  way  by
  which  Tuor  went  down  to  the  sea  came  to  be  called Cirith
  Ninniach, the Rainbow Cleft.                                      
                                                                   
                                 (ii).                                
                                                                   
  The  manuscript  Turlin  and  the  Exiles  of  Gondolin  continues
  (the  paper  and  the  handwriting  are  identical,  and  all were
  placed together) with a further text of  great interest,  since it
  represents the first step towards  the later  story of  the coming
  of the Noldor to  Middle-earth since  the outlines  for Gilfanon's
  Tale g. 237 ff.). This was hastily pencilled and is in places dif-
  ficult to make out.                                               

  
                                                              
  Then   Gelmir  king   of  the   Gnomes  marshalled   his  un-
 happy folk and he said to  them: 'We  am come  at last  to the
 Great Lands  and have  set our  feet upon  the Earth,  and not
 even Elf-wisdom may yet  say what  shall come  of it;  but the
 torment  and  the pain  and the  tears that  we have  borne in
 the way hither shall be sung in song and told  in tale  by all
 the  folk  of  the Elfin  race hereafter;  yea and  even among
 other children of Ior shall some remember it.'                
  Long  time  did  the  Gnome-folk   dwell  nigh   those  west-
 ward shores in  the northern regions of  the Earth;  and their
 anguish was  lessened. Some  were there that fared  far afield
 and  gained  knowledge  of  the lands  about, and  they sought
 ever  to  know  whither Melko  had fled,  or where  was hidden
 the  gems  and  treasury  of  Valinor.  [Struck out:  Then did
 Gelmir marshal his hosts and  three great  armies had  he, and
 Golfin his son was captain of the  one, and  Delin his  son of
 a second, [Oleg >] Luthien his  son of  the third,  but Gelmir
 was lord and king.] Thereafter  did all  the folk  move onward
 to  the  East  and  somewhat  South,  and  all  the  armies of
 Golfin  and  of  Delin  moved  ahead  unhampered. Now  the ice
 melted,  and  the  snow  [?thinned], and  the trees  grew deep
 upon  the  hills, and  their hearts  knew comfort,  till their
 harps  and elfin  pipes awoke  once more.  Then did  the rocks
 ring  with  the  sweet  music  of  the  Elves,  and  countless
 [?coming]  of  their  many  feet;  new  flowers  sprang behind
 those  armies  as they  trod, for  the earth  was glad  of the
 coming  of  the  Gnomes,  nor had  the sun  or the  white moon
 yet seen fairer things in those places than their moving field
 of glinting spears  and their  goldwrought elfin  armoury. But
 the  women  and  the   Gnome-maids  and   Gnome-children  sang
 as  they  journeyed  after,  and  no such  clear song  of hope
 have the  lands heard  since, yet  was it  sad and  boding be-
 side that  singing that  was heard  upon [Kor  >] the  hill of
 Tun while the Two Trees blossomed still.                      
  Of  all  those  scouts  and  scattered  hosts  that  went far
 ahead  or  upon  either  side  of  the  marching  Gnomes  none
 were more eager  or burnt  with greater  fire than  Feanor the
 gem-smith  and  his  seven  sons;  but  nothing did  they dis-

  cover  yet,  and  came the  Gnomes at  length unto  that magic
  northern land of  which tales  often speak,  and by  reason of
  its  dark  woods  and grey  mountains and  its deep  mists the
  Gnomes  named  Dor Lomin  land  of   shadows.  There   lies  a
  lake,  Mithrim  whose mighty  waters reflect  a pale  image of
  the encircling hills.  Here did  the Gnomes  rest once  more a
  great  while,  and  Gelmir  let build  dwellings for  the folk
  about  the  shores  and  shoreland  woods,  but  there  too be
  numbered  and  marshalled  all  his  hosts  both  of spearmen,
  and  bowmen,  and  of  swordsmen,  for  no  lack  of  arms did
  the  Gnomes  bring  out  of  Valinor  and  the   armouries  of
  Makar  to  their  war with  Melko. And three great  armies had
  Gelmir  under  his lordship,  and Golfin  his son  was captain
  of one, and Delin his son  of another,  and Luthien  (not that
  Luthien of the Roses who is of  another and  a later  tale) of
  a  third;  and  Golfin's  might  was  in swordsmen,  and Delin
  had  more  of  those who  bore the  long... elfin  spears, but
  Luthien's  joy  was  in  the  number  and...  of his  bowmen -
  and  the  bow  has ever  been the  weapon wherein  the Elf-kin
  has  had  the  most  wondrous  skill. Now  the colours  of the
  Gnomes  were  gold  and white  in those  ancient days  in mem-
  ory  of  the  Two Trees,  but  Gelmir's  standard  bore upon a
  silver field  a crown  of gold,  and each  captain had  a fair
  banner; and the sign  of Golfin  in those  days was  upon gold
  a silver sword, and of Delin  a green  beech leaf  upon silver
  diapered  with  golden  flowers,  and  of  Luthien   a  golden
  swallow  that winged  through an  azure field  as it  were the
  sky  set  with  silver stars,  and the  sons of  Feanor wrought
  that standard and those  banners, and  they shone  by sunlight
  and  by  mist and  by moonlight  and by  starless dark  by the
  light of the Gnome-wrought gems that sewed them [sic].        
    Now  it  happened  on  a  while that  Feanor got  him beyond
  to the hills  that girt  Dor Lomin  in those  parts [northward
  of  >]  beyond  Artanor  where  these  were  open  empty lands
  and  treeless hills,  and he  had no  small company  and three
  of  his  sons  were with  him. Thus  came they  on a  day nigh
  evening to a hilltop, and afar off descried a red light leaping
  in  a  vale  open on  that side  that looked  towards [?them].

         
                                                                  
 Then  Feanor  wondered  what  this  fire  might  be,  and   he  and
 his folk marched in the still  night swiftly  thereto, so  that ere
 dawn  they  looked  down  into  that  vale.  There  saw   they  an
 armed  company  no  less  than  their  own,  and  they  sat around
 a  mighty  fire  of  wood.  The  most  were  asleep, but  some few
 stirred,  and  Feanor  stood  then  up  and  called  in  his clear
 voice  so  that  the  dark  vale  rang:  'Who  be  ye; men  of the
 Gnomes or other  what -  say swiftly  for 'tis  best for  [you to]
 know the children of Feanor compass you around.'                  
  Then  a  great  clamour  broke  forth  in the  vale and  the folk
 of  Feanor  knew  full  soon  that  here  were  no elfin  folk, by
 reason  of  their  harsh  voices  and  unlovely  cries,  and  many
 arrows  came  winging  in  the  dark   towards  that   voice,  but
 Feanor  was  no  longer  there.  Swiftly  had  he  gone  and drawn
 the  most  of  his  folk   before  the   vale's  mouth   whence  a
 stream issued forlh tree-hung                                     
                                                                  
  Here  the text  ends abruptly  and near  the top  of a  new page;
 it is clear that no more was written.                             
  The  Noldorin  house  has  still  not  emerged,  but  we  have  a
 king  Gelmir  of  the  Gnomes,  with   his  sons   Golfin,  Delin,
 Luthien (the last  emended from Oleg), captains  of his  three ar-
 mies. There is no  suggestion that  Feanor and  his sons  were as-
 sociated  with  these  in  any  sort  of  close  kinship.  In  the
 fragment  of  the  Lay  of the  Fall of  Gondolin (see III. 146-7)
 there appears - for  the first  time -  Fingolfin, who  steps into
 Finwe Noleme's place as  the father  of Turgon  and Isfin,  but is
 not the son of  Finwe, rather  of Gelmir.  I have  suggested there
 that this Gelmir, father of Golfin/Fingolfin, is to  be identified
 with  Finwe,  father of  Fingolfin in  the alliterative  poems and
 later;  and  it  may  be that  the name  Gelmir is  formally con-
 nected  with  Fin-golma,  which  in  the  outlines-for  Gilfanon's
 Tale  is  another  name  for  Finwe  Noleme  g.  238-9,   and  see
 I.  263,  entry  Noleme).  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  Finwe
 Noleme was not in  the earliest  legend the  father of  Feanor and
 was  not  slain  by  Melko  in  Valinor,  but  came  to  the Great
 Lands.  -  Of  the  other  sons  of  Gelmir  named in  the present
 text, Delin and Luthien, there is no trace elsewhere.             
  It is certainly clear that Golfin here is the first appearaace of

  Fingolfin,  and  by  the same  token that  this text  preceded the
  abandoned  beginning  of  the  Lay  of  the  Fall of  Gondolin. On
  the other hand, the obscure story of  the death  of Feanor  in the
  earliest  outlines g.  238 -  9) has  disappeared, and  though the
  present  text  breaks  off  too  soon for  certainty it  seems ex-
  tremely probable that, had my  father continued  it a  little fur-
  ther,  we should  have learned  of Feanor's  death in  battle with
  the  Orcs  whom  he  and his  companions had  aroused in  the val-
  ley  where  they  were  encamped It  may be,  too, that  we should
  have  had  an  explanation  of  the puzzling  lines  of   the  Lay
  (III. 146):                                                         
                                                                   
    'Twas the bent blades of the Glamhoth that drank                
    Fiagolfin's life as he stood alone by Feanor.                   
                                                                   
  We are in any case here still  a long  way from  the story  of the
  divided hosts and the treachery of Feanor.                        
    The  encampment  of  Mithrim  (Asgon)   is refened   to  already
  in the early outlines, but in the later of these there  is mention
  g. 239) of the first  devising of  weapons by  the Gnomes  at this
  time, whereas in the present text  they are  said to  have brought
  great  store  of  arms  'out  of  Valinor  and  the  armouries  of
  Makar'. Here also appears  the earliest  form of  the idea  of the
  flowers  springing  beneath  the  marching  feet  of  the  Gnomish
  host.                                                             
    A  characteristic  heraldry  appears  in   the  armies   led  by
  Gelmir's  sons,  all  in  gold and  silver, in  memory of  the Two
  Trees  -  the  banners  made  (curiously  enough)  by the  sons of
  Feanor.  In  the  'Sketch  of  the   Mythology'  the   banners  of
  Fingolfin were in blue and silver, as they remained (p. 24).      
    The  name  Ior, which  occurs at  the beginning  of the  text in
  the  expression  'among  other  children  of  Ior' (as  opposed to
  'the Elfin race') and seems therefore to refer to Iluvatar,' occurs
  elsewhere only in a quite different reference: it is given  in the
  early  Gnomish  dictionary  as  the  equivalent  of  Qenya  Ivare,
  'the famous "piper of the sea" '.                                 

                                (iii).                               
                                                                 
 Thirdly and lastly, an isolated slip of paper contains a  most cu-
 rious trace of a stage in  development between  The Flight  of the
 Noldoli  in  the  Lost Tales  and the  'Sketch of  the Mythology'.
                                                                 
   The  Trees  stand  dark.  The  Plain  is  full  of  trouble. The
 Gnomes  gather  by  torchlight  in  Tun  or  Cor;  Feanor  laments
 Buithwir  (Felegron)  [emended  to  (Feleor)]  his  father,  bids
 Gnomes  depart  &  seek  Melko  and  their  treasures  -  he longs
 for  the  Silmarils  -  Finweg  &  Fingolfin  speak  against  him.
 The   Gnomes   shout   and  prepare   to  depart.   The  Solosimpi
 refuse:   the   wise   words   of  Ethlon   (Dimlint).  Foamriders
 [?beaches].  The  threats  of  Feanor  to march  to Cu  nan Eilch.
 The  arch,  the  lamplit   quays;  they   seize  the   boats.  One
 Gilfanon   sees   his   mighty   swanwinged    swan-feather   boat
 with  md.oars  [?going]  &  he  k  his  sons run  to the  arch and
 threaten  the  Gnomes.  The  fight  on   the  arch   &  Gilfanon's
 [?curse]  ere  they  throw   him  into   the  waves.   The  Gnomes
 reach Fangros k repent - burn the boats.                         
                                                                 
   Here  Bruithwir  (with  the additional  name Felegron  > Feleor)
 is still the father of Feanor as in the Lost Tales;  but Fingolfin
 and  Finweg  have  emerged, and  speak against  Feanor (it  is not
 clear  whether  Finwegh  ere is Fingolfin's  father ( Finwe) or
 Fingolfin's son (later Fingon): see  IIL 137  - 8,  146). Narrative
 features  that were  never taken  up in  the later  development of
 'The  Silmarillion'  here  make  their  only appearance.  What lay
 behind 'the wise words of  Ethlon (Dimlint)'  and 'the  threats of
 Feanor  to  march  to  Cu  nan  Eilch'  has  now  vanished without
 trace.  The  name Fangros  appears once  elsewhere, in  the allit-
 erative Children  of Hurin,  III. 31  line 631  (earlier Fangair),
 where there is a reference to a song, or songs, being sung       
                                                                 
         of the fight at Fangros, and Feanor's sons'              
         oath unbreakable                                         
                                                                 
 (the fight and the oath  need not  be in  any way  connected). But
 whatever  happened  at  Fangros  is  lost  beyond recall;  and no-

  where later is there any suggestion that the burning of the ships
  arose  from  repentance.  In the  Lost Tales  g. 168)  the Gnomes
  'abandoned  their  stolen ships'  when they  made the  passage of
  the Ice;  Sorontur reported  to Manwe  (I. 177)  that he  had seen
  'a fleet of white ships that drifted empty in the gales, and some
  were burning  with bright  fires', and  Manwe 'knew  thereby that
  the Noldoli were gone for ever  and their  ships burned  or aban-
  doned'.                                                          
    Lastly,  Gilfanon  appears  as  an  Elf  of Alqualonde,  one of
  those hurled by the Gnomes into the  sea, though  it is  not said
  that  he  was  drowned.   Gilfanon  of   Tavrobel  was   a  Gnome
  g. 174-5); and it seems virtually certain that the  two Gilfanons
  were not the same. In that case it is most probable that  the Elf
  of Tavrobel had  ceased to  be so  named; though  he had  not, as
  I think, ceased to exist (see pp. 325-326).                      

                                                             
                                                                
