                                 II.                                
                                                                   
                     THE EARLIEST 'SILMARILLION'.                     
                  (The 'Sketch of the Mythology').                  
                                                                   
 I have earlier (III. 3) given an account of this text, but  I repeat
 the  essentials of  it here.  On the  envelope containing  the man-
 uscript my father wrote at some later time:                        
                                                                   
   Original    'Silmarillion'.    Form    orig    [inally]    composed
   c.  1926-30   for  R.   W.  Reynolds   to  explain   background  of
   'alliterative  version'  of Turin  & the  Dragon: then  in progress
   (unfinished) (begun c. 1918).                                    
                                                                   
 The  'Sketch'  represents a  new starting-point  in the  history of
 'The Silmarillion', for  while it  is a  quite brief  synopsis, the
 further  written  development  of  the  prose  form  proceeded from
 it in a direct line. It is clear from details that need not  be re-
 peated here that it was originally written in  1926 (after  the Lay
 of  the  Children  of  Hurin had  been abandoned,  III. 3);  but it
 was  afterwards  revised, in  places very  heavily, and  this makes
 it a difficult text to present in a way that  is both  accurate and
 readily  comprehensible.  The  method  I  have  adopted is  to give
 the text exactly as it  was first  written (apart  from a  very few
 slight alterations  of expression  in no  way affecting  the narra-
 tive, which are adopted silently into the text), but to break it up
 into short  sections, following  each with  notes giving  the later
 changes made in that  section. I  must emphasize  that there  is no
 manuscript warrant for the  19 divisions  so made:  it is  purely a
 matter  of  convenience  of presentation.  This method  has certain
 advantages:  the  later  changes  can be readily compared  with the
 original  text  immediately  preceding;  and  since   the  following
 version  of  'The Silmarillion',  the Quenta,  has been  treated in
 the  same  way   and  divided   into corresponding   numbered  sec-
 tions, passages of the one can be easily related to those  in the
 other.                                                          
   The later  changes are  referenced by  numbers that  begin with
 1  in  each section.  The commentary  follows at  the end  of the
 complete text, and is related to the numbered sections.         
                                                                
      Sketch of the mythology with especial reference to the     
                        'Children of Hurin'                      

                                 1.
                                                                
   After  the  despatch  of  the  Nine  Valar  for  the governance
 of  the  world  Morgoth  (Demon  of  Dark)  rebels   against  the
 overlordship  of  Manwe,  overthrows  the  lamps  set  up  to il-
 lumine  the  world,  and  floods  the  isle  where the  Valar (or
 Gods)  dwelt. He  fortifies a  palace of  dungeons in  the North.
 The  Valar  remove  to  the  uttermost  West,  bordered   by  the
 Outer  Seas  and  the final  Wall, and  eastward by  the towering
 Mountains  of  Valinor  which  the  Gods  built. In  Valinor they
 gather  all  light  and  beautiful things,  and build  their man-
 sions,  gardens,  and  city,  but  Manwe  and  his  wife  Bridhil
 have   halls   upon   the   highest   mountain   (Timbrenting  or
 Tindbrenting  in  English,  Tengwethil  in   Gnomish,  Taniquetil
 in  Elfin)  whence  they  can see  across the  world to  the dark
 East.  Ifan  Belaurin(1) plants  the Two Trees  in the  middle of
 the plain of Valinor  outside the  gates of  the city  of Valmar.
 They  grow  under  her  songs,  and  one  has  dark  green leaves
 with  shining  silver  beneath,  and  white  blossoms   like  the
 cherry from  which a  dew of  silver light  falls; the  other has
 golden-edged  leaves  of  young  green  like  the beech  and yel-
 low  blossom  like  the  hanging   blossoms  of   laburnum  which
 give  out  heat  and  blazing  light. Each  bee waxes  for seven'
 hours  to  full  glory  and  then  wanes for  seven; twice  a day
 therefore  comes  a  time  of  softer  light  when  each  tree is
 faint and their light is mingled.                               
                                                                
                                 *                               
  1. Yavanna Palurien added in the margin.                                  
  2. At both occurrences of seven in this sentence my father first wrote six,
  but changed it in the act of writing the manuscript.                     
                                                                          
                                      2.                                   
                                                                          
 The  Outer  Lands  are  in  darkness.  The  growth  of things             
 was  checked  when  Morgoth  quenched  the  lamps.  There are             
 forests  of darkness,  of yew  and fir  and ivy.  There Orome             
 sometimes  hunts,  but  in  the  North  Morgoth  and  his de-             
 monic  broods (Balrogs)  and the  Orcs (Goblins,  also called             
 Glamhoth  or  people  of  hate) hold  sway. Bridhil  looks on             
 the darkness and is moved,  and taking  all the hoarded light             
 of Silpion (the white tree) she makes and strews the stars.               
 At the  making of  the stars  the children  of Earth  awake -             
 the Eldar (or  Elves). They  are found  by Orome  dwelling by             
 the  star-lit  pool  (Cuivienen, water  of awakening)  in the             
 East. He rides home to Valinor filled  with their  beauty and             
 tells the Valar, who are reminded of their duty to the Earth,             
 since they.  came thither  knowing that  their office  was to             
 govern it for the two races  of Earth  who should  after come             
 each in appointed time.  There follows  an expedition  to the             
 fortress of the North (Angband, Iron-hell),  but this  is now             
 too  strong  for  them  to  destroy.  Morgoth  is nonetheless             
 taken  captive,  and  consigned  to the  halls of  Mandos who             
 dwelt in the North of Valinor.                                            
 The  Eldalie  (people of  the Elves)  are invited  to Valinor             
 for fear of the evil things of Morgoth that still wandered in             
 the dark. A great march is made  by the  Eldar from  the East             
 led  by  Orome  on  his  white horse.  The Eldar  are divided             
 into  three  hosts, one  under Ingwe  (Ing) after  called the             
 Quendi  (or Elves  proper, or  Light-elves), one  under Finwe             
 (Finn) after called the Noldoli  (Gnomes or  Deep-elves), one             
 under  Elwe  (Elu)  after  called  the Teleri  (Sea-elves, or             
 Solosimpi,  the  Shoreland  Pipers  or  Foamriders).  Many of             
 them  are  lost upon  the march  and wander  in the  woods of             
 the  world,  becoming  after the  various hosts  of Ilkorindi             
 (Elves  who  never  dwelt in  Cor in  Valinor). The  chief of             
 these  was  Thingol,  who heard  Melian and  her nightingales             

 singing  and was  enchanted and  fell asleep  for an  age. Me-
 lian was  one of  the divine  maidens of  the Vala  Lorien who
 sometimes   wandered   into  the   outer  world.   Melian  and
 Thingol   became  Queen   and  King   of  woodland   Elves  in
 Doriath, living in a hall called the Thousand Caves.          
                                                              
   The other Elves  came to  the ultimate  shores of  the West.
 In  the  North  these  in  those days  sloped westward  in the
 North  until  only  a narrow  sea divided  them from  the land
 of  the Gods,  and this  narrow sea  was filled  with grinding
 ice.  But  at the  point to  which the  Elf-hosts came  a wide
 dark sea stretched west.                                      
   There  were  two  Valar  of  the  Sea.  Ulmo   (Ylmir),  the
 mightiest of  all Valar  next to  Manwe, was  lord of  all wa-
 ters, but dwelt often in Valinor, or in the 'Outer Seas'. Osse
 and  the lady Oin,(1) whose  tresses lay  through all  the sea,
 loved  rather the  seas of  the world  that washed  the shores
 beneath  the Mountains  of Valinor.  Ylmir uprooted  the half-
 sunk island  where the  Valar had  first dwelt,  and embarking
 on it the Noldoli and Qendi, who arrived  first, bore  them to
 Valinor.  The  Teleri  dwelt some  time by  the shores  of the
 sea  awaiting  him,  and hence  their love  of it.  While they
 were being  also transported  by Ylmir,  Osse in  jealousy and
 out of love for their singing chained the  island to  the sea-
 bottom  far  out  in the  Bay of  Faerie whence  the Mountains
 of Valinor could dimly  be seen.  No other  land was  near it,
 and it was called the Lonely  Isle. There  the Teleri  dwelt a
 long age becoming  different in  tongue, and  learning strange
 music of Osse, who made the sea-birds for their delight.      
   The Gods  gave a  home in  Valinor to  the other  Eldar. Be-
 cause  they  longed  even  among   the  Tree-lit   gardens  of
 Valinor for a  glimpse of  the stars,  a gap  was made  in the
 encircling  mountains,  and  there  in a  deep valley  a green
 hill,  Cor,  was  built.  This was  lit from  the West  by the
 Trees, to the East it  looked out  onto the  Bay of  Faerie and
 the  Lonely  Isle,  and  beyond  to  the  Shadowy  Seas.  Thus

 some of the blessed light of Valinor filtered into  the Outer              
 Lands,  and  falling  on  the Lonely  Isle caused its western              
 shores to grow green and fair.                                             
   On  the top  of Cor  the city  of the  Elves was  built and              
 called  Tun.  The   Qendi  became   most  beloved   by  Manwe              
 and  Bridhil,  the  Noldoli  by Aule  (the Smith)  and Mandos              
 the  wise.  The  Noldoli  invented  gems  and  made  them  in              
 countless numbers,  filling all  Tun with  them, and  all the              
 halls of the Gods '                                                        
   The greatest in skill and magic of  the Noldoli  was Finn's              
 second  son  Feanor.  (His  elder  son  Fingolfin'  whose son              
 was Finnweg comes into  the tale  later.) He  contrived three              
 jewels  (Silmarils)  wherein  a living  fire combined  in the              
 light  of  the Two  Trees was  set, they  shone of  their own              
 light, impure hands were burned by them.                                   
   The Teleri seeing afar the  light of  Valinor were  tom be-              
 tween desire to rejoin their kindred and to dwell by the sea.              
 Ylmir  taught  them  craft  of  boat-building.  Osse yielding              
 gave them  swans, and  harnessing many  swans to  their boats              
 they sailed to Valinor, and dwelt there  on the  shores where              
 they  could  see the  light of  the Trees,  and go  to Valmar              
 if  they  wished,  but  could  sail and  dance in  the waters              
 touched to light by the radiance that came out past  Cor. The              
 other  Eldar  gave them  many gems, especially opals  and di-              
 amonds and  other pale  crystals which  were strewn  upon the              
 beaches  of  the  Bay  of  Faerie.  They  themselves invented              
 pearls.  Their  chief  town  was  Swanhaven  upon  the shores              
 northward of the pass of Cor.                                              
                                                                           
                                      *                                     
                                                                           
 1. Uinen pencilled against Oin.                                             
 2. The following passage was afterwards added here:                         
                                                                           
       Since  the  Gnomes  or  Noldoli  afterwards came  back into  the &eat
       Lands, and these tales deal  mostly with  them, it  may here  be said
       that Lord or  King of  the Noldoli  was Finn.  His sons  were Feanor,
       Fingolfin,  and Finrod.  Of whom  Feanor was  the most  skillful, the
       deepest in lore, Fingolfin the mightiest and most valiant, Finrod the

  fairest,  and  the  most wisehearted  and gentle.  The seven  sons of
  Feanor were Maidros  the tall;  Maglor a  musician and  mighty singer
  whose voice carried far over hill and sea; Curufin the crafty who in-
  herited most of his father's skill; Celegorm  the fair;  Crantbir the
  dark; and Damrod and Diriel who  after were  great hunters.  The sons
  of Fingolfin were Finweg who  was after  the king  of the  Noldoli in
  the North  of the  world, and  Turgon of  Gondolin; and  his daughter
  was  Isfin the  white. The  sons of  Finrod were  Orodreth, Felagoth,
  Anrod, and Egnor.                                                    
                                                                      
 In the last sentence Felagoth > Felagund, and Orodeth moved to           
 stand after Felagund.                                                 
 3. Finn's second son Feanor and His elder son Fingolfin >  Finn's elder
 son Feanor and His second son Fingolfin (an  early change,  quite pos-
 sibly made at the time of the writing of the manuscript).            

                             4.
                                                                      
 The    Gods    were    now   beguiled    by   Morgoth,    who   having
 passed   seven   ages   in   the  prisons   of  Mandos   in  gradually
 lightened  pain  came  before  the  conclave  of   the  Gods   in  due
 course.   He   looks   with   greed   and   malice  upon   the  Eldar,
 who  also  sit  there  about  the  knees  of the  Gods, and  lusts es-
 pecially  after  the  jewels.  He  dissembles   his  hatred   and  de-
 sire   for   revenge.   He   is   allowed   a   humble   dwelling   in
 Valinor,  and   after  a   while  goes   &eely  about   Valinor,  only
 Ylmir  foreboding  ill,  while  Tulcas  the  strong  who   first  cap-
 tured   him   watches   him.   Morgoth   helps   the  Eldar   in  many
 deeds, but slowly poisons their peace with lies.                      
 He  suggests  that   the  Gods   brought  them   to  Valinor   out  of
 jealousy,   for   fear   their  marvellous   skill,  and   magic,  and
 beauty,   should   grow   too   strong   for   them  outside   in  the
 world.   The   Qendi   and   Teleri   are   little   moved,   but  the
 Noldoli,  the  wisest  of  the  Elves,   become  affected.   They  be-
 gin  at  whiles  to  murmur  against  the  Gods  and   their  kindred;
 they are filled with vanity of their skill.'                          
 Most  of  all  does   Morgoth  fan   the  flames   of  the   heart  of
 Feanor,  but  all  the  while  he  lusts  for the  immortal Silmarils,
 although  Feanor  has  cursed  for   ever  anyone,   God  or   Elf  or
 mortal    that    shall    come    hereafter,   who    touches   them.
 Morgoth   lying   tells   Feanor   that   Fingolfin   and    his   son

 Finnweg am  plotting to  usurp the  leadership of  the Gnomes
 from  Feanor  and  his  sons,  and to  gain the  Silmarils. A
 quarrel breaks out between the sons of  Finn. Feanor  is sum-
 moned before the  Gods, and  the lies  of Morgoth  laid bare.
 Feanor  is  banished  from Tun,  and with  him goes  Finn who
 loves  Feanor  best  of  his  sons, and  many of  the Gnomes.
 They build a treasury Northward in Valinor  in the  hills near
 Mandos' halls. Fingolfin rules  the Gnomes  that are  left in
 Tun.  Thus  Morgoth's  words seem  justified and  the bitter-
 ness he sowed goes on after his words are disproved.         
   Tulcas  is sent  to put  Morgoth in  chains once  more, but
 he escapes through the pass of Cor into  the dark  region be-
 neath  the  feet  of  Timbrenting  called Arvalin,  where the
 shadow  is  thickest  in  all  the  world.  There   he  finds
 Ungoliant,  Gloomweaver,  who  dwells  in  a  cleft   of  the
 mountains,  and  sucks  up  light or  shining things  to spin
 them out again in webs  of black  and choking  darkness, fog,
 and  gloom. With  her he  plots revenge. Only a  terrible re-
 ward will bring her  to dare  the dangers  of Valinor  or the
 sight of  the Gods.  She weaves  a dense  gloom about  her to
 protect  her  and swings  on cords  hem pinnacle  to pinnacle
 till she has scaled the highest peak of the mountains  in the
 south of Valinor (little guarded because of their  height and
 their distance from the old fortress  of Morgoth).  She makes
 a ladder  that Morgoth  can scale.  They creep  into Valinor.
 Morgoth  stabs  the  Trees  and  Ungoliant  sucks   up  their
 juices, belching forth  clouds of  blackness. The  Trees suc-
 cumb  slowly  to  the  poisoned  sword,  and to  the venomous
 lips of Ungoliant.                                          
   The  Gods are dismayed  by  a twilight  at midday,  and va-
 pours of black float in about the ways of the city.  They are
 too  late.  The  Trees die  while they  wail about  them. But
 Tulcas  and  Orome  and  many  others  hunt  on  horseback in
 the  gathering  gloom  for  Morgoth.  Wherever  Morgoth  goes
 there the confusing darkness  is greatest  owing to  the webs
 of  Ungoliant.  Gnomes  from  the  treasury  of Finn  come in
 and report that Morgoth is assisted by a spider  of darkness.
 They  had  seen  them  making  for  the  North.  Morgoth  had

 stayed his flight at the Treasury, slain Finn and many of his               
 men, and carried off the Silmarils  and a  vast hoard  of the               
 most splendid jewels of the Elves.                                          
   In  the  meanwhile  Morgoth  escapes  by   Ungoliant's  aid               
 northward  and  crosses  the  Grinding Ice.  When he  has re-               
 gained  the  northern  regions  of  the world  Ungoliant sum-               
 mons him to pay the other half of her reward. The  first half               
 was the sap of the Trees of  Light. Now  she claims  one half               
 of  the  jewels.  Morgoth  yields  them  up  and  she devours               
 them.  She  is  now become  monstrous, but  he will  not give               
 hei any share in the Silmarils. She enmeshes  him in  a black               
 web, but he is  rescued by  the Balrogs with whips  of flame,               
 and  the  hosts  of the  Orcs; and  Ungoliant goes  away into               
 the uttermost South.                                                        
   Morgoth  returns  to  Angband,  and   his  power   and  the               
 numbers  of  his  demons  and  Orcs  becomes   countless.  He               
 forges an iron crown and sets  therein the  Silmarils, though               
 his hands are burned  black by  them, and  he is  never again               
 free  from  the  pain  of  the  burning.  The crown  he never               
 leaves off for a moment, and  he never  leaves the  deep dun-               
 geons of  his fortress,  governing his  vast armies  from his               
 deep throne.                                                                
                                                                            
                                      *                                      
                                                                            
 1. Added here:                                                               
                                                                            
       which  Morgoth  flatters.  The  Gods  knew  also of  the coming  of mor-
       tals or Men that was to be. They  had not  yet told  the Elves,  for the
       time was  not near,  nor explairied  what was  to be  the realm  of each
       race, and their relations. Morgoth tells of Men,  and suggests  that the
       Gods  are  keeping  the  Elves  captive,  so  that  weaker Men  shall be
       controlled more  easily by  the Gods,  and the  Elves defrauded  of their
       kingdoms.                                                             
                                                                            
     This was an early addition, probably not materially later than the writ-
     ing of the manuscript.                                                  

                                5.                             
                                                              
   When   it  became   clear  that   Morgoth  had   escaped  the
 Gods  assemble about  the dead  Trees and  sit in  the darkness
 stricken  and  dumb  for  a long  while, caring  about nothing.
 The  day  which  Morgoth  chose  for  his attack  was a  day of
 festival  throughout  Valinor. Upon  this day  it was  the cus-
 tom of the chief Valar and  many of  the Elves,  especially the
 people of Ing  (the Quendi),  to climb  the long  winding paths
 in  endless  procession  to  Manwe's  halls  upon  Timbrenting.
 All   the   Quendi  and   some  of   the  Noldoli   (who  under
 Fingolfin  dwelt  still in  Tun) had  gone to  Timbrenting, and
 were  singing  upon  its  topmost  height  when   the  watchers
 from  afar  descried  the  fading  of  the  Trees. Most  of the
 Noldoli  were  in  the  plain,  and the  Teleri upon  the shore.
 The fogs and darkness  drift in  now off  the seas  through the
 pass  of  Cor  as  the  Trees  die.  Feanor summons  the Gnomes
 to Tun (rebelling against his banishment).'                   
   There is  a vast  concourse on  the square  on the  summit of
 Cor about  the tower  of Ing,  lit by  torches. Feanor  makes a
 violent  speech,  and  though  his  wrath  is  for  Morgoth his
 words are in part  the fruit  of Morgoth's  lies.' He  bids the
 Gnomes  fly  in  the  darkness  while the  Gods are  wrapped in
 mourning,  to  seek  freedom  in  the  world  and  to  seek out
 Morgoth,  now  Valinor  is  no  more  blissful  than  the earth
 outside.'  Fingolfin  and  Finweg speak  against him.4  The as-
 sembled  Gnomes  vote  for  flight,  and  Fingolfin  and Finweg
 yield; they will not desert their people, but they  retain com-
 mand over a half of the people of the Noldoli.'               
   The  flight  begins.' The  Teleri will  not join.  The Gnomes
 cannot  escape  without  boats, and  do not  dare to  cross the
 Grinding  Ice.  They  attempt  to   seize  the   swan-ships  in
 Swanhaven,  and  a fight  ensues (the  first between  the races
 of the Earth) in which many Teleri are  slain, and  their ships
 carried  off.  A  curse  is  pronounced  upon the  Gnomes, that
 they shall after  suffer often  from treachery  and the  fear of
 treachery  among  their  own  kindred  in  punishment  for  the

 blood  spilled at Swanhaven.(7) They  sail  North  along the                   
 coast  of  Valinor.  Mandos  sends  an emissary, who speaking                   
 from a high cliff hails them as they sail by, and  warns them                   
 to return, and  when they  will not  speaks the  'Prophecy of                   
 Mandos' concerning the fate of after days.'                                     
   The  Gnomes come  to the  narrowing of  the seas,  and pre-                   
 pare  to  sail.  While  they  are  encamped  upon  the  shore                   
 Feanor and his sons and people sail off taking with  them all                   
 the boats,  and leave  Fingolfin on  the far  shore treacher-                   
 ously,  thus  beginning  the  Curse  of Swanhaven.  They burn                   
 the boats as soon as they land in the East of the  world, and                   
 Fingolfin's people see the light in the  sky. The  same light                   
 also tells the Orcs of the landing.                                             
   Fingolfin's people wander  miserably. Some  under Fingolfin                   
 return to Valinor(9) to seek the Gods' pardon. Finweg leads the                   
 main host North, and over  the Grinding  Ice. Many  are lost.                   
                                                                                
                                        *                                        
                                                                                
 1. As  originally writtten,  this sentence  began Finn  and Feanor  summon &c.
     This  was a  mere slip,  since Finn's  death has  already been  mentioned in
     the text as first written ($4), and my father later struck out Finn and. He
     left  the  plural  verb  summon and  their banishment;  this I  have changed
     to  his  banishment,  since it  is not  said of  the Gnomes  who accompanied
     Feanor  that they  left Tun  under banishment  (though this  is not  said of
     Finn  either).  The  Quenta  has his  banishment in  this passage  (p. 114).
                                                                                
 2. Added here hastily in pencil:                                                 
                                                                                
       He  claims  the  lordship  as eldest  son now  Finn is  dead, in  spite of
       the Gods' decree.                                                         
                                                                                
 [Except for the  later pencilled  alteration given  in note  5, all  the changes
 noted  below,  mostly  concerned  to  introduce  the  part  of  Finrod   in  the
 events,  were  made  at the  same time,  in red  ink. Finrod,  the third  son of
 Finn/Finwe, appears in the interpolated passage given in $3 note 2.]            
                                                                                
 3. Added here:                                                                   
                                                                                
       Feanor and his sons take the unbreakable oath by Timbrenting and          
       the names of Manwe and Bridil to pursue  anyone, Elf,  Mortal, or          
       Orc, who holds the Silmarils.                                             

  4. Added here:                                                                  
                                                                                
        Finrod tries to calm their conflicting anger, but his sons Orodreth,     
        Anrod, and Egnor side with the sons of Feanor.                           
                                                                                
  5. a half of the people of the Noldoli > a half of the Noldoli of Tun (later
     pencilled change).                                                          
                                                                                
  6. Added here but then struck out (see note 7):                                 
                                                                                
        Finrod does not go, but bids Felagoth (and his other sons) go and        
        cherish the Gnomes of his [?house].                                      
                                                                                
  7. Added here:                                                                  
                                                                                
        Finrod is slain at Swanhaven in trying to stay the violence.             
                                                                                
     This  was  also struck  out (see  note 6)  and a  third version  of Finrod's
     part entered:                                                               
                                                                                
        Finrod  and  his  sons  were  not  at  Swanhaven.  They  leave   Tun  reluc-
        tantly,  and  more  than  the  others carry  away memories  of it,  and even
        many fair things made there by hands.                                    
                                                                                
  8. Added here:                                                                  
                                                                                
        and the curse of war against one another because of Swanhaven.           
                                                                                
  9. This passage, from Fingolfin's people wander, changed to read:               
                                                                                
        Finrod and his people arrive. The people of Finrod and Fingolfin          
        wander miserably. Some under Finrod return to Valinor, &c.              
                                                                                
                                         6.                                      
                                                                                
    In  the  meanwhile  Manwe  summons  Ifan  Belaurin  to the                   
  council. Her magic  will not  avail to  cure the  Trees. But                   
  Silpion under her spells bears one last great  silver bloom,                   
  and Laurelin one great  golden fruit.  The Gods  fashion the                   
  Moon  and  Sun  from these  and set  them to  sail appointed                   
  courses from West to East, but afterwards they find it safer                   
  to send them in Ylmir's care through  the caverns  and grot-                   
  toes beneath the Earth, to rise  in the  East and  come home                   

 again  high  in  the  air  over  the  mountains  of  the  West,  to
 sink after each journey into the waters of the Outer Seas.         
   The  light  of  Valinor  is  henceforth  not  much  greater  than
 that  now  scattered  over  the  Earth,  save  that  hem  the ships
 of  Sun  and  Moon  come  nearer  to  Earth, and  rest for  a while
 close  to  Valinor.  The  Gods  and  Elves  look  forward to  a fu-
 ture  time  when  the  'magic  sun  and  moon'  of  the  Trees  may
 be rekindled   and  the   old  beauty   and  bliss   renewed.  Ylmir
 foretells(1) that  it  will  only be  achieved with  the aid  of the
 second  race  of  earth.  But  the  Gods,  even  Manwe,  pay little
 heed  to  him.   They  are   wroth  and   bitter  because   of  the
 slaying  at  Swanhaven(2) and  they   fortify  all   Valinor  making
 the  mountains  impenetrable,  save  at   Cor  which   the  remain-
 ing   Elves   are   commanded   to   guard,  ceaselessly   and  for
 ever,  and  let  no  bird  or  beast  or  Elf  or  Man land  on the
 shores.  of  Faery.  The  magic  isles,  filled  with  enchantment,
 are  strung  across  the  confines  of  the  Shadowy  Seas,  before
 the  Lonely  Isle  is  reached  sailing  West,  to entrap  any mar-
 iners  and  wind  them  in  everlasting  sleep   and  enchantment.'
 The  Gods  sit  now  behind  the  mountains  and  feast,  and  dis-
 miss  the  rebel  and  fugitive  Noldoli  from their  hearts. Ylmir
 alone  remembers  them,  and  gathers  news  of  the   outer  world
 through all the lakes and rivers.                                  
   At  the  rising  of  the  first  Sun  the  younger   children  of
 earth  awoke  in  the  far  East.  No  god  came  to   guide  them,
 but  the  messages  of  Ylmir  little  understood  came  at  whiles
 to  them.  They  meet   Ilkorindi  and   learn  speech   and  other
 things  of  them,  and  become  great   friends  of   the  Eldalie.
 They  spread  through   the  earth,   wandering  West   and  North.
                                                                   
                                  *                                 
 1. Ylmir foretells changed at the time of writing from Bridhil foretells.
 2. Added here (hastily in pencil):                                  
      and the flight and ingratitude of the Gnomes.                 

  3. Added here:                                                        
                                                                      
       Thus the many emissaries of the Gnomes in after days never reach
       Valinor.                                                        
                                                                      
                                    7.                                 
                                                                      
    Now  begins  the  time  of  the   great  wars   of  the   powers  of
  the  North  (Morgoth  and  his  hosts   against  Men,   Ilkorins,  and
  the   Gnomes    from   Valinor).    Morgoth's   cunning    and   lies,
  and  the  curse  of   Swanhaven  (as   well  as   the  oaths   of  the
  sons    of    Feanor    who    swore    the   unbreakable    oath   by
  Timbrenting  to  treat   all  as   foes  who   had  the   Silmarils  in
  keeping)  in  these   wars  do   the  greatest   injury  to   Men  and
  Elves.                                                               
    These  stories  only  tell  a  part  of  the  deeds  of  those days,
  especially  such  as  relate   to  the   Gnomes  and   the  Silmarils,
  and  the  mortals  who  became  entangled  in  their  fates.   In  the
  early  days  Eldar  and  Men   were  of   nearly  equal   stature  and
  power  of  body,  but  the  Eldar  were  blessed  with   greater  wit,
  skill,  and  beauty;  and  those  (the  Gnomes)   who  had   dwelt  in
  Cor  (Koreldar)  as  much   surpassed  the   Ilkorins  as   they  sur-
  passed  mortals.   Only  in   the  realm   of  Doriath,   whose  queen
  was  of  divine  race,  did  the  Ilkorins  equal  the  Koreldar.  The
  Elves  were  immortal,  and   free  from   all  sickness.'   But  they
  might-be  slain  with  weapons   in  those   days,'  and   then  their
  spirits   went   back   to  the   halls  of   Mandos  and   awaited  a
  thousand   years,   or  the   pleasure  of   the  Gods,   before  they
  were   recalled   to   free   life.'   Men   from  the   first  though
  slightly  bigger  were  more  &ail,  more  easily  slain,  subject  to
  ills,  and  grew  old  and  died,  if  not  slain.  What  happened  to
  their  spirits  was  not  known  to  the  Eldalie.  They  did  not  go
  to  the  halls  of  Mandos,  and  many  thought  their  fate  was  not
  in  the  hands  of  the  Valar  after  death.  Though   many,  associ-
  ating  with  Eldar,  believed  that  their spirits  went to  the west-
  ern land, this was not true. Men were not born again.4               
    In   after   days   when   owing   to   the   triumph   of   Morgoth
  Men   and   Elves  became   estranged  the   Eldalie  living   in  the
  world  faded,  and  Men   usurped  the   sunlight.  The   Eldar  wan-.

 dered, such as remained in the Outer Lands, took to the                  
 moonlight and starlight, the woods and caves.                            
                                                                         
                                     *                                    
                                                                         
 1. free from all sickness > free  from death  by sickness  (early change,
   made at the same time as that given in note 4).                        
 2. Added (rough pencilled insertion): or waste away of sorrow,            
 3. Added at the same time as the insertion given in note  2: and  they were
   reborn in their children, so that the number grows not.                
   4 This passage, from They did not go to the halls of Mandos, was struck
   out and. replaced by the following:                                    
                                                                         
       They  went  to  the halls  of Mandos,  but not  the same  as the halls of
       awaiting  where  the  Elves  were  sent.  There they  too waited,  but it
       was  said  that  only Mandos  knew whither  they went  after the  time in
       his  halls  -  they  were  never  reborn  on  Earth,  and none  ever came
       back  from  Mandos,  save  only  Beren  son  of  Barahir,  who thereafter
       spoke  not  to  mortal  Men.  Their  fate after  death was  perchance not
       in the hands of the Valar.                                         
                                                                         
                                     8                                    
                                                                         
   But  in  these  days  they were  kindred and  allies. Before           
 the  rising  of  the  Sun  and  Moon   Feanor  and   his  sons           
 marched  into  the  North and  sought for  Morgoth. A  host of           
 Orcs  aroused  by  the  burning  ships  resisted them  and was           
 defeated in the First Battle with such loss that  Morgoth pre-           
 tended  to  treat  with  them.  Feanor  refused,  but  he  was           
 wounded  in  the  fight  by  a  Balrog chief   (Gothmog),  and           
 died. Maidros the tall, the elder son,  induced the  Gnomes to           
 meet Morgoth (with as little intent of faith on his side as on           
 Morgoth's).   Morgoth  took   Maidros  captive   and  tortured           
 him,  and hung  him from  a rock  by his  right hand.  The six           
 remaining   sons   of   Feanor  (Maglor,   Celegorm,  Curufin,           
 Damrod,  Diriel,  and  Cranthir) ate  encamped about  the lake           
 Mithrim  in  Hisilome  (Hithlum,  or  Dorlomin,  the  land  of           
 shadows  in  the  North-west),  when  they  hear of  the march           
 of  Finweg and  his men'  who have  crossed the  Grinding Ice.           
 The Sun rises  as they  march, their  blue and  silver banners           
 are unfurled, flowers spring beneath the feet of their armies.           

 The  Orcs   dismayed  at   the  light   retreat  to   Angband.  But
 there  is  little  love  between  the  two  hosts  of   Gnomes  en-
 camped   now   on   opposite   shores   of  Mithrim.   Vast  smokes
 and   vapours   are  made   and  sent   forth  from   Angband,  and
 the  smoking  top  of  Thangorodrim  (the   highest  of   the  Iron
 Mountains  around  Morgoth's  fortress)  can   be  seen   from  far
 away.  'The  North  shakes  with  the  thunder  under   the  earth.
 Morgoth  is  forging  armouries.  Finweg   resolves  to   heal  the
 feud.  Alone  he  goes  in  search  of  Maidros.  Aided by  the va-
 pours,   which   me   now  floating   down  and   filling  Hithlum,
 and  by  the  withdrawal  of  Orcs  and  Balrogs  to   Angband,  he
 finds him, but cannot release him.                                    
   Manwe,   to   whom   birds   bring   news  upon   Timbrenting  of
 all  things  which  his  farsighted  eyes  do  not see  upon earth,
 fashions  the  race  of  eagles,  and sends  them under  their king
 Thorndor  to  dwell   in  the   crags  of   the  North   and  watch
 Morgoth.  The  eagles  dwell  out  of  reach  of  Orc  and  Balrog,
 and   are   great   foes   of  Morgoth   and  his   people.  Finweg
 meets  Thorndor  who  bears  him  to  Maidros.  There  is   no  re-
 leasing  the  enchanted  bond  upon  his  wrist.  In  his  agony he
 begs  to  be  slain, but  Finweg cuts  off his  hand, and  they are
 both   borne   away  by   Thorndor,  and   come  to   Mithrim.  The
 feud  is  healed  by  the  deed  of  Finweg  (except  for  the oath
 of the Silmarils).                                                    
                                                                      
                                   *                                   
                                                                      
  1. the march of Finweg and his  men >  the march  of Fingolfin  and his
    sons and his men and Felagoth and the sons  of Finrod  (This change
    belongs with those made in red ink in $5 and concerns the shift from
    Fingolfin to Finrod as the Gnomish lord who returned to Valinor, see
    $5 note 9.)                                                       
                                                                      
                                   9.                                  
                                                                      
   The  Gnomes  march  forward  and   beleaguer  Angband.              
 They  meet Ilkorins and  Men. At  that time  Men already              
 dwelt in the woods of the North, and Ilkorins also. They              
 long warred with  Morgoth.(1) Of Ilkorin race  was Barahir              

 and  his  son  Beren.  Of  mortal  race  was  Hurin  son of                  
 Gumlin, whose  wife was  Morwen," they  lived in  the woods                  
 upon  the  borders of  Hithlum. These  come after  into the                  
 tales.                                                                       
   Morgoth sends out his  armies and  breaks the  leaguer of                  
 Angband, and  from that  time the  fortunes of  his enemies                  
 decline.' Gnomes and  Ilkorins and  Men are  scattered, and                  
 Morgoth's  emissaries  go  among  them with  lying promises                  
 and false suggestions of the greed and treachery of each to                  
 each. Because  of the  curse of  Swanhaven these  often are                  
 believed by the Gnomes.                                                      
   Celegorm  and  Curufin  found  the  realm  of Nargothrond                  
 on the  banks of  the Narog  in the  south of  the Northern                  
 lands.4 Many Gnomes  take service  with Thingol  and Melian                  
 of the  Thousand Caves  in Doriath.  Because of  the divine                  
 magic of Melian Doriath is the safest from the raids of the                  
 Orcs, and it is prophesied that only treachery  from within                  
 will cause the realm to fall.                                                
                                                                             
                                       *                                      
                                                                             
 [This section was substantially interpolated and altered (all in red ink, see
 $5, except for the change given in note 2).]                                 
                                                                             
 1. Added here:                                                                
                                                                             
       This is the time  of Morgoth's  retreat, and  the growth  and prosperity
       of  Men,  a  time  of growth  and  birth  and  flowering known  as the
       'Siege of Angband'.                                                    
                                                                             
 2. This passage, from Of Ilkorin race, was emended to read:                   
                                                                             
       In later times of mortal race was Barahir  and his  son Beren.  Of mor-
       tal race also  were Hurin  and Huor  sons of  Gumlin. Hurin's  wife was
       Morwen, &c.                                                            
                                                                             
     3. Here  was  added  The  men of  Barahir rescue  Celegorm, but  this was
     struck out and the following insertion made:                             
                                                                             
       In  the  Leaguer  of  Angband  Fingolfin's  host guards  the North-west
       on  borders  of  Hithlum;  Felagoth  [>  Felagund]  and  the   sons  of
       Finrod the South and the [?plains]  of Sirion  (or Broseliand);  the sons

  of  Feanor  the  East.  Fingolfin  is slain  when Morgoth  breaks the
  leaguer. Felagoth [>Felagund] is saved by Barahir  the Bold  a mortal
  and escapes south  to found  Nargothrond, swearing  a vow  of friend-
  ship to the race of Barahir. The sons of Feanor live  a wild  and no-
  mad  life  in  the  East,  warring  with  Dwarves  and Orcs  and Men.
  Fingolfin's sons Finweg and Turgon still hold out in the North.      
                                                                     
 4. This sentence was changed to read:                                 
                                                                     
  Felagoth  [>  Felagund]  and   his  brothers   found  the   realm  of
  Nargothrond  on  the  banks  of  Narog  in the  south of  the Northern
  lands.  They  are  aided  by  Celegorm  and  Gurufin  who  long  while
  dwelt in Nargothrond.                                               
                                                                     
                                   10.                                
                                                                     
 The   power   of   Morgoth   begins  to   spread  once   more.  One
 by  one  he  overthrows  Men  and  Elves  in  the  North.  Of these
 a  famous  chieftain  of  Ilkorindi  was  Barahir,  who   had  been
 a  friend  of  Celegorm  of  Nargothrond.  Barahir  is  driven into
 hiding,  his  hiding  betrayed,  and Barahir  slain; his  son Beren
 after   a   life   outlawed  flees   south,  crosses   the  Shadowy
 Mountains,  and   after  grievous   hardships  comes   to  Doriath.
 Of  this  and  his  other  adventures  are  told  in  the   Lay  of
 Leithian.  He  gains  the  love  of  Tinuviel  'the  nightingale' -
 his  own  name  for  Luthien   -  the   daughter  of   Thingol.  To
 win  her  Thingol,  in  mockery,  requires  a  Silmaril   from  the
 crown  of  Morgoth.  Beren  sets  out  to  achieve  this,  is  cap-
 tured,  and  set  in  dungeon  in  Angband,  but conceals  his real
 identity  and  is  given  as  a  slave to  Thu the  hunter. Luthien
 is  imprisoned  by  Thingol,  but  escapes  and  goes in  search of
 Beren.   With  the   aid  of   Huan  lord   of  dogs   she  rescues
 Beren,   and   gains   entrance   to   Angband  where   Morgoth  is
 enchanted  and  finally   wrapped  in   slumber  by   her  dancing.
 They  get  a  Silmaril  and  escape,  but  are  barred at  gates of
 Angband   by   Carcaras   the   Wolfward.   He  bites   o   Beren's
 hand  which  holds  the  Silmaril,  and  goes  mad  with   the  an-
 guish of its burning within him,                                     
 They   escape   and   after   many    wanderings   get    back   to
 Doriath.   Carcaras   ravening  through   the  woods   bursts  into
 Doriath.  There  follows  the  Wolf-hunt   of  Doriath,   in  which

 
                                                                           
 Carcaras is slain, and Huan is killed in defence  of Beren.                
 Beren  is however  mortally wounded  and dies  in Luthien's                
 arms.  Some  songs  say  that  Luthien  went even  over the                
 Grinding Ice, aided by the power of her divine  mother, Me-                
 lian,  to  Mandos'  halls  and  won  him back;  others that                
 Mandos hearing his tale released him. Certain it is that he                
 alone  of  mortals  came  back from  Mandos and  dwelt with                
 Luthien and never spoke to Men again,  living in  the woods                
 of Doriath and in the Hunters' Wold, west of Nargothrond.'                 
   In the days of his outlawry Beren had been  befriended by                
 Hurin of Hithlum, son of  Gumlin. In  the woods  of Hithlum                
 Hurin still remains unbowed to the yoke of Morgoth.                        
                                                                           
                                     *                                      
                                                                           
  1. a famous chieftain of Ilkorindi > a famous chieftain of Men  (cf. $9
   note 2).                                                                 
  2. This sentence, following Beren sets out to  achieve this,  was struck
   through and replaced by the following (in red ink):                      
                                                                           
      (Beren sets out to achieve  this,) and  seeks the  aid of  Felagoth in
      Nargothrond. Felagoth warns him  of the  oath of  the sons  of Feanor,
      and that even if he gets the Silmaril they will not, if they  can pre-
      vent it, allow him to take it to Thingol. But faithful to his own oath
      he  gives  him aid.  The kingdom  is given  to Orodreth,  and Felagoth
      and  Beren  march  North. They  are overcome  in battle.  Felagoth and
      Beren and a small  band escape,  and creeping  back despoil  the dead.
      Disguising themselves as  Orcs they  get as  far as  the house  of the
      Lord  of  Wolves. Them  they are  discovered, and  placed in  prison -
      and devoured one by one.                                              
        Celegorm  discovered what  was  the secret  mission of  Felagoth and
      Beren. He gathers his dogs and  hunters and  goes a-hunting.  He finds
      the traces of battle. Then he finds  Luthien in  the woods.  She flies
      but  is  overtaken  by  Huan  the  chief  of  Celegorm's dogs,  who is
      sleepless,  and she  cannot enchant  him. He  bears her  off. Celegorm
      offers redress.                                                       
                                                                           
    From the second sentence  Felagoth warns  him of  the oath...  this en-
    tire passage was then struck through and See  tale of  Luthien written
    across it; Felagoth  in the  surviving sentence  at the  beginning was
    changed to Felagund; and They fall in the power of the Lord  of Wolves
    (Thu) was added.                                                       

                             
                                                                      
 3. Here was added, perhaps at the time of the writing of the manuscript:
                                                                      
      (But  Mandos  in  payment  exacted that  Luthien should  become mortal
      as Beren.)                                                       
                                                                      
                                   11.                                 
                                                                      
   Maidros  forms  now  a league  against Morgoth  seeing that         
 he will destroy them all, one by one, if  they do  not unite.         
 The  scattered  Ilkorins  and  Men  are   gathered  together.         
 Curufin  and  Celegorm  despatch  a  host  (but not  all they         
 could  gather,  thus breaking  their word)  from Nargothrond.         
 The  Gnomes  of  Nargothrond  refuse  to  be  led  by Finweg,         
 and go  in search  of the  hosts of  Maidros and  Maglor. Men         
 march  up   from  South   and  East   and  West   and  North.         
 Thingol will not send from  Doriath.' Some  say out  of self-         
 ish policy, others  because of  the wisdom  of Melian  and of         
 fate  which  decreed  that  Doriath  should  become  the only         
 refuge of the Eldar  from Morgoth  afterwards. Part  was cer-         
 tainly  due  to  the Silmaril,  which Thingol  now possessed,         
 and  which  Maidros  had  demanded  with  haughty  words. The         
 Gnomes  of  Doriath  are  allowed'  nonetheless  to  join the         
 league.                                                               
   Finweg  advances   into  the   Plain  of   Thirst  (Dor-na-         
 Fauglith)  before  the  Iron  Mountains  and defeats  an Orc-         
 army,  which  falls  back.  Pursuing  he  is  overwhelmed  by         
 countless  hordes  suddenly  loosed  on  him  from  the deeps         
 of  Angband,  and  there  is  fought  the  field   of  Unnum-         
 bered Tears, of which no  elfin songs  tell except  in lamen-         
 tation.                                                               
   The  mortal  armies,  whose  leaders  had mostly  been cor-         
 rupted or bribed by Morgoth, desert or flee away:  all except         
 Hurin's  kin.  From  that  day  Men and  Elves have  been es-         
 tranged,  save the  descendents of  Hurin. Finweg  falls, his         
 blue and silver banner  is destroyed.  The Gnomes  attempt to         
 fall  back  towards  the  hills  and Taur-na-Fuin  (forest of         
 night). Hurin holds the rearguard, and all his men are slain,         
 so that not a single man  escapes to  bring news  to Hithlum.         
 By Morgoth's  orders Hurin,  whose axe  had slain  a thousand         

 Orcs, is taken alive.  By Hurin  alone was  Turgon (Finweg's            
 brother) son of Fingolfin enabled to cut  his way  back into            
 the hills with a part of  his people.  The remainder  of the            
 Gnomes  and  Ilkorins would  have been  all slain  or taken,            
 but for the arrival of Maidros, Curufin  and Celegorm  - too            
 late for the main battle.                                               
   They  are  beaten  back  and  driven into  the South-east,            
 where  they  long  time  dwelt,  and  did  not  go  back  to            
 Nargothrond.  There  Orodreth   ruled  over   the  remnant.'            
 Morgoth  is  utterly  triumphant. His  armies range  all the            
 North,   and  press   upon  the   borders  of   Doriath  and            
 Nargothrond. The slain of his enemies are piled into a great            
 hill  upon Dor-na-Fauglith,  but there  the grass  comes and            
 grows green where all else is desert, and no Orc  dare tread            
 upon that hill where the Gnomish swords rust.                           
   Hurin  is  taken  to  Angband  and  defies Morgoth.  He is            
 chained  in  torment.  Afterward Morgoth  offers him  a high            
 captaincy in his forces, a wealth of jewels, and freedom, if            
 he  will  lead  an  army against  Turgon. None  knew whither            
 Turgon   had   departed  save   Hurin.  Hurin   refused  and            
 Morgoth  devised  a  torture. He  set  him upon  the highest            
 peak  of  Thangorodrim  and  cursed him  with never-sleeping            
 sight like the Gods, and he cursed his seed  with a  fate of            
 ill-hap, and bade Hurin watch the working of it.                        
                                                                        
                                    *                                    
                                                                        
   1. This passage, from Curufin and Celegorm despatch a host, was altered
    by hastily made changes and additioas:                               
                                                                        
      Curufin  and  Celegorm  come from their  wandering; but  Orodreth be-
      cause of Felagund his brother will  not come:  Thingol also  sends but
      few of his folk.  The Gnomes  of Feanor's  sons refuse  to be  led by
      Finweg, and the battle is divided into two  hosts, one  under Maidros
      and  Maglor,  and  one  under Finweg  and Turgon.  Men march  up from
      South  and  East  and  West  and  North. Thingol  sends but  few from
      Doriath.                                                           
                                                                        
 2. Added here: by Thingol.                                               

 
                                                                     
 3. This passage was changed to read:                                  
                                                                     
       They are beaten back and driven into the South-east, where they
       long time dwelt. In Nargothrond Orodreth ruled still.          
                                                                     
                                     12.                              
                                                                     
   Morwen  wife  of   Hurin  was   left  alone   in  the   woods.  Her
 son   Turin   was  a   young  boy   of  seven,   and  she   was  with
 child.   Only   two   old   men    Halog   and    Mailgond   remained
 faithful   to   her.   The   men   of   Hithlum   were   slain,   and
 Morgoth   breaking   his   words   had  driven   all  men,   who  had
 not   escaped   (as   few   did)  away   South,  into   Hithlum.  Now
 most   of   these   were  faithless   men   who   had   deserted  the
 Eldar   in   the   battle   of  Unnumbered   Tears.  Yet   he  penned
 them   behind   the   Shadowy   Mountains,   nonetheless,   and  slew
 such  as  wandered  forth,  desiring  to   keep  them   from  fellow-
 ship  with  Elves.  But  little  love  all  the  same  did  they show
 to  Hurin's  wife.  Wherefore  it  came  into   her  heart   to  send
 Turin  to  Thingol,  because   of  Beren   Hurin's  friend   who  had
 wedded  Luthien.  The  'Children  of  Hurin'   tells  of   his  fate,
 and  how  Morgoth's   curse  pursued   him,  so   that  all   he  did
 turned out unhappily against his will.                               
   He   grew   up   in  Thingol's   court,  but   after  a   while  as
 Morgoth's   power   grew   no   news   from   Hithlum  came   and  he
 heard  no  more  of  Morwen  or   of  his   sister  Nienor   whom  he
 had  not  seen.  Taunted  by  Orgof,  of  the  kin  of  King Thingol,
 he   unwitting   of   his   growing  strength   killed  him   at  the
 king's  table  with  a  drinking  horn.  He  fled the  court thinking
 himself  an  outlaw,  and  took  to  war  against  all,  Elves,  Men,
 and   Orcs,   upon  the   borders  of   Doriath,  gathering   a  wild
 band of hunted Men and Elves about him.                              
   One  day  in  his  absence   his  men   captured  Beleg   the  bow-
 man,  who  had  befriended   Turin  of   old.  Turin   released  him,
 and  is  told   how  Thingol   had  forgiven   his  deed   long  ago.
 Beleg  brings  him  to  abandon  his  war   against  Elves,   and  to
 assuage   his  wrath   upon  the   Orcs.  The   fame  of   the  deeds
 upon  the  marches   and  the   prowess  of   Beleg  the   Gnome  and
 Turin  son  of  Hurin  against   the  Orcs   is brought   to  Thingol

  and  to  Morgoth.  One  only  of  Turin's  band,  Blodrin  Ban's
  son, hates the new life with little plunder and harder fighting.
  He betrays the secret  place of  Turin to  the Orcs.  Their camp
  is  surprised,  Turin  is  taken  and  dragged  to  Angband (for
  Morgoth  has  begun  to fear  he will  escape his  curse through
  his  valour and  the protection  of Melian);  Beleg is  left for
  dead  under  a  heap  of  slain.  He is  found by  Thingol's men
  come  to  summon  them  to  a  feast  at  the   Thousand  Caves.
  Melian heals him, and he sets out  to track  the Orcs.  Beleg is
  the most  skilled in  tracking of  all who  have lived,  but the
  mazes  of  Taur-na-Fuin  bewilder  him.   Them  in   despair  he
  sees  the  lamp  of  Flinding   son  of   Fuilin,  a   Gnome  of
  Nargothrond  who  was  captured  by  Orcs  and  had   long  been
  a thrall in the mines of Morgoth, but escaped.                  
    Of  Flinding  he  learns  news of  the Orc-band  that captured
  Turin.  They  hide and  watch the  host go  by laden  with spoil
  along  the  Orc-road  through  the  heart  of the  forest, which
  the  Orcs  use  when  in need  of haste.  They dread  the forest
  beyond  the  road  as  much  as  Elf  or  Man.  Turin   is  seen
  dragged  along  and  whipped.  The  Orcs  leave  the  forest and
  descend  the  slopes  toward  Dor-na-Fauglith,  and   encamp  in
  a  dale  in  sight  of  Thangorodrim.  Beleg  shoots  the  wolf-
  sentinels  and  steals  with  Flinding into  the camp.  With the
  greatest difficulty and  direst peril  they carry  the senseless
  Turin  away  and  lay  him in  a dell  of thick  thorn-trees. In
  striking  off  his  bonds  Beleg  pricks  Turin's  foot;  he  is
  roused,  and  demented  thinks  the  Orcs  are  tormenting  him,
  he  leaps  on  Beleg  and  kills  him  with  his own  sword. The
  covering  of  Flinding's  lamp  falls  off  and  seeing  Beleg*s
  face he is  turned to  stone. The  Orcs roused  by his  cries as
  he  leaped upon  Beleg discover  his escape  but are  driven far
  and  wide  by a  dreadful storm  of thunder  and deluge.  In the
  morning   Flinding   sees  them   marching  over   the  steaming
  waste  of  Dor-na-Fauglith.  Beleg  is  buried  with his  bow in
  the dell.                                                       
    Flinding  leads  the  dazed  unwitting  Turin  towards safety.
  His  wits  return  by  Ivrin's  lake  where  are the  sources of
  Narog,  and  he  weeps  a  great  while,  and  makes a  song for

 Beleg, the 'Bowman's Friendship', which afterwards be-         
 came a battle-song of the enemies of Morgoth.                  
                                                               
                               13.                              
                                                               
   Flinding  leads  Turin  to  Nargothrond.  There  Turin  gains
 the  love  and  loves  against his  will Finduilas  daughter of
 Orodreth,  who  had  been  betrothed  before  his  captivity to
 Flinding.  He  fights  against  his  love  out  of  loyalty  to
 Flinding, but Flinding  seeing that  Finduilas loves  Turin be-
 comes embittered.                                              
   Turin  leads  the  Gnomes  of  Nargothrond  to  forsake their
 secrecy  and  hidden   warfare,  and   fights  the   Orcs  more
 openly.'  He  has  Beleg's  sword  forged  anew,  into  a black
 blade  with  shining  edges,  and  he  is  from this  given the
 name  of  'Mormakil'  or  black-sword.   The  fame   of  Morma-
 kil  reaches  even to  Thingol. Turin  adopts the  name instead
 of  'Turin'.  For  a  long while  Turin and  the Gnomes  of Na-
 rog are victorious and their  realm reaches  to the  sources of
 Narog, and from  the western  sea to  the confines  of Doriath.
 There is a stay in the might of Morgoth.                       
   Morwen  and  Nienor  are  able  to  journey to  Thingol leav-
 ing  their  goods  in  the  care  of  Brodda  who had  wedded a
 kinswoman  of  Morwen.  They  learn   at  Thingol's   court  of
 the  loss  of  Turin.  News  comes  to  them  of  the  fall  of
 Nargothrond.  Morgoth  had  suddenly  loosed  a  great  army on
 them, and with them one of  the first  and mightiest'  of those
 Dragons  that  bred in  his deep  places and  for a  long while
 troubled the Northern lands of Men and Elves.'                  
   The   host   of  Narog   is  overwhelmed.   Flinding  wounded
 refuses  Turin's  succour  and  dies  reproaching   him.  Turin
 hastes  back  to  Nargothrond  but  the  Dragon  and  Orcs come
 thither before he can put it in defence, and all the fair halls
 beneath  the  earth  are  plundered,  and  all  the  women  and
 maidens of  Narog herded  as slaves  in captivity.  Turin seeks
 to  slay  the Dragon,  but is  held immovable  by the  spell of
 his  eyes,  while  the  Dragon  Glorung(4) taunts  him. Glorung
 then offers  him  freedom  either to  follow seeking  to rescue

 his 'stolen love' Finduilas, or to do his duty and go  to the
 rescue of his mother and sister who are  living (as  he lying
 says) in great  misery in  Hithlum. Turin  forsakes Finduilas
 against his heart (which if he had obeyed his  uttermost fate
 would  not  have  befallen  him)  and  believing  the serpent
 goes  to seek  Hithlum. Glorung  lies in  the caves  of Narog
 and  gathers beneath  him all  the gold  and silver  and gems
 there hoarded.                                              
   Turin   after   long   wandering   goes  to   Hithlum.  But
 Morwen  and  Nienor  are in  Thingol's court,  when survivors
 tell of the fall of Nargothrond, and of  Turin, and  some say
 Turin  escaped alive,  and some  say he  was turned  to stone
 by the  eyes of  the serpent  and lived  still in  bondage in
 Nargothrond.  Morwen  and  Nienor  at  last  get  Thingol  to
 give them men to go against Glorung, or to  spy out  his lair
 at least.                                                   
   Turin slays Brodda in his hall, in his anger when  he finds
 Morwen's  hall  and  lands  empty  and  despoiled.  Repenting
 his  deed  he  flies from  Hithlum again,  and seeks  no more
 after his kin. Desiring to forget his past he takes  the name
 of  Turambar (Turmarth)  'Conqueror of  Fate', and  gathers a
 new  people,  'Men  of  the  Woods', east  of Narog,  whom he
 rules, and lives in peace.                                  
   The  expedition  of  Thingol,  with  whom  ride  Morwen and
 Nienor,  views  Narog from  a hill-top.  The Elves  ride down
 towards  the  lair,(5) but Glorung  coming  out lies  into the
 stream and a huge hissing and great vapour  goes up,  so that
 their horses turn and  fly. Morwen's  horse and  Nienor's are
 also panic-stricken and gallop wildly in  the mist.  When the
 mist  clears  Nienor  finds  herself  face  to face  with the
 Dragon,  whose eye  holds her,  and a  spell of  darkness and
 utter forgetfulness comes  upon her.  She wanders  witless in
 the woods. At last her senses return  but she  remembers lit-
 tle.' Orcs see her and  chase her,  but are  driven off  by a
 band  of  'Woodmen'  under  Turambar, who  lead her  to their
 pleasant homes.                                             
   As they pass the falls of Silver  Bowl a  shivering touches
 her. She lives amid the woodfolk  and is  loved by  Tamar the

 Lame, but at  last weds  Turambar, who  calls her  Niniel 'the
 Tearful' since he first found her weeping.                   
   Glorung  begins  to  raid  across Narog,  md Orcs  gather to
 him.  The  woodmen  slay  many  of  them,  and  Glorung  hear-
 ing  of  their dwelling  comes crawling  and filled  with fire
 over  Narog  and  through  the woods  against them.  He leaves
 a  blasted  track behind  him. Turambar  ponders how  the hor-
 ror can  be warded  from his  land. He  marches with  his men,
 and Niniel foreboding evil rides with him,' till they  can see
 the  burning  track of  Glorung, and  the smoking  place where
 he  lies.  Between  them runs  a stream  in a  deep-cloven ra-
 vine  after  falling  over  the  high  falls  of  Silver Bowl.
 Turambar asks for volunteers and  obtains six  only to  lie in
 the  ravine over  which the  Dragon must  pass. The  seven de-
 part. They climb the  far side  of the  ravine at  evening and
 cling near its edge in the  trees. The  next morning  all have
 slunk away and Turambar is alone.                            
   Glorung   creeps   over.   Turambar   transfixes   him  with
 Gurtholfin(8) 'Wand  of  Death',   his  black   sword. Glorung
 coils back  in anguish  and lies  dying. Turambar  comes forth
 to retrieve his sword, and  places his  foot upon  Glorung and
 exults. But the venom  of Glorung  gushes out  as he  tugs out
 his sword,  and he  falls in  a swoon.  The watchers  see that
 Glorung is slain, but Turin  does not  return. Niniel  goes in
 search  of  him  and finds  him lying  beside Glorung.  As she
 is  tending  him,  Glorung  opens  his  eyes  and  speaks, and
 tells her who Turambar is, and  lifts his spell from  off her.
 Then  she  knows  who  she is,  and knows  his tale  true from
 things  Turambar  has  told  her. Filled  with horror  and an-
 guish she flies and casts  herself over  Silver Bowl  and none
 ever  found  her  body  again.  Tamar  followed her  and heard
 her lament.                                                  
   Turin  comes  back  in  triumph.  He  asks  for  Niniel, but
 none  dare tell  him. Then  Tamar comes  and tells  him. Turin
 slays  him,  and  taking  Gurtholfin  bids  it  slay  him. The
 sword  answers that  his blood  is sweet  as any  other's, and
 pierces him to the heart. Turin is buried beside  Silver Bowl,

 and his name carved in characters of Nargothrond upon a                  
 rock. Beneath is written Niniel.                                         
   Some  say  Morwen  released  from spell  by Glorung's                  
 death came that way and read the stone.                                  
                                                                         
                                     *                                    
                                                                         
 1. Added here: At his advice Narog is bridged (cf. note 5).               
 2. one of the first and mightiest > that first and mightiest.            
 3. Added  here:  even  Glomund,  who  was  at  the  Battle of  Tears (see
   note 4).                                                               
 4. Glorung > Glomund here and subsequently, except  at the  last occur-
   rence.                                                                 
 5. towards the lair > towards the bridge leading to the lair (cf. note 1).
 6. she remembers little > she remembers not even her name.                
 7. Added here: though she is with child,                                  
 8. Gurtholfin > Gurtholfir at both occurrences.                            
                                                                         
                                    14.                                   
                                                                         
   Hurin  was  released  by  Morgoth  after  the end  of Turin            
 and  Nienor,  for  Morgoth thought  still to use him.  He ac-            
 cused Thingol's faint heart and  ungentleness of  Turin's un-            
 happiness,  and  Hurin  wandering  bowed with  grief pondered            
 his words and was embittered by them.                                    
   Hurin   and   outlaws  come   to  Nargothrond,   whom  none            
 dare plunder for dread of the spirit of  Glorung' or  even of            
 his  memory.  They  slay Mim  the Dwarf  who had  taken pos-            
 session and enchanted all the gold. Hurin  casts the  gold at            
 Thingol's  feet with  reproaches. Thingol  will not  have it,            
 and bears with Hurin, until goaded  too far  he bids  him be-            
 gone.  Hurin  wanders  away  and   seeks  Morwen,   and  many            
 for ages after  related that  they met  them together  in the            
 woods lamenting their children.                                          
   The  enchanted  gold  lays  its spell  on Thingol.  He sum-            
 mons  the  Dwarves  of  Nogrod  and  Belegost  to   come  and            
 fashion it into beautiful things, and to  make a  necklace of            
 great  wonder whereon  the Silmaril  shall hang.  The Dwarves            
 plot treachery, and Thingol bitter with the curse of the gold            
 denies  them  their  reward. After  their smithying  they are            

  driven   away   without   payment.   The  Dwarves   come  back;              
  aided  by  treachery  of  some  Gnomes  who  also  were  bitten              
  by the lust of the gold, they surprise Thingol on a  hunt, slay              
  him,  and  surprise  the  Thousand  Caves  and   plunder  them.              
  Melian  they  cannot  touch.  She  goes  away  to   seek  Beren              
  and Luthien.                                                                 
    The  Dwarves  are  ambushed  at  a  ford  by  Beren  and  the              
  brown  and  green  Elves  of  the wood,  and their  king slain,              
  from  whose  neck  Beren  takes  the  'Nauglafring'(2) or neck-              
  lace of the Dwarves, with its Silmaril. It is said that Luthien              
  wearing  that  jewel  is  the  most  beautiful thing  that eyes              
  have  ever  seen  outside  Valinor.  But  Melian  warned  Beren              
  of the curse of the gold and of the Silmaril.  The rest  of the              
  gold is drowned in the river.                                                
    But   the   'Nauglafring'(3) remains  hoarded   secretly   in              
  Beren's   keeping.   When   Mandos   let   Beren   return  with              
  Luthien,  it  was  only at  the price  that Luthien  should be-              
  come  as  shortlived as  Beren the  mortal. Luthien  now fades,              
  even  as  the  Elves  in  later  days faded  as Men  yew strong              
  and  took  the  goodness  of  earth (for  the Elves  needed the              
  light  of  the  Trees).  At  last she  vanished, and  Beren was              
  lost, looking in vain  for her,  and his  son Dior  ruled after              
  him.  Dior  re-established  Doriath  and  grew proud,  and wore              
  the  'Nauglafring',  and   the  fame   of  the   Silmaril  went              
  abroad.  After  vain  bargaining  the sons  of Feanor  made war              
  on  him  (the  second  slaying  of  Elf  by Elf)  and destroyed              
  him,  and  took  the  'Nauglafring'.  They quarrelled  over it,              
  owing to the curse  of the  gold, until  only Maglor  was left.              
  But  Elwing  daughter  of  Dior  was  saved  and  carried  away              
  to the mouth of the river Sirion.4                                           
                                                                              
                                        *                                      
                                                                              
  1. The name  Glorung is  not here  emended, as  in $13,  to Glomund,  but a
     d is written over the g, sc.  Glorund (the  earliest form  of the  name of
     the Dragon).                                                              
  2. At the first occurrence only of Nauglafring, th is pencilled above, i.e.
     Nauglathring or Nauglathfring.                                            
  3. Above  Nauglafring  here   my  father   wrote  Dweorgmene   [Old  English,

  'Dwarf-necklace']; this was struck out, and Glingna Nauglir substi-        
  tuted.                                                                     
  4 The conclusion of this section was changed very soon  after it  was writ-
  ten, since in $17 already as first written the Nauglafring is  with Elwing
  at the mouth of Sirion:                                                    
                                                                            
     After  vain  bargaining  the  sons  of Feanor  made war  on him  (the sec-
     ond  slaying  of  Elf  by  Elf)  and  destroyed  him. But  Elwing daughter
     of  Dior,  Beren's son,  escaped, and  was carried  away by  faithful ser-
     vants   to   the  mouth   of  the   river  Sirion.   With  her   went  the
     Nauglafring.                                                             
                                                                            
                                      15.                                    
                                                                            
 The  great  river  Sirion  flowed  through  the   lands  South-             
 west; at  its mouth  was a  great delta,  and its  lower course             
 ran through wide green and fertile  lands, little  peopled save             
 by birds and  beasts because  of the  Orc-raids; but  they were             
 not  inhabited  by  Orcs,  who  preferred  the  northern woods,             
 and  feared  the power  of Ylmir  - for  Sirion's mouth  was in             
 the Western Seas.                                                           
 Turgon  Fingolfin's son  had a  sister Isfin.  She was  lost in             
 Taurna-Fuin  after  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered   Tears.  There             
 she  was  trapped  by  the   Dark  Elf   Eol.  Their   son  was             
 Meglin.  The  people  of  Turgon  escaping  aided by  the prow-             
 ess  of  Hurin  were lost  from the  knowledge of  Morgoth, and             
 indeed of all in the  world save  Ylmir. In  a secret  place in             
 the  hills  their  scouts  climbing  to  the tops  discovered a             
 broad  valley  entirely encircled  by the  hills in  rings ever             
 lower  as  they  came towards  the centre.  Amid this  ring was             
 a  wide  land  without hills,  except for  one rocky  hill that             
 stuck up from the plain, not right at  the centre,  but nearest             
 to  that  part of  the outer  wall which  marched close  to the             
 edge of Sirion.'                                                            
 Ylmir's  messages  come  up  Sirion  bidding  them   take  ref-             
 uge in  this valley,  and teaching  them spells  of enchantment             
 to place upon all the hills about, to keep off foes  and spies.             
 He foretells that their fortress shall stand longest of all the             
 refuges  of  the  Elves  against  Morgoth,  and   like  Doriath             
 never  be  overthrown  -  save  by  treachery from  within. The             

  spells are strongest near to Sirion, although here  the encir-           
  cling  mountains  are  lowest.  Here the  Gnomes dig  a mighty           
  winding tunnel under the roots of  the mountains,  that issues           
  at last in the Guarded Plain. Its outer entrance is guarded by           
  the spells of Ylmir; its inner is  watched unceasingly  by the           
  Gnomes. It is set there in case those within ever need  to es-           
  cape, and as  a way  of more  rapid exit  from the  valley for           
  scouts,  wanderers,  and  messages,  and  also as  an entrance           
  for fugitives escaping from Morgoth.                                     
    Thorndor  King  of   Eagles  removes   his  eyries   to  the           
  Northern  heights  of  the  encircling  mountains  and  guards           
  them  against  Orc-spies.'  On the  rocky hill,  Amon Gwareth,           
  the hill of watching, whose sides they  polish to  the smooth-           
  ness of glass, and  whose top  they level,  the great  city of           
  Gondolin with gates of steel is built. The plain all  about is           
  levelled as flat and smooth as a lawn of clipped grass  to the           
  feet of the hills, so that nothing can creep over it unawares.           
  The  people  of  Gondolin  grows  mighty, and  their armouries           
  are  filled with  weapons. But  Turgon does  not march  to the           
  aid  of  Nargothrond,  or  Doriath, and  after the  slaying of           
  Dior  he  has  no  more  to   do  with   the  son   of  Feanor           
  (Maglor).' Finally he closes  the vale  to all  fugitives, and           
  forbids the  folk of  Gondolin to  leave the  valley. Gondolin           
  is  the only  stronghold of  the Elves  left. Morgoth  has not           
  forgotten Turgon, but his  search is  in vain.  Nargothrond is           
  destroyed;  Doriath  desolate;  Hurin's  children   dead;  and           
  only scattered and fugitive Elves, Gnomes and  Ilkorins, left,           
  except  such  as  work  in  the  smithies  and mines  in great           
  numbers. His triumph is nearly complete.                                 
                                                                          
                                      *                                    
                                                                          
  1. Added  here  roughly  in pencil:  The hill  nearest to  Angband was
     guarded by Fingolfin's cairn (cf. note 2).                            
  2. Added here at the same time as the addition given in note 1: sitting
     upon Fingolfin's cairn.                                               
  3. the son of Feanor (Maglor) >  the sons  of Feanor  (this goes  with the
     change at the end of $14, note 4).                                    

        
                                                             
                              16.                             
                                                             
  Meglin son of Eol  and Isfin  sister of  Turgon was  sent by
 his mother to  Gondolin, and  there received,'  although half
 of Ilkorin blood, and treated as a prince.                    
  Hurin  of  Hithlum  had  a  brother  Huor.  The son  of Huor
 was  Tuor,  younger than  Turin' son  of Hurin.  Rian, Huor's
 wife,  sought  her  husband's  body  among  the slain  on the
 field of Unnumbered Tears,  and died  there. Her  son remain-
 ing  in  Hithlum  fell into  the hands  of the  faithless men
 whom Morgoth  drove into  Hithlum after  that battle,  and he
 was made a thrall. Growing wild  and rough  he fled  into the
 woods, and  became an  outlaw, and  a solitary,  living alone
 and  communing  with  none  save  rarely  with  wandering and
 hidden Elves. On  a time  Ylmir contrived  that he  should be
 led  to a  subterranean river-course  leading out  of Mithrim
 into a chasmed  river that  flowed at  last into  the Western
 Sea.  In  this way  his going  was unmarked  by Man,  Orc, or
 spy,  and  unknown  of  Morgoth.  After long  wanderings down
 the  western  shores  he came  to the  mouths of  Sirion, and
 there  fell  in  with the  Gnome Bronweg,  who had  once been
 in Gondolin. They journey secretly  up Sirion  together. Tuor
 lingers long in the sweet  land Nan  Tathrin 'Valley  of Wil-
 lows', but there Ylmir himself  comes up  the river  to visit
 him, and tells him of his mission. He is  to bid  Turgon pre-
 pare  for  battle against  Morgoth; for  Ylmir will  turn the
 hearts  of  the  Valar to  forgive the  Gnomes and  send them
 succour. If Turgon will do this, the battle will be terrible,
 but the race of Orcs will perish and will not in after ages
 trouble Elves and Men. If not, the people of Gondolin are
 to prepare for flight to Sirion's mouth, where Ylmir will aid
 them to build a fleet and guide them back to Valinor. If
 Turgon does Ylmir's will Tuor is to abide a while in     
 Gondolin and then go back to Hithlum with a force of     
 Gnomes and draw Men once more into alliance with the     
 Elves, for 'without Men the Elves shall not prevail against
 the Orcs and Balrogs'. This Ylmir does because he knows

 that ere seven'  full years  are passed  the doom  of Gondolin
 will come through Meglin.(4)                                  
   Tuor  and  Bronweg  reach  the  secret  way,(5) and come out
 upon  the  guarded  plain.  Taken  captive  by the  watch they
 are  led  before  Turgon.  Turgon  is  grown  old'   and  very
 mighty  and  proud, and  Gondolin so  fair and  beautiful, and
 its people so proud of it and confident in its secret  and im-
 pregnable strength, that the king  and most  of the  people do
 not wish to  trouble about  the Gnomes  and Elves  without, or
 care  for  Men,  nor  do  they  long  any  more  for  Valinor.
 Meglin  approving, the  king rejects  Tuor's message  in spite
 of  the  words  of  Idril the  far-sighted (also  called Idril
 Silverfoot,  because she  loved to  walk barefoot)  his daugh-
 ter,  and  the  wiser  of  his counsellors.  Tuor lives  on in
 Gondolin,  and becomes  a great  chieftain. After  three years
 he  weds  Idril -  Tuor and  Beren alone  of all  mortals ever
 wedded  Elves,  and  since  Elwing  daughter  of  Dior Beren's
 son  wedded  Earendel  son  of  Tuor and  Idril of  them alone
 has come the strain of Elfinesse into mortal blood.          
   Not  long  after  this  Meglin  going  far  afield  over the
 mountains  is  taken  by  Orcs,  and  purchases his  life when
 taken  to  Angband  by  revealing  Gondolin  and  its secrets.
 Morgoth  promises  him  the  lordship  of  Gondolin,  and pos-
 session of Idril. Lust  for Idril  led him  the easier  to his
 treachery, and added to his hatred of Tuor.                  
   Morgoth  sends  him  back  to  Gondolin.  Earendel  is born,
 having  the  beauty  and  light and  wisdom of  Elfinesse, the
 hardihood and strength  of Men,  and the  longing for  the sea
 which  captured  Tuor  and  held  him  for  ever   when  Ylmir
 spoke to him in the Land of Willows.                         
   At  last  Morgoth  is  ready,  and  the  attack  is  made on
 Gondolin  with dragons,  Balrogs, and  Orcs. After  a dreadful
 fight about the  walls the  city is  stormed, and  Turgon per-
 ishes with many of the  most noble  in the  last fight  in the
 great  square. Tuor  rescues Idril  and Earendel  from Meglin,
 and hurls him  from the  battlements. He  then leads  the rem-
 nant of the  people of  Gondolin down  a secret  tunnel previ-
 ously  made  by  Idril's  advice  which comes  out far  in the

 North  of  the  plain.  Those  who would  not come  with him                 
 but fled to the old way of escape are  caught by  the dragon                 
 sent by Morgoth to watch that exit.                                          
   In the fume  of the  burning Tuor  leads his  company into                 
 the  mountains  into  the  cold  pass of  Cristhorn (Eagles'                 
 Cleft). There they are ambushed, but saved by the  valour of                 
 Glorfindel  (chief  of  the  house of  the Golden  Flower of                 
 Gondolin, who dies in  a duel  with a  Balrog upon  a pinna-                 
 cle) and the intervention of  Thorndor. The  remnant reaches                 
 Sirion and journeys to the land at its mouth - the Waters of                 
 Sirion. Morgoth's triumph is now complete.                                   
                                                                             
                                       *                                      
                                                                             
 [All the changes in this section except that given in note 3 were late alter-
 ations made roughly. and hastily.]                                           
                                                                             
 1 Added against this sentence: last of the fugitives from without            
 2 younger than Turin > cousin of Turin                                      
 3 seven early changed to twelve.                                              
 4 Added here: if they sit still in their halls.                              
 5 Added here: which they find by the grace of Ylmir.                           
 6 The  word  old  circled  for removal.                                     
                                                                             
                                      17.                                     
                                                                             
   To Sirion's mouth Elwing daughter of  Dior comes,  and is                  
 received  by  the  survivors of  Gondolin.' These  become a                  
 seafaring folk, building many boats and  living far  out on                  
 the delta, whither the Orcs dare not come.                                   
   Ylmir  reproaches  the  Valar, and  bids them  rescue the                  
 remnants of the Noldoli  and the  Silmarils in  which alone                  
 now lives the light of the old days of bliss when the Trees                  
 were shining.                                                                
   The  sons of  the Valar  led by  Fionwe Tulcas'  son lead                  
 forth a host, in which all the  Qendi march,  but remember-                  
 ing Swanhaven few of the Teleri  go with  them. Cor  is de-                  
 serted.                                                                      
   Tuor growing old' cannot forbear the call of the sea, and                  
 builds Earame and sails West with Idril and is heard  of no                  

  more.  Earendel  weds  Elwing.  The  call of  the sea  is born
  also in him. He builds Wingelot and wishes  to sail  in search
  of his father. Ylmir bids him to sail to Valinor.' Here follow
  the marvellous adventures of Wingelot in  the seas  and isles,
  and  of  how  Earendel  slew  Ungoliant in  the South.  He re-
  turned  home  and  found  the Waters  of Sirion  desolate. The
  sons  of Feanor  learning of  the dwelling  of Elwing  and the
  Nauglafring  had  come  down  on  the  people of  Gondolin. In
  a battle all the sons of Feanor save Maidros(4) were slain, but
  the  last  folk  of Gondolin  destroyed or  forced to  go away
  and  join  the people  of Maidros.'  Elwing cast  the Nauglaf-
  ring into the sea and leapt after it,' but was changed  into a
  white sea-bird by Ylmir,  and flew  to seek  Earendel, seeking
  about all the shores of the world.                            
    Their  son (Elrond)  who is  half-mortal and  half-elfin,' a
  child,  was  saved however  by Maidros.  When later  the Elves
  return to  the West,  bound by  his mortal  half he  elects to
  stay on earth.  Through him  the blood  of Hurin'  (his great-
  uncle) and of  the Elves  is yet  among Men,  and is  seen yet
  in valour and in beauty and in poetry.                        
    Earendel  learning  of  these   things  from   Bronweg,  who
  dwelt in a hut, a solitary, at the mouth  of Sirion,  is over-
  come  with  sorrow.  With  Bronweg  he  sets sail  in Wingelot
  once more in search of Elwing and of Valinor.                 
    He comes to the  magic isles,  and to  the Lonely  Isle, and
  at last to the Bay of Faerie. He climbs the  hill of  Cor, and
  walks  in  the  deserted  ways  of Tun,  and his  raiment be-
  comes  encrusted  with  the  dust of  diamonds and  of jewels.
  He dares not go  further into  Valinor. He  builds a  tower on
  an isle in the northern seas, to which all the seabirds of the
  world repair. He sails  by the  aid of  their wings  even over
  the airs  in search  of Elwing,  but is  scorched by  the Sun,
  and hunted from  the sky  by the  Moon, and  for a  long while
  he wanders the sky as a fugitive star.(9)                     
                                                               
                                *                               

                                    
                                                                          
 [In this section again most of the  changes (not  those in  notes 2  and 4)
 were hastily made in pencil.]                                             
                                                                          
 1. This sentence was changed to read:                                      
                                                                          
       At Sirion's mouth Elwing daughter of Dior dwelt, and  received the
       survivors of Gondolin.                                              
                                                                          
 2. growing old struck out.                                             
 3. Ylmir bids him to sail to Valinor struck out.                            
 4. Maidros > Maidros and Maglor.                                       
 5. Written in the margin: Maglor sat and sang by the sea in repentance.
 6. My  father  first  wrote  Elwing  cast  herself into  the sea  with the
    Nauglafring, but changed it to Elwing cast the Nauglafring into the sea
    and leapt after it in the act of writing.                             
 7. This sentence was changed to read:                                      
                                                                          
       Their  son  (Elrond) who is part  mortal and  part elfin  and part  of the
       race of Valar,                                                      
                                                                          
     8 Hurin struck out, and  Huor and  of Beren  written above,  together with
     some  illegible  words.  One  might  expect  Through  him  the   blood  of
     Huor  and  of  Beren his  great-grandfathers, but  the illegible  words do
     not  seem  to  be these.  (Hurin was  in fact Elrond's great-great-uncle.)
     9 The last sentence (He sails by  the aid  of their  wings...) is  an addi-
     tion, but I think an addition made at the time of writing.             
                                                                          
                                    18.                                    
                                                                          
   The march of Fionwe into the North is  then told,  and of               
 the Terrible or Last Battle. The Balrogs are all destroyed,               
 and  the  Orcs  destroyed  or  scattered.  Morgoth  himself               
 makes a last sally with all his dragons;  but they  are de-               
 stroyed,  all save  two which  escape, by  the sons  of the               
 Valar, and Morgoth is  overthrown and  bound' and  his iron               
 crown is made into a collar for his neck. The two Silmarils               
 are rescued. The Northern  and Western  parts of  the world               
 are rent and broken in the struggle.'                                     
   The  Gods  and  Elves  release  Men  from   Hithlum,  and               
 march  through  the  lands  summoning  the remnants  of the               
 Gnomes  and Ilkorins  to join  them. All  do so  except the               
 people  of  Maidros.  Maidros aided  by many  men' prepares               
 to perform his  oath, though  now at  last weighed  down by               

                                                                       
                                                                            
 sorrow because of  it. He  sends to  Fionwe reminding  him of               
 the oath and begging for the  Silmarils. Fionwe  replies that               
 he has lost his right to them  because of  the evil  deeds of               
 Feanor, and of the slaying of Dior, and of the  plundering of               
 Sirion.  He  must  submit,  and  come  back  to  Valinor;  in               
 Valinor only and at the judgement of the  Gods shall  they be               
 handed over.                                                                
   Maidros  and  Maglor'  submit.  The  Elves  set  sail  from               
 Luthien (Britain or England) for  Valinor.' Thence  they ever               
 still from time [to time] set sail leaving the world ere they               
 fade.                                                                       
   On the last  march Maglor  says to  Maidros that  there are               
 two sons of Feanor now left, and two  Silmarils; one  is his.               
 He steals it, and flies, but it burns him so that he knows he               
 no longer has  a right  to it.  He wanders  in pain  over the               
 earth, and casts himself into a pit.' One Silmaril is  now in               
 the sea, and one in the earth.'                                             
   The  Gnomes  and  many  of  the  Ilkorins  and  Teleri  and               
 Qendi repeople the  Lonely Isle.  Some go  back to  live upon               
 the shores of Faery and in  Valinor, but  Cor and  Tur remain               
 desolate.                                                                   
                                                                            
                                      *                                      
                                                                            
 1. Added here: by the chain Angainor                                      
 2. Added here: and the fashion of their lands altered (late pencilled ad-
    dition).                                                                 
 3. aided by many men struck out.                                             
 4. and Maglor circled in pencil.                                          
 5. This sentence was changed to read:                                        
                                                                            
          The Elves march to the Western shore, and begin to set sail from
       Leithien (Britain or England) for Valinor.                            
                                                                            
 6. casts himself into a pit > casts it into a fiery pit.                      
 7. Added here: Maglor sings now ever in sorrow by the sea.                   
                                                                            
                                     19.                                     
                                                                            
   The judgement of the Gods takes place. The earth is to                    
 be for Men, and the Elves who do not set sail for the                       

                                                         
                                                             
 Lonely  Isle  or  Valinor shall  slowly fade  and fail.  For a
 while the last dragons and  Orcs shall  grieve the  earth, but
 in the end all shall perish by the valour of Men.            
   Morgoth  is  thrust  through  the  Door  of  Night  into the
 outer dark  beyond the  Walls of  the World,  and a  guard set
 for ever on that Door. The lies  that he  sowed in  the hearts
 of Men and Elves do not  die and  cannot all  be slain  by the
 Gods,  but  live  on  and bring  much evil  even to  this day.
 Some  say  also  that  secretly  Morgoth  or his  black shadow
 and spirit in spite of the  Valar creeps  back over  the Walls
 of  the  World in  the North  and East  and visits  the world,
 others that this is Thu his great chief  who escaped  the Last
 Battle and dwells still in  dark places,  and perverts  Men to
 his  dreadful  worship.  When  the  world  is much  older, and
 the  Gods  weary,  Morgoth  will come  back through  the Door,
 and the last battle of all will be  fought. Fionwe  will fight
 Morgoth  on  the  plain of  Valinor, and  the spirit  of Turin
 shall be  beside him;  it shall  be Turin  who with  his black
 sword  will  slay  Morgoth,  and  thus  the children  of Hurin
 shall be avenged.                                            
   In  those  days the  Silmarils shall  be recovered  from sea
 and  earth  and  air,  and  Maidros   shall  break   them  and
 Belaurin(1) with  their fire  rekindle the  Two Trees,  and the
 great  light  shall  come  forth again,  and the  Mountains of
 Valinor shall be levelled so that it goes out over  the world,
 and  Gods  and  Elves  and  Men' shall  grow young  again, and
 all their dead awake.'                                       
   And thus it was that the  last Silmaril  came into  the air.
 The  Gods  adjudged  the  last Silmaril  to Earendel  - 'until
 many things  shall come  to pass'  - because  of the  deeds of
 the sons of Feanor. Maidros is sent to  Earendel and  with the
 aid of the Silmaril Elwing is  found and  restored. Earendel's
 boat is drawn  over Valinor  to the  Outer Seas,  and Earendel
 launches  it  into  the  outer  darkness  high  above  Sun and
 Moon.  There  he  sails with  the Silmaril  upon his  brow and
 Elwing at his side, the brightest of all stars,  keeping watch
 upon Morgoth.4 So he shall sail until he sees the  last battle
 gathering upon the plains  of Valinor.  Then he  will descend.

   And this is the last end of the  tales of  the days  before the        
 days,  in  the  Northern  regions  of  the  Western  World. These        
 tales  are  some  of  those  remembered  and  sung by  the fading        
 Elves,  and  most  by  the  vanished  Elves  of the  Lonely Isle.        
 They  have  been  told   by  Elves   to  Men   of  the   race  of        
 Earendel,  and  most  to  Eriol  who  alone  of mortals  of later        
 days  sailed  to  the  Lonely   Isle,  and   yet  came   back  to        
 Luthien,'  and  remembered  things  he  had  heard  in Cortirion,        
 the town of the Elves in Tol Eressea.                                    
                                                                         
                                     *                                    
                                                                         
 1 Against Belaurin was written Palurien (cf. $1 note 1).                 
 2 and Men struck out.                                                    
 3 Added here:                                                            
                                                                         
       But of Men in that last Day the prophecy speaks not, save of Turin
       only.                                                              
                                                                         
 4 Added here: and the Door of Night (late pencilled addition).           
 5 Luthien > Leithien (cf. $18 note 5).                                  
                                                                         
                               Commentary on                              
                       the 'Sketch of the Mythology'.                     
                                                                         
   While  the  'Sketch'  is  a  good  and  clear  manuscript,  as  it  had
 to  be  (since  it  was  to  be  read  by  R.  W.  Reynolds), it  will be
 apparent  that  my  father  composed  it   extremely  rapidly:   I  think
 it  quite  possible  and  even   probable  that   he  wrote   it  without
 consulting the earlier prose tales.                                      
   Very   great   advances   have   been   made   towards   the   form  of
 the  story  as  it  appears  in  the  published  work;  but  there  is no
 trace  of  a  prose  narrative  even  in  fragmentary  or note  form that
 bridges  the  gap  between  the  Lost  Tales  and  this  synopsis  in the
 'Valinorean'  part  of  the  mythology  (i.e.  to   the  flight   of  the
 Noldoli  and  the  making  of  the  Sun  and  Moon).   This  is   not  to
 say,  of  course,  that  none  such  ever existed,  though the  fact that
 my  father   did  undoubtedly   preserve  a   very  high   proportion  of
 all  that  he  ever  wrote  leads me  to doubt  it. I  think it  far more

  likely  that while  working on  other things  (during his  time at
  Leeds)   he   had   developed   his   ideas,  especially   on  the
  'Valinorean' part, without setting  them to  paper; and  since the
  prose  Tales  had  been  set aside  a good  many years  before, it
  may be that certain narrative  shifts found  in the  'Sketch' were
  less fully intended, less conscious, than such shifts in the later
  development  of  'The  Silmarillion',  where  he always  worked on
  the basis of existing writings.                                   
    It is in any case  often extremely difficult, or  impossible, to
  judge whether features in the Tales  that are  not present  in the
  'Sketch'  were  omitted  simply  for the  sake of  compression, or
  whether  they   had  been   definitively  abandoned.   Thus  while
  Eriol - not AElfwine, see II. 300 - is mentioned  at the  end, and
  his  coming  to Kortirion  in Tol  Eressea, there  is no  trace of
  the Cottage of Lost Play:  the entire  narrative framework  of the
  Lost  Tales  has  disappeared.  But  this  does  not by  any means
  demonstrate that my father had actually rejected it at  this time.
                                                                   
    The Commentary that follows is divided according to the         
  19 sections into which I have divided the narrative.              
    The 'Sketch of the Mythology' is referred to throughout         
  the rest of this book by the abbreviation 'S'.                    
                                                                   
    S  (the  'Sketch'),  which  makes no  reference to  the Creation
  and  the  Music  of  the  Ainur,  begins  with  the coming  of the
  Nine  Valar  'for  the governance  of the  world': the  Nine Valar
  have been referred to in the alliterative poem  The Flight  of the
  Noldoli  (see III.  133, 137).  There now  appears the isle (later
  called  Almaren)  on  which  the  Gods dwelt  after the  making of
  the  Lamps, the  origin of  which is  probably to  be seen  in the
  tale of The Coming of the Valar I. 69 - 70, where it is  said that
  when  the  Lamps  fell  the  Valar  were  gathered  on  the Twilit
  Isles,  and  that  'that  island  whereon  stood  the  Valar'  was
  dragged  westward  by  Osse.  It  might  seem  that  the  story of
  Melko's making the pillars  of the  Lamps out  of ice  that melted
  had  been  abandoned,  but  it  reappears  again  later,   in  the
  Ambarkanta (p. 292).                                              
    The use of the word  'plant' of  the Two  Trees is  curious, and


                                                                    
 might  be  dismissed  simply  as a  hasty expression  if it  did not
 appear  in  the  following  version   of  'The   Silmarillion',  the
 Quenta  (p. 80).  In the  old tale,  as in  the published  work, the
 Trees   rose   from  the   ground  under   the  chanted   spells  of
 Yavanna.  The  silver  undersides of  the leaves  of the  White Tree
 now  appear,  and  its  flowers are  likened to  those of  a cherry:
 Silpion  is  translated  'Cherry-moon'  in  the  Name-list   to  The
 Fall of  Gondolin (II.  215). The  mention of  the White  Tree first
 may  imply  that it  had now  become the  Elder Tree,  as it  is ex-
 plicitly in the Quenta.                                             
     As S was first written the  Trees had  periods of  twelve hours,
 as in the  Lost Tales  (see 1.  88 and  footnote), but  with emenda-
 tion  from  'six'  to  'seven'  (allowing for  the time  of 'mingled
 light')  the  period  becomes  fourteen  hours.  This  was  a  move-
 ment  towards  the   formulation  in   The  Silmarillion   (p.  38),
 where  each  Tree  'waxed  to  full  and waned  again to  naught' in
 seven  hours;  but in  The Silmarillion  'each day  of the  Valar in
 Aman  contained   twelve  hours',   whereas  in   S  each   day  was
 double that length.                                                 
     The  Gnomish  name of  Varda, Bridhil,  occurs in  the allitera-
 tive  Flight  of  the  Noldoli  (changed  to  Bredhil),  the  Lay of
 Leithian,  and  the   early  Gnomish   dictionary  (I.   273,  entry
 Varda).   On   Timbrenting,   Tindbrenting   see   III.   127,  139;
 Tengwethil  (varying  with  Taingwethil)  is  found  in  the  Lay of
 the  Children  of  Hurin.  For  Ifan  Belaurin  see  I.  273,  entry
 Yavanna;  in  the  Gnomish  dictionary  the  Gnomish  form  is Ifon,
 Ivon.                                                               
                                                                    
                                  2.                                 
                                                                    
     The  description  in S  of the  'Outer Lands'  (now used  of the
 Great  Lands,  see  III.  224),  where  growth  was  checked  at the
 downfall  of  the  Lamps,  but  where  there  are  forests  of  dark
 trees  in  which  Orome  goes  hunting  at  times, moves  the narra-
 tive at this point in one step to its structure in The Silmarillion;
 of the very  different account  in the  Lost Tales  I noticed  in my
 commentary  on  The  Chaining  of  Melko (I.  111): 'In  this earli-
 est  narrative  there  is  no  mention  of  the beginning  of growth
 during  the  time  when  the Lamps  shone, and  the first  trees and

  low plants appeared under Yavanna's spells  in the  twilight after
  their overthrow.'                                                
    Whereas  in  the  Lost  Tales  the  star-making  of  Varda  took
  place  after  the  awakening  of  the  Elves  (I. 113),  here they
  awake 'at the making of the stars.'                              
    In commenting  on the  Lost Tales  I noticed  g. 111,  131) that
  the  Gods  sought  out  Melko  on  account  of his  renewed cosmic
  violence,  before  the  awakening  of  the  Elves and  without re-
  spect  to them  in any  way; and  that the  release of  Melko from
  Mandos  took  place  before the  coming of  the Eldar  to Valinor,
  so  that  he played  a part  in the  debate concerning  their sum-
  mons. In S the later story (that  the discovery  of the  Elves led
  directly to the assault of the Valar on  the fortress  of Morgoth)
  is already present, and moreover a motive is  ascribed to  the in-
  tervention of the  Valar that  is not  found in  The Silmarillion:
  they are 'reminded of  their duty  to the  Earth, since  they came
  thither knowing that their  office was  to govern  it for  the two
  races  of Earth  who should  after come  each in  appointed time'.
  It seems clear also that the old story of the coming of  the Elves
  being  known  to  Manwe  independently   of  their   discovery  by
  Orome (see L 131) had been abandoned.                            
    In  the  Lost  Tales  Melko's  first  fortress  was  Utumna, and
  though  it was  not wholly  destroyed to  its foundations  g. 104)
  after  his  escape back  into the  Great Lands  he was  'busy mak-
  ing  himself  new   dwellings',  as   Sorontur  told   Manwe,  for
  'never  more  will  Utumna  open  unto him'  g. 176).  This second
  fortress  was  Angband  (Angamandi).  In  S,  on  the  other hand,
  the first fortress  is Angband,  and after  his escape  Morgoth is
  able to return to it ($4), for it was too strong  for the  Gods to
  destroy   ($2).  The   name  Utumna   (Utumno)  has   thus  disap-
  peared.                                                          
    In the passage describing the three  hosts of  the Elves  on the
  great  march  from  Cuivienen  (which  occurs,  by  emendation, in
  the Lay of the Children of Hurin, III. 18,  23) there  appears the
  later use of Teleri for the third kindred  (who however  still re-
  tain  the  old name  Solosimpi, the  Shoreland Pipers),  while the
  first  kindred  (the  Teleri of  the Lost  Tales) now  acquire the
  name  Quendi  (subsequently  spelt  in S  both Quendi  and Qendi).
  Thus:                                                            

                                              
                                                                    
           Lost Tales.    'Sketch'.              The Silmarillion.
             Teleri.      Q(u)endi.                  Vanyar.         
                                                                    
           Noldoli.             Noldoli.             Noldor.         
                                                                    
         Solosimpi.     Teleri, Solosimpi.            Teleri.        
                                                                    
  The  formulation  at  the  time  of  the Lost  Tales was  that Qendi
  was  the  original  name  of  all  the  Elves,  and  Eldar  the name
  given  by  the  Gods  and  adopted  by the  Elves of  Valinor; those
  who  remained  in  the  Great  Lands (Ilkorins)  preserved  the  old
  name,  Qendi.  There  also  appear  now  the   terms  'Light-elves',
  'Deep-elves', and  'Sea-elves' (as  in The  Hobbit, chapter  8); the
  meaning  of 'the  Elves proper',  applied to  the first  kindred, is
  clear  from  the  Quenta   (p.  102):   'the  Quendi...   who  some-
  times are alone called Elves.'                                     
    Inwe  of  the  Lost Tales  now  becomes  Ingwe,  with  the  Gnom-
  ish  equivalent  Ing  which  appears in  the alliterative  poems, as
  does  Gnomish  Finn  (in  The  Flight  of  the Noldoli). Elwe (Elu)
  is in the role of the later Olwe, leader of the third  kindred after
  the loss of  Thingol. In  the Tale  of Tinuviel  Tinwelint (Thingol)
  was indeed originally called Tinto Ellu  or Ellu,  but in  the tales
  of  The  Coming  of  the  Elves  and  The Theft  of Melko,  by later
  changes,  Ellu  becomes  the  name  of  the   second  lord   of  the
  Solosimpi chosen in Tinwelint's place.                             
    Notably  absent  from  the  account  in S  are the  initial coming
  of  the  three  Elvish  ambassadors  to Valinor,  and the  Elves who
  did   not   leave   the   Waters  of   Awakening,  referred   to  in
  Gilfanon's  Tale g.  231): the  Ilkorins are  here defined  as those
  who  were  lost  on  the  great  march  into  the  West.   On  these
  omissions see the commentary on $2 in the Quenta, p. 201.          
    Other  omissions  in  S  are  the  two  starmakings of  Varda (see
  p.   201)   and   the   chain  Angainor   with  which   Morgoth  was
  bound (see S $18 note 1).                                          
                                                                    
                                   3.                                
                                                                    
    In the tale of The Coming of the Elves the island on which       
  the Gods were drawn to the western lands at the time of the        
  fall  of  the  Lamps  was  the island  on which  the Elves  were af-

  terwards ferried, becoming Tol Eressea (see I. 118, 134); now,
  the isle on which the Gods dwelt (see the commentary on $1)          
  is again the isle of the Elves' ferrying. But in The Silmarillion    
  there is no connection between the Isle of Almaren and Tol
  Eressea.                                                             
    In the story of the ferrying features of the final narrative       
  emerge in S: the first two kindreds to arrive at the shores of       
  the sea are ferried together on this island, not separately as in    
  the tale; and the love of the sea among the Teleri (Solosimpi)
  began during their waiting for Ulmo's return. On the other           
  hand the old story of Osse s rebellious anchoring of Tol             
  Eressea still survives (see I. 134); but the position of the island
  after its anchoring has now shifted westwards, to the Bay of
  Faerie, 'whence the Mountains of Valinor could dimly be              
  seen': contrast the account in the tale, where Ulmo had tra-         
  versed 'less than half the distance' across the Great Sea when       
  Osse waylaid it, and where 'no land may be seen for man              
  leagues' sail from its cliffs' (see I. 120 - 1, and my discussion
  of this change, I. 134). In the tale, Osse seized and anchored       
  Tol Eressea before its journey was done because he 'deemed           
  himself slighted that his aid was not sought in the ferrying of
  the Elves, but his own island taken unasked' g. 119); in S his     
  jealousy is indeed mentioned, but also his love of the singing       
  of the Teleri, which was afterwards a prominent motive. Osse's    
  making of the seabirds for the Teleri (Solosimpi) was retained,      
  though afterwards lost.                                              
    In the tale the gap in the Mountains of Valinor was not            
  made by the Valor for the sake of the Elves, nor was the hill        
  of Kor raised for them: they had existed since distant days,         
  when 'in the trouble of the ancient seas a shadowy arm of wa-        
  ter had groped in toward Valinor' g. 122). In the passage in S 
  can be seen the origin of that in The Silmarillion (p. 59). Here
  in S Cor is the hill and Tun is the city built upon it (though       
  in $2 there is a reference to Elves dwelling 'in Cor'); see          
  III. 93.                                                             
    On the 'invention' of gems by the Noldoli see I. 138. The          
  especial love of Mandos 'the wise' for the Noldoli is found          
  neither in the Lost Tales nor in The Silmarillion, and may seem      
  an improbable attribute of that Vala: cf. The Coming of the          

  Elves, I.  117: Mandos  and Fui  were cold  to the  Eldar as  to all
  else.'                                                              
    The  passage  concerning  the  Noldorin  princes,  added   to  the
  text of S (though probably after no great  interval), is  the origin
  of  the  passage in  The Silmarillion  (p. 60)  which begins  in the
  same  way:  'The  Noldor  afterwards  came  back   to  Middle-earth,
  and this tale tells  mostly of  their deeds...'  For the  details of
  names  and relations  in this  passage see  the Note  at the  end of
  this section of the commentary.                                     
    The  story  of  the coming  of the  Teleri (Solosimpi)  to Valinor
  from Tol Eressea  comes  in S,  in essentials,  almost to  the form
  in The Silmarillion (p. 61); for the very  different account  in the
  tale  see I.  124-6. In  S, however,  it was  Ylmir (Ulmo)  not Osse
  who  taught  them  the  craft  of shipbuilding,  and this  of course
  reflects the difference still underlying: for here Ylmir  was still,
  as  in  the  tale,  eager  for the  coming of  the Third  Kindred to
  Valinor,  whereas  in  The  Silmarillion   he  had   himself  bidden
  Osse  make  fast  the  island  to  the  sea-bottom,  and  afterwards
  only  'submitted  to  the will  of the  Valar'. -  The name  Ylmir -
  almost  certainly  the  Gnomish  form -  appears in  the Lay  of the
  Children  of  Hurin,  see III.  93; but  the form  Oin for  Uinen is
  not found elsewhere.                                                
                                                                     
                      Note on the Noldorin princes.                   
                                                                     
    Fingolfin  as  the  son  of  Finwe  (Finn)  and  father  of Turgon
  emerges  first  in  the  Lay of  the Fall  of Gondolin  (II. 146-7),
  and is present  in the  second version  of the  Lay of  the Children
  of  Hurin  (only  by  emendation  in  the  first) (III. 137).  That
  Feanor  was  Fingolfin's  brother  is  deducible  from  the  allitera-
  tive Flight of the Noldoli (ibid.), but from S, as  originally writ-
  ten in this section, it is seen that Feanor was at first the second,
  not  the  elder  son.  Here  in  S  Finwe's  third son  Finrod first
  emerges: the mention of  him, and  his sons,  in a  note to  the Lay
  of  the Children  of Hurin (III. 80)  is certainly  later, as  is his
  first appearance in the Lay of Leithian (III. 191, 195).             
    The  seven  sons  of  Feanor  with  the  same  name-forms  as here
  in S have appeared  in the  Lay of  the Children  of Hurin (III. 65,

                                                           
                                                                  
 86);  the  naming  of  Damrod  and Diriel  together in  S suggests
 that they were already twin brothers.                             
   Of  the  sons of  Fingolfin Turgon  of course  goes back  to the
 Lost Tales,  where  he  was the  son, not  the grandson,  of Finwe
 the other son Finweg appears in the Lay of the Children           
 Hurin, where the emendation to Fingon  (see III.  5, 80)  is later
 than S - and  the Quenta,  where he  was still  Finweg in  the text
 as first written.                                                 
   The  sons  of  Finrod  first  emerge here,  and as  the inserted
 passage in S  was first  written Orodreth  was apparently  the el-
 dest   son;  Angrod   was  Anrod;   and  Felagund   was  Felagoth.
 Felagoth occurs as an intervening stage between Celegorm an       
 Felagund in the A-text  of the  Lay of  Leithian (III.  169, 195).
                                                                  
                                 4.                                
                                                                  
   In this section again S moves at a step  close to  the essential
 structure of the narrative in The Silmarillion, though  these are
 important features not  yet present.  I have  discussed previously
 g. 156-8) the radical differences  between the  tale of  The Theft
 of Melko and the story in The  Silmarillion, and  it will  be seen
 that  it was  with S  that almost  all these  differences entered:
 there is thus no  need to  repeat the  comparison again  here. But
 various more minor matters may be noticed.                        
   The  quarrel  of the  Noldorin princes  has as  yet none  of the
 complexity and subtlety that entered into  it afterwards  with the
 history of Miriel, the first wife of Finwe  and mother  of Feanor,
 the quarrel is in any case treated with great brevity.             
   It is said here  that 'Feanor  has cursed  for ever  anyone, God
 or  Elf  or  mortal that  shall come  hereafter, who  touches [the
 Silmarils]'. In $5, by a later interpolation, the oath is taken by
 Feanor  and  his sons  at the  time of  the torchlit  concourse in
 Tun,  but  the  statement  in  $4  my  father  allowed  to  stand,
 clearly  because he  overlooked it.  In the  alliterative fragment
 The  Flight  of  the  NoLdoli, however,  which on  general grounds
 I assume to belong to  the earlier  part of  1925 (III.  131), the
 oath is sworn by Feanor and his  sons as  in the  interpolation in
 S  $5,  'in  the  mighty  square  upon  the  crown  of  Cor'  (see
 III. 136). I incline to  think that  the statement  here in  $4 was
 a slip of memory.                                                 

    The  events  immediately  following  the  council  of   the  Gods
  in  which  Morgoth's  lies  were  disclosed  and   Feanor  banished
  from  Tun  (in S  the banishment  is not  said to  be limited  to a
  term  of  years)  are  not  yet  given  the form  they have  in The
  Silmarillion.  The  entire  story  of  Morgoth's going  to Formenos
  (not  yet  so  named)  and  his  speech  with  Feanor   before  the
  doors (The Silmarillion pp. 71 -  2) has  yet to  appear. Morgoth's
  northward movement up  the coast  in feint  is also  absent; rather
  he  comes  at  once  to Arvalin  'where the  shadow is  thickest in
  all the world', as is said in The Silmarillion (p. 73) of Avathar.
    In  the  story  of  Morgoth's  encounter  with Ungoliant  and the
  destruction of the Trees details  of the  final version  appear, as
  Ungoliant's   ascent  of   the  great   mountain  (later   '  named
  Hyarmentir)  'from  pinnacle  to  pinnacle',  and  the  ladder made
  for Morgoth to climb. There is  no mention  of the  great festival,
  but it appears in 55: it looks as if my  father omitted  to include
  it earlier and brought it in a bit further on as an afterthought.
    In  the  tale  of  The  Theft  of  Melko  Ungoliant   fled  south
  at  once  after  the  destruction  of  the Trees  (I. 154),  and of
  Melko's  subsequent  movements  after  his  crossing  of   the  Ice
  it  is  only  told  (by  Sorontur  to  Manwe, I.  176) that  he was
  busy  building  himself  a  new  dwelling-place  in  the  region of
  the  Iron  Mountains. But  in S  the story  of 'the  Thieves' Quar-
  rel'  and  Morgoth's  rescue  by   the  Balrogs   emerges  suddenly
  fully-formed.                                                     
                                                                   
                                   5.                               
                                                                   
    From  the  account  of  the  great  festival  (see  commentary on
  54)  is  absent  both the  original occasion  for holding  it (com-
  memoration  of  the coming  of the  Eldar to  Valinor, I.  143) and
  that  given  in  The  Silmarillion  (the  autumn feast:  pp. 74-5).
  The later feature  that the  Teleri were  not present  appears (see
  I 157); but there  is no  suggestion of  the important  elements of
  Feanor  coming  alone  to  the festival  from Formenos,  the formal
  reconciliation  with  Fingolfin, and  Feanor's refusal  to surrender
  the Silmarils before he  heard the  news of  his father's  death and
  the theft of the jewels (The Silmarillion pp. 75, 78 - 9).          
    In  the later  emendations of  the text  of S  we see  the growth
  of  the  story  of  the divided  counsels of  the Gnomes,  with the

  introduction of the attempt  of Finrod  (later Finarfin)  to calm
  the conflicting  factions -  though this  element was  present in
  the tale  of  The  Flight  of  the  Noldoli, where  Finwe No1eme
  plays the part  of the  appeaser g.  162). After  a good  deal of
  further shifting in this passage in later texts, and the introduc-
  tion of Galadriel, the alignment, and the motives, of the princes
  as  they  appear  in  The  Silmarillion  are  more  complex  (pp.
  83-4); but the element  is  already  present  that  only  one of
  Finrod's   sons   sided   with   him   (here  Felagund,   in  The
  Silmarillion Orodreth).                                          
    The  emendation  making  Fingolfin  and  Finweg  (Fingon)  rule
  over 'a half of the  Noldoli of  Tun' must  be incorrect;  my fa-
  ther probably  intended  the  revised  text  to  read   'over  the
  Noldoli of Tun'.                                                 
    The rapid shifting in the  part of  Finrod (Finarfin)  in these
  events  can  be  observed in  the successive  interpolations made
  in S. It seems that in the original text he did not appear at all
  (the first mention of him is in the  interpolated passage  in $3,
  pp. 15 - 16). He is said not to have left Tun; then he is said to
  have been slain at Swanhaven; and finally it is told that  he and
  his sons were not at Swanhaven, but left Tun  reluctantly, carry-
  ing  with  them  many  things  of their  making. Finrod  was then
  introduced as only arriving with his people in the far  North af-
  ter the burning of the ships by the Feanorians on the  other side
  of the strait. As  S was  originally written  Fingolfin, deserted
  and  shipless, returned  to Valinor,  and it  was his  son Finweg
  (Fingon) who led the main host  over the  Grinding Ice;  but with
  the  introduction  of  Finrod  he becomes  the one  who returned.
  (Finweg  as  the  leader  of  the  host was  not then  changed to
  Fingolfin, but this was obviously an oversight.)                 
    In the account of the  northward journey  of the  Noldoli after
  the  battle  of  Swanhaven  it seems  that all  the host  was em-
  barked in the ships of the Teleri,  since Mandos'  emissary hails
  them from a high cliff 'as they sail  by', but  this may be merely
  due  to  compression,  since  in  the Tale  g. 166)  some marched
  along the shore while 'the fleet coasted beside them not  far out
  to sea', and the same is told in The Silmarillion ('some  by ship
  and some by land', p.  87). -The  storm raised  by Uinen  is not
  mentioned.                                                       

    It  is  curious  that  the  curse  upon  the  Gnomes,  that they
  should  suffer  from  treachery  and the  fear of  treachery among
  their  own  kindred,  is  separated from  the Prophecy  of Mandos;
  but it  is not  said by  whom this  curse was  pronounced. Nothing
  is told in S as originally written of the content of  the Prophecy
  of Mandos, save that it concerned  'the fate  of after  days', but
  my father subsequently added  that it  told of  'the curse  of war
  against  one  another  because  of  Swanhaven', thus  bringing the
  'curse'  into   the  content   of  the   'Prophecy',  as   in  The
  Silmarillion. There is no trace of  the old  prophecies concerning
  Turgon  and  Gondolin  g.  167,  172),  but nor  is there any sug-
  gestion of the nature of the doom of  the Noldor  as it  is stated
  in The Silmarillion.                                              
    For the original story of the  crossing of  the Grinding  Ice by
  the  Gnomes,  where  there  is  no  element  of  treachery (though
  the blaming of Feanor was already present), see I. 167 - 9.       
                                                                   
                                  6                                 
                                                                   
    The  making  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  is  here  compressed  into
  a couple of phrases. Virtually all of the extremely  elaborate ac-
  count in the old Tale  of the  Sun and  Moon has  disappeared: the
  tears of Vana leading to the last fruit  of Laurelin,  the breaking
  of the 'Fruit  of Noon',  the Bath  of the  Setting Sun  where the
  Sun-maiden  and  her  ship  were  drawn  on  coming  out   of  the
  East, the song of Lorien leading  to the  last flower  of Silpion,
  the  fall  of  the  'Rose  of Silpion'  which caused  the markings
  on  the Moon,  the refusal  to allow  Silmo to  steer the  ship of
  the Moon and the task  given instead  to Ilinsor, a spirit  of the
  Suruli,  Lake Irtinsa where the  ship of  the Moon  was refreshed,
  and  much else.  But while  it is  impossible to  say how  much of
  all this my father had 'privately' rejected at  this time  (see my
  remarks,  I.  200),  some  elements at  least were  suppressed for
  the purposes of this 'Sketch', which is after all only an outline,
  for they will reappear.                                           
    The change in  the celestial  plan now  takes place  because the
  Gods 'find it safer to  send [the  Sun and  Moon] in  Ylmir's care
  through  the  caverns  and  grottoes beneath  the Earth'.  This is
  wholly different from the old story (I. 215),  in which  the orig-
  inal  plan  of  the  Gods  was  that  the Sun  and Moon  should be

  drawn  beneath  the  earth;  this  plan  was  changed   when  they
  found  that  the  Sun-ship  'might  not  safely  come  beneath the
  world'  -  the  very  reverse  of what  is said  in S.  Though the
  Moon  continued  to  pass  beneath  the earth,  the Gods  now made
  the  Door  of  Night  in the  West and  the Gates  of Morn  in the
  East,  through  which  the  Sun  passed thenceforward,  going into
  and returning  from  the  Outer  Dark  g.  216).  The astronomical
  aspect  of  the  mythology  has thus  undergone a  profound shift,
  an entire re-making.                                              
    The  reference  to  the  rekindling  of  the  'Magic  Sun' (here
  with extension to the Moon,  not found  in the  earliest writings)
  is a noteworthy survival; and  the meaning  is explicitly  the re-
  birth  of  the  Trees  (see  II. 286).  Very remarkable  is Ulmo's
  foretelling to the Valar that the rekindling of the Two  Trees and
  the return of  'the bliss  and glory  of old'  would only  come to
  pass by the aid of Men. It is possible that this is a reference to
  his  own  deep designs  laid through  Turgon, Tuor,  and Earendel;
  but  it is  nowhere suggested  that these  designs issued  or were
  intended  to  issue  in  such a  way. Perhaps  we should  see here
  rather  the continued  existence in  some form  of the  old proph-
  ecy given in II. 285:                                             
                                                                   
    The  Elves'  prophecy  is  that  one  day  they  will  fare  forth
    from Tol  Eressea and  on arriving  in the  world will  gather all
    their  fading  kindred  who  still  live  in  the world  and march
    towards  Valinor...  This  they  will  only  do  with the  help of
    Men.   If   Men   aid  them,   the  fairies   will  take   Men  to
    Valinor  -  those  that wish  to go  - fight  a great  battle with
    Melko  in  Erumani   and  open   Valinor.  Laurelin   and  Silpion
    will  be  rekindled,  and  the   mountain  wall   being  destroyed
    then  soft  radiance  will  spread  over  all  the world,  and the
    Sun and Moon will be recalled.                                  
                                                                   
    In  the  account  of the  Hiding of  Valinor we  move in  S from
  the Lost Tales to The Silmarillion: I have  observed (I.  223) the
  total  absence in  the latter  of the  bitter divisions  among the
  Valar,  of  Manwe's  disgusted withdrawal,  of Ulmo's  vain plead-
  ing for pity on the Noldor - and of my  father's explicit  view in
  the tale of The Hiding of Valinor  that the  actions of  the Valar

  at  this  time,  and  their failure  to make  war upon  Morgoth, were
  a  profound  error  arising  from  indolence and  fear. The  fear of
  Morgoth  does  indeed  remain,  and  is the  only motive  offered in
  The  Silmarillion  for  the  Hiding  of  Valinor,  but   the  author
  makes  no  comment  on  it.  In  S  however  the  element  of divine
  anger  against  the Noldoli  is still  present (though  neither here
  nor  later  is there  any reference  to the  peculiar anger  of Aule
  against  them  (see  I.  176), save  that in  the Annals  of Valinor
  (p.  317) when  Finrod and  others returned  to Valinor  after hear-
  ing  the  Doom  of  Mandos  'Aule  their  ancient  friend  smiled on
  them no more').                                                     
                                                                     
    There  are  differences  and  omissions in  the later  versions of
  the story of the Hiding of Valinor in relation to  that in  the tale
  which  have been  sufficiently discussed  already g.  223 -  4); but
  it may be noticed  that in  S no  reason is  given for  keeping open
  the  pass  of  Kor,  neither  that  in  the  tale  nor  that  in The
  Silmarillion.                                                       
                                                                     
    It  is  very clear  that with  the 'Sketch'  the structure  of the
  Valinorean  part  of  the mythology,  though not  of course  the de-
  tail,  had quite  largely reached  the stage  of development  of the
  published  version;  and  it  can  be   understood  why   my  father
  wrote   on   the   envelope   containing   S   the   words  Original
  'Silmarillion'. It is here that 'The Silmarillion' begins.          
                                                                     
                                   7.                                 
                                                                     
    It will be  seen that  in this  passage S  has already  the struc-
  ture  and  some even  of the  phrases of  the last  three paragraphs
  of chapter 12 ('Of Men') in The Silmarillion.                       
    The  Feanorian  oath  (ascribed  here  to  the  sons only)  is em-
  bodied in the text  as written,  which probably  shows that  the in-
  terpolated  passage,  introducing  the  oath,  in  $5  (p.  20)  was
  inserted while S was still in process of composition.               
    The  words  of  S,  'in  the  early  days  Eldar  and Men  were of
  nearly  equal  stature  and  power  of  body',  are  echoed  in  The
  Silmarillion:  'Elves  and  Men  were of  like stature  and strength
  of  body', for  statements on  this matter  in earlier  writings see
  II. 326.                                                            

    The  'higher culture'  that my  father came  to ascribe  to the
  Elves  of  Doriath  (or   more  widely   to  the   Grey-elves  of
  Beleriand)  is  now established  ('Only in  the realm  of Doriath
  ... did the Ilkorins equal the Koreldar'); contrast  the descrip-
  tion of the Ilkorins of Tinwelint's following in the old  Tale of
  Tinuviel ('eerie they were and strange beings, knowing  little of
  light or loveliness or of musics...'),  concerning which  I noted
  that Tinwelint's people are there  described in  terms applicable
  rather to the wild Avari  of The  Silmarillion (see  H. 9,  64). It
  is however said in this passage of the  tale that  'Different in-
  deed did they become when the Sun arose.*                        
    The  ideas  expressed  here  concerning the  nature of  the im-
  mortality of the Elves go back largely to the Lost Tales; cf. the
  description of  the hall  of Mandos  in The  Coming of  the Valar
  (I. 76):                                                         
                                                                  
    Thither  in  after  days  fared the  Elves of  all the  clans who
    were  by  illhap  slain  with  weapons  or did  die of  grief for
    those that were  slain -  and only  so might  the Eldar  die, and
    then  it  was  only  for  a  while.   Them  Mandos   spake  their
    doom,  and  there  they  waited  in  the  darkness,  dreaming  of
    their  past  deeds,  until such  time as  he appointed  when they
    might  again  be  born  into  their  children,  and  go  forth to
    laugh and sing again.                                          
                                                                  
  Similarly in The Music of the Ainur g. 59) it  is said  that 'the
  Eldar dwell till the Great End unless they be  slain or  waste in
  grief (for to both of these deaths are they subject)', and 'dying
  they are reborn in their children, so that their  number minishes
  not, nor grows'. But in the early texts death by sickness  is not
  mentioned, and this appears  for the  first time  in S:  where by
  emendation  there  is a  modification of  the idea,  from freedom
  from all  sickness to  freedom from  death by  sickness. Moreover
  in the early texts rebirth in their own children seems to be rep-
  resented as the universal fate of the Eldar  who die;  whereas in
  S they are said to return from Mandos 'to free life'.  Rebirth is
  mentioned in S very briefly and only in a later interpolation.
    In S  my father's  conception of  the fate  of Men  after death
  is  seen  evolving  (for  the extremely  puzzling account  in the

  Lost Tales see I.  77, 90-3).  As he  first wrote S, there  was an
  explicit assertion that Men  did not  go to  Mandos, did  not pass
  to the western land: this was  an idea  derived from  contact with
  the Eldar.  But he  changed this,  and wrote  instead that  Men do
  indeed go to  their own  halls in  Mandos, for  a time;  none know
  whither they go after, save Mandos himself.                       
    On  the  'fading'  of  the  Elves  who  remained 'in  the world'
  see II. 326.                                                      
                                                                   
                                  8.                                
                                                                   
    Neither  the  brief  outlines   for  what   was  to   have  been
  Gilfanon's  tale of  The Travail  of the  Noldoli (I.  237-41) nor
  the  subsequent  abandoned  narrative  given  on  pp.  5 -  7 bear
  much  relation  to  what  came after.  Enduring features  were the
  camp  by  Asgon-Mithrim,  the  death of  Feanor, the  first affray
  with  the  Orcs,  the capture  and maiming  of Maidros;  but these
  elements had different  motivations and  concomitants in  the ear-
  liest writing, already discussed g. 242 -  3). With  the 'Sketch',
  however, most of the essentials of the  later story  appear fully-
  formed, and the  distance travelled  from the  Lost Tales  is here
  even more striking than hitherto.                                 
                                                                   
    The first battle of  the Gnomes  with the  forces of  Morgoth is
  not clearly placed in S (cf. Gilfanon's Tale,  I. 238,  240, where
  the battle was fought 'in the foothills of the Iron  Mountains' or
  in 'the pass of the Bitter Hills') - but the idea is already pres-
  ent that the Orcs were aroused by  the burning  of the  ships (cf.
  55: 'The same light also tells the Orcs of the landing'.)         
    There  now  emerge  the  death   of  Feanor   at  the   hand  of
  Gothmog  the  Balrog,  the parley  with the  enemy and  the faith-
  less intentions on both sides, the arrival of the second host, un-
  furling their blue and silver banners (see p.  8) under  the first
  Sunrise, and the dismay of  the Orcs  at the  new light,  the hos-
  tile  armies  of  the Gnomes  encamped on  opposite sides  of Lake
  Mithrim,  the  'vast  smokes  and  vapours'  rising  from Angband.
  The only important structural  element in  the narrative  that has
  yet  to appear  is that  of Fingolfin's  march to  Angband immedi-
  ately on arrival  in Middle-earth  and his  beating on  the doors.

    The earlier existence  of the  story of  the rescue  of Maidros
  by Finweg (Fingon) is implied by a  reference in  the Lay  of the
  Children of Hurin (see III. 65, 86) - that in the Lay of Leithian
  is some two years later than S (HI. 222). A curious  point arises
  in the account in S: it seems that it was  only at  this juncture
  that Manwe brought into  being the  race of  Eagles. In  the tale
  of  The Theft  of Melko  Sorontur (the  'Elvish' form  of Gnomish
  Thorndor) had already played a part in the  story before  the de-
  parture of the Noldoli from Valinor. he was  the emissary  of the
  Valar to Melko before the destruction of  the Trees,  and because
  Melko tried to slay the Eagle                                    
                                                                  
    between  that evil  one and  Sorontur has  there ever  since been
    hate  and  war,  and  that  was  most  bitter  when  Sorontur and
    his  folk fared  to the  Iron Mountains  and there  abode, watch-
    ing all that' Melko did g. 149).                               
                                                                  
    It  may  be  noted  that  Lake Mithrim  is placed  in Hisilome/
   Hithlum/Dorlomin; see III. 103.                                 
                                                                  
                                  9.                               
                                                                  
    For this section of the narrative the earliest materials are so
  scanty that we may almost say that the 'Sketch' is  the starting-
  point. In an outline for Gilfanon's Tale g. 238) there is mention
  of a meeting between  Gnomes and  Ilkorins, and  it was  with the
  guidance  of  these  Ilkorins  that  Maidros   led  an   army  to
  Angamandi,   whence   they  were   driven  back   with  slaughter
  leaving  Maidros  a  captive;  and this  was followed  by Melko's
  southward  advance  and  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered Tears.  As I
  have noted (I. 242):                                             
                                                                  
    The  entire  later  history  of the  long years  of the  Siege of
    Angband,  ending  with   the  Battle   of  Sudden   Flame  (Dagor
    Bragollach),  of  the  passage  of  Men  over the  Mountains into
    Beleriand  and  their  taking  service  with the  Noldorin Kings,
    had  yet  to  emerge; indeed  these outlines  give the  effect of
    only  a   brief  time   elapsing  between   the  coming   of  the
    Noldoli from Kor and their great defeat.                       

  In another  outline (I.  240) there  is a  slight suggestion  of a
  longer period, in the  reference to  the Noldoli  'practising many
  arts'. In this outline the  meeting of  Gnomes and  Ilkorins takes
  place at 'the  Feast of  Reunion' (where  Men were  also present).
  But beyond this there is really nothing of the  later story  to be
  found  in  these  projections.  Nor  indeed  had  S (as originally
  written)   made   any  very   remarkable  advances.   Men 'already
  dwelt in the woods of the North',  which is  sufficiently strange,
  since according to  S Men  awoke at  the first  rising of  the Sun
  ($6),  when  also  Fingolfin marched  into Middle-earth  ($8), and
  far  too  little time  had elapsed,  one would  think, for  Men to
  have  journeyed  out  of  'the  far East'  ($6) and  become estab-
  lished in  'the woods  of the  North'. Moreover  there is  no sug-
  gestion (even  allowing for  the brief  and concentrated nature of
  the  'Sketch')  that  the  Leaguer  of  Angband  lasted  any great
  length of time, nor is  the breaking  of the  Leaguer particularly
  characterised:  Morgoth  'sends  out  his  armies',   and  'Gnomes
  and Ilkorins and Men are scattered', that is  all. But  the break-
  ing  of  the Leaguer  was already seen as  a turning-point  in the
  history of the Elves of Beleriand. It  is perfectly  possible that
  much  of  the  new  material  that  appears at  this place  in the
  Quenta (see  pp. 125  ff.) was  already in  my father's  mind when
  he wrote S (i.e., S was  a precis,  but a  precis of  an unwritten
  story); for instance, the  blasting of  the great  grassy northern
  plain  in  the  battle that  ended the  siege (not  even mentioned
  in  S)  was  already  present  when  the  Lay  of  She Children of
  Hurin was written (III. 55).                                       
    With the later interpolations in S enters the idea of  the Siege
  of Angband as  an epoch,  'a time  of growth  and birth  and flow-
  ering',  and  also the  disposition of  the Gnomish  princes, with
  the essentials of the later history already present - Fingolfin in
  Hithlum,  the  Feanorians  in  the  East  (where  they  afterwards
  warred  with  Dwarves,  Orcs,  and  Men),  and  Felagund  guarding
  the entry into the lands of Sirion.  (The reference  to Broseliand
  in this passage is  noteworthy: the  form of  the name  spelt with
  -s-  first  appears  in  the  A-text  of  Canto IV  of the  Lay of
  Leithian  -  probably early  1928; III.  195, 197).  'Fingolfin is
  slain  when  Morgoth  breaks  the  leaguer' may  or may  not imply
  the story of his duel with Morgoth before Angband.                

    Gumlin  father  of  Hurin  has  appeared  in  the  second version
  of  the Lay  of the  Children of  Hurin (III.  115, 126);  but Huor,
  named  as  Hurin's brother  in the  rewriting of  S, here  makes his
  first appearance in the legends.                                    
    The  complexities  of  the history  of Barahir  and Beren  and the
  founding  of  Nargothrond  are  best  discussed  together  with what
  is said in 510; see the commentary on the next section.             
                                                                     
                                   10.                                
                                                                     
  In $9  as first  written Barahir  already appears  as the  father of
  Beren,  replacing  Egnor;  and  they  are  here Ilkorin  Elves,  not
  Men,  though  this  was  changed  when  the  passage   was  revised.
  In  the first  version of  the Lay  of the  Children of  Hurin Beren
  was still  an Elf,  while in  the second  version my  father shifted
  back  and  forth  between  Man  and  Elf (III. 124-5); in  the open-
  ing cantos of the A-text of  the Lay  of Leithian  (in being  by the
  autumn  of  1925)  Egnor  and  his  son  were  Men (III.  171);  now
  here  in  S  (early  1926) they  are again  Elves, though  Egnor has
  become  Barahir.  Perplexingly,  in  $10  as  first  written,  while
  Barahir  is  'a  famous chieftain  of Ilkorindi',  on the  same page
  of  the  manuscript  and quite  certainly written  at the  same time
  Beren  'alone  of  mortals  came  back  from  Mandos'.  It  may well
  be  that  the  statements  in   S  that   Barahir  and   Beren  were
  Ilkorins were an  inadvertent return  to the  former idea,  after the
  decision  that  they  were Men  (seen in  the A-text  of the  Lay of
  Leithian) had  been made.  (Later in  the original  text of  S, $14,
  Beren is a mortal.)                                                 
    The  reference   in  $9  to  the   founding  of   Nargothrond  by
  Celegorm  and  Curufin  and  in  $10  to  Barahir  having   been  'a
  friend  of  Celegorm  of Nargothrond'  belong to  the phase  of the
  swiftly-evolving  legend represented  by  alterations  to the  text of
  the Lay of the Children of Hurin (see III. 83-5),  when it was
  Celegorm   and   Curufin   who   founded   Nargothrond   after   the
  breaking of the Leaguer  of  Angband  and   Felagund  had   not  yet
  emerged; similarly in the A-text of  the Lay of Leithian (III. 171),
  The  alterations  to  S  in  these  sections  move  the story  on to
  the  form  found  in  the  B-text  of  the  Lay  of  Leithian,  with
  Felagund  as  the  one  saved   by  Barahir   and  the   founder  of
  Nargothrond  -  though here  it is  said specifically  that Felagund

            
                                                                   
 and his brothers  founded  the realm,  with  the  aid  of  Celegorm
 and  Curufin;  it  seems therefore  that the  deaths of  Angrod and
 Egnor  in  the battle  that ended  the Leaguer  had not  yet arisen
 (see III. 221, 247).                                               
  The very early  form of  the story  of Beren  (the first  stage of
 development from the Tale of Tinuviel)  in S  $10 as  first written
 has been discussed in III. 219 - 20, 244.  There remains  an inter-
 esting point to mention in the  end of  this version:  the sentence
 'Some  songs  say  that Luthien  went even  over the  Grinding Ice,
 aided  by  the  power  of  her  divine  mother, Melian,  to Mandos'
 halls  and  won  him  back.'  There  is  no  suggestion   hem  that
 Luthien herself died at  the time  of Beren's  death; and  the same
 idea seems likely to underlie the  lines of  the second  version of
 the Lay of the Children of Hurin (III. 107):                        
                                                                   
                 ere he winged afar                                 
    to the long awaiting; thence Luthien won him,                   
    the Elf-maiden, and the arts of Melian...                       
                                                                   
 In the Tale of Tinuviel, on the other hand, it is said (II. 40) that
                                                                   
  Tinuviel   crushed  with   sorrow  and   finding  no   comfort  or
  light  in  all  the  world  followed him  swiftly down  those dark
  ways that all must tread alone                                    
                                                                   
 - and this seems quite clear in its meaning.                       
  Beren  and  Luthien  are here  said to  have lived,  after Beren's
 return,  'in  the  woods  of  Doriath  and  in  the  Hunters' Wold,
 west  of  Nargothrond'.  The  Land  of  the  Dead  that   Live  was
 placed  in  the Hunters'  Wold (Hills  of the  Hunters) in  the Lay
 of the  Children of  Hurin; see  III. 89,  where the  previous his-
 tory of its placing is given.                                      
  That  Beren  and  Hurin  were   friends  and   fellows-in-arms  is
 stated  in  the  Lay  of the  Children of  Hurin, and  earlier (see
 III. 25), but it has not  been said  before that  this relationship
 arose during the time of Beren's outlawry.                         
  For  the  use  of  'Shadowy  Mountains'  to  mean   the  Mountains
  of Terror see III. 170-1.                                        
  In the rewritten passage (p. 28) the story is  seen at  an earlier

  stage than that in the  'Synopsis II'  for Cantos  VI and  VII of
  the  Lay  of  Leithian  (1928),  the  text of  which is  given in
  III.  221,  233.  Celegorm  has been  displaced by  Felagoth (not
  yet  Felagund);  but  Celegorm  'discovered  what was  the secret
  mission  of  Felagoth  and  Beren'  after  their  departure  from
  Nargothrond,  and  thus  the  element  of  the   intervention  of
  Celegorm   and   Curufin,  turning   the  Elves   of  Nargothrond
  against their king, was not yet present.  Moreover in  the north-
  ward  journey  of  Beren  and  his  companions  from  Nargothrond
  there is a  battle with  Orcs, from  which only  a small  band of
  the Elves escapes, afterwards returning to the battlefield to de-
  spoil the dead  and disguise  themselves as  Orcs. These  two el-
  ements  are  clearly  interconnected:  Celegorm (and  Curufin) do
  not  know  why  Beren  and  Felagoth  are  setting out,  and thus
  there  is  no  reason  why  the king  should not  set out  with a
  strong  force.  When  my  father  wrote  'Synopsis  II'   he  had
  brought  in  the  element  of the  intervention of  the Feanorian
  brothers  against  Felagund  and  Beren,  and  with it  the small
  band that was all  they had  as companions  from their  first de-
  parture from Nargothrond.                                        
    The sequence is thus clearly:  S -  Synopsis I  - interpolation
  in S - Synopsis II; and in the revision of S here we have  an in-
  teresting  stage  in  which  Felagund  (Felagoth) has  emerged as
  the  lord of  Nargothrond, but  the 'Feanorian  intervention' has
  not, and Celegorm still 'offers redress' to Luthien, as he did in
  Synopsis I (III. 244) - for his dog Huan had hurt her.           
                                                                  
    The earliest form of this part  of the  story (apart  from that
  which relates to  Hurin) is  extant only  in the  compressed out-
  lines for Gilfanon's Tale. In my comparison  of those  early out-
  lines with the narrative of The Silmarillion I  noted g.  242) as
  essential features of the story that were to survive:            
                                                                  
  - A mighty battle called the Battle of Unnumbered Tears is       
  fought between Elves and Men and the hosts of Melko;             
  - Treachery of Men, corrupted by Melko, at that battle;          
  - But the people of Urin (Hurin) are faithful, and do not sur-
  vive it;                                                         

                              
                                                                
 - The leader of the Gnomes is isolated and slain;               
 - Turgon and his host cut their way out, and go to Gondolin;
 - Melko is wrathful because he cannot discover where Turgon     
 has gone;                                                       
 - The Feanorians come late to the battle;                       
 - A great cairn is piled.                                       
                                                                
 There is no evidence for any narrative of  the Battle  of Unnum-
 bered Tears in its own right between the outlines for Gilfanon's
 Tale and the 'Sketch',  thus $11  in S  shows at  a step  a very
 great advance. This is not however  to be  regarded as  a direct
 evolution from the  outlines, for  many elements  - such  as the
 stories of Beren  and Tinuviel,  and of  Nargothrond -  had been
 developed 'collaterally' in  the meantime.  As S  was originally
 written  in  $11,  the  old  'pre-Felagund'  story  was  present
 ('Curufin  and  Celegorm  despatch  a  host   from Nargothrond',
 see commentary on $10), and  although the  failure of  the Union
 of Maidros to gather together all the Elves of Beleriand  into a
 united force already appears, the alignments were for  this rea-
 son  quite  different:  the  Gnomes  of  Nargothrond  (ruled  by
 Celegorm  and  Curufin)  will not  serve under  Finweg (Fingon).
 But with the rewriting  of S,  made after  the emergence  of the
 Felagund-story,  an  essential  element  of the  later narrative
 comes into being: Orodreth will not join  the league  on account
 of Felagund his brother (cf. The Silmarillion p.  188: 'Orodreth
 would not march forth at the word  of any  son of  Feanor, be-
 cause  of  the  deeds  of Celegorm  and Curufin.')  That Thingol
 sent few (emended from none) out of  Doriath is  a very  old el-
 ement,  appearing  already  in  the  Tale  of Turambar (II. 73),
 where Tinwelint said  to Mavwin,  in words  echoed in  the pres-
 ent passage of S:                                               
                                                                
  not for  love nor  for fear  of Melko  but of  the wisdom  of my
  heart and the fate of the Valar  did I  not go  with my  folk to
  the  Battle   of  Unnumbered   Tears,  who   am  now   become  a
  safety and a refuge...                                         
                                                                
 A new factor in Thingol's policy now  appears, however,  in that
 he resented  the 'haughty  words' addressed  to him  by Maidros,

  demanding the  return of  the Silmaril  - those  'haughty words'
  and  their  effect  on the  Union of  Maidros survived  into The
  Silmarillion (p. 189). That Thingol here  allows 'the  Gnomes of
  Doriath' to join the league is to be related to the statement in
  S  59:  'Many  Gnomes  take  service  with  Thingol  and Melian'
  (after the breaking of the Siege  of Angband).  (In the  Tale of
  Tinuviel there were Noldoli in Tinwelint's service: it  was they
  indeed who built the bridge before his doors. H. 9, 43.)        
    As  S  was  rewritten,  the  division  of  the   opponents  of
  Morgoth  into  two  hosts  was  due  to   the  refusal   of  the
  Feanorians  to  be  led  by  Finweg  (Fingon),  whereas  in  The
  Silmarillion   account   there   was   good   agreement  between
  Himring and Eithel Sirion, and  the assault  from East  and West
  of the Feanorians and the Noldor of Hithlum  a matter  of strat-
  egy  ('they  thought  to take  the might  of Morgoth  as between
  anvil and hammer, and break it to pieces').                     
    The  Battle  of Unnumbered  Tears is  still in  S in  a simple
  form,  but  the  advance of  the Elves  of Hithlum  into Dor-na-
  Fauglith in pursuit of a  defeated Orc-army,  so that  they fall
  prey  to  much   greater  hosts   loosed  from   Angband,  moves
  towards the plan of the later narrative; the late arrival of the
  Feanorians  goes  back to  an outline  for Gilfanon's  Tale (see
  above).  No detail  is given  in S  concerning the  treachery of
  Men at the battle, nor is any reason suggested for the late com-
  ing of the Eastern Noldor.                                      
    Finweg  (Fingon)  had  taken  the place  of Finwe  (Noleme) as
  the Gnomish king slain in the battle already in  the Lay  of the
  Children of  Hurin (III. 86), and  so the  story of  the Scarlet
  Heart, emblem of Turgon (I.  241, H.  172), had  disappeared; in
  the second  version of  the Lay  there is  mention of  his white
  banners... in blood beaten (III. 96). In S  Turgon is  a leader,
  with his  brother Finweg  (Fingon), of  the Western  Noldor from
  the outset, and  was clearly  conceived to  be dwelling  at this
  time in Hithlum (cf. the interpolation in $9:  'Fingolfin's sons
  Finweg and Turgon still hold out in the  North', i.e.  after the
  ending of the Siege of Angband);  and the  discovery of  the se-
  cret valley and the founding  of Gondolin  follows from  the re-
  treat from the disaster of the Battle  of Unnumbered  Tears. The
  'sacrifice of Mablon the Ilkorin' (I. 239, 241) has disappeared.

    The  great  mound of  the slain  on Dor-na-Fauglith,  the first
  trace of which appears in an outline for Gilfanon's Tale (I. 241,
  243), had  been described  in the  Lay of  the Children  of Hurin
  (III. 58-9), where Flinding said to Turin as  they passed  by it
  in the moonlight:                                                
                                                                  
         A! green that hill with grass fadeless                     
         where sleep the swords of seven kindreds...               
                                                                  
         neath moon nor sun is it mounted ever                     
         by Man nor Elf; not Morgoth's host                        
         ever dare for dread to delve therein.                     
                                                                  
    The story  of Hurin  at the  Battle of  Unnumbered Tears  - his
  holding  of  the  rearguard  with  his  men while  Turgon escaped
  southwards, his capture, defiance of Morgoth,  and torture  - had
  already been told in the Tale of Turambar (II.  70-1) and  in the
  Lay of the Children of Hurin (see III. 23-4,  102). In  all these
  sources  Morgoth's  concern  with Hurin,  his attempts  to seduce
  him, and his great  rage when  defied, arise  from his  desire to
  find Turgon; but the element is still of course lacking in S that
  Hurin had  previously visited  Gondolin, which  at this  stage in
  the development of the legend did not exist  as a  Noldorin fast-
  ness until after  the Battle.  As the  story evolved,  this fact,
  known to  Morgoth, gave  still more  ugency to  his wish  to take
  Hurin alive, and to use him against Turgon.                      
                                                                  
                                 12.                               
                                                                  
    It  is  immediately  obvious  that  S was  based on  the second
  version of the Lay of the Children of Hurin, so far  as it  goes -
  which in relation to the whole narrative is  not far:  no further
  than the feast at which Turin  slew Orgof.  This is  already evi-
  dent  from  the  preceding  portion  of  S,  describing Morgoth's
  treatment of Hurin in Angband; while in  the present  section the
  guardians  of  Turin  on the  journey to  Doriath bear  the later
  names  Halog  and  Mailgond  (emended  in  the  Lay  to Mailrond,
  III. 119), not Halog and Gumlin.                               
    It is not to be expected that the  synopsis of  the story  in S
  should show any substantial alteration of that in the  first ver-

  sion of the  Lay; there  is some  development nonetheless.  It is
  now  explicit  that  the  Men who  in the  Lay dwelt  in Dorlomin
  and  dealt  unkindly  with  Hurin's  wife,  and  of whom  I noted
  (III. 24) that 'there is still no indication of who these men were
  or  where  they  came  from', are  now explicitly  'faithless men
  who  had  deserted  the  Eldar  in   the  Battle   of  Unnumbered
  Tears',  penned  in  Hithlum  because  Morgoth  'desired  to keep
  them  from  fellowship  with  Elves'.  The  question  of  whether
  Nienor was born  before Turin  left Hithlum  is now  resolved: he
  had never seen her. For the uncertainty on this point in  the Tale
  of Turambar see  H. 131;  in the  Lay she  was born  before Turin
  left (III. 9).                                                    
    Whereas  in the  Lay Beleg,  who was  not searching  for Turin
  when  he  was  captured  by  the  outlaw  band,  knew  nothing of
  what  had  happened  in  the Thousand  Caves (see  HI. 50),  in S
  'Turin  released  Beleg,  and  is told  how Thingol  had forgiven
  his deed long  ago'. Blodrin  is now  again the  son of  Ban, not
  of Bor (see III. 52).                                            
    There is an interesting  note in  S that  Turin was  taken alive
  to Angband 'for Morgoth  has begun  to fear  that he  will escape
  his  curse  through  his  valour and  the protection  of Melian'.
  This idea is seen  in the  words of  the Lay (III. 33) they haled
  unhappy Hurin's offspring/lest he flee his  fate, and  goes back
  to the Tale of Turambar (H. 76):                                 
                                                                  
    Turin  was  overborne  and  bound,  for  such  was  the  will  of
    Melko  that  he  be brought  to him  alive; for  behold, dwelling
    in  the  halls  of Linwe  [i.e. Tinwelint]  about which  had that
    fay    Gwedheling    the    Queen    woven   'much    magic   and
    mystery  ...  Turin  had  been  lost  out  of  his sight,  and he
    feared lest he cheat the doom that was devised for him.        
                                                                  
    There is little else to note in this section beyond the new de-
  tail  that  the Orcs feared  Taur-na-Fuin no  less than  Elves or
  Men,  and  only went  that way  when in  haste, and  the ancestor
  of  the  phrase  'Gwindor  saw  them   marching  away   over  the
  steaming  sands  of  Anfauglith'  (The  Silmarillion  p.  208) in
  'Flinding  sees  them marching  over the  steaming waste  of Dor-
  na-Fauglith' (cf. the  Lay, III. 48: The  dusty dunes  of Dor-na-

 Fauglith/hissed and spouted). A very great deal is of course     
 omitted in the synopsis.                                         
                                                                 
                                13.                               
                                                                 
   With the  second paragraph  of this  section, 'Turin  leads the
 Gnomes  of  Nargothrond  to  forsake  their  secrecy  and  hidden
 warfare', S reaches the point where  the Lay  of the  Children of
 Hurin  stops,  and  certain   advances  made   on  the   Tale  of
 Turambar  (II.  83  ff.)  can  be  observed.  The  re-forging  of
 Beleg's  sword  for  Turin  in  Nargothrond  now appears.  In the
 Lay  Flinding  put  the  sword  in  the  hollow  of a  tree after
 Beleg's death (III. 56); as I noted (III. 86):  'if the  poem had
 gone  further  Turin  would  have  received  his  black  sword in
 Nargothrond in gift  from Orodreth,  as happens  in the  Tale'. S
 thus  shows  a  development from  the plot  implicit in  the Lay.
 The bridging of Narog by  Turin's counsel  enters the  story only
 as a pencilled marginal note. The extent of the victories and re-
 conquest  of  territory  by  the  Gnomes  of Nargothrond  at this
 time is  made explicit,  and the  realm is  much as  described in
 The Silmarillion (p. 211):                                       
                                                                 
   The  servants  of Angband  were driven  out of  all the  land be-
   tween   Narog   and   Sirion  eastward,   and  westward   to  the
   Nenning and the desolate Falas                                 
                                                                 
 (where however  its northern  border along  the southern  feet of
 the  Shadowy  Mountains  is  not  mentioned;  in  S  'their realm
 reaches to the sources of Narog').                               
   The later addition to  the text  of S,  'even Glomund,  who was
 at the Battle of Tears', is to be related to  the absence  of any
 mention of the Dragon in S's account  of the  battle ($11).  As S
 was  first  written,  the  Dragon  was  named  Glorung,  a change
 from Glorund of the  Lost Tales;  the series  was thus  Glorund >
 Glorung  >   Glomund  >   Glaurung.  In   the  Lay   of  Leithian
 Glomund replaces Glorund (III. 208 - 9).                          
   The  sentence  'Flinding  wounded  refuses Turin's  succour and
 dies reproaching him' shows the later  form of  the story,  as in
 The Silmarillion pp. 212 - 13; for discussion of  the substantial
 change from the Tale see II. 124. It is said in S that Turin for-

 sook Finduilas 'against his heart  (which if  he had  obeyed his
 uttermost fate would  not have  befallen him)',  and this  is no
 doubt to be related to the passage in the Tale (II. 87):         
                                                                
   And truly is it said: 'Forsake  not for  anything thy  friends -
   nor  believe  those  who counsel  thee to  do so'  - for  of his
   abandoning  of  Failivrin in  danger that  he himself  could see
   came the very direst evil upon him and all he loved.          
                                                                
 For discussion of this see II. 125.                             
   Of Turin's return to Hithlum there is little to note,  for the
 synopsis is here very compressed; and  I have  earlier discussed
 fully  the  relationship between  the Tale  and the  later story
 (II. 126-7).  The  Woodmen  with  whom  Turin  lives  after  his
 flight  from  Hithlum  are  now given  a more  definite location
 'east of Narog' (see II. 140-1). In S it is made clear that Turin
 did not join himself to a people already existing, but 'gathered
 a new people'. This is in contradiction, strangely  enough, both
 to  the  Tale (II. 91, 102), where they  had a  leader (Bethos)
 when Turin joined them, and to the later story. Turin  now takes
 the name Turambar at this point in the narrative, not as  in the
 Tale  before  the  Dragon  outside  the  caves of  the Rodothlim
 (II. 86, 125).                                                   
   Turning  now to  the expedition  from Doriath  to Nargothrond,
 the  only  important  structural difference  from the  Tale that
 emerges  in  the  brief  account  in S  is that  Morwen (Mavwin)
 was  evidently  no  longer present  at the  conversation between
 Nienor and the Dragon (II. 98-9, 129); on the other hand, it is
 said at the end of this section that  'Some say  Morwen released
 from  spell  by  Glorung's  death  came  that  way and  read the
 stone.'                                                         
   When  Nienor-Niniel came  to the  falls of  the Silver  Bowl a
 fit of shivering came on her, as in the later narrative, whereas
 in  the Tale  it is  only said  that she  was filled  with dread
 (II. 101, 130). Very notably, the statement that Niniel was with
 child by Turambar was added to S later,  just as  it was  in the
 Tale (see II. 117 note 25, 135).                                
   In the foregoing I have only  picked out  points that  seem to
 show quite clearly  a different  conception of  the events  in S

  
                                                                   
  from that in the Tale. I have not mentioned  the many  slight dif-
  ferences  (including the  very many  omissions) that  are probably
  or certainly due to compression.                                  
                                                                   
                                 14.                                
                                                                   
    Of this section of the narrative there exists in  earlier writing
  only the conclusion of the  Tale of  Turambar (II.  112 -  16) and
  the Tale  of the  Nauglafring (II. 221ff.) in  which the  story is
  continued.  The  opening  passage  of  S  follows  the end  of the
  Tale  of  Turambar  in  Melko's  accusation  against   Thingol  of
  faintheartedness,  Hurin's  embitterment  from  the  pondering  of
  Melko's words,  the gathering  to him  of a  band of  outlaws, the
  fear of  the spirit  of the  dead Dragon  that prevented  any from
  plundering  Nargothrond,  the  presence  there  of   Mim,  Hurin's
  reproaches  and the  casting of  the gold  at Thingol's  feet, and
  Hurin's departure. The  words of  S concerning  the fate  of Hurin
  derive  from  the  Tale,  where  however  he  died in  Hithlum and
  it  was his  'shade' that  'fared into  the woods  seeking Mavwin,
  and long those twain haunted the  woods about  the fall  of Silver
  Bowl bewailing their children'.                                   
    From  this  point  the  source  for  S  (or  perhaps  more accu-
  rately, the previous written form of the narrative) is the Tale of
  the  Nauglafring. It  is here  impossible to  say for  certain how
  much  of  the  complex  story  in the Tale had  by this  time been
  abandoned.                                                        
    It  is  not  made  clear whether  Mim's presence  in Nargothrond
  goes back to the time  of the  Dragon (see  II. 137),  nor whether
  the outlaws of  Hurin's band were Men  or Elves  (in the  Tale the
  text  was  emended  to  convert  them  from  Men  to  Elves);  and
  there is  no indication  of how  the gold  was brought  to Doriath.
  The outlaws disappear in  S after  the slaying  of Mim,  and there
  is no suggestion of  the fighting  in the  Thousand Caves  that in
  the Tale  led  to  the  mound  made  over   the  slain,   Cum  an-
  Idrisaith, the Mound of Avarice.                                  
    The  next  part  of  the  Tale (Ufedhin  the renegade  Gnome and
  the complex   dealings  of   Thingol  with   him  and   with  the
  Dwarves of Nogrod, II. 223 - 9)  is reduced  to a  few lines  in S,
  which  could  possibly  stand  as  an  extremely  abbreviated  ac-
  count  of  the old  story, even  though Ufedhin  is here  not even

  mentioned. The  making of  the Necklace  was not  in the  Tale, as
  it is in S, part of the king's request: the idea of it  was indeed
  hatched  by  Ufedhin  during  his  captivity  as  a lure  'for the
  greater ensnaring of the king' (II. 226); but  this also  could be
  set down to  compression. I  think it  is more  probable, however,
  that my  father had  in fact  decided to  reduce and  simplify the
  narrative, and that Ufedhin had been abandoned.                   
    The   problem   of  the   entry  of   the  Dwarvish   army  into
  Doriath,  defended by  the Girdle  of Melian,  is still  solved by
  the  device  -  the  too  simple device,  see II.  250 -  of 'some
  treacherous  Gnomes'  (in the  Tale there  was only  one traitor);
  the  slaying  of  Thingol  while  hunting remains,  and as  in the
  Tale  Melian, inviolable,  left the  Thousand Caves  seeking Beren
  and Luthien. Though it is not so stated, it  seems likely  that in
  this version  it was  Melian who  brought the  news and  the warn-
  ing to Beren (this is the  story in  the Quenta,  p. 160).  In the
  Tale  it  was  Huan  who  brought  word  to  Beren and  Luthien of
  the assault  on Artanor  and the  death of  Tinwelint, and  it was
  Ufedhin,  fleeing  from  the  Dwarf-host  (after his  abortive at-
  tempt to slay Naugladur and steal the  Nauglafring, and  his kill-
  ing of Bodruith lord of  Belegost), who  revealed the  course that
  the  Dwarves  were  taking  and  made possible  the ambush  at the
  Stony  Ford;  but  Huan  has  in  S  been  slain in  the Wolf-hunt
  ($10), and Ufedhin has (as I think) been eliminated.              
    The  ambush at  the ford  is made  by 'Beren  and the  brown and
  green  Elves  of the  wood', which  goes back  to 'the brown Elves
  and the green', the 'elfin folk all clad in green and brown' ruled
  by Beren and afterwards by  Dior in  Hithlum, in  the Tale  of the
  Nauglafring. But of the vigorous account of the battle at the ford
  in the Tale - the laughter of the Elves  at the  misshapen Dwarves
  running with their long  white beards torn by  the wind,  the duel
  of   Beren   and   Naugladur,   whose  forge-hammer   blows  would
  have  overcome  Beren  had  not   Naugladur  stumbled   and  Beren
  swung  him  off his  feet by  catching hold  of the  Nauglafring -
  there is nothing in S: though equally,  nothing to  contradict the
  old story. There  is however  no mention  of the  two Dwarf-lords,
  Naugladur  of  Nogrod and  Bodruith of  Belegost, and  though both
  Dwarf-cities are  named the  Dwarves are  treated as  an undivided
  force, with, as it seems, one  king (slain  at the  ford): Thingol

  summoned  those  of  Belegost  as  well  as  those  of  Nogrod  to
  Doriath  for  the  fashioning  of  the gold,  whereas in  the Tale
  (II. 230) the former only enter the story after the humiliating ex-
  pulsion of the Dwarves of  Nogrod, in order to  aid them  in their
  revenge. Of the old story  of the  death of  Bodruith and  the feud
  and   slaughter  among   the  two   kindreds  (brought   about  by
  Ufedhin) there is no trace.                                       
    The  drowning  of the  treasure in  the river  goes back  to the
  Tale; but there however the  suggestion is  not that  the treasure
  was deliberately sunk: rather it fell into the river with the bod-
  ies of the Dwarves who bore it:                                   
                                                                   
    those that  waded in  the ford  cast their  golden burdens  in the
    waters  and  sought  affrighted  to  either  bank,  but  many were
    stricken with those pitiless darts and fell  with their  gold into
    the currents (II. 237).                                          
                                                                   
 It is not said in  the Tale  that any  of the  gold was  drowned by
 the Elves.  There, Gwendelin  came to  Beren and  Tinuviel after
 the  battle of  the Stony  Ford, and  found Tinuviel  already wear-
 ing the Nauglafring;  there is  mention of  the greatness  of her
 beauty when  she wore  it. Gwendelin's  warning is  only against
 the  Silmaril (the  rest of  the treasure  being drowned),  and in-
 deed  her  horror at  seeing  the  Necklace   of  the   Dwarves  on
 Tinuviel  was  so  great  that  Tinuviel  put  it  off. This  was to
 Beren's  displeasure,  and  he kept  it (II.  239-40). In  S the
 drowning  seems  to  be  carried  out   in  response   to  Melian's
 warning of the curse upon it, and the story  seems to  be thus:
 Melian comes  to Beren  and Luthien  and warns  them of  the ap-
 proach of  the Dwarf-host  returning out  of Doriath;  after the
 battle  Luthien  wears  the   Nauglafring  and   becomes  immeasur-
 ably beautiful; but Melian warns them of the  curse on  the gold
 and  on the  Silmaril and  they drown  the treasure,  though Beren
 keeps the Necklace secretly.                                   
    The  fading  of  Luthien  follows  immediately on  the statement
 that the  Necklace was  kept, but  no connection  is made.  In the
 Tale such a connection is explicit: the  doom of  mortality that
 Mandos had spoken fell swiftly -                                   

  and  in  this perhaps  did the  curse of  Mim have  [?potency] in
  that it came more soon upon them (II. 240).                       
                                                                  
 Moreover  in  a  synopsis  for  a projected  revision of  the Lost
 Tales  it  is  said  that  the  Nauglafring  'brought  sickness to
 Tinuviel' (II. 246).                                              
  The reference to the  fading of  Luthien in  S retains  the words
 of the Tale: Tinuviel  slowly faded  'even as  the Elves  of later
 days have done', and, again  as in  the Tale,  Luthien 'vanished'.
 In the Tale Beren was an Elf,  and it  is said  of him  that after
 searching all Hithlum and Artanor for  Tinuviel in  terrible lone-
 liness 'he too faded from life'. In my discussion  of this  I said
 (II. 250):                                                         
                                                                  
  Since  this  fading  is here  quite explicitly  the mode  in which
  'that  doom  of  mortality  that  Mandos  had  spoken'  came  upon
  them,  it  is  very notable  that it  is likened  to, and  even it
  seems  identified with,  the fading  of 'the  Elves of  later days
  throughout  the world'  - as  though in  the original  idea Elvish
  fading was a form of mortality.                                  
                                                                  
 The passage in S, retaining this idea in  respect of  Luthien, but
 now  with  the  later  conception  that  Beren  was a  mortal Man,
 not an Elf, is changed in  that Beren  is no  longer said  to have
 faded: he 'was lost', looking in vain for Luthien. It is also said
 here  that  the  price  of  Beren's return  from Mandos  was 'that
 Luthien  should  become as  shortlived as  Beren the  mortal', and
 in $10, where the story of Beren and Luthien  is briefly  told, it
 is  not  in  fact  said  that  Luthien  died  when  Beren  died in
 Doriath  (see the  commentary on  that section,  p. 65).  There is
 also  a  sentence  added to  the MS  in 510:  'But Mandos  in pay-
 ment exacted that Luthien should become mortal as Beren.'         
  It is possible to conclude from this that,  in the  conception as
 it  was  when  S  was  written,  Beren  died,  as  a  mortal dies;
 Luthien  went to  Valinor as  a living  being; and  Mandos allowed
 Beren  to  return to  a second  mortal span,  but Luthien  now be-
 came subject to the same shortness of  span as  he. In  this sense
 she  became  'mortal', but  being an  Elf she  'faded' -  this was
 the manner of her death: as it was  also the  manner of  the death

  of the fading Elves of later ages. Part of  the difficulty  in all
  this  undoubtedly  lies  in  the  ambiguous  nature  of  the words
  'mortal' and  'immortal' applied  to the  Elves: they  are 'immor-
  tal', both in the sense that they need not die, it is not in their
  essential nature to die,  'in the  world', and  also in  the sense
  that, if they did, they did not 'leave the world',  did not  go to
  'a fate  beyond the  world', and  they are  'mortal' in  that they
  might  nonetheless  die  'in the  world' (by  wounds or  by grief,
  but not from sickness or  age). Luthien  became 'mortal'  in that,
  although an Elf, she must die - she must fade.                    
    It  may  be  noted  that  the  words  'as  Men  grew  strong and
  took  the  goodness of  earth' derive  from the  Lay of  the Chil-
  dren of Hurin (III. 44, 54):                                       
                                                                   
                        for in days long gone                       
      ... Men were of mould less mighty builded                     
      ere the earth's goodness from the Elves they drew.            
                                                                   
  Cf.  The Silmarillion,  p. 105:  'In after  days, when  because of
  the  triumph  of  Morgoth  Elves  and  Men  became  estranged,  as
  he most wished, those of the Elven-race that lived still in     
  Middle-earth  waned  and  faded,  and  Men usurped  the sunlight.'
                                                                   
    Lastly, in the story of  Dior and  the ruin  of Doriath  as told
  in  S,  there  are   various  developments.   The  son   of  Dior,
  Auredhir  (II.  240)  has disappeared.  The 'vain  bargaining' be-
  tween  Dior  and the  Sons of  Feanor perhaps  refers to  the pas-
  sage  in  the  Tale  (II. 241)  where Dior asserts that  to return
  the  Silmaril  the Nauglafring  must be  broken, and  Curufin (the
  messenger  of  the  Feanorians)  retorts  that  in  that  case the
  Nauglafring  must  be  given  to  them   unbroken.  In   the  Tale
  Maglor,  Diriel, Celegorm,  and Cranthir  (or the  earlier equiva-
  lents of their names) were killed in the battle (which  there took
  place in Hithlum, where Dior ruled  after his  father); but  in S,
  as first written, the story takes a very strange turn, in that the
  Feanorians did get  their hands  on the  Nauglafring, but  then so
  quarrelled over it that  in the  end 'only  Maglor was  left'. How
  the story would have gone in  this case  is impossible  to discern.

                             15 and 16.                           
                                                                 
   The  two  sections  describing  Gondolin and  its fall  are dis-
 cussed together in the following commentary.                     
   At the  beginning of  $15 the  brief reference  to the  story of
 Isfin  and  Eol  shows  development  from what  was  said  in  the
 Lay  of the  Fall of  Gondolin (III. 146): for  in the  poem Isfin
 was seeking, together with  her mother,  for her  father Fingolfin
 when  she  was entrapped  by Eol  in the  dark forest.  The larger
 history has evolved since then, and now Isfin  'was lost  in Taur-
 na-Fuin  after  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered  Tears'.  We  can only
 surmise  how  she  came  to  be  there.  Either she  left Gondolin
 soon  after  its settlement  bent on  some purpose  unrecorded, or
 else she was lost in the retreat from the battle. (It is, inciden-
 tally, a curious aspect  of the  earlier conception  of Gondolin's
 foundation  that there  were women  and children  to people  it as
 well  as  warriors;  for one  would suppose  that Turgon  had left
 the  old  men,  the  women,  and  the  childhen  of his  people in
 Hithlum -  why should  he do  otherwise? But  in the  outlines for
 Gilfanon's  Tale  them  are  references  to  Turgon's  having 'res-
 cued  a  part  of the  women and  children', and  having 'gathered
 women  and  children from the  camps'  as  he  fled   south  down
 Sirion g. 239, 241).) Meglin is still,  as in  the poem,  'sent by
 his mother to Gondolin', while she remained with her captor.     
   In the account of  Gondolin and  its history  S is  fairly close
 to the tale of The  Fall of  Gondolin, but  there are  some devel-
 opments,  if  mostly of  a minor  kind. There  is first  a notable
 statement  that  'Ylmir's  messages  come  up Sirion  bidding them
 [i.e. the host of Turgon retreating from  the battle]  take refuge
 in this valley', this is unlike the Tale, where Tuor  speaking the
 words  of  Ulmo in  Gondolin says:  'There have  come to  the ears
 of  Ulmo  whispers  of your  dwelling and  your hill  of vigilance
 against the evil of Melko,  and he  is glad' (II. 161,  208). Here
 in S we have the  first appearance  of the  idea that  the founda-
 tion of Gondolin was  a part  of Ulmo's  design. But  Tuor's jour-
 ney is as in the old story, and the visitation of  Ulmo is  in Nan
 Tathrin,  not  at  Vinyamar.  The  bidding  of Ulmo  offers Turgon
 similar choices, to prepare for war, or, if he  will not,  then to
 send  people  of  Gondolin  down Sirion  to the  sea, to  seek for
 Valinor. Here, however, there are differences.  In the  Tale, Ulmo

  offers  scarcely  more  than  a  slender hope  that such  sailors from
  Gondolin  would  reach  Valinor,  and  if  they  did, that  they would
  persuade the Valar to act:                                           
                                                                      
     [The  Gods)  hide  their  land and  weave about  it inaccessible
     magic  that  no evil  come to  its shores.  Yet still  might thy
     messengers win there  and turn  their hearts  that they  rise in
     wrath and smite Melko ... (II. 161 - 2).                           
                                                                      
   In  S, on  the other  hand, the  people of  Gondolin, if  they will
   not  go  to  war  against  Morgoth,  are  to  desert their  city ('the
   people  of  Gondolin   are  to   prepare  for   flight')  -   cf.  The
   Silmarillion   p.   240:   '[Ulmo)  bade   him  depart,   and  abandon
   the  fair  and  mighty  city  that he  had built,  and go  down Sirion
   to  the  sea'  -  and  at  the mouths  of Sirion  Ylmir will  not only
   aid  them  in  the building  of a  fleet but  will himself  guide them
   over  the  ocean.  But  if  Turgon  will  accept Ylmir's  counsel, and
   prepare  for  war,  then  Tuor  is  to  go  to  Hithlum   with  Gnomes
 from  Gondolin  and  'draw  Men  once   more  into   alliance  with
 the  Elves,  for  "without  Men  the Elves  shall not  prevail against
 the Orcs  and  Balrogs".'  Of  this  strange   bidding  there   is  no
 trace  in  the  Tale;  nor  is  it  said  there  that  Ulmo   knew  of
 Meglin,  and  knew  that   this  treachery   would  bring   about  the
 end  of  Gondolin  at  no  distant  time.  These  features  are absent
 also  from  The  Silmarillion;  Ulmo  does  indeed  foresee  the  ruin
 of  the  city,  but  his  foreseeing  is not  represented as  being so
 precise:  'Thus  it  may come  to pass  that the  curse of  the Noldor
 shall  find  thee  too  ere  the  end,  and  treason awake  within thy
 walls. Then they shall be in peril of fire' (p. 126).                 
     The  description  of  the  Vale  of Gondolin  in S  is essentially
 as  in  the  Tale,  with  a  few added  details. As  in the  Tale, the
 rocky  height  of  Amon  Gwareth  was  not  in  the  centre   of  the
 plain but  nearest to  Sirion -  that is,  nearest to  the Way  of Es-
 cape (II. 158, 177). In S, the level top of the hill is said to have
 been achieved by the people of Gondolin themselves, who also
 'polished its sides to the smoothness of glass'. The Way of Es-
 cape is still, as in the Tale (II. 163), a tunnel made by the
 Gnomes - the Dry River and the Orfalch Echor have not yet
 been conceived; and the meaning of the name 'Way of Escape'

                                     
                                                                 
 is made very clear. both  a way  of escape from Gondolin,  if the
 need  should  ever  arise,  and a  way of  escape from  the outer
 world and from Morgoth. In the Tale (ibid.) it  is said  only that
 there  had  been  divided counsels  concerning its  delving, 'yet
 pity for the enthralled Noldoli had prevailed in  the end  to its
 making'.  The  'Guarded  Plain'  into  which  the  Way  of Escape
 issued is the Vale of Gondolin. An additional detail in S is that
 the hills were  lower in  the region  of the  Way of  Escape, and
 the spells of Ylmir there strongest (because nearest to Sirion).
   The cairn of Fingolfin,  added in  pencil in  S, is  an element
 that entered the legends in  the Quenta  (p. 129)  and the  Lay o
 Leithian (III. 286 - 7); the duel of Fingolfin with  Morgoth does
 not appear in S (p. 63). -  Here in  S it  is said  that Thorndor
 'removed his  eyries to  the Northern  heights of  the encircling
 mountains'.  In  the Tale  the eyries  in Cristhorn,  the Eagles'
 Cleft,  were  in  the  mountains  south  of  Gondolin,  but  in S
 Cristhorn is in the northern heights: this is already the case in
 the  Fragment  of  an  alliterative Lay  of Earendel (III. 143).
 Thorndor  had  come  there  from  Thangorodrim  (stated   in  the
 Quenta, p. 164); cf. the 'later  Tuor' in Unfinished Tales  (p. 43
 and note  25): 'the  folk of  Thorondor, who  dwelt once  even on
 Thangorodrim  ere  Morgoth  grew  so  mighty,  and  dwell  now in
 the Mountains of Turgon since the fall  of Fingolfin.'  This goes
 back to the tale of The Theft of Melko, where  there is  a refer-
 ence  g. 149)  to the time 'when  Sorontur and  his folk fared to
 the  Iron  Mountains  and  there abode,  watching all  that Melko
 did'.                                                            
   Some  other  points  concerning  the story  of Gondolin  may be
 noticed.  The  escort  of Noldoli,  promised to  Tuor by  Ulmo in
 the  Land  of  Willows,  of   whom  Voronwe   (in  S   given  the
 Gnomish  form  of  the  name,  Bronweg)  was  the  only  one  who
 did  not  desert him (II. 155-6),  has disappeared;  and 'Bronweg
 had once been in Gondolin',  which is  not the  case in  the Tale
 (II. 156-7).  -  In  the  Tale  Tuor  wedded  Idril when  he 'had
 dwelt  among  the  Gondothlim many  years' (II.  164); in  S this
 took place three years after his  coming to  the hidden  city, in
 The Silmarillion seven years after (p. 241). -  In the Tale there
 is  no  mention  of  Meglin's  support  of  Turgon's  rejection o
 Ulmo's  bidding  (cf.  The  Silmarillion  p. 240:  'Maeglin spoke

  ever against Tuor in the  councils of  the King'),  nor of  the op-
  position of Idril to her father (this is not in  The Silmarillion).
  -  The  closing  of Gondolin  to all  fugitives and  the forbidding
  of the people to leave the  valley is  mentioned in  S but  not ex-
  plained.                                                          
    The  sentence  'Meglin...  purchases  his  life  when   taken  to
  Angband  by  revealing  Gondolin  and  its  secrets'  shows  almost
  certainly,  I  think, that  an important  structural change  in the
  story of the fall of the city had  now entered.  In the  Tale Melko
  had  discovered  Gondolin  before Meglin  was  captured,   and  his
  treachery lay in his giving an  exact account  of the  structure of
  the  city  and  the   preparations  made   for  its   defence  (see
  H.  210-11);  but  the  words  'by  revealing   Gondolin'  strongly
  suggest  the  later  story,  in  which Morgoth  did not  know where
  it lay.                                                           
                                                                   
    Lastly,  there is  a development  in the  early history  of Tuor:
  that he  became a  slave of  'the faithless  men' in  Hithlum after
  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered  Tears.  Moreover  Tuor's  parentage is
  now  finally  established.  Huor  has been  mentioned in  a rewrit-
  ten passage of S ($9), but not named  as father  of Tuor;  and this
  is the first occurrence of  his mother  Rian, and  so of  the story
  that she died  seeking Huor's  body on  the battlefield.  It cannot
  be  said whether  the story  of Tuor's  birth in  the wild  and his
  fostering by Elves had yet arisen.                                
                                                                   
                                  17                                
                                                                   
    In  commenting  on  the  conclusion  of   the  mythology   in  S,
  here comprised in the three sections 17 - 19,  I point  to features
  that derive from  or contradict  those outlines  and notes  from an
  earlier period  that are  collected in  Vol. II  chapter V  and the
  earlier  part of  Chapter VI.  S is  here an  extremely abbreviated
  outline,  composed  very  rapidly  -  my  father was  indeed chang-
  ing his conceptions as he wrote.                                  
    For the narrative  of $17  the primary  extant early  sources are
  the 'schemes' or  plot-outlines which  I have  called 'B'  and 'C',
  in the passages given in H. 253 and 254-5 respectively.           
    At the  beginning of  this section,  before emendation,  the sur-
  vivors  of  Gondolin  were  already  at the  Mouths of  Sirion when

  Elwing  came  there;  and  this  goes  back  to  8 and  C ('Elwing
  ... flees to them [i.e. Tuor and Idril] with the Nauglafring',      
  II. 254).  But earlier  in S  ($15) the  destruction of  Dior took
  place before the  fall of  Gondolin; hence  the revision  here, to
  make  Elwing  'receive the  survivors of  Gondolin'. (In  the Tale
  of the Nauglafring, H. 242, the  fall of  Gondolin and  the attack
  on Dior took place on the same day.)                              
    Following  this,  there  is  a  major development  in S.  In the
  early outlines there is the story, only glimpsed, of the  March of
  the  Elves  of  Valinor  into  the  Great Lands;  and in  B (only)
  there is a reference to  'the sorrow  and wrath  of the  Gods', of
  which I said in my discussion of  these outlines (II. 25  I): 'the
  meaning can surely only be that the March of the Elves from       
  Valinor was undertaken in direct opposition to the will of the
  Valar, that the Valar  were bitterly  opposed to  the intervention
  of the Elves of Valinor  in the  affairs of  the Great  Lands.' On
  the  other  hand, the  bare hints  of what  happened when  the as-
  sault on Melko took place show that greater powers than the       
  Eldar  alone  were  present:  Noldorin (the  Vala Salmar,  who en-
  tered  the world  with Ulmo,  and loved  the Noldoli),  and Tulkas
  himself, who overthrew Melko in the Battle of  the Silent  Pools 
  (outline C, H. 278). The only hint in the  outlines of  Ulmo's in-
  tervention  is  his  saving  of  Earendel from  shipwreck, bidding
  him sail to Kor with the words  'for this  hast thou  been brought
  out  of  the Wrack  of Gondolin'  (B, similarly  in C).  The March
  of  the  Eldar from  Valinor was  brought about  by the  coming of
  the birds from Gondolin.                                          
    In  S,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  Ulmo (Ylmir)  who directly
  brings  about  the intervention  from the  West by  his reproaches
  to  the Valar,  bidding them  rescue the  remnants of  the Noldoli
  and the Silmarils; and the host is led by 'the sons of the Valar',
  commanded  by  Fionwe   -  who   is  here   the  son   of  Tulkas!
  Fionwe  is  frequently  named  in  the  Lost Tales  as the  son of
  Manwe,  while  the  son  of  Tulkas  was  Telimektar  (who  became
  the  constellation  Orion).  The  naming  Fionwe  son   of  Tulkas
  may  have  been  a simple  slip, though  the same  is said  in the
  Quenta as first written  (p. 178);  subsequently Fionwe  again be-
  comes the son of Manwe (p. 185).                                  
    'Remembering  Swanhaven  few  of  the  Teleri  go   with  them':

  in the outline B the presence of  the Solosimpi  on the  March is
  referred  to without  comment, while  in C  they only  agreed to
  accompany  the  expedition  on  condition  that  they  remained by
  the sea (see II. 258), and this  was in  some way  associated with
  their remembrance of the Kinslaying.                             
    The desertion of Kor at  this time  is referred  to in  the out-
  lines, but  only in  connection with  Earendel's coming  there and
  finding  it  empty;  I  noted (II.  257) that  'it seems  at least
  strongly  implied  that  Kor  was  empty  because  the   Elves  of
  Valinor  had  departed  into  the  Great Lands',  and this  is now
  seen to be certain.                                              
    The narrative  in S  now turns  to Tuor.  The statement  that he
  grew  old  at  Sirion's  mouths  -  a  statement  that  was struck
  out  - goes  back to  the old  schemes. His  ship is  now Earame,
  unusnslated;  previously  it   was  Alqarame   'Swanwing',  while
  Earame  was  Earendel's  earlier ship,  translated 'Eaglepinion',
  which  foundered.  In  The Silmarillion  Tuor's ship  is Earrame,
  as in S, with the meaning 'Sea-Wing'.                            
    In  S, Idril  departs in  company with  Tuor. This  is different
  from  the  original schemes,  where Tuor  leaves alone,  and Idril
  'sees him too late', 'laments', and afterwards 'vanishes'.  But in
  the outline C it seems  that she  found him,  for 'Tuor  and Idril
  some  say  sail  now  in  Swanwing  and  may  be seen  going swift
  down the wind at dawn and dusk'.                                 
    In S, the earlier history of Earendel's ship-building  and ship-
  wrecks  in  the Fiord  of the  Mermaid and  at Falasquil  has, ap-
  parently, been abandoned entirely, and Wingelot  is his  first and
  only ship; but there remains  the motive  that Earendel  wishes to
  seek for his father, whereas Ylmir bids him sail to  Valinor (this
  last  being  afterwards  struck out).  His adventures  in Wingelot
  are referred to in  S but  not otherwise  indicated, save  for the
  slaying of Ungoliant 'in the South',  there is  no mention  of the
  Sleeper  in  the  Tower  of  Pearl.  In  C  the  long   voyage  of
  Earendel,  accompanied  by  Voronwe,  that  finally  took  them to
  Kor,  included  an  encounter  with  Ungweliante, though  this was
  after  his  southern  voyage:  'Driven  west.  Ungweliante.  Magic
  Isles. Twilit Isle. Littleheart's gong awakes  the Sleeper  in the
  Tower   of   Pearl.'  In   another  outline   Earendel  encounters
  Wirilome  (Gloomweaver)  in  the  South (II. 260). In  the account

  in  S  he  does  not  on  this  great voyage  come to  Kor, though
  from it, as in B and C, he returns to 'the Waters of  Sirion' (the
  delta) and  finds the  dwellings there  desolate. Now  however en-
  ters the motive of the  last desperate  attempt of  the Feanorians
  to  regain the  Silmaril of  Beren and  Luthien, their  descent on
  the  Havens  of  Sirion,  and  their  destruction.  Thus  the raid
  on  the  Havens  has remained,  but it  is no  longer the  work of
  Melko (see II.  258) and  is brought  into the  story of  the Oath
  of  Feanor.  As  S was  first written  only Maidros  survived; but
  Maglor was  added. (In  $14, as  written, all  the Sons  of Feanor
  save  Maglor  were  slain  at  the  time  of  the attack  on Dior,
  though   this   passage   was  afterwards   struck  out.   In  The
  Silmarillion  Celegorm,  Curufin,  and  Caranthir  were  slain  at
  that  time,  and  Amrod  and  Amras  (later  names  of  Damrod and
  Diriel) were slain in the attack on the Havens of Sirion,  so that
  only Maidros and Maglor were left.)                               
    In the old outlines Elwing was taken  captive (as  is to  be de-
  duced, by Melko); there  is no  mention of  her release  from cap-
  tivity, and she next appears in references to  the sinking  of her
  ship  (on  the  way  to  Tol   Eressea)  and   the  loss   of  the
  Nauglafring;   after  which   she  becomes   a  seabird   to  seek
  Earendel.  Earendel  returning  from his  long voyage  and finding
  the  dwellings  at  Sirion's  mouth sacked,  goes with  Voronwe to
  the ruins of Gondolin, and  in an  isolated note (II. 264,  XV) he
  'goes even to the empty Halls of Iron seeking Elwing'.            
    All this  has disappeared  in S,  with the  new story  of Elwing
  casting herself and the Nauglafring into the sea, except  that she
  still  becomes  a  seabird  (thus  changed by  Ulmo) and  flies to
  seek Earendel about all the shores  of the  world. The  early out-
  lines are then at variance: in C it is said that Earendel dwelt on
  the Isle  of Seabirds  and hoped  that Elwing  would come  to him,
  'but she is seeking him wailing along  all the  shores' -  yet 'he
  will find Elwing at the Faring Forth', while in the  short outline
  E  (II.  260)  she  came  to  him  as  a  seamew  on  the  Isle of
  Seabirds.  But  in  S Elwing  is further  mentioned only  as being
  sought by Earendel when he  sets sail  again, until  she reappears
  at the end ($19) and is restored to Earendel.                     
    The introduction of Elrond  in S  is of  great interest.  He has
  no  brother  as  yet;  and  he  is  saved   by  Maidros   (in  The

                                           
                                                                    
   Silmarillion,  p.  247,  Elrond  and  Elros  were saved  by Maglor).
   When  the  Elves  return  into  the  West  he  elects  to  stay  'on
   earth',  being 'bound  by his  mortal half'.  It is  most remarkable
   that although the idea of  a choice  of fate  for the  Half-elven is
   already  present,  it  takes  a curiously  different form  from that
   which  it  was  to  take  afterwards,  and  which  became  of  great
   importance  in  The  Lard  of  the  Rings;  for  afterwards, Elrond,
   unlike  his  brother  Elros  Tar-Minyatur,  elected  to   remain  an
   Elf - yet his later  choice derives  in part  from the  earlier con-
   ception, for  he elected  also not  to go  into the  West. In  S, to
   choose  his  'elfin  half'  seems  to  have  meant  to   choose  the
   West; afterwards, it meant to choose Elvish immortality.          
        Earendel  learnt  what  had  happened at  the Mouths  of Sirion
   from  Bronweg  (earlier  it  was  Littleheart  son  of  Bronweg  who
   survived  the  sack  of  the  havens,  H.  276  note  5),  and  with
   Bronweg  he  sails  again  in  Wingelot  and  comes  to  Kor,  which
   he  finds  deserted,   and  his   raiment  becomes   encrusted  with
   the  dust  of diamonds;  not daring  to go  further into  Valinor he
   builds a tower on an isle in the  northern seas,  'to which  all the
  sea-birds of  the world  repair'. Bronweg  is not  further men-
 tioned.  Almost  all  of  this,  other   than  the   statement  that
 Earendel did not  dare venture  further into  Valinor, goes  back to
 the  outline  C.  The  tower  on  the Isle  of Seabirds,  which sur-
 vives the The  SilmarilLion (p.  250), is  mentioned in  an isolated
 note on the Earendel story (II. 264, xvii).                          
       In the early outlines Earendel now  set out  on his  last voy-
 age. In B, which  is here  very brief,  his sailing  to the  Isle of
 Seabirds  is  followed by  'his voyage  to the  firmament'. In  C he
   sails with Voronwe to the halls of Mandos seeking for tidings
   of Tuor, Idril, and Elwing; he 'reaches the bar at the margin of
   the world and sets sail on the  oceans of  the firmament  in order
   to  gaze  over  the  Earth. The  Moon mariner  chases him  for his
   brightness and he dives through the  Door of  Night.' In  the out-
  line  E  (II.  260)  'Elwing  as  a  seamew comes  to him.  He sets
   sail over the margent of the world.' In the early  note associated
   with the poem 'The Bidding of  the Minstrel'  (II. 261)  he 'sails
   west again to the lip of the world, just as the Sun is diving into
  the  sea', and  'sets sail  upon the  sky', and  in the  preface to
   'The Shores of Faery' (II. 262) he                                

                                                    
                                                                 
 sat long while in his old age upon  the Isle  of Seabirds  in the
 Northern  Waters  ere  he  set  forth  upon  a  last  voyage.  He
 passed  Taniquetil  and  even  Valinor,  and  drew his  bark over
 the  bar  at  the margin  of the  world, and  launched it  on the
 Oceans  of  the  Firmament.  Of  his  ventures  there no  man has
 told,  save  that  hunted  by  the  orbed  Moon  he fled  back to
 Valinor,  and  mounting  the  towers  of  Kor  upon the  rocks of
 Eglamar he gazed back upon the Oceans of the World.              
                                                                 
 The passage in S is  different from  all of  these, in  that here
 Earendel's voyage into the sky is  achieved with  the aid  of the
 wings  of  seabirds,  and  it introduces the  idea of  his being
 scorched  by  the  Sun  as  well as  hunted by  the Moon.  I sug-
 gested (II. 259) that Earendel originally sailed  into the  sky in
 continuing search for Elwing, and this is now corroborated       
                                                                 
                            18 and 19.                            
                                                                 
 The  story  in  S  now  leaves  Earendel,  wandering the  sky 'as
 a  fugitive  star',  and  comes to  the march  of Fionwe  and the
 Last Battle (a term that is used in S both of the Last  Battle in
 the mythological  record,  in  which the  hosts of  Valinor over-
 threw Morgoth, and of the Last Battle of  the world,  declared in
 prophecy,  when  Morgoth  will  come  back  through the  Door and
 Fionwe will fight him on the  plains of  Valinor). Almost  all of
 this now enters the mythology for the first time; and  almost all
 of what very little survives from the earliest period on the sub-
 ject of the March of the Elves  of Valinor (II. 278-80)  has dis-
 appeared.  There  is  no mention  of Tulkas,  of his  battle with
 Melko, of Noldorin, of the hostility of  Men; virtually  the only
 point  in common  is that  after the  overthrow of  Morgoth Elves
 depart into the West. In the old story the Silmarils play no part
 at the end (cf. the jotting 'What became  of the  Silmarils after
 the capture of Melko?' II. 259); but  now in  S there  appear the
 lineaments of a  story concerning  their fate.  Now also  we have
 the first mention anywhere  of the  breaking of  the Northwestern
 world  in the  struggle to  overthrow Morgoth;  and (in  an addi-
 tion  to  the  text)  the  chain Angainor  appears from  the Lost
 Tales. (Angainor is not named in  the earlier  passage in  S ($2)
 concerning  the  binding of  Morgoth. It  appears (later)  in the

  Lay of Leithian, in a puzzling reference to 'the chain Angainor
  that ere Doom/for Morgoth shall by Gods be wrought'; see
  III. 205, 209-10.)
     In the story of the fate of the Silmarils, Maglor says to
  Maidros that there are two sons of Feanor now left, and two
  Silmarils. Does this imply that the Silmaril of Beren was lost
  when Elwing cast herself into the sea with the Nauglafring
  (unlike the later story)? The answer is certainly yes; the story
  in S is not comprehensible otherwise. Thus when Maglor casts
  himself (changed to casts the jewel) into the fiery pit, having
  stolen one of the Silmarils of the Iron Crown from Fionwe,
 'one Silmaril is now in the sea, and one in the earth'. The third
  was the Silmaril that remained in Fionwe's keeping; and it was
  that one that was bound to Earendel's brow. We thus have a re-
 markable stage of transition, in which the Silmarils have at last
  achieved primary importance, but where the fate of each has
 not arrived at the final form; and the conclusion, seen to be in-
  evitable once reached, that it was the Silmaril regained by
  Beren and Luthien that became the Evening Star, has not been
  achieved. In S, Earendel becomes a star before receiving the
  Silmaril; but originally, as I have said (II. 265), 'there is no
  suggestion that the Valar hallowed his ship and set him in the
 sky, nor that his light was that of the Silmaril'. In this respect
  also S is transitional, for at the end the later story appears.
    The Elves of the Outer Lands (Great Lands), after the con-
  quest of Morgoth, set sail from Luthien (later emended to
  Leithien), explained as 'Britain or England'. For the forms
  Luthany, Luthien, Leithian, Leithien and the texts in which they
  occur see III. 154. It is remarkable that as S was originally
  written Luthien is both the name of Thingol's daughter and the
  name of England.
    It is further said in S that the Elves 'ever still from time to
  time set sail [from Luthien] leaving the world ere they fade'.
  'The Gnomes and many of the Ilkorins and Teleri and Qendi
  repeople the Lonely Isle. Some go back to live upon the shores
  of Faery and in Valinor, but Cor and Tun remain desolate.'
  Some of this can be brought into relation with the old outlines
  (see II. 308 - 9), but how much more was retained in mind, be-
  yond 'The Elves retreated to Luthany' and 'Many of the Elves

  of  Luthany  sought  back  west  over  the  sea  and  settled  in Tol
  Eressea',  cannot  be  determined.  That  even  this  much   was  re-
  tained  is  however very  instructive. The  peculiar relation  of the
  Elves to England  keeps a  foothold, as  it were,  in the  actual ar-
  ticulation of the narrative; as also the idea  that if  they remained
  in 'the world' they would fade (see II. 326).                       
    It  is  not  made  clear  why  'Cor  and  Tin'  remained  desolate,
  since  some  of  the  Elves  'go  back  to  live  upon the  shores of
  Faery and  in Valinor'.  In the  original conception  (as I  have ar-
  gued  its  nature,  II.  280)  the  Eldar of  Valinor, when  they re-
  turned  from  the  Great  Lands  where  they  had  gone  against  the
  will  of the  Valar, were  forbidden to  re-enter Valinor  and there-
  fore  settled  in  Tol  Eressea,  as  'the  Exiles  of  Kor (although
  some  did return  in the  end to  Valinor, since  Ingil son  of Inwe,
  according  to  Meril-i-Turinqi  g.  129),  'went  back  long  ago  to
  Valinor  and  is with  Manwe'). But  in the  story as  told in  S the
  idea  that  the  March  of  the  Eldar  was against  the will  of the
  Valar,  and   aroused  them   to  wrath,   has  been   abandoned, and
  'the  sons  of  the  Valar'  now  lead  the  hosts  out of  the West;
  why  then  should  the  Elves  of  Tun  not  return  there?   And  we
  have  the  statement  in  S  that  Tol  Eressea  was   repeopled  not
  only  by Gnomes  (and nothing  at all  is said  of their  pardon) and
  Ilkorins,  but  also  by  Qendi  (=  the  later  Vanyar)  and Teleri,
  Elves  who  came  from  Valinor  for  the   assault  on   Morgoth.  I
  cannot  explain  this;  and  must  conclude that  my father  was only
  noting  down  the  chief  points   of  his   developing  conceptions,
  leaving much unwritten.                                             
    There  now   appears  the   idea  that   the  Gods   thrust Morgoth
  through  the  Door  of  Night  'into  the   outer  dark   beyond  the
  Walls of the World',* and  there is  the first  reference to  the es-
  cape  of Thu  (Sauron) in  the Last  Battle. There  is also  a proph-
  ecy  concerning  the  ultimate  battle,  when  the  world is  old and
  the   Gods   weary,   and   Morgoth  will   come  back   through  the
  Door  of  Night;  then  Fionwe  with  Turin  beside  him  shall fight
  Morgoth  on  the  plain  of Valinor,  and Turin  shall slay  him with
  his  black  sword.  The  Silmarils  shall  be  recovered,  and  their
  light  released,  the  Trees  rekindled,  the  Mountains  of  Valinor
                                                                     
  (*See the commentary on the Ambarkanta, p. 296.)                    

  
                                                                   
  levelled so that the light goes out over all  the world,  and Gods
  and Elves shall grow young  again. Into  this final  resolution of
  the evil in the world it would prove unprofitable, I think, to en-
  quire  too closely.  References to  it have  appeared in  print in
  Unfinished  Tales,  pp.  395  -  6,  in  the  remarks  on Gandalf:
  'Manwe  will  not  descend  from  the  Mountain  until  the  Dagor
  Dagorath,  and  the  coming  of  the  End,  when  Melkor returns',
  and  in  the  alliterative  poem  accompanying this,  'until Dagor
  Dagorath  and  the  Doom  cometh'.  The  earliest  references  are
  probably  in  the  outline  C (II. 282), where  (when the  Pine of
  Belaurin  is  cut  down) 'Melko  is thus  now out  of the  world -
  but one day he will find a way  back, and  the last  great uproars
  will begin  before the  Great End'.  In the  Lost Tales  there are
  many  references  to  the  Great End,  most of  which do  not con-
  cern us here; but at the end of the tale of The Hiding  of Valinor
  is  told  (I.  219)  of  'that  great  foreboding that  was spoken
  among  the  Gods  when  first  the  Door  of  Night  was  opened':
                                                                   
      For  'tis  said  that  ere  the  Great  End  come  Melko  shall in
      some  wise  contrive  a   quarrel  between   Moon  and   Sun,  and
      Ilinsor  shall  seek  to  follow  Urwendi  through the  Gates, and
      when  they  are  gone  the  Gates of  both East  and West  will be
      destroyed,  and Urwendi  and Ilinsor  shall be  lost. So  shall it
      be  that  Fionwe  Urion,  son  of  Manwe,  of  love   for  Urwendi
      shall  in  the  end  be  Melko's  bane,  and  shall   destroy  the
      world  to  destroy  his  foe,  and  so  shall  all things  then be
      rolled away.                                                  
                                                                   
  (Cf. the  outline C,  II. 281:  'Fionwe's rage  and grief  [at the
  death  of  Urwendi].  In  the  end he  will slay  Melko.') Whether
  any of this  prophecy underlies  the idea  of the  ultimate return
  of  Morgoth  through  the  Door  of  Night  I  cannot say.  At the
  end of the Tale of Turambar,  after the  account of  the 'deifica-
  tion'  of  Turin and  Nienor, there  is a  prophecy (II. 116) that
                                                                   
      Turambar indeed shall stand beside Fionwe in the Great        
      Wrack,  and  Melko  and his  drakes shall  curse the  sword of
      Mormakil.                                                     

  But there is no indication in S of how 'the  spirit of  Turin' will
  survive to  slay Morgoth  in the  ultimate battle  on the  plain of
  Valinor.                                                           
    That  the Mountains  of Valinor  shall be  levelled, so  that the
  light of the rekindled Trees goes out over all  the world,  is also
  found  in  the  earliest  texts;  cf.  the  isolated  passage  in C
  (II. 285) where is told the  Elves' prophecy  of the  (second) Far-
  ing Forth:                                                         
                                                                    
    Laurelin  and  Silpion  will  be  rekindled,  and   the  mountain
    wall  being destroyed  then  soft  radiance  will be  spread over
    all the world, and the Sun and Moon will be recalled.            
                                                                    
  But this  prophecy is  associated with  other conceptions  that had
  clearly been abandoned.                                            
    At the end,  with the  aid of  the Silmaril  Elwing is  found and
  restored,  but  there  is  no  indication of  how the  Silmaril was
  used  to  this  purpose.   Elwing  in   this  account   sails  with
  Earendel, who bears the third Silmaril,  and so  he shall  sail un-
  til he sees 'the last battle gathering upon the plains of Valinor'.
    On  the  reappearance  of the  name Eriol  at the  very end  of S
  see II. 300.                                                       
                                                                    
    I do not intend here to relate this version to  that in  the pub-
  lished work, but  will conclude  this long  discussion of  the con-
  cluding sections 17  - 19  with a  brief summary.  As I  have said,
  S is  here extremely  condensed, and  it is  here even  harder than
  elsewhere  to  know or  guess what  of the  old material  my father
  had suppressed  and what  was still  'potentially' present.  But in
  any case nothing of  the old  layer that  is not  present in  S was
  ever to reappear.                                                  
    In the present version, Earendel has  still not  come to  his su-
  preme  function  as  the  Messenger  who  spoke  before  the Powers
  on  behalf  of  the  Two  Kindreds,  though  the birds  of Gondolin
  have  been abandoned  as the  bringers of  tidings to  Valinor, and
  Ulmo  becomes  the  sole  agent  of  the  final assault  on Morgoth
  out  of  the  West.  The  voyages  of  Earendel  have  been simpli-
  fied:  he  now  has the  one great  voyage -  without Voronwe  - in
  Wingelot,  in  which  he  slew  Ungoliant,  and the  second voyage,

  with  Voronwe,  which takes  him to  Kor -  and the  desertion of
  Kor (Tun)  still depends  on the  March of  the Eldar,  which has
  already  taken place  when he  comes there.  His voyage  into the
  sky  is  now  achieved  by  the  wings  of  birds; and  the Silmaril
  still plays no  part in  his becoming  a star,  for the  Silmaril of
  Beren  and  Luthien  was  drowned  with   the  Nauglafring   at  the
  Mouths  of  Sirion.  But  the  Silmarils at  last become  central to
  the final acts of  the mythological  drama, and  - unlike  the later
  story - only  one of  the two  Silmarils that  remained in  the Iron
  Crown  is  made  away  with  by  a  son  of  Feanor   (Maglor);  the
  second is given to Earendel by the Gods, and the later story is
  visible at the end of S, where his boat 'is drawn over Valinor
  to the Outer Seas' and launched into the Outer Dark, where he
  sails with the Silmaril on his brow, keeping watch on Morgoth.
    The destruction of the people of Sirion's Mouths now be-
  comes the final evil of the Oath of Feanor. Elrond appears,
  with a remarkable reference to the choice given to him as half-
  elven. The coming of the hosts of the West to the overthrow
  of Morgoth is now an act of the Valar, and the hosts are led by
  the Sons of the Valar. England, as Luthien (Leithien), remains
  as the land from which the Elves of the &eat Lands set sail
  at the end for Tol Eressea; but I suspect that virtually all the
  highly complex narrative which I attempted to reconstruct
  (II. 308 - 9) had gone - Earendel and Ing(we) and the hostility
  of Osse, the Ingwaiwar, the seven invasions of Luthany.
     The original ideas of the conclusion of the Eldar Days
  (Melko's climbing of the Pine of Belaurin, the cutting down of
  the Pine, the warding of the sky by Telimektar and Ingil (Orion
  and Sirius), II. 281 - 2) have disappeared; in S, Morgoth is
  thrust through the Door of Night, and Earendel becomes its
  guardian and guarantee against Morgoth's return, until the End.
  And lastly, and most pregnant for the future, Thu escapes the
  Last Battle when Morgoth was overcome, 'and dwells still in
  dark places'.                                                     
