                                     III.                                    
                                                                            
                                  THE QUENTA.                                
                                                                            
 This  work  is extant  in a  typescript (made  by my  father) for           
 which there is no trace of any preliminary notes or  drafts. That           
 the Quenta, or at any rate the greater part of it, was written in           
 1930  seems  to  me to  be certainly  deducible (see  the commen-           
 tary on  $10,  pp. 213-4). After a  quite different  initial section           
 (which is the origin of the Valaquenta) this  text becomes  a re-           
 working  and  expansion  of  the 'Sketch  of the  Mythology'; and           
 it quickly becomes evident that  my father  had S  (the 'Sketch')           
 in front of him when  he wrote  the Quenta  (which I  shall refer           
 to  as 'Q').  The latter  moves towards  The Silmarillion  in its           
 published form,  both in  structure and  in language  (indeed al-           
 ready in S the first forms of many sentences can be perceived).             
   Eriol (as in S; not AElfwine) is mentioned both in the title of           
 Q and at the end of the work,  and his  coming to  Kortirion, but           
 (again as in S) there is no trace of the Cottage of Lost Play. As           
 I have said of its absence  from S  (p. 48),  this does  not dem-           
 onstrate that my father had  rejected the  conception in  its en-           
 tirety:  in  S he  may have  omitted it  because his  purpose was           
 solely  to recount  the history  of the  Elder Days  in condensed           
 form, while in the title of Q it is said that the work was 'drawn           
 from the Book of Lost Tales  which Eriol  of Leithien  wrote'. At           
 least then,  we may  think, some  venue in  which the  Lost Tales           
 were told to Eriol in Kortirion still existed.*                             
   The title makes it very  plain that  while Q  was written  in a           
 finished  manner,  my  father saw  it as  a compendium,  a 'brief           
                                                                            
 (*It is said at the end of the Quenta that Eriol  'remembered things  that he
 had heard in fair Cortirion'. But this Book  of Lost  Tales was  composed by
 Eriol (according  to the  title) out  of a  'Golden Book'  which he  read in
 Kortirion. (Previously the  Golden Book  of Tavrobel  was written  either by
 Eriol (AElwine) himself, or by his son Heorrenda, or by some other person un-
 named long after; see II. 291.))                                            
                                                                            
                                                                         

  history'  that was  'drawn from'  a much  longer work;  and this             
  aspect  remained  an  important  element  in  his  conception of             
  'The Silmarillion'  properly so  called. I  do not  know whether             
  this idea did indeed arise from the fact that the starting point             
  of the second  phase of  the mythological  narrative was  a con-             
  densed synopsis (S); but it seems likely  enough, from  the step             
  by step continuity that leads from  S through  Q to  the version             
  that was interrupted towards its end in 1937.                                
    It seems very probable that the greater  number of  the exten-             
  sions and elaborations found  in Q  arose in  the course  of its             
  composition, and that while Q contains  features, omitted  in S,             
  which go back to the earliest version, these features argue only             
  a recollection of the Lost Tales (to be assumed  in any  case! -             
  and doubtless a very clear recollection), not a close derivation             
  from the actual text. If that had been the  case, one  might ex-             
  pect to find the re-emergence of actual phrasing here  and there;             
  but that seems to be markedly lacking.                                       
                                                                              
    The  history   of  the   typescript  becomes   rather  complex             
  towards  the  end  (from $15),  where my  father expanded  and re-           
  typed  portions  of the  text (though  the discarded  pages were             
  not destroyed).  But I  see no  reason to  think that  much time             
  elapsed between the two versions;  for near  the very  end ($19)             
  the original typescript gives out, and  only the  second version             
  continues to the conclusion of the  Quenta, which  strongly sug-             
  gests that the revisions belong to the same time as the original             
  text.                                                                        
    Subsequently  the  whole  text  was  revised  throughout,  the             
  corrections being made  carefully in  ink; these  changes though             
  frequent are mostly small, and  very often  no more  than slight             
  alterations  of  expression.  This  'layer'  of  emendation  was             
  clearly the first;* afterwards further changes were made at dif-             
  ferent times, often very hastily and not always legibly  in pen-             
  cil. To present the text as first typed with annotation of every             
  small stylistic improvement is obviously quite  unnecessary, and             
                                                                              
  (*The occurrence of Beleriand in the original typescript,  first in  $13, note
  10,  not  as  previously  by  emendation in  ink from  typescript Broseliand,
  shows that some of this 'layer' was carried out while the typescript was still
  in process of composition.)                                                   

  would  in  any  case  require  the  introduction  into  the  text   of  a
  forest of  reference  numbers  to   the  notes.   The  text   given  here
  includes,  therefore,   without  annotation,   all  minor   changes  that
  in  no  way  affect  the  course  of  the narrative  or alter  its impli-
  cations.  Those  emendations  that  are  not  taken  up  into   the  text
  but  recorded  in  the  notes  are  marked  as  'late  changes'  if  they
  are  clearly  distinguishable,  as  is  not  always  the  case,  from the
  first 'layer' described above.                                           
    I  have  divided  the  text  into  the  same   19  divisions   made  in
  S  (see  p.  11);  but  since  the  opening  of  Q  has   nothing  corre-
  sponding in S this section is not given a number.                        
                                                                          
                                      *                                    
                                                                          
                                 THE QUENTA                                
                                                                          
                                  herein is                                
                                                                          
                              QENTA NOLDORINWA                             
                                                                          
                                     OT                                    
                                                                          
                             Pennas-na-Ngoelaidh.                          
                                                                          
                  This is the brief History of the Noldoli                 
                 or Gnomes, drawn from the Book of Lost Tales               
                 which Eriol of Leithien wrote, having read                
                the Golden Book, which the Eldar call Parma                
                 Kuluina,* in Kortirion in Tol Eressea, the               
                                Lonely Isle.                               

  After the making of the World by the  Allfather, who  in El-             
  vish tongue is named Iluvatar, many of the mightiest spirits             
  that dwelt with him came into  the world  to govern  it, be-             
  cause seeing it afar after it was made they were filled with             
  delight at  its beauty.  These spirits  the Elves  named the             
  Valar, which  is the  Powers, though  Men have  often called             
                                                                          
  (*The Elvish name of the Golden Book in the early dictionary of Qenya is
    Parma Kuluinen (II. 310).)                                             

                                           
                                                                 
 them  Gods.  Many  spirits'  they  brought  in their  train, both
 great  and  small,  and  some  of  these  Men have  confused with
 the  Eldar  or  Elves:  but  wrongly,  for  they  were  before the
 world,  but  Elves and  Men awoke  first in  the world  after the
 coming  of  the  Valar.  Yet  in  the  making  of  Elves  and Men
 and  in  the  giving  to  each of  their especial  gifts Iluvatar
 alone  had  part;  wherefore they  are  called  the  Children  of
 the World or of Iluvatar.                                        
  The  chieftains  of  the   Valar  were   nine.  These   were the
 names  of  the  Nine  Gods  in  Elvish  tongue  as it  was spoken
 in  Valinor,  though  other  or  altered names  they have  in the
 speech   of   the   Gnomes,   and  their   names  among   Men  am
 manifold.  Manwe  was  the  Lord  of  the  Gods  and   Prince  of
 the  airs and  winds and  the ruler  of the  sky. With  him dwelt
 as  spouse  the  immortal lady  of the  heights, Varda  the maker
 of  the  stars.  Next  in  might  and  closest  in  friendship to
 Manwe  was  Ulmo  Lord  of  Waters,  who  dwells  alone   in  the
 Outer  Seas,  but  has  in  government  all  waves   and  waters,
 rivers,  fountains  and  springs,  throughout the  earth. Subject
 to  him,  though  he  is often  of rebellious  mood, is  Osse the
 master  of  the  seas  of  the  lands  of  Men,  whose  spouse is
 Uinen  the  Lady of  the Sea.  Her hair  lies spread  through all
 the  waters  under  skies.  Of  might  nigh  equal  to  Ulmo  was
 Aule.  He was  a smith  and a  master of  crafts, but  his spouse
 was  Yavanna,  the  lover  of fruits  and all  the growth  of the
 soil.  In  might  was  she  next  among the  ladies of  the Valar
 to  Varda.  Very  fair  was she,  and often  the Elves  named her
 Palurien, the Bosom of the Earth.                                
  The  Fanturi  were  called  those  brothers  Mandos  and Lorien.
 Nefantur the first was also called,  the master  of the  houses of
 the dead, and the gatherer of the spirits of the slain. Olofantur
 was  the  other, maker  of visions  and of  dreams; and  his gar-
 dens in the land of the Gods were  the fairest  of all  places in
 the world and filled with many spirits of beauty and power.      
  Strongest of all the  Gods in  limbs and  greatest in  all feats
 of  prowess  and  valour  was  Tulkas,  for  which reason  he was
 surnamed  Poldorea,  the Strong One,(2) and  he  was   the  enemy
 and  foe  of  Melko.  Orome  was  a mighty  lord and  little less

                                          
                                                                                    
 in strength than Tulkas. He was a hunter, and trees he loved                        
 (whence   he   was   called  Aldaron   and  by   the  Gnomes                        
 Tavros,(3) Lord of Forests),  and delighted  in horses  and in                        
 hounds.  He hunted  even in  the dark  earth before  the Sun                        
 was lit, and loud were his horns, as still  they are  in the                        
 friths  and pastures  that Orome  possesses in  Valinor. Vana                        
 was his spouse, the Queen of Flowers, the younger  sister of                        
 Varda and Palurien,  and the  beauty both  of heaven  and of                        
 earth is in her face and in her works. Yet mightier than she                        
 is Nienna who dwells with  Nefantur Mandos.  Pity is  in her                        
 heart,  and  mourning and  weeping come  to her,  but shadow                        
 is her realm and night her throne.                                                  
  Last  do  all  name  Melko.  But   the  Gnomes,   who  most                        
 have  suffered  from  his  evil,  will  not  speak  his name                        
 (Moeleg) in their own  tongue's form,  but call  him Morgoth                        
 Bauglir, the  Black God  Terrible. Very  mighty was  he made                        
 by Iluvatar, and some of the powers of all the Valar he pos-                        
 sessed, but to evil uses did  he turn  them. He  coveted the                        
 world and the lordship of Manwe, and the  realms of  all the                        
 Gods;  and  pride  and jealousy  and lust  grew ever  in his                        
 heart, till he became unlike his  wise and  mighty brethren.                        
 Violence he loved and wrath and destruction, and  all excess                        
 of cold and flame. But darkness most he  used for  his works                        
 and turned it to evil and a name of  horror among  Elves and                        
 Men.                                                                                
                                                                                    
                                          *                                          
                                                                                    
 1. Many spirits > Many lesser spirits (late change).                                 
 2. the Strong One > the Valiant (late change).                                        
 3. Tavros > Tauros (late change).                                                     
                                                                                    
    Accents were put in throughout the work in ink (the typewriter did not            
    possess them), and in  addition short  marks were  put in  on certain            
    names in this section: Fanturi, Olofantur, Orome, Aldaron, Vana.                 
                                                                                    
                                          1.                                          
                                                                                    
  In the beginning of the overlordship of the Valar they                             
 saw that the world was dark, and light was scattered over                           

  the  airs  and  lands  and  seas.  Two  mighty  lamps  they made
  for the lighting of the world and  set them  on vast  pillars in
  the  North  and South.  They dwelt  upon an  island in  the seas
  while they were labouring at their first  tasks in  the ordering
  of  the  earth.  But  Morgoth  contested  with  them   and  made
  war.  The  lamps  he overthrew,  and in  the confusion  of dark-
  ness  he aroused  the sea  against their  island. Then  the Gods
  removed  into  the  West,  where ever  since  their  seats  have
  been,  but  Morgoth  escaped,  and  in the  North he  built him-
  self  a  fortress  and  great caverns  underground. And  at that
  time  the  Valar  could not  overcome him  or take  him captive.
  Therefore  they built  then in  the uttermost  West the  land of
  Valinor.  It  was bordered  by the  Outer Sea,  and the  Wall of
  the  World  beyond  that  fences  out  the  Void and  the Eldest
  Dark; but  eastward they  built the  Mountains of  Valinor, that
  are  highest  upon  earth.  In Valinor  they gathered  all light
 and  all  things of  beauty, and  built their  many mansions,
 their  gardens, and  their towers.  Amid most  of the  plain was
 the  city  of  the  Gods,  Valmar the  beautiful of  many bells.
 But  Manwe  and  Varda  have  halls  upon  the  highest  of  the
 Mountains   of  Valinor,   whence  they   can  look  across  the
 world  even  into  the  East.  Taniquetil  the Elves  named that
 holy  height,  and   the  Gnomes   Taingwethil,  which   in  the
 tongue of this island of old was Tindbrenting.                  
    In Valinor Yavanna  planted two  trees in  the wide  plain not
 far  from the  gates of  Valmar the  blessed. Under  her songs
 they  yew,  and of  all the  things which  the Gods  made most
 renown have they, and about their fate all the stories of the
 world  are  woven.  Dark-green leaves  had one,  that beneath
 were  shining  silver,  and  white blossoms  like the  cherry it
 bore,  from  which  a  dew  of  silver  light was  ever falling.
 Leaves  of  young  green  like  the  new-opened beech  the other
 had.  Their  edges  were of shining  gold. Yellow  flowers swung
 upon  its boughs  like the  hanging blossom  of the  merry trees
  Men now call  Golden Rain.  But from  those flowers  there is-
  sued  warmth  and  blazing  light.  For  seven  hours  each tree
  waxed to full glory, and for  seven hours  it waned.'  Each fol-
  lowed each,  and so  twice every  day in  Valinor there  came an

  hour of softer light, when each tree was  faint and  their gold           
  and silver  radiance was  mingled; for  when white  Silpion for           
  six  hours  had  been  in  bloom,  then golden  Laurelin awoke.           
  But Silpion was the elder of the Trees, and the first hour that           
  ever it shone the Gods did not  count into  the tale  of hours,           
  and called  it the  Hour of  Opening, and from that  hour dated           
  the beginning  of their  reign in  Valinor, and  so at  the sixth           
  hour of  the first  of days  Silpion ceased  its first  time of           
  flower,  and  at  the  twelfth  was  the  first  blossoming  of           
  Laurelin  at  an  end. These  Trees the  Gnomes called  in after           
  times  Bansil  and  Glingol; but  Men have  no names  for them,           
  for  their  light  was slain  before the  coming of  the younger           
  children of Iluvatar upon earth.(2)'                                         
                                                                           
                                      *                                     
                                                                           
  1. This sentence was emended to read: In seven hours  each tree  waxed to
    full  glory  and  waned  Before  this  emendation,  the text  was confused
    since periods of both  fourteen and  seven hours  are attributed  to the
    Trees;  but  the  following  sentence,  beginning Each  followed each...
    was retyped over erasures that  cannot be  read, and  this no  doubt ex-
    plains the confusion, which was rectified later by the emendation.       
  2. The typescript page beginning with the words Sea, and the Wall  of the
    World beyond and continuing to the end  of the  section was  replaced by
    another. As far as the end of the first paragraph the replacement is al-
    most identical with  the first,  but with  these differences:  Manwe and
    Varda  had  hails,  whence  they could  look out;  and new  names appear
    for Taniquetil:                                                         
                                                                           
       Taniquetil  the  Elves  named that  holy height,  and Ialasse  the Ever-
       lasting  Whiteness,  and  Tinwenairin  crowned   with  stars,   and  many
       names  beside;  and  the Gnomes  spake of  it in  their later  tongue as
       Amon-Uilas;  and  in  the language  of this  island of  old Tindbrenting
       was its name.                                                        
                                                                           
     The replacement page then coatinues:                                   
                                                                           
       In  Valinor   Yavanna  hallowed   the  mould   with  mighty   song,  and
       Nienna  watered  it  with  tears.  The  Gods  were  gathered  in  silence
       upon  their  thrones  of  council  in  the  Ring  of  Doom nigh  unto the
       golden  gates  of  Valmar the  Blessed; and  Yavanna Palurien  sang be-
       fore  them,  and  they  watched. From the earth  came forth  two slender
       shoots; and silence was over all the  world save  for the  slow chanting

  of  Palurien. Under  her songs  two fair  trees uprose  and grew.  Of all
  things  which  the  Gods  made most  renown have  they, and  about their
  fate all the tales of  the world  are woven.  Dark-green leaves  had the
  one, that beneath were  as silver  shining, and  he bore  white blossoms
  like  the cherry,  from which  a dew  of silver  light was  ever falling,
  and  earth  was  dappled  with  the  dark  and  dancing  shadows  of his
  leaves  amid  the  pools  of  gleaming radiance.  Leaves of  young green
  like the  new-opened beech  the other  bore; their  edges were  of glit-
  tering  gold.  Yellow  flowers swung  upon her  boughs like  the hanging
  blossoms  of  the  merry  trees  Men  now  call  Golden-rain;  and  from
  those flowers there came forth warmth and a great light.                
    In  seven  hours  the  glory  of  each  tree waxed  to full  and waned
  again  to  nought;  and  each  awoke to  life an  hour before  the other
  ceased to shine.  Thus in  Valinor twice  each day  there came  a gentle
  hour of softer light, when  both Trees  were faint,  and their  gold and
  silver radiances mingled. Silpion was the elder of  the Trees,  and came
  first to full stature and to bloom, and that first hour wherein he shone,
  the  white glimmer  of a  silver dawn,  the Gods  reckoned not  into the
  tale of  hours, but  named it  the Opening  Hour, and  counted there from
  the ages of their reign in Valinor. Wherefore at the  sixth hour  of the
  First of Days, and all the joyous days  thereafter until  the Darkening,
  Silpion ceased his time of flower, and at the twelfth Lautelin her blos-
  soming.  These  Trees  the  Gnomes  called  in  after  days  Bansil  and
  Glingol;  but Men  have no  names for  them, for  their light  was slain
  before the coming of the younger children of the world.                 
                                                                         
 On the  next page,  and obviously  associated with  this re-             
 placement text, is a  typed table  here represented.  At the             
 bottom of the replaced page, and clearly associated with the             
 emendation given in note 1 above, is a simpler table of pre-             
 cisely similar significance, with the note:                              
                                                                         
 'Day' ends every second waning to nought of  Laurelin or  at end  of sec-
 ond hour of mingling of light.                                           
                                                                         
                                 2.                                        
                                                                         
   In all this time, since Morgoth overthrew the lamps, the
 Outer (1) Lands east of the Mountains of Valinor were without
 light. While the lamps had shown growth began therein,
 which now was checked because of the darkness. But the
 oldest of all things already grew upon the world: the great
 weeds of the sea, and on the earth the dark shade of yew and

  fir and ivy, and small things faint and silent at their feet.' In
  such  forests  did  Orome  sometimes  hunt,  but  save  Orome and
  Yavanna  the  Valar  went  not  out  of  Valinor,  while  in  the
  North  Morgoth  built  his  strength,  and  gathered   his  demon
  broods   about   him,  whom   the  Gnomes   knew  after   as  the
  Balrogs  with  whips  of  flame.  The  hordes  of  the   Orcs  he
  made  of  stone,  but  their  hearts  of hatred. Glamhoth, people
  of  hate,  the  Gnomes  have  called  them.  Goblins may  they be
  called,  but  in  ancient  days  they were  strong and  cruel and
  fell.  Thus  he  held  sway.  Then Varda  looked on  the darkness
  and  was  moved.  The   silver  light   that  dripped   from  the
  boughs  of  Silpion  she  hoarded,  and   thence  she   made  the
  stars. Wherefore  she is  called Tinwetari,  Queen of  Stars, and
  by  the  Gnomes  Tim-Bridhil.  The unlit  skies she  strewed with
  these bright globes of silver  flame, and  high above  the North,
  a  challenge   unto  Morgoth,   she  set   the  crown   of  Seven
  mighry Stars  to  swing,  the  emblem  of the  Gods, and  sign of
  Morgoth's  doom.  Many  names  have  these  been  called;  but in
  the  old  days  of  the  North  both  Elves  and Men  called them
  the Burning Briar, and some the Sickle of the Gods.              
    It is said that at the making of the stars the children  of the
  earth  awoke:  the  elder children  of Iluvatar.  Themselves they
  named  the  Eldar,  whom  we call  the Elves,  but in  the begin-
  ning  mightier  and  more strong  were they,  yet not  more fair.
  Orome  it  was  that  found  them,  dwelling  by a  star-lit mere
  Cuivienen,(3) Water  of  Awakening,  far  in  the  East.  Swift he
  rode home to  Valinor filled  with the  thought of  their beauty.
  When  the  Valar  heard  his  tidings  they  pondered  long,  and
  they  recalled  their  duty.  For  they   came  into   the  world
  knowing  that  their  office  was  to  govern  it for  the children
  of  Iluvatar  who  should  after  come,  each  in  the  appointed
  time.                                                            
    Thus  came  it  that  because  of  the Elves  the Gods  made an
  assault  upon  the  fortress of  Morgoth in  the North;  and this
  he  never  forgot.  Little  do  the  Elves  or  Men know  of that
  great  riding  of the  power of  the West  against the  North and
  of  the war  and  tumult  of  the  battle of  the Gods.  Tulkas it

                   
                                                             
 was  who  overthrew  Morgoth  and  bound  him   captive,  and
 the world had peace for a  long age.  But the  fortress which
 Morgoth  had  built was  hidden with  deceit in  dungeons and
 caverns far beneath the earth, and the  Gods did  not destroy
 it utterly, and many  evil things  of Morgoth  lingered there
 still, or dared to roam in the secret pathways of the world.
  Morgoth  the  Gods  drew  back  to  Valinor  in  chains, and
 he  was  set in  prison in  the great  halls of  Mandos, from
 which  none,  God,  Elf,  nor  Man has  ever escaped  save by
 the will of the Valar. Vast they are and strong, and built in
 the North of the land  of Valinor.  The Eldalie,'  the people
 of the Elves, the Gods invited to Valinor,  for they  were in
 love with the beauty of  that race,  and because  they feared
 for them in the starlit dusk, and knew  not what  deceits and
 evil wrought by Morgoth still wandered there.                
  Of their own free will,  yet in  awe of  the power  and maj-
 esty of the Gods, the Elves obeyed.  A great  march therefore
 they prepared from their first  homes in  the East.  When all
 was  ready  Orome  rode at  their head  upon his  white horse
 shod with gold. Into  three hosts  were the  Eldalie arrayed.
 The  first  to  march  forth were  led by  that most  high of
 all  the elfin  race, whose  name was  Ingwe, Lord  of Elves.
 Ing  the  Gnomes  now  make  his  name,  but  never  came  he
 back into the Outer Lands until these  tales were  near their
 end.'  The  Quendi'  were  his  own  folk  called,  who some-
 times are alone called  Elves; they  are the  Light-elves and
 the  beloved  of  Manwe  and  his   spouse.  Next   came  the
 Noldoli.  The  Gnomes  we  may  call  them,  a  name  of wis-
 dom; they are the Deep-elves,  and on  that march  their lord
 was  the  mighty  Finwe, whom  his own  folk in  their tongue
 later changed call Finn.' His kindred  are renowned  in elfin
 song, and of them  these tales  have much  to tell,  for they
 warred and laboured long and  sore in  the Northern  lands of
 old.  Third  came  the  Teleri.  The  Foamriders may  they be
 called; they are the Sea-elves, and the Solosimpi (9) they were
 named in Valinor, the pipers  of the  shores.(10) Elwe (or Elu)
 was their lord "                                             


                                                                            
   Many  of  the  elfin  race  were  lost  upon  the  long dark              
 roads,  and  they  wandered  in  the  woods  and  mountains of              
 the world, and never came to  Valinor, nor  saw the  light of              
 the  Two  Trees.  Therefore  they  are  called  Ilkorindi, the              
 Elves that dwelt never in Cor, the  city of  the Eldar  in the              
 land  of  the  Gods. The  Dark-elves are  they, and  many are              
 their scattered tribes, and many are their tongues.                         
   Of  the  Dark-elves  the  chief in  renown was  Thingol. For              
 this reason he came  never to  Valinor. Melian  was a  fay. In              
 the gardens of Lorien she dwelt, and among all his fair folk              
 none  were  there  that  surpassed her  beauty, nor  none more              
 wise,  nor  none  more  skilled  in  magical  and  enchanting              
 song. It is  told that  the Gods  would leave  their business,              
 and  the  birds of  Valinor their  mirth, that  Valmar's bells              
 were silent, and  the fountains  ceased to  flow, when  at the              
 -mingling of the light Melian sang in the  gardens of  the God              
 '  of  Dreams. Nightingales  went always  with her,  and their              
 song  she  taught  them. But  she loved  deep shadow,  and of-              
 ten strayed on long journey into the  Outer Lands,  and there              
 filled the silence of the  dawning world  with her  voice and              
 the voices of her birds.                                                   
   The  nightingales  of  Melian  Thingol  heard  and  was  en-              
 chanted, and left his folk. Melian he found beneath  the trees              
 and was cast into a dream and a great  slumber, so  that his              
 people  sought  him  in  vain.  In  after  days  Melian  and              
 Thingol  became  Queen and  King of  the woodland  Elves of              
 Doriath;  and  Thingol's  halls  were  called  the  Thousand              
 Caves.                                                                    
                                                                            
                                      *                                      
                                                                            
   1. At all three occurrences of Outer Lands in this section Hither is writ-
    ten above Outer (which is not struck out).                               
   2. After at their feet is added: and in their thickets dark  creatures, old
    and strong.                                                               
   3. Cuivienen > Kuivienen                                                    
   4. the battle > the first battle                                            
   5. Written against Eldalie: Quendi (late change).                           

  6. This  sentence,  beginning  Ing the  Gnomes now  make his  name, was
  changed to read:                                                       
                                                                        
    He entered into Valinor and sits  at the  feet of  the Powers,  and all
    Elves  revere his  name, but  he hath  come never  back into  the Outer
    Lands.                                                               
                                                                        
 7. Quendi > Lindar (late change).                                        
 8. whom his own folk in their tongue later changed call Finn > wisest
  of all the children of the world                                       
 9. Solosimpi > Soloneldi                                                 
 10. the pipers of the shores > for they made music beside the breaking
  waves.                                                                 
 11. Elwe {or Elu) was their lord > Elwe was their lord, and his hair was
  long and white.                                                        
 12. Cor > Kor                                                           
                                                                        
  Short marks were written in on the names Eldalie, Teleri.                
                                                                        
                                    3.                                   
                                                                        
 In time the hosts of  the Eldar  came to  the last  shores of           
 the West.' In the North these  shores in  the ancient  days            
 sloped ever westward, until in the northernmost parts of the            
 Earth only  a narrow  sea divided  the land  of the  Gods from          
 the Outer' Lands; but this narrow sea was filled  with grind-           
 ing ice, because of the violence of the frosts of Morgoth. At           
 that place where the elfin hosts first looked upon the sea in           
 wonder a wide dark ocean stretched between them and the                 
 Mountains  of  Valinor.  Over the  waves they  gazed waiting;           
 and Ulmo, sent by  the Valar,  uprooted the  half-sunk island           
 upon which the Gods had  first had  their dwelling,  and drew           
 it to  the western  shores. Thereon  he embarked  the Quendi (3)        
 and the Noldoli, for they had arrived  first, but  the Teleri           
 were behind and did not come until he had gone. The                     
 Quendi and the Noldoli he bore  thus to  the long  shores be-           
 neath the  Mountains of  Valinor, and  they entered  the land           
 of the Gods, and were welcomed to its glory and its bliss.              
 The Teleri thus dwelt long by the shores of the sea awaiting            
 Ulmo's  return,  and  they  grew  to love  the sea,  and made           
 songs filled with the sound of  it. And  Osse loved  them and           

 the  music  of  their  voices,  and sitting  upon the  rocks he
 spoke  to them.  Great therefore  was his  grief when  Ulmo re-
 turned at length  to take  them to  Valinor. Some  he persuaded
 '  to remain  on the  beaches of  the world,  but the  most em-
 barked  upon  the  isle  and  were  drawn  far away.  Then Osse
 followed them, and in rebellion, it is said, he seized the isle
 and  chained  it  to  the  sea-bottom  far  out  in the  Bay of
 Faerie,  whence  the  Mountains  of  Valinor  could  but  dimly
 be descried, and the light of the  realms beyond  that filtered
 through the passes of  the hills.  There it  stood for  many an
 age.  No  other  land was  near to  it, and  it was  called Tol
 Eressea, or the Lonely Isle. There long  the Teleri  dwelt, and
 learned  strange  music of  Osse, who  made the  seabirds for
 their delight. Of this  long sojourn  apart came  the sundering
 of the tongue of the Foamriders and the Elves of Valinor.      
   To  the  other  Elves  the  Valar gave  a home  and dwelling.
 Because  even  among  the  Tree-lit  gardens  of the  Gods they
   , longed at whiles to see the stars, a gap was made in the
   : encircling mountains, and there in a deep valley that ran
   down to the sea the green hill of Cor' was raised. From the
   West the Trees shone upon it; to the East it looked out to
      the Bay of Faerie and the Lonely Isle and the Shadowy     
    Seas. Thus some of the blessed light of Valinor came into
 , the lands without,  and fell  upon the  Lonely Isle,  and its
 , western shore grew green  and fair.  There bloomed  the first
 flowers  that  ever  were east  of the  mountains of  the Gods.
 On  the  top  of  Cor  the  city  of the  Elves was  built, the
 . white walls and towers and  terraces of  Tun. The  highest of
 those  towers  was  the  tower  of  Ing,(5) whose  silver  lamp
 shone far out into the mists of the sea, but few are  the ships
 of  mortals  that  have  ever seen  its marvellous  beam. There
 dwelt  the  Elves  and  Gnomes.  Most   did  Manwe   and  Varda
 love  the  Quendi,  the  Light-elves,'  and  holy  and immortal
 were all  their  deeds  and  songs.  The  Noldoli,   the  Deep-
 elves,  that  Men  call Gnomes,  were beloved  of Aule,  and of
 Mandos the wise;  and great  was their  craft, their  magic and
 their skill, but ever greater their  thirst for  knowledge, and
 their  desire  to  make  things wonderful  and new.  In Valinor

 of their  skill they  first made  gems, and  they made  them in
 countless myriads, and filled all  Tun with  them, and  all the
 halls of the Gods were enriched.'                             
   Since  the  Noldoli  afterwards  came  back  into  the  Great
 Lands,  and  these  tales  tell  mostly  of  them, here  may be
 said, using  the names  in form  of Gnomish  tongue as  it long
 was  spoken  on  the  earth,  that  King  of  the   Gnomes  was
 Finn.'  His  sons  were  Feanor,  Fingolfin,  and   Finrod.  Of
 these Feanor was the most skilful, the deepest  in lore  of all
 his  race;  Fingolfin  the mightiest  and most  valiant; Finrod
 the  fairest  and  most  wise  of  heart.  The  seven  sons  of
 Feanor   were  Maidros   the  tall;   Maglor  a   musician  and
 mighty  singer  whose  voice  carried  far  over hill  and sea;
 Celegorm the fair, Curufin the  crafty, the  heir of  well nigh
 all his father's skill, and Cranthir the dark; the  last Damrod
 and  Diriel,  who  after  were  great  hunters  in  the  world,
 though  not  more  than  Celegorm  the  fair,  the   friend  of
 Orome.  The  sons  of  Fingolfin  were  Finweg,  o who  was af-
 ter  king  of  the  Gnomes  in  the  North  of  the  world, and
 Turgon  of  Gondolin;  and  his daughter  was Isfin  the White.
 The  sons  of  Finrod  were  Felagund,  Orodreth,  Angrod, and.
 Egnor.                                                        
                                                              
   In those far  days Feanor  began on  a time  a long  and mar-
 vellous labour, and all his power and all  his subtle  magic he
 called upon, for he  purposed to  make a  thing more  fair than
 any of  the Eldar  yet had  made, that  should last  beyond the
 end   of   all.   Three   jewels  he   made,  and   named  them
 Silmarils.  A  living   fire  burned   within  them   that  was
 blended of the light of the  Two Trees;  of their  own radiance
 they  shone  even  in the  dark; no  mortal flesh  impure could
 touch  them,  but   was  withered   and  was   scorched.  These
 jewels the Elves prized beyond  all the  works of  their hands,
 and  Manwe  hallowed  them, and  Varda said:  'The fate  of the
 Elves is locked herein, and  the fate  of many  things beside.'
 The  heart  of  Feanor was  wound about  the things  he himself
 had made.                                                     
   Now it must be  told that  the Teleri  seeing afar  the light

 of Valinor were torn between desire to see again their kin-
 dred and to look upon the splendour of the Gods, and love
 of the music of the sea. Therefore Ulmo taught them the
 craft of shipbuilding, and Osse, yielding to Ulmo at last,
 brought to them as his last gift the strong-winged swans.
 Their fleet of white ships they harnessed to the swans of
 Osse, and thus were drawn without help of the winds to
 Valinor. There they dwelt upon the long shores of Fairy-
 land, and could see the light of the Trees, and could visit
 the golden streets of Valmar, and the crystal stairs of Tun,
 if they wished - but most they sailed the waters of the Bay
 of Faerie and danced in those bright waves whose crests
 gleamed in the light beyond the hill. Many jewels the other
 Eldar gave to them, opals and diamonds and pale crystals
 that they strewed upon the pools and sands. Many pearls
 they made, and halls of pearl, and of pearls were the man-
 sions of Elwe at the Haven of the Swans. That was their
 chief town, and their harbour. A marvellous arch of living
 rock sea-carven was its gate, and it lay upon the confines
 of Fairyland, north of the pass of Cor.
                                                               
                                      *                                   
                                                                         
 1. the last shores of the West > the last western shores of the Hither
    Lands.                                                                
 2. Hither written above Outer (see $2 note 1).                           
 3. Quendi > Lindar at all three occurrences (late change; cf. $2.note 7).
 4. Cor > KOr at both occurrences (as in $2).                             
 5. Ing > Ingwe (see $2 note 6).                                         
 6. Light-elves > High-elves, and later to Fair-elves.                    
 7. On a separate slip is the following passage in manuscript without pre-
    cise direction for its insertion, but which seems best placed here:
                                                                         
      But the love of the outer earth and  stars remained  in the  hearts of
      the Noldoli, and they abode there ever  and in  the hills  and valleys
      about the city. But the Lindar after a while grew  to love  rather the
      wide plains and the full light of Valinor, and  they forsook  Tun, and
      came seldom back; and  the Noldoli  became a  separate folk  and their
      king  was Finwe.  Yet none  dwelt in  the tower  of Ingwe  nor... save
      such  as  tended  that  unfailing  lamp,  and Ingwe  was held  ever as
      high-king of all the Eldalie.                                       

                                                           
                                                               
  8. Hither written above Great.                                 
  9. Finn > Finwe (see $2 note 8).                               
 10. Finweg > Fingon.                                            
                                                               
    Now it may be told how the Gods were beguiled by            
 Morgoth. This was the high tide of the glory and the bliss     
 of Gods and Elves, the noontide of the Blessed Realm.          
 Seven' ages as the Gods decreed had Morgoth dwelt in the       
 halls of Mandos, each age in lightened pain. When seven        
 ages had passed, as they had promised, he was brought be-      
 fore their conclave. He looked upon the glory of the Valar,
 and greed and malice was in his heart; he looked upon the      
 fair children of the Eldalie that sat at the knees of the Gods,
 and hatred filled him; he looked upon their wealth of jewels
 and lusted for them; but his thoughts he hid and his ven-      
 geance he postponed.                                           
    There Morgoth humbled himself before the feet of            
 Manwe and sought for pardon; but they would not suffer         
 him to depart from their sight and watchfulness. A humble      
 dwelling he was granted in Valinor within the gates of the     
 city, and so fair-seeming were all his deeds and words that    
 after a while he was allowed to go freely about all the land.
 Only Ulmo's heart misgave him, and Tulkas clenched his         
 hands whenever he saw Morgoth his foe go by. Never has         
 Tulkas the strong forgotten or forgiven a wrong done to        
 himself or his. Most fair of all was Morgoth to the Elves      
 and he aided them in many works, if they would let him.        
 The people of Ing,(2) the Quendi,(3) held him in suspicion, for    
 Ulmo had warned them and they had heeded his words. But        
 the Gnomes took delight in the many things of hidden and       
 secret wisdom that he could tell to them, and some hark-       
 ened to things which it had been better that they had never    
 heard. And when he saw his chance he sowed a seed of lies      
 and suggestions of evil among such as these. Bitterly did      
 the folk of the Noldoli atone for it in after days. Often he
 would whisper that the Gods had brought the Eldar to           
 Valinor but out of jealousy, for fear their marvellous skill   

 and  beauty  and  their  magic  should  grow too  strong for
 them,  as  they waxed  and spread  over the  wide lands  of the
 world.  Visions  he  would  set  before  them  of   the  mighty
 realms  they  might  have  ruled  in power  and freedom  in the
 East. In those days, moreover, the Valar knew of the com-
 ing of Men that were to be; but the Elves knew nought of
 this, for the Gods had not revealed it, and the time was not
 yet near. But Morgoth spoke in secret to the Elves of mor-
 tals, though little of the truth he knew or cared. Manwe
 alone knew aught clearly of the mind of Iluvatar concerning
 Men, and ever has he been their friend. Yet Morgoth whis-
 pered that the Gods kept the Eldar captive so that Men
 coming should defraud them of their kingdoms, for the
 weaker race of mortals would be more easily swayed by
 them. Little truth was there in this, and little have the Valar
 ever prevailed to sway the wills or fates of Men, and least
 of all to good. Yet many of the Elves believed or half-
 believed his evil words. Gnomes were the most of these. Of
 the Teleri there were none.
   Thus, ere the Gods were aware, the peace of Valinor was
 poisoned. The Gnomes began to murmur against the Valar
 and their kindred, and they became filled with vanity, and
 forgot all that the Gods had given them and taught them.
 Most of all did Morgoth fan the flames of the fierce and
 eager heart of Feanor, though all the while he lusted for the
 Silmarils. These Feanor at great feasts wore on brow and
 breast, but at other times, locked fast in the hoards of Tun,
 they were guarded close, though them were no thieves in
 Valinor, as yet. Proud were the sons of Finn,4 and the
 proudest Feanor. Lying Morgoth said to him that Fingolfin
 and his sons were plotting to usurp the leadership of Feanor
 and his sons, and supplant them in the favour of their fa-
 ther and of the Gods. Of these words were quarrels born
 between the children of Finn, and of those quarrels came
 the end of the high days of Valinor and the evening of its
 ancient glory.(5)
           Feanor was summoned before the council of the Gods,
 and there were the lies of Morgoth laid bare for all to see

 who  had  the  will.  By  the  judgement  of  the  Gods  Feanor
 was  banished  from  Tun. But  with him  went Finn  his father
 who loved him more than his other sons, and many other        
 Gnomes. Northward in Valinor in the hills near the halls of
 Mandos they built a treasury and a stronghold; but            
 Fingolfin  ruled  the  Noldoli  in  Tun.  Thus  might Morgoth's
 words  seem  justified, and  the bitterness  he sowed  went on,
 though his lies were disproved, and long  after it  lived still
 between the sons of Fingolfin and of Feanor.(6)                
   Straight from the midst of their council the Gods sent      
 Tulkas  to  lay  hands  on  Morgoth and  bring him  before them
 in chains once more. But he escaped through the pass of        
 Cor,  and  from  the tower  of Ing  the Elves  saw him  pass in
 thunder and in wrath.                                         
   Thence  he  came  into  that  region   that  is   called  Arvalin,
 which lies south of  the Bay  of Faerie,  and beneath  the very
 eastern feet of the mountains of  the Gods,  and there  are the
 shadows the thickest  in all  the world.  There secret  and un-
 known  dwelt  Ungoliant,  Gloomweaver,  in  spider's   form.  It
 is  not  told  whence she  is, from  the outer  darkness, maybe,
 that  lies  beyond  the  Walls  of  the World.  In a  ravine she
 lived,  and  spun  her  webs  in  a  cleft  of  the  mountains, and
 sucked up  light and  shining things  to spin  them forth  again
 in  nets  of  black  and  choking gloom  and clinging  fog. Ever
 she  hungered  for  more  food.  There  Morgoth  met   her,  and
 with  her  plotted  his  revenge.  But  terrible  was  the  reward
 that he must promise her, ere she would dare the perils ofd     
 Valinor or the power of the Gods.                             
   A  great  darkness  she  wove  about her  to protect  her, and
 then  from  pinnacle  to  pinnacle  she   swung  on   her  black
 ropes,  until  she  had  scaled  the  highest  places of  the moun-
 tains. In the south of Valinor was this, for there lay  the wild
 woods  of Orome,  and there  was little  watch, since,  far from
 the  old  fortress  of  Morgoth  in the  North, the  great walls
 there  looked  on  untrodden  lands  and  empty  sea. On  a lad-
 der  that  she  made   Morgoth  climbed,   and  he   looked  down
 upon the shining plain, seeing afar off the domes of Valinor

 in the mingling of the light; and he laughed as he sped
 down the long western slopes with ruin in his heart.
   So came evil into Valinor. Silpion was waning fast and
 Laurelin but just begun to glow, when protected by fate
 Morgoth and Ungoliant crept unawares into the plain. With
 his black sword Morgoth stabbed each tree to its very core,
 and as their juices spouted forth Ungoliant sucked them up,
 and poison from her foul lips went into their tissues and
 withered them, leaf and branch and root. Slowly they suc-
 cumbed, and their light grew dim, while Ungoliant belched
 forth black clouds and vapours as she drank their radiance.
 To monstrous form she swelled.
   Then fell wonder and dismay on all in Valmar, when twi-
 light and mounting gloom came on the land. Black vapours
 floated about the ways of the city. Varda looked down from
 Taniquetil and saw the trees and towers all hidden as in a
 mist. Too late they ran from hill and gate. The Trees died
 and shone no more, while wailing throngs stood round
 them and called on Manwe to come down. Out upon the
 plain the horses of Orome thundered with a hundred
 hooves, and fire started in the gloom about their feet.
 Swifter than they ran Tulkas on before, and the light of the
 anger of his eyes was as a beacon. But they found not what
 they sought. Wherever Morgoth went a darkness and confu-
 sion was around him that Ungoliant made, so that feet were
 bewildered and search was blind.
   This was the time of the Darkening of Valinor. In that
 day there stood before the gates of Valmar Gnomes that
 cried aloud. Bitter were their tidings. They told how
 Morgoth had fled North and with him was a great black
 shape, a spider of monstrous form it had seemed in the
 gathering night. Sudden he had fallen on the treasury of
 Finn. There he slew the king of the Gnomes before his
 doors, and spilled the first elfin blood and stained the land
 of Valinor. Many others too he slew, but Feanor and his
 sons were not there. Bitterly they cursed the chance, for
 Morgoth took the Silmarils and all the wealth of the jewels
 of the Noldoli that were hoarded there.

   Little is known of the paths or journeys of Morgoth after      
 that terrible deed; but this is known to all, that escaping from      
 the hunt he came at last with Ungoliant over the Grinding             
 Ice and so into the northern lands of this world. There               
 Ungoliant summoned him to give her the promised reward.              
 The half of her pay had been the sap of the Trees of Light,            
 The other half was a full share in the plundered jewels. Mor-          
 goth yielded these up, and she devoured them, and their                 
 light perished from the earth, and still more huge grew               
 Ungoliant's dark and hideous form. But no share in the                
 Silmarils would Morgoth give. Such was the first thieves'             
 quarrel.                                                              
   So mighty had Ungoliant become that she enmeshed                    
 Morgoth in her choking nets, and his awful cry echoed                 
 through the shuddering world. To his aid came the Orcs and            
 Balrogs that lived yet in the lowest places of Angband.               
 With their whips of flame the Balrogs smote the webs asun-            
 der, but Ungoliant was driven away into the uttermost                 
 South, where she long dwelt.                                          
   Thus came Morgoth back to Angband, and there count-                 
 less became the number of the hosts of his Orcs and de-               
 mons.' He forged for himself a great crown of iron, and he      
 called himself the king of the world. In sign of this he set          
 the three Silmarils in his crown. It is said that his evil            
 hands were burned black with the touch of those holy and              
 enchanted things, and black they have ever been since, nor            
 was he ever afterward free from the pain of the burning,              
 and the anger of the pain. That crown he never took from              
 his head, and it never was his wont to leave the deep dun-            
 geons of his fortress, but he governed his vast armies from           
 his northern throne.                                                  
                                                                      
                                    *                                  
                                                                      
 1. Nine written above Seven but then struck out.                   
 2. Ing > Ingwe at both occurrences, as previously.                 
 3. Quendi > Lindar, as previously (late change).                       
 4. Finn > Finwe at all occurrences (except once where overlooked),
    previously.                                                       

 
                                                                               
 5. The following was added here later faintly in pencil:                         
                                                                               
        And  Feanor  spoke  words of  rebellion against  the Gods  and plotted
        to  depart  from Valinor  back into  the outer  world and  deliver the
        Gnomes, as he said, from thraldom.                                       
                                                                               
 6. The following was added here in the same way and at the same time          
     as the passage given in note 5:                                            
                                                                               
        But  Morgoth  hid  himself  and  none  knew whither  he had  gone. And
        while  the  Gods were  in council,  for they  feared that  the shadows
        should  lengthen  in  Valinor,  a messenger  came and  brought tidings
        that Morgoth  was in  the North  of the  land, journeying  towards the
        house of Finwe.                                                         
                                                                               
 7 Cor > Kor, as previously.                                                    
                                                                               
     8 Written here later is the direction: Here mention making of Orcs (p. 4).
     Page 4 of  the typescript  contains the  sentence (p.  100) The  hordes of
     the Orcs he made of stone, but their hearts of hatred See p. 352.           
                                                                               
                                                5.                              
                                                                               
   When it became at last all too clear that Morgoth had es-                    
   caped,  the  Gods  assembled  about the  dead Trees  and sat                    
   there in darkness for a long while in dumb silence, and
   mourned in their hearts. Now that day which Morgoth chose
   for this assault was a day of high festival throughout Valinor.
   On this day it was the custom of the chief Valar, all save
   Osse who seldom came thither, and of many of the Elves,
   especially the people of Ing,(1) to climb the long winding
   paths in white-robed procession to Manwe's halls on the
   summit of Tindbrenting. All the Quendi and many of the
   Gnomes, who under Fingolfin still lived in Tun, were there-
   fore on Tindbrenting's height and were singing before the
   feet of Varda, when the watchers from afar beheld the fading
   of the Trees. But most of the Gnomes were in the plain, and
   all the Teleri, as was their wont, were on the shore. The fogs
   and darkness now drifted in from off the sea through the
   pass of Cor,(3) as the Trees died. A murmur of dismay ran
   through all Elfland, and the Foamriders wailed beside the
   sea.

   Then  Feanor  rebelling  against  his   banishment  summoned
 all  the  Gnomes  to  Tun.  A vast  concourse gathered  in the
 great square on the top of the hill of Cor, and it was  lit by
 the light of many  torches which  each one  that came  bore in
 hand.                                                        
   Feanor  was  a  great  orator  with   a  power   of  moving
 words. A very  wild and  terrible speech  he made  before the
 Gnomes  that  day,  and  though  his  anger  was  most against
 Morgoth,  yet  his  words  were  in  great  part the  fruit of
 Morgoth's lies. But he was distraught with  grief for  his fa-
 ther  and  wrath  for  the  rape  of  the  Silmarils.  He  now
 claimed  the  kingship  of  all  the  Gnomes, since  Finn (4) was
 dead,  in  spite of  the decree  of the  Gods. 'Why  should we
 obey  the  jealous Gods  any longer,'  he asked,  'who cannot,
 even  keep  their  own  realm  from  their  foe?' He  bade the
 Gnomes prepare  for flight  in the  darkness, while  the Valar
 were  still  wrapped  in  mourning;  to  seek  freedom  in the
 world  and  of their  own prowess  to win  there a  new realm,
 since  Valinor  was no  longer more  bright and  blissful than
 the  lands  outside;  to  seek  out Morgoth  and war  with him
 for ever until  they were  avenged. Then  he swore  a terrible
 oath. His seven sons  leaped to  his side  and took  the self-
 same  vow  together, each  with drawn  sword. They  swore the:
 unbreakable oath, by  the   name  of   Manwe  and   Varda  and
 the  holy  mountain,(5) to  pursue with  hate and  vengeance to
 the  ends  of  the  world  Vala,  Demon,   Elf,  or   Man,  or Orc
 who hold or take or keep a Silmaril against their will.      
   Fingolfin  and  his  son  Finweg'  spake against  Feanor, and
 wrath  and  angry  words   came  near   to  blows;   but  Finrod
 spoke  and  sought  to  calm  them,  though  of his  sons only
 Felagund  was  on   his  side.   Orodreth,  Angrod,   and  Egnor
 took the part of Feanor. In the end it was put  to the  vote of
 the assembly, and moved  by the  potent words  of Feanor  the
 Gnomes  decided  to  depart.  But  the  Gnomes  of   Tun  would
 not renounce the kingship  of Fingolfin,  and as  two divided.
 hosts therefore they set  forth: one  under Fingolfin  who with
 his sons yielded to the general  voice against  their wisdom,
 because they would not desert their people; the other under

  Feanor.   Some   remained  behind.   Those  were   the  Gnomes
  who  were  with  the  Quendi  upon  Tindbrenting. It  was long
  ere they  came back  into this  tale of  the wars  and wander-
  ings of their people.                                         
    The Teleri would not join that flight.  Never had  they lis-
  tened to  Morgoth. They  desired no  other cliffs  nor beaches
  than  the  strands  of  Fairyland.  But  the Gnomes  knew that
  they  could  not  escape  without  boats  and ships,  and that
  there  was  no time  to build.  They must  cross the  seas far
  to  the  North  where  they were  narrower, but  further still
  feared  to  venture;  for  they had  heard of  Helkarakse, the
  Strait of the Grinding Ice, where the great frozen  hills ever
  shifted and broke,  sundered and  clashed together.  But their
  white ships with white sails the Teleri would not  give, since
  they prized  them dearly,  and dreaded  moreover the  wrath of
  the Gods.                                                     
    Now it is told that the hosts of Feanor marched  forth first
  along  the  coast  of.  Valinor;  then  came  the   people  of
  Fingolfin less eager, and in the rear of this host were Finrod
  and  Felagund  and  many  of  the noblest  and fairest  of the
  Noldoli.  Reluctantly  they  forsook  the  walls  of  Tun, and
  more than  others they  carried thence  memories of  its bliss
  and beauty, and  even many  fair things  made there  by hands.
  Thus the people of  Finrod had  no part  in the  dreadful deed
  that then was done, and  not all  of Fingolfin's  folks shared
 in it; yet  all the  Gnomes that  departed from  Valinor came
 under  the  curse  that  followed.  When  the  Gnomes  came  to
 the  Haven  of  the  Swans  they  attempted  to seize  by force
 the white fleets that lay anchored there.  A bitter  affray was
 fought  upon  the great  arch of  the gate  and on  the lamplit
 quays and piers, as is  sadly told  in the  song of  the Flight
 of  the  Gnomes.  Many were  slain on  either side,  but fierce
 and  desperate were  the hearts  of the  people of  Feanor, and
 they won  the battle;  and with  the help  beside of  many even
 of  the  Gnomes  of  Tun  they  drew  away  the  ships  of  the
 Teleri,  and manned  their oars  as best  they might,  and took
 them north along the coast.                                    
    After  they  had  journeyed  a  great way  and were  come to

  the  northern  confines  of  the  Blessed  Realm, they  beheld a
  dark  figure  standing  high upon  the cliffs.  Some say  it was
  a  messenger,  others  that  it  was  Mandos  himself.  There he
  spoke  in  a loud  dread voice  the curse  and prophecy  that is
  called  the  Prophecy  of  Mandos,'   warning  them   to  return
  and seek for pardon, or in the end to return only at  last after
  sorrow  and  endless  misery.  Much  he  foretold  in  the  dark
  words,  which  only  the  wisest of  them understood,  of things
  that  after  befell;  but all  heard the  curse he  uttered upon
  those  that  would  not  stay,  because  they  had  at Swanhaven
  spilled the blood of their kindred, and fought the  first battle
  between  the  children  of  earth  unrighteously. For  that they
  should  suffer  in all  their wars  and councils  from treachery
  and  from  the  fear  of  treachery  among  their  own  kindred.
  But  Feanor  said:  'He  saith  not  that  we shall  suffer from
  cowardice,  from  cravens  or  the  fear  of cravens',  and that
  proved true.(8)                                                 
    All  too  soon  did  the  evil  begin   to  work.   They  came
  at last far to the North and saw the first teeth of the ice that
  floated  in  the  sea.  Anguish they  had of  the cold.  Many of
  the  Gnomes   murmured,  especially   of  those   that  followed
  less eagerly under  the banners  of Fingolfin.  So it  came into
  the  heart  of Feanor  and his  sons to  sail off  suddenly with
  all the ships, of  which they  had the  mastery, and  'leave the
  grumblers  to  grumble,  or whine  their way  back to  the cages
  of  the  Gods.'  Thus  began  the  curse   of  the   slaying  at
  Swanhaven.  When  Feanor  and  his  folk  landed  on  the shores
  in the West of the northern world,  they set  fire in  the ships
  and made  a great  burning terrible  and bright;  and Fingolfin
  and  his  people  saw  the light  of it  in the  sky. Thereafter
  those  left  behind  wandered  miserably,  and  were  joined by
  the companies of Finrod that marched up after.                  
    In  the  end  in  woe  and  weariness  Finrod  led  some  back
  to  Valinor  and  the  pardon  of the  Gods -  for they  were not
  at  Swanhaven  -  but   the  sons   of  Finrod   and  Fingolfin (9)
  would not  yield, having  come so  far. They  led their  host far
  into the bitterest North, and  dared at  last the  Grinding Ice.
  Many  were  lost  there  wretchedly,  and  there was  small love

                                                             
                                                                            
 for the sons of Feanor in the hearts of those that came at                  
 last by this perilous passage into the Northern lands.                      
                                                                            
                                      *                                      
                                                                            
   1. Ing > Ingwe, as previously.                                             
   2. At neither of the occurrences of Quendi is the name changed, as pre-
   viously, to Lindar, clearly through oversight.                            
 3 Cor > Kor at both occurrences, as previously.                             
 4 Finn not emended to Finwe as previously, through oversight.               
 5 This sentence was rewritten:                                              
                                                                            
         They swore an oath which none  shall break,  and none  should take,
         by the name  of the  Allfather, calling  the Everlasting  Dark upon
         them, if they kept it  not, and  Manwe they  named in  witness, and
         Varda, and the Holy Mount, vowing                                   
                                                                            
 6. Finweg > Fingon, as in $3, note 10.                                    
 7. Prophecy of Mandos > Prophecy of the North                                
 8. Here is written lightly in pencil: Finrod returned.                       
 9. the sons of  Finrod and  Fingolfin >  Fingolfin and  the sons  of Finrod.
    (This emendation was  made, I  think, simply  for clarity,  the original
    text having been intended  to mean  'the sons  of Finrod,  together with
    Fingolfin': for  Fingolfin, not  his son  Finweg/Fingon, has  become the
    leader of the hosts across the Grinding Ice, since Finrod is now the one
    who returned to Valinor - see the commentary on S $5, pp. 55 - 6.)       
                                                                            
                                      6.                                     
                                                                            
   When  the  Gods  heard  of  the flight  of the  Gnomes they               
 were  aroused  from  their  grief.  Manwe  summoned  then  to               
 his council Yavanna; and she put forth all her power,  but it               
 availed not to heal the Trees. Yet beneath her spells Silpion               
 bore at last one great and single silver bloom,  and Laurelin               
 a great golden fruit. Of these, as is said in the song of the               
 Sun  and  Moon,  the  Gods  fashioned  the  great   lamps  of               
 heaven,  and  set them  to sail  appointed courses  above the               
 world. Rana  they named  the Moon,  and Ur  the Sun;  and the               
 maiden  who guided  the galleon  of the  sun was  Urien,(1) and               
 the youth who  steered the  floating island  of the  Moon was               
 Tilion.  Urien  was  a  maiden  who  had  tended  the  golden               
 flowers in the gardens of Vana,  while still  joy was  in the               

 Blissful Realm, and Nessa daughter of Vana (2) danced on         
 the lawns of never-fading green. Tilion was a hunter from     
 the company of Orome, and he had a silver bow. Often he       
 wandered from his course pursuing the stars upon the heav-
 enly fields.                                                  
   At first the Gods purposed that the Sun and Moon should     
 sail from Valinor to the furthest East, and back again, each
 following the other to and fro across the sky. But because
 of the waywardness of Tilion and his rivalry with Urien,      
 and most because of the words of Lorien and Nienna, who       
 said that they had banished all sleep and night and peace     
 from the earth, they changed their design. The Sun and        
 Moon were drawn by Ulmo or his chosen spirits through         
 the caverns and grottoes at the roots of the world, and      
 mounted then in the East, and sailed back to Valinor, into
 which the Sun descended each day at time of Evening. And      
 so is Evening the time of greatest light and joy in the land
 of the Gods, when the Sun sinks down to rest beyond the       
 rim of earth upon the cool bosom of the Outer Sea. Tilion     
 was bidden not to mount until Urien was fallen from the       
 sky, or far had journeyed to the West, and so it is that they
 are now but seldom seen in the heaven together.               
   Still therefore is the light of Valinor more great and fair
 than that of other lands, because there the Sun and Moon     
 together rest a while before they go upon their dark journey
 under the world, but their light is not the light which came
 from the Trees before ever Ungoliant's poisonous lips         
 touched them. That light lives now only in the Silmarils.     
 Gods and Elves therefore look forward yet to a time when 
 the Magic Sun and Moon, which are the Trees, may be re-       
 kindled and the bliss and glory of old return. Ulmo foretold
 to them that this would only come to pass by the aid, frail
 though it might seem, of the second race of earth, the youn-
 ger children of Iluvatar. Little heed did they pay to him at
 that time. Still were they wroth and bitter because of the in-
 gratitude of the Gnomes, and the cruel slaying at the Haven
 of the Swans. Moreover for a while all save Tulkas feared     
 the might and cunning of Morgoth. Now therefore they for-     

  tified all Valinor, and set a sleepless watch  upon the  wall of
  hills, which they now  piled to  a sheer  and dreadful  height -
  save  only  at  the  pass  of  Cor.'  There  were  the remaining
  Elves  set  to  dwell,  and they  went now  seldom to  Valmar or
  Tindbrenting's  height,  but  were  bidden  to  guard  the  pass
  ceaselessly that no bird  nor beast  nor Elf  nor Man,  nor any-
  thing  beside  that  came  from  the  lands without,  should ap-
  proach the shores of  Faerie, or  set foot  in Valinor.  In that
  day, which songs  call the  Hiding of  Valinor, the  Magic Isles
  were  set,  filled  with  enchantment,  and  strung  across  the
  confines  of  the  Shadowy  Seas,  before  the  Lonely  Isle  is
  reached  sailing  West,  there  to  entrap  mariners   and  wind
  them  in  everlasting  sleep. Thus  it was  that the  many emis-
  saries  of  the  Gnomes  in  after  days  came  never   back  to
  Valinor - save one, and he came too late.4                     
                                                                
    The  Valar  sit  now  behind  the  mountains  and  feast,  and
  dismiss  the  exiled  Noldoli  from   their  hearts,   all  save
  Manwe  and  Ulmo.  Most  in  mind  did   Ulmo  keep   them,  who
  gathers  news  of  the  outer  world through  all the  lakes and
  rivers that flow into the sea.                                
    At the  first rising  of the  Sun over  the world  the younger
  children  of  earth awoke  in the  land of  Eruman (5) in  the East
  of East.' But of Men little is told in these tales,  which con-
  cern the oldest days  before the  waning of  the Elves  and the
  waxing  of  mortals, save  of those  who in  the first  days of
  Sunlight  and  Moonsheen  wandered  into   the  North   of  the
 world.  To  Eruman  there  came  no  God  to  guide  Men  or to
 summon  them  to  dwell  in  Valinor.  Ulmo  nonetheless took
 thought  for  them,  and  his  messages came  often to  them by
 stream  and  flood,  and  they  loved  the waters  but understood
 little   the  messages.   The  Dark-elves   they  met   and  were
 aided  by  them,  and  were  taught  by  them  speech   and  many
 things beside, and became the friends of the children of the
 Eldalie who had never found the paths to Valinor, and knew
 of the Valar but as a rumour and a distant name. Not long
 was then Morgoth come back into the earth, and his power
 went not far abroad, so that there was little peril in the

 lands and hills where new things, fair and fresh,  long ages              
 ago devised in the thought of Yavanna, came at last to their              
 budding and their bloom.                                                  
   West,  North,  and  South  they  spread and  wandered, and              
 their joy was the joy of the morning before the dew  is dry,              
 when every leaf is green.                                                 
                                                                          
                                     *                                     
                                                                          
 1. Urien > Arien at all occurrences.                                     
 2. daughter of Vana struck out. See pp. 326 - '7.                        
 3. Cor > Kor, as previously.                                               
 4. and he came too late > the mightiest mariner of song.                   
 5. At the first occurrence the name Eruman was later underlined in pen- 
    cil, as if for correction, but not at the second.                       
 6. Added here:                                                             
                                                                          
       for measured time had come into the  world, and  the first  of days;
       and thereafter the lives of the  Eldar that  remained in  the Hither
       Lands were lessened, and their waning was begun.                    
                                                                          
                                      7.                                   
                                                                          
   Now began the times  of the  great wars  of the  powers of             
 the North, when the Gnomes of Valinor and Ilkorins and                     
 Men strove  against the  hosts of  Morgoth Bauglir,  and went             
 down in ruin. To this end  the cunning  lies of  Morgoth that             
 he sowed amongst his  foes, and  the curse  that came  of the             
 slaying at the Haven of the Swans, and the  oath of  the sons             
 of Feanor, were ever at work; the greatest injury they did to             
 Men and Elves.                                                            
   Only a part do these tales tell of the deeds of those days,             
 and most they tell  concerning the  Gnomes and  the Silmarils             
 and the mortals that became entangled in their fate. In the              
 early days Eldar and Men were of little different stature and             
 bodily might; but the Eldar were blessed with  greater skill,             
 beauty, and wit, and  those who  had come  from Valinor  as              
 much surpassed the Ilkorins in these things  as they  in turn             
 surpassed the people  of mortal  race. Only  in the  realm of             
 Doriath,  whose  queen  Melian  was  of  the  kindred  of the             

 Valar,  did  the  Ilkorins  come  near  to  match  the  Elves of          
 Cor.(1) Immortal  were   the  Elves,   and  their   wisdom  waxed          
 and  grew  from  age  to  age,  and  no  sickness  or pestilence          
 brought  them  death.  But  they  could  be  slain  with weapons          
 in  those  days,  even  by  mortal  Men,  and  some   waned  and          
 wasted  with sorrow  till they  faded from  the earth.  Slain or          
 fading their spirits went back to  the halls  of Mandos  to wait          
 a  thousand  years,  or  the  pleasure  of Mandos'  according to          
 their  deserts,   before  they   were  recalled   to  free   life  in
 Valinor,  or  were  reborn,'  it  is  said,  into  their  own children.'
 More   frail   were   Men,  more   easily  slain   by  weapon   or  mis-
 chance,  subject  to   ills,  or   grew  old   and  died.   What  befell
 their  spirits  the  Eldalie  knew  not.  The   Eldar  said   that  they
 went  to  the  halls  of  Mandos,  but  that  their  place   of  waiting
 was   not  that   of  the   Elves,  and   Mandos  under   Iluvatar  knew
 alone  whither  they  went  after  the  time  in  his  wide   halls  be-
 yond  the  western   sea.  They   were  never   reborn  on   earth,  and
 none   ever   came   back   from   the  mansions   of  the   dead,  save
 only  Beren  son   of  Barahir,   who  after   spoke  never   to  mortal
 Men.  Maybe  their  fate   after  death   was  not   in  the   hands  of
 the Valar.                                                              
     In after days, when because of the triumphs of Morgoth                
   Elves  and  Men  became  estranged, as  he most  wished, those          
   of the Eldalie that lived still in the world faded, and Men
   usurped the sunlight. Then  the Eldar  wandered in  the lone-        
   lier  places  of  the Outer'  Lands, and  took to  the moonlight        
   and to the starlight, and to the woods and caves.'                      
                                                                          
                                     *                                     
                                                                          
   1. Cor > Kor, as previously.                                             
   2. Mandos > Nefantur                                                     
   3. or were reborn > or sometimes were reborn                               
   4. Added here:                                                           
                                                                          
       And of like fate were those fair offspring of Elf and mortal,       
       Earendel, and Elwing, and Dior her father, and Elrond her child.
                                                                          
     Hither written above Outer, but Outer not struck out.                 
     Added at the end:                                                     

                                                             
                                                                     
  and became as shadows,  wraiths and  memories, such  as set  not sail
  unto the West and vanished from the world, as is told ere  the tale's
  ending.                                                             
                                                                     
                                   8.                                 
                                                                     
 But in these days Elves and Men were kindred and allies.             
 Before the rising of the Sun and Moon Feanor and his sons            
 marched into the North seeking for Morgoth. A host of               
 Orcs aroused by the light of the burning ships came down             
 on them, and there was battle on the plain renowned in               
 song. Yet young and green it stretched' to the feet of the         
 tall mountains upreared over Morgoth's halls; but afterward          
 it became burnt and desolate, and is called the Land of              
 Thirst, Dor-na-Fauglith in the Gnomish tongue. There was             
 the First Battle.' Great was the slaughter of the Orcs and           
 Balrogs, and no tale can tell the valour of Feanor or of his         
 sons. Yet woe entered into that first great victory. For             
 Feanor was wounded to the death by Gothmog Lord of                 
 Balrogs, whom Ecthelion after slew in Gondolin. Feanor               
 died in the hour of victory, looking upon the gigantic peaks       
 of Thangorodrim, the greatest of hills of the world;(3) and he       
 cursed the name of Morgoth, and laid it on his sons never            
 to treat or parley with their foe. Yet even in the hour of his       
 death there came to them an embassy from Morgoth ac-                
 knowledging his defeat, and offering to treat, and tempting          
 them with a Silmaril. Maidros the tall persuaded the                 
 Gnomes to meet Morgoth at the time and place appointed,              
 but with as little thought of faith on his side as there was         
 on the part of Morgoth. Wherefore each embassy came in               
 far greater force than they had sworn, but Morgoth brought           
 the greater, and they were Balrogs. Maidros was ambushed             
 and most of his company was slain; but Maidros was taken             
 alive by the command of Morgoth, and carried to Angband              
 and tortured, and hung from the face of a sheer precipice            
 upon Thangorodrim by his right wrist alone.                          
 Then the six sons of Feanor dismayed drew off and en-                
 camped by the shores of Lake Mithrim, in that northern               
 land which was after called Hisilome, Hithlum or Dorlomin            

 by  the  Gnomes,  which  is  the  Land  of  Mist.  There they
 heard of  the march  of Fingolfin  and Finweg (4) and Felagund,
 who had crossed the Grinding Ice.                            
   Even as these came the first Sun arose; their blue and sil-
 ver banners were unfurled, and  flowers sprang  beneath their
 marching  feet.  The  Orcs  dismayed at  the uprising  of the
 great  light  retreated  to  Angband,  and  Morgoth  thwarted
 pondered a long while in wrathful thought.                   
   Little  love  was  there  between  the  two  hosts encamped
 upon the  opposing shores  of Mithrim,  and the  delay engen-
 dered by their feud did great harm to the cause of both.     
   Now  vast  vapours   and  smokes   were  made   in  Angband
 and  sent forth  from the  smoking tops  of the  Mountains of
 Iron, which even afar off in Hithlum could be  seen staining
 the  radiance of  those earliest  mornings. The  vapours fell
 and  coiled  about  the  fields  and  hollows,  and   lay  on
 Mithrim's bosom dark and foul.                               
   Then Finweg the valiant  resolved to  heal the  feud. Alone
 he went  in search  of Maidros.  Aided by  the very  mists of
 Morgoth,  and  by the  withdrawal of  the forces  of Angband,
 he ventured into the fastness of his enemies, and at  last he
 found Maidros hanging in torment. But he could not reach
 him to release him; and Maidros begged' him to shoot him
 with his bow.
   Manwe to whom all birds are dear, and to whom they
 bring news upon Tindbrenting of all things which his far-
 sighted eyes do not see, sent' forth the race of Eagles.
 Thorndor was their king. At Manwe's command they dwelt
 in the crags  of the  North and  watched Morgoth  and hin-
 dered his  deeds, and  brought news  of him  to the  sad ears
 of Manwe.                                                    
   Even  as  Finweg  sorrowing  bent   his  bow,   there  flew
 down  from  the  high airs  Thorndor king  of eagles.  He was
 the mightiest of all birds that ever  have been.  Thirty feet'
 Was  the  span  of his  outstretched wings.  His beak  was of
 gold. So the  hand of  Finweg was  stayed, and  Thorndor bore
 to  the  face  of  the  rock  where  Maidros  hung.  But nei-
 ther could  release the  enchanted bond  upon the  wrist, nor

 sever it nor draw it from the stone.  Again in  agony Maidros                  
 begged  them  to  slay  him,  but  Finweg  cut  off  his hand                  
 above  the  wrist,  and  Thorndor bore  them to  Mithrim, and                  
 Maidros'  wound  was  healed,  and  he  lived to  wield sword                  
 with his left hand more deadly to his foes than his right had                  
 been.                                                                          
   Thus  was the  feud healed  for a  while between  the proud                  
 sons of Finn' and their jealousy  forgotten, but  still there                  
 held the oath of the Silmarils.                                                
                                                                               
                                       *                                        
                                                                               
 1. Yet young and green > Yet dark beneath the stars (and later it stretched
      > the plain stretched). (This change was made no doubt because the        
      Sun had not yet risen; but it destroys the force of the antithesis with
      but afterward it became burnt and desolate.)                              
 2. Added here: the Battle under Stars.                                     
 3. the world > the hither world                                                 
 4. Finweg > Fingon, as previously, at all occurrences.                     
 5. The typescript had present tenses, finds, cannot, begs, early emended       
      to found, could not, begged; an indication that my father was closely
      following the S manuscript. Present tenses are occasionally found later
      in Q as originally typed.                                                 
 6.  sent > had sent                                                            
 7.  feet > fathoms                                                             
 8. Finn > Finwe, as previously.                                                 
                                                                               
                                          9.                                    
                                                                               
   Then   the   Gnomes   marched   forward    and   beleaguered                 
 Angband from West,  South, and  East. In  Hithlum and  on its                 
 borders in the West lay the hosts of Fingolfin. The South was                 
 held  by  Felagund  son of  Finrod and  his brethren.  A tower                 
 they had on an island in the river  Sirion, which  guarded the                 
 valley  between the  northward bending  mountains on  the bor-                 
 ders of  Hithlum and  the slopes  where the  great pine-forest                 
 grew,  which  Morgoth after  filled with  such dread  and evil                 
 that not even the Orcs would go through it,  save by  a single                 
 road  and  in great  need and  haste, and  the Gnomes  came to                 
 call  it  Taur-na-Fuin,  which is  Deadly Nightshade.  But in                 
 those days it was wholesome, if thick and dark,' and the peo-                 

  ple  of  Orodreth,  of  Angrod  and  Egnor, ranged  therein and
  watched from its eaves the plain below,  that stretched  to the
  Mountains  of  Iron.  Thus  they guarded  the plain  of Sirion,
  most fair of rivers in elfin song, most loved of Ulmo,  and all
  that  wide  land  of  beech  and  elm  and  oak  and  flowering
  mead that was named Broseliand.(2)                             
    In  the east  lay the  sons of  Feanor. Their  watchtower was
  the  high hill  of Himling,  and their  hiding place  the Gorge
  of  Aglon,  cloven  deep  between  Himling   and  Taur-na-Fuin,
  and  watered by  the river  of Esgalduin  the dark  and strong,
  which  came  out  of  secret wells  in Taur-na-Fuin  and flowed
  into Doriath and past the  doors of  Thingol's halls.  But they
  needed  little a  hiding place  in those  days, and  ranged far
  and  wide,  even  to  the walls  of Angband  in the  North, and
  east  to  the  Blue Mountains,'  which are  the borders  of the
  lands  of which  these tales  tell. There  they made  war upon (4)
  the  Dwarves  of  Nogrod and  Belegost; but  they did  not dis-
  cover  whence  that  strange  race  came,  nor have  any since.
  They are not friend of Valar'  or of  Eldar or  of Men,  nor do
  they  serve  Morgoth;  though  they  are  in  many  things more
  like his people, and little  did they  love the  Gnomes.' Skill
  they  had  well-nigh  to  rival  that of  the Gnomes,  but less
  beauty  was  in  their  works,  and  iron  they  wrought rather
  than gold and  silver, and  mail and  weapons were  their chief
  craft. Trade and barter was  their delight  and the  winning of
  wealth  of  which  they  made  little  use.  Long   were  their
  beards  and  short  and  squat   their  stature.   Nauglir  the
  Gnomes  called  them,  and  those  who  dwelt  in  Nogrod  they
  called  Indrafangs,  the   Longbeards,  because   their  beards
  swept the floor before their feet. But as yet little they trou-
  bled  the  people  of  earth,  while  the  power of  the Gnomes
  was great.                                                     
    This  was  the  time that  songs call  the Siege  of Angband.
  The  swords  of  the  Gnomes  then  fenced  the earth  from the
  ruin  of  Morgoth,  and  his  power was  shut behind  the walls
  of   Angband.   The   Gnomes  boasted   that  never   could  he
  break  their  leaguer,  and that  none of  his folk  could ever
  pass to work evil in the ways of the world.                    

   A time of solace it was beneath the new Sun and Moon,       
 a time of birth and blossoming. In those days befell the first
 meeting of the Gnomes with the Dark-elves, and the Feast      
 of Meeting that was held in the Land of Willows was long      
 recalled in after days of little joy. In those days too Men
 came over the Blue Mountains into Broseliand (7) and             
 Hithlum,(8) the bravest and fairest of their race. Felagund it
 was that found them, and he ever was their friend. On a       
 time he was the guest of Celegorm in the East, and rode       
 a-hunting with him. But he became separated from the oth-
 ers,(9) and at a time of night he came upon a dale in the      
 western foothills of the Blue Mountains. There were lights
 in the dale and the sound of rugged song. Then Felagund       
 marvelled, for the tongue of those songs was not the tongue 
 of Eldar or of Dwarves.(10) Nor was it the tongue of Orcs,      
 though this at first he feared. There were camped the peo-     
 ple of Beor, a mighty warrior of Men, whose son was          
 Barahir the bold. They were the first of Men to come into     
 Broseliand. After them came Hador the tall, whose sons        
 were Haleth and Gumlin, and the sons of Gumlin Huor and      
 Hurin,(11) and the son of Huor Tuor, and the son of Hurin        
 Turin. All these were tangled in the fates of the Gnomes      
 and did mighty deeds which the Elves still remember           
 among the songs of the deeds of their own lords and kings.
   But Hador was not yet seen in the camps of the Gnomes.      
 That night Felagund went among the sleeping men of           
 Beor's host and sat by their dying fires where none kept      
 watch, and he took a harp which Beor had laid aside, and      
 he played music on it such as mortal ear had never heard,     
 having learned the strains of music from the Dark-elves       
 alone. Then men woke and listened and marvelled, for great
 wisdom was in that song, as well as beauty, and the heart     
 grew wiser that listened to it. Thus came it that Men called
 Felagund, whom they met first of the Noldoli, Wisdom;(12)     
 and after him they called his race the Wise, whom we call     
 the Gnomes.(13)                                               
   Beor lived till death with Felagund, and Barahir his son
 was the greatest friend of the sons of Finrod.(14) But the sons

 of Hador were allied to the house of  Fingolfin, and  of these
 Hurin  and  Turin  were  the  most  renowned.  The   realm  of
 Gumlin  was  in  Hithlum,  and  there  afterward  Hurin  dwelt
 and  his  wife  Morwen Elfsheen,  who was  fair as  a daughter
 of the Eldalie.(15)                                           
                                                              
   Now  began  the  time  of  the  ruin of  the Gnomes.  It was
 long  before  this  was  achieved, for  great was  their power
 grown,  and  they  were  very valiant,  and their  allies were
 many and bold, Dark-elves and Men.                            
   But  the  tide  of their  fortune took  a sudden  turn. Long
 had  Morgoth  prepared  his  forces  in secret.  On a  time of
 night at winter he let forth great rivers of flame that poured
 over all the  plain before  the Mountains  of Iron  and burned
 it  to  a  desolate  waste.  Many  of  the Gnomes  of Finrod's
 sons perished in  that burning,  and the  fumes of  it wrought
 darkness  and  confusion  among  the foes  of Morgoth.  In the
 train  of  the  fire (16) came the  black armies  of the  Orcs in
 numbers  such  as  the  Gnomes  had   never  before   seen  or
 imagined.   In  this   way  Morgoth   broke  the   leaguer  of
 Angband and  slew by  the hands  of the  Orcs a  great slaugh-
 ter of the bravest of  the besieging  hosts. His  enemies were
 scattered  far  and wide,  Gnomes, Ilkorins,  and Men.  Men he
 drove for the  most part  back over  the Blue  Mountains, save
 the  children  of  Beor  and  of  Hador  who  took  refuge  in
 Hithlum  beyond  the  Shadowy  Mountains,  where  as  yet  the
 Orcs  came  not  in  force.  The  Dark-elves  fled   south  to
 Broseliand (17) and  beyond, but  many went  to Doriath,  and the
 kingdom and power  of Thingol  grew great  in that  time, till
 he became  a bulwark  and a  refuge of  the Elves.  The magics
 of  Melian  that  were  woven  about  the  borders  of Doriath
 fenced evil from his halls and realm.                         
   The pine-forest Morgoth  took and  turned it  to a  place of
 dread  as  has  been  told,  and the  watchtower of  Sirion he
 took  and  made  it  into  a  stronghold  of evil  and menace.
 There dwelt Thu the chief  servant of  Morgoth, a  sorcerer of
 dreadful power,  the lord  of wolves.(18) Heaviest had  the bur-
 den of that dreadful battle, the second  battle and  the first

 defeat (19) of the Gnomes, fallen upon the sons of Finrod.         
 There were Angrod and Egnor slain. There too would             
 Felagund have been taken or slain, but Barahir came up         
 with all his men and saved the Gnomish king and made a         
 wall of spears about him; and though grievous was their        
 loss they fought their way from the Orcs and fled to the       
 fens of Sirion to the South. There Felagund swore an oath      
 of undying friendship and aid in time of need to Barahir       
 and all his kin and seed, and in token of his vow he gave      
 to Barahir his ring.                                           
   Then Felagund went South, (20) and on the banks of Narog        
 established after the manner of Thingol a hidden and cav-      
 ernous city, and a realm. Those deep places were called        
 Nargothrond. There came Orodreth after a time of breath-       
 less flight and perilous wanderings, and with him Celegorm     
 and Curufin, the sons of Feanor, his friends. The people of
 Celegorm swelled the strength of Felagund, but it would       
 have been better if they had gone rather to their own kin,     
 who fortified the hill of Himling (21) east of Doriath and filled
 the Gorge of Aglon with hidden arms.                           
   Most grievous of the losses of that battle was the death 
 of Fingolfin mightiest of the Noldoli. But his own death he
 sought in rage and anguish seeing the defeat of his people.
 For he went to the gates of Angband alone and smote upon       
 them with his sword, and challenged Morgoth to come out        
 and fight alone. And Morgoth came. That was the last time     
 in those wars that he left the gates of his strong places, but
 he could not deny the challenge before the faces of his        
 lords and chieftains. Yet it is said that though his power and
 strength is the greatest of the Valar and of all things here
 below, at heart he is a craven when alone, and that he took
 not the challenge willingly. The Orcs sing of that duel at
 the gates, but the Elves do not, though Thorndor looked       
 down upon it and has told the tale.                            
   High Morgoth towered above the head of Fingolfin, but        
 great was the heart of the Gnome, bitter his despair and ter-
 rible his wrath. Long they fought. Thrice was Fingolfin       
 beaten to his knees and thrice arose. Ringil was his sword,

  as cold its blade and as bright as  the blue  ice, and  on his
  shield was the star on a blue field that  was his  device. But
  Morgoth's  shield  was   black  without   a  blazon   and  its
  shadow  was  like  a  thundercloud.  He  fought  with  a  mace
  like a great hammer of his forges. Grond  the Orcs  called it,
  and when it smote the earth as Fingolfin slipped aside,  a pit
  yawned  and  smoke  came  forth.  Thus  was   Fingolfin  over-
  come,  for  the  earth  was  broken  about  his  feet,  and he
  tripped and fell, and Morgoth put his foot,  that is  heavy as
  the roots of hills, upon his neck. But this  was not  done be-
  fore  Ringil  had  given  him  seven  wounds,  and at  each he
  had cried aloud. He goes halt in his left foot for ever, where
  in his last despair  Fingolfin pierced  it through  and pinned
  it to the earth.(22) But the scar upon his face Fingolfin did not
  give.  This was  the work  of Thorndor.  For Morgoth  took the
  body of Fingolfin to hew  it and  give it  to his  wolves. But
  Thorndor  swept  down  from  on  high  amid  the  very throngs
  of  Angband  that  watched  the  fight,  and  smote  his claw"
 into the face of Morgoth and rescued the body of Fingolfin,
 and bore it to a great height. There he set his cairn upon a
 mountain, and that mountain looks down upon the plain of
 Gondolin, and over the Mount of Fingolfin no Orc or de-
 mon ever dared to pass for a great while, till  treachery was
 born among his kin.                                            
   But  Finweg (24) took the  kingship of  the Gnomes,  and held
 yet  out,  nighest  of  the  scattered Gnomes  to the  realm of
 their  foe,  in  Hithlum  and  the  Shadowy  Mountains  of  the
 North that  lie South  and East  of the  Land of  Mist, between
 it  and Broseliand  and the  Thirsty Plain.  Yet each  of their
 strongholds  Morgoth  took  one  by  one,  and  ever  the  Orcs
 growing more bold wandered far and wide, and numbers of
 the Gnomes and Dark-elves they took captive and carried to
 Angband and made thralls, and forced them to use their     
 skill and magic in the service of Morgoth, and to labour
 unceasingly in tears in his mines and forges.(25) And Mor-
 goth's emissaries went ever among the Dark-elves and the
 thrall-Gnomes and Men (to whom in those days he feigned
 the greatest friendship while they were out of his power),

 and lying promises they made and false suggestions                        
 the greed and treachery of each to each; and because of the              
 curse of the slaying at Swanhaven often were the lies be-                 
 lieved; and the Gnomes feared greatly the treachery                       
 those of their own kin who had been thralls of Angband,                   
 that even if they escaped and came back to their people lit-              
 tle welcome they had, and wandered often in miserable ex-                 
 ile and despair (26)                                                      
                                                                          
  1. Added here: and it was called Taur Danin (late change).                
  2. Broseliand > Beleriand (see note 7), and the following added:          
                                                                          
       in Gnomish tongue; and Noldorien has it been  called, [Geleithian>] 
       Geleidhian,  the  kingdom  of  the  Gnomes,  and  Ingolonde the fair
       and sorrowful.                                                      
                                                                          
  3. east to the Blue Mountains > east unto Erydluin, the Blue Mountains.   
    Against Erydluin was pencilled later Eredlindon.                       
  4. made war upon > had converse with (late change).                       
  5. This sentence was emended to read: Little friendship was there be-        
    tween Elf and Dwarf, for these are not friend of Valar, &c. (late          
    change).                                                               
  6. and little did they love the Gnomes bracketed for exclusion (late          
    change).                                                               
  7. Broseliand > Beleriand at all occurrences (see note 2).                
  8. and Hithlum struck out.                                                
  9. Added here: and passed into Ossiriand (late change).                   
 10. Almost illegible words were pencilled above Eldar or of Dwarves.       
   the (? Valar] or of [?Doriath ] nor yet of the Green Elves.             
 11. This sentence was emended to read: After them came Hador the           
    Golden-haired, whose sons were Gundor and Gumlin, and the sons of      
    Gumlin Hurin and Huor, &c. (late change). At the bottom of the         
    page, without direction for its insertion, is written: Haleth the hunter,
    and little later                                                       
 12. Wisdom > Gnome that is Wisdom > Gnome or Wisdom                        
 13. Added here: Took F[elagund] to be a god (late change).                 
 14. Added here: but he abode in Dorthonion (late change).                   
 15. Written here, with mark of insertion: Dagor Aglareb and the Fore-      
    boding of the Kings (late addition).                                   
 16. In the train of the fire > In the pont of that fire came Glomund the   
    golden, the father of dragons, and in his train                        

                                                     
                                                                              
   17. Above Beleriand (emended from Broseliand, see note 7)  is pencilled
         Geleidhian (see note 2).                                              
   18. Scribbled  against  this:  Sauron his  servant in  Valinor whom  he sub-
         orned.                                                                
   19. the second battle and the first defeat  > the  Second Battle,  the Battle
         of Sudden Flame, and the first defeat (and later Second > Third).
   20. Added here: and West                                               
   21. Himling > Himring (late change; at the first two occurrences of the
         name, near the beginning of this section, it was not emended).        
   22. and pinned it to the earth struck through (late change).                 
   23. claw > bill                                                              
   24. Finweg > Fingon, as previously.                                          
   25. In this sentence magic > craft and in tears  in his  mines and  forges to
         an  uncertain  reading,  probably  and  tears  and torment  were their
         wages (late changes).                                                 
   26. A page of the typescript  ends here,  and at  the bottom  of the  page is
         written Turgon (late addition).                                       
                                                                              
                                        10.                                    
                                                                              
       In these days of doubt and fear, after the Second (1) Battle,              
   many dreadful things befell of  which but  few are  here told.              
   It is  told that  Beor was  slain and  Barahir yielded  not to              
   Morgoth, but  all his  land was  won from  him and  his people              
   scattered,  enslaved  or slain,  and he  himself went  in out-              
   lawry  with  his  son Beren  and ten  faithful men.  Long they              
   hid  and  did  secret  and  valiant deeds  of war  against the              
   Orcs. But in the end, as is told in the  beginning of  the lay              
   of  Luthien and  Beren, the  hiding place  of Barahir  was be-              
   trayed,  and he  was slain  and his  comrades, all  save Beren              
   who by  fortune was  that day  hunting afar.  Thereafter Beren              
   lived an outlaw alone,  save for  the help  he had  from birds              
   and beasts which he loved;  and seeking  for death  in desper-              
   ate deeds found it  not, but  glory and  renown in  the secret              
   songs  of  fugitives and  hidden enemies  of Morgoth,  so that              
   the tale of his  deeds came  even to  Broseliand,(2) and  was ru-              
   moured  in  Doriath.  At  length  Beren  fled  south  from the              
   ever-closing circle of those that hunted him, and  crossed the              
   dreadful  Mountains  of Shadow,(3) and came  at last  worn and              
   haggard  into  Doriath.  There in  secret he  won the  love of              
   Luthien  daughter  of  Thingol,  and  he  named  her Tinuviel,              

  the nightingale, because of the  beauty of  her singing  in the
  twilight beneath the  trees; for  she was  the daughter  of Me-
  lian.                                                          
    But  Thingol was  wroth and  he dismissed  him in  scorn, but
  did not slay him because  he had  sworn an  oath to  his daugh-
  ter. But he desired nonetheless to send him to his  death. And
  he thought in his heart of a quest that could not  be achieved,
  and he said: If thou bring me a Silmaril from the crown of     
  Morgoth, I will let Luthien wed thee, if  she will.  And Beren,
  vowed  to  achieve  this,  and  went from  Doriath to  Nargo-
  thrond bearing the ring of Barahir. The  quest of  the Silmaril
  there aroused the oath from sleep that the  sons of  Feanor had
  sworn,  and evil  began to  grow from  it. Felagund,  though he
  knew the  quest to  be beyond  his power,  was willing  to lend
  all his aid to Beren, because of his own oath to Barahir. But
  Celegorm  and  Curufin  dissuaded his  people and  roused up
  rebellion  against  him.  And  evil  thoughts  awoke  in their
  hearts, and they thought to usurp  the throne  of Nargothrond,
  because they were sons of the eldest line. Rather than a Sil-
  maril  should be  won and  given to  Thingol, they  would ruin
  the power of Doriath and Nargothrond.                          
    So  Felagund  gave  his  crown   to  Orodreth   and  departed
  from his people with  Beren and  ten faithful  men of  his own-
  board.  They  waylaid  an  Orc-band  and  slew  them  and  dis-
  guised  themselves  by the  aid of  Felagund's magic  as Orcs.-
  But  they  were  seen  by  Thu  from  his   watchtower,  which'
  once  had  been  Felagund's  own,   and  were   questioned  by
  him,  and  their  magic  was  overthrown  in a  contest between
  Thu  and  Felagund.  Thus  they  were  revealed  as  Elves, but
  the  spells  of  Felagund  concealed  their  names  and  quest.
  Long  they  were  tortured  in  the dungeons  of Thu,  but none
  betrayed the other.                                            
    In  the  meanwhile  Luthien  learning  by  the  far  sight of
  Melian that Beren  had fallen  into the  power of  Thu sought
  in  her  despair  to  fly  from Doriath.  This became  known to
  Thingol, who imprisoned her in a  house in  the tallest  of his
  mighty  beeches  far  above  the  ground.  How she  escaped and
  came into the woods, and was found there by Celegorm as        

 they hunted on the borders of Doriath, is told  in the  lay of
 Luthien.  They  took  her  treacherously  to  Nargothrond, and
 Curufin  the  crafty  became  enamoured  of  her  beauty. From
 her  tale  they  learned  that  Felagund was  in the  hands of
 Thu;  and  they  purposed to  let him  perish there,  and keep
 Luthien  with  them,  and  force  Thingol  to  wed  Luthien to
 Curufin,4  and  so  build  up  their  power  and  usurp Nargo-
 thrond  and  become  the  mightiest  of  the  princes  of  the
 Gnomes.  They  did  not  think  to  go in  search of  the Sil-
 marils, or suffer any others to do so, until they had  all the
 power  of  the  Elves  beneath  themselves  and   obedient  to
 them.  But  their  designs  came  to nought  save estrangement
 and bitterness between the kingdoms of the Elves.            
   Huan  was  the  name  of   the  chief   of  the   hounds  of
 Celegorm.  He  was  of  immortal  race from  the hunting-lands
 of  Orome.  Orome  gave  him  to   Celegorm  long   before  in
 Valinor,  when Celegorm  often rode  in the  train of  the God
 and  followed his  horn. He  came into  the Great'  Lands with
 his  master,  and  dart  nor weapon,  spell nor  poison, could
 harm  him,  so  that  he went  into battle  with his  lord and
 saved  him  many  times  from  death.  His  fate had  been de-
 creed that he should not meet death save at  the hands  of the
 mightiest wolf that should ever walk the world.              
   Huan  was  true  of  heart,  and he  loved Luthien  from the
 hour that  he first  found her  in the  woods and  brought her
 to Celegorm.  His heart  was grieved  by his  master's treach-
 ery, and he set Luthien free and went with her to the North.
   There  Thu  slew  his  captives  one   by  one,   till  only
 Felagund  and  Beren  were  left.  When  the hour  for Beren's
 death came Felagund  put forth  all his  power, and  burst his
 bonds,  and  wrestled  with  the  werewolf  that came  to slay
 Beren; and he killed the wolf,  but was  himself slain  in the
 dark.  There  Beren  mourned  in   despair,  and   waited  for
 death.  But  Luthien  came  and  sang  outside  the  dungeons.
 Thus  she  beguiled Thu  to come  forth, for  the fame  of the
 loveliness  of  Luthien  had  gone through  all lands  and the
 wonder  of  her  song.  Even  Morgoth  desired  her,  and  had
 promised the  greatest reward  to any  who could  capture her.

 Each wolf  that Thu  sent Huan  slew silently,  till Draugluin
 the  greatest  of  his  wolves  came.  Then  there  was fierce
 battle, and Thu knew that Luthien  was not  alone. But  he re-
 membered  the fate  of Huan,  and he  made himself  the great-
 est wolf that had yet walked the world, and came forth. But 
 Huan  overthrew  him,  and  won  from  him  the  keys  and the
 spells that held together his enchanted  walls and  towers. So
 the stronghold was  broken and  the towers  thrown down  and
 the dungeons opened. Many captives were released, but        
 Thu  flew  in  bat's  form  to  Taur-na-Fuin.   There  Luthien
 found  Beren  mourning  beside Felagund.  She healed  his sor-
 row  and  the  wasting  of  his  imprisonment,   but  Felagund
 they buried on the top of his own island hill, and Thu  came
 there no more.                                               
   Then  Huan returned  to his  master, and  less was  the love
 between  them  after.  Beren  and  Luthien  wandered  careless
 in happiness, until they came nigh to  the borders  of Doriath
 once more. There Beren remembered his vow, and bade         
 Luthien farewell, but she would not be sundered from him.
 In  Nargothrond  there  was  tumult.  For  Huan  and  many  of
 the  captives of  Thu brought  back the  tidings of  the deeds
 of Luthien, and the death of Felagund, and the treachery of
 Celegorm and Curufin was laid bare. It is  said they  had sent
 a secret embassy to Thingol ere Luthien escaped, but         
 Thingol in wrath had sent their letters back  by his  own ser-
 vants to Orodreth.' Wherefore  now the  hearts of  the people:
 of  Narog  tumed  back  to  the  house  of  Finrod,  and  they
 mourned  their  king  Felagund  whom  they  had  forsaken, and
 they did the bidding of Orodreth.  But he  would not  suffer 
 them to slay the  sons of  Feanor as  they wished.  Instead he
 banished  them from  Nargothrond, and  swore that  little love
 should there be between Narog and any of the sons of         
 Feanor thereafter. And so it was.                            
   Celegorm  and  Curufin  were  riding  in  haste and  wrath 
 through the woods to find their way to  Himling,(7) when they
 came  upon Beren  and Luthien,  even as  Beren sought  to part
 from  his  love.  They  rode  down  on  them,  and recognizing
 them  tried  to   trample  Beren   under  their   hooves.  But

 Curufin swerving lifted Luthien to  his saddle.  Then befell
 the leap  of Beren,  the greatest  leap of  mortal Men.  For he
 sprang like a lion right  upon the  speeding horse  of Curufin,
 and grasped him  about the  throat, and  horse and  rider fell
 in confusion upon  the earth,  but Luthien  was flung  far off
 and   lay   dazed   upon  the   ground.  There   Beren  choked
 Curufin,  but  his  death  was  very  nigh from  Celegorm, who
 rode back with his spear. In that hour Huan forsook the ser-
 vice  of  Celegorm,  and  sprang  upon him  so that  his horse
 swerved aside, and no man for fear of the terror of  the great
 hound dared  go nigh.  Luthien forbade  the death  of Curufin,
 but Beren despoiled  him of  his horse  and weapons,  chief of
 which  was  his  famous  knife,  made   by  the   Dwarves.  It
 would  cut iron  like wood.  Then the  brothers rode  off, but
 shot  back  at Huan  treacherously and  at Luthien.  Huan they
 did  not  hurt,  but  Beren sprang  before Luthien  and was
 wounded,   and   Men   remembered   that  wound   against  the
 sons of Feanor, when it became known.                         
    Huan stayed with Luthien, and  hearing of  their perplexity
 and the  purpose Beren  had still  to go  to Angband,  he went
 and fetched them  from the  ruined halls  of Thu  a werewolf's
 coat and a bat's. Three times only did  Huan speak  with the
 tongue  of  Elves or  Men. The  first was  when he  came to
 Luthien  in  Nargothrond.  This  was the  second, when  he de-
 vised  the  desperate counsel  for their  quest. So  they rode
 North, till they could no longer go on  horse in  safety. Then
 they  put  on  the  garments as  of wolf  and bat,  and Luthien
 in guise of evil fay rode upon the werewolf.                  
    In  the  lay  of  Luthien  is  all  told  how they  came to
 Angband's  gate,  and found  it newly  guarded, for  rumour of
 he  knew  not  what  design  abroad among  the Elves  had come
 to  Morgoth.  Wherefore  he  fashioned  the  mightiest  of all
 Wolves,  Carcharas (8) Knife-fang,  to  sit  at the  gates.' But
 Luthien  set  him in  spells, and  they won  their way  to the
 presence  of  Morgoth,  and  Beren  slunk  beneath  his chair.
  Then Luthien dared the most dreadful and most valiant
  deed that any of the women of the Elves have ever dared;
  no less than the challenge of Fingolfin is it accounted, and

 may be greater, save that she was half-divine. She cast off
 her disguise and named her own name, and feigned that she     
 was brought captive by the wolves of Thu. And she be-         
 guiled Morgoth, even as his heart plotted foul evil within
 him; and she danced before him, and cast all his court in     
 sleep; and she sang to him, and she flung the magic robe      
 she had woven in Doriath in his face, and she set a binding
 dream upon him - what song can sing the marvel of that        
 deed, or the wrath and humiliation of Morgoth, for even the
 Orcs laugh in secret when they remember it, telling how      
 Morgoth fell from his chair and his iron crown rolled upon
 the floor.                                                    
   Then forth leaped Beren casting aside the wolvish robe,     
 and drew out the knife of Curufin. With that he cut forth a
 Silmaril. But daring more he essayed to gain them all. Then:
 the knife of the treacherous Dwarves snapped, and the ring-
 ing sound of it stirred the sleeping hosts and Morgoth        
 groaned. Terror seized the hearts of Beren and Luthien, and
 they fled down the dark ways of Angband. The doors were       
 barred by Carcharas, now aroused from the spell of            
 Luthien. Beren set himself before Luthien, which proved ill;
 for ere she could touch the wolf with her robe or speak       
 word of magic, he sprang upon Beren, who now had no         
 weapon. With his right he smote at the eyes of Carcharas,
 but the wolf took the hand into his jaws and bit it off. Now
 that hand held the Silmaril. Then was the maw of Carcharas
 burned with a fire of anguish and torment, when the           
 Silmaril touched his evil flesh; and he fled howling from
 before them, so that all the mountains shuddered, and the     
 madness of the wolf of Angband was of all the horrors that
 ever came into the North o the most dire and terrible.        
 Hardly did Luthien and Beren escape, ere all Angband was      
 aroused.                                                      
   Of their wanderings and despair, and of the healing of      
 Beren, who ever since has been called Beren Ermabwed the      
 One-handed, of their rescue by Huan, who had vanished,        
 suddenly from them ere they came to Angband, and of their     
 coming to Doriath once more, here there is little to tell.(11)

 But in Doriath  many things  had befallen.  Ever things had
 gone ill there since Luthien fled away.  Grief had  fallen on
 all the people and silence on their songs when  their hunting
 found  her  not.  Long  was  the  search,  and  in  searching
 Dairon  the  piper  of  Doriath was  lost, who  loved Luthien
 before  Beren came  to Doriath.  He was  the greatest  of the
 musicians  of  the  Elves,  save  Maglor  son of  Feanor, and
 Tinfang  Warble.  But  he  came  never  back  to  Doriath and
 strayed into the East of the world.>                         
    Assaults too there were on Doriath's borders,  for rumours
 that  Luthien  was  astray had  reached Angband.  Boldog cap-
 tain of the Orcs was there  slain in  battle by  Thingol, and
 his   great   warriors   Beleg   the   Bowman   and   Mablung
 Heavyhand  were  with  Thingol in  that battle.  Thus Thingol
 learned that Luthien  was yet  free of  Morgoth, but  that he
 knew of her wandering; and Thingol was  filled with  fear. In
                                                             
                                                             
 the midst of his fear came the embassy of Celegorm in se-
 cret,  and  said  that  Beren  was  dead,  and  Felagund, and
 Luthien  was  at Nargothrond.  Then Thingol  found it  in his
 heart  to  regret  the  death  of  Beren,  and his  wrath was
 aroused at the hinted treachery of Celegorm  to the  house of
 Finrod,  and because  he kept  Luthien and  did not  send her
 home. Wherefore he sent  spies into  the land  of Nargothrond
 and prepared for war. But  he learned  that Luthien  had fled
 and  that Celegorm  and his  brother were  gone to  Aglon. So
 now he  sent an  embassy to  Aglon, since  his might  was not
 great enough to fall upon all the seven brethren, nor was his
 quarrel  with  others  than  Celegorm  and Curufin.  But this
 embassy journeying  in the  woods met  with the  onslaught of
 Carcharas. That great wolf had run in madness through all
 the  woods  of  the  North,  and  death and  devastation went
 with  him.  Mablung  alone escaped  to bear  the news  of his
 coming  to Thingol.  Of fate,  or the  magic of  the Silmaril
 that he bore to his torment, he was not stayed by  the spells
 of Melian,  but burst  into the  inviolate woods  of Doriath,
 and far and wide terror and destruction was spread.          
    Even as the sorrows of  Doriath were  at their  worst came
 Luthien  and  Beren  and  Huan  back  to  Doriath.  Then  the

 heart of Thingol was lightened, but he looked not with love
 upon Beren in whom he saw the cause of all his woes.        
 When he had learned how Beren had escaped from Thu he       
 was amazed, but he said: 'Mortal, what of thy quest and of
 thy vow?' Then said Beren: 'Even now I have a Silmaril in
 my hand.' 'Show it to me,' said Thingol. 'That I cannot,'
 said Beren, 'for my hand is not here.' And all the tale he
 told, and made clear the cause of the madness of Carcharas,
 and Thingol's h art was softened by his brave words, and
 his forbearance, and the great love that he saw between his
 daughter and this most valiant Man.                         
   Now therefore did they plan the wolf-hunt of Carcharas.
 In that hunt was Huan and Thingol and Mablung and Beleg     
 and Beren and no more. And here the sad tale of it must be
 short, for it is elsewhere told more fully. Luthien remained
 behind in foreboding, as they went forth; and well she      
 might, for Carcharas was slain, but Huan died in the same
 hour, and he died to save Beren.'4 Yet Beren was hurt to the
 death, but lived to place the Silmaril in the hands of      
 Thingol, when Mablung had cut it from the belly of the 
 wolf. Then he spoke not again, until they had borne him     
 with Huan at his side back to the doors of Thingol's halls.
 There beneath the beech, wherein before she had been im-
 prisoned, Luthien met them, and kissed Beren ere his spirit
 departed to the halls of awaiting. So ended the long tale of
 Luthien and Beren. But not yet was the lay of Leithian, re-
 lease from bondage, told in full. For it has long been said
 that Luthien failed and faded swiftly and vanished from the
 earth, though some songs say that Melian summoned           
 Thorndor, and he bore her living unto Valinor. And she      
 came to the halls of Mandos, and she sang to him a tale of
 moving love so fair that he was moved to pity, as never has
 befallen since. Beren he summoned, and thus, as Luthien     
 had sworn as she kissed him at the hour of death, they met
 beyond the western sea. And Mandos suffered them to de-     
 part, but he said that Luthien should become mortal even as
 her lover, and should leave the earth once more in the man-
 ner of mortal women, and her beauty become but a mem-      

 ory of song. So it was, but it is said that  in recompense           
 Mandos  gave  to Beren  and to  Luthien thereafter  a long           
 span of life and joy, and they wandered knowing thirst nor           
 cold in the  fair land  of Broseliand,  and no  mortal Man           
 thereafter spoke to Beren or his spouse.> Yet he came back           
 into these tales when one more sad than his was done.                
                                                                     
                                   *                                  
                                                                     
  1. Second > Third (late change); see $9 note 19.                     
  2. Broseliand > Beleriand, as previously.                            
  3. Mountains of Shadow > Mountains of Terror (see III. 170 - 1).     
  4. Curufin struck through and Cele[gorm] written above (late change).
  5. Great > Hither (cf. $3 note 8).                                   
  6. This sentence, from Thingol in wrath, emended to: Thingol was     
    wroth, and would have gone to war with them as is later told.      
  7. Himling > Himring, as in $9 note 21 (late change).                
  8. Carcharas > Carcharoth at all occurrences.                        
  9. Added here: Dire and dreadful was that beast; and songs have also
    named him Borosaith, Everhungry, and Anfauglin, Jaws of Thirst.
 10. Added here: ere Angband's fall                                    
 11. Late addition in the margin: Thorndor bore them over Gondolin to
    Brethil.                                                          
 12. save Maglor son of Feanor, and Tinfang Warble > and Maglor son
    of Feanor and Tinfang Gelion alone are named with him.            
 13. Added here: where long he made secret music in memory of Luthien.
 14. Added here: and he bade him farewell, and that was the third and
    last time Huan spoke.                                             
 15. This sentence emended to: and they wandered knowing neither thirst
    nor cold upon the confies of Geleidhian in fair Ossiriand, Land of
    Seven Streams, Gwerth-i-cuina, the Living Dead; and no monal Man
    thereafter, &c.                                                   
                                                                     
                                  11.                                  
                                                                     
   Now'  it must  be told  that Maidros  son of  Feanor per-          
 ceived that Morgoth was not unassailable after the deeds of          
 Huan and Luthien and the breaking of the towers of Thu,(2)         
 but that he would destroy them all one by one, if  they did           
 not form again a league and council. This was the Union of           
 Maidros  and  wisely planned.  The scattered  Ilkorins and           
 Men were gathered  together, while  the forces  of Maidros           
 made ever fiercer assaults from  Himling,' and  drove back           

                     
                                                                
 the Orcs and took their spies. The smithies of Nogrod and       
 Belegost  were  busy  in  those  days  making  mail   and  sword
 and  spear  for  many  armies,  and  much   of  the   wealth  and
 jewelry of Elves and Men they got  into their  keeping in  that 
 time,  though  they  went  not  themselves  to  war.  'For  we do
 not know  the rights  of this  quarrel,' they  said, 'and  we are
 friends  of  neither  side  -  until it  hath the  mastery.' Thus
 great  and  splendid  was  the  army  of  Maidros, but  the oath
 and the curse did injury to his design.                         
    All  the  hosts  of  Hithlum,  Gnomes  and  Men,   were  ready
 to his summons, and Finweg (4) and Turgon and Huor and             
 Hurin were their chiefs.' Orodreth would not march from       
 Narog at the word of Maidros, because of the death of          
 Felagund,  and  the  deeds  of  Curufin  and  Celegorm.(6) Yet  he
 suffered  a  small  company  of  the   bravest,  who   would  not
 endure to be idle when the great war was afoot, to go          
 North.  Their  leader  was  the  young  Flinding  son  of Fuilin,
 most  daring of  the scouts  of Nargothrond;  but they  took the
 devices  of  the  house  of  Finweg  and  went  beneath  his ban
 ners, and came never back, save one.'                           
    From  Doriath  none  came.'  For  Maidros  and  his  brethren
 had  before  sent   unto  Doriath   and  reminded   Thingol  with
 exceedingly   haughty   words  of   their  oath,   and  summoned
 him  to  yield  up the  Silmaril. This  Melian counselled  him to
 do,  and  maybe  he  would  have  done,  but  their   words  were
 overproud,  and  he  thought  how  the  jewel  had  been gained
 by  the  sorrows   of  Thingol's   people,'  and   despite  the
 crooked  deeds  of  the  sons  of  Feanor;  and  greed"  too,  it
 may  be,  had  some  part in  the heart  of Thingol,  as after-
 wards  was  shown.   Wherefore  he   sent  the   messengers  of
 Maidros  back  in  scorn.  Maidros  said  nought,  for   at  that
 time  he  was  beginning  to  ponder  the  reunion of  the forces
 of  the  Elves.  But   Celegorm  and   Curufin  vowed   aloud  to
 slay  Thingol  or  any  of  his  folk they  should ever  see, by
 night or day, in war or peace.                                  
    For  this  reason  Thingol  went  not forth,(13) nor any  out of
 Doriath save Mablung, and Beleg who obeyed no man.              
    Now  came   the  day   when  Maidros   sent  forth   his  sum-

 mons  and  the  Dark-elves,  save out  of Doriath,  marched to
 his  banner,  and  Men  from  East and  South. But  Finweg and
 Turgon  and  the  Men  of  Hithlum were  gathered in  the West
 upon the borders of the Thirsty Plain, waiting for  the signal
 of  the  advancing  standards from  the East.  It may  be that
 Maidros delayed too long gathering his  forces; certain  it is
 that  secret  emissaries  of  Morgoth  went  among  the camps,
 thrall-Gnomes  or things  in elfin  form, and  spread forebod-
 ing  and  thoughts  of disunion.  To Men  they went  most, and
 the fruit of their words was later seen.                     
   Long  the army  waited in  the West,  and fear  of treachery
 fell  upon them,  when Maidros  came not,  and the  hot hearts
 of  Finweg  and  Turgon  became  impatient.'4 They  sent their
 heralds across the plain and their  silver trumpets  rang; and
 they  summoned  the  hosts  of  Morgoth  to  come   out.  Then
 Morgoth sent forth a force, great and yet  not too  great. And
 Finweg  was  moved to  attack from  the woods  at the  feet of
 the  Shadowy  Mountains  where  he  lay  hid. But  Hurin spoke
 against it.                                                  
   Then Morgoth led  forth one  of the  heralds of  Finweg that
 he  had  wrongfully  taken  prisoner  and  slew  him  upon the
 plain, so that the watchers from afar might see - for  far and
 clear do the eyes of the Gnomes behold  things in  bright air.
 Then  the  wrath  of  Finweg  burst  its  bonds  and  his army
 leaped forth to sudden  onslaught. This  was as  Morgoth de-
 signed, but it is said that  he reckoned  not the  true number
 of their array, nor knew yet the measure of their  valour, and
 well  nigh  his  plan  went ill.  Ere his  army could  be suc-
 coured  they  were  overwhelmed,  and  that  day  there  was a
 greater slaughter of the  servants of  Morgoth than  there yet
 had been, and  the banners  of Finweg  were raised  before the
 walls of Angband.                                            
    Flinding,  it  is said,  and the  men of  Nargothrond burst
 even  within  the  gates;  and  fear  came  on Morgoth  on his
 throne. But  they were  slain or  taken, for  no help  came." By
 other secret gates Morgoth let issue forth the main  host that
 he  had  kept  in  waiting,   and  Finweg   and  the   Men  of
 Hithlum were beaten back from the walls.                     

   Then in the plain began the Battle of Unnumbered            
 Tears,' of which no song or tale tells the full, for the voice
 of the teller is whelmed in lamentation. The host of the      
 Elves was surrounded. Yet in that hour there marched up at
 last the banners of Maidros and his allies from the East.     
 Even yet the Elves might have won the day, for the Orcs       
 wavered. But as the vanguard of Maidros came upon the         
 Orcs, Morgoth let loose his last forces, and all Angband      
 was empty. There came wolves and serpents, and there          
 came Balrogs like fire, and there came the first of all the
 dragons, the eldest of all the Worms of Greed. Glomund        
 was his name and long had his terror been noised abroad,      
 though he was not come to his full growth and evil, and       
 seldom had he been seen.(17) Thus Morgoth strove to hinder       
 the joining of the hosts of the Elves, but this the Eldar say
 he would not even so have achieved, had not the captains      
 of Men in the hosts of Maidros turned and fled, and their
 number was very great. Treachery or cowardice or both         
 was the cause of that grievous wrong. But worse is to tell,
 for the swart Men, whom Uldor the Accursed led, went         
 over to the foe and fell upon Maidros' flank. From that day
 were Elves estranged from Men, unless it be from the chil-
 dren of the children of Hador.(18)                            
   There Finweg fell in flame of swords, and a fire it is said
 burst from his helm when it was cloven; but he was beaten     
 to the earth and his white banners were trodden under foot.
 Then the army of the West, sundered from Maidros, fell        
 back as best it could win its way, step by step, towards the
 Shadowy Mountains or even the dreadful fringes of Taur-      
 na-Fuin. But Hurin did not retreat, and he held the rear-     
 guard, and all the Men of Hithlum and his brother Huor       
 were there slain about him in a heap, so that not one came 
 back with tidings to their home. The valiant stand of Hurin
 is still remembered by the Elves, for by it was Turgon en-
 abled to cleave his way from the field and save part of his
 battle, and rescue his people from the hills, and escape      
 southward to Sirion. Renowned in song is the axe of Hurin     
 that slew a hundred Orcs, but the magic helm that Gumlin       

                                                              
                                                                
 his  sire  bequeathed  him  he  did not  wear that  day. Thereon
 was  set  in  mockery  the  image  of the  head of  Glomund, and
 oft  it  had  gone  into  victory,  so that  the Men  of Hithlum
 said:  We  have  a  dragon  of  more worth  than theirs.  It was
 Telchar's  work,  the  great  smithy of  Belegost, but  it would
 not  have  availed  Hurin  on  that  field,  for by  the command
 of  Morgoth  he  was  taken  alive,   grasped  by   the  hideous
 arms  of  the  uncounted  Orcs,  till  he  was   buried  beneath
 them.                                                           
                                                                
   Maidros  and  the  sons  of  Feanor  wrought  great  slaughter
 on  Orc  and Balrog  and traitor  Man that  day, but  the dragon
 they did not slay and the fire of  his breath  was the  death of
 many.  And  they  were  driven  in  the  end  far away,  and the
 Gorge  of  Aglon  was  filled   with  Orcs   and  the   hill  of
 Himling  with  the  people  of  Morgoth. But  the seven  sons of
 Feanor, though each was wounded, were not slain. o              
   Great  was  the  triumph  of  Morgoth. The  bodies of  his en-
 emies that were slain were piled in  a mound  like a  great hill
 upon  Dor-na-Fauglith,  but  there  the  grass  came   and  grew
 green in that place alone in all the desert,  and no  Orc there-
 after   trod   upon   the  earth   beneath  which   the  Gnomish
 swords  crumbled  into  rust.  The  realm   of  Finweg   was  no
 more,  the sons  of Feanor  wandered in  the East,  fugitives in
 the   Blue  Mountains.   The  armies   of  Angband   ranged  all
 the  North.  To  Hithlum  Morgoth  sent  Men  who were  his ser-
 vants  or  afraid  of  him.  South  and  East  his Orcs  went in
 plunder  and  ruin-,  well  nigh  all  Broseliand (22) they overran.
 Doriath  yet  held  where  Thingol  lived, and  Nargothrond. But
 he  heeded  these  not  much  as  yet,  maybe  because  he  knew
 little of  them. But  one thing  grievously marred  his triumph,
 and great was  his wrath  when he  thought of  it. This  was the
 escape  of  Turgon,  and  in  no  way  could  he  learn  whither
 that king had gone."                                            
   Hurin  was  now  brought  before   Morgoth  and   defied  him.
 He  was   chained  in   torment.  Afterward   Morgoth  remember-
 ing that treachery or the fear of it, and especially the treach-
 ery  of  Men,  alone  would  work  the  ruin"  of   the  Gnomes,

 came  to Hurin  and offered  him honour  and freedom  and a                  
 wealth of jewels, if he would lead an army  against Turgon,                  
 or even tell him whither that  king had  gone; for  he knew                  
 that  Hurin  was  close  in  the  counsels  of the  sons of                  
 Fingolfin.  But  Hurin  mocked  him. Therefore  Morgoth de-                  
 vised  a  cruel  punishment.  Upon  the  highest   peak  of                  
 Thangorodrim  he  set him  chained upon  a chair  of stone,                  
 and he cursed him with a curse of never-sleeping sight like                  
 unto the Gods, but his kin and seed he  cursed with  a fate                  
 of  sorrow  and ill-chance,  and bade  Hurin sit  there and                  
 watch the unfolding of it.                                                   
                                                                             
                                       *                                      
                                                                             
 The first part of this section was heavily but  hastily and  roughly emended,
 on top of the careful alterations that belong to an earlier 'layer'. In three
 of the following notes (7, 14, 15) I give the final text of the passages that
 were most changed.                                                           
                                                                             
  1. Scribbled  in  the margin  is Swarthy  Men, apparently  with a  mark of
     insertion to this point in the narrative.                                
  2. the towers of Thu > Sauron's tower (late change).                       
  3.  This   sentence   emended   to   read:   The   Dark-elves   were  summoned
     again  from afar,  and Men  of the  East were  gathered together;  and the
     forces  of Maidros  sallied forth  from Himling  (late change).  Himling >
     Himring subsequently.                                                    
                                                                             
  4. Finweg > Fingon throughout, as previously.                             
  5. Added  here:  Yet  less  was  the  aid  that  Maidros  had  of   Men  than
     should  have  been,  because of  the wounding  of Beren  in the  wood; and
     (Orodreth would nor march, &c.)                                          
  6. Celegorm  >  Celegorn  at  both  occurrences  (this  change  has  not been
     made previously).                                                        
  7. This  paragraph,  after  the  changes  given in  notes 4-6,  was rewritten
     later (introducing the later story of the  foundation of  Gondolin), thus:
                                                                             
          All the hosts of Hithlum, Gnomes and Men, were ready to his sum     
       mons; and Fingon and Huor and Hurin were their chiefs. And             
       Turgon  himself  deeming  that  haply  the hour  of deliverance  was at
       hand  came  forth  himself  unlooked  for,  and  he  brought   a  great
       army, and they  encamped before  the West  Pass in  sight of  the walls
       of  Hithlum,  and  there  was  joy  among  the  people  of  Fingon  his
       brother.  [An  addition  here  was struck  out, no  doubt at  the time
       of writing,  and replaced  by a  different statement  about the  folk of

       Haleth  below:  The  folk  of  Haleth  made ready  in the  forest of
       Brethil.] Yet less was the aid that Maidros had  of Men  than should
       have been, because of the  wounding of  Beren in  the wood;  for the
       folk of Haleth abode in the forest, and few  came to  war. Orodreth,
       moreover,  would  not  march  from  Narog  at  the word  of Maidros,
       because  of  the death  of Felagund,  and the  deeds of  Curufin and
       Celegorn.  Yet  he  suffered  a  small company  of the  bravest, who
       would not endure to be idle when great war was  afoot, to  go North.
       Their leader was Gwindor son of Guilin, a  very valiant  prince; but
       they took the devices of the house  of Fingon  and went  beneath his
       banners, and came never back, save one.                              
                                                                           
  8.  From Doriath none came > From Doriath too came scanty aid.           
  9.  Added here: and the anguish of Luthien                                
 10.  greed > covetice                                                      
  11. beginning to ponder > already beginning to devise (late change).      
  12. This sentence changed to read: vowed aloud to slay Thingol, and de-
      stroy his folk, if they came victorious from war, and the jewel were
      not yielded of free-will                                              
  13. Thingol went not forth > Thingol fortified his realm, and went not
      forth                                                                 
  14. From the beginning of the preceding paragraph (Now came the           
      day ...) the text was extensively rewritten in the later 'layer' of
      change:                                                               
                                                                           
       At  length  having gathered  at last  all the  strength that  he might
       Maidros  appointed  a  day,  and  sent  word  to  Fingon  and  Turgon.
       Now  for a  while the  Gnomes had  victory, and  the Orcs  were driven
       out  of  Beleriand,  and  hope  was  renewed;  but  Morgoth  was aware
       of all that was done, and he took counsel against their  uprising, and
       he  sent  forth  his  spies and  emissaries among  Elves and  Men, but
       especially  did  these  come  unto the  Swarthy Men,  and to  the sons
       of Ulfang. Upon  the East  under the  banner of  Maidros were  all the
       folk of the sons of  Feanor, and  they were  many; and  the Dark-elves
       coming  from  the  South  were  with  him, and  the battalions  of the
       Easterlings,  with  the  sons  of  Bor  and  Ulfang.  But  Fingon  and
       Turgon  and  the  Men  of  Hithlum  and  such as  came from  the Falas
       and  from  Nargothrond  were  gathered  ready  in  the  West  upon the
       borders  of  the  Thirsty Plain,  waiting under  the banner  of Fingon
       for  the  signal  of  the  advancing  standards  from  the  East.  But
       Maidros  was  delayed  upon  the  road  by  the machinations  of Uldor
       the  Accursed  son  of  Ulfang,  and  ever  the  secret   emissaries  of
       Morgoth  went  among  the  camps,  thrall-Gnomes  or things  in elvish
       form, and spread foreboding and thoughts of treason.                 
         Long the army  waited in  the West,  and fear  of treachery  grew in

    their thought, when Maidros came not. Then the hot hearts                   
    Fingon and Turgon became impatient.                                  
                                                                               
 15. This passage, from Flinding, it is said, was changed by late emenda-        
                                                                               
 tion to read:                                                             
                                                                         
        Gwindor son of Guilin, it is said, and the men of Nargothrond       
        were in the forefront of the battle and burst within the gates; and     
        they slew the Orcs in the very halls of Morgoth, and fear came on      
        Morgoth on his throne. But at the last Gwindor and his men were       
    all slain or taken, for no help came to them.                              
                                                                               
 16. Added here: Nirnaith Arnediad (late change).                                
 17. Added here: since the second battle of the North.                           
 18. Added here: and of Beor (late change).                                      
 19. But Hurin did not retreat > But there Hurin turned to bay                   
 20. The following passage was added here:                                       
                                                                               
    But their arms were scattered, and their folk minished and dis-              
    persed and their league broken; and they took to a wild and wood-           
    land life, beneath the feet of Eryd-luin [later > Ered-luin], mingling      
    with the Dark-elves, and forgetting their power and glory of old.           
                                                                               
 21. wandered in the East, fugitives in the Blue Mountains > wandered as         
     leaves before the wind.                                                        
 22. Broseliand > Beleriand, as previously.                                      
 23. The following passage was added here:                                       
                                                                               
    and his anger was the greater, for it is said that of all the Gnomes           
    he feared and hated most the house and people of Fingolfin, who               
    had harkened never to his lies and blandishments, and came into                
    the North, as has been told, only out of loyalty to their kin.              
                                                                               
 24. the ruin > the final ruin                                                    
                                                                               
                                      12.                                        
                                                                               
     Morwen (1) the wife of Hurin was left in Hithlum and with              
 her were but two old  men too  old for  war, and maidens and                  
 young boys. One of these was Hurin's child, Turin son of                       
 Hurin renowned  in song.  But Morwen  was with  child once                     
 more, and so she stayed and mourned  in Hithlum,  and went                     
 not like Rian wife of Huor to seek for tidings of her lord.                    
 The  Men'  of the  faithful race  were slain,  and Morgoth                     

 drove  thither  in  their  stead  those  who  had  betrayed the
 Elves,  and  he  penned  them  behind  the  Shadowy  Mountains,
 and  slew  them  if  they  wandered  to Broseliand (3) or beyond;
 and  such  was  all they  got of  the love  and rewards  he had
 promised them. Yet their hearts were turned to evil, and lit-
 tie  love  they  showed to  the women  and children  of the
 faithful  who  had  been slain,  and most  of them  they en-
 slaved. Great was the courage and majesty of Morwen, and
 many  were  afraid  of  her,  and  whispered  that  she  had
 learned  black  magics  of  the  Gnomes.4  But  she   was  poor
 and  well  nigh  alone,  and  was  succoured  in secret  by her
 kinswoman  Airin  whom  Brodda,  one   of  the   incoming  Men,
 and  mighty  among  them,  had  taken  to  wife.  Wherefore  it
 came  into  her  heart  to  send  Turin,  who  was  then  seven
 years of age, to Thingol,  that he  might not  grow up  a churl
 or  servant;  for  Hurin  and  Beren had  been friends  of old.
 The fate of Turin is told in  the 'Children  of Hurin',  and it
 need not in  full be  told here,  though it  is wound  with the
 fates of the Silmarils and the Elves. It is called the  Tale of
 Grief, for it is very sorrowful, and in it  are seen  the worst
 of the deeds of Morgoth Bauglir.                               
    Turin  grew  up  in Thingol's  court, but  after a  while as
 Morgoth's  power  grew   news  came   no  more   from  Hithlum,
 for  it was  a long  and perilous  road, and  he heard  no more
 of  Nienor  his sister  who was  born after  he left  his home,
 nor  of  Morwen  his  mother;  and  his  heart  was   dark  and
 heavy.  He  was often  in battle  on the  borders of  the realm
 where  Beleg  the  Bowman was  his friend,  and he  came little
 to the court, and wild  and unkempt  was his  hair and  his at-
 tire, though sweet his voice  and sad  his song.  On a  time at
 the table of the king he was  taunted by  a foolish  Elf, Orgof
 by  name,  with  his rough  garb and  strange looks.  And Orgof
 in   jest   slighted  the   maidens  and   wives  of   the  Men
 of  Hithlum.  But  Turin  unwitting  of  his  growing  strength
 slew Orgof with a drinking vessel at the king's board.         
    He  fled  then  the  court, and  thinking himself  an outlaw
 took  to war  against all,  Elves, Men,  or Orcs,  that crossed
 the path of  the desperate  band he  gathered upon  the borders

 of  the  kingdom,  hunted  Men  and  Ilkorins and  Gnomes. One
 day,  when  he  was  not  among them,  his men  captured Beleg
 the  Bowman  and  tied  him  to  a tree,  and would  have slain
 him; but  Turin returning  was smitten  with remorse,  and re-
 leased  Beleg  and forswore  war or  plunder against  all save
 the  Orcs.  From  Beleg  he learned  that Thingol  had pardoned
 his deed the day that it was done. Still he  went not  back to
 the  Thousand  Caves;  but  the  deeds that  were done  on the
 marches  of  Doriath  by  Beleg  and  Turin  were   noised  in
 Thingol's halls, and in Angband they were known.             
   Now  one  of  Turin's  band  was  Blodrin  son  of   Ban,  a
 Gnome,'  but  he  had  lived  long  with  the Dwarves  and was
 of evil heart and  joined Turin  for the  love of  plunder. He
 loved  little the  new life  in which  wounds were  more plen-
 tiful than booty. In the end he betrayed the  hiding-places of
 Turin' to the Orcs, and the camp of Turin was surprised.     
 Blodrin was slain by a chance arrow of his evil allies  in the
 gloom,  but  Turin  was  taken  alive, as  Hurin had  been, by
 the  command  of  Morgoth.  For  Morgoth  began  to  fear  that
 in  Doriath  behind  the  mazes  of  Melian,  where  his deeds
 were  hidden  from  him,  save  by  report,(7) Turin  would cheat
 the doom  that he  had devised.  Beleg was  left for  dead be-
 neath  a  heap  of  slain.  There  he  was found  by Thingol's
 messengers  who  came  to  summon  them  to  a  feast  in  the
 Thousand  Caves.  Taken  back  thither  he  was healed  by Me-
 lian, and set off  alone to  track Turin.  Beleg was  the most
 marvellous  of  all  woodsmen  that  have  ever  been,  and his
 skill was little less than Huan  in the  following of a trail,
 though  he followed  by eye  and cunning  not by  scent. None-
 theless  he  was  bewildered  in  the  mazes of  Deadly Night-
 shade  and wandered  there in  despair, until  he saw  the lamp
 of  Flinding  Fuilin's son,(8) who had  escaped from  the mines
 of  Morgoth,  a  bent  and  timid  shadow  of his  former shape
 and  mood.  From  Flinding  he  learned  news  of  the  Orc-band
 that  had  captured  Turin;  and  it  had  delayed  long  in the
 lands  plundering  East  among  Men,  but   was  now   come in
 great  haste,  owing  to  the  angry  message of  Morgoth, and
 was  passing  along the  Orc-road through  Taur-na-Fuin itself.

                                                                           
                                                                            
      Near the issuing of this road, where  it reaches  the edge             
  of the forest upon the face of the steep'  slopes that  lie to             
  the south of  the Thirsty  Plain, Flinding  and Beleg  lay and             
  watched the  Orcs go  by. When  the Orcs  left the  forest and             
  went far down the slopes to camp in  a bare  dale in  sight of             
  Thangorodrim,  Beleg  and  his  companion  followed  them.  At             
  night  Beleg  shot  the  wolf-sentinels  of the  Orc-camp, and             
  stole with Flinding into its midst.  With the  greatest diffi-             
  culty and direst peril they lifted Turin, senseless in a sleep             
  of  utter  weariness,  and  brought  him out  of the  camp and             
  laid him in a dell of thick thorn trees high  up on  the hill-             
  side. In striking" off the bonds  Beleg pricked  Turin's foot;             
  and he,  roused in  sudden fear  and anger,  for the  Orcs had             
  often  tormented  him, found  himself free.  Then in  his mad-             
  ness he  seized Beleg's  sword, and  slew his  friend thinking             
  him a foe. The covering of  Flinding's lamp  fell off  at that             
  moment,  and  Turin  saw  Beleg's face;  and his  madness left             
  him and he was turned as to stone.                                         
      The Orcs, awakened  by his  cries as  he leaped  on Beleg,             
  discovered the escape of Turin, but were  scattered by  a ter-             
  rible storm of thunder and a  deluge of  rain. In  the morning             
  Flinding  saw  them  marching  away  over  the  steaming sands             
  of  Dor-na-Fauglith.  But  through  all  the  storm  Turin sat             
  without  movement;  and scarcely  could he  be roused  to help             
  in the burying of Beleg  and his  bow in  the dell  of thorns.             
  Flinding  afterwards  led  him,  dazed and  unwitting, towards             
  safety;  and  his  mind  was  healed  when  he  drank  of  the             
  spring of Narog  by Ivrin's  lake. For  his frozen  tears were             
  loosed, and he wept,  and after  his weeping  made a  song for             
  Beleg,  the  Bowman's  Friendship,   which  became   a  battle             
  song of the foes of Morgoth.                                               
                                                                            
                                       *                                     
                                                                            
  1. Written in the margin against the opening of this section is Take in
     Helm of Gumlin from page 34. Page  34 in  the typescript  contains the
     passage concerning the Helm in $11, p. 142.                           
  2. The Men > Most of the Men                                           
  3. Broseliand > Beleriand, as previously.                                 

                                                                                
                                                                                
  4. whispered that she had learned black magics from the Gnomes >                
   whispered that she was a witch (late change).                                 
  5. a Gnome > a Gnome of Feanor's house                                          
  6. the hiding-places of Turin > the hiding-places of Turin beyond the          
   eaves of Doriath                                                               
  7. save by report > or upon its borders whence came but uncertain re-          
  port                                                                           
  8. Flinding Fuilin's son > Gwindor son of Guilin, and subsequently   
   Flinding > Gwindor (late changes; see 511 note 15).                            
  9. steep > long                                                                 
 10. Added after high up on the hillside:                                        
                                                                                
        Then  Beleg  drew his  renowned sword,  made of  iron that  fell from
        heaven as a blazing star, and it would cut all earth-dolven iron. But
        fate was that day more strong, for in striking, &c.                      
                                                                                
                                       13.                                       
                                                                                
    Flinding' led Turin in the end to Nargothrond. There in                     
  days long gone' Flinding had loved Finduilas daughter of                      
  Orodreth, and he called her Failivrin, which is the gleam on                   
  the waters of the fair lake whence Narog comes. But her,                       
  heart was turned against her will to Turin, and his to her.                    
  Out of loyalty' he fought against his love and Finduilas                       
  grew wan and pale, but Flinding perceiving their hearts                        
  grew bitter.                                                                   
    Turin grew great and mighty in Nargothrond, but he                          
  loved not their secret manner of fighting and ambush, and                      
  began to long for brave strokes and battle in the open. Then                   
  he caused to be forged anew the sword of Beleg, and the                        
  craftsmen of Narog made thereof a black blade with shining                     
  edges of pale fire; from which sword he became known                           
  among them as Mormaglir.(4)                                                     
    With this sword he thought to avenge the death of Beleg                     
  the Bowman, and with it he did many mighty deeds; so that                      
  the fame of Mormaglir, the Black-sword of Nargothrond,                         
  came even unto Doriath and to the ears of Thingol, but the                     
  name of Turin was not heard. And long victory dwelt with                     
  Mormaglir and the host of the Gnomes of Nargothrond who                     
  followed him; and their realm reached even to the sources                    

                                                             
                                                              
 of Narog, and from the western sea  to the  marches of        
 Doriath; and there was a stay in the onset of Morgoth.        
                                                              
      In this time of respite and hope Morwen arose,  and leav-
 ing her goods  in the  care of  Brodda, who  had to  wife' her
 kinswoman  Airin,  she  took  with  her  Nienor  her daughter,
 and  adventured  the  long journey  to Thingol's  halls. There
 did new grief await her, for she learnt of  the loss  and van-
 ishing of Turin; and even as she  dwelt a  while as  the guest
 of  Thingol, in  sorrow and  in doubt,  there came  to Doriath
 the tidings of the fall of Nargothrond; whereat all folk wept.
      Biding  his  hour  Morgoth  had loosed  upon the  folk of
 Narog  at unawares  a great  army that  he had  long prepared,
 and  with  the  host  came  that father  of the  dragons, Glo-
 mund,   who  wrought   ruin  in   the  Battle   of  Unnumbered
 Tears.   The  might   of  Narog   was  overwhelmed   upon  the
 Guarded  Plain, north  of Nargothrond;  and there  fell Flind-
 ing son  of Fuilin,(6) mortally wounded,  and dying  he refused
 the succour  of Turin,  reproaching him,  and bidding  him, if
 he would amend the  evil he  had wrought  his friend,  to has-
 ten back to Nargothrond to rescue  even with  his life,  if he
 could, Finduilas whom they loved, or to slay her else.        
      But  the  Orc-host  and  the  mighty  dragon   came  upon
 Nargothrond before  Turin could  put it  in defence,  and they
 overthrew  Orodreth  and  all  his  remaining  folk,  and  the
 great  halls  beneath  the  earth  were sacked  and plundered,
 and  all  the  women  and maidens  of the  folk of  Narog were
 herded  as  slaves  and taken  into Morgoth's  thraldom. Turin
 only  they  could  not overcome,  and the  Orcs fell  back be-
 fore him in terror and amaze,  and he  stood alone.  Thus ever
 did  Morgoth  achieve  the  downfall  of  men  by   their  own
 deeds;  for but  little would  men have  accounted the  woe of
 Turin  had  he  fallen  in  brave  defence  before  the mighty
 doors of Nargothrond.                                         
      Fire was in the eyes of Turin, and the edges of his sword
 shone  as  with  flame,  and  he  strode  to battle  even with
 Glomund,  alone and  unafraid. But  it was  not his  fate that
 day to rid the world of that creeping evil;  for he  fell under

 the  binding spell  of the  lidless eyes  of Glomund,  and he
 was  halted  moveless;  but  Glomund (7) taunted  him,  calling
 him deserter of his kin,  friend-slayer, and  love-thief. And
 -the dragon offered him his freedom either to  follow seeking
 to rescue his 'stolen love' Finduilas, or to do his  duty and
 go to the rescue of his  mother and  sister, who  were living
 in great misery in Hithlum (as he said and lied) and  nigh to
 death. But he must swear to abandon one or the other.       
   Then  Turin  in  anguish  and  in  doubt  forsook Finduilas
 against his  heart, and  against his  last word  to Flinding (8)
 (which if he had obeyed, his uttermost fate had  not befallen
 him),  and  believing the  words of  the serpent  whose spell
 was upon him, he left the realm of Narog and went to        
 Hithlum. And it is sung that he stopped in  vain his  ears to
 keep out the echo of the  cries of  Finduilas calling  on his
 name  as  she  was  borne  away; and  that sound  hunted him:
 through  the  woods.  But  Glomund,  when  Turin   had  gone,
 crept  back  to  Nargothrond  and  gathered unto  himself the
 greater  part  of its  wealth of  gold and  gems, and  he lay
 thereon in its deepest hall, and desolation was about him.
   It is said that  Turin came  at length  to Hithlum,  and he
 found not his mother  or his  kin; for  their hall  was empty
 and their land despoiled,  and Brodda  had added  their goods
 unto  his  own. In  his wooden  hall at  his own  board Turin
 slew  Brodda; and  fought his  way from  the house,  but must
 needs afterward flee from Hithlum.(9)                       
                                                            
   There was  a dwelling  of free  Men in  the wood,  the rem-
 nant of the people of Haleth, son of Hador and brother of
 Gumlin the grandsire of Turin. They  were the  last of  the 
 Men that were Elf-friends to linger  in Beleriand,(10) neither
 subdued by Morgoth, nor penned in Hithlum beyond the        
 Shadowy  Mountains.   They  were   small  in   numbers,  but
 bold, and their houses were in  the green  woods about  the 
 River Taiglin that enters the  land of  Doriath ere  it joins
 with the great waters of Sirion, and maybe some magic of
 Melian had yet protected them. Down from the sources of     
 Taiglin  that  issues  from   the  Shadowy   Mountains  Turin

  
                                                                  
  came  seeking  for  the  trail  of  the  Orcs  that  had plundered
  Nargothrond  and  must  pass  that  water  on  their road  back to
  the realm of Morgoth.                                            
      Thus  he  came  upon  the  woodmen  and  learned   tidings  of
  Finduilas; and  then he  thought that  he had  tasted his  fill of
  woe,  yet  it  was  not  so.  For  the  Orcs  had marched  nigh to
  the   borders   of   the   woodmen,  and   the  woodmen   had  am-
  bushed  them,  and  come  near  to  rescuing  their  captives. But
  few  had  they  won  away,  for  the  Orc-guards  had  slain  most
  of   them   cruelly;   and   among   them   Finduilas   had   been
  pierced  with  spears,(11) as  those  few  who  had been  saved told
  him  amid  their  tears.  So  perished  the  last  of the  race of
  Finrod  fairest  of  Elven-kings, and  vanished from  the world
 of Men.                                                           
         Grim was the heart  of Turin  and all  the deeds  and days
 of his life seemed vile; yet the  courage of  the race  of Hador
 was  as  a  core  of  unbent  steel. There  Turin vowed  to re-
 nounce  his  past, his  kin, his  name, and  all that  had been
 his,  save  hatred   of  Morgoth;   and  he   took  a   new  name,
 Turambar   (Turumarth (12) in the   forms   of   Gnomish  speech),
 which  is  Conqueror  of  Fate;  and   the  woodmen   gathered  to
 him,  and  he  became  their  lord,  and ruled  a while  in peace.
 Tidings  came  now  more  clear   to  Doriath   of  the   fall  of
 Orodreth  and  the  destruction   of  all   the  folk   of  Narog,
 though  fugitives   no  more   than  could   be  counted   on  the
 hands  came  ever  into  safety  there,  and  uncertain  was their
 report.  Yet  thus  was  it  known  to   Thingol  and   to  Morwen
 that  Mormaglir  was  Turin;  and  yet  too  late;  for  some said
 that  he  had  escaped  and  fled,'  and  some  told  that  he had
 been  turned  to  stone  by  the  dreadful  eyes  of  Glomund  and
 lived still enthralled in Nargothrond.                            
         At last Thingol yielded so far to the tears and entreaties
 of  Morwen  that  he  sent  forth  a   company  of   Elves  toward
 Nargothrond  to  explore  the  truth.   With  them   rode  Morwen,
 for  she  might  not  be  restrained;  but  Nienor  was  bidden to
 remain  behind.  Yet  the  fearlessness  of  her  house  was hers,
 and  in  evil  hour, for  love and  care of  her mother,  she dis-

  guised herself as one  of the  folk of  Thingol, and  went with
  that ill-fated riding.                                         
    They viewed Narog afar from the summit of the tree-clad      
  Hill of  Spies to  the east  of the  Guarded Plain,  and thence
  they rode down greatly daring towards the banks of Narog.      
  Morwen   remained  upon   the  hill   with  scanty   guard  and
  watched  them  from  afar.  Now  in  the  days of  victory when
  the  folk  of  Narog  had  gone  forth once  more to  open war,
  a bridge had been built across  the river  before the  doors of
  the hidden city (and this had proved their undoing).           
  Towards this bridge the Elves of Doriath now came, but         
  Glomund  was  aware  of their  coming, and  he issued  forth on
  a sudden and lay into the stream,  and a  vast and  hissing va-
  pour  arose  and  engulfed  them.  This  Morwen  saw  from  the
  hill-top, and her guards would  not stay  longer but  fled back
  to Doriath taking her with them.                               
    In  that  mist   the  Elves   were  overwhelmed,   and  their
  horses  were  stricken  with  panic, and  they fled  hither and
  thither and could not find  their fellows;  and the  most part
  returned never back to Doriath. But when the mist cleared      
  Nienor  found  that  her  wandering  had  taken  her  only back
  unto  the  banks  of  Narog,  and before  her lay  Glomund, and
  his eye was upon her. Dreadful was  his eye,  like to  the eye
  of  Morgoth  his  master  who   had  made   him,  and   as  she
  gazed perforce upon it a spell of darkness and utter forget- 
  fulness  fell  upon her  mind. Thence  she wandered  witless in
  the woods, as a wild creature without speech or thought.       
    When  her  madness  left her,  she was  far from  the borders
  of  Nargothrond,  she  knew  not  where;  and   she  remembered
  not  her  name  or  home.  Thus  was  she found  by a  band of
  Orcs  and  pursued  as  a  beast  of  the  woods;  but  she was
  saved  by  fate.  For  a party  of the  woodmen of  Turambar in
  whose  land  they  were  fell  upon  the  Orcs  and  slew them;
  and  Turambar  himself  placed her  upon his  horse and  bore 
  her to the woodmen's pleasant homes. He named her              
  Niniel, Tear-maiden, for he had first seen her weeping.        
  There is a  narrow gorge  and a  high and  foaming fall  in the
  river Taiglin, that the woodmen called the Falls of Silver-

 bowl;(14) and this  fair place  they passed  as they  rode home,
 and  would  camp  there as  they were  wont; but  Niniel would
 not stay, for a chill and a mortal shivering took her  in that
 place.                                                        
   Yet  afterwards  she found  some peace  in the  dwellings of
 the  woodmen,  who  treated  her  with kindliness  and honour.
 There  she  won the  love of  Brandir, son  of Handir,  son of
 Haleth; but he was lame of foot, being wounded by an Orc-
 arrow as a child, and uncomely and of less might than     
 many, wherefore he had yielded the rule to Turin at the
 choice of the woodfolk. He was gentle of heart and wise of
 thought, and great was his love, and he was ever true to
 Turambar; yet bitter was his soul when he might not win
 the love of Niniel. For Niniel would not be parted ever
 from  the side  of Turambar,  and great  love was  ever be-
 tween those twain from the hour of  their first  meeting. Thus
 Turin  Turambar  thinking  to  cast off  his ancient  woes was
 wed to  Nienor Niniel,  and fair  was the  feast in  the woods
 of Taiglin.                                                   
   Now  the  power  and  malice  of  Glomund  waxed  apace  and
 well-nigh all the realm of Nargothrond of  old he  laid waste,
 both west of Narog and  beyond it  to the  east; and  he gath-
 ered  Orcs  to  him  and  ruled  as  a dragon-king;  and there
 were battles on  the marches  of the  woodmen's land,  and the
 Orcs  fled.  Wherefore  learning  of  their  dwelling, Glomund
 issued  from  Nargothrond,  and  came  crawling,  filled  with
 fire,  over  the  lands  and to  the borders  of the  woods of
 Taiglin,  leaving  behind   him  a   trail  of   burning.  But
 Turambar  pondered  how  the  horror  could  be   warded  from
 his  people; and  he marched  forth with  his men,  and Niniel
 rode with  them, her  heart foreboding  ill, until  they could
 descry afar the blasted track  of the  dragon and  the smoking
 place  where  he  now  lay,  west  of  the deep-cloven  bed of
 Taiglin. Between  them lay  the steep  ravine of  the river,
 whose waters had in that spot fallen, but a little way before,
 over the foaming fall of Silver-bowl.                         
     There  Turambar  thought  of a  desperate counsel,  for he
 knew  but  too  well  the  might  and  malice  of  Glomund. He

 resolved to lie in wait in  the ravine  over which  the dragon
 must pass, if he would reach  their land.  Six of  his boldest
 men  begged  to  come with  him; and  at evening  they climbed
 up the further side of the  ravine and  clung in  hiding among
 the bushes at its brink. In the night  the great  dragon moved
 nigh  to  the  river, and  the rumour  of his  approach filled
 them with fear  and loathing.  Indeed in  the morning  all had
 slunk away leaving Turambar only.                            
   The next evening, when Turambar was now nearly spent,     
 Glomund  began  the  passage  of  the  ravine,  and  his  huge
 form  passed  over  Turambar's  head.  There  Turambar  trans-
 fixed  Glomund  with  Gurtholfin,  Wand-of-Death,   his  black
 sword;  and  Glomund  coiled  back  in  anguish and  lay dying
 nigh  to the  river's brink  and came  not into  the woodmen's
 land.  But  he wrested  the sword  from Turambar's  grasp in
 his  throes,  and  Turambar  came now  forth from  hiding, and
 placed  his  foot  upon  Glomund  and  in exultation  drew out
 his  sword.  Greedy  was  that  blade  and  very  fast  in the
 wound, and as  Turambar wrenched  it with  all his  might, the
 venom  of  the  dragon  spouted  on  his hand  and in  the an-
 guish of its burning he fell in a swoon.                     
   So it was that the watchers from afar perceived that       
 Glomund had been slain,'yet Turambar did not return. By      
 the light  of the  moon Niniel  went forth  without a  word to
 seek  him,  and  ere she  had long  gone Brandir  missed her
 and followed  after. But  Niniel found  Turambar lying  as one
 dead  beside  the  body  of  Glomund.  There  as she  wept be-
 side  Turambar  and  sought  to   tend  him,   Glomund  opened
 his eyes for the last time, and spake, telling her  the true.
 name  of  Turambar;  and  thereafter  he  died,  and  with his
 death the spell of forgetfulness was  lifted from  Niniel, and
 she remembered  her kin.  Filled with  horror and  anguish, for
 she  was  with  child,  she  fled  and  cast herself  over the
 heights  of  Silver-bowl, and  none ever  found her  body. Her
 last lament ere she cast herself away was heard only by      
 Brandir;  and  his  back was  bowed and  his head  turned grey
 in that night.                                               
   In  the  morn  Turin  awoke  and found  that one  had tended

                                                                              
                                                                              
  his hand.  Though it  pained him  grievously, he  returned in                
  triumph filled with  joy for  the death  of Glomund,  his an-                
  cient foe; and he asked for Niniel, but none dared  tell him,                
  save Brandir.  And Brandir  distraught with  grief reproached                
  him;  wherefore  Turin  slew him,  and taking  Gurtholfin red                
  with blood bade it slay  its master;  and the  sword answered                
  that his blood was as sweet as any other, and it  pierced him                
  to the heart as he fell upon it.                                             
      Turin they buried nigh  to the  edge of  Silver-bowl, and                
  his  name  Turin  Turambar  was  carved  there  upon  a rock.                
  Beneath  was  written  Nienor  Niniel.  Men changed  the name                
  of that place thereafter to Nen-Girith, the Shuddering Water.                
      So ended the tale of Turin the unhappy;  and it  has ever                
  been held the worst of the  works of  Morgoth in  the ancient                
  world.  Some  have  said  that  Morwen,   wandering  woefully                
  from  Thingol's  halls, when  she found  Neinor not  there on                
  her return, came on a  time to  that stone  and read  it, and                
  there died.                                                                  
                                                                              
                                       *                                       
                                                                              
  1. Flinding > Gwindor at all occurrences, as previously (late changes).
  2. in days long gone > in days before (late change).                     
  3. Out of loyalty > Out of loyalty to Gwindor (late change).                  
  4. Added here: but the sword he named Gurtholfin, Wand-of-Death.               
  5. The  words  Brodda, who  had to  wife struck  through (late  change), so
       the sentence  reads leaving  her goods  in the  care of  her kinswoman
       Airin                                                                   
  6. Flinding son of Fuilin > Gwindor son of Guilin (late change).              
       This passage, from and he was halted moveless, was extended:            
                                                                              
          and long  time he  stood there  as one  graven of  stone silent  before the
          dragon,   until   they   two   alone   were  left   before  the   doors  of
          Nargothrond. Then Glomund taunted him, &c.                           
                                                                              
  8. and against his last word to Flinding struck though.                       
  9. This sentence rewritten to read:                                           
                                                                              
          Then Turin knew the lie of Glomund, and  in his  anguish and  in his
          wrath for the evil that had been done to his  mother he  slew Brodda
          at his  own board  and fought  his way  from the  house; and  in the
          night, a hunted man, he fled from Hithlum.                            

                                     
                                                                           
 10. Beleriand here as originally typed, not emended from Broseliand; and
     subsequently.                                                          
 11.  and  among them  Finduilas had  been pierced  > and  Finduilas they
     fastened to a tree and pierced                                         
 12. Turumarth > Turamarth                                                   
 13. This passage, from came ever into safety there, was altered thus;       
                                                                           
       ... came ever into safety in Doriath. Thus was  it known  to Thingol
       and to Morwen that  Mormaglir was  Turin himself;  and yet  too late
       they learned this; for some said that he was  slain, and  some told,
       &c.                                                                  
                                                                           
 14. Ealls  of  Silver-bowl  >  Falls of  Celebros, Foam-silver;  and subse-
     quently Silver-bowl > Celebros.                                        
                                                                           
                                     14.                                    
                                                                           
   But  after  the  death of  Turin and  Nienor, Hurin  was re-             
 leased  by  Morgoth,  for  Morgoth thought  still to  use him;             
 and  he  accused  Thingol  of  faint  heart and  ungentleness,             
 saying  that  only thus  had his  purpose been  brought about;             
 and  Hurin  distraught,  wandering  bowed  with   grief,  pon-             
 dered these words,  and was  embittered by  them, for  such is             
 the way of the lies of Morgoth.                                            
   Hurin  gathered  therefore  a  few  outlaws  of   the  woods             
 unto  him,  and  they  came  to  Nargothrond,  which   as  yet             
 none, Orc, Elf, or  Man, had  dared to  plunder, for  dread of             
 the spirit  of  Glomund  and  his very  memory. But  one Mim             
 the Dwarf they found there. This  is the  first coming  of the             
 Dwarves into these tales' of the ancient world; and it is said             
 that  Dwarves  first  spread  west  from  Erydluin,(2) the Blue             
 Mountains,  into  Beleriand  after  the  Battle  of Unnumbered             
 Tears.  Now  Mim  had   found  the   halls  and   treasure  of             
 Nargothrond  unguarded;  and  he  took  possession   of  them,             
 and sat there in joy fingering the gold and gems,  and letting             
 them  run  ever  through  his  hands;  and  he  bound  them to             
 himself  with  many  spells.  But  the folk  of Mim  were few,             
 and  the outlaws  filled with  the lust  of the  treasure slew             
 them, though  Hurin  would  have  stayed  them,  and   at  his             
 death Mim cursed the gold.                                                 
   And  the  curse  came  upon  the  possessors  in  this wise.             

 Each  one of  Hurin's company  died or  was slain  in quarrels
 upon  the road;  but Hurin  went unto  Thingol and  sought his
 aid, and the folk of Thingol  bore the  treasure to  the Thou-
 sand  Caves.  Then  Hurin  bade  cast  it all  at the  feet of
 Thingol, and he reproached  the Elfking  with wild  and bitter
 words. 'Receive thou,' said he, 'thy fee for thy  fair keeping
 of my wife and kin.'                                         
   Yet  Thingol  would  not take  the hoard,  and long  he bore
 with  Hurin;  but  Hurin  scorned him,  and wandered  forth in
 quest of Morwen his wife,  but it  is not  said that  he found
 her  ever  upon the  earth; and  some have  said that  he cast
 himself at last into the western sea, and so ended  the might-
 iest of the warriors of mortal Men.                          
   Then  the  enchantment  of  the  accursed dragon  gold began
 to fall even upon the  king of  Doriath, and  long he  sat and
 gazed upon it, and the seed of the  love of  gold that  was in
 his  heart  was  waked  to   growth.  Wherefore   he  summoned
 the greatest of  all craftsmen  that now  were in  the western
 world,  since  Nargothrond  was  no  more  (and  Gondolin  was
 not  known),  the Dwarves  of Nogrod  and Belegost,  that they
 might  fashion  the  gold and  silver and  the gems  (for much
 was  yet unwrought)  into countless  vessels and  fair things;
 and  a  marvellous  necklace  of  great  beauty   they  should
 make, whereon to hang the Silmaril.                          
   But  the  Dwarves  coming  were  stricken  at once  with the
 lust and desire of the treasure,  and they  plotted treachery.
 They said  one to  another: 'Is  not this  wealth as  much the
 right of the Dwarves as  of the  elvish king,  and was  it not
 wrested  evilly  from  Mim?'  Yet  also  they  lusted  for the
 Silmaril.                                                    
   And  Thingol,  falling  deeper  into  the  thraldom  of  the
 spell, for his part scanted his promised reward for  their la-
 bour;  and  bitter  words  grew  between  them, and  there was
 battle  in  Thingol's  halls.  There  many  Elves  and Dwarves
 were slain, and  the howe  wherein they  were laid  in Doriath
 was  named  Cum-nan-Arasaith,  the   Mound  of   Avarice.  But
 the remainder  of the  Dwarves were  driven forth  without re-
 ward or fee.                                                 

    Therefore   gathering   new   forces   in   Nogrod   and   in
  Belegost they returned at  length, and  aided by  the treachery
  of  certain Elves  on whom  the lust  of the  accursed treasure
  had fallen they passed into Doriath  secretly. There  they sur-
  prised  Thingol  upon  a  hunt  with   but  small   company  of
  arms;  and Thingol  was slain,  and the  fortress of  the Thou-
  sand  Caves  taken  at  unawares  and  plundered;  and  so  was
  brought well nigh to  ruin the  glory of  Doriath, and  but one
  stronghold  of  the  Elves  against  Morgoth now  remained, and
  their twilight was nigh at hand.                               
    Queen  Melian  the  Dwarves  could  not  seize  or  harm, and
  she  went  forth  to  seek  Beren and  Luthien. Now  the Dwarf-
  road  to  Nogrod  and  Belegost  in  the Blue  Mountains passed
  through  East  Beleriand   and  the   woods  about   the  River
  Ascar,(3) where   aforetime   were   the  hunting   grounds  of
  Damrod  and  Diriel,  sons  of  Feanor. To  the south  of those
  lands  between  the  river and  the mountains  lay the  land of
  Assariad,  and  there (4) lived  and wandered  still in  peace and
  bliss  Beren  and  Luthien,  in  that  time  of  respite  which
  Luthien  had  won,  ere both  should die;  and their  folk were
  the Green Elves  of the  South, who  were not  of the  Elves of
  Cor,'  nor of  Doriath, though  many had  fought at  the Battle
  of  Unnumbered  Tears.  But  Beren  went  no  more to  war, and
  his land was filled with  loveliness and  a wealth  of flowers;
  and  while  Beren  was  and  Luthien  remained  Men  called  it
  oft Cuilwarthien,(6) the Land of the Dead that Live.             
    To  the  north  of  that region  is a  ford across  the river
  Ascar, near to its joining with Duilwen (7) that falls in torrents
  from  the  mountains; and  that ford  is named  Sarn-athra,(8) the
  Ford  of  Stones.  This  ford  the Dwarves  must past  ere they
  reached their homes," and  there Beren  fought his  last fight,
  warned  of  their  approach  by  Melian.  In  that  battle  the
  Green  Elves  took  the  Dwarves  unawares  as  they   were  in
  the midst of their passage, laden with  their plunder;  and the
  Dwarvish chiefs were slain, and well nigh  all their  host. But
  Beren  took  the Nauglafring,  o the  Necklace of  the Dwarves,
  whereon was hung the  Silmaril; and  it is  said and  sung that
  Luthien  wearing  that  necklace  and  that  immortal  jewel on

  her white breast was the  vision of  greatest beauty  and glory
  that  has ever  been seen  outside the  realms of  Valinor, and
  that for a while the  Land of  the Dead  that Live  became like
  a  vision of  the land  of the  Gods, and  no places  have been
  since so fair, so fruitful, or so filled with light.           
    Yet  Melian  warned  them  ever  of the  curse that  lay upon
  the  treasure  and  upon  the Silmaril.  The treasure  they had
  drowned  indeed  in  the  river  Ascar,   and  named   it  anew
  Rathlorion,(11) Golden-Bed,  yet  the  Silmaril   they  retained.
  And in time the brief  hour of  the loveliness  of the  land of
  Rathlorion  departed.  For  Luthien  faded  as Mandos  had spo-
  ken,  even  as  the  Elves  of  later  days  faded,   when  Men
  waxed  strong  and  usurped  the  goodness  of  the  earth; and
  she  vanished  from  the  world;  and  Beren  died,   and  none
  know where their meeting shall be again."                      
    Thereafter  was  Dior  Thingol's  heir,  child  of  Beren and
  Luthien, king in the woods, most  fair of  all the  children of
  the  world,  for  his race  was threefold:  of the  fairest and
  goodliest of Men, and of the Elves, and  of the  spirits divine
  of Valinor; yet it shielded him not from the  fate of  the oath
  of  the  sons  of  Feanor. For  Dior went  back to  Doriath and
  for  a  time  a  part  of  its ancient  glory was  raised anew,
  though  Melian  no  longer  dwelt  in that  place, and  she de-
  parted  to  the land  of the  Gods beyond  the western  sea, to
  muse on her sorrows in the gardens whence she came.            
    But  Dior  wore  the Silmaril  upon his  breast and  the fame
  of that jewel went  far and  wide; and  the deathless  oath was
  waked  once  more  from  sleep.  The  sons  of Feanor,  when he
  would  not  yield  the  jewel  unto them,  came" upon  him with
  all their host; and so befell the second slaying of Elf by Elf,
  and  the  most  grievous.  There  fell  Celegorm   and  Curufin
  and  dark  Cranthir,  but  Dior  was  slain,"  and  Doriath was
  destroyed and never rose again.                                
    Yet the sons of Feanor  gained not  the Silmaril;  for faith-
  ful servants  fled  before  them  and  took  with  them  Elwing
  the daughter  of  Dior,  and  she escaped,  and they  bore with
  them the  Nauglafring, and  came in  time to  the mouth  of the
  river Sirion by the sea.                                       

                                     *                                       
                                                                            
  1.   This is the first coming of the Dwarves into these tales > Now for the
       first time did the Dwarves take part in these tales                    
  2.   Eryd-luin > Ered-luin (late change).                                  
  3.   Ascar > Flend > Gelion at the first two occurrences, but left un-     
       changed at the third.                                                 
  4.   This sentence emended to read: To the south of those lands between    
       the river Flend [> Gelion ] and the mountains lay the land of         
       Ossiriand, watered by seven streams, Flend [> Gelion], Ascar,         
       Thalos, Loeglin [> Legolin ], Brilthor, Duilwen, Adurant. There leved,
       &c.                                                                   
         (The rivers were first written Flend, Ascar, Thalos, Loeglin,       
       Brilthor, Adurant. Duilwen was then added between Thalos and          
       Loeglin; then Legolin replaced Loeglin and Duilwen was moved to       
       stand between Brilthor and Adurant.)                                  
  5.   Cor > Kor, as previously.                                             
  6.   Men called it oft Cuilwarthien > Elves called it oft Gwenh-i-cuina    
       (see $10 note 15).                                                    
  7.   Duilwen > Ascar (see p. 285, entry Dwarf-road).                       
  8.   Sarn-athra > Sarn-athrad.                                               
  9.   ere they reached their homes > ere they reached the mountain passes
       that led unto their homes                                             
  10.  Nauglafring > Nauglamir at both occurrences (late changes).            
  11.  Rathlorion > Rathloriel at both occurrences (late changes).           
  12.  Added here:                                                           
                                                                            
          Yet it hath  been sung  that Luthien  alone of  Elves hath  been num-
          bered  among  our  race,  and  goeth  whither  we go  to a  fate beyond
          the world.                                                         
                                                                            
        A large pencilled X is made in the margin against the sentence in the
        typescript  beginning  For  Luthien  faded...;  in  my  father's  manu-
        scripts this always implies that there  is some  misstatement in  the text
        that requires revision.                                              
                                                                            
  13.   The words The sons of Feanor, when were struck out, and the sen-     
        tence enlarged thus:                                                 
                                                                            
          For while Luthien wore that peerless gem no Elf would dare assail  
          her, and not even Maidros dared ponder such a thought. But now     
          hearing of the renewal of Doriath and Dior's pride, the seven gath-
          ered again from wandering; and they sent unto Dior to claim their  
          own. But he would not yield the jewel unto them; and they came,    
          &c.                                                                
                                                                            
  14.   Added here: and his young sons Eldun and Elrun (late change).        

  [For much of this section  there exist  two typescript  texts, the
  later of the two being longer.  Subsequently there  is a  lot more
  of such replacement, and I shall call the earlier 'Q I', the later
  'Q II'. Q II is given after the notes to Q I.]                    
                                                                   
    Here  must  be  told  of  Gondolin.  The  great   river  Sirion,
  mightiest  in  elvish  song,  flowed  through  all  the   land  of
  Beleriand  and  its  course  was  south-west;  and  at  its  mouth
  was  a  great  delta  and  its  lower  course  ran  through  green
  and fertile lands, little peopled  save by  birds and  beasts. Yet
  the  Orcs  came  seldom  there,  for  it was  far from  the north-
  ern  woods  and  fells,  and  the  power  of  Ulmo  waxed  ever in
  that water, as it drew nigh  to the  sea; for  the mouths  of that
  river  were  in  the  western  sea,  whose  uttermost  borders are
  the shores of Valinor.                                            
    Turgon,  Fingolfin's  son,  had  a  sister,  Isfin   the  white-
  handed.  She  was  lost  in  Taur-na-Fuin  after  the   Battle  of
  Unnumbered  Tears.  There  she  was   captured  by   the  Dark-elf
  Eol,  and  it is  said that  he was  of gloomy  mood, and  had de-
  serted  the  hosts  ere  the  battle;  yet  he  had not  fought on
  Morgoth's  side.  But Isfin  he took  to wife,  and their  son was
  Meglin.                                                           
    Now   the   people   of   Turgon   escaping  from   the  battle,
  aided  by  the  prowess  of  Hurin,  as  has  been  told,  escaped
  from   the   knowledge   of   Morgoth   and   vanished   from  all
  men's  eyes;  and  Ulmo   alone  knew   whither  they   had  gone.
  Their  scouts  climbing  the  heights  had  come  upon   a  secret
  place  in  the  mountains:  a  broad  valley' entirely  circled by
  the hills,  ringed  about  it  in  a  fence unbroken,  but falling
  ever  lower  as  they  came  towards  the  middle.  In   the  mid-
  most  of  this  marvellous  ring  was  a  wide  land  and  a green
  plain,  wherein  was  no  hill,  save for  a single  rocky height.
  This  stood  up  dark  upon the  plain, not  right at  its centre,
  but nearest  to that  part of  the outer  wall that  marched close
  to  the  borders  of  Sirion.  Highest  were the  Encircling Moun-

 tains  towards  the  North and  the threat  of Angband,  and on
 their  outer  slopes  to  East  and North  began the  shadow of
 dread  Taur-na-Fuin;  but  they  were   crowned  with the cairn
 of Fingolfin, and no evil came that way, as yet.              
   In this valley the Gnomes  took refuge,'  and spells  of hid-
 ing  and  enchantment  were set  on all  the hills  about, that
 foes and  spies might  never find  it. In  this Turgon  had the
 aid of the messages of Ulmo, that came now up the river       
 Sirion;  for  his  voice  is to  be heard  in many  waters, and
 some  of  the  Gnomes  had  yet  the lore  to harken.  In those
 days Ulmo was filled with pity  for the  exiled Elves  in their
 need,  and  in  the  ruin  that  had  now   almost  overwhelmed
 them. He foretold that the fortress  of Gondolin  should stand,
 longest of all the refuges of the Elves against the might of
 Morgoth,'  and  like  Doriath  never  be  overthrown   save  by
 treachery  from  within.  Because of  his protecting  might the
 spells  of concealment  were strongest  in those  parts nearest
 to  Sirion,  though  there  the  Encircling  Mountains  were at
 their  lowest.  There  the  Gnomes dug  a great  winding tunnel
 under the roots of the hills, and  its issue  was in  the steep
 side, tree-clad  and dark,  of a  gorge through  which Sirion
 ran,  at  that  point  still  a  young stream  flowing strongly
 through the  narrow vale  between the  shoulders of  the Encir-
 cling   Mountains   and   the   Shadowy  Mountains,   in  whose
 northern heights it took its rise.                            
   The  outer  entrance  of  that  passage,  which they  made at
 first to be a way of secret issue for themselves and  for their
 scouts and spies, and for a way  of return  to safety  for fu-
 gitives, was guarded by their magic and the power of          
 Ulmo,4 and no evil  thing found  it; yet  its inner  gate which
 looked  upon  the  vale  of  Gondolin  was  guarded unceasingly
 by the Gnomes.'                                               
   Thorndor King of Eagles removed his eyries from            
 Thangorodrim  to  the  northward  heights  of  the  Encircling:
 Mountains,  and  there he  kept watch,  sitting upon  the cairn
 of King Fingolfin. But on the rocky hill amid the vale,       
 Amon  Gwareth,  the  Hill  of  Watch,  whose  sides  they  pol-

  
                                                                
 ished  to  the  smoothness  of  glass, and  whose top  they lev-
 elled,  the  Gnomes  built  the  great  city  of  Gondolin  with
 gates  of  steel,  whose  fame  and  glory  is  greatest  of all
 dwellings  of  the  Elves  in  the  Outer  Lands. The  plain all
 about they levelled, that it was as  smooth and  flat as  a lawn
 of grass  until nigh  unto the  feet of  the hills;  and nothing
 might walk or creep across unseen.                              
    In  that  city  the  folk  waxed  mighty, and  their amouries
 were  filled  with  weapons  and  with  shields,  for  they pur-
 posed  yet to  come forth  to war  when the  hour was  ripe. But
 as  the years  drew on  they grew  to love  that place,  and de-
 sired  no better.  and few  ever issued  forth,(6) they  shut them
 behind  their  impenetrable  and  enchanted hills,  and suffered
 ' none to enter, fugitive or foe, and tidings of the outer world
 came but faint and far, and  they heeded  them little,  and for-
 got   the   messages   of  Ulmo.   They  succoured   not  Nargo-
 thrond  or  Doriath,  and  the  wandering  Elves  knew  not  how
 to  find  them;  and  when  Turgon  learned  of  the  slaying of
 Dior,  he  vowed  never  to  march  with  any  son   of  Feanor,
 and closed  his realm,  forbidding any  of his  folk to  go ever
 forth.'                                                         
    Gondolin  now  alone  remained  of  all  the  strongholds  of
 the  Elves.  Morgoth  forgot  not  Turgon,  and knew  that with-
 out  knowledge   of  that   king  his   triumph  could   not  be
 achieved;  yet  his  search  unceasing   was  in   vain.  Nargo-
 thrond  was  void,   Doriath  desolate,   the  sons   of  Feanor
 driven  away  to a  wild woodland  life in  the South  and East,
 Hithlum  was  filled  with  evil  men,  and  Taurna-Fuin  was  a
 place  of  nameless  dread;  the race  of Hador  was at  an end,
 and  the  house  of  Finrod;  Beren  came  no  more to  war, and
 Huan  was  slain;  and  all  Elves  and Men  bowed to  his will,
 or  laboured  as  slaves  in  the  mines  and  smithies  of Ang-
 band,  save  only  the  wild  and   wandering,  and   few  there
 Were  of  these save  far in  the East  of once  fair Beleriand.
 His  triumph was  near complete,  and yet  was not  quite full.(8)
                                                                
                                *                                

                                                                           
                                                                             
  1. This sentence was rewritten thus:                                         
                                                                             
       Ulmo  alone  knew  whither  they had  gone; for  they returned  to the
       hidden city of Gondolin that Turgon had  built. In  a secret  place in
       the mountains there was a broad valley, &c.                            
                                                                             
  2. the Gnomes took refuge > Turgon had taken refuge                       
  3. At this point the replacement text Q II begins.                           
  4. the power of Ulmo > the power of Sirion beloved of Ulmo                
  5. The  following  passage was  added in  pencil in  the margin  without di-
     rection for insertion. For its place in Q II, where it is embodied in the
     text, see below.                                                         
                                                                             
       For   Turgon   deemed   after   the   Battle   of   Unnumbered   Tears  that
       Morgoth  had  grown  too  mighty  for  Elves  and  Men,  and  that  it  were
       better  to  ask  the  forgiveness and  aid of  the Valar  ere all  was lost.
       Wherefore  some  of  his  folk  would  at  whiles  go  down  Sirion,  and  a
       small  and  secret  haven  they  there  made,  whence  ever  and  anon ships
       would  set  forth  into  the  West.  Some  came  back  driven   by  contrary
       winds, but many never returned; and none reached Valinor.              
                                                                             
  6. Added here: and they sent no more messengers into the West;               
  7. Here the replacement text Q II ends.                                      
  8. Added at the end: In this wise came the fall of Gondolin.                 
                                                                             
                            $15 in the Q II version                           
                              (see note 3 above).                             
                                                                             
  and  like  Doriath  never  be  overthrown save  by treachery                
  from within. Because of his protecting might the  spells of"                
  concealment were strongest in those parts nearest to Sirion,                
  though there the Encircling Mountains were at their lowest.:                
  In that region the Gnomes dug a  great winding  tunnel under                
  the roots of the hills, and its issue was in the steep side,                
  tree-clad and dark, of  a gorge  through which  the blissful                
  river ran. There he was  still a  young stream,  but strong,                
  flowing down the narrow  vale that  lies between  the shoul-                
  ders of the Encircling Mountains and the Mountains of                       
  Shadow,  Eryd-Lomin,(1) the  walls   of  Hithlum,   in  whose                
  northern heights he took his rise.(2)                                        
    That passage they made at first to be a way of  return for                
  fugitives and for such as escaped from the bondage of                       
  Morgoth; and most as an issue for  their scouts  and messen-                

  gers.  For  Turgon  deemed,  when first  they came  into that
  yale  after the  dreadful battle,'  that Morgoth  Bauglir had
  grown too mighty for  Elves and  Men, and  that it  were bet-
  ter to seek the forgiveness and aid of  the Valar,  if either
  might be got, ere all was  lost. Wherefore  some of  his folk
  went  down  the  river Sirion  at whiles,  ere the  shadow of
  Morgoth yet stretched into the uttermost parts  of Beleriand,
  and  a  small  and  secret  haven  they  made  at  his mouth;
  thence  ever and  anon ships  would set  forth into  the West
  bearing  the  embassy of  the Gnomish  king. Some  there were
  that  came  back  driven  by  contrary  winds;  but  the most
  never returned again, and none reached Valinor.              
    The  issue  of  that  Way  of Escape  was guarded  and con-
  cealed by the mightiest  spells they  could contrive,  and by
  the  power  that  dwelt  in  Sirion beloved  of Ulmo,  and no
  thing of evil found it; yet its inner gate, which looked upon
  the  vale  of  Gondolin,  was  watched  unceasingly   by  the
  Gnomes.                                                      
    In  those  days Thorndor'  King of  Eagles removed  his ey-
  ries  from  Thangorodrim,  because of  the power  of Morgoth,
  and the stench and  fumes, and  the evil  of the  dark clouds
  that lay  now ever  upon the  mountain-towers above  his cav-
  ernous  halls.   But  Thorndor   dwelt  upon   the  northward
  heights of the Encircling  Mountains, and  he kept  watch and
  saw many things, sitting  upon the  cairn of  King Fingolfin.
  And  in  the vale  below dwelt  Turgon Fingolfin's  son. Upon
  Amon  Gwareth,  the  Hill  of   Defence,  the   rocky  height
  amidst the plain, was  built Gondolin  the great,  whose fame
  and glory is mightiest in song of all  dwellings of  the Elves
  these  Outer Lands.  Of steel  were its  gates and  of marble
  were its walls. The sides of the hill the Gnomes  polished to
  the smoothness of dark glass,  and its  top they  levelled for
  the building  of their  town, save  amidmost where  stood the
  tower and palace of the  king. Many  fountains there  were in
  that city,  and white  waters fell  shimmering down  the glis-
  tening  sides  of  Amon  Gwareth.  The  plain all  about they
  smoothed till it became as a  lawn of  shaven grass  from the

 stairways  before  the  gates  unto  the  feet of  the mountain       
 wall, and nought might walk or creep across unseen.                   
   In  that  city  the  folk waxed  mighty, and  their armouries       
 were  filled  with  weapons  and  with  shields; for  they pur-       
 posed at first to come forth to  war, when  the hour  was ripe.       
 But as the years drew  on, they  grew to  love that  place, the       
 work  of  their hands,  as the  Gnomes do,  with a  great love,       
 and  desired  no  better.  Then  seldom  went  any  forth  from       
 Gondolin  on  errand  of  war  or  peace  again.  They  sent no       
 messengers  more  into  the  West,   and  Sirion's   haven  was       
 desolate.  They  shut  them behind  their impenetrable  and en-       
 chanted  hills,  and  suffered  none to  enter, though  he fled       
 from  Morgoth  hate-pursued;  tidings  of  the   lands  without       
 came to them faint and far,  and they  heeded them  little; and       
 their  dwelling  became  as  a  rumour,  and  a  secret  no man       
 could  find.  They  succoured  not  Nargothrond   nor  Doriath,       
 and  the  wandering  Elves  sought  them  in  vain;   and  Ulmo       
 alone  knew  where  the realm  of Turgon  could be  found. Tid-       
 ings  Turgon  heard  of  Thorndor  concerning  the  slaying  of       
 Dior, Thingol's heir, and thereafter  he shut  his ear  to word       
 of  the  woes  without;  and  he  vowed to  march never  at the       
 side of any  son of  Feanor; and  his folk  he forbade  ever to       
 pass the leaguer of the hills.                                        
                                                                      
                      Changes made to this passage.                    
                                                                      
 1. Eryd-Lomin > Eredwethion                                            
 2. in whose northern heights he took his rise struck through.          
 3. This sentence marked with an X in the margin.                       
 4. Thorndor >  Thorondor throughout.                                  
                                                                      
                                   16.                                 
                                                                      
 [A  substantial  part  of  this  section  is again  extant both  in the
 original typescript (Q I) and in a replacement text (Q II).]          
                                                                      
   On a time Eol was lost in Taur-na-Fuin, and Isfin came              
 through great peril and dread unto Gondolin, and after her            
 coming  none  entered  until  the  last  messenger of  Ulmo, of       

 whom  the  tales speak  more ere  the end.  With her  came her
 son  Meglin, and  he was  there received  by Turgon  his moth-
 er's brother,(1) and though  he was  half of  Dark-elfin' blood
 he was treated as a prince of Fingolfin's  line. He  was swart
 but  comely,  wise  and  eloquent,  and  cunning to  win men's
 hearts and minds.                                            
   Now  Hurin  of  Hithlum  had  a  brother  Huor.  The  son of
 Huor   was  Tuor.   Rian  Huor's   wife  sought   her  husband
 among  the  slain  upon  the  field  of Unnumbered  Tears, and
 there bewailed him, ere  she died.  Her son  was but  a child,
 and remaining in Hithlum fell into the hands of  the faithless
 Men  whom  Morgoth  drove  into  that  land after  the battle;
 and he became a thrall.  Growing of  age, and  he was  fair of
 face and great of stature, and despite his grievous  life val-
 iant and wise, he  escaped into  the woods,  and he  became an
 outlaw  and  a  solitary,  living  alone  and  communing  with
 none save rarely wandering and hidden Elves.(3)'                
   On a time  Ulmo contrived,  as is  told in  the Tale  of the
 Fall  of Gondolin,  that he  should be  led to  a river-course
 that  flowed  underground from  Lake Mithrim  in the  midst of
 Hithlum into a great  chasm, Cris-Ilfing,(4) the Rainbow-cleft,
 through which a turbulent water ran at  last into  the western
 sea.  And  the name  of this  chasm was  so devised  by reason
 of the rainbow that shimmered ever in the  sun in  that place,
 because of the abundance of the  spray of  the rapids  and the
 waterfalls.                                                  
   In this way  the flight  of Tuor  was marked  by no  Man nor
 Elf;  neither  was  it  known  to  the  Orcs  or  any  spy  of
 Morgoth, with whom the land of Hithlum was filled.           
   Tuor  wandered  long  by  the  western   shores,  journeying
 ever South; and he came at last to the  mouths of  Sirion, and
 the sandy deltas peopled  by many  birds of  the sea.  There he
 fell  in  with  a  Gnome,  Bronweg,'  who  had   escaped  from
 Angband,  and being  of old  of the  people of  Turgon, sought
 ever to find the path  to the  hidden places  of his  lord, of
 which  rumour  ran  among  all  captives  and  fugitives.  Now
 Bronweg  had  come  thither  by  far  and  wandering  paths to
 the East, and little though any step back nigher to  the thral-

 dom from which he had come was to his liking, he pur-       
 posed now to go up Sirion and seek for Turgon in            
 Beleriand. Fearful and very wary was he, and he aided Tuor
 in their secret march, by night and twilight, so that they
 were not discovered by the Orcs.                            
   They came first into the fair Land of Willows, Nan-       
 Tathrin which is watered by the Narog and by Sirion; and
 there all things were yet green, and the meads were rich
 and full of flowers, and there was song of many birds; so
 that Tuor lingered there as one enchanted, and it seemed
 sweet to him to dwell there after the grim lands of the     
 North and his weary wandering.                              
   There Ulmo came and appeared before him, as he stood      
 in the long grass at evening; and the might and majesty of
 that vision is told of in the song of Tuor that he made for
 his son Earendel. Thereafter. the sound of the sea and the
 longing for the sea was ever in Tuor's heart and ear; and an
 unquiet was on him at whiles that took him at last into the
 depths of the realm of Ulmo.' But now Ulmo bade him         
 make all speed to Gondolin, and gave him guidance for the
 finding of the hidden door; and words were set in his       
 mouth to bear to Turgon, bidding him prepare for battle     
 with Morgoth ere all was lost, and promising that Ulmo      
 would win the hearts of the Valar to send him succour. That
 would be a mortal and a terrible strife, yet if Turgon would
 dare it, Morgoth's power should be broken and his servants
 perish and never after trouble the world. But if Turgon     
 would not go forth to this war, then he must abandon        
 Gondolin and lead his people down Sirion, ere Morgoth       
 could oppose him, and at Sirion's mouth Ulmo would be-      
 friend him, and lend his aid to the building of a mighty    
 fleet wherein the Gnomes should sail back at last to        
 Valinor, but then grievous would be the fate of the Outer
 Lands. Tuor's part if Turgon should accept the counsels of
 Ulmo, would be to go forth when Turgon marched to war       
 and lead a force into Hithlum and draw its Men once more,
 into alliance with the Elves, for 'without Men the Elves
 shall not prevail against the Orcs and Balrogs'.            

 This  errand  did  Ulmo  himself  perform out  of his  love of
 Elves  and  of  the  Gnomes,  and  because  he  knew  that ere
 twelve  years  were   passed  the   doom  of   Gondolin  would
 come, strong though it seemed, if its people sat  still behind
 their walls.                                                 
    Obedient  to  Ulmo  Tuor   and  Bronweg   journeyed  North,
 and  came  to  the hidden  door; and  passing down  the tunnel
 neath the hills they came to  the inner  gate and  looked upon
 the  vale  of  Gondolin,  the  city  of  seven  names, shining
 white  flushed  with  the  rose  of dawn  upon the  plain. But
 there they  were made  captive by  the guard  of the  gate and
 led  before  the  king. Tuor  spoke his  embassy to  Turgon in
 the great square of Gondolin before the  steps of  his palace;
 but  the  king  was  grown  proud  and  Gondolin  so  fair and
 beautiful and he was so trustful of  its secret  and impregna-
 ble  strength,  that he  and the  most of  his folk  wished no
 longer  to  trouble  with  the  Gnomes  and  Men  without, nor
 did they long more to return to the lands of the Gods.       
    Meglin  spake  against Tuor  in the  councils of  the king,
 and Turgon  rejected the  bidding of  Ulmo, and  neither did
 he go forth to war nor seek to  fly to  the mouths  of Sirion;
 but  there  were  some  of  his  wiser  counsellors  who  were
 filled with disquiet, and the king's  daughter spake  ever for
 Tuor. She was named Idril, one of the  fairest of  the maidens
 of the Elves of old, and folk called her  Celebrindal, Silver-
 foot, for the whiteness of  her slender  feet, and  she walked
 and danced ever unshod.                                      
    Thereafter  Tuor   sojourned  in   Gondolin,  and   grew  a
 mighty  man  in  form and  in wisdom,  learning deeply  of the
 lore  of  the Gnomes;  and the  heart of  Idril was  turned to
 him, and his to  hei. At  which Meglin  ground his  teeth, for
 he  loved  Idril, and  despite his  close kinship  purposed to
 Wed  her;  indeed  already  he  was planning  in his  heart to
 oust  Turgon and  to seize  the throne,  but Turgon  loved and
 trusted  him.  Tuor  wedded  Idril nonetheless,  for he  had be-
 come  beloved  by  all  the  Gnomes  of Gondolin,  even Turgon
 the proud,  save only  Meglin and  his secret  following. Tuor
 and  Beren  alone  of  mortal  Men ever  wedded Elves  of old,

  and  since Elwing  daughter of  Dior son  of Beren  after wed-
  ded Earendel son of  Tuor and  Idril, of  them alone  has come
  the  elfin  blood  into mortal  Men. But  yet Earendel  was an
  infant; and he was a child surpassing fair: a light was in his
  face  as  of  heaven,  and he  had the  beauty and  the wisdom
  of Elfinesse (7) and  the strength  and hardihood  of the  Men of
  old; and the  sea spoke  ever in  his ear  and heart,  even as
  with Tuor his father.                                         
    On  a  time when  Earendel was  yet young,  and the  days of
  Gondolin were full  of joy  and peace  (and yet  Idril's heart
  misgave  her,  and foreboding  crept upon  her spirit  like a
  cloud),  Meglin  was  lost.  Now   Meglin  loved   mining  and
  quarrying after metals above  other craft;  and he  was master
  and  leader  of  the  Gnomes  who  worked  in   the  mountains
  distant from the city, seeking for metals for  their smithying
  of  things  both  of  peace  and  war.  But often  Meglin went
  with few of his folk beyond the leaguer  of the  hills, though
  the  king  knew not  that his  bidding was  defied; and  so it
  came to pass, as fate willed, that  Meglin was  taken prisoner
  by  the  Orcs  and  taken  before   Morgoth.  Meglin   was  no
  weakling  or  craven,  but  the   torment  wherewith   he  was
  threatened  cowed  his  soul,  and he  purchased his  life and
  freedom  by  revealing  unto  Morgoth  the  place  of Gondolin
  and the ways  whereby it  might be  found and  assailed. Great
  indeed  was  the  joy of  Morgoth; and  to Meglin  he promised
  the lordship of Gondolin,  as his  vassal, and  the possession
  of Idril, when that city should be taken.  Lust for  Idril and
  hatred of Tuor  led Meglin  the easier  to his  foul treachery.
  But  Morgoth  sent  him  back  to  Gondolin,  lest  men should
  suspect the betrayal, and so  that Meglin  should aid  the as-
  sault  from  within  when  the  hour  came;  and  Meglin abode
  in the halls of the king with a smile on his face and  evil in
  his heart, while the gloom gathered ever deeper upon Idril-
    At  last,  and  Earendel  was  then  seven  years   of  age,
  Morgoth  was  ready,  and  he  loosed  upon Gondolin  his Orcs
  and his Balrogs  and his  serpents; and  of these,  dragons of
  many  and  dire  shapes  were  now devised  for the  taking of
  the city. The  host of  Morgoth came  over the  Northern hills

 where the  height was  greatest and  the watch  less vigilant,
 and it came at night at a time of festival, when all  the folk
 of  Gondolin  were  upon  the  walls to  wait upon  the rising
 sun and sing their songs at its uplifting; for the  morrow was
 the  feast  which  they  named  the Gates  of Summer.  But the
 red light mounted the hills in the North and not in  the East;
 and there was no stay  in the  advance of  the foe  until they
 were  beneath  the  very  walls  of  Gondolin,   and  Gondolin
 was beleaguered without hope.                                
   Of the deeds of desperate valour there  done, by  the chief-
 tains of the noble houses  and their  warriors, and  not least
 by Tuor, is much told in The  Fall of  Gondolin; of  the death
 of Rog without the walls; and  of the  battle of  Ecthelion of
 the  Fountain  with  Gothmog  lord  of  Balrogs  in  the  very
 square of  the king,  where each  slew the  other; and  of the
 defence  of  the  tower  of Turgon  by the  men of  his house-
 hold,  until  the  tower  was overthrown;  and mighty  was its
 fall and the fall of Turgon in its ruin.                     
   Tuor sought to rescue Idril from the sack  of the  city, but
 Meglin  had  laid  hands  upon  her  and  Earendel;  and  Tuor
 fought on  the walls  with him,  and cast  him down  to death.
 Then  Tuor  and  Idril  led  such  remnants  of  the  folk  of
 Gondolin as they could gather  in the  confusion of  the burn-
 ing down a secret way that Idril had let  prepare in  the days
 of her foreboding. This was  not yet  complete, but  its issue
 was  already  far beyond  the walls  and in  the North  of the
 plain  where  the  mountains  were  long  distant   from  Amon
 Gwareth.  Those  who  would  not  come  with  them,  but  fled
 to the old Way of Escape that  led into  the gorge  of Sirion,
 were  caught  and  destroyed  by  a  dragon  that  Morgoth had
 sent to watch that gate, being apprised of  it by  Meglin. But
 of  the  new  passage  Meglin had  not heard,  and it  was not
 thought that  fugitives would  take a  path towards  the North
 and  the highest  parts of  the mountains  and the  nighest to
 Angband.                                                     
   The fume of the  burning, and  the steam  of the  fair foun-
 tains of Gondolin  withering in  the flame  of the  dragons of
 the North,  fell  upon the  vale in  mournful mists;  and thus

 
                                                               
 was  the  escape  of  Tuor  and  his  company  aided,  for then
 was still  a long  and open  road to  follow from  the tunnel's
 mouth  to  the  foothills  of  the  mountains. They  came none-
 theless  into the  mountains, in  woe and  misery, for  the high
 places  were  cold  and  terrible,  and  they  had  among  them
 many women and children and many wounded men.                  
   There  is  a  dreadful  pass,  Cristhorn (8) was it  named, the
 Eagle's  Cleft,  where  beneath  the  shadow  of   the  highest
 peaks a narrow path  winds its  way, walled  by a  precipice to
 the right and on the left a dreadful fall leaps into emptiness.
 Along  that  narrow  way their  march was  strung, when  it was
 ambushed  by  an  outpost  of  Morgoth's  power;  and  a Balrog
 was their leader. Then  dreadful was  their plight,  and hardly
 would it have  been saved  by the  deathless valour  of yellow-
 haired  Glorfindel,  chief of  the House  of the  Golden Flower
 of Gondolin, had not Thorndor' come timely to their aid.       
   Songs  have  been  sung of  the duel  of Glorfindel  with the
 Balrog upon a pinnacle  of rock  in that  high place;  and both
 fell to ruin in the  abyss. But  Thorndor bore  up Glorfindel's
 body  and  he  was  buried  in  a  mound  of stones  beside the
 pass, and there came after a  turf of  green and  small flowers
 like  yellow  stars  bloomed  there  amid  the   barrenness  of
 stone.  And  the  birds  of  Thorndor  stooped  upon  the  Orcs
 and  drove  them  shrieking back;  and all  were slain  or cast
 into  the  deeps,  and  rumour  of  the  escape  from  Gondolin
 came not until long after to Morgoth's ears.                   
   Thus  by  weary   and  dangerous   marches  the   remnant  of
 Gondolin  came  unto  Nan-Tathrin  and  there  rested  a while,
 and were healed of their  hurts and  weariness, but  their sor-
 row  could  not  be  cured.  There  they  made feast  in memory
 of  Gondolin  and  those  that  had  perished,   fair  maidens,
 wives,  and  warriors and  their king;  but for  Glorfindel the
 well-beloved  many  and   sweet  were   the  songs   they  sang
 And  there  Tuor  in  song  spoke  to  Earendel  his  son  of the
 coming  of  Ulmo  aforetime,  the  sea-vision  in the  midst of
 the land,  and the  sea-longing awoke  in his  heart and  in his
 son's.  Wherefore  they  removed  with  the  most  part  of the
 people  to  the mouths  of Sirion  by the  sea, and  there they

 dwelt,  and  joined  their  folk  to  the slender  company of                 
 Elwing daughter of Dior, that had  fled thither  little while                 
 before.                                                                       
   Then  Morgoth  thought in  his heart  that his  triumph was                 
 fulfilled, recking little of the sons of Feanor, and of their                 
 oath, which had  harmed him  never and  turned always  to his                 
 mightiest aid. And in his black  thought he  laughed, regret-                 
 ting not the one Silmaril he had  lost, for  by it  he deemed                 
 the last shreds of the elvish race should vanish yet from the                 
 earth and trouble it no more. If he knew  of the  dwelling by                 
 the waters of Sirion  he made  no sign,  biding his time, and                 
 waiting upon the working of oath and lie.                                     
                                                                              
                                       *                                       
                                                                              
      1. mother's brother > sister-son; no doubt as his sister-son was intended.
      2. Dark-elfin > Dark-elven                                                
 3. This  paragraph  was  largely  struck out,  as well  as some  hasty emenda-
      tions that had  been made  to it  (introducing the  idea of  Tuor's being
      born 'in the wild' and fostered by  Dark-elves, and  Rian's dying  on the
      Hill  of  Slain  - which  is here  called Amon  Dengin). The  passage was
      then rewritten:                                                          
                                                                              
        Now  Hurin  of  Hithlum  had  a  brother  Huor, and  as has  been told
        Rian his wife went  forth into  the wild  and there  her son  Tuor was
        born, and he was  fostered by  the Dark-elves;  but Rian  laid herself
        down  and  died  upon  the  Hill  of Slain.  But Tuor  grew up  in the
        woods of Hithlum, and he was  fair of  face and  great of stature, and
        valiant and wise; and he  walked and  hunted alone  in the  woods, and
        he  became  a  solitary,  living  alone and  communing with  none save
        rarely wandering and hidden Elves.                                     
                                                                              
 4. Cris-Ilfing > Kirith Helvin                                            
 5. Bronweg > Bronwe at the first two occurrences, but not at the third,        
      which occurs in the part replaced by the Q II text.                      
 6. At this point the replacement text Q II begins.                             
 7. Here the replacement text Q II ends.                                        
 8. Cristhorn > Kirith-thoronath                                                
 9. Thorndor > Thorondor, as previously.                                        

                     $16 in the Q II version                    
                        (see note 6 above).                     
                                                               
 But  now  Ulmo  bade  him  make  all  speed  to   Gondolin,  and
 gave  him  guidance  for  the  finding of  the hidden  door; and
 a  message  he  gave  him to  bear from  Ulmo, friend  of Elves,
 unto Turgon, bidding  him to  prepare for  war, and  battle with
 Morgoth  ere  all  was lost;  and to  send again  his messengers
 into  the  West.  Summons  too  should  he  send  into  the East
 and  gather,  if  he  might,  Men  (who  were   now  multiplying
 and  spreading  on  the earth)  unto his  banners; and  for that
 task  Tuor  was  most  fit.  'Forget,'  counselled   Ulmo,  'the
 treachery  of  Uldor  the  accursed,  and  remember  Hurin;  far
 without  mortal  Men  the  Elves shall  not prevail  against the
 Balrogs and  the Orcs.'  Nor should  the feud  with the  sons of
 Feanor be left unhealed; for this should  be the  last gathering
 of  the  hope  of  the  Gnomes,  when  every sword  should count.
 A terrible and mortal strife he foretold, but victory  if Turgon
 would  dare  it,  the  breaking  of  Morgoth's  power,  and  the
 healing  of  feuds,  and  friendship  between  Men   and  Elves,
 whereof  the  greatest  good  should  come  into the  world, and
 the  servants  of  Morgoth  trouble  it no  more. But  if Turgon
 would  not  go  forth  to  this  war,  then  he  should  abandon
 Gondolin  and  lead  his  people  down  Sirion,  and  build thee
 his  fleets  and  seek  back  to  Valinor and  the mercy  of the
 Gods.  But  in  this  counsel  there was  danger more  dire than
 in  the  other,  though  so  it  might  not  seem;  and grievous
 thereafter would be the fate of the Outer' Lands.              
  This  errand  Ulmo  performed  out  of his  love of  the Elves,
 and  because  he  knew  that  ere  many  years  were  passed the
 doom  of Gondolin  would come,  if its  people sat  still behind
 its walls;  not thus  should anything  of joy  or beauty  in the
 world be preserved from Morgoth's malice.                      
  Obedient   to   Ulmo   Tuor   and   Bronweg'   journeyed   North,
 and  came  at  last  to the  hidden door;  and passing  down the
 tunnel  reached  the  inner  gate,  and  were  taken by  the guard
 as prisoners. There they saw the fair  vale Tumladin (3) set like
 a  green  jewel  amid  the  hills;  and amidst  Tumladin Gondolin

  the great, the city of seven names,  white, shining  from afar,
  flushed  with the  rose of  dawn upon  the plain.  Thither they
  were led and passed the gates  of steel,  and were  brought be-
  fore the steps of the palace of the king. There Tuor  spake the
  embassy  of  Ulmo, and  something of  the power  and majesty
  of the Lord of Waters his voice had caught, so that  all folk
 looked in wonder on  him, and  doubted that  this were  a Man
 of  mortal  race  as  he  declared.  But  proud was  Turgon be-
 come,  and  Gondolin  as  beautiful  as  a  memory of  Tun, and
 he trusted in its secret and impregnable  strength; so  that he
 and the most  part of  his folk  wished not  to imperil  it nor
 leave it, and they desired not to mingle in  the woes  of Elves
 and  Men  without;  nor did  they any  longer desire  to return
 through dread and danger to the West.                          
    Meglin  spoke  ever  against  Tuor  in  the councils  of the
 king,  and  his  words  seemed  the more  weighty in  that they
 went  with  Turgon's  heart.  Wherefore  Turgon   rejected  the
 bidding  of  Ulmo;  though  some  there  were  of   his  wisest
 counsellors  who  were   filled  with   disquiet.  Wise-hearted
 even  beyond  the  measure  of the  daughters of  Elfinesse was
 the  daughter  of  the  king,  and  she  spoke  ever  for Tuor,
 though it did not  avail, and  her heart  was heavy.  Very fair
 and tall was she, well nigh of warrior's stature, and  her hair
 was  a  fountain  of  gold.  Idril  was  she named,  and called
 Celebrindal, Silver-foot, for  the whiteness  of her  foot; and
 she  walked  and  danced  ever  unshod  in  the white  ways and
 green lawns of Gondolin.                                       
    Thereafter  Tuor  sojourned  in  Gondolin,  and went  not to
 summon  the  Men  of  the  East,  for  the  blissfulness  of
 Gondolin,  the  beauty  and wisdom  of its  folk, held  him en-
 thralled. And he grew high in the favour of Turgon; for he
 became a mighty man in stature and in mind, learning      
 deeply of the lore of the Gnomes. The heart of Idril was
 turned to him, and his to her; at which Meglin ground his
 teeth, for he desired Idril, and despite his close kinship pur-
 posed to possess her; and she was the only heir of the king
 of Gondolin. Indeed in his heart he was already planning
 how he might oust Turgon and seize his throne; but Turgon

  the great, the city of seven names,  white, shining  from afar,
  flushed  with the  rose of  dawn upon  the plain.  Thither they
  were led and passed the gates  of steel,  and were  brought be-
  fore the steps of the palace of the king. There Tuor  spake the
  embassy  of  Ulmo, and  something of  the power  and majesty
  of the Lord of Waters his voice had caught, so that  all folk
 looked in wonder on  him, and  doubted that  this were  a Man
 of  mortal  race  as  he  declared.  But  proud was  Turgon be-
 come,  and  Gondolin  as  beautiful  as  a  memory of  Tun, and
 he trusted in its secret and impregnable  strength; so  that he
 and the most  part of  his folk  wished not  to imperil  it nor
 leave it, and they desired not to mingle in  the woes  of Elves
 and  Men  without;  nor did  they any  longer desire  to return
 through dread and danger to the West.                          
    Meglin  spoke  ever  against  Tuor  in  the councils  of the
 king,  and  his  words  seemed  the more  weighty in  that they
 went  with  Turgon's  heart.  Wherefore  Turgon   rejected  the
 bidding  of  Ulmo;  though  some  there  were  of   his  wisest
 counsellors  who  were   filled  with   disquiet.  Wise-hearted
 even  beyond  the  measure  of the  daughters of  Elfinesse was
 the  daughter  of  the  king,  and  she  spoke  ever  for Tuor,
 though it did not  avail, and  her heart  was heavy.  Very fair
 and tall was she, well nigh of warrior's stature, and  her hair
 was  a  fountain  of  gold.  Idril  was  she named,  and called
 Celebrindal, Silver-foot, for  the whiteness  of her  foot; and
 she  walked  and  danced  ever  unshod  in  the white  ways and
 green lawns of Gondolin.                                       
    Thereafter  Tuor  sojourned  in  Gondolin,  and went  not to
 summon  the  Men  of  the  East,  for  the  blissfulness  of
 Gondolin,  the  beauty  and wisdom  of its  folk, held  him en-
 thralled. And he grew high in the favour of Turgon; for he
 became a mighty man in stature and in mind, learning      
 deeply of the lore of the Gnomes. The heart of Idril was
 turned to him, and his to her; at which Meglin ground his
 teeth, for he desired Idril, and despite his close kinship pur-
 posed to possess her; and she was the only heir of the king
 of Gondolin. Indeed in his heart he was already planning
 how he might oust Turgon and seize his throne; but Turgon

 loved  and  trusted  him.  Nonetheless  Tuor   took  Idril  to wife;
 and  the  folk  of  Gondolin   made  merry   feast,  for   Tuor had
 won  their  hearts,  all  save  Meglin  and his  secret following,
 Tuor  and  Beren  alone  of  mortal  Men  had  Elves  to  wife, and
 since  Elwing  daughter  of  Dior  son   of  Beren   after  wedded
 Earendel  son  of  Tuor  and  Idril  of  Gondolin,  of  them alone
 has  come  the  elfin4  blood   into  mortal   race.  But  as yet
 Earendel  was  a  little  child:  surpassing  fair  was he, a light
 was  in  his  face  as  the  light  of  heaven,  and  he   had the
 beauty and the wisdom of Elfinesse.                              
                                                                 
                    Changes made to this passage                  
                                                                 
 1. Outer > Hither                                                 
 2. Bronweg > Bronwe (see note 5 above).                           
 3. Tumladin > Tumladen                                            
 4. elfin > elven                                                   
                                                                 
                                 17.                              
                                                                 
  [The whole of this section is extant in the two typescript ver-
 sions Q I and Q II.]                                             
                                                                 
   Yet  by  Sirion  there  grew  up  an  elfin  folk,  the gleanings
 of  Doriath  and  Gondolin,  and  they  took  to  the  sea  and  I
 the  making  of  fair  ships,   and  they   dwelt  nigh   unto its
 shores and under the shadow of Ulmo's hand.                      
   But  in  Valinor  Ulmo  spake  grievous  words  unto  the  Valar
 and  unto  the  Elves  the  kinsfolk  of  the  exiled  and  ruined
 Gnomes,  and  he  called  on  them  to   forgive,  and   to  rescue
 the   world   from   the   overmastering   might  of   Morgoth, and
 win   back   the   Silmarils  wherein   alone  now   bloomed  the
 light  of  the  days  of  ancient  bliss  when  the Two  Trees st(R)
 shone. And the sons of the Valar prepared for battle,            
 Fionwe  son  of  Tulcas  was  the  captain of  the host.  With hi(R)
 marched the host of the Quendi, the Light-elves, the folk        
 Ingwe,   and  among   them  such   of  the   race  of   the  Gnomes
 [as]  had  not  left  Valinor;  but   remembering  Swan   Haven the
 Teleri  came  not  forth.  Tun  was  deserted  and  the hill  of Cor
 knew  no  more  the  feet  of  the  elder  children  of  the world.

   In those  days Tuor  felt old  age creep  upon him,  and he
 could  not  forbear the  longing that  possessed him  for the
 sea; wherefore he built a great ship Earame,  Eagle's Pinion,
 and with Idril he set sail into the sunset and the  West, and
 came  no more  into any  tale. But  Earendel the  shining be-
 came the lord of the  folk of  Sirion and  took to  wife fair
 Elwing; and yet he could not rest. Two  thoughts were  in his
 heart blended as one: the longing  for the  wide sea;  and he
 thought  to  sail  thereon  following  after  Tuor  and Idril
 Celebrindal who  returned not,  and he  thought to  find per-
 haps the last shore and bring ere  he died  a message  to the
 Gods and Elves  of the  West, that  should move  their hearts
 to pity on the world and the sorrows of Mankind.            
   Wingelot he built, fairest of the ships of song,  the Foam-
 flower; white  were its  timbers as  the argent  moon, golden
 were  its  oars,  silver  were  its  shrouds, its  masts were
 crowned with jewels  like stars.  In the  Lay of  Earendel is
 many  a  thing  sung  of his  adventures in  the deep  and in
 lands untrod, and in many seas  and many  isles; and  most of
 how  he  fought  and  slew  Ungoliant  in  the South  and her
 darkness  perished,  and  light  came  to  many  places which
 had yet long been hid. But Elwing sat sorrowing at home.
   Earendel found not Tuor, nor came he  ever on  that journey
 to the shores of Valinor; and at  last he  was driven  by the
 winds back East, and he came at a time of  night to  the ha-
 vens of Sirion, unlooked for, unwelcomed, for they  were des-
 olate. Bronweg alone sat  there in  sorrow, the  companion of
 his father of old, and his tidings were filled with  new woe.
                                                            
   The dwelling of Elwing at Sirion's  mouth, where  still she
 possessed  the  Nauglafring  and  the glorious  Silmaril, be-
 came  known  to  the sons  of Feanor;  and they  gathered to-
 gether from their  wandering hunting-paths.  But the  folk of
 Sirion would not  yield that  jewel which  Beren had  won and
 Luthien had worn,  and for  which fair  Dior had  been slain.
 And so befell the last and cruellest slaying  of Elf  by Elf,
 the third woe achieved by the accursed oath;  for the  sons of
 Feanor  came  down  upon  the  exiles  of  Gondolin  and  the

 remnant  of  Doriath,  and  though  some  of their  folk stood
 aside  and some  few rebelled  and were  slain upon  the other
 part aiding Elwing against their own lords,  yet they  won the
 day.  Damrod  was  slain  and Diriel,  and Maidros  and Maglor
 alone now  remained of  the Seven;  but the  last of  the folk
 of  Gondolin  were  destroyed  or  forced  to depart  and join
 them to  the people  of Maidros.  And yet  the sons  of Feanor
 gained  not  the  Silmaril;  for  Elwing cast  the Nauglafring
 into the sea, whence it shall  not return  until the  End; and
 she  leapt  herself into  the waves,  and took  the form  of a
 white  sea-bird,  and  flew  away  lamenting  and  seeking for
 Earendel about all the shores of the world.                  
   But  Maidros  took  pity  upon  her  child Elrond,  and took
 him with him, and harboured  and nurtured  him, for  his heart
 was sick and weary with the burden of the dreadful oath.     
   Learning  these  things  Earendel  was  overcome  with  sor-
 row;  and  with Bronweg  he set  sail once  more in  search of
 Elwing and of Valinor. And it is told in  the Lay  of Earendel
 that he came at last unto the Magic Isles, and  hardly escaped
 their enchantment, and found  again the  Lonely Isle,  and the
 Shadowy Seas,  and the  Bay of  Faerie on  the borders  of the
 world. There he landed on the immortal  shore alone  of living
 Men, and his feet  clomb the  marvellous hill  of Cor;  and he
 walked in the deserted ways of  Tun, where  the dust  upon his
 raiment and his shoes  was a  dust of  diamonds and  gems. But
 he ventured not into Valinor. He came too  late to  bring mes-
 sages to the Elves, for the Elves had gone.(1)               
   He built  a tower  in the  Northern Seas  to which  all the
 sea-birds  of the  world might  at times  repair, and  ever he
 grieved for fair  Elwing looking  for her  return to  him. And
 Wingelot  was lifted  on their  wings and  sailed now  even in
 the  airs  searching  for Elwing;  marvellous and  magical was
 that ship, a starlit flower in the sky.  But the  Sun scorched
 it  and  the  Moon  hunted  it  in  heaven, and  long Earendel
 wandered over Earth, glimmering as a fugitive star.          
                                                             
                               *                              

   1. At the foot of the page is written very quickly and faintly in pencil:
                                                                            
        Make  Earendel  move  the  Gods.  And  it  is said  that there  were Men
        of Hithlum repentant of their evil in that  day, and  that so  were ful-
        filled  Ulmo's  words, for  by Earendel's  embassy and  the aid  of val-
        iant  Men the  Orcs and  Balrogs were  destroyed, yet  not as  utterly as
        might have been.                                                     
                                                                            
    At the top of the next page is written; Men turned  the [tide]  (the last
    word is illegible).                                                      
                                                                            
                           $l7 in the Q II version.                         
                                                                            
    Yet  by  Sirion and  the sea  there grew  up an  elfin' folk,            
  the gleanings of  Gondolin and  Doriath, and  they took  to the            
  waves  and  to  the making  of fair  ships, dwelling  ever nigh            
  unto the shores and under the shadow of Ulmo's hand.                       
    In  Valinor  Ulmo spoke  unto the  Valar of  the need  of the            
  Elves,  and  he  called  on  them to  forgive and  send succour            
  unto  them  and  rescue  them  from  the   overmastering  might            
  of  Morgoth,  and  win  back  the  Silmarils wherein  alone now            
  bloomed  the  light of  the days  of bliss  when the  Two Trees            
  still were shining. Or  so it  is said,  among the  Gnomes, who            
  after  had  tidings  of  many  things  from their  kinsfolk the            
  Quendi,  the  Light-elves  beloved  of  Manwe,  who  ever  knew            
  something  of the  mind of  the Lord  of the  Gods. But  as yet            
  Manwe  moved  not,  and  the  counsels of  his heart  what tale            
  shall tell?  The Quendi  have said  that the  hour was  not yet            
  come, and that only  one speaking  in person  for the  cause of            
  both  Elves  and  Men,  pleading  for  pardon  upon  their mis-            
  deeds  and  pity  on  their  woes, might  move the  counsels of            
  the  Powers;  and  the  oath  of  Feanor  perchance  even Manwe            
  could  not  loose,  until  it found  its end,  and the  sons of            
  Feanor  relinquished the  Silmarils, upon  which they  had laid            
  their ruthless claim. For the light which lit the Silmarils the            
  Gods had made.                                                             
    In those  days Tuor  felt old  age creep  upon him,  and ever            
  a  longing  for  the  deeps  of  the sea  grew stronger  in his            
  heart. Wherefore  he built  a great  ship Earame,  Eagle's Pin-            
  ion,(2) and with Idril he set sail into the sunset  and the West,            

                              
                                                             
 and came no  more into  any tale  or song.(3) Bright Earendel
 was then lord of  the folk  of Sirion  and their  many ships;
 and  he  took  to  wife  Elwing  the fair,  and she  bore him
 Elrond Half-elfin.(4) Yet Earendel could not rest, and his voy-
 ages about the shores of the Outer (5) Lands  eased not  his un-
 quiet.  Two purposes  grew in  his heart,  blended as  one in
 longing for the wide sea: he sought to sail  thereon, seeking
 after Tuor  and Idril  Celebrindal who  returned not;  and he
 thought to find perhaps the last shore and bring ere  he died
 the message  of Elves  and Men  unto the  Valar of  the West,
 that should move the hearts of Valinor and  the Elves  of Tun
 to pity on the world and the sorrows of Mankind.             
   Wingelot' he built, fairest of the ships of song, the Foam-
 flower; white  were its  timbers as  the argent  moon, golden
 were  its  oars,  silver  were  its  shrouds, its  masts were
 crowned with jewels  like stars.  In the  Lay of  Earendel is
 many  a  thing  sung  of his  adventures in  the deep  and in
 lands   untrodden,  and   in  many   seas  and   many  isles.
 Ungoliant' in the  South he  slew, and  her darkness  was de-
 stroyed, and light came to  many regions  which had  yet long
 been hid. But Elwing sat sorrowing at home.                  
   Earendel  found not  Tuor nor  Idril, nor  came he  ever on
 that journey to the  shores of  Valinor, defeated  by shadows
 and enchantment, driven by repelling winds, until  in longing
 for  Elwing  he  turned  him  homeward  toward the  East. And
 his heart bade him haste, for a sudden fear was fallen on him
 out of dreams, and the winds that before he had  striven with
 might not now bear him back as swift as his desire.          
   Upon  the  havens  of  Sirion  new  woe  had   fallen.  The
 dwelling  of  Elwing  there,  where  still she  possessed the
 Nauglafring'  and  the glorious  Silmaril, became  known unto
 the  remaining  sons  of  Feanor,  Maidros  and   Maglor  and
 Damrod  and  Diriel;  and they  gathered together  from their
 wandering  hunting-paths,  and  messages  of  friendship  and
 yet stern demand they sent  unto Sirion.  But Elwing  and the
 folk of Sirion  would not  yield that  jewel which  Beren had
 won  and  Luthien  had  worn,  and for  which Dior  the Fair 
 was slain; and least of all while Earendel their lord  was in

 the sea, for them seemed  that in  that jewel  lay the  gift of
 bliss and healing that had  come upon  their houses  and their
 ships.                                                       
   And so came in the  end to  pass the  last and  cruellest of
 the slayings of  Elf by  Elf; and  that was  the third  of the
 great wrongs achieved by the  accursed oath.  For the  sons of
 Feanor  came  down  upon  the  exiles  of  Gondolin   and  the
 remnant  of  Doriath  and  destroyed  them.  Though   some  of
 their folk stood aside, and some few  rebelled and  were slain
 upon  the  other part  aiding Elwing  against their  own lords
 (for  such  was  the  sorrow  and confusion  of the  hearts of
 Elfinesse  in  those  days),  yet Maidros  and Maglor  won the
 day. Alone they now  remained of  the sons  of Feanor,  for in
 that  battle Damrod  and Diriel  were slain;  but the  folk of
 Sirion perished or fled away, or departed of need to  join the
 people  of  Maidros,  who  claimed  now  the  lordship  of all
 the  Elves  of  the Outer  Lands. And  yet Maidros  gained not
 the  Silmaril, for  Elwing seeing  that all  was lost  and her
 child Elrond (9) taken captive, eluded the  host of  Maidros, and
 with the  Nauglafring upon  her breast  she cast  herself into
 the sea, and perished as folk thought.                       
   But  Ulmo  bore her  up and  he gave  unto her  the likeness
 of a great white bird, and upon  her breast  there shone  as a
 star the shining Silmaril, as she flew over the water  to seek
 Earendel  her  beloved.  And on  a time  of night  Earendel at
 the  helm  saw  her  come  towards  him,  as  a   white  cloud
 under  moon exceeding  swift, as  a star  over the  sea moving
 in strange  course, a  pale flame  on wings  of storm.  And it
 is  sung  that  she  fell  from  the air  upon the  timbers of
 Wingelot,  in  a  swoon, nigh  unto death  for the  urgency of
 her  speed,  and  Earendel  took  her unto  his bosom.  And in
 the morn  with  marvelling  eyes  he  beheld  his wife  in her
 own  form  beside him  with her  hair upon  his face;  and she
 Slept.                                                       
   But  great was  the sorrow  of Earendel  and Elwing  for the
 ruin of the havens of Sirion, and the captivity of  their son,
 for  whom  they  feared  death,  and  yet it  was not  so. For
 Maidros  took  pity  on  Elrond,  and  he  cherished  him, and

 love  grew  after  between  them, as  little might  be thought;
 but  Maidros'  heart  was sick  and weary"  with the  burden of
 the dreadful oath. Yet  Earendel saw  now no  hope left  in the
 lands  of  Sirion,  and  he  turned again  in despair  and came
 not home, but sought back once more to Valinor with           
 Elwing at his  side. He  stood now  most oft  at the  prow, and
 the Silmaril he  bound upon  his forehead;  and ever  its light
 grew  greater  as they  drew unto  the West.  Maybe it  was due
 in part  to the  puissance of  that holy  jewel that  they came
 in time to the waters that as yet no vessels save those of the
 Teleri  had  known;  and  they  came unto  the Magic  Isles and
 escaped their magic;" and they came into the Shadowy          
 Seas and passed their shadows; and they looked upon the       
 Lonely Isle and they tarried  not there;  and they  cast anchor
 in  the  Bay  of  Faerie" upon  the borders  of the  world. And
 the  Teleri  saw  the  coming  of  that  ship and  were amazed,
 gazing from afar upon  the light  of the  Silmaril, and  it was
 very great.                                                   
   But  Earendel  landed on  the immortal  shores alone  of liv-
 ing  Men;  and  neither  Elwing  nor any  of his  small company
 would he  suffer to  go with  him, lest  they fell  beneath the
 wrath  of the  Gods, and  he came  at a  time of  festival even
 as  Morgoth  and  Ungoliant had  in ages  past, and  the watch-
 ers  upon  the  hill  of  Tun  were  few,  for the  Quendi were
 most in the halls of Manwe on Tinbrenting's (13) height.           
   The  watchers  rode  therefore  in  haste  to Valmar,  or hid
 them in the passes of the hills;  and all  the bells  of Valmar
 pealed;  but  Earendel clomb  the marvellous  hill of  Cor" and
 found  it  bare, and  he entered  into the  streets of  Tun and
 they  were  empty; and  his heart  sank. He  walked now  in the
 deserted ways  of Tun  and the  dust upon  his raiment  and his
 shoes was a dust of diamonds, yet no one heard his call       
 Wherefore  he  went  back  unto  the  shores  and  would  climb
 once  more  upon  Wingelot  his  ship;  but  one came  unto the
 strand and cried unto  him: 'Hail  Earendel, star  most radiant,
 messenger most fair!" Hail thou bearer of light before the
 Sun  and  Moon,  the  looked-for  that  comest   unawares,  the
 longed-for  that comest  beyond hope!  Hail thou  splendour of

  the children of the world, thou  slayer of  the dark!  Star of
  the sunset hail! Hail herald of the morn!'                    
    And  that  was  Fionwe  the  son  of  Manwe,  and   he  sum-
  moned  Earendel  before  the  Gods;  and  Earendel  went  unto
  Valinor  and  to  the halls  of Valmar,  and came  never again
  back  into  the  lands  of  Men." But  Earendel spake  the em-
  bassy of the two  races'" before  the faces  of the  Gods, and
  asked  for  pardon  upon the  Gnomes and  pity for  the exiled
  Elves and for unhappy Men, and succour in their need.         
    Then  the sons  of the  Valar prepared  for battle,  and the
  captain  of  their  host  was  Fionwe  son  of  Manwe. Beneath
  his white banner  marche<i also  the host  of the  Quendi, the
  Light-elves, the folk  of Ingwe,  and among  them such  of the
  Gnomes  of  old  as  had  never  departed from  Valinor,"" but
  remembering  Swan  Haven  the  Teleri  went  not   forth  save
  very  few,  and  these  manned  the  ships wherewith  the most
  of that army carne into the Northern  lands; but  they them-
  selves would set foot never on those shores.                  
    Earendel was  their guide:  but the  Gods would  not suffer
  him  to  return again,  and he  built him  a white  tower upon
  the confines of the outer world in the Northern regions of
  the Sundering Seas: and there  all the  sea-birds of  the earth
  at  time=-  repaired.  And often  was Elwing  in the  form and
  likeness of  a bird;  and she  devised wings  for the  ship of
  Earendel, and it was lifted even into the  oceans of  the air.
  Marvellous and magical was that ship, a starlit flower  in the
  sky,  bearing  a  wavering  and  holy flame;  and the  folk of
  earth beheld it  from afar  and wondered,  and looked  up from
  despair, saying surely a Silmaril is in the sky, a new star is
  risen  in the  West. Maidros  said unto  Maglor:" 'If  that be
  the Silmaril that riseth by some  power divine  out of  the sea
  into which we saw it fall, then let us be glad, that its glory
  is  seen  now  by  many.'  Thus  hope arose  and a  promise of
  betterment; but Morgoth was filled with doubt.                
    Yet it is said that he looked not for the assault  that came
  upon  him  from  the  West.  So  great  was  his  pride become
  that  he  deemed  none  would  ever again  come against  him in
  open  war;  moreover  he  thought  that  he had  estranged the

  Gnomes  for  ever  from  the  Gods  and  from  their  kin, and               
  that content in their Blissful Realm the  Valar would  heed no               
  more  his  kingdom  in the  world without.  For heart  that is               
  pitiless counteth not the power that pity hath, of which stern               
  anger  may  be  forged  and a  lightning kindled  before which               
  mountains fall.                                                              
                                                                              
   1. elfin > elven                                                              
   2. Earame, Eagle's Pinion > Earrame, Sea-wing                               
   3. Added here:                                                               
                                                                              
        But  Tuor  alone  of  mortal  Men  was  numbered  among  the   elder  race,
        and  joined  with  the   Noldoli  whom   he  loved,   and  in   after  time
        dwelt still, or so it hath  been said,  [struck out:  in Tol  Eressea] ever
        upon  his  ship  voyaging  the  seas  of  Fairyland  [>  the  Elven-lands],
        or  resting  a  while  in  the  harbours  of  the  Gnomes  of  Tol Eressea;
        and his fate is sundered from the fate of Men.                         
                                                                              
  4. and she bore him Elrond Half-elfin > and she bore him Elros and             
  Elrond, who are called the Halfelven.                                        
  5. Outer > Hither at both occurrences.                                        
  6. Wingelot > Vingelot at all three occurrences; at the first only, Vingelot
  later > Wingilot                                                             
  7. Ungoliant > Ungoliante at both occurrences.                                
  8. Nauglafring > Nauglamir at both occurrences (cf. $14 note 10).             
  9. her child Elrond > her children Elros and Elrond                            
  10. This passage was rewritten thus:                                          
                                                                              
        But great was the sorrow of Earendel and Elwing for the ruin of       
        the havens of Sirion, and the captivity of their sons; and they        
        feared that they would be slain But it was not so. For Maglor took:
        pity on Elros and Elrond, and he cherished them, and love grew af-
        ter between them, as little might be thought; but Maglor's heart         
        was sick and weary, &c.                                                
                                                                              
  11. and they came  unto the  Magic Isles  and escaped  their magic  > and
      they came to the Enchanted Isles and escaped their enchantment          
  12. Bay of Faerie > Bay of Elvenhome                                          
  13. Tinbrenting 's > Tindbrenting 's                                          
  14. This paragraph was emended at different times, and it is  not perfectly
      clear what was intended. The first change was the addition,  after lest
      they fell beneath the wrath of the Cods,  of: And  he bade  farewell to

        all whom he loved  upon the  last shore,  and was  taken from  them for
        ever.  Subsequently  nor any  of his  small company  seems to  have been
        removed, with the  result: and  he would  nor suffer  Elwing to  go with
        him, lest she fell beneath the wrath of the Gods:  but the  previous ad-
        dition was not struck out.                                              
   15.  Cor > Kor, as previously.                                               
   16.  This passage was altered to read:                                       
                                                                               
          Wherefore  he  turned  back towards  the shores  thinking to  set sail
          once  more  upon  Vingelot  his  ship;  but  one  came  unto  him  and
          cried: 'Hail Earendel, radiant star, messenger most fair!'            
                                                                               
   17. came never again back into the lands of Men > never again set foot        
   upon the lands of Men.                                                       
   18. races > kindreds                                                         
   19. Added here: and Ingwiel son of Ingwe was their chief;                     
   20. This passage, from the beginning of the paragraph, was extensively        
   rewritten:                                                                   
                                                                               
           In  those days  the ship  of Earendel  was drawn  by the  Gods beyond
           the edge of the world, and it was lifted even into the oceans  of the
           air. Marvellous and magical was that  ship, a  starlit flower  in the
           sky, bearing a wavering and  holy flame;  and the  folk of  Earth be-
           held it from afar and wondered,  and looked  up from  despair, saying
           surely a Silmaril is in the sky, a new star is risen in the West. But
           Elwing  mourned  for  Earendel yet  found him  never again,  and they
           are  sundered  till  the world  endeth. Therefore  she built  a white
           tower upon the confines of the  outer world  in the  Northern regions
           of the Sundering Seas; and  there all  the seabirds  of the  earth at
           times repaired.  And Elwing  devised wings  for herself,  and desired
           to fly to  Earendel's ship.  But [?she  fell back]  ... But  when the
           flame of it appeared on high Maglor said unto Maidros:               

                                        18.                                       

   [The whole  of this  section is  again extant  in the  two typescript        
   versions Q I and Q II.]                                                      
                                                                               
       Of  the  march  of Fionwe  to the  North little  is said,  for in        
   that  host  there  were  none  of  the  Elves   who  had   dwelt  and        
   suffered  in  the  Outer  Lands,  and  who  made  these   tales;  and        
   tidings  only  long  after  did  they  learn  of  these  things  from        
   their   distant   kinsfolk   the  Elves   of  Valinor.   The  meeting        
   of  the   hosts  of   Fionwe  and   of  Morgoth   in  the   North  is        

                                                            
                                                              
 named  the  Last  Battle,  the Battle  Terrible, the  Battle of
 Wrath  and  Thunder.  Great  was  Morgoth's  amaze   when  this
 host  came  upon  him  from  the  West,  and  all  Hithlum  was
 ablaze  with  its  glory, and  the mountains  rang; for  he had
 thought  that he  had estranged  the Gnomes  for ever  from the
 Gods and from  their kin,  and that  content in  their blissful
 realm  the  Gods  would  heed  no  further  his kingdom  in the
 world  without.  For  heart  that  is  pitiless counts  not the
 power that pity hath; nor foresees that of gentle ruth  for an-
 guish  and  for valour  overthrown stern  anger may  be forged,
 and a lightning kindled before which mountains fall.'         
   There  was  marshalled  the  whole  power  of  the  Throne of
 Hate,  and  well  nigh  measureless  had  it  become,  so  that
 Dor-na-Fauglith  might  by  no  means   contain  it,   and  all
 the North  was aflame  with war.  But it  availed not.  All the
 Balrogs  were  destroyed,  and  the  uncounted  hosts   of  the
 Orcs  perished  like  straw in  fire, or  were swept  away like
 shrivelled  leaves  before  a  burning  wind.  Few  remained to
 trouble  the  world  thereafter.   And  Morgoth   himself  came
 forth,  and  all  his dragons  were about  him; and  Fionwe for
 a moment was  driven back.  But the  sons of  the Valar  in the
 end  overthrew  them  all,  and  but  two escaped.  Morgoth es-
 caped  not.  Him  they  threw  down,  and  they bound  him with
 the  chain   Angainor,  wherewith   Tulkas  had   chained  him
 aforetime,  and  whence  in  unhappy  hour  the  Gods  had  re-
 leased him;  but his  iron crown  they beat  into a  collar for
 his  neck,  and  his  head  was  bowed  unto  his   knees.  The
 Silmarils Fionwe took and guarded them.                       
   Thus  perished  the  power   and  woe   of  Angband   in  the
 North and its multitude of captives came  forth into  the light
 again  beyond   all  hope,   and  looked   upon  a   world  all
 changed.  Thangorodrim  was  riven  and  cast  down,   and  the
 pits of  Morgoth uncovered,  roofless and  broken, never  to be
 rebuilt; but so  great was  the fury  of those  adversaries that
 all  the  Northern  and Western  parts of  the world  were rent
 and gaping, and the sea roared  in in  many places;  the rivers
 perished  or  found  new  paths,  the  valleys   were  upheaved
 and  the  hills trod  down; and  Sirion was  no more.  Then Men

 fled away, such as perished not  in the  ruin of  those days,
 and long  was it  ere they  came back  over the  mountains to
 where  Beleriand  once  had been,  and not  till the  tale of
 those days had faded to an echo seldom heard.                
                                                             
   But  Fionwe  marched  through   the  lands   summoning  the
 remnants  of  the Gnomes  and the  Dark-elves that  never yet
 had  looked  on Valinor  to join  with the  captives released
 from Angband,  and depart;  and with  the Elves  should those
 of the race of Hador and  Beor alone  be suffered  to depart,
 if they would. But  of these  only Elrond  was now  left, the
 Half-elfin; and [he] elected  to remain,  being bound  by his
 mortal blood in love  to those  of the  younger race;  and of
 Elrond alone has the blood of the elder race and of  the seed
 divine of Valinor come among mortal Men.                     
   But Maidros would not  obey the  call, preparing  to fulfil
 even  yet  the  obligation  of  his  oath, though  with weary
 loathing and despair. For he would have given battle  for the
 Silmarils, if they were withheld from  him, though  he should
 stand  alone in  all the  world save  for Maglor  his brother
 alone.  And  he  sent  unto  Fionwe  and  bade  him  yield up
 those  jewels  which of  old Morgoth  stole from  Feanor. But
 Fionwe said that the right that  Feanor and  his sons  had in
 that  which  they  had  made,  had  perished, because  of the
 many  and  evil  deeds  they  had  wrought  blinded  by their
 oath, and most of  all the  slaying of  Dior and  the assault
 upon  Elwing.  To  Valinor  must  Maidros  and  Maglor return
 and  abide  the  judgement  of  the  Gods,  by  whose  decree
 alone would he  yield the  jewels to  any keeping  other than
 his own.                                                     
   Maidros  was minded  to submit,  for he  was sad  at heart,
 and he said: 'The  oath decrees  not that  we shall  not bide
 our  time, and  maybe in  Valinor all  shall be  forgiven and
 forgot,  and  we  shall  be vouchsafed  our own.'  But Maglor
 said that if once they returned  and the  favour of  the Gods
 was not  granted them,  then would  their oath  still remain,
 and be fulfilled in despair yet greater; 'and who can tell to
 what  dreadful end  we shall  come if  we disobey  the Powers

 in their own land,  or purpose  ever to  bring war  into their
 Guarded  Realm  again?'  And  so  came  it  that  Maidros  and
 Maglor  crept  into  the camps  of Fionwe,  and laid  hands on
 the  Silmarils;  and  they  took  to  their weapons  when they
 were  discovered. But  the sons  of the  Valar arose  in wrath
 and  prevented  them,  and  took  Maidros  prisoner;  and  yet
 Maglor eluded them and escaped.                               
   Now the Silmaril that Maidros  held -  for the  brothers had
 agreed each to take one,  saying that  two brethren  alone now
 remained,  and   but  two   jewels  -   burned  the   hand  of
 Maidros, and he had but one  hand as  [has] been  before told,
 and  he  knew  then that  his right  thereto had  become void,
 and that  the oath  was vain.  But he  cast the  Silmaril upon
 the ground, and Fionwe  took it;  and for  the anguish  of his
 pain and the remorse of his heart  he took  his own  life, ere
 he could be stayed.                                           
   It is told too of Maglor that he fled far, but he  too could
 not endure  the pain  with which  the Silmaril  tormented him;
 and  in  an  agony  he  cast it  from him  into a  yawning gap
 filled with fire, in the rending of the Western lands, and the
 jewel  vanished  into  the  bosom  of  the  Earth.  But Maglor
 came  never  back among  the folk  of Elfinesse,  but wandered
 singing in pain and in regret beside the sea.                 
                                                              
   In those days there was a  mighty building  of ships  on the
 shores  of the  Western Sea,  and most  upon the  great isles,
 which  in  the  disruption  of the  Northern world  were fash-
 ioned  of old  Beleriand. Thence  in many  a fleet  the survi-
 vors  of  the  Gnomes,  and  of the  Western companies  of the
 Dark-elves,  set  sail  into the  West and  came no  more into
 the  lands  of  weeping  and  of  war;  and   the  Light-elves
 marched  back  beneath  the  banners  of their  king following
 in the train of Fionwe's  victory. Yet  not all  returned, and
 some  lingered  many an  age in  the West  and North,  and es-
 pecially in the Western Isles. Yet  ever as  the ages  drew on
 and the Elf-folk faded on the Earth, they would still set sail
 at eve from our  Western shores;  as still  they do,  when now
 there linger few anywhere of the lonely companies.            

     But in  the West  the Gnomes  returned rehabited  for the               
 most  part the  Lonely Isle  that looks  both East  and West;               
 and  with  them  were  mingled  the   Dark-elves,  especially               
 such  as  had  once  belonged to  Doriath. And  some returned               
 even  to  Valinor,  and  were welcomed  amid the  bright com-               
 panies  of  the  Quendi, and  admitted to  the love  of Manwe               
 and the pardon of the Gods; and the Teleri forgave  their an-               
 cient bitterness, and the curse was laid to rest. But Tun was               
 never again inhabited; and Cor stands still a hill  of silent               
 and untrodden green.                                                        
                                         *                                  
   1. The content of this passage,  from Great  was Morgoth's  amaze..., has
     been given at the end of $17 in the Q II version, since it appears there
     before the words Of the march of  the host  of Fionwe  with which  I be-
     gin $18.                                                                
                                                                            
                           $18 in the Q II version.                          
                                                                            
     Of the march of the host of Fionwe to the North little is               
 said, for in his  armies carne  none of  those Elves  who had               
 dwelt  and  suffered  in  the  Outer'  Lands,  and  who  made               
 these tales; and  tidings only  long after  did they  leam of               
 these things from their kinsfolk the Light-elves  of Valinor.               
 But Fionwe  came, and  the challenge  of his  trumpets filled               
 the  sky,  and  he  summoned  unto  him  all  Men  and  Elves               
 from Hithlum  unto the  East; and  Beleriand was  ablaze with               
 the glory of his arms, and the mountains rang.                               
     The meeting of the hosts of the West and of the  North is               
 named the Great Battle,  the Battle  Terrible, the  Battle of               
 Wrath  and  Thunder.  There  was  marshalled the  whole power               
 of the Throne of Hate, and well nigh  measureless had  it be-               
 come, so that Dor-na-Fauglith could not  contain it,  and all               
   the North was aflame with war. But it availed not.  All the              
   Balrogs  were  destroyed,  and  the  uncounted hosts  of the              
   Orcs perished like straw in fire, or were swept  like shriv-              
   elled leaves before a  burning wind.  Few remained  to trou-              
   ble the world thereafter. And it is said that there many Men              

 of Hithlum  repentant of  their evil  servitude did  deeds of
 valour, and  many beside  of Men  new come  out of the East;(2)
 and  so  were fulfilled  in part  the words  of Ulmo;  for by
 Earendel son of  Tuor was  help brought  unto the  Elves, and
 by the swords  of Men  were they  strengthened on  the fields
 of war.' But Morgoth quailed and  he came  not forth;  and he
 loosed his last assault,  and that  was the  winged dragons.4
 So sudden  and so  swift and  ruinous was  the onset  of that
 fleet, as a tempest of a hundred thunders winged  with steel,
 that  Fionwe  was  driven  back;  hut  Earendel  came  and  a
 myriad of birds  were about  him, and  the battle  lasted all
 through  the  night  of  doubt.  And Earendel  slew Ancalagon
 the  black  and the  mightiest of  all the  dragon-horde, and
 cast  him  from  the  sky,  and  in  his  fall the  towers of
 Thangorodrim  were  thrown  down.  Then  the  sun rose  of the
 second day and the sons' of the Valar prevailed, and  all the
 dragons were  destroyed save  two alone;  and they  fled into
 the East. Then were all the  pits of  Morgoth broken  and un-
 roofed,  and  the might  of Fionwe  descended into  the deeps
 of  the  Earth,  and there  Morgoth was  thrown down.  He was
 bound'  with  the chain  Angainor, which  long had  been pre-
 pared, and his iron  crown they  beat into  a collar  for his
 neck,  and  his  head was  bowed unto  his knees.  But Fionwe
 took the two Silmarils that remained and guarded them.      
   Thus  perished  the  power  and  woe  of  Angband   in  the
 North, and  its multitude  of thralls  came forth  beyond all
 hope into the light of day, and they looked upon a  world all
 changed; for so great was the fury of those  adversaries that
 the  Northern  regions  of  the Western  world were  rent and
 riven,  and  the  sea  roared  in  through  many  chasms, and
 there was confusion and great noise; and the  rivers perished
 or found new  paths, and  the valleys  were upheaved  and the
 hills  trod  down;  and  Sirion  was no  more. Then  Men fled
 away, such as perished  not in  the ruin  of those  days, and
 long  was  it  ere  they  came  back  over  the  mountains to
 where  Beleriand once  had been,  and not  until the  tale of
 those wars had faded to an echo seldom heard.               
                       * * *
   But   Fionwe   marched  through   the  Western   lands  sum-
 moning  the  remnants  of  the  Gnomes,  and   the  Dark-elves
 that had yet not looked on Valinor, to  join with  the thralls
 released  and  to depart.  But Maidros  would not  harken, and
 he  prepared,  though  with  weary  loathing  and  despair, to
 perform  even  yet  the  obligation of  his oath.  For Maidros
 and Maglor  would have  given battle  for the  Silmarils, were
 they withheld, even  against the  victorious host  of Valinor,
 and though they stood alone in  all the  world. And  they sent
 unto  Fionwe  and  bade   him  yield   now  up   those  jewels
 which  of  old  Morgoth  stole  from  Feanor. But  Fionwe said
 that the right to  the work  of their  hands which  Feanor and
 his  sons  had  formerly possessed  now had  perished, because
 of  their  many  and  evil  deeds blinded  by their  oath, and
 most of all the slaying of Dior and  the assault  upon Elwing;
 the  light  of  the  Silmarils  should  go  now  to  the  Gods
 whence  it  came,  and  to  Valinor  must  Maidros  and Maglor
 return and there  abide the  judgement of  the Gods,  by whose
 decree  alone  would   Fionwe  yield   the  jewels   from  his
 charge.                                                      
   Maglor  was  minded  to  submit,  for he  was sad  at heart,
 and  he said:  'The oath  says not  that we  may not  bide our
 time, and maybe in Valinor all shall  be forgiven  and forgot,
 and we  shall come  into our  own.' But  Maidros said  that if
 once  they  returned  and the  favour of  the Gods  were with-
 held  from them,  then would  their oath  still remain,  to be
 fulfilled in despair yet greater;  'and who  can tell  to what
 dreadful  doom  we  shall come,  if we  disobey the  Powers in
 their own land, or purpose ever to bring war again  into their
 Guarded  Realm?'  And  so  it  came  that  Maidros  and Maglor
 crept  into  the  camps  of  Fionwe,  and  laid  hands  on the
 Silmarils, and  slew the  guards; and  there they  prepared to
 defend themselves to the  death. But  Fionwe stayed  his folk;
 and the brethren departed and fled far away.                 
   Each took a single Silmaril, saying that  one was  lost unto
 them  and  two  remained,  and  but   two  brethren.   But  the
 jewel  burned  the  hand  of Maidros  in pain  unbearable (and
 he had but  one hand  as has  before been  told); and  he per-

 ceived that it was  as Fionwe  had said,  and that  his right
 thereto  had become  void, and  that the  oath was  vain. And
 being in anguish and despair  he cast  himself into  a gaping
 chasm filled with fire, and  so ended;  and his  Silmaril was
 taken into the bosom of the Earth.                           
   And it is told also of Maglor  that he  could not  bear the
 pain with which the Silmaril  tormented him;  and he  cast it
 at last into the sea, and thereafter  wandered ever  upon the
 shore  singing  in  pain  and  regret  beside the  waves; for
 Maglor was the mightiest of the singers of  old, but  he came
 never back among the folk of Elfinesse.                      
                                                             
   In those days there was a mighty building  of ships  on the
 shores  of  the Western  Sea, and  especially upon  the great
 isles, which  in the  disruption of  the Northern  world were
 fashioned of ancient Beleriand.  Thence in  many a  fleet the
 survivors  of  the  Gnomes  and of  the Western  companies of
 the  Dark-elves set  sail into  the West  and came  not again
 into the lands  of weeping  and of  war; but  the Light-elves
 marched  back  beneath  the banners  of their  king following
 in the train of Fionwe's  victory, and  they were  borne back
 in  triumph unto  Valinor.' But  in the  West the  Gnomes and
 Dark-elves rehabited for the most part the Lonely  Isle, that
 looks both East and  West; and  very fair  did that  land be-
 come,   and  so   remains.  But   some  returned   even  unto
 Valinor, as all were free to  do who  willed; and  the Gnomes
 were  admitted  again  to the  love of  Manwe and  the pardon
 of the Valar, and the Teleri forgave their ancient grief, and
 the curse was laid to rest.                                  
   Yet  not  all  would  forsake  the  Outer Lands  where they
 had  long  suffered and  long dwelt;  and some  lingered many
 an age in the West and North, and  especially in  the western
 isles  and  the  lands  of  Leithien.  And  among  these were
 Maglor  as  has  been  told;  and with  him Elrond  the Half-
 elfin,'  who  after  went  among mortal  Men again,  and from
 whom alone the blood of the elder race'  and the  seed divine
 of  Valinor  have  come  among  Mankind  (for  he was  son of
 Elwing, daughter of Dior,  son of  Luthien, child  of Thingol

 and  Melian;  and  Earendel  his  sire   was  son   of  Idril               
 Celebrindal,  the  fair maid  of Gondolin).  But ever  as the               
 ages  drew  on  and  the  Elf-folk faded  on the  Earth, they               
 would still set sail at eve from our Western shores: as still               
 they  do,  when  now  there  linger  few  anywhere  of  their               
 lonely companies.                                                           
                                                                            
                                      *                                      
                                                                            
  1. Hither written above or replacing Outer at both occurrences.            
  2. In this sentence, in the first 'layer' of emendation,  many Men  > some
   few  Men  and  many  beside  of  Men  >  some  beside  of Men.  Later the
   sentence was rewritten rapidly in pencil:                                 
                                                                            
       And it is said that all that were left of the three  Houses of  the Fa-
       thers  of  Men  fought  for  Fionwe, and  to them  were joined  some of
       the Men  of Hithlum  who repenting  of their  evil servitude  did deeds
       of valour against the Orcs; and so were fulfilled, &c.                
                                                                            
     See note 3.                                                             
                                                                            
 3. Added here at the same time as the rewriting given in note 2:             
                                                                            
       But most Men, and especially those new come out of the East, were     
       on the side of the Enemy.                                             
                                                                            
 4. Added here:                                                               
                                                                            
       for as yet had none of these creatures of his cruel thought assailed
       the air.                                                              
                                                                            
 5. sons > children (late change).                                            
 6. and there Morgoth was thrown down altered and expanded thus:              
                                                                            
       and there Morgoth stood at last at bay; and yet  not valiant.  He fled
       unto  the  deepest  of his  mines and  sued for  peace and  pardon. But
       his  feet  were  hewn  from  under  him,  and  he  was hurled  upon his
       face. Then was he bound, &c.                                          
                                                                            
     Added here:                                                             
                                                                            
       Yet little joy  had they  in their  return, for  they came  without the
       Silmarils, and these could  not be  again found,  unless the  world was
       broken and re-made anew.                                              

            
                                                                    
 8. Half-elfin > Half-elven (cf. $17 in the Q II version, note 4).     
 9. the elder race > the Firstborn                                    
                                                                    
                                  19.                                
                                                                    
 [Q  I comes  to an  end soon  after the  beginning of  this section.]
                                                                    
   Thus  did  the  Gods  adjudge  when  Fionwe  and the  sons of     
 the  Valar  returned  unto  Valmar:  the  Outer   Lands  should     
 thereafter  be  for  Men,  the younger  children of  the world;     
 but  to  the  Elves  alone  should  the  gateways  of  the West     
 stand ever open; but if they  would not  come thither  and tar-     
 ried in  the world  of Men,  then should  they slowly  fade and     
 fail. And so hath it  been; and  this is  the most  grievous of     
 the fruits of the works and lies  of Morgoth.  For a  while his     
 Orcs  and  Dragons  breeding  again  in  dark  places  troubled     
 and affrighted the world,  as in  far places  they do  yet; but     
 ere the End all shall perish by the valour of mortal Men.           
   But  Morgoth  the  Gods  thrust  through  the  Door  of Time-     
 less Night into the  Void beyond  the Walls  of the  World; and     
 a guard is set for ever on that door. Yet the lies that             
                                                                    
 [Here the  Q I  text gives  out, at  the foot  of a  typescript page,
 but Q II continues to the end.]                                     
                                                                    
   This   was   the   judgement   of   the   Gods,  when   Fionwe  and
 the  sons  of  the  Valar  had   returned  unto   Valmar:  thereafter
 the  Outer   Lands  should   be  for   Mankind,  the   younger  chil-
 dren  of  the  world;  but  to the  Elves  alone  should   the  gate-
 ways  of  the  West  stand  ever   open;  and   if  they   would  not
 come  thither  and   tarried  in   the  world   of  Men,   then  they
 should  slowly  fade  and  fail.  This  is the  most grievous  of the
 fruits  of  the  lies  and  works  that  Morgoth  wrought,  that  the
 Eldalie  should   be  sundered   and  estranged   from  Men.   For  a
 while   his   Orcs   and   his   Dragons   breeding  again   in  dark
 places  affrighted  the  world,  and  in  sundry  regions do  so yet;
 but  ere  the  End  all  shall  perish  by   the  valour   of  mortal
 Men.                                                                
   But   Morgoth   the  Gods   thrust  through   the  Door   of  Time-

                                                 
                                                              
 less  Night  into  the  Void,  beyond the  Walls of  the World;
 and a guard is set for ever  on that  door, and  Earendel keeps
 watch  upon  the  ramparts  of  the  sky,  Yet  the  lies  that
 Melko,(1) Moeleg  the  mighty  and  accursed,   Morgoth  Bauglir
 the  Dark  Power  Terrible, sowed  in the  hearts of  Elves and
 Men  have  not  all  died,  and  cannot by  the Gods  be slain,
 and  they  live  to  work  much  evil even  to this  later day.
 Some  say  also  that  Morgoth  at whiles  secretly as  a cloud
 that cannot be seen or felt, and yet is, and the  poison, is,(2)
 creeps  back  surmounting  the  Walls  and visiteth  the world;
 but  others  say that  this is  the black  shadow of  Thu, whom
 Morgoth  made,  and  who  escaped  from  the  Battle  Terrible,
 and dwells in dark places  and perverts  Men-' to  his dreadful
 allegiance and his foul worship.                              
    After the triumph of the Gods Earendel sailed still  in the
 seas  of  heaven,  but  the  Sun  scorched  him  and  the  Moon
 hunted  him  in  the  sky,  [and  he  departed long  behind the
 world  voyaging  the  Outer  Dark  a  glimmering  and  fugitive
 star.](4) Then  the Valar  drew his  white ship  Wingelot-- over
 the land of Valinor, and they filled it with radiance  and hal-
 lowed  it,  and  launched  it  through the  Door of  Night. And
 long Earendel set sail into  the starless  vast, Elwing  at his
 side,(6) the Silmaril upon  his brow,  voyaging the  Dark behind
 the  world,  a glimmering  and fugitive  star. And  ever and
 anon  he  returns  and shines  behind the  courses of  the Sun
 and  Moon above  the ramparts  of the  Gods, brighter  than all
 other stars,  the  mariner  of  the  sky, keeping  watch against
 Morgoth  upon the  confines of  the world.  Thus shall  he sail
 until  he  sees  the  Last  Battle  fought  upon the  plains of
 Valinor.                                                      
    Thus  spake  the  prophecy  of  Mandos,  which  he  declared
 in  Valmar  at  the  judgement of the Gods,  and the  rumour of
 it was  whispered among  all the  Elves of  the West:  when the
 world  is  old  and  the  Powers   grow  weary,   then  Morgoth
 shall  come  back  through  the Door out of the Timeless
 Night;  and  he  shall  destroy  the  Sun  and  the  Moon,  but
 Earendel  shall  come  upon  him  as  a  white flame  and drive
 him from the airs. Then shall  the last  battle be  gathered on

                                                                   j
                                                                        
 the  fields  of  Valinor.  In  that day  Tulkas shall  strive with      
 Melko,  and  on  his  right  shall  stand Fionwe  and on  his left      
 Turin  Turambar,  son  of  Hurin,  Conqueror  of  Fate,(7) and  it      
 shall  be  the  black  sword of  Turin that  deals unto  Melko his      
 death  and  final  end;  and so  shall the  children of  Hurin and      
 all Men be avenged.                                                     
   Thereafter  shall  the  Silmarils'  be  recovered  out   of  sea      
 and  earth  and  air;  for  Earendel  shall  descend and  yield up      
 that  flame  that  he  hath  had  in  keeping.  Then  Feanor shall      
 bear  the  Three  and  yield  them  unto  Yavanna   Palurien;  and      
 she  will  break  them  and  with  their  fire  rekindle  the  Two      
 Trees,  and  a  great light  shall come  forth; and  the Mountains      
 of  Valinor  shall be  levelled, so  that the  light goes  out all      
 over  the  world.  In  that  light  the   Gods  will   again  grow      
 young,  and  the Elves  awake and  all their  dead arise,  and the      
 purpose  of  Iluvatar  be  fulfilled   concerning  them.   But  of      
 Men  in  that  day  the  prophecy  speaks   not,  save   of  Turin      
 only, and him it names among the Gods.'                                 
   Such  is  the  end  of  the tales  of the  days before  the days      
 in  the  Northern  regions  of  the Western  world. Some  of these      
 things  are  sung  and  said  yet  by the  fading Elves;  and more      
 still  are  sung  by  the  vanished  Elves that  dwell now  on the      
 Lonely  Isle.  To  Men  of the  race of  Earendel have they at      
 times  been  told,  and most  to Eriol,(10) who alone of  the mor-      
 tals  of  later  days,  and  yet  now  long  ago,  sailed  to  the      
 Lonely  Isle,  and  came  back  to  the  land  of  Leithien" where      
 he  lived,  and  remembered  things  that  he  had  heard  in fair      
 Cortirion, the city of the Elves in Tol Eressea.                        
                                                                        
                                    *                                    
                                                                        
  1. Melko > Melkor (but only at the first occurrence).                   
  2. and yet is, and the poison is > and yet is venomous                  
  3. This sentence was rewritten:                                         
                                                                        
       but others say that this is the black shadow of Sauron, who served
       Morgoth and became the greatest and most  evil of  his underlings;
       and Sauron escaped from the Great Battle, and dwelt in dark places
       and perverted Men, &c.                                            

                                                                            
                                                                             
  4. This sentence survives from an earlier point in the narrative in Q I      
     (end of $17, p. 180); in Q II the latter part of it, and he departed long
     behind the world voyaging the Outer Dark a glimmering and fugitive       
     star, was struck out, since it recurs immediately below.                 
  5. Wingelot not here emended (as in $17 in the Q II version, note 6) to      
     Vingelot.                                                                
  6. Elwing at his side struck out.                                            
  7. Added here in pencil: coming from the halls of Mandos                     
  8. Thereafter shall the Silmarils > Thereafter Earth shall be broken and     
     re-made, and the Silmarils                                               
  9. among the Gods emended in pencil to among the sons of the Gods            
  10. Apparently changed, in pencil, to Ereol.                                 
  11. Leithien emended in pencil to Britain.                                   
                                                                             
                            Commentary on the Quenta.                         
                                                                             
                                Opening Section.                              
                                                                             
    This passage,  to which  there is  nothing corresponding  in S,           
  may be compared with the  Lost Tales  I. 58,  66 -  7 on  the one           
  hand  and  with the  Valaquenta (The  Silmarillion pp.  25ff.) on           
  the other. This opening section of Q is the origin  and precursor           
  of the Valaquenta, as may be seen from the fall of  its sentences           
  and from many details of wording; while brief as it is  it offers           
  no actual contradictions to the text of the Lost Tales, save in a           
  few details  of names.  The Nine  Valar, referred  to in  S$1 and           
  in the alliterative Flight of the Noldoli (III. 133), are now for           
  the  first  time  identified. This  number was  to remain  in the           
  Eight  Aratar  (eight,  because  'one   is  removed   from  their           
  number', The Silmarillion p.  29), though  there was  much shift-           
  ing in the composition of the  number in  later writings;  in the           
  Lost  Tales  there  were  'four  great  ones'  among  the  Valar,           
  Manwe, Melko, Ulmo, Aule (I. 58).                                           
    The  name  of  Mandos in  the Lost  Tales, Vefantur  'Fantur of           
  Death', who 'called his hall with his own name  Ve' (I.  66, 76),           
  now  becomes  Nefantur. Nowhere  is there  any indication  of the           
  meaning of the first element: but  the new  name bears  a curious           
  resemblance  to  the  Old  English  name  of  Mandos  found  in a           
  list of such names  of the  Valar (p.  255): Nefrea  (Old English           
  ne(o)  'corpse',  frea  'lord').  The  late  change of  Tavros to           

  Tauros is made also to the B-text  of the  Lay of  Leithian (III.
  195, 282).                                                       
    Vana  (here  specifically  given  as Vana)  is now  the younger
  sister of Varda and Palurien (in the  Lost Tales  these goddesses
  are not said to be 'related'); in  The Silmarillion  Vana remains
  the  younger  sister  of  Yavanna.  We  meet  here   the  Gnomish
  name  of  Melko,  Moeleg,  which  the  Gnomes  will not  use; cf,
  the Valaquenta (p.  31): 'the  Noldor, who  among the  Elves suf-
  fered most from his malice, will not utter it [Melkor),  and they
  name  him  Morgoth,  the  Dark  Enemy  of  the World'.  The orig-
  inal Gnomish form was Belcha (II. 44, 67).                       
                                                                  
    In  this  section  of  Q,  before  the  replacement  page  (see
  note  2)  was  written,  the only  important developments  from S
  are  the  reduction  of the  periods of  the Trees  from fourteen
  hours to seven (and this only came in with  an alteration  to the
  typescript, see note 1), and the explicit statement  that Silpion
  was the elder of the Trees, and shone alone for a time (the      
  Opening  Hour).  It  is  also  said  that  the  Gnomes afterwards
  called the Trees Bansil and Glingol. In the tale of The Fall of
  Gondolin these names were expressly those of the Trees of        
  Gondolin (see II. 214 - 16), but (especially since Glingol occurs
  in a rejected reading in The Cottage of  Lost Play  (I. 22)  as a
  name of  the Golden  Tree of  Valinor) it  seems clear  that they
  were  the  Gnomish  names  of  the  original  Trees,  which  were
  transferred to their scions in Gondolin; in the Lay of  the Chil-
  dren of Hurin and in the Lay of Leithian, as  here in  Q, Glingol
  and Basil (later emended to  Glingal and  Belthil) are  the Trees
  of Valinor. But in The  Silmarillion Glingal  and Belthil  are the
  particular names of Turgon's images of the Trees in Gondolin..
    With the replacement  page in  this section  (note 2)  there are
  several  further  developments,  and  the passage  describing the
  periods of the Trees  and the  mingling of  the lights  is effec-
  tively the final form, only differing from that in The           
  Silmarillion (pp. 38 - 9)  in some  slight rhythmical  changes in
  the sentences. Yavanna no longer 'plants' the Trees, and         
  Nienna is present at their birth (replacing Vana of the Lost     
  Tales, I. 71-2); the Valar sit upon their 'thrones of  council' in

 the  Ring  of Doom  near the  golden gates  of Valmar;  and the
 moving  shadows  of  Silpion's leaves,  not mentioned  in S  or in
 Q as  first written,  reappear from  the Lost  Tales (see  I. 88).
 Here  also appear  the names  of Taniquetil,  Ialasse 'Everlasting
 Whiteness',   Gnomish   Amon-Uilas,   and   Tinwenairin   'crowned
 with stars'; cf. The Silmarillion p. 37:                           
                                                                   
    Taniquetil  the  Elves  name that  holy mountain,  and Oiolosse
    Everlasting  Whiteness,  and   Elerrina  Crowned   with  Stars,
    and many  names beside;  but the  Sindar spoke  of it  in their
    later tongue as Amon Uilos.                                     
                                                                   
  'Elves' is still used  here in  contradistinction to  'Gnomes'; on
  this usage see pp. 50 - l.                                        
                                                                   
                                  2.                                
                                                                   
    Q remains close to S  in this  section. I  have noticed  in com-
  menting  on  S  the  absence  of certain  features that  are found
  both in the Lost  Tales and  in The  Silmarillion: (1)  the coming
  of  the three  Elvish ambassadors  to Valinor,  (2) the  Elves who
  did   not   leave   the   Waters   of   Awakening,  (3)   the  two
  starmakings  of  Varda,  and  (4)  the  chain Angainor  with which
  Morgoth  was  bound; and  there is  still no  mention of  them. As
  I  have  said (p.  92), the  Quenta though  written in  a finished
  manner is still very  much an  outline, and  the absence  of these
  elements  may  be  thought  to  be  due  merely to  its compressed
  nature. Against this, however, in respect of (1), is the statement
  in Q  that Thingol  'came never  to Valinor',  whereas in  the old
  story (I. 115) as  in The  Silmarillion (p.  52) Tinwelint/Thingol
  was  one  of  the three  original ambassadors;  and in  respect of
  (3), Varda is  said in  Q to  have strewn  'the unlit  skies' with
  stars. As regards (4), it is said  later in  Q ($18)  that Morgoth
  was  bound  after  the  Last  Battle  'with  the  chain  Angainor,
  wherewith Tulkas had chained him aforetime'.                      
    The  constellation  of  the  Great  Bear  is called  the Burning
  Briar, and the Sickle of the Gods, in the Lay of Leithian.        
    It  is  said  here  that  the Elves  named themselves  Eldar, in
  contrast both to the old  idea (I.  235) that  Eldar was  the name
  given  to  them  by  the Gods,  and to  The Silmarillion  (p. 49),

  where Orome 'named them in their own tongue Eldar, the peo-     
  ple of the stars'.                                              
    The original statement in Q that Ingwe 'never came back       
  into the Outer Lands until these tales were near their end' is a
  reference to his leadership of the March of the Elves of Valinor
  in the second assault on Morgoth, in which he perished          
  (I. 129). The revised statement given in note 6, saying that
  Ingwe never came back from the West, is virtually the same as
  that in The Silmarillion (p. 53); see the Commentary on $17.
  The Gnomish forms of the names of the three leaders, Ing,       
  Finn, and Elu, are removed by the rewritings given in notes 6,
  8 and 11; and the use of Quendi for the First Kindred ('who     
  sometimes are alone called Elves', see p. 51) is displaced by
  Lindar in a late emendation (note 7), while Quendi reappears
  (note 5) as the name for all the Elves. These late changes be- .
  long to a new nomenclature that came in after the Quenta was,
  completed.                                                      
                                                                 
                                 3.                               
                                                                 
    While Q again follows S very  closely here,  there is  one im-
  portant narrative development: the first appearance of the story
  of Osse's sitting on the rocks of  the seashore  and instructing
  the  Teleri,  and  of  his  persuading  some  to remain  'on the
  beaches of the world' (the later Elves of the Havens of         
  Brithombar and Eglarest,  ruled by  Cirdan the  Shipwright). And
  with the late addition given in note 7 there appears the removal
  of  the First  Kindred (here  called the  Lindar) from  Tun, and
  their sunderance from  the Gnomes;  here there  is a  detail not
  taken up into subsequent  texts (probably  because it  was over-
  looked), that the Noldoli of Tun left the  tower of  Ingwe unin-
  habited, though they tended the lamp.                           
    As  in  $2,  Finn  was emended  to Finwe  (and Ing  to Ingwe),
  although  the  names  of  the  Noldorin princes  are said  to be
  given in Gnomish  form, and  Ylmir found  in S  is not  taken up
  in Q (similarly Oin  in S$3,  but Uinen  in the  opening section
  of Q).                                                          
    In the passage on the Noldorin princes (a later addition to S)
  Celegorm  becomes  the friend  of  Orome  (a  development  aris-
  ing from the later story of Huan, see $10); Finrod's third son,

 Anrod in S, becomes Angrod. On the change Finweg > Fingon         
 see p. 54.                                                        
                                                                  
                                 4.                                
                                                                  
   Many  touches  found  in  the  story  in  The  Silmarillion  now
 make  their  appearance in  Q (as  Feanor's wearing  the Silmarils
 at great feasts, Morgoth's sight of  the domes  of Valmar  far off
 in the mingling  of the  lights, his  laugh 'as  he sped  down the
 long  western  slopes',  his  great  cry  that echoed  through the
 world  as  Ungoliant's  webs  enmeshed  him).  I  have  noticed in
 my  commentary  on  S that  'the entire  story of  Morgoth's going
 to  Formenos  (not  yet  so  named)  and  his  speech  with Feanor
 before the doors has yet to  appear', and  it has  not done  so in
 Q; but the late interpolation given in note 6, stating that a mes-
 senger  came  to  the Gods  in council  with tidings  that Morgoth
 was  in  the  North  of  Valinor  and journeying  to the  house of
 Finwe,  is the  first hint  of this  element. In  The Silmarillion
 (p.  72)  messengers  came  to  the Valar  from Finwe  at Formenos
 telling of Morgoth's first coming there, and  this is  followed by
 the   news   from   Tirion   that  he   had  passed   through  the
 Calacirya  - a  movement that  appears at  this point  in S  and Q
 ('he  escaped  through  the  pass of  Kor, and  from the  tower of
 Ingwe the Elves saw him pass in thunder and in wrath').           
   There is no mention in S$4 of the great  festival at  this point
 in the narrative, and its appearance  in $5  looks like  an after-
 thought (see p. 55); that the same is  still true  in Q  shows the
 close dependence of the later version on the earlier at this stage
 in the work.                                                      
                                                                  
                                 5.                                
                                                                  
   In this section Q as usual contains many details and endur-     
 ing phrases not found in S, such as the wailing of the            
 Foamriders  beside  the  sea,  Feanor's  contempt  for  the  Valar
 'who cannot even keep their own realm from their foe', the
 drawn swords of the oath-takers, the fighting on 'the great arch
 of the gate and on the lamplit quays and piers' of Swanhaven,
 and the suggestion that the speaker of the Prophecy may have
 been Mandos himself. There was no mention in S of the       

  Gnomes   who   did   not   join   the  Flight   (they  being   those  who
  were  on  Taniquetil  celebrating  the  festival):  this   now  reappears
  from  the  Lost  Tales  (I.  176);  nor   was  it   said  that   not  all
  Fingolfin's people shared in the Kinslaying at Swanhaven.                 
    The  reference  to  'the  song  of  the  Flight  of  the   Gnomes'  may
  be   to   the   alliterative   poem   The    Flight   of    the   Noldoli
  (III.   131   ff.),   though   that  was   abandoned  at   the  Feanorian
  Oath:  perhaps  my  father  still  thought  to  continue  it one  day, or
  to write a new poem on the subject.*                                      
    The   pencilled   addition   'Finrod   returned'  (note   8)  indicates
  the  later  story,  according  to  which   Finarfin  (Finrod)   left  the
  march  of  the   Noldor  after   hearing  the   Prophecy  of   the  North
  (The  Silmarillion  p.  88);  in  S  as  emended  (note   9)  and   in  Q
  Finrod  only  came   up  with   Fingolfin  after   the  burning   of  the
  ships  by  the  Feanorians,  and  only  after  that  did   Finrod  return
  to Valinor.                                                               
    Helkarakse  reappears  in   Q  from   the  Lost   Tales,  but   is  now
  rendered  'the  Strait  of  the  Grinding  Ice',  whereas   its  original
  meaning  was  'Icefang',  and  referred  to  the  narrow  neck   of  land
  which   'ran  out   from  the   western  land   almost  to   the  eastern
  shores'   and   was   separated   from   the    Great   Lands    by   the
  Qerkaringa or Chill Gulf (I. 166 - 7 and note 5).                         
                                                                           
                                      6.                                    
                                                                           
    If  there  ever  was  a  'song  of  the  Sun   and  Moon'   (called  in
  The  Silmarillion  p,  99  by  an  Elvish  name,  Narsilion) it  has dis-
  appeared.   The   account   in   Q   scarcely   expands   the   extremely
  cursory  passage  in  S;  but  the  reason  now  given  for   the  change
  in  the  divine  plan  is  not  that  the  Gods 'find  it safer'  to send
  the  Sun  and  Moon  beneath  the   Earth:  rather   it  is   changed  on
  account   of   'the   waywardness   of   Tilion   and  his   rivalry with
  Urien',  and  still  more  because  of  the  complaints  of   Lorien  and
  Nienna   against   the   unceasing   light.   This   element   re-emerges
  from  the  Tale  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  (I.  189   -  90),   where  the
  Valar   who   protested  were   Mandos  and   Fui  Nienna,   Lorien,  and
                                                                           
  (*Later this becomes a reference to 'that lament which is named           
    Noldolante, the Fall of the Noldor, that Maglor made ere he was lost' (The
  Silmarillion p. 87); but I have found no trace of this.)                  

  Vana.  Likewise  the  names  Rana  and  Ur  given  by the  Gods to
  the  Moon  and  Sun go  back to  the old  story, where  however Ur
  is  said  to  be  the  Elvish name:  the Gods  named the  Sun Sari
  (I. 186 - 7).                                                     
    The   Sun-maiden   is   now  named   Urien,  emended   to  Arien
  (her  name  in  The  Silmarillion),  replacing Urwendi  (< Urwen);
  she is  said to  have 'tended  the golden  flowers in  the gardens
  of  Vana',  which  clearly  derives from  the tending  of Laurelin
  by Urwen(di) in the Lost Tales  (1. 73).  Tilion, the  hunter with
  the silver  bow from  the company  of Orome,  not Ilinsor,  is now
  the steersman of the Moon; but as I  noted in  I. 88,  Tilion, who
  in  The  Silmarillion  'lay  in  dreams  by  the  pools   of  Este
  [Lorien's  wife]  in Telperion's  flickering beams',  perhaps owes
  something to  the figure  of Silmo  in the  Lost Tales,  the youth
  whom  Lorien  loved  and  who  was  given  the task  of 'watering'
  Silpion.  The  words of  Q concerning  Tilion, *often  he wandered
  from  his  course pursuing  the stars  upon the  heavenly fields',
  and the reference to his rivalry with  Urien (Arien),  clearly de-
  rive from the passage in the old tale  (I. 195)  where it  is told
  of  Ilinsor  that he  was 'jealous  of the  supremacy of  the Sun'
  and that 'often he set sail in chase of [the stars]'.             
    A  trace  of  the  old conception  of the  Moon survives  in the
  reference to 'the  floating island  of the  Moon', a  phrase still
  found in The Silmarillion (see I. 202).                           
    The  occurrence  cf  the  name  Eruman  of  the  land  where Men
  awoke  (Murmenalda  in  Gilfanon's  Tale,  'far  to  the  east  of
  Palisor', I. 232 - 3, Hildorien in The Silmarillion, 'in the east-
  ward regions of Middle-earth') is strange, and  can only  be re-
  garded  as  a  passing  application  of it  in a  wholly different
  meaning, for it was in fact retained in a refinement of  its orig-
  inal sense  - the  land between  the mountains  and the  sea south
  of Taniquetil and Kor, also  in the  Lost Tales  called Arvalin
 (which   is   the  name   given  to   it  in   S  and   Q):  Eruman
 (>   Araman)   afterwards   became   the   wasteland   between  the
 mountains and the sea north of Taniquetil (see I. 82 - 3).         
    Though  the  phrase  in  Q  'the oldest  days before  the waning
 of  the  Elves  and  the  waxing  of mortals'  was retained  in The
 Silmarillion (p.  103), a  later addition  to Q  (note 6),  not re-
 tained,  is  more  explicit:  'for  measured time  had come  into the

  world, and the first of days; and thereafter the lives of the El-                
  der that remained in the  Hither Lands  were lessened,  and their                
  waning  was  begun.'  The  meaning  of  this is  undoubtedly that                
  measured  time  had  come  into  the Great  or Hither  Lands, for                
  the phrase 'thus  measured time  came into  the Hither  Lands' is                
  found in the earliest Annals  of Beleriand  (p. 353).  This seems                
  to relate  the waning  of the  Elves to  the coming  of 'measured                
  time',  and  may  in turn  be associated  with the  following pas-                
  sage from The Silmarillion (p. 103):                                             
                                                                                  
    From this time  forth were  reckoned the  Years of  the Sun.                  
    Swifter and briefer are they than the long Years of the Trees                  
    in Valinor. In that time the air of Middle-earth became heavy                  
    with the  breath of  growth and  mortality, and  the changing                  
    and ageing of all things was hastened exceedingly.                             
                                                                                  
  In the earlier writings the waning or fading of the Elves is al-                 
  ways, clearly if  mysteriously, a  necessary concomitant  of the                 
  waxing of  Men.* Since  Men came  into the  world at  the rising                 
  of the  Sun it  may be  that the  conceptions are  not fundamen-                 
  tally at variance: Men, and  measured time,  arose in  the world                 
  together, and were the sign for the declining of the  Elves. But                 
  it must  be remembered  that the  doom of  'waning' was,  or be-                 
  came,  a part  of the  Prophecy of  the North  (The Silmarillion                 
  p. 88):                                                                          
                                                                                  
    And those that endure  in Middle-earth  and come  not to                       
    Mandos shall grow weary of the world as with a great bur-                       
    den, and shall wane, and become as shadows of regret be-                       
    fore the younger race that cometh after.                                       
                                                                                  
    On the phrase used of Earendel: 'he came too late', see II.                    
  257; and cf. Q$17: 'He came too late to bring messages to the
  Elves, for the Elves had gone.'                                                  
                                                                                  
    ( *See II. 326. In one place it was said that the Elves 'cannot live in an air
    breathed by a number of Men equal to their own or greater' (II. 283), In the
  Lay of the Children of Hurin (see III. 54) appears the idea of 'the goodness of 
  the earth' being usurped by Men, and this reappears in $14 in both S and Q       
  (in S with the added statement that 'the Elves needed the light of the Trees'))

                                 7.                                
                                                                  
   In this section Q does scarcely  more than  polish the  text of
 S and embody the  later alterations  made to  it, and  the content
 has  been  discussed  in  the  commentary  on  S. In  the sentence
 added to the end of Q (note 6) there is  a clear  echo of  the old
 idea  of  the  fading  Elves  of  Luthany,  and  the Elves  of Tol
 Eressea  who  have  withdrawn  from  the  world  'and  there  fade
 now no more' (see II. 301, 326).                                  
                                                                  
   Q provides  here new  details but  otherwise follows  S closely.
 The site of the First Battle (by  later interpolation  called 'The
 Battle under Stars') is now in the great Northern plain, still un-
 named  before  its  desolation,  when  it  became Dor-na-Fauglith;
 in  The  Silmnrillion  (p.  106)  the  Orcs  attacked  through the
 passes  of  the  Mountains  of  Shadow and  the battle  was fought
 'on  the  grey fields  of Mithrim'.  Feanor's sight  of Thangoro-
 drim  as  he  died now  appears, and  his cursing  of the  name of
 Morgoth as he gazed on the  mountain -  transferred from Turin,
 who  did  the same  after the  death of  Beleg in  the Lay  of the
 Children of Hurin (III. 87).                                     
   A very  minor structural  change is  found in  the story  of the
 feign=d offer of a  peace-treaty by  Morgoth. In  S this  was made
 before the death of Feanor, and Feanor  indeed refused  to treat;
 after   his   death   Maidros   'induced   the   Gnomes   to  meet
 Morgoth'.  In Q  'even in  the hour  of his  death there  came to
 [his  sons]  an  embassy  from  Morgoth acknowledging  his defeat,
 and offering to  treat, and  tempting them  with a  Silmaril'. The
 greater force sent by Morgoth is now referred to;  and it  is seen
 that the numbers of the Balrogs  were still  conceived to  be very
 great:   but   Morgoth   brought  the   greater,  and   they  were
 Balrogs'  (contrast  The  Silmarillion:  'but  Morgoth   sent  the
 more, and there were Balrogs').                                   
   In  the  story  of  the  rescue  of  Maidros by  Finweg (Fingon)
 the explicit  and puzzling  statement of  S that  it was  only now
 that  Manwe  'fashioned  the  race  of  eagles'  is  changed  to a
 statement that it was now that he  sent them  forth; by  the later
 change of 'sent' to 'had sent' the final text is reached. In Q are

  found the details that Finweg (Fingon) climbed to Maidros un-        
  aided but could not reach him, and of the thirty fathoms of          
  Thorndor's outstretched wings, the staying of Finweg's hand        
  from his bow, the twice repeated appeal of Maidros that              
  Finweg slay him, and the heading of Maidros so that he lived         
  to wield his sword better with his left hand than he had with         
  his right - cf. the Lay of the Children of Hurin (III. 65): his left
  wieldeth/his sweeping sword. But there are of course still many     
  elements in the final story that do not appear: as the former        
  close friendship of Maidros and Fingon, the song of Fingon          
  and Maidros' answer, Fingon's prayer to Manwe, and Maidros'          
  begging of forgiveness for the desertion in Araman and waiv-         
  ing of his claim to kingship over all the Noldor.                    
                                                                      
                                    9.                                 
                                                                      
    In this section of the narrative Q shows an extraordinary and
  unexpected expansion of S, much greater than has been the         
  case hitherto, and many elements cf the history in the pub-          
  lished Silmarillion appear here (notably still absent are the en- 
  tire story of Thingol's cold welcome to the new-come Noldor,         
  and of course the origin at this time of Nargothrond and             
  Gondolin):, but S, as emended and interpolated, was still the        
  basis. A few of the new features had in fact already emerged       
  in the poems: thus the Elvish watchtower on Tol Sirion first         
  appears in Canto VII cf the Lay of Leithian (early 1928); the        
  deaths of Angrod and Egnor in the battle that ended the Siege       
  of Angband, called the Battle cf Sudden Flame in one of              
  the earlier additions in this section (note 19), in Canto Vl of      
  the Lay (see p. 66): the Gorge of Aglon in Canto VII and              
  Himling in Canto X (both passages written in 1928); Esgalduin        
  already in the Lay of the Children of Hurin (but its source in      
  'secret wells in Taur-na-Fuin' has not been mentioned before).       
  But much of the content of Q in this sect!on introduces wholly       
  new elements into the legends.                                       
    The lates pencilled alterations and additions given in the         
  notes were put in a good while afterwards, and the names thus,       
  intrcduced (Taur Danin, Eredlindon, Ossiriand - which was           
  Assariad in Q$14, Dorthonion, Sauron) belong to later phrases.       
  But it may be noticed here that the change of Second Battle to       

  Third Battle (note  19) is  explained by  the development  of the
  Glorious Battle  (Dagor Aglareb,  a late  addition given  in note
  15), so that the Battle of Sudden Flame became  the third  of the
  Battles  of  Beleriand.  With  'the Foreboding  of the  Kings' in
  note 15 cf. The Silmarillion p. 115: 'A victory  it was,  and yet
  a  warning', or  the reference  may be  to the  foreboding dreams
  of Turgon and Felagund (ibid. p. 114).                           
    The names of Beleriand given  in one  of the  earlier additions
  (note  2),  Noldorien,  Geleidhian, and  Ingolonde 'the  fair and
  sorrowful',  are  interesting.  With  these  may be  compared the
  list of names  given in  III. 160,  which include  Noldorinan and
  Golodhinand,  the  latter  showing  Golodh, the  Sindarin equiva-
  lent  of  Quenya  Noldo; Geleidhian  obviously contains  the same
  element   (cf.   Annon-in-Gelydh,  the   Gate  of   the  Noldor).
  Ingolonde   occurs   again   in   the   next  version   of  'The
  Silmarillion' (the version nearing completion in 1937, see I. 8):
                                                                  
    And  that  region   was  named   of  old   in  the   language  of
    Doriath  Beleriand, but  after the  coming of  the Noldor  it was
    called  also in  the tongue  of Valinor  Ingolonde, the  fair and
    sorrowful, the Kingdom of the Gnomes.                          
                                                                  
  If  Ingolonde  means  'the  Kingdom  of  the Gnomes',  this name
  also  should  probably  be  associated  with  the  stem  seen  in
  Noldo, Golodh. In  much later  writing my  father gave  the orig-
  inal  form  of  the  word  as   ngolodo,  whence   Quenya  noldo,
  Sindarin golodh, noting that n  = 'the  Feanorian letter  for the
  back nasal, the ng of king'.  He also  said that  the mother-name
  of Finrod (= Felagund)  was Ingoldo:  this was  'a form  of noldo
  with syllabic n, and  being in  full and  more dignified  form is
  more or less equivalent to "the Noldo", one  eminent in  the kin-
  dred',  and he  noted that  'the name  was never  Sindarized (the
  form would have been Angolod)'.                                   
    How  significant  is the  likeness of  Ingolonde to  England? I
  cannot certainly answer this; but  it seems  plain from  the con-
  clusion of Q that England  was one  of the  great isles  that re-
  mained  after the  destruction of  Beleriand (see  the commentary
  on $18).                                                         
    The  territory  of  the  other   sons  of   Finrod  (Finarfin),

  Orodreth, Angrod, and Egnor, is  now set  in the  pineclad high-
  lands which afterwards were Taur-na-Fuin.                       
    Quite new in  Q is  the passage  concerning the  Dwarves, with
  the notable statement that  the Feanorians  'made war  upon' the
  Dwarves  of  Nogrod  and  Belegost,  changed afterwards  to 'had
  converse with' them; this led ultimately to  the picture  in The
  Silmarillion  (p.  113) of  Caranthir's contemptuous  but highly
  profitable  traffic with  the Dwarves  in Thargelion.  The older
  view of  the Dwarves  (see II.  247) was  still present  when my
  father wrote  the Quenta:  though 'they  do not  serve Morgoth',
  'they are in many  things more  like his  people' (a  hard saying
  indeed);  they  were  naturally  hostile to  the Gnomes,  who as
  naturally  made  war  on  them. The  Dwarf-cities of  Nogrod and
  Belegost  go  back  to the  Tale of  the Nauglafring,  where the
  Dwarves  are  called  Nauglath  (Nauglir  in  Q, Naugrim  in The
  Silmarillion); but in the Tale the Indrafangs are the Dwarves of
  Belegost.                                                       
    The  Feast  of  Reunion,  which goes  back to  Gilfanon's Tale
  (I. 240) but is not mentioned in S (where there  is only  a ref-
  erence to the 'meeting' of  the Gnomes  with Ilkorins  and Men),
  reappears in Q ('The Feast of Meeting'); it is held in  the Land
  of Willows, not as in The Silmarillion near the pools  of Ivrin.
  The presence of Men  at the  feast has  been excised,  and there
  now  enters  the  story  of  the  passage of  Men over  the Blue
  Mountains (called in an addition Erydluin, note  3) and  the en-
  counter  of  Felagund, hunting  in the  East with  Celegorm, and
  Beor.  This  passage  in  Q  is  the forerunner  of that  in The
  Silmaril/ion (p.  140), with  the strangeness  of the  tongue of
  Men in Felagund's ears, his  taking up  Beor's harp,  the wisdom
  that  was  in  Felagund's song,  so that  Men called  him 'Gnome
  or Wisdom' (note 12). It is interesting to observe that after my
  father abandoned the use of the word 'Gnome' (see I. 43 -  4) he
  retained Nom as the  word for  'wisdom' in  the language  of the
  people of Beor (The Silmarillion p. 141).  The abiding  of Beor
  with Felagund until his death is mentioned (and in a  late addi-
  tion the dwelling of the Beorians on Dorthonion, note 14).       
    Hador, called the Tall  and by  a later  change (note  11) the
  Golden-haired, now first enters, and he is one of the  two lead-
  ers  of  Men  to  cross  the  Mountains  into  Beleriand. Later,

  whereas  in  the  House of  Beor the  original leader  remained, and
  new  generations  were  introduced  beneath  him,  in  the  case  of
  the  House  of  Hador  the  original  leader  was   moved  downwards
  and  replaced  by  Marach;  but  the   two  Houses   remained  known
  as the House of Beor and the House of Hador.                        
    Hador  has,  beside  Gumlin  (who  appeared  in  the  second  ver-
  sion  of  the  Lay  of  the  Children  of  Hurin as  Hurin's father,
  III.  115,  126),  another  son  Haleth;  and  this   occurrence  of
  Haleth  is not  merely an  initial application  of the  name without
  particular   significance,   but   implies   that   originally   the
  'Hadorian'  and  'Halethian'  houses  of  the  Elf-friends  were one
  and  the  same:  the  affinity  of the  names Hador,  Haleth (though
  Haleth  ultimately  became  the  Lady  Haleth)  goes  back  to their
  origin  as  father  and  son.  The   pencilled  words   'Haleth  the
  hunter,  and  little later'  (note 11)  were very  probably intended
  to go after the words 'After them came', i.e.                       
                                                                     
    They were the first of Men to come into Beleriand. After          
    them came Haleth the hunter, and little later Hador, &c.          
                                                                     
  This  shows  of course  the development  of the  third house  of the
  Elf-friends,  later  called  the  Haladin; and  with the  removal of
  Haleth to independent status  as the  leader of  a third  people the
  other son of Hador became Gundor (note 11). Thus:                   
                                                                     
     Quenta                                                           
   as written.              Hador the Tall.                           
                                                                     
                       Haleth.                                        
                                                                     
                                         Hurin Huor.                  
                                                                     
     Quenta.            Hador the Goldenhaired.               Haleth.
   as emended.                                                 the.
                                                              Hunter.
                                                                     
                      Gundor.                                         
                                                                     
                                         Hurin Huor.                  

         The.             Hador the Goldenhaired.                            
    Silmarillion.                                                            
                                                                            
                         Gundor.                                             
                                                                            
                                                Hurin Huor.                  
                                                                            
   Morwen  now  gains  the  name  'Elfsheen', and  the association           
 of the House of Hador with Fingolfin in Hithlum appears.                    
   The  battle  that  ended  the  Siege  of  Angband  had  already           
 been described in Canto VI (III. 212 - 13) of the Lay of Leithian           
 (March 1928); a second  description of  it is  found in  Canto XI           
 of  the Lay  (HI. 275;  September 1930).  By later  additions the           
 name  'The  Battle  of  Sudden  Flame'  (note  19)  and Glomund's           
 presence in it  (note 16)  are introduced  (on the  name Glomund.           
 see  p.  71). Here  also is  the flight  of many  Dark-elves (not           
 Gnomes  as  in  S)  to  Doriath,  to  the  increase  of Thingol's           
 power.                                                                      
   It  is  now  suggested  that  Celegorm  and  Curufin   came  to           
 Nargothrond after the Battle of Sudden Flame as  to a  refuge al-           
 ready in being, and with  them came  Orodreth their  friend; this           
 is to be related  to the  earlier passage  in Q  (55): 'Orodreth,           
 Angrod, and Egnor took  the part  of Feanor'  (in the  debate be-           
 fore the Flight of the Noldoli). That Thingol's halls  in Doriath           
 were the inspiration for Nargothrond is also suggested.                     
   With the account  here of  the challenge  of Fingolfin  and his           
 death  compare the  Lay of  Leithian Canto  XII. This  dates from           
 late September 1930, and is later than this section of Q (see the           
 commentary on $10),  as is  seen by  the reference  to Thorndor's           
 'beak of gold' (line  3616, found  already in  the A-text  of the           
 Lay),  in  contrast  to  his  'claw'  in  Q,  emended  to  'bill'           
 (note 23).*                                                                 
                                                                            
 (*Cf. also 'thirty feet' as the span of Thorndor's wings emended to 'thirty
 fathoms' in Q$8 (note 7), 'thirty fathoms' in the Lay (line 3618).)         

                                 10.                                       
                                                                         '7
                                                                          
    This  version  of  the  legend  of  Beren  and Luthien  is unlike      
  previous  sections  of  the  Quenta:  for  whereas hitherto  it has    1
  been  an  independent  extension  of S,  here (for  a good  part of      
  its  length)  it  is  a compression  of the  Lay of  Leithian. Very      
  slight  differences  between  Q  and the  Lay are  not in  my opin-      
  ion significant, but are merely the results of precis.                   
    At  the  end  of the  fight with  Celegorm and  Curufin, however,      
  Q  and  the  Lay  diverge.  In  the Lay  Beren's healing  (not men-      
  tioned  in  Q)  is  followed  by  debate  between  him  and Luthien      
  (3148ff.),  their  return to  the borders  of Doriath,  and Beren's      
  departure  alone  on  Curufin's  horse,   leaving  Huan   to  guard      
  Luthien  (3219ff.).  The   narrative  in   Canto  XI   begins  with      
  Beren's  reaching  Dor-na-Fauglith  and his  Song of  Parting; then      
  follows  (3342ff.)  Luthien's  overtaking  of Beren,  having ridden      
  after  him  on  Huan,  Huan's  coming  to  them shortly  after with      
  the  wolfcoat and  batskin from  the Wizard's  Isle, and  his coun-      
  sel to them. In Q, on the other hand, the story is essentially dif-      
  ferent,  and  the  difference  cannot  be explained  by compression      
  (admittedly at this point severe): for  Huan went  off to  the Wiz-      
  ard's  Isle  for  the  wolfcoat  and  batskin  and  then  Beren and      
  Luthien  rode  North  together  on  horseback,  until they  came to      
  a  point  where they  must put  on the  disguises. This  is clearly      
  the form of the story given  in Synopsis  IV for  this part  of the      
  Lay (III. 273):                                                          
                                                                          
    Luthien heals Beren. They tell Huan of their doubts and de-            
    bate and he goes off and brings the wolfham and batskin                
    from the Wizard's Isle.                                                
    Then he speaks for the last time.                                      
       They prepare to go to Angband.                                      
                                                                          
  But  Q  is  later  than  Synopsis  IV,  for  the  idea  had already      
  emerged that Huan. spoke thrice, the third time at his death.            
    It  seems  at  least  extremely  probable,  then,  that  Q$10 was      
  written  when  the  Lay  of  Leithian extended  to about  the point      
  where the narrative turns to  the events  following the  routing of      
  Celegorm  and  Curufin   and  Huan's   desertion  of   his  master.      
  Now  against  line  3031  is  written   the  date   November  1929,      

  probably referring forwards (see the  note to  this line),  and the          
  next  date,  against  line 3220  (the return  of Beren  and Luthien          
  to Doriath),  is 25  September 1930.  In the  last week  of Septem-          
  ber  of  that  year  my  father composed  the small  amount remain-          
  ing  of  Canto  X, and  Cantos XI  and XII,  taking the  story from          
  Beren's  solitary departure  on Curufin's  horse to  the enspelling          
  of  Carcharoth  at the  gates of  Angband; and  this part  had not,          
  according  to  the   analysis  above,   been  composed   when  Q$10          
  was  written.*  These  considerations  make  1930 a  virtually cer-          
  tain date for the composition of Q or  at least  the major  part of          
  it; and this fits well with my father's statement {see p.  11) that          
  the 'Sketch' was  written 'c.  1926 -  30', for  we have  seen that          
  the original writing of S  dates from  1926 (III.  3), and  the in-          
  terpolations  and  emendations  to  it,  which  were taken  up into          
  Q,  would  belong  to  the  following  years.  The  statement  in Q          
  that  'in  the  lay  of  Luthien  is  all  told  how  they  came to          
  Angband's  gate'  must  be an  anticipation of  further composition          
  of the Lay that my father was at this time premeditating.                    
    From  here  on  there  are  minor  narrative  divergences between          
  Q  and  the  Lay.  Thus  in the  prose Morgoth  'fashioned' (rather          
  than  bred)  Carcharoth  (cf. Synopsis  III 'fashions',  Synopsis V          
  'fashions'  >  'chooses',  III. 293  - 4).  The wolf's  names Boro-          
  saith,  Everhungry,  and  Anfauglin,  Jaws  of Thirst  (an addition          
  given in note 9), are not  found in  the Synopses  or the  Lay, but          
  the latter, in the  form Anfauglir,  reappears in  The Silmarillion          
  (p. 180) with the same meaning.                                              
    In  the prose  Luthien is  praised for  casting off  her disguise          
  and  naming  her  own  name,  feigning 'that  she was  brought cap-          
  tive  by  the  wolves of  Thu', whereas  in the  Lay she  claims at          
  first to  be Thuringwethil,  sent to  Morgoth by  Thu as  a messen-          
  ger,  and  it  seems  that  her  bat-raiment  falls  from   her  at          
  Morgoth's  command  (lines  3959  -  65), and  that he  divines who          
  she is  without her  naming her  name. In  these features  Q agrees          
  rather  with  Synopsis  III,  where she  does say  who she  is, and          
  'lets fall her bat-garb' (III. 305). It is not said in the Lay that          
  'she flung the magic  robe in  his face'  (but in  The Silmarillion          
  p. 181 'she cast her cloak before his eyes'), and  there is  in the          
                                                                              
  (*Cf. also the internal evidence given in the commentary on $9 that the Fall
  of Fingolfin in Canto XII is later than Q's account.)                        

  prose  the  notable  detail  of  the  Orcs'  secret  laughter  at
  Morgoth's fall from his throne. In Q  Beren leaps  forth, casting
  aside  the  wolfcoat,  when  Morgoth  falls,  whereas in  the Lay
  Luthien  must rouse  him from  his swoon.  The ascription  of the
  snapping  of  Curufin's  knife  to  dwarvish  'treachery'  agrees
  however  with  the  verse  ('by  treacherous  smiths   of  Nogrod
  made',  line  4161)  -  this   feature  is   not  found   in  The
  Silmarillion, of course; while  the arousing  of the  sleepers by
  the  sound  of its  breaking agrees  with the  A-text of  the Lay
  (lines 4163 - 6), not with the  revised version  of B,  where the
  shard struck Morgoth's brow.                                     
    From  the  point where  the Lay  ends, with  the biting  off of
  Beren's  hand  by  the  Wolf,  the  Q  account  can  be  compared
  with  the  Synopses. The  'wanderings and  despair' of  Beren and
  Luthien  and  'their  rescue  by Huan'  clearly associate  Q with
  Synopsis V (III. 312), and the marginal  addition (note  11) con-
  cerning  their rescue  by Thorndor,  their flight  over Gondolin,
  and their setting down in  Brethil, belongs  with the  brief late
  outline given in III. 309.  The structure  of events  in Doriath,
  with  Boldog's  raid  preceding  the  embassy  from  Celegorm  to
  Thingol,  agrees  with Synopsis  IV (III.  310) rather  than with
  Synopsis  V  (III.  311),  where  Thingol's  host  moving against
  Nargothrond  meets  Boldog;  but  Q  agrees  with  Synopsis  V in
  many  details,  such  as  the  presence of  Beleg and  Mablung in
  the battle with Boldog, and Thingol's changed view of Beren.     
    At  the end  of this  section the  Land of  the Dead  that Live
  reaches, in the emendation given in note 15, its final placing in
  Ossiriand,  and  the  name  Gwerth-i-Cuina  appears for  the Dead
  that Live (later in Q as originally written,  $14, the  names are
  Assariad  and  Cuilwarthien,  cf.  i-Cuilwarthon  of   the  Lost
  Tales).  On  the  name  Geleidhian for  Broseliand/Beleriand, oc-
  curring in this emendation, see the commentary on $9.            
    On  the  statements  at  the  end  of  this  section concerning
  Luthien's fate, and the 'long span  of life  and joy'  granted to
  Beren and Luthien by Mandos, see the commentary on $14.          
    A  matter  unconcerned  with  the  story  of Beren  and Luthien
  arises at the beginning of this  section, where  it is  said that
  Beor  was slain  in the  Battle of  Sudden Flame;  in $9,  on the
  other hand, 'Beor lived till  death with  Felagund'. This  can be

  interpreted  to  mean  that he  died in  Felagund's service  at the
  time  that his  son Barahir  rescued Felagund,  but such  an expla-
  nation is forced (especially since in the later form of  his legend
  his  death  was  expressly  of  old  age,  and  was  a source  of great
  wonder to the  Elves who  witnessed it,  The Silmarillion  p. 149).
  It seems more  likely that  there is  here an  inconsistency within
  Q,  admittedly  surprising since  the two  passages are  not widely
  separated.                                                         
    For  the  emendation  of  'Second   Battle'  to   'Third  Battle'
  (note  1)  see  the  commentary  on  $9;  and  with  the  change of
  Tinfang Warble  to Tinfang  Gelion (note  12) cf.  line 503  in the
  Lay of Leithian, where the same change was made.                   
                                                                    
                                  11.                                
                                                                    
    In  this section  the Quenta  becomes, both  in structure  and in
  much of  its actual  wording, the  first draft  of Chapter  20 ('Of
  the Fifth Battle') of The Silmarillion.                            
    There  appears  now  the   unwise  and   premature  demonstration
  of  his  gathering  strength  by Maidros,  warning Morgoth  of what
  was  afoot  among  his  enemies  and  allowing  him  time  to  send
  out  his  emissaries  among  the Men  from the  East -  though this
  is less clear and explicit in Q as originally  written than  it be-
  comes  with  the rewriting  given in  note 14,  and even  then the
  two phases of  the war  are not  clearly distinguished.  Some fur-
  ther  development in  this had  still to  come: in  The Silmarillion
  the  coming  of  the  Easterlings  into  Beleriand  is  told  at an
  earlier point (p. 157; cf. note 1 to this section in Q), and it is
  said  that some  of them,  though not  all, 'were  already secretly
  under  the  dominion of  Morgoth, and  came at  his call',  the en-
  try of his  'spies  and  workers  of treason'  was made  easier 'for
  the faithless Men of  his secret  allegiance were  yet deep  in the
  secrets of the sons of Feanor' (p. 189). Though these agents of
  Morgoth are said  in Q  (as rewritten,  note 14)  to have  gone es-
  pecially  to the  sons of  Ulfang, and  though Bor  and his  sons are
  mentioned,  there  is  no  suggestion  here  of  the  good  faith of
  the  sons  of  Bor, who  slew Ulfast  and Ulwarth  in the  midst of
  the battle {The Silmarillion p. 193).                              
    The  Dwarves  now  play  a  part  in  these  events,   though  only
  as furnishers  of weapons;  but in  Q they  are shown  as calculat-

                                                                              
                                                                               
   ing and indeed cynical ('we are friends of  neither side  - until            
   it has won'), actuated solely by desire for  gain. In  The Silma-            
   rillion  the  Dwarves  actually  entered  the  war  on  Maedhros'            
   side,  and  'won  renown',  Azaghal  Lord  of   Belegost  wounded            
   Glaurung as the dragon  crawled over  him (p.  193). But  at this            
   time I do not think that my  father would  have conceived  of the            
   Dwarves of the mountains taking any  active part  in the  wars of            
   the Elves.                                                                   
       Whereas in S (as emended, $11 note  1) it  is only  said that            
   'Orodreth  because  of  Felagund  his  brother  will  not  come',            
   there  now  appears  in Q  the small  company out  of Nargothrond            
   who  went  to  the  war  under  the  banners  of  Finweg (Fingon)            
   'and came never back, save one',  the leader  is Flinding  son of            
   Fuilin, who comes out of  the old  Tale of  Turambar and  the Lay            
   of the Children of Hurin, and who is thus given a  fuller history            
   before  he fled  from the  Mines of  Melko to  meet Beleg  in the            
   Forest of Night. In the tale as in the poem (see  III. 53)  it is            
   only said that he had  been of  the people  of the  Rodothlim (of            
   Nargothrond)  and  that  he  was  captured  by  Orcs.   By  later            
   change  in  Q  (note  7) he  becomes Gwindor  son of  Guilin. But            
   it is  notable that  although the  wild onrush  of the  Gnomes of            
   Nargothrond,  that  carried  them  even  into  Angband  and  made            
   Morgoth  tremble  on  his  throne,  was led  by Flinding/Gwindor,            
   his heroic fury had as yet no  special cause:  for the  herald of            
   Finweg/Fingon  who  was  murdered  on  Dor-na-Fauglith  in  order            
   to  provoke  the  Elves  of  Hithlum  to  attack  Morgoth's decoy            
   force is not named.* The next and  final stage  was for  the her-            
   ald  to  become  Gelmir  of  Nargothrond, Gwindor's  brother, who            
   had  been  captured in  the Battle  of Sudden  Flame: it  was in-            
   deed grief for the loss of  Gelmir that  had brought  Gwindor out            
   of  Nargothrond against  the will  of Orodreth  (The Silmarillion            
   p. 188). Thus Flinding/Gwindor,  devised long  before for  a dif-            
   ferent story, ends by being, in his earlier life, the involuntary            
   cause of the loss of the great battle and the  ruin of  the king-            
   doms of the Noldor in Middle-earth.                                          
                                                                               
     (* The statement that 'Morgoth led forth one of the heralds... and slew him
   upon the plain' certainly does not mean, I think,  that Morgoth  himself came
   forth and did the deed;  rather 'Morgoth'  here stands  for 'the  servants of
   Morgoth, obeying his command.')                                              

    The account of the  behaviour of  the people  of Haleth  in the
  rewritten  passage  given  in note  7 shows  my father  in doubt;
  they made ready for war, then they  abode in  the forest  and few
  came  forth  'because  of  the  wounding  of  Beren in  the wood'
  (cf.  'Men  remembered that  wound against  the sons  of Feanor',
  Q$10;  'Men  remembered  at  the  Marching  Forth',  the  Lay  of
  Leithian line 3103). In the event, the former idea prevailed: 'In
  the forest of Brethil Halmir, lord of the People of Haleth, gath-
  ered his men, and  they whetted  their axes',  and in  the battle
  'fell most of the Men of Brethil,  and came  never back  to their
  woods' (The Silmarillion pp. 189, 192).                          
    In this same rewritten passage the later  story of  the founda-
  tion  of  Gondolin  before  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered  Tears is
  present, with  Turgon coming  forth 'unlooked  for' with  a great
  host. It is perhaps strange that in the subsequent passage of re-
  writing  (note 14)  Maidros 'appointed  a day,  and sent  word to
  Fingon  and  Turgon',  and  'Fingon  and  Turgon  and the  Men of
  Hithlum...  were  gathered  ready  in the  West upon  the borders
  of the Thirsty Plain', which does not at all suggest  that Turgon
  had just arrived, but seems rather to revert to the earlier story
  (in  S,  note 1,  and in  Q as  originally written)  according to
  which he was one of  the leaders  of the  Western Elves  from the
  beginning of the preparations for war ('all the hosts  of Hithlum
  ...  were  ready  to  his  summons,  and  Finweg  and  Turgon and
  Huor and Hurin  were their  chiefs'). It  seems that  the emended
  narrative  in  Q  represents  an  intermediate  stage:  Turgon now
  emerges from  Gondolin already  long since  in existence,  but he
  does not march up in the nick of time, on the  day itself,  as in
  the later story: he comes, certainly unexpected,  but in  time to
  take part in the final strategic preparations.                   
    The  challenge  to  Morgoth,  summoning  by  silver  trumpets
  his   host  to   come  forth,   was  afterwards   abandoned,  but
  Morgoth's decoying  force, 'great  and yet  not too  great', sur-
  vived,  as  did  Burin's  warning  against premature  attack. The
  uncontrollable bursting forth of the Elves  of Hithlum  and their
  allies is brought about in  the same  way as  in the  later story,
  even though there is still lacking in Q the  fine point  that the
  one  slaughtered  before their  eyes was  the brother  of Gwindor
  of Nargothrond; and there is present in the Q narrative the ini-

  tial  success  of  the  hosts  of  Hithlum,  the  near-miscarriage of
  Morgoth's   plans,   the   sweeping   of   the   banners   of  Finweg
  (Fingon)  over  the plain  to the  very walls  of Angband.  The final
  stages of the battle are less fully treated in Q, but all  the essen-
  tial structure is there; several features are indeed still absent, as
  the  death  of  Fingon  at  the  hands  of  Gothmog  (but  the  flame
  from  his  helm  as  it  was  cloven  is  mentioned,  a  feature that
  goes  back  to  the  Lay  of the  Children of  Hurin, and  from which
  the  words  Finweg  (Fingon)  fell  in  flame  of swords  derive, see
  III.  103), the  fall of  the Men  of Brethil  in the  rearguard (see
  above),  the  presence  of   the  Dwarves   of  Belegost   (with  the
  death  of  Azaghal  and  the  wounding  of  the dragon),  the fateful
  words   between   Huor   and   Turgon   that   were    overheard   by
  Maeglin (The Silmarillion p. 194).                                   
    Glomund's  presence  at   the  Battle   of  Unnumbered   Tears  was
  introduced in a later addition to  the text  of S  ($13, note  3) and
  is  now  incorporated  in  the  Q  narrative; his  earlier appearance
  at  the  Battle  of  Sudden  Flame  enters  with  an addition  to Q$9
  (note 16), and  is referred  to again  here (note  17) -  'the second
  battle   of   the   North',  because   the  Glorious   Battle,  Dagor
  Aglareb,  which  became  the  second  battle,  had  not yet  been de-
  veloped.  But  according  to  Q  the  dragon  'was  not  yet  come to
  his  full  growth'  at  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered Tears;  later, he
  was  already  full  grown  at  the  Battle   of  Sudden   Flame  (The
  Silmarillion  p.  151),  and  his  first,  immature   emergence  from
  Angband was placed still further back {ibid. pp. 116 - 17).          
    The  Dragon-helm  of   Dor-lomin  here   reappears  from   the  Lay
  of the Children  of Hurin  (see III.  26, 126),  where in  the second
  version it is said that it was the work of Telchar, and              
                                                                      
       Would that he [Hurin] had worn it to ward his head              
       on that direst day from death's handstroke! (665 - 6)           
                                                                      
  But   only   now   does   the  dragon-crest   become  the   image  of
  Glomund.  Afterwards  the  h!  story  of  the   helm  was   much  en-
  larged:  in  the  Narn i  Hin Hurin  (Unfinished Tales  p. 75)  it is
  told  that  Telchar  (of Nogrod,  not as  in Q  of Belegost)  made it
  for  Azaghal  of  Belegost,  and  that  it  was   given  by   him  to
  Maedhros,  by   Maedhros  to   Fingon,  and   by  Fingon   to  Hador,

  whence  it  descended  to  Hador's  grandson   Hurin.  In   the  Narn
  it is said that Hurin never in fact wore it; and also that the peo-
  ple  of  Hithlum  said  'Of  more  worth  is  the Dragon  of Dorlomin
  than  the  gold-worm  of  Angband!'  -   which  originated   in  this
  passage  of  Q,  'We  have  a  dragon  of  more  worth  than theirs'.
  A   pencilled   direction  against   the  beginning   of  $12   in  Q
  (note  1)  postpones  the  introduction  of  the  Helm  to  the point
  where  Morwen  sends  it  to  Thingol,  as  it   is  placed   in  The
  Silmarillion (p. 199).                                               
    Some  other  minor  features now enter, as Melian's counsel  to
  restore  the  Silmaril  to  the  sons  of  Feanor  (The  Silmarillion
  p.  189),  and  in additions  to the  text the  presence of  Elves of
  the Falas  among the  Western hosts  at the  great battle  (note 14),
  and  the  especial  hatred  and  fear  felt by  Morgoth of  the House
  of  Fingolfin  (note  23;  The  Silmarillion  p.  196,  where however
  the  reasons  for  it  are  their  frierdship with Ulmo and the
  wounds  that  Fingolfin  had  given  him  -  and  Turgon, Fingolfin's
  son).  In  emendations  to  Q  (note  6)  the  name  Celegorm  begins
  a long uncertainty between that form and Celegorn.                   
    The  mention  of  'Dark-elves,  save   cut  of   Doriath'  marching
  to  Maidros'  banners  shows  that  my  father  still  naturally used
  this  term of  Thingol's people; cf. the  Index to  The Silmarillion,
  entry Dark Elves.                                                    
                                                                      
                                   12.                                 
                                                                      
    It  is  immediately  apparent,  from  many  actual  repetitions  of
  wording,  that  when  my  father  composed  the  Q  version  of  the
  tale  of  Turin  Turambar  he  had  the  'Sketch'  in front  of him;
  while  many  of  the  phrases  that  occur  in The  Silmarillion ver-
  sion are  first found  here. There  are also  features in  Q's narra-
  tive  that  derive  from  the Lay  of  the  Children  of  Hurin  but
  which  were  omitted  in  S.  The  statement in  Q, repeated  from S,
  that  the  fate  of  Turin  is  told  in the  <Children of  Hurin> no
  doubt  shows  that  my father  had not  yet given  up all  thought of
  completing that poem some day.                                       
    In this first  of the  two sections  into which  the tale  of Turin
  is  here  divided  there  are  only  minor points  to be  noticed. Q,
  though much fuller than  S, is  still expressly  a synopsis,  and the
  entire  element  of  the  Dragonhelm  is  omitted  (see  note  1  and

  the  commentary  on  $11),  together   with  the   guiding  of   Turin  by
  the  two  old  men  and  the  return  of  one  of  them  to   Morwen:  the
  guides   (Halog   and   Mailgond   in   S)  are   here  not   named.  Rian
  Huor's wife has already appeared in S at a later point ($16).             
    Airin,   wife   of   Brodda   and   kinswoman   of   Morwen,   re-enters
  from  the  old  Tale  (she  is   mentioned  in   S$13  but   not  named),*
  and  the  aid  she  gives  to  Morwen  is   secret,  which   perhaps  sug-
  gests   a   movement   towards   the   worsening  of   Brodda's  character
  as tyrant  and oppressor  (see II.  127), though  later in  Q it  is still
  told  that  Morwen  entrusted  her  goods  to  him   when  she   left  her
  home  (the  text  was  subsequently   altered  here,   $13  note   5).  We
  meet  here   the  expression   'the  incoming   Men',  surviving   in  the
  term  'Incomers'  used  in  the  Narn,  and  also  the  element  that  the
  Easterlings   were   afraid  of   Morwen,  whispering   that  she   was  a
  witch skilled in Elvish magic.                                            
    There  has  been  virtually   no  further   development  in   the  story
  of  Turin  in  Doriath,  the  slaying  of  Orgof,  and  the  outlaw  band.
  Blodrin  the  traitor  is  now  described  as  a  Gnome,  and  by  a later
  addition  (note  5)  a  member  of  the  House  of  Feanor;  in   the  Lay
  (as  in  S)  it  is  not  made  clear  who  he was,  beyond the  fact that
  he  was  an  Elf  who  had  been  tumed  to   evil  during   his  upbring-
  ing among the Dwarves (III. 52).                                          
    In  the   passage  concerned   with  Taur-na-Fuin   there  is   the  new
  detail  that  the  Orc-band   that  captured   Turin  'had   delayed  long
  in   the   lands   plundering  East   among  Men',   which  is   found  in
  The  Silmarillion  (p.  206):  the  Orcs  'had  tarried  on   their  road,
  hunting  in  the  lands  and  fearing  no  pursuit  as  they  came  north-
  ward'.   This   feature   clearly   arose  from   a  feeling   that  Beleg
  would  never  have  caught  up  with  the  Orcs   if  they   had  returned
  swiftly  to  Angband,  but  in  both  S   and  Q   they  were   moving  in
  haste  through  Taur-na-Fuin,  and  in  Q  this   is  explained   by  'the
  angry message of Morgoth'.                                                
    The  addition  concerning  Beleg's   sword  (note   10)  is   the  first
  indication  that  it  was  of  a  strange  nature;  the  phrase  'made  of
  iron  that  fell  from  heaven as  a blazing  star, and  it would  cut all
                                                                           
  (*In  the Tale  Airin was  Morwen's friend  (II. 93);  in S  and Q  she was
  Morwen's kinswoman; in The Silmarillion (p. 198) and the Narn (p. 69) she
  was Hurin's kinswoman.)                                                    

                                             
                                                                 
 earth-dolven iron' is found  in The  Silmarillion at  a different
 point (p. 201), where the origin of the sword is more fully told.
                                                                 
                                13.                                
                                                                 
  There are several  substantial developments  in the  latter part
 of the story of Turin in Q.                                      
  Finduilas'   name   Failivrin  is   now  ascribed   to  Flinding
 (Gwindor); in the Lay occur the lines                            
                                                                 
          the frail Finduilas that Failivrin,                     
        the glimmering sheen on the glassy pools                  
        of Ivrin's lake the Elves in love                         
        had named anew.                  (III. 76, lines 2175 - 8)
                                                                 
 In  Nargothrond  Turin,  as  the Black  Sword, is  Mormaglir, not
 as  in  S  Mormakil  (cf. the  Tale of  Turambar, II.  84: 'Hence
 comes  that  name  of  Turin's  among  the  Gnomes,  calling  him
 Mormagli  or  Mormakil  according  to  their speech').  The final
 form was Mormegil.  It is  now expressly  stated that  though ru-
 mour  of  the  Black  Sword of  Nargothrond reached  Thingol 'the
 name of Turin was not heard',  but there  is still  no suggestion
 that Turin deliberately concealed his identity.                  
  The  place  where  the  Gnomes  of  Nargothrond   were  defeated
 is not  said to  be between  the rivers  Ginglith and  Narog (The
 Silmarillion  p.  212),  but  'upon the  Guarded Plain,  north of
 Nargothrond', and as will be seen later  the battlefield  at this
 time was east of Narog, not in  the triangle  of land  between it
 and  Ginglith.  The impression  is given  that the  reproaches of
 Flinding  (Gwindor)  as  he  died were  on account  of Finduilas.
 There is indeed no suggestion  here that  Turin's policy  of open
 war  was  opposed  in Nargothrond,  nor that  it was  this policy
 that  revealed  Nargothrond  to  Morgoth;  but  since  these ele-
 ments  were  fully  present  in  the Tale  of Turambar  (II. 83-4)
 their  absence  from  Q must  be set  down to  compression. There
 is also no mention  at this  point in  Q of  the bridge  over the
 Narog (see S$13 notes 1 and 5), but  it is  referred to  later in
 this  section  as  having  proved  the  undoing  of the  Elves of
 Nargothrond. Orodreth  was slain  at Nargothrond,  and not  as in
 The Silmarillion on the battlefield.                             

    In an alteration to Q (note 9) a shift is  implied in  the motive            
  of Turin's slaying  of Brodda.  In the  Tale Turin  struck Brodda's            
  head off  in explicit  vengeance on  'the rich  man who  addeth the            
  widow's little to his  much' (II.  90); in  the revised  passage in            
  Q  (as afterwards  in The  Silmarillion, p.  215, and  most clearly            
  in the Narn, pp. 107 - 8) Turin's  action sprang  in part  from the            
  fury  and  agony  of his  realisation that  the dragon  had cheated            
  him.*                                                                          
    Whereas  in  S  the  Woodmen  are  placed 'east  of Narog',  in Q            
  they  are  said  to  dwell  'in  the  green  woods about  the River            
  Taiglin that enters the land of Doriath ere it joins with the great            
  waters of Sirion' - these  being the  first occurrences  of Taiglin            
  and  'Doriath  beyond  Sirion'  in  the  texts  (though   both  are            
  marked on  the earliest  'Silmarillion' map,  see insert).  I noted            
  in  connection  with  the  passage  in  S that  it is  strange that            
  whereas  in  the  Tale  the  Woodmen  had  a  leader  (Bethos) when            
  Turin joined them, as also in the  later story,  in S  Turin 'gath-            
  ered  a  new  people'.  Now  in  Q the  Woodmen have  an. identity,            
  'the remnant of the people of  Haleth', Haleth  being at  this time            
  the  son  of  Hador  and  uncle  of Hurin,  and the  'Hadorian' and            
  'Halethian' houses one and the same,  as already  in $9;  but still            
  as  in  S  Turin  at once  becomes their  ruler. Brandir  the Lame,            
  son  of  Handir  son of  Haleth, does  indeed emerge  here, replac-            
  ing  Tamar  (son  of  Bethos  the  ruler) of  the Tale  of Turambar            
  who is still present in S, and it is said that Brandir had 'yielded            
  the rule to Turin at the choice of the woodfolk', but in  the later            
  story it is  an important  element that  Brandir remained  the tit-            
  ular ruler until his death, though disregarded by Turin.                       
    Here  is  the  first   mention  of   Turin's  vain   seeking  for            
  Finduilas  when  he  came  down  from  Hithlum,  and the  first ac-            
  count of Finduilas' fate; in the  Tale and  in S  there is  no sug-            
  gestion of what became of her. Finduilas is 'the  last of  the race            
  of  Finrod'  (later  Finarfin)  because   Galadriel  had   not  yet            
  emerged.                                                                       
    The narrative  of Q  also advances  to the  later form  in making            
  Nienor   accompany   the  expedition   from  Doriath   in  disguise            
  (see II. 128); and the 'high  place... covered  with trees'  of the            
                                                                                
  (*In the Narn it is not made clear that Turin actually intended to kill Brodda
  when he hurled him across the table.)                                          

  Tale and the 'hill-top' of S now becomes 'the tree-clad  Hill of
  Spies'.  But in  Q it  was only  Morwen who  was set  for safety
  on the Hill of Spies:  there is  no mention  of what  Nienor did
  until  she  was  confronted  by  Glomund on  the banks  of Narog
  (not, as later, on the Hill). This is a movement away  both from
  the  Tale  and  from the  later story,  where Morwen  and Nienor
  remained together until  the dragon-fog  arose; but  towards the
  later story in that Nienor met the dragon  alone (on  the treat-
  ment of  this in  S see  the commentary).  We must  suppose that
  at this stage in the  development of  the legend  Nienor's pres-
  ence was never revealed, either to her mother or to  anyone else
  save the dragon; in  the later  story she  was discovered  at the
  passage  of  the  Twilit  Meres (The  Silmarillion p.  217, Narn
  pp. 114 - 15). The 'Mablung-element' is still wholly absent; and
  it is to be noted that Morwen was  taken back  in safety  to the
  Thousand  Caves,  whence  she  afterwards  wandered   away  when
  she  found  that  Nienor  was  gone.  -  The  bridge  over Narog
  seems  to  have  been  still  standing  after  the sack  (in The
  Silmarillion Glaurung broke it down, p. 214).                   
    By emendation in Q (note 14)  appears for  the first  time the
  name  Celebros, translated  'Foam-silver', for  Silver-bowl; but
  in Q (as in S) the falls are  still in  the Taiglin  itself (see
  II.  132).  Later,  Celebros  became the  name of  the tributary
  stream in  which  were  the  falls;  and  the  falls  were named
  Dimrost, the Rainy Stair.                                       
    In the story of the slaying of the dragon, the six (not as af-
  terwards  two) companions  of Turambar  still survive  through S
  from the Tale (II. 106); though in Q they were  not so  much the
  only  companions  that  Turambar could  find but  rather 'begged
  to come with him'. In the Tale  the band  of seven  clambered up
  the far side of the ravine in the evening  and stayed  there all
  night;  at  dawn of  the second  day, when  the dragon  moved to
  cross,  Turambar  saw  that  he had  now only  three companions,
  and  when  they  had  to  climb  back down  to the stream-bed to
  come up under Glorund's belly  these three  had not  the courage
  to go up  again. Turambar  slew the  dragon by  daylight; Niniel
  went down to the ravine on  the second  evening, and  threw her-
  self over the falls at sunrise  of the  third day;  and Turambar
  slew himself in the afternoon of that day. In S the only indica-

                                                                    
                                                                       
  tion  of  time  is  that  all  six  of Turambar's  companions deserted
  him during the night spent clingirg to the further lip of the ra-
  vine.  In  Q the  six all  deserted Turambar  during the  first night,
  as  in  S,  but  he  spent  the  whole of  the following  day clinging
  to  the  cliff;  Glomund  moved  to  pass  over  the  ravine   on  the
  second  night  (my  father   clearly  wished   to  make   the  dragon-
  slaying take  place in  darkness, but  achieved this  at first  by ex-
  tending  the time  Turambar  spent  in  the  gorge).  But  Niniel went
  down  and  found  him,  and  threw  herself  over  the falls,  on that
  same  night.  Thus  in  Q  the  story  has  moved  closer  to  that of
  The  Silmarillion  and  the  Narn,  and  needed  only  the contraction
  of  the  time  before  the  dragon  crossed  the  ravine, so  that all
  took  place  in  a  single  night  and  the  following  morning.  - It
  seems  to  be  suggested  in  Q  that  Glomund  in   his  death-throes
  hurled  himself  back  on  to  the  bank  from   which  he   was  com-
  ing;  he  'coiled  back  in  anguish  ...  and   came  not   into  the
  woodmen's  land'.  If  this  is so  Niniel must  have crossed  the ra-
  vine to reach  Turambar. In  the Tale  (II. 107)  it is  explicit that
  'almost   had  [the   dragon]  crossed   the  chasm   when  Gurtholfin
  pierced  him,  and  now  he cast  himself upon  its farther  bank', as
  also in the later versions.                                           
    That  Niniel  was  with  child  by  Turambar  is  now stated  in the
  text as  written (in  the Tale  and in  S this  appears only  in later
  additions).                                                           
    In  the  Tale  (II.  111)  Turambar  slew  himself  in the  glade of
  Silver  Bowl;  it  is not  said in  S or  in Q  where he  died, though
  in  both  he  was  buried  beside  Silver  Bowl.  -  At  the  very end
  appears  in  Q  the  name  Nen-Girith,  its  first   occurrence:  'Men
  changed  the  name  of  that  place  thereafter  to   Nen-Girith,  the
  Shuddering  Water.'  In  The  Silmarillion  (p.  220)  it is  said, in
  the  passage  describing  the  great  fit of  shuddering that  came on
  Nienor  at  Dimrost,  the  falls  of  Celebros, that  - on  account of
  this  -  'afterwards that  place was  called Nen  Girith', and  in the
  Narn  (p.  123)  that  'after  that  day'  it  was called  Nen Girith.
  These  passages  can  be  taken  to  mean that  the falls  of Celebros
  were  renamed  Nen  Girith  simply  on   account  of   Nienor's  shiv-
  ering  when  she  first  came there.  But this  is surely  absurd; the
  event  was,  in itself  and without  aftermath, far  too slight  for a
  renaming  -  too  slight,  indeed  for  narrative  mention  or legend-

  ary recollection, if it had no aftermath: places are not renamed
  in legend because a  person, however  important, caught  a chill
  there. Obviously the prophetic element is  the whole  point, and
  it  goes  back  to  the  Tale,  where before  ever the  name Nen
  Girith  was  devised  Nienor  'not knowing  why was  filled with
  a dread and could not look upon the  loveliness of  that foaming
  water'  (II, 101),  and in  the original  story both  Nienor and
  Turambar died in that very place (see II.  134-5). I  think that
  the phrase in the Narn, 'after that day', must be interpreted to
  mean 'after that time', 'after the  events which  are now  to be
  described  had  come  to  pass'.  I  noted  in  Unfinished Tales
  (p. 149, note 24):                                                 
                                                                    
    One might  suppose that  it was  only when  all was  over, and
    Turin and Nienor dead,  that her  shuddering fit  was recalled
    and  its  meaning seen,  and Dimrost  renamed Nen  Girith; but
    in the legend Nen Girith is used as the name throughout.         
                                                                    
  Almost certainly, the use of the name 'Nen Girith' in  the later
  narratives  before  the  account  of the  events that  must have
  given rise to the name is  to be  explained in  the same  way as
  that  proposed  by my  father for  Mablung: concerning  which he
                                                                    
  Silmaril from the belly of Carcharoth                              
                                                                    
    the  hand  [of  Beren]  and jewel  seemed to  have so  great a  j
    weight  that   Mablung's  own   hand  was   dragged  earthward  i
    and forced open, letting the other fall to the ground.  It was
    said  that  Mablung's  name  ('with  weighted hand')  was pro-
    phetic; but it may have been a title derived from  the episode
    that afterwards became the one that the  hero was  chiefly re-
    membered by in legend.                                           
                                                                    
  I have no doubt that  the story  in Q  shows the  original idea:
  Nienor  shivered with  prophetic but  unconscious fear  when she
  came to the falls of Celebros;  there both  she and  her brother
  died horrifyingly; and after their deaths the falls were renamed
  Nen  Girith,  the  Shuddering  Water,  because  the  meaning was
  understood.  'Afterwards',  'After  that  day', this  became the

  name  of  the  falls;  but in  the legendary  history, when  all was
  well-known  both to  the historian  and to  his audience,  the later
  name became generalised, like that of Mablung.                      
                                                                     
                                   14.                                
                                                                     
    At  the  beginning of  this section  it is  made clear  that Mim's
  presence  in  Nargothrond  did  not  go  back  to  the  time  of the
  dragon,   since   he   'had   found  the   halls  and   treasure  of
  Nargothrond  unguarded'.  In  the  Lost  Tales  my  father doubtless
  saw  no  particular  need  to  'explain' Mim;  he was  simply there,
  a  feature of  the narrative  situation, like  Andvari the  Dwarf in
  the Norse Volsung legend. But in Q the first step is taken to
  relate  him  to  the  developing  conception   of  the   Dwarves  of
  Middle-earth:  they  spread  into  Beleriand  from  the  Blue  Moun-
  tains  after  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered  Tears.   (Ultimately  the
  need  to  'explain'  Mim  led  to  the  conception  of   the  Petty-
  dwarves.)  But  Q's  statement  that  the  Dwarves  only  now  enter
  the  tales  of  the  ancient  world seems  at variance  with earlier
  passages:  with  $9,  where  it  is  said  that the  Feanorians made
  war  on  the  Dwarves  of  Nogrod  and  Belegost,  and  with  $11,
  concerning  the  furnishing  of  weapons  by  the  Dwarves   to  the
  armies of the Union of Maidros.                                     
    Here  Mim  has  some  companions,  slain  with  him  by  the  out-
  laws  of  Hurin's  band,  whom  Hurin  'would  have stayed',  in the
  Tale  of  Turambar  (II.  113)  Mim  was  alone,  and  it  was  Urin
  himself  who  gave  him   his  death-blow.   Whereas  in   the  Tale
  Urin's  band  -  large  enough  to be  called a  host -  brought the
  treasure  of  Nargothrond to  the caves  of Tinwelint  in a  mass of
  sacks  and  rough boxes  (while in  S there  is no  indication what-
  soever  of  how  the  treasure  came  to  Doriath,  and  the outlaws
  are  not  further  mentioned  after  the  slaying  of  Mim),   in  Q
  Hurin's  outlaws  are  as  conveniently  got  rid  of  as  they were
  conveniently come by - 'each one died or was slain in quarrels
  upon the road', deaths ascribed to Mim's curse; and since     
  Hurin now goes alone to Doriath and gets Thingol's help in the
  transportation of the treasure the outlaw-band seems to serve
  very little narrative purpose. The fight in the halls of Tinwelint
  between the woodland Elves and the outlaws, not mentioned in
  S, has now therefore been expunged (the emergence in Q of a     

  new  fight  in  the halls,  between the  Elves and  the Dwarves,      
  would  demand  its  removal  in  any case,  if Menegroth  were not
  to appear a permanent shambles).                                      
    But  the  problem  remained:   how  did   the  gold   come  to  
  Doriath? It was an essential idea that  Hurin, destroyed  by what     
  he had seen (or by  what Morgoth  allowed him  to see)  and tor-
  mented  by  bitterness and  grief, should  cast the  treasure of      
  Nargothrond at Thingol's feet in a gesture  of supreme  scorn of      
  the craven and greedy king, as he conceived him  to be;  hut the
  new story in Q is obviously unsatisfactory -  it ruins  the ges-      
  ture, if Hurin  must get  the king  himself to  send for  the gold
  with which he is  then to  be humiliate<i,  and it  is difficult
  imagine the conversation between Hurin and Thingol when
  Hurin first appeared  in Doriath,  announcing that  the treasure
  had become available.                                                 
    However this may be,  the gold  comes to  Doriath, and  in all      
  versions Hurin departs: but now in  Q, to  drown himself  in the
  western sea, without ever finding Morwen again.                       
    I  have  said in  commenting on  the corresponding  section in
  S that I think it probable that my father had already decided to      
  simplify the involved story in the Tale of the  Nauglafring con-  
  cerning the gold of Nargothrond. In Q, which  is a  fully artic-  
  ulated narrative, if brief, the absence of Ufedhin can  be taken  
  as  a  clear  indication that  he had  been abandoned,  and with      
  him,  necessarily,  many of  the complexities  of the  king's deal    
  ings with the Dwarves. The  story has  become, then,  quite sim-      
  ple.  Thingol  desires  the  unwrought  gold  brought  by  Hurin to   
  be  worked;  he  sends for  the greatest  craftsmen on  earth, the    
  Dwarves  of  Nogrod  and  Belegost;  and  they  coming  desire the    
  treasure for themselves, the Silmaril also, and  plot to  gain it.    
  The argument that they use -  that the  treasure belonged  in right   
  to the Dwarves, since  it was  taken from  Mim -  reappears from      
  the Tale of the Nauglafring, where it occurs  in a  different con-     
  text  (II.  230:  an  argument  used  by  Naugladur lord  of Nogrod   
  to support his intention to attack Tinwelint).                        
    The  relative  wealth   or  otherwise   of  Thingol   has  not      
  touched on in Q, but his riches are recounted in  the Lay  of the     
  Children  of  Hurin  (see  III.  26)  and in  the Lay  of Leithian
  (III. 160 - 1); and this is no doubt the force of the  word 'even'

  in 'Then the  enchantment of  the accursed  dragon gold  began to            
  fall even upon the king of Doriath.'                                         
    In  S  the  king  drives  the  Dwarves  away  without  any pay-            
  ment; there is no mention of any  strife at  this point,  and one            
  would  think  that  even  the   most  severe   compression  could            
  hardly have avoided  mentioning it.  But in  Q the  narrative now            
  takes a quite different turn. Thingol  'scanted his  promised re-            
  ward',  and  this  led to  fighting in  the Thousand  Caves, with            
  many  slain  on  both sides;  and 'the  Mound of  Avarice', which            
  in the Tale of the Nauglafring  covered the  bodies of  the slain            
  Elves of Artanor  after the  battle with  the outlaws  of Hurin's            
  band, now  covers those  of the  Dwarves and  Elves; the  form of            
  the Elvish name  is changed  from Cum  an-Idrisaith (II.  223) to            
  Cum-nan-Arasaith.                                                           
    As  in  S,  the  sack  of  Menegroth  by  the Dwarves  is still            
  treated in Q with the utmost brevity, and central features of the            
  story  in  the Tale  of the  Nauglafring do  not recur,  nor ever            
  would. But (in addition to the loss of  Ufedhin) it  seems likely            
  that the 'great host'  of Orcs,  paid and  armed by  Naugladur of            
  Nogrod  (II.  230),  would  by  now   have  been   abandoned.  Of            
  course the whole story arose in  terms of,  and continues  to de-            
  pend  on,  the hostile  view of  the Dwarves  which is  so promi-            
  nent in the early writings.                                                  
    The  much  emended  geographical   passage  that   follows  now            
  in Q is best understood in relation  to the  first 'Silmarillion'            
  map, and I  postpone discussion  of the  rivers of  Ossiriand and            
  the Dwarf-road to Chapter IV, pp. 283ff. It  is sufficient  to no-            
  tice here that the courses of the six  tributary rivers  of Gelion            
  (here  called  Ascar,*  before  emendation to  Flend and  then to            
  Gelion,  note  3) are  drawn on  that map  in precisely  the same            
  form  as they  have on  that published  in The  Silmarillion, and            
  the first  map  names them  in order  of the  original emendation            
  to  Q  (note  4)  before  that was  itself changed:  i.e., Ascar,            
  Thalos, Duilwen, Loeglin, Brilthor, Adurant.                                 
    It  is  now  made  explicit  that  it  was  Melian  who  warned            
                                                                              
  (* It seems probable that the first two occurrences of Ascar in  this section
  were mere slips, for Flend (> Gelion). At the third  occurrence the  name is
  used, as it is on the map, for the northernmost of the rivers coming down out
  of the Blue Mountains, afterwards renamed Rahlorion (> Rathloriel).)         

            
                                                                     
 Beren  of  the  approach  of  the Dwarves  (see p.  75); and  the re-
 moval  of  the  Land  of  the  Dead  that  Live  from  'the  woods of
 Doriath  and  the  Hunters'  Wold,  west  of  Nargothrond',  where it
 is  still  placed in  S ($10),  to Assariad  (Ossiriand) in  the East
 makes  the  interception  of  the  Dwarves   far  simpler   and  more
 natural:  the  Stony  Ford  (which  goes  back  to  the  Tale  of the
 Nauglafring  and  is  there  called  Sarnathrod)  now  lies   on  the
 river  that bounds  that very  land. The  geographical shift  and de-
 velopment  has  made  the  whole  organisation  of  the   story  here
 much easier.                                                         
  Beren's  people  now  at   last  become   'the  Green   Elves'  (see
 p.  74);  but the  story of  the ambush  at the  ford is  passed over
 in  Q as  sketchily as  it was  in S:  there is  now no  mention even
 of  the  taking  of  the  Nauglafring  (>  Nauglamir) from  the slain
 king.  The  story  of  the  drowning  of  the  treasure  remains much
 the  same  as  in  S,  but  there are  suggestions of  wider implica-
 tions  in  the  wearing  of  the  Nauglafring: that  the Land  of the
 Dead  that  Live became  itself so  fruitful and  so fair  because of
 the  presence  of  Luthien  wearing  the  Silmaril.  This  passage is
 retained  almost  word  for  word  in The  Silmarillion (p.  235). It
 is  clearly  to be  associated with  a later  passage, found  both in
 Q  (p.  182)  and  in  The  Silmarillion (p.  247), where  the people
 dwelling  at  the  Havens  of  Sirion after  the  fall   of  Gondolin
 would  not  surrender  the  Silmaril  to   the  Feanorians   'for  it
 seemed  to  them  that  in  the  Silmaril  lay  the  healing  and the
 blessing  that  had  come  upon  their houses  and their  ships'. But
 the  Silmaril  was  cursed  (and  this   may  seem   a  sufficiently
 strange   conception),   and   Melian   warned   Beren   and  Luthien
 against it. In Q it is not said, as it is in S, that the Silmaril was
 kept  secretly  by  Beren,  merely  that  he  and  Luthien 'retained'
 it.  In  both  texts the  fading of  Luthien follows  immediately; but
 while  Q  again  makes  no  actual  connection  (see  p. 75)  the very
 ordering  of  its  sentences  suggests  that  such  a  connection was
 there:  'the  Land  of the  Dead that  Live became  like a  vision of
 the  land  of  the  Gods...  Yet  Melian  warned  them  ever   of the
 curse...  yet  the  Silmaril  they  retained. And  in time  the brief
 hour  of  the  loveliness  of  the land  of Rathlorion  departed. For
 Luthien faded as Mandos had spoken...'                               
  The  statements  made  in  S$$10  and  14  on  the  fates  of  Beren

  and Luthien have been discussed at  some length  (pp. 76  - 77).               
  When we turn to Q,  we find  that in  the earlier  passage ($10,               
  where  the  first  death  of Beren  and Luthien's  pleading with               
  Mandos is recounted), while there is mention  of songs  that say               
  that Luthien was borne living to Valinor by Thorndor,  these are               
  discounted, and 'it has long been said  that Luthien  failed and               
  faded swiftly and  vanished from  the earth',  and thus  came to               
  Mandos: she had died, as Elves might die, of grief (cf.  the old               
  Tale of Tinuviel, II. 40).  And the  dispensation of  Mandos ex-               
  acted  that  'Luthien should  become mortal  even as  her lover,               
  and should leave the  earth once  more in  the manner  of mortal               
  women'.  This  seems  precise:  it  can  surely  only  mean that               
  Luthien had become, not an Elf  with a  peculiar destiny,  but a               
  mortal woman. Her nature had changed.*                                         
    Yet  Q  retains  the  conception  in  the  present  passage of               
  Luthien's fading  - her  second fading.  I think  it can  now be               
  seen why my father wrote an X against  this sentence  (note 12);               
  and note also the marginal addition at this point: 'Yet  it hath               
  been  sung  that  Luthien  alone  of  Elves  hath  been numbered               
  among  our  race,'  and  goeth whither  we go  to a  fate beyond               
  the world' (cf. The  Silmarillion p.  236: 'Beren  Erchamion and               
  Luthien Tinuviel had  died indeed,  and gone  where go  the race               
  of Men to a fate beyond the world').                                           
    Coming lastly to the  story of  Dior and  the end  of Doriath,               
  it is now  Celegorm, Curufin,  and Cranthir  who were  slain, as               
  in The Silmarillion (p. 236); and by a late addition to the text               
  (note  14)  Dior  has  sons,  Eldun and  Elrun, who  were killed               
  with  their  father. In  The Silmarillion  they were  Elured and               
  Elurin, who were left by the servants of  Celegorm to  starve in               
  the forest.                                                                    
                                                                                
  (*The  further  judgement  of  Mandos  in  $10,  that  'in recompense'  he 'gave
  to Beren and Luthien thereafter a long span of life and joy', seems at variance
  with what is implied here in Q. See III. 125.                                  
   + 'our race': the Quenta, according to its title (pp. 92 - 3), was 'drawn from
  the Book of Lost Tales which Eriol of Leithien wrote'.)                         

                                  15.                                
                                                                    
   In this version of the story of Eol and Isfin it is told  that Eol
 'was  of  gloomy mood,  and had  deserted the  hosts ere  the battle
 [of  Unnumbered  Tears]'.  Nothing  has  been  said  before  of  how
 Eol  came  to  be  dwelling in  the terrible  forest (and  later his
 earlier   history   was   to   be   wholly   changed    again:   The
 Silmarillion p. 132).                                               
                                                                    
   The general description of the plain and city of Gondolin in      
 Q is obviously closely based on S, and shows little more than       
 stylistic development. But Thorndor is here said to have dwelt      
 on Thangorodrim before he moved his eyries to the Encircling        
 Mountains (see p. 80); and there is an interesting reference to          
 the original intention of the people of Gondolin to go to war       
 again when the time was ripe. The most important alteration         
 here is the pencilled addition (note 5), taken up into the Q II     
 text, telling that Turgon after the Battle of Unnumbered Tears      
 sent at times Elves down Sirion to the sea, where they built a      
 small haven and set sail, in vain, for Valinor. This is the forerun-
 ner of the passage in The Silmarillion (p. 159), where however      
 the building of ships by the Gondolindrim and the setting sail      
 for Valinor 'to ask for pardon and aid of the Valar' is placed af-
 ter the Dagor Bragollach and the breaking of the Leaguer of         
 Angband (for the foundation of Gondolin took place centuries        
 before the Battle of Unnumbered Tears). But in The Silmarillion     
 (p. 196) there was also a further attempt by Turgon to reach        
 Valinor in the time after the great battle, when Cirdan of the      
 Falas built for him seven ships, of which the only survivor was     
 Voronwe. The origin of this idea of the fruitless voyages of the
 Gondolindrim is to be found in the tale of The Fall of Gondolin     
 (II. 162), where Ulmo by the mouth of Tuor counselled Turgon        
 to make such voyages, and Turgon replied that he had done so        
 'for years untold', and would do so now no more.                    
   In the replacement text Q II (pp. 166 - 68), where the old        
 story of the foundation of Gondolin is still present, there is      
 very little to record in narrative development, except that the
 sending of Elves to Sirion's mouth and the sailing of ships         
 from a secret haven is now incorporated in the text; and it is      
 said that as the years drew on these sailings ceased and the ha-

    Maps to         
                   
 THE SHAPING
                   
       OF         
   MIDDLE-EARTH.
                   
  J. R. R. TOLKIEN.

  ven  was  abandoned.  It  is  now  explained  why  it   was  that           
  Thorndor (> Thorondor) moved his eyries from Thangorodrim.                  
    The passage of time is left entirely vague in these narratives.           
  There  is no  indication of  how many  years elapsed  between the           
  Battle  of  Unnumbered Tears  or its  immediate aftermath  - when           
  in  the  first  years  of  Gondolin  Turgon was trying to  get his           
  messages  to  Valinor -  and the  coming of  Tuor, by  which time           
  the  haven  at  Sirion's  mouth  was  desolate, none  could enter           
  Goldolin from the  outside world,  and neither  the king  nor the           
  most part of his  people wished  any more  for return  to Valinor           
  (p. 171). But the change  in feeling  in Gondolin  - and  all the           
  mighty  works of  levelling and  tunnelling -  must imply  a long           
  lapse of time ('as the years drew on', pp.  165, 168).  This con-           
  ception goes back to the original  Fall of  Gondolin (see  my re-           
  marks, II. 208); but at that time Tuor  had no  associations that           
  would  tie  him  into  a  chronological  framework. Already  in S           
  ($16), however,  Huor, brother  of Hurin,  had become  Tuor's fa-           
  ther,  and  Huor  was slain  in the  Battle of  Unnumbered Tears.           
  Clearly  there  was  a  major  narrative-chronological difficulty           
  lurking here,  and it  was not  long before  my father  moved the           
  founding of Gondolin {and with it that of  Nargothrond) to  a far           
  earlier point in the history. Unhappily, as I have  mentioned be-           
  fore (II. 208, footnote), the  Quenta account  was the  last that           
  my  father  ever  wrote  of  the  story  of Gondolin  from Tuor's           
  coming  to  its  destruction; and  therefore, though  the revised           
  chronological  structure  is perfectly  clear, the  latest actual           
  formed  narrative  retains  the  old  story  of  the  founding of           
  Gondolin  after  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered  Tears.  Against the           
  words  in the  Q II  replacement 'For  Turgon deemed,  when first           
  they came into  that vale  after the  dreadful battle'  my father           
  wrote an X (note 3); but in all the years that followed  he never           
  turned to it again.*                                                        
    The name  Eryd-Lomin occurs  for the  first time+ in the  Q II           
                                                                             
  (*The passage in The Silmarillion (p. 240) is an editorial attempt to use the
  old narrative within the later structure.                                   
    +For the first time in the narrative texts. The actual first occurrence is
  probably in the caption to my father's painting of  Tol Sirion  (Pictures by
  J. R. R. Tolkien no. 36) of July 1928, which though it cannot be made out in
  the reproduction reads: 'The Vale of  Sirion, looking  upon Dor-na-Fauglith,)
 with Eryd Lomin (the Shadowy Mountains) on the left and the eaves of Taur-
 na-Fuin on the right.')                                                    

 replacement text, but its  reference is  to the  Mountains of             
 Shadow fencing Hithlum, and it was later emended (note  1) to             
 Eredwethion  (Ered  Wethrin  in  The Silmarillion).  The name             
 Eryd-Lomin did at  this time  mean 'Shadowy  Mountains', just             
 as Dor-lomin meant 'Land of Shadows' (see I. 112, and  I. 255             
 entry  Hisilome).  Subsequently  Eryd-Lomin,  Ered  Lomin was             
 changed  both  in  meaning  ('Shadowy Mountains'  to 'Echoing             
 Mountains', with lom 'echo', as also  in Dor-lomin  'Land of             
 Echoes') and in application, becoming the name of the coastal             
 range to the west of Hithlum.                                             
                                                                          
                                    16.                                    
                                                                          
   At  the  beginning  of  this  section  we  find  the  first  beginnings
 of  the  later  story  of  the  coming  of   Isfin and   Meglin  (Aredhel
 and  Maeglin)  to  Gondolin,  rather  than  (as  still  in  S)  the send-
 ing  of  Meglin  by  his  mother;  Eol  was  lost  in  Taur-na-Fuin,  and
 his  wife  and  son  came  to   Gondolin  in   his  absence.   There  was
 much further development to come (the story of Maeglin in                 
 The Silmarillion is one of the latest elements in the book).              
   In  the  rewritten  passage  given  in  note  3 the  birth of  Tuor 'in
 the  wild'  appears  (see  p.  81);  the  implication  is  no  doubt that
 as in The Silmarillion (p. 198) and with more detail in the               
 'later  Tuor'  (Unfinished  Tales  p.  17)  he  was  born  in  the  wilds
 of  Hithlum,  and  that  it  was  after  his  birth  that Rian  went east
 to the Hill of Slain (in the rough rewriting of the passage in            
 Q  I  now  first  given  an  Elvish  name,  Amon   Dengin).  But   it  is
 odd that in the rewriting Tuor's servitude among 'the faithless           
 Men', found in S and in Q as first written, is excluded.                  
   In the account of Tuor's flight from Hithlum the name of the            
 Rainbow  Cleft  as  originally  written  was  Cris-Ilfing  (in  the  tale
 of  The  Fall  of  Gondolin  it  was   Cris  Ilbranteloth   or  Glorfalc),
 emended   to   Kirith   Helvin   (Cirith   Ninniach   in   The  Silmaril-
 lion).                                                                    
   Tuor's  journey   remains  unchanged.   It  was   already  said   in  S
 that  Bronweg  'had  once  been  in  Gondolin',  now it  is added  that 
 he   had   escaped   from   Angband,   and   had  reached   Sirion  after
                                                                          
  long  wanderings  in  the  East.  That  he had  been in  Angband ap-
  pears  in  fact  already  in  the  Lay  of  the  Fall   of  Gondolin
  (III. 148), and is implied in the Tale (II. 156 - 7). The story of his
  lone survival from the last of the  ships sent  out on  Turgon's or-
  ders  had  not  yet  arisen;  and  his  escape  from  Angband  makes
  him a rather  obvious parallel  to Flinding  (Gwindor), or  at least
  points  a general  likeness between  the stories  of Turin  and Tuor
  at  this  point. In  each case  a Man  is guided  by an  Elf escaped
  from  Angband to  the hidden  city of  which the  Elf was  a citizen
  in the past. - The visitation of Ulmo to  Tuor 'as  he stood  in the
  long  grass at  evening' in  the Land  of Willows  goes back  to the
  Tale, where he stood  'knee-deep in  the grass' (II. 155).  This was
  an  essential  element  never abandoned;  see II.  205. The  song of
  Tuor  that he  made for  his son  Earendel is  extant, and  is given
  in Appendix 2 to this chapter (p. 262).                             
    Ulmo's  instructions  to  Tuor  in  Q  remain  the  same as  in S;
  but  in  the  Q  II  replacement  there  are  important differences.
  Here,  the  great   war  between   Gondolin  and   Angband  foreseen
  by  Ulmo  is  given  a  larger  scope,  and  its  succesful  outcome
  made  to  seem  more  plausible:  Tuor's  errand  to  Hithlum, where
  he  was  to  draw  the ('evil'  and 'faithless')  Men of  Hithlum (a
  land  full  of  Morgoth's  spies)  into alliance  with the  Elves, a
  task  it  would  seem  of  the  utmost  hopelessness,  is  now aban-
  doned,  and  Tuor  is to  journey into  the East  and rouse  the new
  nations  of  Men;  the  feud with  the Feanorians  is to  be healed.
  But  in  the  contrary  case,  Ulmo  no  longer  makes  any  promise
  to  aid  the  people of  Gondolin in  the building  of a  fleet. His
  foreknowledge  of  the   approaching  doom   of  Gondolin   is  made
  progressively  less  precise:  in  S  he  knows  that  it  will come
  through  Meglin  in  seven (>  twelve) years,  in Q  I that  it will
  come  in  twelve  years,  but  without  mention of  Meglin, in  Q II
  only that  it will  come before  many years  are passed,  if nothing
  is done.                                                            
    In the story of  Meglin's treachery  in Q  it is  expressly stated
  (as it is not in S, though it is almost  certainly implied)  that he
  revealed  the  actual  situation  of  Gondolin,  of   which  Morgoth
  was until then ignorant.                                            
    There  are  strong  suggestions  in  this compressed  account that
  Gondolin's  rich  heraldry  of  houses  and  emblems  was   only  in

  abeyance,   not   abandoned.    The   seven    names   of    Gondolin   are
  referred   to,   though   not   given,  and   Ecthelion  of   the  Fountain
  and   Glorfindel   of   the  House   of  the   Golden  Flower   are  named.
  Indeed   so   many   old  features   reappear  -   the  Gates   of  Summer,
  the  'death  of  Rog  without  the  walls'*  -  that   it  does   not  need
  the  reference  in  the  text  to  The  Fall  of  Gondolin  to  show  that
  my  father  had  the  Tale  very  fully  in  mind.  In  the   reference  to
  the   'devising'   (rather   than   'breeding')    of   new    dragons   by
  Morgoth  for  the  assault  on  the  city  there   is  even   a  suggestion
  of   the   (apparently)   inanimate   constructions   of  the   Tale  (see
  II. 213).                                                                  
    The  relation   between  the   present  shor;   version  of   the  escape
  of   the   fugitives   and   the   ambush    in   Cristhorn    (>   Kirith-
  thoronath),    which    is   effectively    that   in    The   Silmarillion
  (p.  243),  and  that  in  the Tale  has been  discussed in  II. 213  - 14.
  The   absence   from   The   Silmarillion   of   the  fugitives   who  went
  to  the   Way  of   Escape  and   were  there   destroyed  by   the  dragon
  lying  in  wait,  an  element  present  in  S  and Q,  is due  to editorial
  excision,  based  on  evidence  in  a   much  later   text  that   the  old
  entrance  to  Gondolin  had  been  blocked  up.  That   text  is   the  ba-
  sis  for  the  passage  in  The  Silmarillion  (p.  228)  where  Hurin  af-
  ter   his   release   from   Thangorodrim   came   to   the  feet   of  the
  Encircling Mountains:                                                      
                                                                            
    he looked about him with little hope, standing at the foot of           
    a great fall of stones beneath a shee! rock-wall; and  he knew           
    not that this was all that was now left to see of the  old Way           
    of  Escape: the  Dry River  was blocked,  and the  arched gate           
    was buried.                                                              
                                                                            
  The sentence in The Silmarillion p. 240 'Therefore in that time            
  the very entrance to the  hidden door  in the  Encircling Moun-            
  tains was caused to be blocked up' was an editorial addition.               
    In Q reappears from the Tale the sojourn of the  survivors of            
  Gondolin in the Land of Willows,  and the  return of  the 'sea-            
  longing'  to Tuor,  leading to  the departure  from Nan-Tathrin            
  down Sirion to the Sea.                                                    
                                                                            
  (*For the absence of Rog from the passage in The Silmarillion (p. 242) see
    II. 211, second footnote.)                                               

                                             
                                                                  
  Lastly may  be noticed  the description  of Idril  Celebrindal in
 Q  II  (p, 177)  - tall,  'well nigh  of warrior's  stature', with
 golden hair: the prototype  of Galadriel  (see especially  the de-
 scription of her in Unfinished Tales pp. 229 - 30),              
                                                                  
                                17.                                
                                                                  
  In the original  Q text  in this  section the  structure of  S is
 closely  followed, and  in many  respects the  story is  still un-
 changed where change was very soon to take place.                 
  All  trace  of  Ulmo's  urging Earendel  to undertake  the voyage
 to Valinor  has disappeared  (see S$17  note 3);  but it  is still
 Ulmo's  'grievous  words'  to the  Valar that  lead to  the coming
 forth  of  the  Sons  of  the  Valar  against  Morgoth,  and still
 Earendel 'came too late to bring  messages to  the Elves,  for the
 Elves  had  gone' (cf.  Q$6: 'he  came too  late'). There  now ap-
 pears,  on the  other hand,  Earendel's wish  to bring  'a message
 to  the  Gods  and  Elves  of  the  West,  that should  move their
 hearts to pity on  the world',  even though,  when he  came, there
 were none in Kor to  whom to  deliver it.  But the  ultimate story
 is noted on the text in pencil (note 1).                          
  In  the  account of  the host  that came  from Valinor  Fionwe is
 still the son of Tulkas (see p. 82};  but now  none of  the Teleri
 leave Valinor, while on  the other  hand there  is mention  of the
 Gnomes   who   had   not  left   Valinor  at   the  time   of  the
 Rebellion  - cf.  the earlier  passage in  Q ($5):  'Some remained
 behind... It was long ere  they came  back into  this tale  of the
 wars and wanderings of their people.'                             
  Bronweg  is  still  present  as  in  S  living alone  at Sirion's
 mouth after the attack by the Feanorians, and he still  sails with
 Earendel  on  the  second  voyage  of  Wingelot that  brought them
 to Kor. Earendel still at this point in the story builds the Tower
 of Seabirds; his ship is raised, as in S, on  the wings  of birds,
 as he  searches for  Elwing from  the sky,  whence he  is hunted
 by  the  Moon  and  wanders  over  the earth  as a  fugitive star.
 Elwing still casts the Silmaril into the sea  and leaps  after it,
 taking  the  form of  a seabird  to seek  Earendel 'about  all the
 shores  of  the  world'.  Minor  developments  are  the dissension
 among  the  Feanorians, so  that some  stood aside  and others
 aided Elwing; the deaths  of Damrod  and Diriel  (see p.  84); the

                                                                             
                                                                                 
  explanation of Maidros' pity for the child Elrond ('for his heart               
  was sick and weary with the  burden of  the dreadful  oath'); and               
  the  description  of  Wingelot.  The name  of Tuor's  ship Earame               
  is translated 'Eagle's Pinion' (the old explanation of  the name,               
  when it was  Earendel's ship),  not 'Sea-wing'  (see p.  83). The               
  passage in S concerning the  choice of  Elrond Halfelven  is here               
  omitted, but the matter reappears in $18.                                       
                                                                                 
    With this section the rewriting of Q (as  'Q II')  becomes con-               
  tinuous to the end of the work, and the original text ('Q I') in               
  fact gives out before the end. Since  substantial stretches  of Q               
  I  remain unchanged  in Q  II, I  do not  suppose that  much time               
  elapsed between them; but  certain major  new strokes  are intro-               
  duced into the legend in the rewriting.                                         
    These  major developments  in the  present section  are, first,               
  that Ulmo's words to the Valar  did not  achieve the  war against               
  Morgoth  ('Manwe  moved  not');  second,  that  Elwing,  borne up               
  as  a  seabird,  bore  the Silmaril  on her  breast, and  came to               
  Earendel, returning from his  first voyage  in Wingelot:  so that               
  the  Silmaril  of  Beren  was  not lost,  but became  the Evening               
  Star; and third, that Earendel, voyaging to Valinor with Elwing,               
  came before the Valar, and it was  his 'embassy  of the  two kin-               
  dreds' that led to the assault on Morgoth.*                                     
    But there are also many  changes of  a less  structural charac-               
  ter in Q II, as: Earendel's earlier voyages  about the  shores of               
  the  Outer  Lands before  he built  Wingelot; his  warning dreams               
  to return in haste to the Mouths  of Sirion,  which in  the event               
  he  never  came  back  to,  being  intercepted  by the  coming of               
  Elwing  as  a  seabird  and  her  tidings  of  what  had happened               
  there  in  his  absence  -  hence  the  disappearance  of Bronweg               
  from the story; the healing power of the  Silmaril on  the people               
  of  Sirion  (see  p.  230): the  great light  of the  Silmaril as               
  Wingelot  approached Valinor,  and the  suggestion that  it was               
  the power  of the  jewel that  brought the  ship through  the en-               
  chantmerts  and  the  shadows;  Earendel's  refusal to  allow any               
  of those that travelled with him to come  with him  into Valinor;               
  the new explanation of the desertion  of Tun  upon Kor  (for ',he               
                                                                                 
  (*The first appearance of this central idea is in a hasty pencilled note to Q I
  (note 1): 'Make Earendel move the Gods.')                                       

  story still endured that the city of the Elves  was empty  of its                 
  inhabitants   when   Earendel  came   there);  the   greeting  of                 
  Earendel  by  Fionwe  (now  again  the  son  of  Manwe)   as  the                 
  Morning  and  Evening  Star;  the  manning by  the Teleri  of the                 
  ships  that  bore  the  hosts of  the West;  and the  sighting of                 
  the Silmaril  in the  sky by  Maidros and  Maglor and  the people                 
  of the Outer Lands.                                                               
    By  subsequent  emendation  to  Q  II  some   further  elements                 
  enter. To Tuor is ascribed a fate (note 3) hardly  less astonish-                 
  ing  than  that of  his cousin  Turin Turambar.  Elrond's brother                 
  Elros appears (notes  4 and  9); and  Maglor takes  over Maidros'                 
  role as their saviour, and as the less ruthless and single-minded                 
  of the two brothers (note 10;  see the  commentary on  $18). Tne                 
  addition in note 19  stating that  the leader  of the  Gnomes who                 
  had  never  departed  from Valinor  was Ingwiel  son of  Ingwe is                 
  at first sight surprising: one would expect Finrod  (> Finarfin),                 
  as in The Silmarillion (p. 251). I think however that  this addi-                 
  tion  was  imperfectly  accommodated  to  the  text:  the meaning                 
  intended  was  that  Ingwiel  was  the chief  of the  Quendi (the                 
  Light-elves,  the  Vanyar)  among  whom  the  Gnomes  of  Valinor                 
  marched.* In a revision to Q$2 (note 6)  the original  text, say-                 
  ing  that  Ingwe  never  came  back into  the Outer  Lands 'until                 
  these  tales were  near their  end', was  changed to  a statement                 
  that  he  never  returned.  Ingwiel  replaces  Ingil son  of Inwe                 
  of the Lost Tales, who built Ingil's Tower in Tol Eressea (I. 16)                 
  after his return from the Great Lands.                                            
    As Q II was first written                                                       
                                                                                   
    Earendel was their guide [i e. of the fleet of the hosts of                     
    Valinor];  but  the  Gods  would not  suffer him  to return                     
    again,+ and he built him a white tower upon the confines of                     
                                                                                   
   (*In the final version of this passage my father  noticed the  (apparent) error,
    and changed Ingwiel son  of Ingwe  to Finarfin  son of  Finwe (hence  the read-
    ing in The Silmarillion). The result is that whereas in Q II only the  leader of
    !he First Kindred is named, Ingwiel, in the final version only the leader of the
    Noldor of Valinor is named, Finarfin; but the one should not, I think,  have re-
    placed    the    other    -    rather    both    should    have    been   named.
    + Cf. the letter of 1967 cited in II.  265: 'Earendil,  being in  part descended
    from Men, was not allowed to set foot on Earth again.')                       

                                                                           
                                                                              
 the outer world in  the Northern  regions of  the Sundering                   
 Seas, and there all the sea-birds of the earth at times re-                   
 paired.                                                                       
                                                                              
 The  Tower   of  Seabirds   thus  survives   in  the   same  place   in  the
 narrative  as  in  S  and  Q,   where  Earendel   builds  the   tower  after
 his  fruitless  visit  to  Kor. At  the end  of this  section in  S Earendel
                                                                              
 sails by the aid of [the seabirds'] wings even over the airs                  
 in search of Elwing, but is scorched by the Sun,  and hunted                  
 from the sky by the Moon, and  for a  long while  he wanders                  
 the sky as a fugitive star.                                                   
                                                                              
 Virtually the same is said at the end of the section  in Q  I. In             
 Q  II, however,  as first  written, Elwing  was with  Earendel at             
 this time,* in the form of  a bird,  and it  was she  who devised             
 wings for his ship, so that 'it was lifted  even into  the oceans             
 of the air'.                                                                  
 In  S  and Q  I Earendel  does not  yet bear  a Silmaril  when he             
 wanders the sky 'as a fugitive star' (for  the Silmaril  of Beren             
 is drowned with the Nauglafring, and the others are still in the             
 Iron Crown of Morgoth); whereas in Q II it is  at this  time that             
 the Silmaril appears in the sky and gives hope  to the  people of             
 the Outer Lands.                                                              
 With  the  revision  to Q  II given  in note  20 enters  the idea             
 that it was the  Gods themselves  who set  Earendel and  his ship             
 in the sky. It is now Elwing  who builds  the Tower  of Seabirds,             
 devising wings for herself in order to try to reach him, in vain;             
 and they are sundered till the end  of the  world. This  no doubt             
 goes with the revision to Q  II given  in note  14: 'And  he bade             
 farewell  to  all  whom  he loved  upon the  last shore,  and was             
 taken from them for ever.'                                                    
 In  The  Silmarillion  the  element  of  a  small  ship's company             
 remains:  the  three  mariners  Falathar, Erellont,  and Aerandir             
 (p. 248). These,  and Elwing,  Earendil refused  to allow  to set             
                                                                              
 (*It is not actually said in Q II that Elwing returned to Earendel  after being
 bidden by him to remain behind  when he  landed on  'the immortal  shores' and
 went to Kor; but it is evident that she did, from her having devised wings for
 his ship.)                                                                     

  foot  on  the  shore of  Aman; but  Elwing leapt  into the  sea and
  ran  to  him,  saying:  'Then  would  our  paths  be  sundered  for
  ever.'  There  Earendil  and  Elwing  'bade  farewell  to  the com-
  panions  of  their  voyage,  and  were taken  from them  for ever',
  but  Elwing  did  not  even  so  accompany  Elendil to  Tirion. She
  sojourned  among  the  Teleri  of  Alqualonde,  and  Earendil  came
  to her there after he  had 'delivered  the errand  of the  Two Kin-
  dreds'  before the  Valar; and  they went  then together  to Valmar
  and  heard  Manwe  s  decree,  and  the  choice  of  fate  that was
  given to them and to their children.                              
    A  curious point  arises in  the account  in Q  II of  the voyage
  of  Earendel  and  Elwing  that  brought  them  to  the   coast  of
  Valinor.  Whereas  in Q  I it  is said  that Earendel  'found again
  the  Lonely  Isle,  and  the  Shadowy  Seas',  in  Q II  'they came
  into  the  Shadowy  Seas  and  passed   their  shadows;   and  they
  looked  upon  the  Lonely  Isle...'  This  suggests that  the Shad-
  owy  Seas  had  become  a  region  of  the Great  Sea lying  to the
  east  cf Tol  Eressea; and  the same  idea seems  to be  present in
  $6 both in S and in Q, for it is said there that  at the  Hiding of
  Valinor  'the  Magic Isles  were... strung  across the  confines of
  the  Shadowy  Seas,  before  the  Lonely  Isle  is  reached sailing
  West'.  Quite different  is the  account in  the Lost  Tales, where
  'beyond  Tol  Eressea  [lying  west  of  the  Magic  Isles]  is the
  misty  wall  and  those  great  sea  glooms  beneath which  lie the
  Shadowy  Seas'   (I.  125);   and  the   Shadowy  Seas   extend  to
  the coasts of the western  land (I.  68). Conceivably,  this devel-
  opment  is  related  to  the  changed  position  of  Tol  Eressea -
  anchored  in,  the  Bay  of   Faerie  within   far  sight   of  the
  Mountains  of  Valinor,  and  not  as  in  the  Lost Tales  in mid-
  Ocean: a change that entered the geography in S$3.                
    In  emendations  to  Q  II  the  Magic   Isles  become   the  En-
  chanted Isles (note 11; see II. 324 - 5) and the Bay of  Faerie be-
  comes   the   Bay   of   Elven-home  (note   12);  also   the  name
  Earame  of  Tuor's  ship  becomes  Earrame,  with the  later inter-
  pretation 'Sea-wing' (note 2).                                    
                                                                   
                                  18.                               
                                                                   
    There are several interesting developments in the story of       
  the Last Battle and its aftermath as told in the original Q I text

  of this section. The very brief account in S is here  greatly ex-
  panded,  and much  of the  final version  appears, if  still with
  many differences(  notably  the absence of Earendel). That
  Morgoth  had  been  bound  long  before  by  Tulkas in  the chain
  Angainor  now  re-emerges from  the Lost  Tales (this  feature is
  absent in Q$2; see pp. 86, 201).                                 
    The passage describing  the rending  of Beleriand  survives al-
  most  unchanged  in  The  Silmarillion  (p.  252), which  in fact
  adds  nothing  else. There  is a  notable statement  (retained in
  Q  II) that                                                      
                                                                  
    Men  fled  away,  such  as  perished  not  in  the ruin  of those
    days,  and  long  was  it  ere  they  came  back  over  the moun-
    tains to where Beleriand  once had  been, and  not till  the tale
    of those days had faded to an echo seldom heard.               
                                                                  
  I do not know certainly what this refers to (see below,  p. 244).
  Unhappily  the  evidence  for the  development of  the conception
  of the drowning of Beleriand is extremely  scanty. Later,  it was
  only a small  region (Lindon)  that remained  above the  sea west
  of  the  Blue  Mountains;  but  this  need not  by any  means yet
  have been the case. It is also said in Q (again retained in Q II)
  that                                                             
                                                                  
    there  was  a  mighty  building  of  ships on  the shores  of the
    Western Sea, and most  upon the  great isles,  which in  the dis-
    ruption   of   the   Northern   world   were  fashioned   of  old
    Beleriand.                                                     
                                                                  
  Of the size and number of these  'great isles'  we are  not told.
  On  one  of  my  father's  sketchmaps  made for  The Lord  of the
  Rings there is the island of Himling, i.e. the summit of the Hill
  of Himring, and also Tol Fuin, i.e. the highest part  of Taur-na-
  Fuin (see Unfinished Tales pp. 13 - 14); and in  The Silmarillion
  (p. 230) it is said that the stone of the  Children of  Hurin and
  the  grave  of  Morwen  above  Cabed  Naeramarth  stands  on  Tol
  Morwen  'alone  in  the  water  beyond the  new coasts  that were
  made in the days of the  wrath of  the Valar'.  But it  seems ob-
  vious that my father was at  this time  imagining far  larger is-

                                                                         
                                                                                
 lands than these, since it was on them that the great fleets were               
 built at the end of  the War  of Wrath.  Luthien ()  Leithien) as               
 the land from which the Elves set sail,  named in  S $18  and ex-               
 plained  as  'Britain or  England', is  not named  in Q;  but the               
 words that  follow in  S: 'Thence  they ever  still from  time to               
 time set sail leaving the world  ere they  fade', are  clearly re-               
 flected in Q:                                                                   
                                                                                
   Yet not all returned, and some lingered many  an age  in the                  
   West and  North, and  especially in  the Western  Isles. Yet                  
   ever  as  the ages  drew on  and the  Elf-folk faded  on the                  
   Earth, they would  still set  sail at  eve from  our Western                  
   shores; as still they do, when now there linger few anywhere                  
   of the lonely companies.                                                      
                                                                                
 The  relation  between  these  passages  strongly suggests  that the            
 'Western  Isles'  were the  British Isles,*  and that  England still            
 had  a place  in the  actual mythological  geography, as  is explic-            
 itly so in  S. In  this connection  the opening  of AElfwine  of En-            
 giand, in the final text AElfwine II (II. 312 - 13), is interesting:            
                                                                                
   There was a land called England, and it was an island  of the                 
   West, and before it  was broken  in the  warfare of  the Gods                 
   it  was  westernmost of  all the  Northern lands,  and looked                 
   upon the Great Sea that Men of old  called Garsecg;  but that                 
   part that was broken was  called Ireland  and many  names be-                 
   sides, and its dwellers come not into these tales.                            
      All that land the Elves named Luthien and do so yet. In                 
   Luthien alone dwelt still the  most part  of the  Fading Com-                 
   panies, the Holy Fairies that have not  yet sailed  away from                 
   the world,  beyond the  horizon of  Men's knowledge,  to the                 
   Lonely Island, or even to  the Hill  of Tun  upon the  Bay of                 
   Faery that washes the western  shores of  the kingdom  of the                 
   Gods.                                                                         
                                                                                
  (*This may seem to be rendered  less likely  by the  form of  the passage  in Q
   II, where the first sentence is expanded: 'and especially in the western isles
   and the lands of Leithien'. But I do not think that this phrase need  be taken
   too precisely, and believe that the equation holds.)                         

  It  is  possible,  as  I suggested  (II. 323  - 4),  that this  passage refers
  to  the  cataclysm,  and  its   aftermath,  that   is  otherwise   first  men-
  tioned  in  S  $18.  AElfwine  II  cannot   be  dated,   but  AElfwine   I  on
  which   it   was   based   was   probably   written  in   1920  or   not  much
  later.  It  is  also  conceivable,  if  no  more,  that  the  meaning  of  the
  words   in   Q,   that   it   was   long   before    Men   came    back   over
  the   mountains   to   where   Beleriand   once  had   been,  refers   to  the
  bloody   invasions   of   England   in  later   days  described   in  AElfwine
  II;  for  there  is  very  little  in  that  text that  cannot be  readily ac-
  commodated   to   the   present   passage   in   S  and   Q,  with   the  pic-
  ture   of    the   fading    Elves   of    Luthien   'leaving    our   Western
  shores'.*  But  a  serious  difficulty  with  this  idea  lies  in   the  com-
  ing   of   Men   'over   the   mountains'   to   where   Beleriand   once  had
  been.                                                                         
    Certainly   the   most   remarkable,   even   startling,   feature   of  the
  aftermath  of  the  Last  Battle  in  Q  (I)  is   the  statement   that  when
  Fionwe     marched     through    the     lands    summoning     the    Gnomes
  and   the   Dark-elves   to   leave   the   Outer  Lands,   the  Men   of  the
  Houses   of   Hador   and   Beor   were   'suffered   to   depart,   if   they
  would'.   But   only  Elrond   was  left;   and  of   his  choice,   as  Half-
  elven,  the  same   is  told   as  in   S  $17.   The  implications   of  this
  passage  are  puzzling.  It   is  obvious   that  'the   race  of   Hador  and
  Beor'    means    those    directly   descended    from   Hador    and   Beor;
  afterwards     the     conception    of     these    Houses     became    much
  enlarged   -   they   became   clans.   But  since   of  the   direct  descen-
  dants   only   Elrond   was  left,   what  does   this  permission   mean?  Is
  it  a   (very  curious)   way  of   offering  the   choice  of   departure  to
  the   Half-elven,   if   he   (they)  wished?   -  because   the  Half-elven
  had   only   come  into   existence  in   the  Houses   of  Hador   and  Beor.
                                                                               
  (*Two small likenesses may be noticed: in AElfwine  11 the  ships of  the Elves
  weigh anchor from the western haven 'at eve' (II. 315), as in Q; and with 'the
  lonely companies' of Q cf. 'the Fading Companies' of AElfwine  II in  the pas-
  sage cited above.                                                             
    A further attractive deduction, that  this was  the origin  of the  haven of
  Belerion in  AElfwine of  England, the  western harbour  'whence the  Elves at
  times set sail' (a survival of the old name Beleriand among  the Men  of later
  days when its original reference was forgotten,  and 'the  tale of  those days
  had faded to an echo seldom heard'), cannot be sustained: for AElfwine  11 was
  certainly written long before  the earliest  occurrences of  Beleriand (rather
  than Broseliand).)                                                             

  But this seems too  legalistic and  contorted to  be at  all proba-
  ble.  Then does  it imply  that, if  there had  in fact  been other
  descendants  -  if,  for  example,  Gundor  son  of  Hador  had had
  children  -  they  would  have  been   permitted  to   depart?  And
  what  then?  Would  they  have  ended  their  days  as  mortal  Men
  on  Tol  Eressea?  The  permission  seems  very  obscure  on either
  interpretation;  and  it  was  removed  from  Q II.  Nonetheless it
  represents, as I think, the first germ of the  story of  the depar-
  ture of the survivors of the Elf-friends to Numenor.               
    The story of the  fate of  the Silmarils  in Q  I advances  on S,
  and  here  reaches  an  interesting  transitional  stage  between S
  and  Q  II,  where the  final resolution  is achieved.  Maidros re-
  mains  as  in S  the less  fiercely resolute  of the  two surviving
  sons of Feanor in the fulfilment  of the  oath: in  S it  is Maglor
  alone  who  steals  a  Silmaril  from  Fionwe's  keeping, and  in Q
  I  it is  Maidros who  is 'minded  to submit',  but is  argued down
  by  Maglor.  In  Q  II  the  arguments  remain,  but  the  parts of
  Maidros  and  Maglor  are  reversed,  just  as  in  $17  (by  later
  emendation  to  Q  II,  note  10)  Maglor   becomes  the   one  who
  saved  Elrond  and  Elros. In  Q I  both brothers  go to  steal the
  Silmarils  from  Fionwe,  as in  the final  version of  the legend;
  but,  as  in  S,  only Maglor  carries his  away -  for in  the new
  story Maidros is captured. Yet,  whereas as  in S  only one  of the
  two  remaining Silmarils  is consigned  to the  deep places  by the
  act of one of the brothers (Maglor), and the  other is  retained by
  Fionwe   and   ultimately   becomes   Earendel's  star   -  Maidros
  playing, so far as can be seen, no further part in its fate, in Q I
  the burning of the unrighteous hand, and  the realisation  that the
  right  of the  sons of  Feanor to  the Silmarils  is now  void, be-
  comes  that  of  Maidros;  and,  a  prisoner  of  Fionwe,  he slays
  himself, casting the Silmaril on  the ground  (and though  the text
  of Q I does not go so far as this, the logic of the  narrative must
  lead to the  giving of  this Silmaril  to Earendel,  as in  S). The
  emended  version  in  S  (notes  6  and  7),  that Maglor  casts his
  Silmaril into a fiery pit  and thereafter  wanders singing  in sor-
  row by the sea (rather  than that  he casts  himself also  into the
  pit), is taken up into Q I.                                        
    In Q  II the  story has  shifted again,  to the  final harmonious
  and  symmetrical  structure:  the  Silmaril of  Beren is  not lost,

  and  becomes  the  star  of  Earendel:  both  Maglor  and  Maidros
  take  a  Silmaril  from  the camp  of Fionwe,  and both  cast them
  down into inaccessible places. Maidros still  takes his  own life,
  but does so by casting himself into the fiery pit - and this  is a
  return  to  the original  story of  Maglor told  in S.  Maglor now
  casts his Silmaril into the sea - and thus the Silmarils of earth,
  sea, and sky are retained, but they  are different  Silmarils; for
  in the earlier versions it was one  of those  from the  Iron Crown
  of Morgoth that became the Evening Star.                          
    This  extraordinarily complex  but highly  characteristic narra-
  tive  evolution  can  perhaps be  shown more  clearly in  a table:

          S.          
                      
 The Silmaril cf       
 Beren is  cast into
 the  sea  by Elwing
 and lost.             
                      
                      
                      
                      
 Maglor alone steals
 a  Silmaril  from 
 Fionwe, and es-       
 capes.               
                      
        
                      
 Maglor knows
 from  the pain of 
 the Silmaril that he 
 no  longer has a
 right  to it

     QI.     
                      
 As in S.              
                      
 Maidros is minded     
 to submit, but     
 Maglor argues        
 against him.          
                      
 Maidros and           
 Maglor together       
 steal both Silmarils
 from Fionwe, but      
 Maidros is cap-
 tured.                
                      
 Maidros knows         
 from the pair of
 the Silmaril that he
 no longe has a       
 right to it.          

         QII.       
                   
 The Silmaril of
 Beren is brought
 by Elwing to       
 Earendel on        
 Wingelot; with it
 he goes to Valinor.
                   
 Maglor is minded
 to submit, but     
 Maidros argues     
 against him.       
                   
 As in Q I, hut both
 Ma! dros and       
 Maglor  are permit-
 ted to depart bear-
 ing the Silmarils.
                   
 As in QI.             


  Maglor casts       
  himself and the
  Silmaril into a
  fiery pit          
  > He casts the     
  Silmaril into a pit
  and wanders by     
  the shores.         
                    
  Maidros' Silmaril
  is adjudged  by the
  Gods to Earendel.


  Maidros casts his
  Silmaril on the      
  ground and takes     
  his life.             
                      
  Maglor casts his     
  Silmaril into  a fiery
  pit  and   wanders  by
  the shores.          
                      
  [As in S, though     
  this point not       
  reached in Q I].     


  Maidros casts      
  himself and his
  Silmaril into a
  fiery pit.         
                    
  Maglor casts his
  Silmaril into the
  sea and wanders
  by the shores.     
                    
  The Silmaril of
  Beren, never lost,
  is retained by     
  Earendel.          

    We find still in both versions of  Q, as  in S,  the statement
  that some of  the returning  Elves went  beyond Tol  Eressea and
  dwelt in Valinor ('as all were free to do who  willed'. Q  II) -
  and it is made clear in the Q texts that these included  some of
  the  exiled  Noldoli,  'admitted to  the love  of Manwe  and the
  pardon of the Gods'. Also retained in Q I (but not  in Q  II) is
  the statement that Tun remained deserted., again  without expla-
  nation given (see p. 87). But whereas in S Tol Eressea  was re-
  peopled  by 'the  Gnomes and  many of  the Ilkorins  and Teleri
  and Qendi', in the Q-texts Teleri and  Quendi are  not mentioned
  here,  only  Gnomes  and  Dark-elves  ('especially  such  as had
  once belonged to Doriath', Q I).                                
    In a hasty pencilled note to Q I ($17 note 1) there is  a ref-
  erence  to  some  Men of  Hithlum being  repentant, and  to !he
  fulfilment of Ulmo's foretelling (i.e.  'without Men  the Elves
  shall not prevail against the Orcs and  Balrogs', $16):  both by
  the  valour  of  the  Men  of  Hithlum,  and  by the  embassy of
  Earendel to the Valar. This is taken up into Q II in the present
  section, with the addition  that many  Men new  come out  of the
  East fought against Morgoth; but further  revision (notes  2 and
  3) altered this to say that most Men  and especially  these new-
  comers  from  the  East  fought on  the side  of the  Enemy, and
  also that in addition to the repentant Men of Hithlum  'all that
  were left of the three Houses of the Fathers  of Men  fought for

                     S and Q.                    
                                               
  Earendel   (with   Bronweg)    visits   Kor
  fruitlessly,  for  the  Elves  have already
  gone ($17).                                   
                                               
  He builds the Tower where all seabirds        
  come (Q: and grieves for the loss of          
  Elwing)($17).                                 
                                               
  By birds' wings Wingelot is lifted into the
  sky ($17).                                   
                                               
  He  is scorched  by the  Sun and  hunted by
  the Moon, and wanders  as a  fugitive star.
  He has no Silmaril. ($17).                   
                                               
  After the Last Battle the Silmaril of         
  Maidros is given to Earendel and Elwing       
  is restored to him; he sails into the Outer
  Dark with Elwing, bearing the Silmaril        
  ($ 19) [The Q I text ends before this point
  is reached].                                  

               Q II.                          
                                             
  Earendel (with Elwing, and bearing          
  the Silmaril) goes to Valinor, and          
  forbidding Elwing to accompany him          
  further declares 'the embassy of the Two
  Kindreds' ($17).                            
                                             
  He guides the fleet out of the West; he      
  builds the Tower of Seabirds, and           
  Elwing is with him ($17).                  
                                             
  Elwing devises wings for Wingelot ($17).
                                             
  He sails the sky bearing the Silmaril       
  (? with Elwing), and the star is seen by the
  people of the Outer Lands ($ 17).          
                                             
  He descends from the sky to the Last        
  Battle with  countless birds  about him,
  and slays Ancalagon ($ 18).                 
                                             
  He is scorched by the Sun and hunted by     
  the Moon, and sails as a fugitive star ($19)
  His ship is hallowed by the Valar and       
  launched through the Door of Night.         
  Elwing is with him ($ 19).                 

       Revisions to Q II.                  
                                          
 Earendel bids farewell  to Elwing  for ever
 on the shore of Valinor ($ 17 note 14).
                                          
 Earendel's ship is hallowed by  the Valar
 and set in the sky ($ 17 note 20).        
                                          
 Elwing builds the Tower and devises       
 bird-wings for herself, but cannot        
 reach Earendel, and they are sundered for
 ever ($17 note 20).                       
                                          
 (Elwing is not with him).                 
                                          
 (Elwing is not with him; $19 note 6).     

  broken  by  Maidros);  and  with  the awakening  of the  Elves and
  the rising of their dead the purpose of Iluvatar will be fulfilled
  concerning  them.  The  appearance  of  Turin  at the  end remains
  profoundly  mysterious;  and  here  it is  said that  the prophecy
  names  him  among  the  Gods, which  is clearly  to be  related to
  the passage in the old  Tale of  Turambar (II.  116), where  it is
  said  that  Turin  and Nienor  'dwelt as  shining Valar  among the
  blessed  ones',  after  they  had  passed  through Fos' Almir, the
  bath cf flame. In changes  to the  text of  Q II  it is  said that
  Turin  is  named  among  'the  songs  of  the  Gods',  rather than
  among  the  Gods,  and  also  that  he  comes  'from the  halls of
  Mandos'  to  the  final  battle;  about  which I  can say  no more
  than that  Turin Turambar,  though a  mortal Man,  did not  go, as
  do the race of Men, to a fate beyond the world.                   
                                                                   
                              APPENDIX 1.                           
                                                                   
          Fragment of a translation of the Quenta Noldorinwa        
            into Old English, made by AElfwine or Eriol;            
                together with Old English equivalents               
                           of Elvish names.                         
                                                                   
  There  are  extant.  fragments of  Old English  (Anglo-Saxon) ver-
  sions of the Annals of Valinor (three),  the Annals  of Beleriand,
  and  Quenta  Noldorinwa.  All begin  at the  beginning of  the re-
  spective  works  arid  only  one,  a  version  of  the  Annals  of
  Valinor, constitutes a substantial text.  The Old  English version
  of the Quenta  which is  given here  had no  title, but  my father
  later inserted in pencil the title  Pennas; cf.  Qenta Noldorinwa
  or Pennas-na-Ngoelaidh, p.  77. in  a brief  detached list  of El-
  vish  names  and  words that  belongs to  this period  occurs this
  entry:                                                            
                                                                   
           Quenta story, tale (quete-'say'). N[oldorin] pent.       
           pennas history (quentasse).                             
                                                                   
    At this time Eriol and AElfwine reappear together as the El-
  vish and English names of the mariner who came to Tol             

  Eressea  and  there translated  various Elvish  works into  his own
  language: in  the preamble  to the  Annals of  Valinor (p.  310) he
  is 'Eriol of Leithien, that is AElfwine of  the Angelcynn',  and in
  one  of  the  Old  English  versions  of these  Annals the  work is
  said  (p.  334)  to  have  been translated  by 'AElfwine,  whom the
  Elves  named Eriol'.  (On the  earlier relations  of the  two names
  see II. 300 - 1.)                                                  
    The  Old  English  version  of  the  Quenta   is  a   very  close
  equivalent  of  the  Modern  English text  from its  opening 'After
  the  making  of  the  World  by  the Allfather'  to 'shadow  is her
  realm and night her throne'  (pp. 94  - 6),  where the  Old English
  ends. It is a manuscript in ink, obviously a first draft, with pen-
  cilled  emendations  (mostly  small  alterations of  word-order and
  suchlike) which  I take  up into  the text;  the last  paragraph is
  written  in  pencil,  very  rapidly. Acute  accents on  long vowels
  were put  in rather  sporadically and  I have  made the  usage con-
  sistent, as with the Old English texts throughout.                 
                                                                    
                                Penn as                              
                                                                    
    AEfter pam pe Ealfaeder, se pe on elfisc Iluuatar                 
  hatte, pas worolde geworhte, pa comon manige pa                    
  mihtegostan gaestas pe mid him wunodon hire to                      
  stieranne; for pon pe hi hie feorran ofsawon faegre                
  geworhte and hi lustfollodon on hire wlitignesse. has      5            
  gaestas nemdon pa Elfe Valar, paet is pa Moegen, pe                 
  men oft siddan swapeah nemdon Godu. Opre gaestas                     
  manige haefdon hi on hira folgode, ge maran ge                     
  laessan, 7 para sume tealdon men sippan gedwollice                  
  mid paem Elfum; ac hie lugon, for pam pe aer seo          10                  
  worold geworht waere hi waeron, 7 Elfe and Firas (paet               
  sindon men) onwocon aerest on worolde aefter para                   
  Valena cyme. Ealfaeder ana geworhte Elfe and Firas                 
  ond aegperum gedaelde hira agene gifa; py hatad hi                  
  woroldbearn oppe Ealfaederes bearn.                       15
    Para Valena ealdoras nigon waeron. Pus hatad pa                  
  nigon godu on elfiscum gereorde swa swa pa elfe hit                
                                                                    
  on Valinore spraecon, peah pe hira naman sind opre 7              

 onhwerfede on nold-elfisc, and missenlice sind  hira na-
 man mid mannum.                                           20
   Manwe  waes  goda  hlaford,   and  winda   and  wedera
 wealdend  and  heofones  styrend.  Mid  him   wunede  to
 his geferan seo  undeadlice heanessa  hlaefdige, uprodera
 cwen,  Varda  tunglawyrhte.  Him  se  nyxta  on maegene,
 and  on  freondscipe  se  cudesta,  waes  Ulmo  agendfrea  25
 ealra waetera, se pe ana wunad on Utgarsecge,  7 styred
 swapeah  eallum  waegum  7  waeterum,  earn  7  streamum,
 wyllum    ond   aewelmum   geond    eordan   ymbhwyrfte.
 Him underpyded,  peah he  him oft  unhold bid,  is Osse,
 se  pe manna  landa saem styred, 7  his gefera  is Uinen   30
 merehlaefdige.  Hire  feax  lip  gespraedd geond  ealle sae
 under heofenum.                                             
   On  maegene  waes  Aule  Ulmo  swidost gelic.  He waes
 smip  and  creaftiga, 7  Yavanna waes  his gefera,  seo pe
 ofet  and  haerfest  and  ealle eordan  waestmas lufode.   35
 Nyxt   was   heo  on   maegene  para   Valacwena  Vardan.
 Swipe wlitig  waes  heo,  and  hie  pa  Elfe  nemdon  oft
 Palurien paet is 'eorpan sceat'.                            
   Pa   gebropru   Mandos   7   Lorien   hatton  Fanturi.
 Nefantur  hated  se  aeresta,  neoaerna   hlaford,  and    40
 waelcyriga,  se  pe  samnode  ofslaenra   manna  gaestas.
 Olofantur  hated  se  oder,  swefna wyrhta  7 gedwimora;
 7   his  tunas   on  goda   landum  waeron   ealra  stowa
 faegroste  on  worolde  7  waeron  gefylde   mid  manigum
 gaestum wlitigum and mihtigum.                             45
   Ealra   goda   strengest   7    leopucraeftigost   and
 foremaerost  ellendaedum  waes  Tulkas;  py  hated  he eac
 pon Poldorea  se  ellenrofa  (se  dyhtiga);  and  he waes
 Melkoes unwine and his wiprbroca.                           
   Orome  waes  mihtig hlaford  and lytle  laessa maegenes  50
 ponne  Tulkas  sylf.  Orome   waes  hunta   7  treowcynn
 lufode  -  py  hatte  he  Aldaron,  7 pa  noldielfe hine
 Tauros  nemdon,  paet  is  Wealdafrea   -  7   him  waeron
 leofe  hors  and  hundas.  Huru he  eode on  huntod purh
 pa deorce land aer  pam pe  seo sunne  wurde gyt atend/     55
 onaeled;  swipe hlude  waeron  his  hornas,  7   swa  beod

 giet on fridum and feldum pe Orome ah on Valinore.                           
 Vana hatte his gefera, seo waes gingra sweostor hira                          
 Vardan 7 Palurienne, 7 seo faegernes ge heofenes ge                          
 eordan bid on hire wlite and hire weorcum. Hire 60                           
 mihtigre swapeah bid Nienna, seo pe mid Nefantur                              
 Mandos eardad. Mildheort bid heo, hire bid geomor                            
 sefa, murnende mod; sceadwa bid hire scir 7 hire                             
 prymsetl peostru.                                                             
                                                                             
                                    NOTES.                                   
                                                                             
      6.   Morgen  ('Powers')  was  emended  to  Reg...  (?Regen  ?Regin). Old
           English regn- in compounds  'great, mighty',  related to  Old Norse
           regin 'Gods' (occurring in Ragnarok).                              
     11.   Firas  is  an emendation  of Elde  (both are  old poetic  words for
           'men').  At  line  13  Firas  is  written  beside  Elde,  which was
           emended to AElde (and Elfe apparently to AElfe).                     
     13.   Valena genitive plural is an emendation from Vala; also in line 16.
     26.   on  Utgarsecge:  Ut-garsecg  'the  Outer  Seas'.  Garsecg,  one  of
           many Old English names of the sea, is  used frequently  in AElfwine
           of England of the Great Sea of the West (in one of the  texts spelt
           Garsedge        to       represent        the       pronunciation).
     41.   waelcyriga: 'chooser of the slain (wael)',  the Old  English equiva-
           lent of Old Norse valkyrja (Valkyrie).                             
 55 - 6.  atend, onaeled: these words  are alternatives,  but neither  is marked
          for rejection.                                                      
 62-3.    Cf.  Beowulf  lines  49  - 50:  him waes  geomor sefa,  murnende mod
          ('sad was their heart and mourning in their soul').                 
                                                                             
                                       *                                      
                                                                             
    Associated with the Old English texts are several lists of El-            
 vish names with  Old English  equivalents, some  of which  are of            
 much interest for the light they  cast on  the meaning  of Elvish            
 names;  though  many  are not  in fact  translations, as  will be            
 seen.                                                                        
    There is firstly a list of the Valar:                                     

       The chief gods are Frean. os (ese).                         
                                                                  
 [O.E. frea 'ruler, lord', os 'god' (in proper names as            
 Oswald), with mutated vowel in the plural.]                       
                                                                  
 Manwe  is  Wolcenfrea  [O.E.  wolcen  'sky',  cf.  Modern English
 welkin.]                                                          
                                                                  
 Ulmo is  Garsecges  frea,  &  ealwaeter-frea  [For  Garsecg  see
 note  to line  26 of  the O.E.  Quenta. In  that text  Ulmo is
 called  agendfrea  ealra  waetera  'Lord of  Waters' (literally
 'owning lord of all waters').]                                    
                                                                  
 Aule is Craeftfrea.                                                
                                                                  
 Tulkas is Afodfrea [O.E. afod, eafod 'might, strength'.]           
                                                                  
 Orome  is  Wadfrea  and  Huntena  frea  [O.E.   wad  'hunting',
 'Hunting  Lord and  Lord of  Hunters'. In  the O.E.  Quenta he
 is Wealdafrea 'Lord of Forests', translating Tauros.]              
                                                                  
 Mandos  is  Nefrea  [O.E.  ne(o)  'corpse',  cf.  neoaerna hlaford
 'master  of  the  houses  of  the  dead'  in  the O.E.  Quenta. On
 the Elvish name Nefantur see p. 199.]                             
                                                                  
 Lorien is Swefnfrea [O.E. swefn 'dream'.]                         
                                                                  
 Melko  is  Manfrea,  Bolgen,  Malscor  [O.E.  man  'evil,  wicked-
 ness';  bolgen  'wrathful'.  An  O.E.  verbal  noun  malscrung  is
 recorded,   with  the   meaning  'bewildering,   bewitching';  see
 the  Oxford  English  Dictionary   s.v.  Masker   (verb),  'bewil-
 der'.]                                                            
                                                                  
 Osse is Saefrea.                                                    
                                                                  
 There are also  several lists  of Old  English equivalents  of El-
 vish names of  persons and  places, and  since they  all obviously
 belong to the  same period  I combine  them and  give them  in al-
 phabetical order:                                                 
 Aldaron: Beaming [O.E. beam 'tree'.]                              
 A.mon Uilas: Sinsnaw, Sinsnaewen [O.E. sin- 'perpetual',           
 appears in the Quenta, p. 98 note 2.]                             

 Ancalagon: Anddraca  [O.E. and-  as the  first element  in com-
 pounds  denotes  opposition,  negation  (anda  'enmity, hatred,
 envy'); draca 'dragon' (see II. 350).]                         
                                                               
 Angband:   Engbend,  Irenhell   [Engbend  contains   O.E.  enge
 'narrow, strait, oppressive, cruel' and bend 'bond, fetter', it
 is  thus  not  a translation  but a  word-play between  the two
 languages.]                                                    
                                                               
 Asgar: Baening [This river, Ascar in Q  as in  The Silmarillion,
 is also Asgar in  the Annals  of Beleriand  (p. 367).  I cannot
 interpret  Baening.  If  a  derivative of  O.E. ban  'bone' (cf.
 baenen  'of  bone')  it  might  have  some  meaning  like  'the
 place (i.e. the river)  filled with  bones', with  reference to
 the Dwarves  who were  drowned in  the river  at the  battle of
 the Stony Ford; but this does not seem at all probable.]       
                                                               
 Balrog:  Bealuwearg,  Bealubroga [O.E.  bealu 'evil',  cf. Mod-
 ern English  bale(ful); wearg  'felon, outlaw,  accursed being'
 (Old  Norse  vargr  'wolf,  outlaw',  whence the  Wargs); broga
 'terror'.  These  O.E.  names are  thus like  Engbend ingenious
 sound-correspondences contrived from O.E. words.]              
                                                               
 Bansil: Beansil, Beansigel  [The second  element is  O.E. sigel
 'sun, jewel' (cf. J. R. R. Tolkien,  Sigelwara land,  in Medium
 AEvum  III, June  1934, p.  106); the  first is  presumably beam
 'tree'. This is another  case where  AElfwine used  Old English
 words to give a likeness of  sound (with  of course  a suitable
 meaning), rather than a translation.- In  the Name-list  to The
 Fall of Gondolin Bansil is  translated 'Fair-gleam',  II. 214.]
                                                               
 Baragund, Barahir: Beadohun, Beadomaer [O.E. beadu              
   'battle'.]                                                   
                                                               
 Bauglir: Broga [O.E. broga 'terror'.]                          
                                                               
 Beleg: Finboga [O.E. boga 'bow'.]                              
                                                               
 Belegar:  Ingarsecg,   Westsae,  Widsae  [The  Gnomish   name  of
 the Great Sea has not yet  appeared in  the texts.  Ingarsecg =
 Garsecg; Utgarsecg is the  Outer Sea  (see note  to line  26 of
 the O.E. Quenta).]                                             

 Belegost: Micelburg ['Great fortress', the original meaning     
   (see II. 336).]                                               
                                                                
    Blodrin Ban's son: Blodwine Banan sunu [Blodwine presum-     
    ably contains O.E. blod 'blood'; while bana is 'slayer'.]
                                                                
 Doriath:    Ealand,    Folgen(fold),    Infolde,   Wudumaeraland
 [O.E. ealand,  land by  water or  by a  river -  doubtless with
 reference  to  the rivers  Sirion and  Esgalduin. Folgen(fold):
 O.E. folgen is the past participle  of feolan  'penetrate, make
 one's way, get to',  but the  cognate verbs  in Gothic  and Old
 Norse have the meaning  'hide', and  it may  be that  folgen is
 here given the sense of Old Norse  folginn 'hidden',  i.e. 'the
 hidden  (land)'.  Gondolin  is  called  Folgenburg.  Infolde, a
 word  not  recorded,  perhaps  has some  meaning like  'the in-
 ner  land',  'the  land  within'.  Wudumaeraland  no  doubt con-
 tains maere 'boundary, border'.]                                
                                                                
 Dor-lomen: Womanland [See Ered-lomen.]                          
                                                                
   Drengist:  Nearufleot [Drengist  has not  yet appeared  in the
   texts. O.E. nearu' narrow', fleot ' arm of the sea, estuary,
   firth'.]                                                      
                                                                
   Ered-lomen:   Womanbeorgas   [O.E.   woma    'sound,   noise',
   beorg  'mountain';  sc. the  Echoing Mountains,  and similar!y
   Womanland for  Dor-lomen, Land  of Echoes.  This is  the later
   etymology of these names; see pp. 233 - 4,]                   
                                                                
   Gelion:  Glaeden  [Gelion  appears by  emendation of  Flend in
   the  Quenta  $14.  O.E.  glaedene  'iris,  gladdon', as  in the
   Gladden  Fields  and  Gladden  River  in   The  Lord   of  the
   Rings.]                                                       
                                                                
   Gondolin:   Stangaldor(burg),   Folgenburg,   Galdorfaesten
   [O.E. stan 'stone'; galdor 'spell, enchantment', faesten 'fast-
   ness,  fortress'. For  Folgenburg (?  'the hidden  city') see
   Doriath.]                                                     
                                                                
         Hithlum: Hasuglom, Hasuland (Hasulendingas) [O.E. hasu
 grey ., glom 'gloaming, twilight'. Hasulendingas the people
 of Hasuland'.]
                                                                
 Laurelin:  Gleng(g)old [O.E.  gleng ornament,  splendour';

 Glengold is not a translation but a sound-imitation of          
 Glingol ('Singing-gold', II. 216.]                              
                                                                
 Mithrim: Mistrand, Mistora [O.E. ora 'bank, shore', and         
 rand of the same meaning.]                                     
                                                                
 Nargothrond:     Hlydingaburg,     Stangaldor(burg)     [Hly-
 dingaburg  is the  city of  the Hlydingas,  the people  of Narog
 (Hlyda).  Stangaldor (burg)  is also  given as  an O.E.  name for
 Gondolin.]                                                      
                                                                
 Narog: Hlyda [Hlyda 'the loud one' (O.E. hlud 'loud'; see       
 III. 87 - 8).]                                                  
                                                                
 Silmaril: Sigel, Sigelmaerels  [For sigel  see Bansil  above. O.E
 maerels  'rope',  Sigelmaerels is  another case  of imitation  - but
 it refers to the Necklace of the Dwarves.]                      
                                                                
 Sirion:  Fleot  (Flewet),  Scirwendel [Fleot  must here  have the
 meaning  'river',  which  is scarcely  evidenced in  Old English,
 though it  is the  general meaning  of the  word in  cognate lan-
 guage  (cf.  Drengist  above).  Scirwendel:  O.E.  scir 'bright';
 wendel  does  not  occur,  but certainly  refers to  the windings
 of a  river's course  - cf.  Withywindle, the  river in  the Old
 Forest,  concerning  which  my  father  noted: '-windle  does not
 actually  occur  (Withywindle  was   modelled  on   withywind,  a
 name  of  the  convolvulus  or  bindweed)'  (Guide  to  the Names
 in  The  Lord  of  the  Rings,  in A  Tolkien Compass,  p. 196).]
                                                                
 Taur-na-Danion:  Furhweald  [In  an  addition  to  the  Quenta $9
 (note  1)  Taur Danin  is given  as the  former name  of Taur-na-
 Fuin, when it  was still  'wholesome, if  thick and  dark'; Taur-
 na-Danion   here   was   changed  to   Taur-na-Donion,  precursor
 of  Dorthonion  'Land  of  Pines'. O.E.  furh 'fir,  pine', weald
 'forest'.]                                                      
                                                                
 Taur-na-Fuin:      Nihtsceadu,       Nihtsceadwesweald,      Atol
 Nihtegesa,   Nihthelm unfaele   [O.E.  sceadu   'shadow';  weald
 'forest', atol 'dire, terrible', egesa 'terror';  niht-helm 'cover
 of  night',  a  poetic  compound  found  in  BeowuLf   and  other
 poems;  unfaele  'evil'.  Cf.  the  Modern  English translation,
 found  in  the long  Lays and  in the  Quenta, 'Forest  of Deadly
 Nightshade'.]                                                   

 Tindbrenting  pe  pa  Brega  Taniquetil  a nemnad ['Tindbrenting
 which  the  Valar  name  Taniquetil':  see  III.  127,  and for
 Brega see Vala.]                                                 
                                                                 
 Vala:  Bregu  [O.E.  bregu  ruler,  lord,   plural  (unrecorded)
 brega.  Two   other  words   were  added   to  the   list: Maegen
 'powers',  which  is  used  in the  O.E. Quenta  line 6,  and Ese
 (see p. 255).]                                                   
                                                                 
 Valinor:  Breguland,  Godedel  [O.E.  edel  'country,  native
   land'.]                                                        
                                                                 
 Valmar: Godaburg, Bregubold [O.E. bold 'dwelling'.]              
                                                                 
   Another  page  gives Old  English equivalents  of the  names of
 the Kindreds of the Elves, and of the princes  of the  Noldoli ar-
 ranged in a genealogical table. This page is headed:             
                                                                 
               Firas. Includes both Men and Elves.                
                                                                 
   This contradicts the  use of  Firas in  the O.E.  Quenta, where
 it appears as an emendation of Elde  (lines 11  and 13),  used in
 distinction to Elfe. Then follows:                               
                                                                 
                            Fira bearn.                           
              $l. Paet eldre cyn: Elfe oppe Wine.                  
 l. Ingwine: lyftelfe, heahelfe, hwitelfe, Lixend. Godwine        
                                                                 
 2.  Eadwine:  goldelfe,  eordelfe,  deopelfe,  Raedend.  Fin-
 ning as                                                          
                                                                 
 3.  Saewine:  saeelfe,  merepyssan,  flotwine,  Nowend.  Elwingas
                                                                 
 Wine can only be  O.E. wine  (old plural  wine) 'friend'  (a word
 used of equals, of superiors, and of inferiors); but its use here
 as a general term equivalent to Elfe is curious.                 
   Of  the  names given  to the  First Kindred,  lyftelfe contains
 O.E.  lyft  'sky, air',  Lixend 'Shining  Ones'. The  Second Kin-
 dred: Ead- in the context of  the Noldoli  is in  no doubt  to be
 interpreted 'riches'. I  am not  sure of  the meaning  of Raedend,

  though it clearly refers to the know1edge and desire for knowl-
  edge of the Noldoli in some aspect. Finningas 'the people of    
  Finn' (Ing and Finn as the Gnomish forms of Ingwe and Finwe
  were still found in Q $2, though removed by later changes to  
  the text). The Third Kindred: O.E. merepyssa 'sea-rusher'      
  (used in recorded O.E. poetry of ships); flotwine contains O.
  flot 'sea', Nowend 'mariners., shipmasters'.                   
                                                                 
    In  the  geneaiogical table  that follows  Feanor is  given the
  Old  English  name  Finbros  Gimwyrhta  ('Jewel-wright'); since
  his sons are here  called Brosingas  (from Brosinga  mene 'the
  necklace of the  Brosings' in  Beowulf, line  1199) -bros  is pre-
  sumably   a   back-formation  from   Brosingas.  They   are  also
  called  Yrfeloran:  an  unrecorded  compound,  'those  bereft  o
  their inheritance', the  Dispossessed. The  Brosingas or  sons o
  Feanor are given thus:                                          
                                                                 
       1. Daegred  Winsterhand   [O.E. daegred   'daybreak,  daven';
       winsterhand   'left-banded'   {for    the   right    hand   of
       Maidros  was  cut  off  in  his  rescue  from  Thangorodrim,
       Q  $8).  l  can  cast   no  light   on  the   O.E.  equivalent
       Daegred  for  Maidros,  un1ess  an  extremely  late  note  on
       Maidros  (Maedhros)  is  relevant   (for  ideas   long  buried
       so  far  as  written  record  goes  might  emerge  again  many
       years later): according to  this he  inherited 'the  rare red-
       brown  hair  of  Nerdanel's  kin'   (Nerdanel  was   the  wife
       of  Feanor,  The  Silmarillion  p.  64),  and  was  called 'by
       his   brothers   and   other  kin'   Russandol  'copper-top'.]
                                                                 
       2.   Daegmund   Swinsere   [I   cannot  explain   Daegmund  for
       Maglor.    O.E.   mund    is   'hand',    also   'protection',
       swinsere  (not  recorded}  'musician,  singer'  (cf. swinsian
       'make music').]                                            
                                                                 
       3.  Cynegrim  Fagerfeox  [Celegorm  'Fairfax',  i.e.  fair-
       haired.  Cynegrim  is  probably  the  substitution   of  an
       O.E. name with some;similarity of sound.]                  
                                                                 
  4. Cyrefinn Facensearo [Curufin the Crafty, O.E. cyre           
      'choice', facen 'deceit, guile, wickedness' (a word of      

  wholly bad meaning); searu 'skill, cunning' (also with           
  bad  meaning,  'plot,  snare,  treachery'); facensearu           
  'treachery'.]                                                    
                                                                  
 5. Colpegn Nihthelm [Cranthir the Dark. O.E. col 'coal';            
  for nihthelm see under Taur-na-Fuin above.]                      
                                                                  
 6. Deormod ) huntan [Damrod and Diriel the hunters.
 7. Tirgeld )                                                      
  O.E.  deormod  'brave-hearted',   tir  'glory';   -geld  (-gild)
  in names, 'of worth'.]                                           
                                                                  
 Fingolfin appears as Fingold Fengel (O.E. fengel 'king,           
 prince', cf. III. 145), and his sons are Finbrand (i.e. Finweg/
 Fingon)  and  Finstan  (i.e.  Turgon);  the  element  stan 'stone'
 presumably  showing  that  -gon  in   Turgon  is   gond  (gonn)
 'stone', see I. 254. Fingolfin's daughter is Finhwit (i.e. Isfin),
 and  Eol  is  Eor;  Meglin  is  Manfrid  (an  unrecorded  compound
 of man 'evil deed, wickedness' and frid 'peace').                  
 Finbrand  (i.e.  Finweg/Fingon)  here  has  a  son,   Fingar;  and
 the daughter of Finstan (i.e. Turgon) is Ideshild Silfrenfot (i.e.
 Idril Celebrindal).                                               
 Finrod  (i.e.  the  later  Finarfin)  is  called   Finred  Felanop
 (felanop  'very  bold'), and  his sons  are Inglaf  Felahror (i.e.
 Felagund;  felahror  has  the  same  meaning  as  felanop), Ordred
 (i.e. Orodreth), Angel  (i.e. Angrod),  and Eangrim  (i.e. Egnor).
 Ordred  (i.e.  Orodreth)  has  two   sons,  Ordhelm   and  Ordlaf;
 his daughter  is Fripuswip  Fealuleome (i.e.  Finduilas Failivrin;
 fealuleome perhaps 'golden light').                               
 Lastly, there  is a  fourth child  of Finwe  given in  this table:
 Finrun Felageomor (felageomor 'very sorrowful'),                  
 The  name  given  to  Felagund, Inglaf  Felahror, is  notable; for
 Felagund  was  to  become  his  'nickname',  and  his   true  name
 Inglor (as it remained until replaced  long afterwards  by Finrod,
 when the original Finrod became Finarfin); see p, 411.            
                                                                  
                                 *                                 

                              APPENDIX 2.                            
                                                                    
                          The Horns of Ylmir.                        
                                                                    
 This  poem  is  unquestionably  that  referred   to  in   the  Quent
 p. 170:  'the might  and majesty  of that  vision is  told of  in the
 song  of  Tuor  that  he  made  for  his  son  Earendel.' It  is extant
 in  three  versions  and five  texts. The  first version,  found only
 in one manuscript, consists of 40 lines, beginning:                 
                                                                    
          I sat on the ruined margin of the deep-voiced echoing sea
 and ending:                                                         
  and I wake to silent caverns, and empty sands, and peace           
                                                                    
 (lines  15 and  66 in  the text  given below).  To the  manuscript in
 ink my  father added  in pencil  the title  The Tides,  together with
 the  notes  Dec.  4  1914  and On  the Cornish  Coast. For  his visit
 to  the  Lizard  Peninsula  in  Cornwall  in the  summer of  1914 see
 Humphrey  Carpenter,  Biography,  pp.   70  -   1.  But   although  I
 have found nothing earlier than  this text  it is  clear from  my fa-
 ther's  notes  to  subsequent  versions  that  he remembered  the or-
 igin of the poem to be earlier than that time.                      
                                                                    
  The  second  version  bears  the   title  Sea   Chant  of   an  Elder
 Day  (and  Old  English  Fyrndaga  Saeleop),  and  is  extant  in  two
 manuscripts  which  differ  only  in  small  details.  The  second has
 some   minor   emendations,   and   the  date:   Mar.  1915   <  Dec.
 1914  <   1912,  also   Essay  Club   [of  Exeter   College,  Oxford]
 March 1915. This version begins:                                    
                                                                    
     In  a  dim  and  perilous region,  down whose  great tempes-
     tuous ways                                                      
  I  heard  no  sound  of men's  voices; in  those eldest  of the
     days,                                                           
  I  sat  on  the  ruined  margin  of  the   deep-voiced  echoing
     sea...                                                          
                                                                    
 (i.e. it begins at  line 13  in the  text, p.  265) and  contains two
 further  lines  after  'and  empty  sands,  and  peace'   (where  The
 Tides ends):                                                        

    In a lovely sunlit region down whose old chaotic ways                   
  Yet no sound of men's voices echoed in those eldest of all                
    days.                                                                   
                                                                           
 It  is  from  this  version,  not   that  of   1914,  that   Humphrey  Car-
 penter  cites  the  first  six  lines  (ibid. pp.  73 -  4). The  Sea Chant
 differs  from  The  Tides   both  by   extension  (it   has  50   lines  as
 against 40) and in the reconstruction of many verses.                      
  Against  the  second  text   of  the   Sea  Chant   my  father   wrote  in
 pencil:                                                                    
                                                                           
  This is the song that Tuor told to Earendel his son what time             
  the Exiles of Gondolin dwelt awhile in  Dor Tathrin  the Land             
  of Willows after the burning of their city. Now Tuor  was the             
  first  of  Men  to  see  the  Great Sea,  but guided  by Ulmo             
  towards  Gondolin he  had left  the shores  of the  Ocean and             
  passing  through  the  Land  of  Willows became  enamoured of             
  its loveliness, forgetting both his quest and his former love             
  of  the  sea. Now  Ulmo lord  of Vai  coming in  his deep-sea             
  car sat at twilight in the reeds of Sirion and played  to him             
  on his magic flute of hollow shells. Thereafter did Tuor hun-             
  ger ever after the sea and had no peace in  his heart  did he             
  dwell in pleasant inland places.*                                         
                                                                           
 This  very  evidently  belongs  with  the  tale  of  The  Fall of          
 Gondolin (see especially II. 153 - 6), and was no doubt  added at          
 the time of the composition of the tale (and of the third version          
 of the poem), since the Sea Chant  has no  point of  contact with          
 the Tuor legend, nor indeed  with any  feature of  the mythology.          
                                                                           
  The third version, entitled The  Horns of  Ulmo, is  extant in            
 a manuscript and in a typescript taken directly from it, and it            
 is only now that the references to  Ulmo and  Osse (and  to the            
 rending of the Earth by the Gods in the primeval  darkness) ap-            
 pear in the poem. A note on the  MS, written  at the  same time            
 as the poem, reads:                                                        
                                                                           
 (*Dor Tathrin occurs in the Name-list to The Fall of Gondolin, II. 346, and
 Ulmo's 'deep-sea car' in the tale of The Chaining of Melko, I. 101.)       

  1910-11 - 12  rewr[itten] &  recast often.  Present shape  due to
  rewriting  and  adding  introd[uction]  &  ending  in   a  lonely
  house  near  Roos,  Holderness   (Thistle  Bridge   Camp)  Spring
  1917                                                            
                                                                 
 (For  Roos  see  Humphrey  Carpenter, Biography,  p. 97.)  A fur-
 ther pencilled note adds: 'poem to 'The Fall of Gondolin".'      
  Thus the  absorption of  the poem  into the  legend of  Tuor and
 Earendel  took  place at  much the  same time  as the  writing of
 the tale of The Fall of Gondolin (see I. 203, II. 146); it should
 have been given in The Book of Lost Tales Part II.               
  A  few  small   emendations  were   made  to   the  MS   of  The
 Horns  of  Ulmo,  notably  Ulmo  >  Ylmir  (the latter  being the
 Gnomish  form,  found in  the Lay  of the  Children of  Hurin and
 in the 'Sketch'), and the second reference to Osse (lines 41 - 2,
 replacing two earlier verses). The typescript is  essentially the
 same  as  the  manuscript  (with  the  words  'from "The  Fall of
 Gondolin" ' added beneath the title), but it  has some  small al-
 terations  made  in  red ball-point  pen, which  therefore belong
 to a much  later time.  These late  changes are  not incorporated
 in the  text given  here, but  are given  in notes  following the
 poem.                                                            
                                                                 
                         The Horns of Ylmir                       
                               from                               
                      'The Fall of Gondolin'.                     
                                                                 
     'Tuor  recalleth  in  a  song sung  to his  son Earendel     
     the  visions  that  Ylmir's  conches once  called before     
     him in the twilight in the Land of Willows.'                 
                                                                 
       'Twas  in  the  Land  of Willows  where the  grass is  long and
       green -                                                    
       I  was  fingering  my harp-strings,  for a  wind had  crept un-
       seen                                                       
     And  was  speaking  in  the  tree-tops, while  the voices  of the
       reeds                                                      

                      
                                                                   
      Were  whispering reedy  whispers as  the sunset  touched the
      meads,                                                        
 5.  Inland  musics  subtly  magic  that  those reeds  alone could
      weave -                                                       
     'Twas  in  the  Land  of  Willows  that  once  Ylmir  came at
      eve.                                                          
                                                                   
      In the twilight by the river on a hollow thing of shell       
      He made immortal music, till my heart beneath his spell       
     Was broken in the twilight, and the meadows faded dim          
 10. To  great  grey  waters  heaving round  the rocks  where sea-
      birds swim.                                                   
                                                                   
      I  heard  them  wailing  round  me  where  the  black cliffs
      towered high                                                  
      And the old primeval starlight flickered palely in the sky.
     In  that  dim and  perilous region  in whose  great tempestu-
      ous ways                                                      
     I heard  no sound  of men's  voices, in  those eldest  of the
      days,                                                         
 15. I sat on the ruined margin of the deep-voiced echoing sea      
     Whose roaring foaming music crashed in endless cadency         
     On the land besieged for ever in an aeon of assaults           
     And  torn in  towers  and  pinnacles  and  caverned  in great
      vaults;                                                       
     And its arches  shook with  thunder and  its feet  were piled
      with shapes                                                   
 20. Riven  in  old  sea-warfare  from   those  crags   and  sable
      capes.                                                        
                                                                   
     Lo!  I  heard  the  embattled  tempest  roaring up  behind the
     tide                                                          
     When  the  trumpet  of  the  first  winds  sounded,   and  the
     grey sea sang and cried                                        
     As  a  new  white  wrath  woke  in  him,  and his  armies rose
      to war                                                        
      And swept in billowed cavalry toward the walled and           
      moveless shore.                                               

  25.    There the windy-bannered fortress of those high and vir-
         gin coasts                                               
       Flung back the first thin feelers of the elder tidal hosts;
       Flung back the restless streamers that like arms of a ten-
         tacled thing                                             
       Coiling  and  creeping  onward  did  rustle and  suck and
         cling.                                                   
       Then  a  sigh  arose  and a  murmuring in  that stealthy-
         whispering van,                                          
  30.  While, behind, the torrents gathered and the leaping bil-
         lows ran,                                                
       Till the foam-haired water-horses in green rolling volumes
         came -                                                   
       A mad tide trampling landward - and their  war-song burst
         to flame.                                                
                                                                 
         Huge heads were tossed in anger  and their  crests were
         towers of froth                                          
       And the song the great seas  were singing  was a  song of
         unplumbed wrath,                                         
  35     For through that giant welter Osse's  trumpets fiercely
         blew,                                                    
       That  the voices  of the  flood yet  deeper and  the High
         Wind louder grew;                                        
       Deep hollows hummed and  fluted as  they sucked  the sea-
         winds in;                                                
       Spumes and great white spoutings yelled shrilly  o'er the
         din;                                                     
       Gales blew the bitter tresses of the sea in the land's dark
         face                                                     
  40.  And wild airs thick with spindrift fled on a whirling race
       From battle unto battle, till the power of all the seas
       Gathered like one mountain about Osse's awful knees,       
       And a dome of shouting water  smote those  dripping black
         facades                                                  
       And its catastrophic fountains smashed in  deafening cas-
         cades.                                                   
                                                                 
  45.    Then the immeasurable hymn of  Ocean I  heard as  it rose
         and fell                                                 

                            
                                                                     
        To its organ whose stops were  the piping  of gulls  and the
        thunderous swell;                                             
      Heard  the  burden  of  the  waters  and  the  singing  of the
        waves                                                         
      Whose  voices  came  on  for  ever  and  went  rolling  to the
        caves,                                                        
      Where  an  endless  fugue  of  echoes  splashed   against  wet
        stone                                                         
  50    And   arose  and   mingled  in   unison  into   a  murmuring
        drone -                                                       
      'Twas  a  music  of  uttermost  deepness  that stirred  in the
        profound,                                                     
      And  all  the  voices  of  all  oceans  were gathered  to that
                                                                     
        sound;                                                     
                                                                     
        'Twas  Ylmir, Lord  of Waters,  with all-stilling  hand that
        made                                                          
        Unconquerable harmonies, that the roaring sea obeyed,         
  55. That its  waters poured  off and  Earth heaved  her glistening
        shoulders again                                               
      Naked up into the airs and cloudrifts and sea-going rain,       
        Till the suck and suck of green eddies and the slap  of rip-
        ples was all                                                  
      That  reached  to  mine  isled stone,  save the  old unearthly
        call                                                          
      Of  sea-birds  long-forgotten  and  the  grating   of  ancient
        wings.                                                        
                                                                     
  60.   Thus  murmurous  slumber  took  me  mid  those  far-off  el-
        dest things                                                   
      (In a lonely twilit region down whose old chaotic ways          
      I  heard  no sound  of men's  voices, in  those eldest  of the
        days                                                          
      When  the  world  reeled  in  the  tumult  as  the  Great Gods
        tore the Earth                                                
      In the darkness, in the tempest of the cycles ere our birth),
  65. Till the tides went out, and the  Wind died,  and did  all sea
        musics cease                                                  
      And  I  woke  to  silent  caverns and  empty sands  and peace.

        Then the magic drifted from me and that music loosed its             
            bands -                                                          
        Far, far-off, conches calling - lo! I stood in the sweet             
            lands,                                                           
        And the meadows were about me where the weeping wil-                 
            lows grew,                                                       
 70.    Where the long grass stirred beside me, and my feet were                 
            drenched with dew.                                               
        Only the reeds were rustling, but a mist lay on the                  
            streams                                                          
        Like a sea-roke drawn far inland, like a shred of salt sea-          
            dreams.                                                          
        'Twas in the Land of Willows that I heard th'unfathomed              
            breath                                                           
        Of the Horns of Ylmir calling - and shall hear them till             
            my death.                                                        
                                                                            
                                    NOTES.                                   
                                                                            
 The following are the late changes made to the typescript, referred to on
 p. 264:                                                                     
                                                                            
 1 and 6.    Twas to It was.                                                 
 16.         The line changed to: Whose endless roaring music crashed in     
             foaming harmony, and marked with an X.                          
 21.         roaring to rolling.                                             
 28.         The line marked with an X, probably primarily on account of     
             the use of did (cf. III. 153).                                  
 65.         The line changed to: Till the tides went out, and the Wind      
             ceased, and all sea musics died (but this destroys the rhyme).
 72.         'sea-roke'; roke is a medieval English word surviving until re-
             cent times in dialect meaning 'mist, fog, drizzling rain'.      
