                                      IV.                                   
                                                                           
                           THE FIRST 'SILMARILLION'                         
                                     MAP.                                   
                                                                           
 This  map  was  made  on  a  sheet  of  examination  paper  from  the
 University  of  Leeds  (as  was   most  of   the  A-text   of  the   Lay  of
 the  Children  of  Hurin,  III.  4), which  suggests that  it originated
 in  association  with  the  Lay,  or  perhaps  rather with  the 'Sketch
 of  the  Mythology'  which  was   written  to   accompany  it   (p.  11).
 On   the   other  hand,   some  names   which  seem   to  belong   with  the
 first  making  of  the  map  do  not   appear  in   the  texts   before  the
 Quenta.  Though  it  was  not  drawn  initially  in  a  way   that  would
 suggest  that  my  father  intended  it  to  endure,  it  was   his  working
 map   for   several  years,   and  it   was  much   handled  and   much  al-
 tered.  Names  were  emended   and  places   re-sited;  the   writing  is
 m  red  ink,  black  ink,  green  ink,  pencil,   and  blue   crayon,  often
 overlaying   each   other.  Lines   representing  contours   and  others
 representing   streams  tangle   with  lines   for  redirection   and  lines
 cancelling other lines.  But it  is striking  that the  river-courses as
 drawn  on  this  first  map   were  scarcely   changed  at   all  after-
 wards.                                                                    
   Associated with the map are two supplementary sheets,
 giving an Eastern and a Western extension to the main or cen-
 tral map; these are reproduced and annotated subsequently (see
 insert). The main map is on a single sheet but is here repro-
 duced in two halves, Northern and Southern. Names that were
 written in red ink all seem to belong to the original 'layer' of
 names, as do some (e.g. Huan, Mavwin, Turgon) of those in
 black ink; but Taiglin, Geleidhian, in red, do not otherwise oc-
 cur before the Quenta. Those in green ink are few: Broseliand;
 Gnomes on the Northern half beside Gondolin, and on the
 Southern half beside Nargothrond; and Wandering Gnomes in
 the South-east.

   In the following alphabetically-ordered list I take each half              
 in turn* and comment on almost  every item,  noticing especial-              
 ly where the name in  question first  appears in  the narrative              
 texts.                                                                       
                                                                             
                         The Northern HaIf of the Map.                        
                                                                             
   Aglon, Gorge of The name itself is a hasty later addition. The             
   Gorge  of Aglon  first occurs  in the  Lay of  Leithian (lines             
   2062,  2995, passages  composed in  1928). In  the Lay  and in             
   Q ($$9, 10) the Gorge is the dwelling of  the Sons  of Feanor,             
   who are placed  on the  map to  the North  of it  (and circled             
   with an arrow directing to the East).                                      
                                                                             
   Angband The placing  of Angband  in relation  to Thangoro-                 
   drim shows how my father saw them at the time of  the long                 
   Lays and the 'Sketch'. In the Lay of the Children of Hurin                 
   (lines 712 - 14) the 'hopeless halls of Hell' are                          
                                                                             
             wrought at the roots of the roaring cliffs                       
             of  Thangorodrim's   thunderous  mountain.                       
                                                                             
   In the Lay of Leithian (lines 3526ff.) Angband's gate seems                
   clearly  to  lie  beneath  Thangorodrim;  and  in   S  ($8)                
   Thangorodrim is 'the highest of  the Iron  Mountains around                
   Morgoth's  fortress'.  See  further  the commentary  on the                
   Ambarkanta, p. 307.                                                        
                                                                             
     Angeryd The Iron Mountains. Cf. Angorodin in the Tale of
   Turambar (II. 77).                                                         
                                                                             
     Angrin Aiglir Aiglir Angrin occurs twice in the Lay of the
   Children of Hurin (lines 711, 1055), emended later to Eiglir               
   Engrin (in The Silmarillion Ered Engrin).                                  
                                                                             
 (* The list of names for the northern half includes names as far south as the
 fold  in  the  original map,  which can  be seen  in the  reproductions; thus
 Ginglith, Esgalduin, Thousand Caves appear in the first list, but Doriath be-
 yond Sirion, Aros in the second.)                                            

 Aryador  This  name  reappears,  rather  surprisingly,  from the
 Lost  Tales, as  a third  name of  Hithlum. In  the tale  of The
 Coming  of  the  Elves (I.  119) hador  is said  to be  the name
 among Men for Hisilome; see also I. 249.                         
                                                                 
 Battle  of  Unnumbered  Tears The  Mound of  Slain is  placed in
 the Lay of the Children of Hurin (lines 1439  ff.) 'at  the fur-
 thest  end  of  Dor-na-Fauglith's  dusty  spaces'  (Flinding and
 Turin  were  wandering  westward,  line  1436);  cf. also  Q$11
 'Finweg  and  Turgon  and  the  Men  of  Hithlum  were  gathered
 in the West upon the borders of the Thirsty Plain.'              
                                                                 
 Beleg and Turin These names mark the north march of              
     Doriath, where Beleg and Turin fought together against the
 Orcs, an element that first entered the story in the Lay  of the
 Children of Hurin (see III. 27).                                 
                                                                 
 Cristhorn  Placed  in  the  mountains  north (not  as originally
 south) of Gondolin, as already in the  fragment of  the alliter-
 ative Lay of Earendel (III. 143).                                
                                                                 
 Deadly Nightshade, Forest of See Taur-na-Fuin.                   
                                                                 
 Dorlomin See Hithlum.                                          
                                                                 
 Dor-na-Fauglith  This  name  arose  during  the  composition  of
 the Lay of the Children of Hurin (see III.  55), where  also the
 Thirsty Plain  is found.  On the  map this  is an  emendation of
 The Black Plain.                                                 
                                                                 
 Dwarf-road  to Belegost  and Nogrod  in the  South It  is inter-
 esting  that  the  Dwarf-road is  shown as  leading all  the way
 from Nogrod  and Belegost  in the  far South  to the  very doors
 of the Thousand Caves. It is possible, if not very  likely, that
 the  'Dwarf-road'  on   the  map   merely  indicates   the  path
 that   the   Dwarves  did   in  fact   take  when   summoned  to
 Doriath, rather than a beaten track.                             

 Eredwethion A later replacement of Eryd Lomin, as also in             
   Q II $15 (note 1).                                                  
                                                                      
   Eryd Lomin This name occurs in the caption to the painting          
   of Tol Sirion of July 1928, where, as on the map and in             
   Q   II   $15,   it   refers   to   the  Shadowy   Mountains;  see
   pp. 192-3.                                                          
                                                                      
   Esgalduin  First  found  in  the  Lay  of  the  Children  of  Hurin
   (III. 93). It is said in Q ($9) that it 'came  out of  secret wells
   in   Taur-na-Fuin',   see   Shadowy    Spring.   The    course   of
   Esgalduin was not afterwards changed.                               
                                                                      
 Ginglith First occurs in the Lay of the Children of Hurin             
   (III. 88). Its course was never changed.                            
                                                                      
   Gondolin  Placed  as  it was  to remain.  The lines  running south
   and   west   from  the   Encircling  Mountains   perhaps  represent
   the hidden 'Way of Escape'.                                         
                                                                      
   Hithlum  Obviously  Hithlum  was  not  intended  to  extend  south
   of  the  Shadowy  Mountains,  despite  the   placing  of   the  M.
   The  contour  lines  show  that  the  Mountains  of   Mithrim  did
   not  yet  exist.  Dorlomin  is  given as  an alternative  name, as
   it  is  in  S  and  Q  ($8),  where  Lake  Mithrim  is  placed  in
   Hisilome/Hithlum/Dorlomin;   on   the   map   Mithrim   is  simply
   and solely the name of the lake (cf. III. 103).                     
                                                                      
     Huan That a territory, south and east of Ivrin, is assigned to
   Huan shows a very early stage in the legend of Beren and            
   Luthien, when Huan was independent of any master (see               
   III.  244).                                                         
                                                                      
   Isle  of  the  Werewolves  The Isle  first appears  in the  Lay of
   Leithian  in  a  passage  written  in March  1928 (see  III. 234).
   Originally  marked  on  the  map  S.W.   of  Gondolin,   and  with
   the  river  Sirion dividing  quite broadly  and enclosing  a large
   island,  this  site  was  struck  out, and  an arrow  directs from
   here to a more northerly position,  not far  south of  the battle-

 field  of  Unnumbered Tears.  The later  map brought  it some-
 what southward again.                                          
                                                               
 (line 1526); it is placed on the  map in  the position  that I
 dunk is indicated in the Lay (see III. 87),  and where  it re-
 mained.                                                        
                                                               
 Land of Dread Occurs twice in the Lay of Leithian (lines 49,
 383) of the realm of Morgoth.                                  
                                                               
 Mavwin It is  curious that  the map  retains the  old name,
 which  goes  back  to  the  Tale  of  Turambar, for  Morwen is
 found already in the second version  of the  Lay of  the Chil-
 dren  of  Hurin  (III.  94)  and  in  S. In  S ($9)  Hurin and
 Morwen 'lived in the woods on the borders of Hithlum'.         
                                                               
 Mindeb First occurs in the Lay of Leithian, line 2924          
 (April 1928).                                                  
                                                               
 Mithrim, Lake See Hithlum.                                   
                                                               
 Mountains of Iron See Angeryd, Angrin Aiglir.               
                                                               
 Nan Dun-Gorthin  As the  map was  originally drawn  this was
 placed  west of  Sirion, S.W.  of Gondolin  and very  close to
 the Isle of the  Werewolves (as  that was  originally placed).
 This cannot be the same placing as in the Lay  of the  Fail of
 Gondolin (III.  148), where  the hidden  door of  Gondolin was
 actually 'in dark Dungorthin'.                                 
   Subsequently   Nan-Dungorthin   was   struck  out   and  the
 name written again further  north, still  west of  Sirion, but
 close  beneath  the  Shadowy   Mountains.  This   position  is
 clearly that of the Lay of the Children of Hurin,  where Turin
 and  Flinding  passed  the  site of  the Battle  of Unnumbered
 Tears, crossed Sirion  not far  from his  source, and  came to
 'the  roots  ...  of  the Shadowy  Mountains', where  they en-
 tered the valley of Nan Dungorthin (see III. 59, 87).          
   Later  again,  an  arrow  was  drawn  moving  Nan Dungorthin

 to a  position east  of Sirion  and north  of Doriath,  and so
 more  or  less  into  the  position  of  Nan  Dungorthin  (Nag
 Dungortheb) on the later map.                                 
                                                              
  Orcs' Road of Haste Cf. S $12: 'the Orc-road... which the
 Orcs use when in need of haste.'                              
                                                              
 Shadowy  Mountains  First occurs  in the  Lay of  the Children
 of Hurin (see III. 29). See Eryd Lomin.                       
                                                              
 Shadowy  Spring  It  is  notable  that  the  rivers  Aros  and
 Esgalduin  arise  at  the  same place,  in the  Shadowy Spring
 (not previously  named in  the texts;  see Esgalduin).  In the
 later map,  on which  mine in  the published  Silmarillion was
 based, this is still  the case,  and my  map, showing  the two
 sources as separate, is regrettably in error.                 
                                                              
 Silver Bowl Shown in the Taiglin itself (not  as later  in the
 tributary stream  Celebros), as  in the  Tale of  Turambar and
 still in S and Q ($13).                                       
                                                              
 Sirion The course of the river was never changed; in the later
 map my father followed the earlier precisely.                 
                                                              
 Sirion's Well This is referred to in the Lay of the Children of
 Hurin (line 1460). Its site remained unchanged.               
                                                              
 Sons of Feanor See Aglon.                                     
                                                              
 Taiglin This looks like an  original element  on the  map, al-
 though the  name does  not otherwise  occur until  the Quenta,
 $13 (see p. 223).                                             
                                                              
 Taur-na-Fuin  This  name (for  Taur Fuin  of the  Lost Tales)
 and its translation Deadly Nightshade first occur in  the Lay.
 of the Children cf Hurin (III. 55).                           
                                                              
 Thangorodrim See Angband.                                     

  Thimbalt This name  occurs nowhere  else. It  is not  clear from
  the map  what it  represents, but  since an  area marked  out by
  dots   surrounds   Angband,   and   a  similar   area  surrounds
  Thimbalt,  it  seems  likely  that  this  was  another fortress.
  Thimbalt was struck out in pencil.                              
                                                                 
  Thirsty  Plain  See  Dor-na-Fauglith.  Thirsty is  an emendation
  in black ink of Black in red ink.                               
                                                                 
  Thousand  Caves  First  occurs  in  the Lay  of the  Children of
  Hurin. It is here placed as  it was  to remain,  where Esgalduin
  bends westward towards Sirion.                                  
                                                                 
  Woodmen  of  Turambar  This  is  the  second  and  later placing
  of  the  Woodmen on  the map;  see notes  on the  southern half.
                                                                 
                   The Southern Half of the Map.                  
                                                                 
  Aros, River Aros has  only been  named hitherto  in the  Tale of
  the  Nauglafring,  where  after  the  sack  of  Artanor (Doriath)
  the  Dwarves  journeying  thence  to  their  homes in  the South
  (II. 225) had to pass  the 'fierce  stream' Aros  at Sarnathrod,
  the Stony Ford (II. 236). It is also said in the same place that
  Aros, nearer to its spring, ran past the doors  of the  Caves of
  the  Rodothlim,  though  against  this  my  father  later  noted
  (II. 244 note 15) 'No [?that] is  Narog', while  in the  Tale of
  Turambar  it  is  said  (II.  81)  that the  Caves were  above a
  stream that 'ran down to feed the river Sirion'.  I am  not sure
  how to interpret this. If it is assumed that  the Stony  Ford in
  the Tale of the  Nauglafring was  on the  (later) Aros,  then the
  Caves  of  the  Rodothlim  were  on  that  river also,  which is
  most  improbable.  On  the other  hand, if  Aros was  simply the
  earlier  name  of  Narog,  the question  arises why  the Dwarves
  fleeing out of  Artanor should  have been  going in  this direc-
  tion.                                                           
     On the whole I am inclined to  think that  the phrase  in the
  Tale  of the  Nauglafring saying  that Aros  ran past  the Caves
  of  the  Rodothlim  was a  momentary confusion  in a  text writ-
  ten  at  very great  speed (II.  221), and  that the  Stony Ford
  (but not  the Caves)  was always  on the  Aros, this  river hav-

  ing always borne this name. If this is so, this is still the ge-
  ography  on  the  map  (as  originally  marked in  this detail),
  where  Athrasarn  (Stony  Ford)  was  placed  on the  Aros half-
  way  between  Umboth-muilin  and  the  inflowing  of  Celon.  At
  this  time  the  Land  of the  Cuilwarthin was  in the  North of
  the Hills of  the Hunters;  and therefore  in the  story implied
  by the  map Beren  and his  Elves crossed  Sirion from  his land
  and   ambushed  the   Dwarves  on   the  southern   confines  of
  Doriath.  It  is  not  clear  why  the  Dwarves were  not taking
  the  Dwarf-road  from  the  Thousand  Caves,  which  crossed the
  Aros  much  higher  up;  on  this  point  see  the  note  on the
  Dwarf-road in the northern half of the map.                     
    Before  the first  map was  laid aside  the idea  had changed,
  and  when  the  Land  of  the  Cuilwarthin  was  moved  eastward
  (see  note on  Beren) the  Stony Ford  was moved  eastward also;
  for the later history see under the  Eastward Extension  of this
  map.                                                            
                                                                 
 Athrasarn (Stony Ford) See Aros.                                 
                                                                 
  Beren The first  placing of  Beren and  Land of  the Cuilwarthin
  (Land of the Dead that Live), in the North of  the Hills  of the
  Hunters  and  in  the  proximity  of  Nargothrond,  agrees  with
  the Lay of the Children of Hurin lines 1545 -  6 (see  III. 89),
  and so still in S ($10). In the  Last Tales  the Dead  that Live
  Again  were  (i-)Guilwarthon,  changed in  the Tale  of Tinuviel
  (II.  41)  to  i-Cuilwarthon;  in  Q  ($14)  the land  is called
  Cuilwarthien, changed to Gwerth-i-Cuina.                        
    Subsequently   Beren   and  Land   of  the   Cuilwarthin  were
  struck out in  this position,  and Land  of the  Cuilwarthin re-
  entered much further  to the  East, in  the empty  lands between
  Sirion  and Gelion.  This was  again struck out, in  pencil, with
  the note 'Lies to the east of  this and  beyond the  Great Lands
  of  the  East  and  of  wild  men'  (on  which  see   Beren  and
  Luthien  and  Great Lands  under   the  Eastward   Extension  of
  the  map).  In Q  (514) the  Land of  the Dead  that Live  is in
  Assariad  (>Ossiriand),  'between  the  river  [Gelion]  and the
  [Blue] mountains'.                                              

  Broseliand  This  name  occurs  first in  the Lay  of Leithian,
  with  the  spelling  Broceliand  (III.  158-9,  169); BeLeriand
  first appears (i.e. as originally typed,  not as  an emendation
  of Broseliand) in Q $13,  and in  the Lay  of Leithian  at line
  3957. Broseliand  occurs also  in the  note in  red ink  in the
  south-east corner of the map; this is  given together  with the
  later alterations to it at the end of these notes on the south-
  ern half.                                                      
                                                                
  Celon, River This has not occurred in any text. The course of
  Celon is the same as on the later map, the river rising (in the
  Eastward Extension of the present map) in Himling.             
                                                                
 Cuilwarthin, Land of the See Beren.                            
                                                                
  Doriath  The  bounds of  Doriath are  represented, I  think, by
  Mindeb,  by  the  dotted  line  (above  'Beleg and  Turin') be-
  tween Mindeb  and Aros,  then by  Aros and  Sirion to  the dot-
  ted line  encircling 'Doriath  beyond Sirion',  and so  back to
  Mind eb.                                                       
                                                                
  Doriath beyond Sirion It is said  in Q  ($13) that  the Taiglin
  'enters the land of Doriath ere it joins with the  great waters
  of Sirion'. As  a name,  'Doriath beyond  Sirion' has  only oc-
  curred in a note on the MS of the Tale of the Nauglafring
  (II. 249).                                                     
                                                                
  Duil Rewinion This name of the  Hills of  the Hunters  (also on
  the  Westward  Extension of  the map)  is not  found elsewhere.
                                                                
 Dwarf-road See Aros.                                            
                                                                
  Geleidhian This occurs in the note in the corner of the map     
  as the Gnomish name of Broseliand. It is found in additions
  to Q, $9 (note 2)  and $10  (note 15);  see also  photo insert.
                                                                
  Guarded Plain, The First occurs in the Lay of the Children of
  Hurin (III. 88). On the later map the name is written over a
  much larger  area further  to the  North-east, and  outside the

 boundaries  of  the  realm  of  Nargothrond  as shown  on that
 map (see Realm of Narog beyond Narog).                        
                                                              
 Hill of Spies This first appears in Q $13 (see p. 224). If, as
 would  seem  natural,  the  Hill  of  Spies  is  the  eminence
 marked  by  radiating  lines  a  little  north  of  east  from
 Nargothrond, the name itseif is placed oddly distant  from it,
 and  seems  rather  to refer  to the  highland rising  N.E. of
 Nargothrond, between Narog and Taiglin.                       
                                                              
 Hills of the Hunters, The First named in the Lay of  the Chil-
 dren  of  Hurin, though  they had  been described  without be-
 ing  named  in  the  Tale  of  Turambar;  see  my  discussion,
 III. 88. On  the map  the Hills  of the  Hunters a-e  shown as
 extending far southwards towards  the coast  of the  Sea, with
 the  Narog  bending  south-eastwards  along  the  line  of the
 Hills; and  there is  an outlying  eminence above  the unnamed
 cape in the S.W. corner of the map (later Cape Balar).        
                                                              
 Ingwil First occurs in the Lay of the Children of Hurin       
 (III. 88 - 9).                                                
                                                              
 Luthien  caught  by  Celegorm  In the  Lay of  Leithian (lines
 2342  -  7) Celegorm  and Curufin  hunting oui  of Nargothrond
 with  Huan  on  the  occasion when  Luthien was  captured rode
 for 'three days',                                             
                                                              
             till nigh to the borders in the West              
             of Doriath a while they rest.                     
                                                              
 Marshes of Sirion On the  later map  called 'Fens  of Sirion'.
                                                              
 Nan Tathrin (Land  of Willows)  For the  name Nan  Tathrin see
 III. 89. It was already placed essentially thus in the tale of
  The Fall of Gondolin (see  II. 153,  217), and  in Q  $16 Nan-
 Tathrin 'is watered by the Narog and by Sirion'.              
                                                              
      Nargothrond Nargothrond was placed first further to the
   South and nearer to the confluence with Sirion; the second

                                                                         
                                                                             
        site is  where it  remained -  but it  is curious  that in  both sites
        it  is marked  as lying  on the  east side  of the  river: in  the Lay
        of  the  Children  of  Hurin  it  was  on the  western side  (cf. line
        1762),  and,  I  would  think,   always  had   been.  (On   the  West-
        ward Extension map this is corrected.)                                
          In   Q  $9,   after  the   Battle  of   Sudden  Flame   Barahir  and
        Felagund  'fled  to  the  fens  of  Sirion  to  the South',  and after
        swearing    his    oath    to    Barahir    Felagund    'went   South'
        (emended   to   'South   and    West')   and    founded   Nargothrond.
        This  would  in  fact  point  to  the  first  site  of  Nargothrond on
        the map; since the later site is due West from the fens.              
                                                                             
        Narog  First  occurs in  the Lay  of the  Children of  Hurin. The      
        course of the river was scarcely changed subsequently.                
                                                                             
        Realm  of  Narog  beyond  Narog  This was  hastily added  to the      
        map in  blue crayon,  together with  the broken  line indicating      
        its  boundaries.  On  the  later map  the 'Realm  of Nargothrond      
        beyond  the  river'  covers  a  much  larger  territory  to  the      
        North-east (see Guarded Plain).                                       
                                                                             
        Sirion See notes on the northern half.                                
                                                                             
        Sirion flows underground See Umboth-muilin. Sirion's fall is           
        also referred to in the Lay of the Children of Hurin, lines           
        1467-8.                                                               
                                                                             
        Umboth-muilin   The   name   goes   back   to   the   Tale    of   the
        Nauglafring  (II.   225).  It   emerges  from   the  Lay   of  Leithian
        (lines   1722   if.)   that   the   Twilight   Meres  were   north  of
        Sirion's  fall  and  passage  underground,  whereas  in  the  tale of
        The  Fall  of'  Gondolin  the  reverse  was  the  case  (see  II. 217,
        HI. 222 - 3).                                                         
                                                                             
        Waters  of  Sirion  Cf. S  $16 'The  remnant reaches  Sirion and      
        journeys  to  the land  at its  mouth -  the Waters  of Sirion',      
        and  $l7  'He  returned  home  and  found  the Waters  of Sirion      
        desolate.'                                                            
                                                                             
                                                                  

  Woodmen   of   Turambar   The   Woodmen   were  first   placed  a
  long  way  away  from their  later location  - south  of Sirion's
  passage  underground  and  north  of  Nan  Tathrin,   with  their
  land (shown  by a  dotted line)  extending on  both sides  of the
  river.  This position  is quite  at variance  with what  was said
  in  the Tale  of Turambar  (II. 91):  'that people  had houses...
  in lands  that were  not utterly  far porn  Sirion or  the grassy
  hills of that river*s middle course', which as  I said  (II. 141)
  'may  be  taken  to  agree  tolerably with  the situation  of the
  Forest  of Brethil'.  The first  placing of  the name  was struck
  out,  and  the  second agrees  with Q  ($13); 'their  houses were
  in  the  green  woods  about  the River  Taiglin that  enters the
  land of Doriath ere it joins  with the  great waters  of Sirion.'
                                                                 
 Note on the south-east corner of the map, in  red ink  with later
 pencilled additions:                                             
                                                                 
  All  the  lands  watered  by  Sirion  south  of  Gondolin [added:
  or   more   usually   R.   Taiglin]   are   called   in   English
  'Broseliand',  Geleidhian  by  the  gnomes.  [Added:  -  but this
  usually  does  not  include  Doriath.  Its  east boundary  is not
  shown. It is the Blue Mountains.]                               
                                                                 
 It is interesting that Broseliand is said to be the English name;
 and that Doriath is not usually included in Broseliand.          
  Lastly,  it may  be mentioned  that of  the highlands  rising on
 the eastern side of the lower course of Sirion there is  no trace
 on the later map.                                                
                                                                 
          THE WESTWARD AND EASTWARD EXTENSIONS TO THE MAP.        
                                                                 
  These  supplementary  maps  were  drawn   in  relation   to  the
 main or central  map and  substantially overlapping  it: they are
 in  close  accord  with it  in all  features where  they overlap.
 These sheets  were carefully  laid out,  but the  actual markings
 were  done extremely  rapidly in  soft pencil,  and are  now very
 faint; the paper is thin and the maps are  battered. Some  alter-
 ations and  additions were  made in  ink (some  of the  rivers of
 Ossiriand are written in ink and some in pencil).                
                                                                 
                                                                 

    The notes on these supplementary maps include almost all
  names that do not occur on the main map, and a few that occur
  on both which have features of interest on the extensions.
                                                                   
                       The Westward Extension.                      
                                                                   
  Bridge of  Ice The  words in  the N.W.  corner 'Far  north lies
  the  bridge  of  Ice' refer  to the  Helkarakse, but  the meaning
  of  the  word  'bridge'  is  only  explained  in  the  Ambarkanta
  (see pp. 291 - 2).                                                
                                                                   
  Brithombar (and Eldorest) This  is the  first occurrence  of the
      Havens  of the  Falas. That  Osse persuaded  some of  the Teleri
      to  remain  'on  the  beaches  of  the  world'  is  mentioned in
      Q  $3;  and  in  a  later  rewriting  of  a  passage  in  Q  $11
      (note  14) the  presence of  Elves 'from  the Falas'  before the
      Battle of Unnumbered Tears is referred to.                    
                                                                   
   Brithon,  River  The  first  occurrence  of  the name,  as of
      Brithombar  the  haven  at  its  mouth. The  later imposition
      on  the  coast-line  as originally  drawn of  the river-mouth
      and  the  long  cape giving  protection to  the haven  can be
      seen.                                                         
                                                                   
   Celegorm  and  Curufin  They  are  shown  as  being  lords  of a
   'fief' N.W. of the Hills  of the  Hunters, with  Felagund ruling
   in Nargothrond.                                                  
                                                                   
   Eldor, River The first occurrence of the  name. This  river was
      later  named  Eglor,  Eglahir, and  finally Nenning,  its course
      remaining unchanged.                                          
                                                                   
   Eldorest, Haven of Eldorest  The first  occurrence of  the name
      (see  Brithombar).  The  haven  at  the mouth  of the  Eldor be-
      came  Eglorest  when  the  river  became the  Eglor, and  so re-
      mained  (Eglarest  in  The  Silmarillion)  when  the  river  was
      again renamed Nenning.                                        
                                                                   
   Felagund See Celegorm and Curufin.                              

 Hithlum The mountain-range fencing Hithlum on the West         
 (later Ered Lomin when that name was transferred from the      
 Shadowy Mountains, see pp. 233 - 4) is shown.                  
                                                               
 Morwen This is written over Mavwin (see this entry under       
 the main map).                                                 
                                                               
     Nargothrond is now placed on the west bank of Narog.       
                                                               
 Orc-Mountains Extensive highlands cover the entire region      
 between Brithombar and the range forming the southern          
 fence of what was later called Nevrast. On the later map       
 these highlands are retained in the region between the         
 sources of the Brithon and the Eldor (Nenning), and are too    
 little represented on my map in the published Silmarillion.
   Here Morgoth reaches the shores is probably a reference      
 to the story that has not yet emerged in the texts, that in the
 year after the Battle of Unnumbered Tears 'Morgoth sent        
 great strength over Hithlum and Nevrast, and they came         
 down the rivers Brithon and Nenning and ravaged all the        
 Falas' (The Silmarillion p. 196).                              
                                                               
 Realm of Narog Of the three occurrences, that in the centre    
 between the Hills of the Hunters and the river was put in at
 the time of the making of the map; the other two (Realm of     
 Narog in the West, and Realm of Narog Beyond Narog to          
 the East of the river) were entered in blue crayon at the      
 same time as Realm of Narog beyond Narog on the main           
 map, as also was the continuation of the broken line, mark-
 ing the northern boundary, as far as the river Eldor.          
                                                               
 Tower  of  Tindobel  This  stands  where  on  the  later  map is
 Barad  Nimras  (the  tower  raised  by  Felagund  'to  watch the
 western sea', The Silmarillion pp. 120, 196). Tindobel  is first
 mentioned in the Annals of Beleriand (later than the           
 Quenta), p. 398.                                               
                                                               
        Ylmir's Way Ylmir, almost certainly the Gnomish form of
   Ulmo, is found in the Lay of the Children of Hurin (III. 93)

 and regularly  in  S.  With 'Ylmir's  Way' cf.  the tale  of The
 Fall of Gondolin (II. 149 - 50):                                   
                                                                   
     Thereafter  'tis said  that  magic  and  destiny  led  [Tuor] on
     a  day  to  a  cavernous  opening  down  which  a  hidden  river
     flowed  from  Mithrim.  And  Tuor  entered  that   cavern  seek-
     ing  to  learn  its  secret,  but  the  waters of  Mithrim drove
     him  forward  into  the  heart  of  the rock  and he  might not
     win back into the light. And this,  'tis said,  was the  will of
     Ulmo  Lord  of  Waters  at  whose  prompting  the   Noldoli  had
     made that hidden way.                                          
                                                                   
 It  is not  clear from  this passage  at what  point the  river out
 of  Lake   Mithrim  went   underground.  In   the  story   of  Tuor
 written   long   afterwards   and   given   in   Unfinished   Tales
 Tuor followed  'a sudden  spring of  water in  the hills'  (p. 21),
 and                                                              
                                                                   
     he  came  down  from  the  tall  hills  of  Mithrim  and  passed
     out  into  the  northward  plain  of  Dor-lomin;  and  ever  the
     stream  grew  as  he  followed  it  westward, until  after three
     days  he  could  descry  in  the  west the  long grey  ridges of
     Ered Lomin... (Unfinished Tales, p. 20).                       
                                                                   
 The   Gate   of   the   Noldor,  where   the  stream   went  under-
 ground, was in the eastern foothills of Ered Lomin.                
     Ylmir's  Way  issues  in  a firth  that is  unnamed on  the map
 (Drengist  has  hitherto  only  occurred  in  the  list of  Old En-
 glish names, p. 257).                                              
                                                                   
 It will be seen that the  western coastline  is closely  similar to
 that on the later map.                                           
                                                                   
                       The Eastward Extension.                      
                                                                   
 Adurant,  River  The  most  southerly of  the tributaries  of Ge-
 lion,  named  in  an addition  to Q  514 (note  4). Its  course and
 relation  to   the  mountains   and  the   other  rivers   was  not
 changed.                                                           

  Ascar, River  The name  of the  northernmost of  the tributaries
  of  Gelion  occurs  in  Q  $14  (see  entry  Flend  below).  Its
  course and relation to the  mountains and  the other  rivers was
  not changed.                                                    
                                                                 
  Beren  and  Luthien  Here  dwelt  Beren  and Luthien  before de-
  struction  of  Doriath  in  Land  of  Cuilwarthin.  On  the main
  map  the  second  placing  of  this  land,  between  Sirion  and
  Gelion, was rejected with the note:  'Lies to  the east  of this
  and  beyond  the  Great  Lands  of  the East  and of  wild men.'
  This  must  mean  that  my  father  was moving  the Land  of the
  Dead  that Live  far away  into unknown  regions (see  the entry
  Great  Lands);  but  the  Eastward  Extension  map places  it in
  the  final  position,  in the  region of  the Seven  Rivers: see
  Gweirth-i-cuina.                                                
                                                                 
 Blue Mountains These were first named in Q $9.                  
                                                                 
  Brilthor, River This, the fifth of the tributaries of Gelion, is
  named in  an addition  to Q  $14 (note  4); later  emendation to
  Q  moved  Duilwen  further  south  and  brought   Brilthor  into
  the fourth place.                                               
                                                                 
  Broseliand  Here  is  end  of  Broseliand,  written  between the
  rivers Ascar and  Thalos, and  against the  western feet  of the
  Blue Mountains. Cf. the addition to  the note  in the  corner of
  the  main  map (p.  280): 'Its  east boundary  is not  shown. It
  is the Blue Mountains.'                                         
                                                                 
 Cuilwarthin See Beren and Luthien, Gweirth-i-cuina.              
                                                                 
   Damrod  and  DirieL  The  note  above  the  name  Diriel  reads:
   'Here  is  a  wide  forest  where  many fugitive  gnomes wander.
   Orcs  come  seldom.'  Cf.  Q  $14:  'the  woods about  the River
   [Flend/Gelion],  where  aforetime   were  the   hunting  grounds
   of Damrod and Diriel.'                                         
     The  note  below  the  name  Diriel  reads:  'Here   also  are
   many  Ilkorins  who  do  not  live  in  Doriath  but  fought  at
   Nirnaith  Unoth.'  Nirnaith  Unoth  occurs  in  the  Lay  of the
   Children  of  Hurin,  replaced  by  Nirnaith  Ornoth  (III.  79,

 102,  123).  On  Dark-elves  at the  Battle of  Unnumbered Tears
 see S and Q $11.                                                
                                                                
 Dolm, Mt. This is the first appearance of the mountain after-
 wards named Dolmed, placed as on the later map.                 
                                                                
 Duilwen This, the third of the tributaries  of Gelion,  is named
 m an addition to Q $14 (note 4), where  it is  placed as  on the
 map  between  Thalos   and  Loeglin.   Later  emendation   to  Q
 gave  the  final  order,  with  Duilwen  moved  south  to become
 the fifth tributary.                                            
                                                                
 Dwarf-road  and  Sarn Athra  As  the  Dwarf-road   was  first
 marked  on  this  map,  after crossing  Aros it  bent south-east
 and  ran  in  that  direction  in  a  straight line  across East
 Broseliand,  crossing  (Flend)  Gelion   at  Sarn  Athra,  which
 (having  been  moved  from  its  position   on  the   main  map,
 where  it  was on  the Aros)  was now  placed at  the confluence
 of the third  tributary river  (here Duilwen).  The line  of the
 road goes off the  map in  the south-east  corner, with  the di-
 rection:  'Southward  in  East  feet   of  Blue   Mountains  are
 Belegost  and  Nogrod.'  This  site  for Sarn Athra  agrees with
 Q  $14,  where  the  ford  is  near  the  confluence  of (Flend)
 Gelion and Duilwen.                                             
    A  later  route  for the  Dwarf-road is  also marked  on this
 map.  Here  the  road  bears  more  nearly east  in the  land of
 Damrod  and  Diriel  and  so  crosses  (Flend)   Gelion  further
 north: Sarn Athra  is now  placed just  below the  confluence of
 Ascar  with Gelion  (this is  the reason  for the  emendation of
 Duilwen  to  Ascar  in  Q  514,  note  7).  It then  follows the
 course  of  Ascar on  the southern  side, crosses  the mountains
 by  a  pass  below  Mount  Dolm,  and  then turns  sharply south
 and goes away on the eastern side of the mountains.             
    On the  later map  Sarn Athra  is placed  just above  the con-
 fluence  of  Ascar  and  Gelion,  and  the  road  therefore goes
 along the northern bank of  Ascar, but  still crosses  the moun-
 tains  south  of   Mount  Dolmed;   the  Dwarf-cities   are  now
 placed  in  the  eastern  side  of  the  mountains not  far from
 Mount Dolmed.                                                   

         East Broseliand The term East Beleriand occurs in Q $14.
                                                                 
   Flend  In  Q $14  the great  river of  East Beleriand  was first
   named  Ascar,  but  since  Ascar was  already in  Q the  name of
   the  northernmost  of  the tributaries  from the  Blue Mountains
   I think that this was a mere slip (see p. 229 and  footnote) for
   Flend,  to  which it  was emended.  Flend then  > Gelion,  as on
   the  map.  The  course  of  Gelion  was not  changed afterwards,
   but  the  map  does  not  show the  later eastern  tributary arm
   ('Greater Gelion').                                            
                                                                 
 Gelion See Flend.                                                
                                                                 
 Great Lands The note down the right hand side of the map       
   reads: 'Here lie the Great Lands of the East where Ilkorins
   (dark-elves) and Wild Men live, acknowledging Morgoth as       
   God and King.' This use of Great Lands for the lands of .      
   Middle-earth east of the Blue Mountains is notable; it is      
   used also on the main map, where the third site of the Land
   of the Dead that Live is said to lie 'beyond the Great Lands
   of the East and of wild men' (see Beren and Luthien). In the
   Lost Tales the term Great Lands always means the lands be-     
   tween the Seas (i.e. the whole of the later Middle-earth); in
   S and Q Outer Lands (which in the Lost Tales meant the         
   Western Lands) is used of Middle-earth, with later emenda-     
   tion to Hither Lands in Q.                                      
      The statement here that in the Great Lands of the East      
   both Wild Men and Dark-elves acknowledged Morgoth as           
   God and King is significant for the future. Cf. the emenda-
   tion to Q II $18, note 3: 'But most Men, and especially        
   those new come out of the East, were on the side of the En-
   emy.' The corruption of certain Men in the beginning of        
   their days appears in very early synopses (for Gilfanon's      
   Tale); see I. 236.                                             
                                                                 
   Gweirth-i-cuina  This  name,  in  which  Gweirth-  is apparently
   emended   from   Gwairth-,   is   written    over   Cuilwarthin.
   Gwerth-i-cuina  (not  Gweirth-  as  on  the  map)  has  appeared
   in  two  emended  passages  in  Q:  $10  (note  15)  'they  wan-

                                                                
                                                                     
    dered...  upon  the  confines  of  Geleidhian  in  fair Ossiriand,
   Land  of   Seven  Streams,   Gwerth-i-cuina,  the   Living  Dead'
     (where  the  name  seems  to  be  used  of  Beren  and  Luthien
    themselves); and  $14 (note  6) 'Elves  called it  oft Gwerth-i-
     cuina', where it is used of the land, as on the map.             
                                                                     
   Humling The first occurrence is in the Lay of Leithian lines       
    2994 - 5 (April 1928):                                            
                                                                     
                              where Himling's watchful hill           
        o'er Aglon's gorge hung tall and still.                       
                                                                     
     Loeglin  As  the  fourth  of  the tributaries  of Gelion  this is
     named  in  an  addition  to  Q  514  (note  4).  Later emendation
     moved  Duilwen  further  south  and  brought  Loeglin   (>  Lego-
     lin) into the third place.                                       
                                                                     
   Nirnaith Unoth See Damrod and Diriel.                              
                                                                     
   Ossiriath  (of  the  Seven  rivers)  This form  is not  found else-
     ' where.  It is  written over  Assariad, which  occurs in  Q $14,
     later emended  to Ossiriand  (note 4).  Ossiriand(e) is  found as
     a rejected alternative to  Broseliand in  Canto I  of the  Lay of
     Leithian (III. 158 - 60). The  placing of  the name,  between the
     sixth and seventh rivers, is  odd, but  in view  of 'of  the Seven
     rivers' probably not significant.                                
                                                                     
   Rathlorion This is the form of the new name of Ascar found         
     in Q ($14), later emended to Rathloriel.                         
                                                                     
  Sarn Athra See Dwarf-road. In Q 514 Sarn-athra, emended              
    to Sarn-athrad (note 8).                                           
                                                                     
  Sons of Feanor See entry Aglon to the northern half of the         
   main map.                                                         
                                                                     
  Thalos  This, the second of the tributaries of Gelion, is named     
     in an addition to Q $14 (note 4). Its course and relation to
     the mountains and the other rivers was not changed.     
                                                                     
                                                                     
