                                 V.                               
                                                                 
                           THE AMBARKANTA.                        
                                                                 
 This very short work, of cardinal  interest (and  not least  in the
 associated maps), is entitled at the beginning of the text  'Of the
 Fashion of the World', on  a title-page  loose from  but obviously
 belonging with the work is written:                              
                                                                 
                             Ambarkanta.                          
                                                                 
                       The Shape of the World.                    
                                                                 
                               Rumil.                             
                                                                 
 together with the word Ambarkanta in tengwar. This is the first  
 appearance of Rumil since the Lost Tales; but he is not men-     
 tioned in the text itself.                                       
  That the Ambarkanta is later than the Quenta (perhaps by        
 several years) cannot be doubted. The reappearance of the        
 name Utumna is an advance on Q, where also the term              
 'Middle-earth' does not appear; Eruman is (aberrantly) the       
 name in Q of the land where Men awoke (pp. 119, 205),            
 whereas in the Ambarkanta its name is for the first time         
 Hildorien; and there are several cases where the Ambarkanta      
 has names and details that are only found in Q by emendation     
 (for example, Elvenhome p. 289, but Bay of Faerie > Bay of       
 Elvenhome in Q (II), p. 186 note 12).                            
  The text consists of six pages of fine manuscript in ink, with
 very little emendation; I give the final forms throughout, with
 all rejected readings in the notes that follow the text. Closely
 associated with the work and here reproduced from the origi-     
 nals are three diagrams of the World, here numbered I, II, and
 III, and two maps, numbered IV and V (see insert). On the        
 pages facing these reproductions I note changes made to          
                                                                 
             

 names. The text begins with a list of cosmographical words,       
 with explanations; this I give on pp. 294 - 6.                    
                                                                 
                    OF THE FASHION OF THE WORLD.                  
                                                                 
    About all the World are the Ilurambar, or Walls of the         
 World. They are as ice and glass and steel, being above all
 imagination  of  the  Children  of  Earth  cold,  transparent, and
 hard.  They  cannot  be  seen, nor  can they  be passed,  save by
 the Door of Night.                                                
    Within  these  walls the  Earth is  globed: above,  below, and
 upon all  sides  is  Vaiya,  the  Enfolding  Ocean.  But  this is
 more  like to  sea below  the Earth  and more  like to  air above
 the Earth.  In  Vaiya   below  the   Earth  dwells   Ulmo.  Above
 the Earth  lies  the Air,  which is  called Vista,(1) and sustains
 birds  and  clouds.  Therefore  it is  called above  Fanyamar, or
 Cloudhome;  and  below  Aiwenore (2) or Bird-land.  But  this air
 lies only  upon  Middle-earth  and  the   Inner  Seas,   and  its
 proper  bounds  are  the  Mountains  of Valinor  in the  West and
 the  Walls  of  the  Sun  in  the  East.  Therefore  clouds  come
 seldom  in  Valinor,  and the  mortal birds  pass not  beyond the
 peaks  of  its  mountains.  But  in  the  North and  South, where
 there  is  most  cold  and  darkness  and   Middle-earth  extends
 nigh to  the  Walls  of  the  World, Vaiya  and Vista  and Ilmen'
 flow together and are confounded.                                
   Ilmen is  that air  that is  clear and  pure being  pervaded by
 light though it gives no light.  Ilmen lies  above Vista,  and is
 not great in  depth, but  is deepest  in the  West and  East, and
 least in the North and South. In  Valinor the  air is  Ilmen, but
 Vista  flows  in  at  times  especially  in  Elvenhome,  part  of
 which is at the  eastern feet  of the  Mountains; and  if Valinor
 m  darkened and  this air  is not  cleansed by  the light  of the
 Blessed  Realm,   it  takes   the  form   of  shadows   and  grey
 mists.  But Ilmen  and Vista  will mingle  being of  like nature,
 but Ilmen  is  breathed  by the  Gods, and  purified by  the pas-
 sage  of  the  luminaries;  for  in  Ilmen  Varda   ordained  the
 courses of the stars, and later of the Moon and Sun.             
    From Vista there is no outlet  nor escape  save' for  the ser-

 vants  of  Manwe,  or  for such  as he  gives powers  like to
 those of his people, that can sustain themselves in  Ilmen or
 even in the upper Vaiya, which  is very  thin and  cold. From
 Vista  one  may  descend  upon  the  Earth.  From  Ilmen  one
 may descend  into Valinor.  Now the  land of  Valinor extends
 almost to Vaiya, which is most  narrow in  the West  and East
 of  the  World,  but  deepest  in  the  North and  South. The
 Western  shores  of Valinor  are therefore  not far  from the
 Walls  of  the  World.  Yet  there is  a chasm  which sunders
 Valinor from Vaiya, and it is filled with Ilmen, and  by this
 way  one  may  come  from  Ilmen  above  the  earth   to  the
 lower  regions,  and  to  the Earthroots,  and the  caves and
 grottoes that are at the foundations of  the lands  and seas.
 There  is Ulmo's  abiding-place. Thence  are derived  the wa-
 ters  of  Middle-earth.  For these  waters are  compounded of
 Ilmen  and  Vaiya  and  Ambar' (which  is Earth),  since Ulmo
 blends  Ilmen  and  Vaiya  and  sends  them  up  through  the
 veins  of  the  World  to  cleanse and  refresh the  seas and
 rivers, the  lakes and  the fountains  of Earth.  And running
 water  thus  possesses  the  memory  of  the  deeps  and  the
 heights,  and  holds  somewhat  of  the  wisdom and  music of
 Ulmo, and of the light of the luminaries of heaven.         
   In  the  regions of  Ulmo the  stars are  sometimes hidden,
 and  there  the  Moon  often  wanders  and  is not  seen from
 Middle-earth. But the Sun  does not  tarry there.  She passes
 under the earth in haste,  lest night  be prolonged  and evil
 strengthened; and she is  drawn through  the nether  Vaiya by
 the servants of Ulmo, and it is warmed and filled  with life.
 Thus  days  are  measured by  the courses  of the  Sun, which
 sails from  East to  West through  the lower  Ilmen, blotting
 out the stars; and she passes over the midst  of Middle-earth
 and halts not, and she bends her  course northward  or south-
 ward,  not  waywardly  but  in  due  procession  and  season.
 And when she rises above  the Walls  of the  Sun it  is Dawn,
 and  when she  sinks behind  the Mountains  of Valinor  it is
 evening.                                                    
   But  days are  otherwise in  Valinor than  in Middle-earth.
 For there the  time of  greatest light  is Evening.  Then the

                        
                                                                
 Sun  comes  down  and  rests for  a while  in the  Blessed Land,
 lying  upon the  bosom of  Vaiya. And  when she  sinks into
 Vaiya  it is  made hot  and glows  with rosecoloured  fire, and
 this for a long while illumines  that land.  But as  she passes
 toward  the  East  the glow  fades, and  Valinor is  robbed of
 light,  and  is  lit  only with  stars; and  the Gods  mourn then
 most for the death of Laurelin. At  dawn the  dark is  deep in
 Valinor,  and  the shadows  of their  mountains lie  heavy on
 the mansions  of the  Gods. But  the Moon  does not  tarry in
 Valinor, and passeth swiftly o'er  it to  plunge in  the chasm
 of Ilmen,(5) for he pursues  ever after  the Sun,  and overtakes
 her  seldom,  and  then  is  consumed  and  darkened   in  her
 flame.  But  it  happens at  times that  he comes  above Valinor
 ere the Sun has left it, and  then he  descends and  meets his
 beloved, and Valinor is filled with mingled light as  of silver
 and  gold;  and the  Gods smile  remembering the  mingling of
 Laurelin and Silpion long ago.                                
                                                                
   The Land of Valinor slopes downward from the feet of
 the Mountains, and its western shore is at the level of the
 bottoms of the inner seas. And not far thence, as has been
 said, are the Walls of the World; and over against the west-
 ermmost shore in the midst of Valinor is Ando Lomen (6) the
 Door of Timeless Night that pierceth the Walls and opens
 upon the Void. For the World is set amid Kuma, the Void,
 the Night without form or time. But none can pass the
 chasm and the belt of Vaiya and come to that Door, save
 the great Valar only. And they made that Door when Melko
 was overcome and put forth into the Outer Dark; and it is
 guarded by Earendel.
                                                                
   The Middle-earth lies amidst the World, and is made of
 land and water; and its surface is the centre of the world
 from the confines of the upper Vaiya to the confines of the
 nether. Of old its fashion was thus. It was highest in the
 middle, and fell away on either side into vast valleys, but
 rose again in the East and West and again fell away to the
 chasm at its edges. And the two valleys were filled with the

  primeval water, and the shores of these  ancient seas  were in
  the  West  the  western highlands  and the  edge of  the great
  land, and in the East the  eastern highlands  and the  edge of
  the  great  land upon  the other  side. But  at the  North and
  South it did  not fall  away, and  one could  go by  land from
  the  uttermost  South  and the  chasm of  Ilmen to  the utter-
  most  North  and  the  chasm  of Ilmen.  The ancient  seas lay
  therefore in troughs, and their waters spilled not to the East
  or to the West; but  they had  no shores  either at  the North
  or at the South, and they  spilled into  the chasm,  and their
  waterfalls  became  ice  and  bridges  of  ice because  of the
  cold;  so  that  the  chasm  of  Ilmen  was  here  closed  and
  bridged, and the  ice reached  out into  Vaiya, and  even unto
  the Walls of the World.                                       
                                                               
    Now it  is said  that the  Valar coming  into the  World de-
  scended  first  upon  Middle-earth at  its centre,  save Melko
  who  descended in  the furthest  North. But  the Valar  took a
  portion of land and made an  island and  hallowed it,  and set
  it  in  the Western  Sea and  abode upon  it, while  they were
  busied in the exploration and first ordering of the  World. As
  is  told  they  desired to  make lamps,  and Melko  offered to
  devise  a new  substance of  great strength  and beauty  to be
  their pillars. And  he set  up these  great pillars  north and
  south of the Earth's middle yet nearer to  it than  the chasm;
  and  the  Gods  placed  lamps  upon  them  and  the  Earth had
  light for a while.                                            
    But  the  pillars were  made with  deceit, being  wrought of
  ice; and they melted, and the  lamps fell  in ruin,  and their
  light was spilled. But the melting of the  ice made  two small
  inland seas, north and south of the middle  of the  Earth, and
  there was a northern  land and  a middle  land and  a southern
  land. Then the  Valar removed  into the  West and  forsook the
  island;  and  upon  the highland  at the  western side  of the
  West  Sea  they  piled  great   mountains,  and   behind  them
  made  the  land  of  Valinor.  But  the  mountains  of Valinor
  curve  backward,  and  Valinor  is broadest  in the  middle of
  Earth, where the mountains march  beside the  sea; and  at the

  north  and  south  the  mountains  come  even  to  the  chasm.
  There are those  two regions  of the  Western Land  which are
  not of Middle-earth and  are yet  outside the  mountains: they
  are dark  and  empty.  That to  the North  is Eruman,  and that
  to the South is Arvalin; and there is only a narrow strait be-
  tween  them  and the  corners of  the Middle-earth,  but these
  straits are filled with ice.                                  
    For their further protection the  Valar thrust  away Middle-
  earth at the centre and crowded  it eastward,  so that  it was
  bended, and the  great sea  of the  West is  very wide  in the
  middle, the widest of all waters  of the  Earth. The  shape of
  the Earth in  the East  was much  like that  in the  West, save
  for the narrowing  of the  Eastern Sea,  and the  thrusting of
  the land thither. And beyond  the Eastern  Sea lies  the East-
  ern Land, of which we  know little,  and call  it the  Land of
  the Sun;  and  it  has  mountains,  less  great than  those of
  Valinor, yet very great, which are  the Walls  of the  Sun. By
  reason of the falling of  the land  these mountains  cannot be
  descried, save by highflying birds, across the seas  which di-
  vide them from the shores of Midd1e-earth.                    
    And  the  thrusting  aside  of  the  land caused  also moun-
  tains  to appear  in four  ranges, two  in the  Northland, and
  two in the Southland;  and those  in the  North were  the Blue
  Mountains in the West side,  and the  Red Mountains  in the
  East  side;  and  in  the  South were  the Grey  Mountains and
  the  Ye11ow.  But Melko  fortified the  North and  built there
  the  Northern  Towers, which  are also  called the  Iron Moun-
  tains,  and  they  look  southward.  And  in  the  middle land
  there  were  the  Mountains  of  the  Wind,  for  a  wind blew
  strongly  there  coming  from  the  East  before the  Sun; and
  Hildorien  the  land  where  Men   first  awoke   lay  between
  these  mountains  and  the  Eastern  Sea. But  Kuivienen where
  Orome found the Elves  is to  the North  beside the  waters of
  Helkar.(7)                                                    
                                                               
    But the symmetry of the ancient Earth was changed and       
  broken in the first Battle of the Gods, when Valinor went     
  out  against  Utumno,(8) which  was  Melko's   stronghold,  and

 Melko was chained.  Then the  sea of  Helkar (which  was the                  
 northern lamp) became an inland sea or  great lake,  but the                  
 sea of Ringil (which was the southern  lamp) became  a great                  
 sea flowing north-eastward and joining  by straits  both the                  
 Western and Eastern Seas.                                                     
   And  the  Earth  was  again broken  in the  second battle,                  
 when Melko  was again  overthrown, and  it has  changed ever                  
 in the wearing and passing of many ages.' But  the greatest.                  
 change  took  place,  when the  First Design  was destroyed,                  
 and the Earth was  rounded, and  severed from  Valinor. This                  
 befell in the days of  the assault  of the  Numenoreans upon                  
 the land of the Gods, as is told in the Histories. And since                  
 that time the world has forgotten the  things that  were be-                  
 fore, and  the names  and the  memory of  the lands  and wa-                  
 ters of old has perished.                                                     
                                                                              
                                     NOTES.                                    
                                                                              
 1. Vista: at all  seven occurrences  the original  name Wilwa  was changed,
     first in pencil then in ink, to Vista; so also on the world-diagrams I and
     II, and on the diagram III (the World Made Round).                         
 2. Original reading Aiwenor; so also on diagram I.                         
 3. Ilmen:  at  all  the  many occurrences  the original  name Silma  was care-
     fully  erased  and  changed  to  Ilma  (the  same change  on the  map IV);
     Ilma  was then  itself altered  to Ilmen  (the same  succession of changes
     on diagrams I and II).                                                    
 4. Ambar  is  an  emendation  but  the  underlying word  is wholly  erased (so
     also on diagram II; written in later on I).                               
 5. In the margin is written Ilmen-assa, changed from Ilman-assa.               
 6. Ando Lomen is interpolated into the text,  but in  all probability  not sig-
     nificantly later than the original writing of the MS.                     
 7. The  last  two  sentences  of  this  paragraph  (from  'And  in  the middle
     land...')  were  added,  but  to all  appearance belong  in time  with the
     original writing of the MS.                                               
 8. Utumno is emended from Utumna.                                              
 9. The  original  MS  ends  here;  what  follows,  concerning  the  Earth Made
     Round  at the  time of  the assault  of the  Numenoreans, was  added later
     (see p. 309).                                                             
                                                                              
            I give now the list of cosmological words accompanying the         
                Ambarkanta. My father made several changes to this list, but

  since the alterations were mostly made over erasures  and the                
  additions belong to the same period it  is impossible  to know                
  the original form of the list in all points. The changes in the                
  list are however much the same as  those made  in the  text of                
  the Ambarkanta  and on  the world-diagrams;  thus Silma  > Ilma                
  >  Ilmen,  Wilwa  >  Vista,  Aiwenor  > Aiwenore;  ava, ambar,                
  Endor  over  erasures;  Avakuma,  & Elenarda  Stellar Kingdom                
  additions. The translation of Ilmen as 'Place of light'  is an                
  emendation from 'sheen'.                                                      
                                                                               
   Ilu The World.                                   World.                      
                                                                               
     Ilurambar The Walls of the World;                                          
     ramba wall                                                                 
                                                                               
   Kuma darkness, void                           Dark.                          
     ava outer, exterior; Avakuma                                               
                                                                               
     Vaiya fold, envelope. In nature like to Outer Sea, or Encircling           
     water, but less buoyant than air, and Ocean, or Enfolding Ocean            
     surrounding The Outer Sea.*                                                
                                                                               
     Ilmen Place of  light. The  region above    Sky. Heaven                    
     the air,  than which  it is  thinner and                                   
     more  clear.  Here  only  the  stars and                                   
     Moon  and  Sun  can  fly.  It  is called                                   
     also  Tinwe-malle  the   Star-street,  &                                   
     Elenarda Stellar Kingdom.                                                  
                                                                               
     Vista  air.  Wherein  birds may  fly and    Air                            
     clouds   sail.   Its  upper   region  is                                   
     Fanyamar    or   Cloudhome,    and   its                                   
     lower Aiwenore' or Birdland.                                               
                                                                               
   ambar Earth. ambar-endya or Middle Earth                                     
   Earth of which Endor is the midmost                                          
   point.                                                                       
                                                                               
  (* This is  very confusing,  since Vaiya  is apparently  said to  surround the
  Outer Sea (though  in the  right-hand column  it is  itself defined  as 'Outer
  Sea'). But the word 'The' in 'The Outer Sea' has a capital T; and I think that
  my father left the preceding sentence  unfinished, ending  with 'surrounding',
  and that he added 'The Outer Sea' afterwards as a  definition of  Vaiya, with-
  out noticing that the preceding phrase was incomplete.)                       

 ear water; sea.  Sea                                                           
   The roots of the Earth are Mar-                                              
   talmar, or Talmar Ambaren.                                                   
                                                                               
 ando door, gate.                                                               
                                                                               
 lome Night. Ando Lomen the Door of                                            
 Night,  through  which   Melko  was                                            
 thrust after the Second War  of the                                            
 Gods.                                                                          
                                                                               
 All that land that lies above water, between the Seas of the                   
 West and East and the Mountains of North and South is                          
 Pelmar, the Enclosed Dwelling.                                                 
                                                                               
                         Commentary on the Ambarkanta.                          
                                                                               
 This   elegant   universe,   while   certainly   in   many  respects   an  ev-
 olution   from   the   old   cosmology   of   the   Lost  Tales,   shows  also
 radical shifts and advances in essential structure.                            
  To   begin   from   the   Outside:   beyond   the   Walls   of    the   World
 lies   'the   Void,   the   Night   without   form   or   time',   Kuma  (Ava-
 kuma);   and   this   is   of   course   an   aboriginal    conception,   'the
 outer  dark',  'the  limitless  dark',  'the  starless  vast'  of the  tale of
 The   Hiding   of   Valinor   (I.    216).   The    Walls   of    the   World,
 Ilurambar,*   are   the    unbroken,   uninterrupted    shell   of    a   vast
 globe;   they   are   cold,   invisible,   and   impassable   save   by   Ando
 Lomen,   the   Door   of   Night.   This   Door   was   made   by   the  Valar
 'when    Melko    was    overcome    and    put    forth   into    the   Outer
 Dark',   and   Earendel  guards   it.  Already   in  S   ($19)  it   was  said
 that   'Morgoth   is   thrust   through   the   Door   of   Night   into   the
 outer  dark  beyond   the  Walls   of  the   World,  and   a  guard   set  for
 ever   on   that   Door',  this   is  repeated   in  the   corresponding  pas-
 sage   in   Q,   where   the   same   expressions   are   used   as   in   the
 Ambarkanta,    'the    Door    of   Timeless    Night',   'the    Void',   and
 where   Earendel,   sailing   in   the   Void,  is   named  as   the  guardian
 (see  pp.  197,  248).  It  is  not  however  said  in  these  texts  that the
                                                                               
 (*Ilu is 'the World' in diagrams I  and II,  and is  so defined  in the  list of
 words (p. 295); for its early meaning see I. 255, entry Ilwe. - The  changes to
 Earambar in diagrams I and II, like the pencilled note at the bottom of I, were
 made very much later and do not concern us here.)                              

  Door  of  Night  was  made   when  Melko   was  overcome,   at  the
  end of the Great Battle.                                           
    I have remarked earlier (p. 57 - 8) on the great shift in the as-
  tronomical  myth  introduced in  S by  the passage  of the  Sun be-
  neath  the  Earth,  rather  than  departure  through  the  Door of
  Night  followed by  the journey  through the  Outer Dark  and re-
  turn through  the  Gates  of  Morn,  as  described  in  The  Hiding of
  Valinor;  in  that  account  the  Gods  made the  Door of  Night in
  order  that  the  Sunship  should  not  have  to pass  beneath the
 Earth. Thus  the  Door  of  Night  has  remained,  but  its purpose
 and the time of its making have been totally changed.               
    The  conception  of  a  great Wall  surrounding the  'World' and
 fencing  it  against  an  outer  Emptiness  and Darkness  goes back
 to the beginning; in The Hiding of Valinor it  is called  'the Wall
 of Things', and Ulmo instructs the Valar that 'Vai  runneth from
 the  Wall  of  Things  unto  the Wall  of Things  whithersoever you
 may fare' (I. 214). I have discussed earlier (I. 86)  the possibil-
 ity that already in the  early cosmology  Vaitya (the  outermost of
 the three 'airs')  and Vai  (the Outer  Ocean) constituted  'a con-
 tinuous  enfolding  substance',  and  that the  Ambarkanta 'only
 makes  explicit  what  was  present  but  unexpressed  in  the Lost
 Tales', and pointed to the difficulties in this idea. In  the first
 draft of The Hiding of Valinor  (see I.  221 note  16) the  Wall of
 Things  was  evidently  imagined, as  I have  said (I.  227), 'like
 the walls of terrestrial cities, or gardens - walls  with a  top: A
 "ring-fence" '; the Walls  were lower  in the  East, so  that there
 was  no  Door  there  corresponding  to  the Door  of Night  in the
 West,  and  the  Sun  rode  over  the Eastern  Wall. In  the second
 draft  (I.  216)  the  idea of  the Gates  of Morn  was introduced;
 but the nature and extent of the Walls  was still  left obscure,
 and  indeed nothing  else is  said of  them in  the Lost  Tales be-
 yond  the  statement  that  they  are  'deep-blue'  g. 215).  A re-
 markable  sentence  in  the  original  tale  of  The  Music  of the
 Ainur (I. 56) declares that 'the  Ainur marvelled  to see  how the
 world  was globed  amid the  void and  yet separated  from it'.
 How this is  to be  interpreted in  the context  of the  Lost Tales
 I  do  not  know;  but the  sentence was  retained through  all the
 rewritings of  the Ainulindale  (cf. The  Silmarillion p.  17), and
 so   became   a   precise   description   of   the  world   of  the

  Ambarkanta,  whatever  my  father's  original  meaning  may  have              
  been.                                                                          
    In a  view of  the close  similarity of  wording between  Q and              
  the  Ambarkanta  on  the  subject  of  the  expulsion   of  Melko              
  through  the  Door  of Night,  mentioned above,  it is  very puz-              
  zling that in the same passage of Q (p. 197) it is said that some              
  think that  he 'creeps  back surmounting  the Wal1s  and visiteth              
  the  world'.  The  fact  that  this  is  only  a  surmise  ('Some              
  say...'),  and  that  the  Prophecy  of Mandos  which immediately              
  follows  declares  that  when  Morgoth  does  return  it  will be              
  through the Door of Night, hardly  explains how  the idea  of his              
  'surmounting  the  Walls'  (in  inescapable contradiction  to the              
  Ambarkanta,  and  negating  the  purpose  of   Earendel's  guard)              
  could arise.*                                                                  
    It  is not  indeed explained  in the  Ambarkanta how  the Valar              
  entered the world at its beginning,  passing through  the impass-              
  able Walls, and perhaps we should not  expect it  to be.  But the              
  central idea at this  time is  clear: from  the Beginning  to the              
  Great  Battle  in  which  Melko  was  overthrown, the  world with              
  all  its  inhabitants was  inescapably bounded;  but at  the very              
  end, in  order to  extrude Melko  into the  Void, the  Valar were              
  able to pierce the Walls by a Door.                                            
                                                                                
    Wholly new is the conception of  Ilmen as  the pure  air that                
  is breathed in Valinor, and whose bounds  are the  Mountains of                
  Valinor and the mountains called the Walls  of the  Sun, beyond                
  the Eastern Sea, though 'Vista flows in at times  especially in                
  Elvenhome'.  In  Ilmen  journey  the Sun,  Moon, and  Stars, so                
  that  this  region  is  called  also Tinwe-malle+  and Elenarda                
  (translated 'Star-street' and 'Stellar Kingdom' in the  list of                
  words, p.  295). This  partly corresponds  to the  cosmology of                
  the Lost Tales, where the Moon-ship 'saileth in the lower folds                
  of  Ilwe threading  a white  swathe among  the stars',  and the                
                                                                                
  (*This  conception  of  the  Walls  reappears much  later, and  is found  in The
  Silmarillion (p. 36): Melkor, returning to Arda after  his expulsion  by Tulkas
  into the outer darkness, 'passed over the Walls of the Night with his host, and
  came to Middle-earth far in the north'. But  this is  an aspect  of intractable
  problems  arising  in the  later cosmology  that cannot  be entered  into here.
  + See I. 269 (entry Tinwe Linto) and 263 (entry Olore Malle).)                

  stars 'could not soar into the dark and  tenuous realm  of Vaitya           
  that is  outside  all', but  where the  Sun 'voyageth  even above           
  Ilwe and beyond the stars' (I. 181, 193).                                   
    The  lowest  air,  Vista,  in  which  are  Fanyamar 'Cloudhome'           
  and Ainwenore 'Bird-land', retains  the characteristic  nature of           
  the earlier Vilna; cf. I. 65 'Vilna that is  grey and  therein may           
  the birds fly safely'. But there is an important corollary to the           
  frontier  between  Ilmen  and  Vista  in  the West:  'clouds come           
  seldom  in  Valinor,  and the  mortal birds  pass not  beyond the           
  peaks of its mountains'.                                                    
                                                                             
    An   aspect   of   the   cosmology   that   seems   puzzling   at   first
  sight  arises  from  the  statements  in  the   Ambarkanta  (1)   that  'in
  the  North   and   South   ...   Middle-earth    extends   nigh    to   the
  Walls  of  the  World'  (p.  290),  and  (2)  that  Vaiya  is   'most  nar-
  row   in  the   West  and   East  of   the  World,   but  deepest   in  the
  North  and   South'  (ibid.).   This  apparent   contradiction  is   to  be
  explained   by   the   passage   (p.   292)   describing   how   the  Inner
  Seas  have  no  shores  at  North   and  South,   hut  spilling   into  the
  Chasm   of   Ilmen   form   ice   bridges*  that   close  the   chasm,  and
  the  ice  extends  out  into   Vaiya  and   even  to   the  Walls   of  the
  World.   This   ice   is   represented    by   the    mountain-like   peaks
  above  the  words  Tormen   and  Harmen   in  diagram   II.  Of   all  this
  there  is  no  trace  in  the Lost  Tales; but  it will  be found  that the
  Ambarkanta    here    greatly    illumines     the    passage     in    The
  Silmarillion (p. 89) describing the Helcaraxe:                              
                                                                             
    For between the land of Aman that in the north  curved east-              
    ward, and the east-shores of  Endor (which  is Middle-earth)              
    that bore westward, there was a narrow strait, through which              
    the  chill waters  of the  Encircling Sea  and the  waves of              
    Belegaer flowed together, and there were vast fogs and mists              
    of deathly cold, and the sea-streams were filled with clash-              
    ing hills of ice and the grinding of ice deep-sunken.                     
                                                                             
    The passage of the Sun beneath the Earth seems to be dif-                 
  ferently conceived in the Ambarkanta from that of the Moon;                 
                                                                             
  (*Cf. 'Far north lies the bridge of Ice' in the N.W. corner of the Westward
    Extension of the first 'Silmarillion' map, p. 281; Insert p. iv.)         

 for while both pass from East to West through I1men, the Sun                    
 'sinks into Vaiya' and is 'drawn through the nether Vaiya by                    
 the servants  of Ulmo',  whereas the  Moon plunges  into the                    
 Chasm of Ilmen.*                                                                
                                                                                
   Turning  now  to  the  surface  of  the Earth,  we meet  for the              
 first time the name Endor,  which does  not occur  in the  text of              
 the Ambarkanta itself, but which  is defined  in the  word-list as              
 'the  midmost  point'  of  Ambarendya  or  Middle-earth.  Endor is              
 marked  in  also on  the 'World-diagrams'  I and  II, and  also on              
 the map  IV, where  it is  shown as  a point,  the 'Earth-middle',              
 and  subsequently  changed  to  Endon.   The  name   Endor  occurs              
 once in The Silmarillion (in the passage just cited), but there it              
 is a name of  Middle-earth, not  of the  midmost point  of Middle-              
 earth;  so  also in  The Lord  of the  Rings (Appendix  E): Quenya              
 Endore,  Sindarin  Ennor  'Middle-earth'.  Ambar-endya   seems  to              
 be  synonymous  with  Pelmar,  since in  the word-list  the former              
 is  defined  as  'Middle-earth', while  on map  IV the  region be-              
 tween  the  two  seas  of  East  and  West  is  called  'Pelmar or              
 Middle-earth', but in diagram I  they are  marked as  if different              
 in reference. Possibly, Pelmar (translated in the list of words as              
 'the  Enclosed  Dwelling') means  strictly the  habitable surface,              
 Ambar-endya the central raised part of Ambar, the Earth.+                      
                                                                                
 (* The  statement  in  The  Silmarillion (p.  101) that  Tilion (steersman  of the
 Moon)  'would  pass  swiftly  over  the  western  land...  and  plunge   in  the
 Chasm  beyond  the  Outer  Sea'  cannot  in  any  way  be  brought  into harmony
 with  the  Ambarkanta,  where  the  Chasm  of Ilmen  is reached  before Vaiya,
 and must be so by virtue of the fundamental ideas of the cosmology.             
   The  passage  in the  'Silmarillion' version  that followed  Q and  was inter-
 rupted at the end of 1937 has: 'But Tilion... passes  swiftly over  the western
 land... and  plunges into  the chasm  between the  shores of  the Earth  and the
 Outer  Sea.'  The passage  in the  published Silmarillion  derives from  a later
 version written in all probability in 1951 - 2; but though I retained it I am at
 loss                     to                      explain                     it.
 + For the first  element in  Pelmar see  the Appendix  to The  Silmarillion, en-
 try   pel-.   Neither   this   name   nor  Ambar,   Ambar-endya  occur   in  The
 Silmarillion,  but  Ambar-metta  'world-ending' is  found in  The Return  of the
 King (VI. S). - Middle-earth is first  found in  the Ambarkanta  and in  the An-
 nals of Valinor, which belong to the same  period but  cannot be  dated relative
 to one another. - Romen  'East' appears  for the  first time  in diagram  I, and
 Hyarmen  'South'  and  Formen  'North'  (<  Harmen,   Tormen)  in   diagram  II.)

  The lines  drawn  downwards  from  the  surface   of  the   Earth  to
  Martalmar  'the roots  of the  Earth' in  diagrams I  and II  are 'the
  veins of  the  World'  (p.  290);  and this  passage is  important in
  understanding   Ulmo's   power    and   benign    influence   exerted
  through  the  waters  of  the  world  (cf.  The  Silmarillion   pp.  27,
  40,  in  both of  which passages  the expression  'the veins  of the
  world' is used).                                                     
       In the East of  the world  are the  Walls of  the Sun,  which is
  a   great   mountain   range   symmetrically   answering   the  Moun-
  tains of  Valinor  in  the  West,  as  shown  on  map  IV.   Of  this
  range  there  is  no  mention  in  the  Lost  Tales,  where  almost all
  that is  said  of  the  East  is  contained  in  Orome's words  to the
  In   the  East   beyond  the   tumbled  lands   there  is   a  silent
  beach  and  a  dark  and  empty  sea'  (I.  214); in  the East  also was
  the great  mountain  Kalorme  (I.  212),  and  there  Aule  and  Ulmo
  'builded  great  havens  [of  the  Sun  and  Moon] beside  the sound-
  less  sea'  (I.  215).  In   the  Ambarkanta   the  Gates   of  Morn,
  through  which  the  Sun  returns  from  the Outer  Dark in  the Lost
  Tales, have disappeared.                                             
       In  the  description  of  evening  and  dawn  in Valinor  in the
  Ambarkanta  there  is  an  echo  of  the  Lost  Tales:   'Valinor  is
  Sled  with  mingled  light  as  of  silver  and  gold;  and  the Gods
  smile  remembering  the  mingling  of   Laurelin  and   Silpion  long
  ago',  cf. I.  216 'Then  smile the  Gods wistfully  and say:  "It is
  the mingling of the lights once more." '                             
       The  extremely  close  symmetry  of  the  Eastern   and  Western
  lands  as displayed  on map  IV is  striking; the  chief departure
  from  symmetry  being  the  difference  in  shape  of the  great Seas,
  and  this  was  due  to  the  eastward  thrusting  or  'crowding'  of
  Middle-earth - 'so that  it was  bended' -  at the  time of  the mak-
  ing of Valinor and the raising of its protective mountain-chain.
  This more than Titanic crushing of the new-made world was
  the origin of the great mountain ranges of Middle-earth, the
  Blue, the Red, the Yellow, and the Grey. Cf. The Silmarillion
  p. 37:                                                               
                                                                      
       And  the  shape  of  Arda  and  the  symmetry  of  its  waters  and
       its lands was marred in  that time,  so that  the first  designs of
       the Valar were never after restored.                            

  But in The Silmarillion this loss of  symmetry is  not attributed
  to  the  deliberate  act  of  the  Valar  themselves, who  in the
  Ambarkanta  are  ready  to  contort the  very structure  of Ambar
  for the sake of their own security.                              
    There  are some  interesting points  in the  Ambarkanta account
  of the first days of the Valar in the world. Here it is  said for
  the  first  time that  Melko 'descended  in the  furthest North',
  whereas the  Valar, coming  to Middle-earth  at its  centre, made
  their island from 'a portion of land' and set  it in  the Western
  Sea.  The  old  story  of Melko's  treacherous assistance  of the
  Valar in their works  by devising  the pillars  of the  Lamps out
  of ice is still present, despite the wording of S, and still more
  of  Q  ($1):  'Morgoth  contested  with  them  and made  war. The
  lamps  he  overthrew  ...', which  seems to  suggest that  it had
  been  abandoned.  In  the  tale of  The Coming  of the  Valar the
  name Ringil was  given (by  Melko!) to  the northern  pillar, and
  Helkar  to  the  southern (I.  69); in  the Ambarkanta  the names
  are applied to the Lamps rather than the pillars, and  Ringil be-
  comes that of the southern, Helkar that of  the northern.  In the
  tale there is no mention of the formation of  Inland Seas  at the
  time of  the fall  of the  Lamps; rather  'great floods  of water
  poured  from  [the  Lamps]  into  the  Shadowy  Seas',   and  'so
  great was their thaw that whereas those seas were at first  of no
  great  size  but clear  and warm,  now were  they black  and wide
  and vapours lay upon  them and  deep shades,  for the  great cold
  rivers that poured into  them' (I.  70). Later  the names  of the
  Lamps  were  changed   more  than   once,  but   Helcar  remained
  the name  of the  Inland Sea  'where aforetime  the roots  of the
  mountain  of  Illuin [the  northern Lamp]  had been'  (The Silma-
  rillion p. 49), and it is seen from the Ambarkanta that  the idea
  of  the  sea  being  formed where  the Lamp  once stood  owed its
  origin to the melting pillar of ice, although the actual story of
  Melko's  devising  of the  pillars was  abandoned when  it became
  impossible  to  represent  Melko as  co-operative, even  in seem-
  ing, with the Valar. There is no mention  in The  Silmarillion of
  a southern sea where the other Lamp had stood.                   
    Kuivienen is said in  the Ambarkanta  to be  'to the  North be-
  side  the waters  of Helkar',  as shown  on map  IV. In  the Lost
  Tales (I. 115, 117) Koivie-neni was a  lake (with  'bare margin',

                                                            
                                                                  
 in  a  vale  'surrounded  by  pine-clad  slopes') in  Palisor, the
 midmost region;  in The  Silmarillion it  is 'a  bay in  the Inland
 Sea  of  Helcar'  (p.  49).  In  the same  passage Orome,  on that
 that  led  him  to  the  finding  of the  Elves, 'turned  north by
 the shores  of  Helcar  and  passed  under  the  shadows  of the
 Orocarni, the  Mountains of  the East',  and this  agrees perfectly
 map   IV   (Orocarni   Red   Mountains,   see   the   Appendix  to
 The Silmarillion   entry   caran).   The  Blue   Mountains  oppose
 them symmetrically  in the  West; and  in the  South are  the Grey
 Mountains  and  the  Yellow,  again  symmetrically  opposed  both
 to each  other  and  to  the  northern  ranges.  The  hack  of the
 March  of  the  Elves as  marked on  map IV  is again  in complete
 ment   with   The  Silmarillion   (p.  53):   'passing  northwards
 about the  Sea  of  Helcar  they  turned towards  the west',  but of
 the  Misty  Mountains  (Hithaeglir) and  the Great  River (Anduin)
 where many  Elves  of  the  Third  Host  turned  away   South  (ibid.
 p.  54)  there  is  no sign.  In The  Hobbit and  The Lord  of the
 Rings  the  Grey  Mountains  (Ered  Mithrin)  are a  range beyond
 Mirkwood in the North of Middle-earth.                            
                                                                  
   It seems that Beleriand,  to judge  by the  placing and  size of
 the  lettering  of  the  name on  map IV,  was relatively  a very
 snall region; and the EIves reached the  Sea to  the south  of it,
 at the Falasse (later the Falas of Beleriand). But my father cir-
 cled 'Beleriand' in pencil  and from  the circle  drew an  arrow to
 the point where the  track of  the March  reached the  Sea, which
 probably implies  that he  wished to  show that  this was  in fact
 within the confines of Beleriand.                                
   The  name  Hildorien  of  the  land  where  Men  awoke (implying
 Hildor, the Aftercomers) now first appears; for the curious use of
 the  name  Eruman  for  this  land  in Q  see pp.  119 -  20, 205.
 Hildorien is a land lying between  the Mountains  of the  Wind and
 the Eastern Sea; in The Silmarillion (p. 103)  it is  placed, more
 vaguely, 'in the eastward regions of Middle-earth'.               
   The   placing   of   Utumna  (in   the  Ambarkanta   emended  to
 Utumno,  note  8)  on map  IV is  notable, as  is also  the occur-
 rence  of  the  name  itself.  Whereas  in  the Lost  Tales Melko's
 first fortress  was  Utumna,   and  his   second  Angband   (see  I.
 198),  in  S  and  Q the  original fortress  is Angband,  to which

  Melko  returned after  the destruction  of the  Trees (see  p. SO),
  and  Utumna  is  not  mentioned  in  those  texts.  My  father  had
  now  reverted  to  Utumna  (Utumno)  as  the  name  of  Melko's an-
  cient and original dwelling in Middle-earth  (see further  below,
  p. 307).                                                          
                                                                   
    The  archipelagoes  in  the  Western  Sea  have  undergone  the
  great change  and simplification  that distinguishes  the account
  in The Silmarillion from that in the Lost Tales (see  II. 324-5);
  there is no sign on the map of the Harbourless Isles or  the Twi-
  lit  Isles,  and  instead  we  have   'The  Enchanted   or  Magic
  Isles' - in Q II $17 Magic  Isles is  emended to  Enchanted Isles
  (note  11). The  'Shadowy Isles'  lying to  the northward  of the
  Enchanted Isles on the map seem to be a new conception.           
    The  name  Eldaros  (not Eldamar,  see I.  251) appears  on map
  IV  with  the  meaning  'Elvenhome'.  Eldaros  has  occurred once
  previously, in one of the AElfwine' outlines (II.  301): 'Eldaros
  or AElfham', where the reference is  unclear, but  seems to  be to
  Tol  Eressea.  The  words  'Bay  of Elfland'  are written  on the
  map but no bay is indicated.                                      
    In  the  West  the  symmetrically  formed  lands of  Eruman and
  Arvalin  between  the  Mountains  and  the  Sea  now  appear; for
  the earlier history see I. 83. Tun lies a little to the  north of
  Taniquetil; and the position of Valmar is as it was on the little
  ancient map given in I. 81.                                       
                                                                   
    In  the  Ambarkanta  something  is  said  of  the  vast further
  changes in the shape of  the lands  and seas  that took  place in
  'the first Battle  of the  Gods', when  Melko was  taken captive,
  concerning  which  there  is nothing  in Q  ($2) beyond  a refer-
  ence to the 'tumult'. In The Silmarillion (p. 51) this  is called
  'the Battle of the Powers', and                                   
                                                                   
    In that time the shape of Middle-earth was changed, and the.
    Great  Sea  that  sundered  it  from  Aman  grew  wide  and deep;
    and  it  broke in  upon the  coasts and  made a  deep gulf  to the
    southward. Many lesser bays were made between the Great         
    Gulf  and  Helcaraxe  far  in the  north, where  Middie-earth and
    Aman came nigh together. Of these the Bay of Balar was          

               
                                                                  
 the  chief;  and  into  it  the mighty  river Sirion  flowed down
 from  the  new-raised   highlands  northwards:   Dorthonion,  and
 the mountains about Hithlum.                                      
                                                                  
 The  text  of  the  Ambarkanta  does  not  mention the  Great Gulf
 or the Bay of Balar, but speaks  rather of  the vast  extension of
 the  sea  of Ringil  and its  joining to  the Eastern  and Western
 Seas (it is not clear why it is said that the  sea of  Helkar 'be-
 came an inland sea or great lake', since it  was so  already). But
 on the back  of the  map IV  is another  map (V)  that illustrates
 all the  features of  both accounts.  This map  is however  a very
 rapid pencil sketch, and is in places difficult to interpret, from
 uncertainty as to  the meaning  of lines,  more especially  in the
 Western  Lands  (Outer Lands).  It is  very hard  to say  how pre-
 cisely this map should be interpreted in relation  to map  IV. For
 example,  in  map  IV  the  Grey  Mountains  are very  widely sep-
 arated from the  Blue, whereas  in map  V there  is only  a narrow
 space  at  the head  of the  Great Gulf  between them;  the Inland
 Sea  (Helkar)  is further  to the  North; and  so on.  Again, many
 features are  absent (such  as the  Straits of  Ice), and  in such
 cases one cannot be sure whether  their absence  is casual  or in-
 tentional; though the failure to mark  in Tol  Eressea or  the En-
 chanted Isles suggests  the former.  I am  inclined to  think that
 map V is a very rough sketch not to be interpreted too strictly.
 The   narrow   ring  between   the  Earth   and  the   Outer  Seas
 clearly represents the Chasm of Ilmen.                            
 In  relation  to  Beleriand  in  the  North-west,  and  bearing in
 mind   the   whole  underlying   history  of   Eriol-AElfwine  and
 Leithien (England),  the southern  part of  the Hither  Lands, be-
 low  the  Great  Gulf, bears  an obvious  resemblance to  the con-
 tinent of Africa;  and in  a vaguer  way the  Inland Sea  could be
 interpreted  as the  Mediterranean and  the Black  Sea. But  I can
 offer nothing on this matter that  would not  be the  purest spec-
 ulation.                                                          
 The  sea  marked  'East  Sea'  on  map  V  is  the  former  sea of
 Ringil,-  cf.  the  Ambarkanta:  the  sea of  Ringil ...  became a
 great sea flowing northeastward  and joining  by straits  both the
 Western and Eastern Seas.'                                        
 In  the  North-west  the  ranges  of  Eredlomin   and  Eredwethrin

  (not   named;  see   pp.  233-4)   enclosing  Hithlum   (which  is           
  named)  are  shown,  and  the  western  extension  of  Eredwethrin           
  that was the southern fence of later Nevrast.*  In the  version of           
  'The Silmarillion' that followed Q it is said that  in the  War of           
  the  Gods  the  Iron  Mountains  'were  broken  and  distorted  at           
  their   western   end,   and   of   their   fragments   were  made           
  Eredwethrin  and  Eredlomin',  and that  the Iron  Mountains 'bent           
  back northward', and map  V, in  relation to  map IV,  agrees well           
  with this. The first 'Silmarillion' map (see insert), on  the oth-           
  er  hand,  shows  the  Iron  Mountains  curving  back  strongly to           
  the North-east (it is conceivable that the  hasty zigzag  lines to           
  the east of Thangorodrim were intended to rectify this).                     
    In the version of 'The Silmarillion' just referred to it is also           
  said that  'beyond the  River Gelion  the land  narrowed suddenly,           
  for the Great Sea ran into a  mighty gulf  reaching almost  to the           
  feet of Eredlindon,  and there  was a  strait of  mountainous land           
  between  the  gulf  and  the inland  sea of  Helcar, by  which one           
  might come into the vast  regions of  the south  of Middle-earth'.           
  Again,  these  features  are  clearly  seen  on  map V,  where the           
  'strait of mountainous land' is called the 'Straits of the World'.           
  The enclosed areas to the  east of  Eredwethrin and  south-east of           
  Thangorodrim   clearly   represent   the    Encircling   Mountains           
  about  Gondolin  and  the  highlands   of  Taur-na-Fuin;   we  see           
  what  was  later  called  the  Gap of  Maglor between  those high-           
  lands  and the  Blue Mountains,  and the  rivers Gelion  (with its           
  tributaries, the rivers  of Ossiriand),  Sirion, and  Narog.+ With           
  this part of map V compare  the first  'Silmarillion' map  and its           
  Eastward extension.                                                          
    Particularly notable is  the closeness  of Hithlum  on map  V to           
  the edge of the world (the Chasm of Ilmen).                                  
    Angband  is  placed  in  very  much  the  same  position  on map           
  V  as  is  Utumna  on  map  IV: very  near to  the Chasm  of Ilmen           
  and  well  behind the  mountain-wall, in  the land  that on  map V           
                                                                              
  (*This  range  is  seen  also  on   the  Westward   Extension  of   the  first
  'Silmarillion' map (see insert).                                             
   + A11 these north-western features  are drawn  in ink,  whereas the  rest of
  map V is in pencil; but the mountain-ranges (though not the rivers) are inked
  in over pencil.)                                                             

                    
                                                                             
 is called  Daidelos  (later  Dor  Daedeloth).*  As  noted above,                
 Utumna had  now  been  resurrected  from  the  Lost  Tales  as                
 Melko's original fortress; and it emerges clearly  from later                
 texts  that the  story now  was that  when Melko  returned to                
 Middle-earth after the destruction of the Trees he returned to                
 the ruins of Utumna and built there his new  fortress, Angband.                
 This,  I  think,  is why  the fortress  is called  Angband, not                
 Utumna, on map V.                                                            
  The history was therefore as follows:                                       
                                                                             
  Lost Tales.  Utumna.      Melko's original fortress.                              
               Angband.     His dwelling when he re-                              
                                          turned.                             
                                                                             
  S,Q.          Angband.    Melko's original fortress to                          
                                                                             
                                   which he returned.                  
                                                                             
  Ambarkanta.    Utumna.    Melko's original fortress.          
  maps.          Angband.   His  second  fortress  built  on        
                              the  site  of   Utumna  when        
                              he returned.                        
                                                                             
 Much  later, Utumno  and Angband  were both  ancient fotresses               
 of Morgoth, and  Angband was  that to  which he  returned (The               
 Silmarillion pp. 47, 81).                                                    
  Thangorodrim is shown on map V as a  point, set  slightly out               
 from the Iron Mountains. This represents a  change in  the con-               
 ception of Thangorodrim from that on the  first 'Silmarillion'               
 map, which illustrates the words of  S ($8)  that Thangorodrim               
 is 'the highest of  the Iron  Mountains around  Morgoth's for-               
 tress'.  The  marking  of  Thangorodrim  on  Ambarkanta  map  V               
 Shows the later conception, seen in  The Silmarillion  p. 118,               
 where it is said expressly that Melkor made a tunnel under the               
 tnountains which issued south of  them, that  Thangorodrim was               
 piled above the gate of issue, and that Angband was behind the               
                                                                             
 (* Similar forms but with different application have  occurred earlier:  in the
 Epilogue to the Lost Tales the High Heath in Tol Eressea where the battle was
 fought  is  Ladwen-na-Dhaideloth,  Dor-na-Dhaideloth  ('Sky-roof'),  II. 287;
 and in line 946 of the Lay of the Children of Hurin Dor-na-Fauglith was first
 called Daideloth ('High plain'), III. 49.)                                   

 mountain-wall:  thus  Thangorodrim   stood  out   somewhat  from
 the main range.                                                  
                                                                 
   There  are  extremely  puzzling  features  in the  Western Land
 on map V.  There is  now a  mountain chain  (for so  the herring-
 bone markings must be  interpreted, since  that is  their meaning
 elsewhere  on  the  map)  extending up  the western  coast north-
 wards from Taniquetil to the  Helkarakse and  (as it  seems) ris-
 ing out of the  sea, as  well as  the old  westward curve  of the
 Mountains  of  Valinor  (bending  back  to  the  Chasm  of Ilmen)
 seen on map IV;  thus Eruman  (with the  first occurrence  of the
 name  Araman pencilled  above it  afterwards) is  not represented
 as  a coastal  wasteland between  the mountains  and the  sea but
 is  walled in  by mountains  both on  the East  and on  the West.
 I do not understand this; in  any case  The Silmarillion  has the
 geography shown on map IV.                                       
   Equally puzzling is the  representation of  the lands  south of
 Tun and Taniquetil.  Here there  are herring-bone  lines continu-
 ing  the  main  line  of  mountains  southwards  from Taniquetil,
 with again  the old  westward curve  back to  the Chasm;  but the
 area  symmetrically  corresponding  to  Eruman  in  the  North is
 here  left  unnamed,  and  Arvalin   (emended  from   Eruman)  is
 shown  as a  substantial land  extending east  even of  the 'new'
 mountains, from the southern  shore of  the Bay  of Faery  to the
 extreme South of the world. The  Bay of  Faery, which  is clearly
 shown on this  map (in  contrast to  map IV),  is in  fact partly
 formed by this 'new' Arvalin.  In a  corner of  the map  is writ-
 ten:                                                             
                                                                 
   After  the War  of the  Gods (Arvalin  was cast  up by  the Great
   Sea at the foot of the Mts.                                    
                                                                 
 Though the brackets are not closed after 'Mts.', I think that the
 first words may  have been  intended as  a title,  indicating the
 period  represented  by the  map. But  the following  words, cou-
 pled  with  the  absence of  Arvalin from  its expected  place on
 the map, seem to imply  that it  was only  now that  Arvalin came
 into being.                                                      
                                * * *                             

                
                                                                
  The  Old  English  names  Ingarsecg,  Utgarsecg  are  found  in
 the Old English texts (pp. 253,  256). Aflon  on the  coast north
 of Tun is Alqualonde (later Sindarin alph, lond (lonn):  see the
 Appendix to The Silmarillion, entries  alqua, londe).  The names
 Aman,  Araman  were  added  to map  V many  years later  (as also
 Arda, Earambar on the diagrams).                                
                                                                
  If this map shows the vastness  of the  cataclysm that  my fa-
 ther conceived as having taken place at the  time of  the break-
 ing  of Utumno  and the  chaining of  Melko, at  the end  of the
 Ambarkanta he added (see note  9) a  passage concerning  the far
 greater cataclysm that took place 'in the days of the assault of
 the  Numenoreans  upon  the  land  of the  Gods'. This  may have
 been added much later; but the passage  is written  carefully in
 ink, not scribbled in pencil, and is far more likely to  be con-
 temporary, since the story of Numenor arose about this  time. In
 support of this is the diagram III, 'the  World after  the Cata-
 clysm and  the  ruin of  the Numenoreans';  for on  this diagram
 the  inner  air  was  originally  marked  Wilwa and  only later
 changed to Vista. In  the Ambarkanta  and the  accompanying list
 of words, as in diagrams I and II, Vista is likewise  an emenda-
 tion from Wilwa; it seems therefore that diagram III  belongs to
 the same period.                                                
