                                  VI.                                
                                                                    
                        THE EARLIEST ANNALS OF                       
                                VALINOR.                             
                                                                    
 I refer  to this  work as  the 'earliest'  Annals of  Valinor because
 it  was  followed  later  in  the  1930s  by  a  second  version, and
 then,  after  the  completion  of  The  Lord  of  the Rings  and very
 probably  in  1951  - 2,  by a  third, entitled  The Annals  of Aman,
 which  though  still  a  part  of the  continuous evolution  of these
 Annals  is  a  major  new  work,  and  which  contains  some  of  the
 finest prose in all the Matter of the Elder Days.                   
  These  earliest  Annals  of  Valinor  are   comprised  in   a  short
 manuscript  of  nine  pages  written  in  ink. There  is a  good deal
 of  emendation  and  interpolation,  some   changes  being   made  in
 ink and probably  not much  if any  later than  the first  writing of
 the  text, while  a second  layer of  change consists  of alterations
 in faint and rapid  pencil that  are not  always legible.  These lat-
 ter  include  two  quite  substantial  passages  (given  in  notes 14
 and   18)   which   introduce   wholly   new    material   concerning
 events in Middle-earth.                                             
  The text  that follows  is that  of the  Annals as  originally writ-
 ten,  apart  from  one  or two  insignificant alterations  of wording
 that are taken up silently, and all  later changes  are given  in the
 numbered  notes,  other  than   those  made   to  dates.   These  are
 many  and  complex  and  are  dealt  with  all  together, separately,
 at the end of the notes.                                            
  It  is  certain  that  these  Annals  belong to  the same  period as
 the  Quenta,  but  also  that they  are later  than the  Quenta. This
 is  seen  from  the  fact  that  whereas  in  Q  Finrod (=  the later
 Finarfin)  returned  to  Valinor  out  of  the  far  North  after the
 burning of the ships, and the later story of his return  earlier, af-
 ter  the  Prophecy of  the North,  is only  introduced in  a marginal
 note  ($5  note  8  and  commentary  p.  204),  in  the   Annals  the

  later story is already embodied in the text (Valian  Year 2993).
  The Annals  have  Beleriand,  whereas  Q,  as  far  as  $12, had
  Broseliand  emended  to  Beleriand;  they  have   several  names
  that do  not  occur  in  Q,  e.g.  Bladorion,  Dagor-os-Giliath,
  Drengist,  Eredwethion  (this  only   by  later   emendation  in
  Q);  and  Eredlomin  has its  later sense  of the  Echoing Moun-
  tains, not  as in  Q and  on the  first map  of the  Shadowy Moun-
  tains (see pp. 233-4). I see no way of  showing that  the Annals
  are later, or earlier, than the Ambarkanta, but the matter seems
  of no importance; the two  texts certainly  belong to  very much
  the same time.                                                  
    Following  my  commentary  on  the Annals,  which I  shall re-
  fer to as 'AV', I give the Old English versions in  an appendix.
                                                                 
                         ANNALS OF VALINOR.                       
                                                                 
  (These   and   the   Annals   of   Beleriand  were   written  by
  pengolod the Wise  of Gondolin,  before its  fall, and  after at
  Sirion's Haven, and  at Tavrobel  in Tol  Eressea after  his re-
  turn  unto  the  West, and  there seen  and translated  by Eriol
  of Leithien, that is AElfwine of the Angelcynn.)                
                                                                 
                  Here begin the Annals of Valinor.               
                                                                 
         0  At  the  beginning  Iluvatar, that  is 'Allfather',
            made  all  things, and  the Valar,  that is  the 'Pow-
            ers',   came   into   the   World.  These   are  nine,
            Manwe,    Ulmo,    Aule,    Orome,    Tulkas,    Osse,
            Mandos,   Lorien,   and   Melko.   Of    these   Manwe
            and  Melko   were  most   puissant  and   were  breth-
            ren,  and  Manwe  was  lord  of  the  Valar  and holy;
            but  Melko  turned  to  lust  and  pride  and violence
            and evil, and  his name  is accursed,  and is  not ut-
            tered,  but  he  is  called  Morgoth.  The  spouses of
            the   Valar   were  Varda,   and  Yavanna,   who  were
            sisters;  and  Vana;  and the  sister of  Orome, Nessa
            the  wife  of  Tulkas;(1) and Uinen  lady of  the Seas;

 and  Nienna  sister  of   Manwe  and   Melko;  and
 Este.  No  spouse  hath   Ulmo  or   Melko.(2) With
 them came many lesser spirits, their  children, or
 beings of their own kind but of less  might; these
 are the Valarindi.                               
                                                 
   Time  was counted  in the  world before  the Sun
 and Moon  by the  Valar according  to ages,  and a
 Valian age  hath 100  of the  years of  the Valar,
 which are each as ten years are now.             
                                                 
   In  the  Valian Year  500: Morgoth  destroyed by
 deceit the Lamps (3) which Aule  made for  the light-
 ing  of the  World, and  the Valar,  save Morgoth,
 retired to the  West and  built there  Valinor be-
 tween the Outer Seas that  surround the  Earth and
 the Great Seas of the West, and  on the  shores of
 these they piled great  mountains. But  the symme-
 try  of  land and  sea was  first broken  in those
 days.(4)                                           
                                                 
   In the Valian Year 1000,  after the  building of
 Valinor,  and  Valmar  the city  of the  Gods, the
 Valar brought into being the  Two Trees  of Silver
 and  of   Gold,  whose   bloom  gave   light  unto
 Valinor.                                         
   But  all  this  while Morgoth  had dwelt  in the
 Middle-earth  and  made  him  a great  fortress in
 the North of the World; and  he broke  and twisted
 the Earth much in that time.(5)                    
                                                 
   A thousand Valian Years of  bliss and  glory fol-
 lowed  in  Valinor,  but  growth  that   began  on
 Middle-earth  at  the  lighting  of the  Lamps was
 checked.  To  Middle-earth  came  only   Orome  to
 hunt in the dark woods of  the ancient  Earth, and
 sometimes Yavanna walked there.                  

   The  Valian  Year  2000  is accounted  the Noon-
 tide of the Blessed Realm, and the full  season of
 the mirth  of the  Gods. Then  did Varda  make the
 stars (6) and set them aloft, and thereafter  some of
 the Valarindi strayed  into the  Middle-earth, and
 among  them  was  Melian,  whose  voice   was  re-
 nowned  in  Valmar. But  she returned  not thither
 for  many  ages, and  the nightingales  sang about
 her in the dark woods of the Western Lands.      
                                                 
   At the first shining of the  Sickle of  the Gods
 which Varda set (7) above  the North  as a  threat to
 Morgoth and an omen of his  fall, the  elder chil-
 dren  of  Iluvatar  awoke  in  the midmost  of the
 World:  they  are  the  Elves.(8) Orome  found them
 and befriended them; and the  most part  under his
 guidance  marched  West  and  North to  the shores
 of  Beleriand,  being  bidden   by  the   Gods  to
 Valinor.                                         
   But  first  Morgoth  in  a  great war  was bound
 and  made  captive   and  imprisoned   in  Mandos.
 There  he  was  confined  in  punishment  for nine
 ages (900 Valian Years)(9) until he sought  for par-
 don. In that war the lands were rent  and sundered
 anew.(10)                                           
   The Quendi (11) and  the Noldoli  were the  first to
 reach Valinor, and upon  the hill  of Kor  nigh to
 the strand  they built  the city  of Tun.  But the
 Teleri  who came  after abode  an age  (100 Valian
 Years)  upon  the  shores  of Beleriand,  and some
 never  departed  thence.  Of  these  most renowned
 was  Thingol  (Sindingul)(12) brother of  Elwe, lord
 of  the  Teleri,  whom  Melian  enchanted.  Her he
 after  wedded and  dwelt as  a king  in Beleriand,
 but this was after  the departure  of most  of the
 Teleri,  drawn  by  Ulmo  upon Tol  Eressea.(13) This
 is the Valian Years 2000 to 2100.                

    From  2100  to  2200  the  Teleri  dwelt  on Tol
 Eressea in the  Great Sea  within sight  of Valinor,
 in 2200 they came  in their  ships to  Valinor, ang
 dwelt  upon  its  eastern  strands, and  there they
 made   the   town   and   haven  of   Alqalonde  or
 'Swan-haven',   so   called   because   there  were
 moored their swan-shaped boats.                    
                                                   
    About  2500  the  Noldoli  invented   and  began
 the fashioning of  gems; and  after a  while Feanor
 the  smith,  eldest  son  of  Finwe  chief  of  the
 Noldoli,  devised  the   thrice-renowned  Silmarils
 concerning  the  fates of  which these  tales tell.
 They shone of  their own  light, being  filled with
 the radiance of the  Two Trees,  the holy  light of
 Valinor, blended to a marvellous fire.(14)          
                                                   
    In  2900  Morgoth  sued for  pardon, and  at the
 prayers of Nienna his sister,  and by  the clemency
 of  Manwe  his  brother,  but  against  the  wish o
 Tulkas  and  Aule,  he  was  released,  and feigned
 humility  and  repentance,  obeisance to  the Valar
 and  love and  friendship for  the Elves,  and dwelt
 in Valinor in ever-increasing freedom. But he lied
 and   dissembled,   and   most   he    cozened   the
 Noldoli,  for  he  had  much to  teach, and  they had
 an over-mastering  desire to  learn; but  he coveted
 their gems and lusted for the Silmarils.           
                                                   
  2900  During  two  more ages (15) Valinor abode  yet in
  bliss, yet a  shadow of  foreboding began  to gather
  in  many  hearts;  for  Morgoth  was  at   work  with
  secret whisperings  and cunning  lies; and  most he
  worked,  alas,  upon  the  Noldoli,  and  sowed the
  seeds  of  dissension  between  the  sons  of Finwe,
  Feanor, Fingolfin, and Finrod, and of  distrust be-
  tween  Noldoli  and  Valar.  2950  By  the  doom of
  the  Gods  Feanor,  eldest  son  of Finwe,  and his

          
                                                             
         household   and  following   was  deposed   from  the
         leadership  of  the  Noldoli  -  wherefore  the house
         of  Feanor  was  after  called the  Dispossessed, for
         this  and  because  Morgoth  after  robbed   them  of
         their treasure  - and  the Gods  sent also  to appre-
         hend   Morgoth.   But   he   fled   into   hiding  in
         Arvalin, and plotted evil.(16)                       
                                                             
 2990-1. Morgoth   now   completed   his   designs   and  with
         the  aid  of  Ungoliante  out  of Arvalin  stole back
         into Valinor,  and destroyed  the Trees,  escaping in
         the  gathering  dark   northward,  where   he  sacked
         the dwellings of Feanor,  and carried  off a  host of
         jewels,  among  them  the  Silmarils;  and   he  slew
         Finwe  and  many  Elves  and  thus   defiled  Valinor
         and   began   slaughter   in   the    World.(17) Though
         hunted  by  the Valar  he escaped  into the  North of
         the  Hither  Lands   and  re-established   there  his
         stronghold,  and  bred  and  gathered  once  more his
         evil servants, Orcs and Balrogs.(18)                 
                                                             
         2991 Valinor lay now in great gloom,  and darkness,
         save only for the stars, fell on all the World. But
         Feanor against the  will of  the Valar  returned to
         Tun  and claimed  the kingship  of the  Noldoli af-
         ter  Finwe,  and he  summoned to  Tun all  the peo-
         ple  of  that  kindred. And  Feanor spoke  to them,
         and  his  words  were  filled  with  the   lies  of
         Morgoth,  and  distrust of  the Valar,  even though
         his  heart was  hot with  hate for  Morgoth, slayer
         of his father and robber of his gems.                
         The  most  of  the  Noldoli (19) he persuaded  to fol-
         low  him out  of Valinor  and recover  their realms
         on earth, lest they be filched by the younger chil-
         dren  of  Iluvatar, Men  (herein he  echoed Morgoth
         unwitting);  and  war for  ever on  Morgoth seeking
         to recover their treasure.  At that  meeting Feanor
         and his sons swore their dreadful  oath to  slay or

 pursue any  soever that  held a  Silmaril against
 their will.                                      
                                                 
 2992  The  march began,  though the  Gods forbade
 (and yet hindered not), but under divided leader-
 ship, for  Fingolfin's house  held him  for king.
 Long  was  the  people  preparing.  Then  it came
 into Feanor's heart that riever should that great
 host, both warriors and other, and store of goods
 make  the vast  leagues unto  the North  (for Tun
 beneath  Taniquetil  is  upon  the Girdle  of the
 Earth,  where  the  Great Seas  are measurelessly
 wide) save with the help of ships. But the Teleri
 alone had ships, and they would not yield or lend
 them against the will of the Valar.              
   Thus  about  2992  of  Valian Years  befell the
 dreadful  battle  about  Alqalonde, and  the Kin-
 slaying  evilly  renowned  in  song,   where  the
 Noldoli distraught furthered Morgoth's  work. But
 the Noldoli  overcame the  Teleri and  took their
 ships,  and  fared slowly  north along  the rocky
 coasts in great peril and hardship and  amid dis-
 sensions.                                        
                                                 
   In 2993 it is said they came  to a  place where
 a high rock  stands above  the shores,  and there
 stood either  Mandos or  his messenger  and spoke
 the  Doom  of  Mandos.  For  the  kin-slaying  he
 cursed the house of Feanor, and to a  less degree
 all who followed them or shared in their emprise,
 unless they would  return to  abide the  doom and
 pardon of the Valar. But if they would  not, then
 should evil fortune and disaster befall them, and
 ever from treachery of kin towards kin; and their
 oath should turn against them, and a measure of 
 mortality should visit them, that they  should be
 lightly slain with weapons, or torments,  or sor-
 row,  and  in the  end fade  and wane  before the

        
                                                   
 younger  race.  And  much  else he  foretold darkly
 that  after  befell,  warning  them that  the Valar
 would fence Valinor against their return.(20)      
  But  Feanor  hardened  his  heart  and   held  on,
 and so also but  reluctantly did  Fingolfin's folk,
 feeling the constraint of their kindred and fearing
 for  the  doom  of  the  Gods   (for  not   all  of
 Fingolfin's house  had been  guiltless of  the kin-
 slaying).  Felagund  and the  other sons  of Finrod
 went  forward  also, for  they had  aforetime great
 fellowship,  Felagund with  the sons  of Fingolfin,
 and  Orodreth,  Angrod,  and  Egnor  with  Celegorm
 and Curufin sons of Feanor. Yet  the lords  of this
 third house were  less haughty  and more  fair than
 the  others,  and  had  had  no  part  in  the kin-
 slaying,  and  many  with  Finrod  himself returned
 unto  Valinor  and  the  pardon  of  the  Gods. But
 Aule  their  ancient  friend  smiled  on   them  no
 more, and the Teleri were estranged.               
                                                   
 2994 The Noldoli came to the bitter North, and fur-
 ther they would not dare, for there is a strait be-
 tween   the  Western   Land  (whereon   Valinor  is
 built)  that  curveth  east,  and the  Hither Lands
 which  bear west,  and through  this the  chill wa-
 ters of the Outer Seas and the  waves of  the Great
 Sea  flow  together,  and there  are vast  mists of
 deathly  cold,  and  the  streams  are  filled with
 clashing hills of ice and with the grinding  of ice
 submerged. This strait was named Helkarakse.       
  But  the  ships  that  remained, many  having been
 lost, were too few to carry all across, and dissen-
 sions  awoke  between  Feanor  and  Fingolfin.  But
 Feanor seized the  ships and  sailed east;(21) and he
 said: 'Let the  murmurers whine  their way  back to
 the shadows of  Valinor.' And  he burned  the ships
 upon the eastern shore, and so  great was  its fire

 that the Noldoli left behind  saw its  redness afar
 off.                                               
                                                   
   Thus  about  2995  Feanor  came   unto  Beleriand
 and  the  shores  beneath  Eredlomin   the  Echoing
 Mountains,  and  their  landing  was at  the narrow
 inlet Drengist  that runs  into Dorlomen.  And they
 came  thence  into  Dorlomen  and  about  the north
 of  the  mountains  of Mithrim,  and camped  in the
 land  of  Hithlum  in  that  part  that   is  named
 Mithrim and north of the great  lake that  hath the
 same name.                                         
                                                   
 2996  And  in the  land of  Mithrim they  fought an
 army  of  Morgoth  aroused by  the burning  and the
 rumour  of  their advance;  and they  were victori-
 ous  and drove  away the  Orcs with  slaughter, and
 pursued  them   beyond  Eredwethion   (the  Shadowy
 Mountains) into Bladorion. And  that battle  is the
 First Battle of Beleriand, and is  called Dagor-os-
 Giliath, the Battle under Stars; for all was as yet
 dark. But the victory  was marred  by the  death of
 Feanor,  who  was  wounded  mortally   by  Gothmog,
 lord  of  Balrogs,  when  he advanced  unwarily too
 far upon  Bladorion,(22) and Feanor was  borne back
 to Mithrim and  died there,  reminding his  sons of
 their  oath.  To  this  they now  added an  oath of
 vengeance for their father.                        
                                                   
 2997 But Maidros  eldest son  of Feanor  was caught
 in the snares  of Morgoth.  For Morgoth  feigned to
 treat  with him,  and Maidros  feigned to  be will-
 ing,  and either  purposed evil  to the  other, and
 came  with force  to the  parley; but  Morgoth with
 the more, and Maidros was made captive.            
   Then  Morgoth  held  him  as  hostage,  and swore
 only  to  release  him if  the Noldoli  would march
 away  either  to  Valinor, if  they could,  or from

  
                                                  
 Beleriand and away to the far  South; and  if they
 would not he would torment Maidros.               
 But  the  Noldoli  trusted not  that he  would re-
 lease  Maidros  if  they  departed, nor  were they
 willing  to  do  so whatever  he might  do. Where-
 fore  in 2998  Morgoth hung  Maidros by  the right
 wrist  in  a  band  of  hellwrought steel  above a
 precipice  upon  Thangorodrim,  where  none  could
 reach him.                                        
                                                  
 Now  it  is told  that Fingolfin  and the  sons of
 Finrod (23) won their  way  at  last   with  grievous
 losses  and  with  minished  might into  the North
 of  the  World.  And   they  came   perforce  over
 Helkarakse, being unwilling  to retrace  their way
 to Valinor, and having no  ships; but  their agony
 in that crossing was very  great and  their hearts
 were filled with bitterness against Feanor.       
 And  even  as  they  came  the  First Ages  of the
 World  were  ended;(24) and  these  are  reckoned as
 30000 years or  3000 years  of the  Valar; whereof
 the first Thousand was before  the Trees,  and Two
 Thousand  save  nine  were Years  of the  Trees or
 of the Holy Light, which lived after and lives yet
 only in the Silmarils. And the Nine are  the Years
 of Darkness or the Darkening of Valinor.          
                                                  
 But  towards  the  end  of this  time as  is else-
 where  told  the  Gods  made  the  Sun   and  Moon
 and  sent  them  forth over  the World,  and light
 came  unto  the  Hither  Lands.(25) And   Men  awoke
 in the East of the World even at the first Dawn.(26)
 But  with  the first  Moonrise Fingolfin  set foot
 upon  the  North;  for the  Moonrise came  ere the
 Dawn,  even   as  Silpion   of  old   bloomed  ere
 Laurelin and was the elder of  the Trees.  But the
 first Dawn shone upon  Fingolfin's march,  and his
 banners blue and silver  were unfurled,  and flow-

   ers sprang beneath his marching feet, for a time                  
   of opening and growth was come into the Earth,                    
   and good of evil as ever happens.                                 
       But Fingolfin marched through the very fast.                  
   ness of Morgoth's land, Dor-Daideloth (27) the Land                   
   of Dread, and the Orcs fled before the new light                  
   amazed, and hid beneath the earth; and the Elves                  
   smote upon the gates of Angband and their trum-                   
   pets echoed in Thangorodrim's towers.                             
       They came thus south unto Mithrim, and little                 
   love (28) was there between them and the house o                      
   Feanor; and the folk of Feanor removed and                        
   camped upon the southern shores, and the lake                     
   lay between the peoples. And from this time are                   
   reckoned the Years of the Sun, and these things                   
   happened in the first year. And after came mea-                   
   sured time into the World, and the growth and                     
   change and ageing of all things was thereafter                    
   more swift even in Valinor, but most in the                       
   Hither Lands,(29) the mortal regions between the                     
   Seas of East and West. And what else happen                       
   is recorded in the Annals of Beleriand, and in the                
   Pennas or Qenta, and in many songs and tales.                     
                                                                    
                                NOTES.                               
                                                                    
1. Added here in pencil: daughter of Yavanna.                        
2. This passage, from and Nienna..., was emended in pencil to read:
 and Vaire; and Este. No spouse hath Ulmo or Melko or Nienna,        
 Manwe's sister and Melko's.                                         
3. Cf. the title to the Ambarkanta map IV (see insert): The World about
 V.Y. 500 after the fall of the Lamps.                                
4. But the symmetry of land and sea was first broken in those days is an
 addition, but was probably made at the time of writing of the text. Cf.
 pp. 301 - 2 and the citation from The Silmarillion given there.     
5. and he broke and twisted the Earth much in that time is another
 dition probably made at the time of writing.                        
6. The paragraph to this point was emended in ink to read: But on a
 time (1900) Varda began the making of the stars... The sentence     
 The Valian Year 2000 is accounted the Noontide of the Blessed       

                                        
                                                                          
     Realm, and the full season of the mirth of the Gods was removed to
     a later point: see note 10.                                           
 7.  Added here in ink: last and (i.e. the Sickle of the Gods which Varda
     set last and above the North).                                        
 8.  Added here in ink: Hence are they called the children of the stars,
 9.  nine ages (900 Valian Years) emended in ink to seven ages (700        
     Valian Years).                                                        
 10. At this point the sentence The Valian Year 2000... was reintroduced
     (see note 6).                                                         
 11. Quendi > Lindar in pencil.                                            
 12. Sindingul > Tindingol in pencil.                                      
 13. Added here in pencil: His folk looked for him in vain, and his sleep
     lasted till they had gone.                                            
 14. Added here in pencil:                                                 
                                                                          
      2700   Here   the   Green-elves   or  Laiqi   or  Laiqeldar   came  to
      Ossiriand at length  after many  wanderings and  long sojourns  in di-
      verse  places. It  is told  that a  company of  the Noldoli  under Dan
      forsook the host of Finwe  early in  the march  and turned  south, but
      again  finding  the  lands  barren  and  dark  turned north,  and they
      came  about  2700  over  Eredlindon  under  Denithor  son of  Dan, and
      dwelt in Ossiriand, and they were allies of Thingol.                 
                                                                          
     The name Denithor is an emendation, probably of Denilos (see          
     note 18).                                                             
 15. This second entry for 2900 was written after the first was changed to
     2700 (see note 9, and the note on dates below).                       
 16. This passage was emended and extended thus in pencil:                 
                                                                          
      ... robbed them of their treasure.  But Morgoth  hid himself  in the
      North  of  the  land, as  was known  only to  Finwe and  Feanor, who
      dwelt now apart.                                                     
      2950  The  Gods  sent  to apprehend  Morgoth, but  he fled  over the
      mountains into Arvalin, and plotted evil for a long while, gathering
      the strength of darkness into him.                                   
                                                                          
     The date 2950 earlier in the paragraph was struck out at the same     
     time.                                                                 
 17. Added here in pencil: This reward got Finwe for his friendship.
 18. Added here in ink:                                                    
                                                                          
      Then  fear  came  into  Beleriand,  and Thingol  made his  mansions in
      Menegroth,  and  Melian wove  magics of  the Valar  about the  land of
      Doriath, and the most of the  Elves of  Beleriand withdrew  within its
      protection,   save  some   that  lingered   in  the   western  havens,
      Brithombar and Eglorest, beside the Great Seas.                      

  To this was added, in faint and hasty pencil:                          
                                                                        
       and  the  remnant  of  the  Green-elves  of  Ossiriand  behind  the riv-
       ers  and  the  might  of  Ulmo.  But  Thingol with  his ally  Denilos of
       the  Green-elves  kept  the  Orcs  for a  while from  the South.  But at
       length Denilos son of Dan was slain, and Thingol                  
                                                                        
  Here the  pencilled note  ends abruptly.  Above -los  of Denilos  at the
  first occurrence is an alternative  reading, illegible,  but in  view of
  Denithor probably < Denilos in note 14, no doubt -thor.                
 19. Noldoli emended from Gnomes at the time of writing.                 
 20. Added  here  in  pencil: Here  endeth that  which Rumil  wrote. See
  p. 348.                                                                
 21. Added here in ink: with  all his  folk and  no others  save Orodreth,
  Angrod, and Egnor, whom Celegorm and Curufin loved;                    
 22. Added here in pencil: but he... duel and Feanor fell wrapped in fire.
 23. Fingolfin and  the sons  of Finrod  emended in  ink to  Fingolfin and
  Felagund (cf. note 21).                                                
 24. Added here in pencil: for they had tarried long  in despair  upon the
  shores of the West. The next sentence begins: And these...             
 25. Added here in pencil: But the Moon was the first to set sail.        
 26. Sun-rise written in pencil above Dawn.                               
 27. Dor-Daideloth is  an emendation  in ink  of (almost  certainly) Dor-
  Daidelos; cf. the Ambarkanta map V, and p. 307.                        
 28. This sentence  emended in  pencil to  read: Then  being wary  of the
  wiles  of  Morgoth  they turned  unto Mithrim,  that the  Shadowy Moun-
  tains should be their guard. But little love...                        
 29. Added in pencil; of Middle-earth.                                     
                                                                        
                    Note on changes made to the dates.                   
            (i) Dates in the period up to the Valian Year 2200.          
                                                                        
 The   mention  of   the  Noontide   of  the   Blessed  Realm   was  dis-
 placed  (notes  6  and  10)  in  order  to   date  the   starmaking  and
 other    events   earlier    than   2000.    The   beginning    of   the
 starmaking  was  then  dated  1900   (note  6),   and  against   At  the
 first  shining  of  the  Sickle  of  the  Gods was  written in  the date
 1950.  Against  the  march  of  the  Elves  led   by  Orome   was  writ-
 ten  in  1980  -   1990;  and   against  the   arrival  of   the  Quendi
 (Lindar) and Noldoli in Valinor 2000.                                   
 In  the  sentence  But  the  Teleri   who  came   after  abode   an  age

                      
                                                                 
 (100  Valian  Years)  upon  the  shores  of  Beleriand  the  words
 an  age  were  struck  out,  100  changed  to  10, and  the dates
 2000-2010   written   in.  In   the  sentence   This  is   the  Valian
 Years 2000  to  2100  the  second  date  was  likewise  changed to
 2010.                                                            
   In  the  concluding  part  of the  period, by  pencilled changes
 perhaps later than  the foregoing,  the dates  of the  dwelling of
 the Teleri  on  Tol  Eressea,  originally   2100  to   2200,  were
 changed  to  2010  to  2110;  and  the  coming  of  the   Teleri  to
 Valinor  in  2200  was  changed  to  2111.  The  result  of these
 changes may be shown in a table:                              
                                                                 
   Original.      After.                                          
   Annals.       changes.                                         
                                                                 
    2000          1900      Making of the stars by Varda begun.                  
                                                                 
                  1950      Making of the Sickle of the Gods           
                              (end of the starmaking).             
                                                                 
                1980 - 1990 March of the Elves.                    
                                                                 
    2000          2000      Noontide of the Blessed Realm.                       
                                                                 
                  2000      Coming of the first two kindreds of
                              the Elves to Valinor.                
                                                                 
 2000-2100      2000-2010   Teleri on the shores of Beleriand.     
 2100-2200      2010-2110   Teleri dwelling in Tol Eressea.          
     2200         2111      Coming of the Teleri to Valinor.           
                                                                 
        (ii) Dates in the period from the Valian Year 2900.        
                                                                 
 The  year  2900,  in  which  Morgoth   sued  for   pardon,  was
 Changed to 2700, following the change in the length of  his im-
 prisonment  from  nine  to seven  ages (900  to 700  Valian Years)
 e  earlier  (note  9).  These  changes   must  have   been  made
 while the Annals were in progress, in view of the second entry
 for 2900 that follows  in the  text as  written, During  two more
 ages Valinor  abode yet  in bliss,  i.e. two  more ages  from the

  emended  date,  2700,  when  Morgoth  sued   for  pardon   and  was
  released.                                                         
    For the shifting of the date 2950 see note 16.                  
    Almost  all  the  dates from  2990 -  1 to  the end  were emended
  in pencil, and the results are best set out in a table.  (The dates
  given  in  the  text  as  2992 to  2995 are  themselves emendations
  in ink,  apparently in  each case  advancing the  date by  one year
  from that originally written.)                                    
    The  sentence  Thus  about  2992  of  Valian  Years (p.  316) was
  changed  to  Thus  in  the  dread  Year  of  the Valar  2999 (29991
  S.Y.), where S.Y.= Sun Year; cf. the opening of the Annals,
  where it is explained that  a Valian  Year was  equal to  ten years
  'now', i.e. of the Sun.                                           
    It will be seen that the  effect of  the later  pencilled changes
  given  in the  table below  was to  speed up  events from  the Bat-
  tle  of  Alqualonde to  the landing  of Fingolfin  in Middle-earth,
  so that they extend over  only a  single Valian  Year. In  the pas-
  sage  giving  the  reckoning  of  the  First  Ages  of   the  World
  (p.  319),  over  nine  in  Two  Thousand save  nine were  Years of
  the Trees my  father wrote  one; this  one year  is the  dread Year
  of the Valar 2999.                                                
    In this table, only actual  pencilled changes  made to  the dates
  are recorded. The  change of  2991 to  2998 -  3000 is  intended to
  cover all that follows, or refers only to the beginning of  the en-
  try:  Valinor  now  lay  in  great gloom,  and darkness...  fell on
  all the World.                                                    
                                                                   
       Original Annals.                          After changes.     
                                                                   
  (Valian Years).                              (Valian.   (Sun.     
                                                Years).   Years).     
                                                                   
     2900 - 1     Destruction of the Trees       2998             
                  and escape of Morgoth                              
                                                                   
     2991         Rebellion of Feanor         2998-3000          
                                                                   
     2992       Preparation for the Flight       2999             
                  of the Noldoli                                    
                                                                   
     2992         The Battle of Alqualonde       2999       29991                     

                          
                                                                   
   Original Annals.                             After changes.        
                                                                   
 (Valian Years).                             (Valian.     (Sun.    
                                              Years).     Years).
                                                                   
  2993           The Doom of Mandos.                      29992
                                                                   
  2994           The Noldoli in the far                   29994
                 North; the burning of the                            
                 ships.                                               
                                                                   
  2995           The landing of the                       29995
                 Feanorians and the                                   
                 encampment in Mithrim.                               
                                                                   
  2996           The Battle under Stars and.     Date siruck out      
                 the death of Feanor.                                 
                                                                   
  2997           Capture of Maidros.                      29996
                                                                   
  2998           Maidros hung from                                            
                 Thangorodrim.                                         
                                                                   
  3000           Landing of Fingolfin.                                         
                                                                   
            Commentary on the Annals of Valinor.                  
                                                                   
 In the  preamble  to  the Annals  of Valinor  (AV) we  meet one
 Pengolod  the  Wise  of Gondolin,  who dwelt  at Tavrobel  in Tol
 Eressea  'after  his   return  unto   the  West'.   Pengolod  (or
 Pengolod)  often appears  later, but  nothing more  is told  of his
 history  (the reference  to Sirion's  Haven shows  that he  was one
 Of  those  who  escaped  from  Gondolin  with  Tuor  and  Idril).  I
 am much inclined to think that his  literary origin  is to  be found
 Gilfanon   of   the  Lost   Tales,  who   also  lived   at  Tavrobel
 (which  now  first  emerges  again);  there  Eriol  stayed   in  his
 house  ('the  house  of  a  hundred  chimneys'),  and  Gilfanon bade
 him  write  down  all  that  he had  heard (II.  283), while  in the
 Preamble  to  AV  Eriol   saw  Pengolod's   book  at   Tavrobel  and
 translated  it  there.  Moreover  Gilfanon  was  of  the  Noldoli,  and
 though  in  the  Lost  Tales he  is not  associated with  Gondolin he

  was  an  Elf  of  Kor,  'being  indeed one  of the  oldest of  the fair-
  ies  and  the  most  aged  that  now dwelt  in the  isle', and  had live
  long  in  the  Great  Lands  (I.  175);  while   Pengolod  was   also an
  Elf  whose  life  began  in  Valinor,  since  he  'returned'   into  the
  West.                                                                   
    It  is  not  clear  whether  the  ascription  of  both sets  of Annals
  to   Pengolod   of  Tavrobel,   where AElfwine/Eriol   translated  them,
  is  a  departure  from  or  is congruent  with the  title of  the Quenta
  (p.  94),  in  which  Eriol  is  said  to  have  read  the  Golden  Book
  (Parma  Kuluina)  in  Kortirion.  In  the   early  notes   and  outlines
  there  are  different  conceptions  of  the  Golden  Book: see  II. 287,
  290  -  1,  310.  On  the  explicit  equation of  AElfwine and  Eriol in
  the preamble to AV see p. 252.                                          
    On   the  later   addition  to   AV  (note   20)  'Here   endeth  that
  which  Rumil  wrote'  see  pp.  348  -  9.  Rumil  re-emerges  from  the
  Lost Tales also as the author of the Ambarkanta (p. 288).               
                                                                         
    In  the  opening  passage  of  AV,  and   in  the   later  alterations
  made   to   it,  there   are  some   developments  in   the  composition
  and  relations  of  the  Valar.  The  Nine  Valar  are  the same  as the
  nine  'chieftains  of  the  Valar'  or  the 'Nine  Gods' of  the opening
  section   in  Q;   and  the   association  of   the  Valar   with  their
  spouses   has   undergone   little   change   from   the   Lost   Tales:
  Manwe    and    Varda,    Aule    and    Yavanna;   Orome    and   Vana;
  Tulkas   and   Nessa;   Osse   and   Uinen;   Mandos  and   Nienna.  But
  now  Este  first  appears,  the  spouse  of Lorien  (as is  implied here
  by  the  arrangement  of  the  passage,  and  as  is   expressly  stated
  in the Old English version of AV, p. 340).                              
    The  'consanguinity'  of  the  Valar.  In  the  Lost  Tales  Aule  and
  Yavanna  Palurien  were  the  parents  of  Orome   g.  67),   and  Nessa
  was  Orome's  sister  (I.  75).  In   the  addition   to  AV   given  in
  note  1  Nessa  is  still  the  daughter  of  Yavanna;*  as   will  appear
  subsequently  (p.  349)  Orome  was   the  son   of  Yavanna,   but  not
  of  Aule.  In  The  Silmarillion   (p.  29)   Orome  and   Nessa  remain
  brother and sister, though their parentage is not stated.               
    Varda  and  Yavanna  are  said  to  be  sisters  in  Q,  as  in  AV; in
                                                                         
  (*In Q $6 (p. 120) Nessa is the daughter of Vana, though this statement was
  struck out (note 2).)                                                    

 
                                                                    
 Q Vana is  a third  sister, though  apparently not  so in  AV, and
 she  remains  the younger  sister of  Yavanna in  The Silmarillion
 (ibid.).                                                            
    Manwe  and  Melko  are  said in  AV to  be 'brethren'  (cf. The
 Silmarillion  p.  26:  Manwe  and  Melkor  were  brethren  in  the
 thought of Iluvatar'), and Nienna is their  sister; in  The Silma-
 rillion (p.  28) she  is the  sister of  the Feanturi,  Mandos and
 Lorien.                                                              
    If  these  sources are  combined the  fullest extension  of the
 genealogy is therefore:                                             
                                                                    
  Este = Lorien. Mandos = Nienna. Melko. Manwe.                          
                                                                    
        Manwe = Varda. Yavanna = Aule.            Vana = Orome.     
                                                                    
              Tulkas = Nessa.    Orome = Vana.                            
                                                                    
  Only   the   sea-gods,  Ulmo,   and  Osse   with  Uinen,   are  not
  brought in.                                                        
    By the emendation given in note 2 Vaire appears, and is          
  clearly  by  the  arrangement  of  the  passage the  spouse of
  Mandos,  as  she  remained;  and   Nienna  now   becomes  solitary,
  again  as she  remained. Of  course it  is altogether  unclear what
  is really meant by the terms 'brother', 'sister',  'mother', 'son',
  'children' in the context of the great Valar.                      
    The  term  Valarindi  has  not   occurred  before;   see  further
  p. 350.                                                            
                                                                    
    In what follows I relate my remarks to the dates of the An-      
  nals. In most respects this text (as originally written) is in har-
  mony with  the Quenta,  and I  notice only  the relatively  few and
  for the most part minor points in which they are not, or in       
  Which the Annals offer some detail that is absent from the         
  Quenta (a great deal is of course found in the much longer         
  Quenta that is omitted in the brief Annals).                       

  Valian  Year  500  The  words  'Morgoth  destroyed  by  deceit the
  Lamps' indicates the story of his devising the pillars out of ice,
  as in the Ambarkanta (see pp. 292, 302).                          
                                                                   
  Valian  Year  2000  (later  1900,  1950) The  making of  the stars
  seems  still  to be  thought of  as accomplished  by Varda  at one
  and the same period, as in  Q $2  (see p.  201). A  later addition
  in AV (note 7) makes the Sickle of  the Gods  the last  of Varda's
  works  in  the  heavens,  and  thus  the  Elves  awoke   when  the
  starmaking was concluded,  as in  The Silmarillion  (p. 48);  in S
  and  Q  they  awoke  'at the  making of  the stars'.  The addition
  given  in  note  8  telling that  the Elves  were for  this reason
  called 'the children of the stars' is interesting; but  later evi-
  dence  shows  that  this  was  not  yet  the  meaning of  the name
  Eldar.                                                            
    The  Elves  are  said  to  have  awoken 'in  the midmost  of the
  World', in S and Q Cuivienen is 'in the East', 'far in  the East',
  as in The Silmarillion. But I doubt that  this is  significant, in
  view  of  the  placing  of  Kuivienen  on  the  Ambarkanta  map IV
  (see insert), which could be referred to either  as 'in  the East'
  or as 'in the midmost of the World'.                              
    In  S  and Q  there is  no mention  of the  Elves who  would not
  leave  the Waters  of Awakening  (see p.  51); in  AV there  is at
  least a suggestion of  them in  the reference  to 'the  most part'
  of the Elves having  followed Orome.  But the  story of  the three
  original ambassadors of the Elves is still absent (see p. 201).
    In S  and Q  ($4) the  length of  Morgoth's imprisonment  in the
  halls  of  Mandos  was  seven ages;  in Q  'seven' was  emended to
  'nine', but  this was  then rejected  (note 1);  in AV  'nine' was
  emended  to  'seven'  (note 9).  In The  Silmarillion (p.  65) the
  number of ages is three.                                          
    The  rending  and  sundering  of  the  lands  in  the  war  that
  ended  in   the  captivity   of  Morgoth   is  described   in  the
  Ambarkanta (see pp. 293, 304 - 6).                                
    The term Quendi for the  First Kindred  is still  used in  AV as
  in Q, and as in Q  was later  changed to  Lindar. The  addition in
  note 13  makes it  explicit that  Thingol did  not awake  from his
  enchanted sleep until his people had  passed over  the Sea;  so in

                                       
                                                                             
 the Tale of Tinuviel, II. 9: 'Now when he awoke he thought no     
 more of his people (and indeed it had been vain, for long now     
 had those reached Valinor).' He is now the brother of Elwe     
 Lord of the Teleri (cf. I. 120).     
                                                                             
 Valian Fear 2200 (later 2111) The name Alqalonde (not in S     
 and Q, where only the English name, Swanhaven or Haven of     
 the Swans, is used) reappears from (Kopas) Alqalunte of the     
 Lost Tales; cf. Alflon on the Ambarkanta map V (p. 309; see     
 also insert).     
    It is to be noticed that while the changing of the dates     
 (p. 323) greatly reduced the time during which the Teleri dwelt     
 on the coast of Beleriand (from 100 Valian Years to 10), it     
 does not affect the length of their sojourn in Tol Eressea, 100     
 Valian Years, equivalent to 1000 Years of the Sun (cf. Q $3;     
 'Of this long sojourn apart came the sundering of the tongue     
 of the Foamriders and the Elves of Valinor'),     
                                                                             
 Valian  Year  2500   Wholly  new   is  the   matter  of   the  pencilled
 addition  given  in  note  14.  My  father  was  here  working  out  the
 chronology  at large,  for there  is no  reason for  this story  to ap-
 pear  in  Annals  of  Valinor.*  It  agrees  with  what  is  told   in  The
 Silmarillion  (p.  54),  save  that  Denethor's  father is  there Lenwe
 not  Dan,  and  that   these  Elves   came  from   the  third   host,  the
 Teleri, not from the Noldor.                                                 
    This  is  the  first  indication  of  the  origin  of  the Green-elves,
 who  have  hitherto  only  appeared  in  association  with  Beren (see
 p  74,   and  Q   $14),  and   the  first   appearance  of   their  Elvish
 names   Laiqi  or   Laiqeldar  (later   Laiquendi).  For   earlier  forms
 of  Ossiriand  see  p.  287;  the  final  form  occurs  also  in  emenda-
 tions  to  Q  ($$9,  10,  14).  Eredlindon  appears  in  a  late  addition
 to Q 59, note 3.                                                                
                                                                             
 Valian Year 2900 (later 2700) In S and Q it is Tulkas and     
 Ulmo who are opposed to the release of Morgoth, as in The     
 Silmarillion (p. 66); in AV it is Tulkas and Aule. In AV ap-     
                                                                             
 (* It remained in the 'tradition' of these Annals, however, and is still present in
 the much later Annals of A man (though there with a direction  to transfer  it to
 the Annals of Beleriand).)                                                       

  pears the intercession of Nienna on  Morgoth's behalf,  and this
  was retained in The Silmarillion  (p. 65),  though Nienna  is no
  longer his sister.                                              
                                                                 
  Valian  Year  2950  'The  Dispossessed',  the  name given  to the
  House  of  Feanor,  has  appeared  in   the  Old   English  name
  Yrfeloran, p. 260.                                              
    I have noticed in my  commentary on  Q $4  that the  later in-
  terpolation (note 6), telling that a messenger  came to  the Gods
  in  council  with  tidings  that  Morgoth  was  in the  North of
  Valinor and journeying to the house of Finwe,  is the  first hint
  of  the  story  of Morgoth's  going to  Formenos and  his speech
  with Feanor before the doors. In AV also, as originally written,
  the  northward  movement  of  Morgoth  was  absent  (he  fled at
  once into Arvalin after the council  of the  Gods in  which they
  deposed  Feanor  and  sent  to  apprehend  Morgoth); but  in the
  pencilled  interpolation  given  in note  16 Morgoth  'hid himself
  in  the  North  of  the  land, as  was known  only to  Finwe and
  Feanor, who dwelt now  apart'. It  was then  that the  Gods sent
  to apprehend him,  though no  explanation is  given of  how they
  knew  where  he  was;  but  the  story now  becomes structurally
  the same as that in The Silmarillion (p. 72), where it  was only
  when  Finwe  sent  messengers  to   Valmar  saying   that  Morgoth
  had  come  to  Formenos  that  Orome and  Tulkas went  after him.
                                                                 
  Valian Years 2990 - I The addition given in note 17, 'This      
  ward got Finwe for his friendship', refers, I think, to the rela-
  tions between Morgoth and the Noldoli before his exposure.      
  This seems much more likely than that Morgoth actually suc-     
  ceeded in cozening the Noldoli in exile in the North of Valinor,
  that they formed an alliance with him.                          
    It is remarkable that according to the revised dating no less
  than 48 Valian Years (2950-2998), that is 480 Years of the      
  Sun, elapsed between Morgoth's flight into Arvalin and the de-
  struction of the Trees.                                         
    The insertion (in two instalments) given in note 18 intro-    
  duces further new history of the 'Dark Ages' of Middle-eearth. 
  The Havens on the coast of Beleriand were marked in later on    
  the Westward Extension of the first map (see insert), where     

                                   
                                                               
 they are named  Brithombar and  Eldorest (see  p. 281).  Now ap-
 pears also the withdrawal of  the Elves  of Beleriand  behind the
 Girdle  of  Melian:  cf.  The  Silmarillion, pp.  96-7: [Thingol]
 withdrew all  his people  that his  summons could  reach within
 the fastness of Neldoreth  and Region.'  The name  Menegroth of
 the    Thousand    Caves     has    not     occurred    before.
 The incomplete pencilled addition is the first hint of the bat-
 tle of the  Elves of  Beleriand with  the Orcs  after Morgoth's
 return  ('the  first  battle  in  the  Wars of  Beleriand', The
 Silmarillion p. 96), in which Denethor was slain,              
                                                               
 Valian Year 2992 (later 2999) In the account  of the  Flight of
 the Noldoli there is a suggestion, in the  words 'The  march be-
 gan, though the  Gods forbade  (and yet  hindered not)',  of the
 speech of  the messenger  of Manwe  as the  march began  in The
 Silmarillion (p. 85): 'Go not forth! ... No aid will  the Valar
 lend you in this quest, but neither will they hinder you.'     
                                                               
 Valian Year 2993 (later  Sun Year  29992) More  is now  told of
 the content of the Prophecy of Mandos, in particular as it con-
 cerns the altered fate of the Noldoli who  would not  turn back
 from their rebellion. In Q ($5) nothing is said of this, and the
 curse, as reported, is restricted to the  doom of  treachery and
 the fear of treachery among themselves; but in a  later passage
 ($7), which goes back to S and  indeed to  the Lost  Tales (see
 p. 60), it is told that                                        
                                                               
   Immortal  were  the  Elves,  and...  no sickness  or pestilence
   brought  them  death.  But they  could be  slain by  weapons in
   those  days...  and  some  waned  and  wasted with  sorrow till
   they faded from the earth.                                   
                                                               
 In AV the Doom of Mandos foretells that                        
                                                               
   a  measure  of  mortality  should  visit  them  [the  House  of
   Feanor  and  those  who  followed  them],  that they  should be
   lightly  slain  with weapons,  or torments,  or sorrow,  and in
   the end fade and wane before the younger race.               

 At first sight this seems at odds with the story as it stands,      
 where  Finwe  and  many  other  Elves  had  already  been  slain by
 Morgoth,  who  thus  'began  slaughter in  the world',.  'a measure
 of mortality' was their fate in any case. But it  may be  that the
 word 'lightly' is to  be given  full weight,  and that  the meaning
 is that the Noldoli will be less  resistant to  death that  comes in
 these  ways. In  The Silmarillion  (p. 88)  Mandos or  his emissary
 said:                                                              
                                                                   
   For  though  Eru  appointed  you  to die  not in  Ea, and  no sick-
   ness  may assail  you, yet  slain ye  may be,  and slain  ye shall
   be: by weapon and by torment and by grief.                       
                                                                   
 This I take  to mean,  in effect:  Do not  forget that,  though you
 are  immortal  in  that you  cannot die  through sickness,  you can
 nonetheless  be  slain  in  other  ways;  and  you will  indeed now
 die in such ways abundantly.'                                      
   The  waning  of  the  Elves  now  becomes   an  element   in  the
 Doom of Mandos; on this see p. 206.                                
   The  statement  in  AV  that  when  Finrod  and  many  others re-
 turned  to  Valinor  and  were  pardoned  by  the Gods  'Aule their
 ancient friend smiled  on them  no more'  is interesting.  It does
 not appear in The Silmarillion. where nothing is said of  the re-
 ception of Finarfin. (Finrod) and those who came with him on
 their  return beyond  the fact  that 'they  received the  pardon of
 the  Valar,  and  Finarfin  was  set  to  rule  the remnant  of the
 Noldor in the Blessed Realm' (p. 88); but  it is  to be  related to
 a  passage  in  the  old  Tale  of  the  Sun and  Moon (I.  176) in
 which  Aule's  peculiar  anger  against the  Noldoli for  their in-
 gratitude and for the Kinslaying is described.                     
   The  alliances  and  friendships  between  the  princes   of  the
 Noldoli  in  the third  generation have  been touched  on in  S and
 Q $5,  where  Orodreth,  Angrod,  and  Egnor,  sons  of  Finrod,
 sided  with  the  Feanorians  in  the  debate  in Tun  before the
 Flight of  the Noldoli; in AV this  becomes a  friendship especial-
 ly with Celegorm  and Curufin,  and is  no doubt  to be  related to
 the evolution of the Nargothrond legend.                           
                                                                   
 Valian Year 2994 (later Sun Year 29994) The friendship of         
 Celegorm. and Curufin with Orodreth, Angrod, and Egnor just         

       
                                                                 
 referred to leads to the remarkable  development (in  the addi-
 tion given in note 21) that these  three sons  of Finrod  were ac-
 tually allowed passage  in the  ships by  the Feanorians,  and that
 only Felagund   came   over   the   Helkarakse   with   Fingolfin
 (note 23). This  story if  adhered to  would presumably  have af-
 fected the  further  evolution  of  the history  of the  Noldor in
 Beleriand. In The Silmarillion the  only especial  relationship of
 friendship  between any  of the  sons of  Feanor and  their cousins
 from  that  with  Aredhel  Fingolfin's  daughter)  is   that  be-
 tween   Maedhros   and   Fingon;   and   Maedhros,   not  perceiving
 that his father meant to burn the ships,  proposed that  Fingon be
 among the first of the other Noldor to be brought  over in  a sec-
 ond journey (p. 90).                                            
                                                                 
 Valian  Year  2995  (later  Sun  Year  29995)  Here the  firth of
 Drengist is named for the first time in the narrative texts (it oc-
 curs in the list of Old English names,  p. 257,  but is  not named
 on  the  Westward  Extension  of  the  first map);  Eredlomin has
 the later sense  of the  Echoing Mountains  (see pp.  233-4, 272);
 and  Mithrim  is  used not  only of  the Lake  but of  the region
 about  the  Lake,  and  the  Mountains  of Mithrim  are mentioned
 for the first time (see  p. 272,  entry Hithlum).  The encampment
 of  the  Feanorians  by  Lake  Mithrim  now  precedes  the Battle
 under Stars.                                                     
                                                                 
 Valian Year 2996 (date later struck out) The first battle of the
 returning Noldor with the Orcs is now fought in Mithrim, not
 on the Northern plain (Q $8), and the plain at last receives an
 Elvish name, Bladorion, referring to the time when it was still
 grassland   (with  Bladorion   perhaps  compare   Bladonven  'the
 wide earth',  a name  of Yavanna  given in  the old  Gnomish dic-
 tionary,  I.  264,  entry  Palurien). The  Orcs are  pursued into
 Bladorion  and  Feanor  is  wounded there,  but dies  in Mithrim,
 The name Battle under Stars is added in Q $8,  note 2,  but this
 is the  first  occurrence  of  an  Elvish  name, Dagor-os-Giliath
 (later Dagor-nuin-Giliath).  Fredwethion replaces,  in the  text as
 written,  Eredlomin  as  the  Elvish  name  of the  Shadowy Moun-
 tains (previously  it  is  found  only in  later alterations,  Q II$15,
 note 1, and on the first map; see p. 272).                        

 Valian Year 2997 (later Sun Year 29996) A new element in           
 AV  is  the  condition which  Morgoth proposed  for the  release of
 Maidros.                                                           
                                                                   
 Valian  Year  3000  Here  is  introduced  the  story  that Fingolfin
 after  landing  in  Middle-earth  marched   even  to   Angband  and
 beat on the gates, but  (in the  emendation given  in note  28) be-
 ing  prudent  retreated  to  Mithrim;  and  although  in  S and  Q Q
 it  is  already  told that  the two  hosts of  the Noldor  were en.
 camped  on  opposing  shores  of  Lake  Mithrim,  it  is  now  added
 that   the   Feanorians   removed  to   the  southern   shore  when
 Fingolfin came.                                                    
   On  the  phrase  'after came  measured time  into the  World' see
 Q $6 note 6, and pp. 205-6,                                        
   With 'the Pennas or Qenta'  cf. the  title of  Q (p.  94): Quenta
 Noldorinwa or Pennas-na-Ngoelaidh.                                 
                                                                   
                              APPENDIX.                             
                                                                   
           Old English versions of the Annals of Valinor,           
                     made by AElfwine or Eriol.                     
                                                                   
 The first version given here is certainly the oldest, and is per-
 haps  earlier  than  the  Modern  English  Annals.  A few  late pen
 cilled alterations or suggestions are given in the notes.          
                                   I.                              
       peos   gesegen   wearp  aerest   on   bocum   gesett   of
       Pengolode   pam   Upwitan   of   Gondoline aer   pam  pe
       heo  abrocen  wurde,  7  sippan aet  Sirigeones  Hype,  7
       aet  Tafrobele  on  Toleressean  (paet is  Anetige), after
       pam  pe  he  eft  west  com;  7  heo  wearp   paer geraedd
       and   gepiedd   of   AElfwine,   pam   pe   ielfe   Eriol
       genemdon.                                                    
                                                                   
 Frumsceaft  Her aerest worhte  Ilufatar, paet  is Ealfaeder
       oppe Heofonfaeder oppe Beorhtfaeder, eal ping.                 

   
                                                           
D.  geara para Falar (paet is para Mihta oppe Goda): an     10
 gear para Goda bid swa lang swa tien gear beod nu        
 on paere worolde arimed aefter paere sunnan gange.           
 Melco (paet is Orgel) oppe Morgop (paet is              
 Sweart-os) oferwearp para Goda Blacern, 7 pa               
 Godu west gecirdon hie, and hie paer Valinor paet is    15      
 Godepel geworhton.                                         
                                                           
M.  Her pa Godu awehton pa Twegen Beamas, Laurelin             
 (paet is Goldleop) 7 Silpion (paet is Glisglom)            
                                                           
MM.  Godedles Middaeg oppe Heahprymm. Her bleowon                
 pa Beamas pusend geara; ond Varda (heo waes             20              
 gydena aepelust) steorran geworhte; for pam hatte           
 heo Tinwetari Steorrena Hlaefdige. Her onwocon              
 Ielfe on Eastlandum; 7 se Melco weard gefangen 7           
 on clustre gebunden; 7 siddan comon ielfa sume on          
 Godedel.                                                25
                                                           
MM op MMC.  Her  weard   Tun,  seo   hwite  burg,      
 atimbred  on  munte  Core.  Pa Telere  gewunodon giet      
 on  pam  weststrandum  para  Hiderlanda; ac  se Teler      
 pingol weard on wuda begalen.                           
                                                           
MMC op MMCC. Wunodon pa Telere on Anetige.               30           
                                                           
MMCC.  Her comon pa Telere op Godedel.                         
                                                           
MMD.  Her purh searucraeftas apohton and  beworhton pa      
 Nold-ielfe  gimmas   missenlice,  7   Feanor  Noldena      
 hlaford    worhte    pa   Silmarillas,    paet  waeron      
 Eorclanstanas.                                           35
                                                           
MM op MMDCCCC.   Haeftnyd Morgodes.                            
                                                           
MMDCCCC.  Her weard Morgop alysed, 7 he wunode              
 on Godedle, 7 licette paet he hold waere Godum 7             
 Ielfum.                                                    

MMCCCCXCLX.  Her  ofsloh  Morgod  pa   Beamas  ond      40  
 opfleah, 7 aetferede mid him para Elfa gimmas  7 pa          
 Eorclanstanas. Sippan  forleton pa  Noldelfe hiera          
 hyldo, and  eodon on  elpeodignes, 7  gefuhton wid          
 pa Telere aet Elfethyde 7 sige namon 7 aetferedon pa          
 Teleriscan scipu.                                      45
   Her weard micel gesweorc 7 genipu on Godedle              
 7 ofer ealne middangeard. Pa hwile endniwede                
 Morgod his ealde faesten on pam Norpdaelum, and              
 getrymede micle, and orcas gegaderode, and pa               
 Eorclanstanas on his irenhelme befaeste.               50                  
   Pa for Feanor mid his seofon sunum and micelre            
 fierde norp 7 pa siglde on Teleriscum scipum to             
 pam Weststrandum, and paer forbaerndon hie pa                 
 scipu ond aswicon hiera geferan pe on last sidodon.         
   Her gefeaht Feanores fierd wip pam orcum 7 sige      55   
 namon 7 pa orcas gefliemdon op Angband (paet is              
 Irenhelle); ac Godmog, Morgodes pegn, ofsloh                
 Feanor, and Maegdros geweold sippan Feanores                
 folc. Pis gefeoht hatte Tungolgud.                         
                                                            
                                NOTES.                       
                                                            
                     Textual Notes to Version I.             
                                                            
 All  the following  changes, except  that in  line 9,  were made
 very quickly  in pencil  and without  striking out  the original
 forms; they belong to  a much  later period,  as is  shown by the
 fact that  Melkor for  Melko was  not introduced  until 1951.
                                                            
    2.    Pengolode > Pengolode                              
    2.    Gondoline > Gondolinde                             
    4.    Tafrobele > (probably) Taprobele (see p. 344 note to
          line 8, and p. 347 note to line 7).                
    6.    Eriol > Ereol                                      
    10.   Falar is an emendation in ink of Valar.            
    13.   Melco > Melcor (but rot at line 23')               
    14.   Blacern > Leohtfatu                                

 
                                                                             
  16.  Godepel > Esa-eard (esa genitive plural of os, see p.                  
       255).                                                                  
                                                                             
                       Old English Names in Version I.                        
                                                                             
 Far less   use  is   made  of   Old  English   equivalents  than   is  pro-
 vided  for   in  the   lists  given   on  pp.   255  -   61;  so   we  have
 Gondoline    with    an    Old    English    inflectional    ending    (not
 Stangaldorburg,   etc.),   Nold(i)elfe,   also   genitive   plural  Noldena
 (not    Deopelfe,    etc.),    Feanor,   Maegdros,    Godmog,    on   munte
 Core.   Old   English   equivalents,   used   or   only    mentioned,   are
 mostly   actual    translations.   Thus    Melco   is    Orgel   ('Pride');
 Morgod   is   Sweart-os   ('Black   God',   'Dark   God',  see   II.  67);
 Laurelin   is   Goldleop   ('Gold-song',   'Song   of   Gold'   -   cf.  the
 translation   'singing-gold'   in   the   name-list    to   The    Fall   of
 gondolin,   II.   216,   and    contrast   Glengold    imitating   Glingol,
 pp.  257  -  8);  Silpion  is  Glisglom  (of  which  the  elements  are ev-
 idently  the  stem  glis-  seen  in  the  verbs  glisian,  glisnian 'shine,
 glitter',   and   glom   'twilight');   Alqalonde   is   Elfethyd   ('Swan-
 haven')*;  Tol  Eressea  is  Anetig  (  Solitary  Isle  ).,   the  Battle-
 under-Stars   is   Tungolgud   ('Star-battle').   Irenhell    for   Angband
 and  Godedel  ('Land  of  the  Gods')   for  Valinor   are  found   in  the
 list of Old English names.                                                   
  The   Silmarils   are   Eorclanstanas   (also  treated   as  an   Old  En-
 glish  noun  with   plural  Silmarillas).   There  are   several  different
 forms   of   this   Old   English   word:  eorclan-,   eorcnan-,  earcnan-,
 and   eorcan-   from   which   is   derived   the   'Arkenstone'   of   the
 Lonely   Mountain.   The   first   element   may   be  related   to  Gothic
 airkns  'holy'.  With  middangeard  line  47  cf.   my  father's   note  in
 Guide   to  the   Names  in   The  Lord   of  the   Rings,  in   A  Tolkien
 Compass,  p.  189:   'The  sense   is  "the   inhabited  lands   of  (Elves
 and)   Men",   envisaged   as   lying   between   the   Western   Sea   and
 that   of   the   Far   East   (only   known  in   the  West   by  rumour).
 Middle-earth   is   a   modern    alteration   of    medieval   middel-erde
 from Old English middan-geard.'                                              
  Varda's   name   Tinwetari,   Queen   of   the   Stars,   goes   back   to
                                                                             
 (*This Old English name (with variant initial vowel, lelfethyp) is found long
 before in a marginal note to Kopas Alqalunte in the tale of The Flight of the
 Noldoli, I. 164, footnote.)                                                  

 the tale of The Chaining of Melko (I. 100), and is found also      
 in Q $2.                                                           
                                                                   
                         Dates in Version I.                        
                                                                   
   The   date   MMDCCCCXCIX   (written   with    M   for    MM,   as
 also  the  two  occurrences  of  MMDCCCC,   but  these   are  obvi-
 ously  mere  slips  without  significance),  2999,  does  not agree
 with  that in  the Modern  English version  for the  destruction of
 the  Two  Trees  and  the rape  of the  Silmarils, which  are there
 given under 2990 - 1.                                              
                                                                   
   This  text  relates  very  closely indeed  to the  Modern English
 version.  There are  slight differences  of substance  between them
 here  and  there,  and  some of  the emendations  made to  the mod-
 ern  version are  embodied in  the Old  English text;  these points
 are mentioned in  the notes,  as also  are some  details concerning
 the dates and some features of the names.                          
   The  text  was  lightly  emended  in  pencil,  but  these changes
 are  almost  without  exception  modifications  of   word-order  or
 other slight syntactical changes, and all such I take into the text
 silently. It breaks off abruptly at the beginning of the  annal en-
 try  equivalent to  2991 with  the words  'Valinor lay  now', these
 are not at the foot of a page, and none of the text has been lost.
   At first sight it  is puzzling  that in  the preamble  the Annals
 of  Valinor  are  called Pennas,  since the  Pennas or  Quenta (see
 pp. 250 - 1) is clearly intended to represent a  different literary
 tradition from the Annals,  or at  least a  different mode  of pre-
 senting  the  material.  The  preamble  goes  on  to  say, however,
 that this book Pennas is divided into three  parts: the  first part
 is  Valinorelumien,  that  is Godedles  geargetael (i.e.  Annals of
 Valinor);  the  second  is Beleriandes  geargetael (i.e.  Annals of
 Beleriand);  and  the  third  is  Quenta  Noldorinwa or  Pennas nan
 Goelid,  that  is  Noldelfaracu  (the   History  of   the  Noldorin
 Elves). Thus, here at  any rate,  Pennas (Quenta)  is used  in both
 a  stricter  and  a  wider  sense:  the  whole  opus  that AElfwine
 translated in Tol Eressea  is the  Pennas (Quenta),  'the History',

 but the term is also used more narrowly of the Pennas nan
 Goelid or Quenta Noldorinwa, which may be thought of as
 'the Silmarillion proper', as opposed to the 'Annals'. In fact, in
 an addition to the very brief Old English version III of the An-
 nals of Valinor (p. 347, note to line 5) it is expressly said:
 This third part is also called Silmarillion, that is the history of
 the Eorclanstanas [Silmarils].'
                                                                    
        Her onginned seo boc pe man Pennas nemned, 7                
        heo is on preo gedaeled; se forma dael is                      
        Valinorelumien paet is Godedles geargetael, 7 se              
        oper is Beleriandes geargetael, 7 se pridda                  
        Quenta Noldorinwa oppe Pennas nan Goelid paet         5                
        is Noldelfaracu. Pas aerest awrat Pengolod se                 
        Upwita of Gondoline, aer pam pe heo abrocen                      
        wurde, 7 sippan aet Siriones hype 7 aet Tavrobele               
        in Toleressean (paet is Anetege), pa he eft west             
        com. And pas bec AElfwine of Angelcynne              10                   
        geseah on Anetege, pa pa he aet sumum cerre                   
        funde hie; 7 he geleornode hie swa he betst                  
        mihte 7 eft gepeodde 7 on Englisc asette.                     
                                                                    
                      Her onginned Godedles geargetael.               
                                                                    
        On frumsceafte Iluuvatar, paet is Ealfaeder, gescop            
        eal ping, 7 pa Valar, paet is pa Mihtigan (pe sume   15         
        menn sippan for godu heoldon) comon on pas                   
        worolde. Hie sindon nigon: Manwe, Ulmo, Aule,                
        Orome, Tulkas, Mandos, Lorien, Melko. Para                   
        waeron Manwe 7 Melko his bropor ealra mihtigoste,             
        ac Manwe waes se yldra, 7 waes Vala-hlaford 7        20               
        halig, 7 Melko beah to firenlustum and                       
        upahaefennesse and ofermettum and wearp yfel and             
        unmaedlic, and his nama is awergod and                        
        unasprecenlic, ac man nemned hine Morgod in                 
        Noldelfisc-gereorde. Pa Valacwene hatton swa:        25             
        Varda 7 Geauanna, pe gesweostor waeron, Manwes                

 cwen  7  Aules  cwen;  7  Vana  Oromes cwen;  7 Nessa      
 Tulkases   cwen   (seo   waes  Oromes   sweostor);  7      
 Uinen,  merecwen,  Osses   wif;  7   Vaire  Mandosses      
 cwen,  7  Este  Loriendes  cwen.  Ac  Ulmo   7  Melko   30
 naefdon cwene, 7 Nienna seo geomore naefde wer.              
    Mid   pissum  geferum   comon  micel   heap laesra      
 gesceafta,  Valabearn,  oppe  gaestas   Valacynnes  pe      
 laesse maegen haefdon. Pas waeron Valarindi.                   
                                                           
    And pa Valar aer pam pe Mona 7 Sunne wurden           35
 gerimdon tide be langfirstum oppe ymbrynum, pe               
 waeron hund Valageara on geteald; 7 an Valagear             
 waes efne swa lang swa ten gear sindon nu on                
 worolde.                                                   
                                                           
D.     On  pam  Valageare  D  mid searucraefte fordyde   40
 Morgop  pa  blacern,  pe  Aule  smipode,  paette  seo      
 weorold   mid   sceolde   onleohted  weordan;   7  pa      
 Valar,  buton  Morgope   anum,  gecerdon   hie  West,      
 and  paer  getimbredon  Valinor  (paet is  Godedel) be      
 saem  tweonum  (paet  is  betwuh  Utgarsecge  pe  calle   45
 eordan  bebuged,  and  seo   micle  Westsae, paet is      
 Garsecg,    oppe    Ingarsecg,   oppe    Belegar   on      
 Noldelfisce;   7   on   Westsaes  strandum  geheapodon      
 hie  micle  beorgas. And  middangear[d]es rihtgesceap      
 wearp  on  pam  dagum aerest  of  Morgode  onhwerfed.     50
                                                           
M. Her, aefter  pam  pe  Valinor  weard  getimbrod, 7      
 Valmar  paet  is  Godaburg,  gescopon  7  onwehton  pa      
 Valar  pa  Twegen  Beamas,  operne  of  seolfre operne      
 of golde geworhtne, pe  hira leoma  onleohte Valinor.      
 Ac   Morgop bude   on  middangearde   and  geworhte       55
 him  paer micel  faesten on  norpdaelum; and  on paere      
 tide  forbraec  he  and  forsceop  he  micle  eordan 7      
 land.  Sippan  wearp  pusend  geara blaed 7  bliss on      
 Godeple,  ac  on  middangearde  pa waestmas,   pe  be      
 para     blacerna     ontendnesse    aer     ongunnon     60 
 upaspringan,    amerde   wurdon.    To   middangearde      
 com  para  Vala  nan  butan  Orome,  pe   oft  wolde      

         
                                                        
 huntian on paere firnan eordan be deorcum                
 wealdum, 7 Iauannan pe hwilum for pider.                
                                                        
MM. Pis  gear  bip  Valarices  Middaeg  oppe  Heah-    65
 prymm  geteald,  7  pa  waes Goda  myrgpu gefullod.      
 Pa geworhte Varda steorran 7 sette hie on lyfte (7      
 py hatte  heo Tinwetari,  paet is  Tungolcwen), and      
 sona aeher  pam  of  Godeple  wandrodon  Valarindi      
 sume 7 comon on  middangeard, and  para gefraegost    70
 weard Melian, pe waes aer Loriendes hiredes,  7 hire      
 stefn  waes maere mid Godum:  ac heo  ne com  eft to      
 Godabyrig aer pon pe fela geara ofereodon  and fela      
 wundra   gelumpon,   ac   nihtegalan  waeron  hire      
 geferan  7  sungon  ymb hie  be pam  deorcum wudum    75
 on westchlum.      
 Pa  pa  paet tungol,  pe  gefyrn   Godasicol  oppe      
 Brynebrer hatte, lixte aerest forp on heofonum, for      
 pam pe Varda hit asette Morgope  on andan  him his      
 hryre   to   bodianne,   pa   onwocon   pa  yldran    80
 Ealfaederes  bearn on  middan  worolde: paet sindon      
 Elfe. Hie  funde Orome  and wearp  him freondhald,      
 and para  se maesta dael sippan  West foron  him on      
 laste and mid  his latteowdome  sohton Beleriandes      
 weststrand,  for  pam  pe  Godu  hie   lapodon  on    85
 Valinor.                                                
  Pa   wearp   Morgop  aer  mid   micle  heregange      
 forhergod  and  gebunden  and  sippan aet Mandosse      
 on cwearterne gedon. Paer weard he witefaest seofon      
 firstmearce (paet is seofon hund Valageara)  op paet  90
 he daedbette  and him  forgifennesse baede.  On pam      
 gefeohtum  eac  wurdon  eordan land  eft forbrocen      
 swide 7 forscapen.                                     
                                                        
 Pa   Cwendi   (paet  waeron Leohtelfe)   and   pa      
 Noldelfe sohton aerest to lande  on Valinor,  7 on    95
 pam  grenan   hylle   Core   pam  saeriman   neah      
 getimbrodon  hie  Tun pa  hwitan Elfaburg;  ac pa      
 Teleri,  pe  sip comon  on Beleriand,  gebidon ane      

 firstmearce paer be strande, and sume hie ne foron
 panon sippan naefre. Para waes Pingol gefraegost,      100
 Elwes brodor, Teleria hlafordes: hine Melian begol.
 Hie haefde he sippan to wife, and cyning weard on
 Beleriande; ac paet gelamp aefter pam pe Ulmo         
 oflaedde Teleria pone maestan dael on Anetige, and     
 brohte hie swa to Valinor. pas ping wurdon on pam      105
 Valagearum MM op MMC.                               
                                                    
   Of   MMC   op   MMCC   wunodon   pa   Teleri   on
 Toleressean   onmiddum   Ingarsecge,    panon   hie
 mihton  Valinor  feorran  ofseon;  on   MMCC  comon
 hie  mid  micelre  scipferde  to Valinore,  and paer   110
 gewunodon   on   eastaerman   Valinores,   and
 geworhton  paer  burg  and  hype,  and   nemdon  hie
 Alqualonde, paet is  Elfethyp, for paem pe hie paer
 hira scipu befaeston, 7 pa waeron ielfetum gelic.     
                                                    
  Paes  ymb  preo  hund  sumera,  oppe ma oppe laes,    115
 apohton  pa  Noldelfe   gimmas  and   ongunnon  hie
 asmipian,  and  sippan   Feanor  se   smip,  Finwes
 yldesta  sunu  Nol[d]elfa  hlafordes,   apohte  and
 geworhte   pa   felamaeran Silmarillas,   pe  peos
 gesaegen fela ah  to secganne  be hira  wyrdum. Hie    120
 lixton  mid  hira  agenum  leohte,  for pam  pe hie
 waeron   gefylde  para   twegra  Beama   leomum,  pe
 wurdon  paeroninnan  geblanden  and  to  halgum  and
 wundorfyllum fyre gescapen.                         
                                                    
MMDCC. Her Morgop daedbette and  him forgefennesse       125
 baed; ond  be  Niennan  pingunga  his  sweostor him
 Manwe  his  brodor  are  geteah,  Tulkases  unpance
 and Aules, and hine  gelesde; 7  he licette paet he
 hreowsode   7   eadmod   waere,   and    pam  Valum
 gehersum  and  pam  elfum swipe  hold; ac  he leah,     130
 and swipost he bepaehte pa Noldelfe,  for pam  pe he
 cupe fela uncupra pinga laeran; he  gitsode swapeah
 hira gimma and hine langode pa Silmarillas.        

                          
                                                       
MMCM. Purh twa firstmearce wunode pa giet Valinor        
 on blisse, ac tweo 7 inca aweox swapeah manigum          135
 on heortan swulce nihtsceadu nathwylc, for pam pe      
 Morgop for mid dernum runungum and searolicum         
 lygum, and yfelsop is to secganne, swipost he          
 onbryrde pa Noldelfe and unsibbe awehte betwux         
 Finwes sunum, Feanor and Fingolfin and Finrod,           140     
 and ungepwaernes betwux Godum 7 elfum.                  
                                                       
MMCMD. Be Goda dome wearp Feanor, Finwes yldesta        
 sunu, mid his hirede 7 folgope adon of Noldelfa        
 ealdordome - py hatte sippan Feanores cynn pa          
 Erfeloran, for pam dome 7 for py pe Morgoth              145        
 bereafode hie hira mapma - 7 pa Godu ofsendon          
 Morgop to demanne hine; ac he aetfleah 7 darode        
 on Arualine and bepohte hine yfel.                     
                                                       
MMCMD - Her Morgop fullfremede his searowrencas       
MMCMDI sohte Ungoliante on Arualine and baed hie          150
 fultumes. Pa bestaelon hie eft on Valinor 7 pa          
 Beamas forspildon, and sippan aetburston under          
 pam weaxendum sceadum and foron norp and paer           
 hergodon Feanores eardunge and aetbaeron gimma           
 unrim and pa Silmarillas mid ealle, 7 Morgop             155      
 ofsloh paer Finwe 7 manige his elfe mid him and         
 awidlode swa Valinor aerest mid blodgyte and            
 morpor astealde on worolde. He pa fleame generede      
 his feorh, peah pe pa Godu his ehton wide landes,      
 sippan becom he on middangeardes norpdaelas and          160      
 geedstadelode paer his faesten, and fedde and           
 samnode on niwe his yfele peowas, ge Balrogas ge       
 orcas. Pa com micel ege on Beleriand, 7 Pingol his     
 burgfaesten getrymede on Menegrop paet is pusend         
 peostru, and Melian seo cwen mid Vala-gealdrum           165       
 begol paet land Doriap and bewand hit ymbutan,          
 and sippan sohton se maesta dael para deorc-elfa of      
 Beleriande Pingoles munde.                             
                                                       
 MMCMI. Her laeg Valinor on                              

               NOTES TO VERSlON II.                              
                                                               
   6.    Noldelfaracu emended in ink from Noldelfagesaegen.      
   8.    Tavrobele > (probably) Tafrobele, in pencil. In version
         I Tapobele probably > Taprobele, and in version III    
         Taprobele as written, but in this case the emendation
         seems clearly to be to f; this would be a mere         
         spelling-correction (f being the Old English spelling
         for the voiced consonant [v] in this position).        
 15-16.  This phrase (pe sume menn sippan for godu heoldon)     
         is not in the Modern English version, but cf. the open-
         ing section of Q (p. 94): 'These spirits the Elves     
         named the Valar, which is the Powers, though Men       
         have often called them Gods.'                          
  17.    Osse has been inadvertently omitted.                   
  20.    It is not said in the Modern English version that      
         Manwe was the elder.                                   
  26     Geauanna: this spelling would represent 'Yavanna' in
         Old English. At line 64 the name is spelt Iauanna(n),
         and in the Old English version of the Quenta (p. 253)
         Yavanna; in version III Geafanna (p. 347).             
 29-31   The text here embodies the sense of the pencilled      
         emendation to the Modern English version (p. 320       
         note 2) whereby Vaire enters as the spouse of Mandos
         and Nienna becomes solitary. At line 31, after naefde
         wer, was added in pencil: Seo waes Manwes sweostor      
         7 Morgodes; this is stated in the Modern English ver-
         sion as written.                                       
 45-7.   Utgarsecg, Garsecg, Ingarsecg: see pp. 255,            
         256.- Belegar: see p. 256; see also insert.            
  49.    middangeardes: see p. 337.                             
  52.    Valmar is Godaburg in the list of Old English names,
         p. 259.                                                
 65-7.   The changes made to the text of the Modern English     
         version, in order to date the Starmaking and the Awak-
         ening of the Elves before 2000 (see pp. 320-1, notes 6
         and 10) are not embodied in the Old English.           
 71.     The statement that Melian was of Lorien's people is    
         not in the Modern English version, but is found in S
         and Q ($2) and goes back to the Tale of Tiniviel       

            
                                                                  
          (II.  8):  '[Wendelin]  was  a  sprite  that  escaped from
          Lorien's gardens before even Kor was built.'             
    78.   Brynebrer  ('Burning  Briar'):  this  name  for  the Great
          Bear,  not  found  in the  Modern English  version, occurs
          in    Q    ($2)    and   in    the   Lay    of   Leithian.
 89 - 90. seofon firstmearce, not  'nine ages'  as first  written in
          the   Modern   English   version   (p.   321    note   9).
          firstmearce  ('spaces  of  time')  is  an  emendation made
          at  the  time  of  writing  from  langfirstas (one  of the
          words used for Valian 'ages' earlier, line 36).          
    94.   Cwendi  emended  in  pencil  first  to  Eldar and  then to
          Lindar;  Quendi  >  Lindar  also  in  Q  ($2   and  subse-
          quently)  and  in  the modern  version.- Leohtelfe  is not
          one  of  the  Old  English  names  of  the  First  Kindred
          given  in  the  list on  pp. 255ff.,  but they  are called
          Light-elves in S and Q ($2; see p. 51).                  
   104.   Anetige spelt thus, as in version I line 4;  Anetege lines
          9 and 11.                                                
   108.   Ingarsecge < Garsecge (see lines 45-7).                  
   125.   For the date 2700 see  note to  lines 89  - 90  above, and
          the note on dates, p. 322.                               
   145.   Erfeloran  ('the  Dispossessed'),  with   variant  initial
          vowel  Yrfeloran,  is  found  in the  list of  Old English
          names of the Feanorians, p. 260.                         
   149.   These   dates   are  presumably   to  be   interpreted  as
          2950  -  1:  in  the  previous  entry  (line   133)  MMCMD
          corresponds  to  2950  in  the  Modern   English  version.
          My  father  was  here  using   D  =   50,  not   500.  But
          2950  -  1  does  not  correspond  to  the  Modern English
          version,  which  has  2990-1.  The  discrepancy   is  per-
          haps  no  more  than  a  mere  error  of  writing  (though
          version I is also discrepant in  this date,  having 2999);
          the  date  of  the  next  entry,  MMCMI  (2901),  is obvi-
          ously an error, from  its place  in the  chronological se-
          ries.                                                    
 163-8.   This  sentence  represents  part of  the passage  added to
          the  Modern  English  version  (p.   321  note   18),  but
          omits  the  reference  to  the   Elves  who   remained  in
          Brithombar and Eglorest.                                 

                                  III.                             
                                                                  
    This version,  on a  single manuscript  page, gives  a slightly
  different form of the first twenty-odd lines of version II. It is
  much  later than  II, as  is shown  by Melkor,  not Melko  (see p
  282), but was  nonetheless taken  directly from  it, as  is shown
  by  the  continued  absence  of Osse  from the  list of the Valar
  (see note to line 17 in version II).  Later changes  pencilled on
  version  I  are  here   embodied  in   the  text   (Pengolod  for
  Pengolod, Taprobele for Tafrobele, Melkor for Melko).            
    Version III is cast in a different form of Old English, that of
  ninth century  Mercia (some  of the  forms are  peculiarly charac
  teristic of the  Mercian dialect  represented by  the interlinear
  glosses on the  Vespasian Psalter).  A few  pencilled emendations
  are not included in the text, but recorded in the notes that fol-
  low.                                                             
                                                                  
  Her onginned seo boc pe man Pennas nemned on aelfisc,             
  7 hio is on preo gedaeled: se forma dael is Ualinorelumien         
  paet is Godoedles gergetael; 7 se oder dael is Beleriandes          
  gergetael; 7 se pridda Quenta Noldorinwa odde Pennas na            
  Ngoeloed, paet is Noldaelfaracu. pas boc aerest awrat           5             
  Pengolod se udwita on Gondoline aer pam pe heo abrocen            
  wurde 7 seoddan aet Siriones hyde 7 aet Taprobele on Tol-          
  eressean (paet is Anetege), pa he eft west com. And pas           
  bec AElfwine of Ongulcynne gesaeh on Anetege ha da he             
  aet sumum cerre paet land funde; 7 he daer liornode hie        10         
  swa he betst maehte 7 eft gepeodde 7 on englisc gereord           
  asette.                                                          
                                                                  
  Her onginned Godoedles gergetael, 7 spriced aerest of              
  weorulde gescefte. On frumscefte gescop Iluuatar paet is          
  Allfeder all ping, 7 pa pa seo weoruld aerest weordan          15          
  ongon pa comun hider on eordan pa Ualar (paet is pa               
  Mehtigan pe sume men seoddan for godu heoldun). Hi               
  earun nigun on rime: Manwe, Ulmo, Aule, Orome,                   
  Tulcas, Mandos, Lorien, Melkor. Peara werun Manwe 7              
  Melcor his brodur alra mehtigoste, ac Manwe wes se             20            
  aeldra 7 is Uala-hlafard 7 halig, 7 Melcor beh to                 
  firenlustum 7 to upahefennisse 7 ofermoettum 7 weard             

 yfel 7 unmedlic, 7 his noma is awergod 7 unasproecenlic,
 for pam man nemned hine Morgop on                        
 Noldaelfiscgereorde. Orome 7 Tulcas werun gingran on     25     
 Alfeadur gepohte acende aer pere weorulde gescepennisse     
                                                            
 ponne odre fife. Pa  Uala-cwene hattun  swe: Uarda       
 Manwes cwen, 7 Geafanna Aules cwen (pa pa he and hie      
 don to sinhiwan aefter  pam pe  Ualar hider  comon on       
 weorulde).                                             30
                                                            
                 NOTES 10 VERSION III.                       
                                                            
 2-4. Ualinorelumien pat is and Quenta Noldorinwa odde
                are circled in pencil as if for exclusion.
 5. Added in pencil here: 'and pes pridda dael man eac
     nemned Silmarillion paet is Eorclanstana gewyrd.' See
                                                   p. 339.
 5-6. on Gondoline is an emendation in ink from of
   Gondoline, i.e. Pengolod began the work in Gondolin;
   but this is implied in the preambles to versions I and II,
   which have of Gondoline here. - Gondoline
   Gondolinde in pencil, as in version I (note to line 2).
 7. Taprobele is very clearly written with p; see p. 344
    note to line 8.
 18. Osse is left out following version II.
 19. Melkor > Melcor in ink at the second occurrence, no
  doubt at the time of writing, since Melcor is written at
  line 20.
 25-7. The statement that Orome and Tulkas 'were younger in
  the thought of Iluvatar' is absent from the other ver-
  sions (cf. The Silmarillion p. 26: 'Manwe and Melkor
  were brethren in the thought of Iluvatar').- odre fife:
  i.e. the other Valar with the exclusion of Manwe and
  Melkor. See p. 349, Old English text lines 1 - 4.
 28. Geafanna: see p. 344, note to line 26.
 28-30. It is very notable that Aule and Yavanna are here
      (alone) said to have become husband and wife (wurdon
  to sinhiwan) after the Valar came into the world. In The
  Silmarillion the only union among the Valar that is said
  to have taken place after the entry into Arda is that of

  Tulkas and Nessa; and Tulkas came late to Arda (pp.              
  35-6). See further p. 349.                                      
                                                                 
                                IV.                                
                                                                 
 This is  not a  version, but  a single  page of  manuscript with,
 first, a different beginning to the Annals of Valinor in Modern
 English, and then  ten lines,  written very  rapidly, in  Old En-
 glish. Both contain interesting features. The first reads as fol-
 lows:                                                            
                                                                 
                         Annals of Valinor.                        
                                                                 
 These  were  written  first  by  Rumil  the  Elfsage  of Valinor,
 and  after   by  Pengolod   the  Wise   of  Gondolin,   who  made
 also  the  Annals  of  Beleriand,  and  the  Pennas that  are set
 forth  below.  These  also  did  AElfwine  of the  Angelcynn turn
 into speech of his land.                                         
                                                                 
 Here beginneth the Annals of Valinor and the founda-             
 tions of the world.                                              
                                                                 
 Of the Valar and their kindred                                   
                                                                 
        At the beginning Iluvatar, that is Allfather, made all    
 things, and the Valar, or Powers, came into  the world.          
 These are nine: Manwe, Ulmo, Aule, Orome, Tulkas, Osse,          
 Lorien, Mandos, and Melko.                                       
                                                                 
 Pennas  is  here  used  in  the  narrow sense  of 'The  History of
 the Gnomes' (Quenta Noldorinwa, Silmaril/ion): see p. 338.       
 Here Rumil appears  as author,  and in  view of  the interpolation
 in  AV  (note  20)  'Here  endeth  that which  Rumil wrote'  it is
 clear  that  the  words of  this preamble  'These were  written first
 by  Rumil...  and  after  by  Pengolod'  mean  that  Pengolod  com-
 pleted what Rumil began. The next version of the Annals of       
 Valinor in fact makes this  explicit, for  after 'Here  endeth that
 which  Rumil wrote'  the later  text has  'Here followeth  the con-
 tinuation of Pengolod', and the two interpolations in AV (notes

  14 and 18) concerning events in Middle-earth before the Re-
   turn of the Noldoli are embodied in the second version as ad-
   ditions by Pengolod: 'This have I, Pengolod, added here, for it
   was not known unto Rumil.'
                                  
    In  the  original tale  of The  Music of  the Ainur  (I. 47  - 8)            
  Rumil  was  a Noldo  of Kor,*  but he  also spoke  to Eriol  of his            
  'thraldom  under   Melko'.  From   the  reference   here  to   Rumil  as            
  'the  Elfsage  of  Valinor',  however,  and  from  his  ignorance of            
  events in Middle-earth, it seems  clear that  in the  later concep-            
  tion he never left  Valinor. It  might be  suggested that  his part            
  in  the Annals  ends where  it does  (p. 317  and note  20) because            
  he was  one  of  those who  returned to  Valinor with  Finrod after            
  hearing  the  Doom  of  Mandos.  This  is admittedly  pure specula-            
  tion, but it is perhaps significant that in the next version of the            
  Annals  the  end  of  Rumil's  part  in  the work  was moved  on to            
  the end of  the entry  for the  Valian Year  2993, after  the words            
  'But Aule  their ancient  friend smiled  on them  no more,  and the            
  Teleri were estranged';  thus his  part ends  with the  actual rec-            
  ord of  Finrod's return,  and of  the reception  that he  and those            
  with him received.                                                             
                                                                                
    The  passage  in Old  English that  follows begins  with vir-                
  tually  the  same  phrase,  concerning  Orome  and  Tulkas,  as                
  that in version III lines 23 - 5; but this manuscript has a cu-                
  rious,  uninterpretable  sign  between  Orome  and  the  plural                
  verb waeron,  which  in  view  of  the other  text I  expand to                
  mean 7 Tulkas.                                                                 
                                                                                
    Orome   [7   Tulkas]   waeron  gingran   on  Ealfaederes                      
  gepohtum  acende aer paere worolde  gescepennisse ponne                      
  opre fife, 7 Orome  weard Iafannan  geboren, seo  pe wyrd                      
  after nemned, ac he nis Aules sunu.                                            
    Mid  pissum  mihtigum  comon  manige laessan  gaestasp aes                      
  ilcan cynnes 7 cneorisse, peah laessan maegnes. Pas sindon                      
                                                                                
  (* As he remained; cf. The Silmarillion p. 63: 'Then it was that the Noldor first
  bethought  them  of  letters,  and  Rumil  of  Tirion  was  the  name   of  the
  loremaster who  first achieved  fitting signs  for the  recording of  speech and
  song.')                                                                      


 pa Vanimor, pa Faegran. Mid him eac pon wurdon getealde                        
 hira bearn, on worolde acende, pa waeron manige and swipe                        
 faegre. Swylc waes Fionwe Manwes sunu                                          
                                                                              
   There  follow   a  few   more  words   that  are   too  uncertain   to  re-
 produce.   Here   Orome,   younger   in   the   thought   of   Iluvatar   than
 the  other  great  Valar  'born  before   the  making   of  the   world',  is
 declared   to  be   the  son   of  Yavanna   but  not   of  Aule,   and  this
 must   be   connected   with   the   statement  in   the  Old   English  ver-
 sion   III  that   Yavanna  and   Aule  became   sinhiwan  after   the  entry
 of the Valar into the world (see p. 347 - 8, note to lines 28 - 30).          
   In  what  is   said  here   concerning  the   lesser  spirits   of  Valarin
 race   there   are   differences   from  AV   (p.  311)   and  the   Old  En-
 glish  version  II  (p.  340).  In  this   present  fragment   these  spirits
 are   not   called  Valarindi   but  Vanimor,   'the  Fair'.*   The  Children
 of   the  Valar,   'who  were   many  and   very  beautiful',   are  counted
 among   the   Vanimor,   but,   in   contradiction  to   AV,  they   were  on
 worolde  acende,  'born  in  the  world'.   At  this   time,  it   seems,  my
 father   was   tending   to   emphasize   the   generative   powers   of  the
 great  Valar,  though  afterwards  all  trace   of  the   conception  disap-
 peared.                                                                       
                                                                              
 (*The word Vanimor has not occurred before, but its  negative Vi:animor  is de-
 fined in the tale of The Coming of the Valar (1. 75) as 'monsters, giants, and
 ogres',  and  elsewhere in  the Lost  Tales Uvanimor  are creatures  bred by
 Morgoth (I. 236 - 7), and even Dwarves (11. 136).)                           
