                                VII.                               
                                                                  
                       THE EARLIEST ANNALS OF                      
                             BELERIAND.                            
                                                                  
 As with the  Annals of  Valinor, these  are the  'earliest' Annals
 of Beleriand because they were  followed by  others, the  last be-
 ing  called  the  Grey  Annals,  companion to  the Annals  of Aman
 and belonging to the  same time  (p. 310).  But unlike  the Annals
 of  Aman,  the  Grey  Annals were  left unfinished  at the  end of
 the  story  of  Turin  Turambar;  and both  as prose  narrative and
 still more  as definitive  history of  the end  of the  Elder Days
 from the  time  of  The  Lord  of the  Rings their  abandonment is
 grievous.                                                         
  The   earliest   Annals  of   Beleriand  ('AB')   are  themselves
 found in  two versions,  which I  shall call  AB I  and AB  II. AB
 I is a complete text to the end of the First Age;  AB II  is quite
 brief, and though it  begins as  a fair  copy of  the much-emended
 opening of I it soon becomes strongly divergent. In this chapter
  I give both texts separately and in their  entirety, and  in what
 follows I refer only to the earlier, AB I.                     
 This  is a  good, clear  manuscript, but  the style  suggests very
 rapid composition. For much of its length the entries are in the
 present tense and often  staccato, even  with such  expressions as
 'the  Orcs  got  between  them'  (annal  172),  though  by  subse-
 quent  small  expansions  and  alterations here  and there  my fa-
 ther slightly modified this  character. I  think that  his primary
 intention  at  this time  was the  consolidation of  the historical
 structure in its internal relations and  chronology -  the Annals
 began,  perhaps,  in  parallel  with  the  Quenta as  a convenient
 way of driving abreast, and  keeping track  of, the  different el-
 ements  in  the  ever  more  complex  narrative  web.  Nonetheless
 major new developments enter here.                               
    The manuscript was fairly heavily emended, though much
                                 

  less so  towards the  end, and  from the  nature of  the changes,
  largely  concerned  with  dating,  it  has  become  a complicated
  document. To present it in its original form, with all  the later
  changes  recorded  in  notes, would  make it  quite unnecessarily
  difficult  to  follow,  and  indeed  would be  scarcely possible,
  since many alterations were made  either at  the time  of writing
  or in its immediate context. A later  'layer' of  pencilled emen-
  dation, very largely concerned with names, is easily separable.
  The text given here, therefore, is that of the  manuscript afier
  all  the earlier  changes and  additions (in  ink) had  been made
  to it, and these are only recorded in the notes in certain cases.
  The later pencilled alterations are fully registered.            
    That  AB  I is  earlier than  the comparable  portion of  AV is
  easily shown. Thus in AB I,  as in  Q ($8),  there is  no mention
  of  Fingolfin's  march  to  Angband  immediately on  his arrival,
  whereas it appears in  AV (p.  320); again  as in  Q and  in con-
  trast to AV (p. 318) the Battle under Stars was fought, and      
  Feanor  died,  before  the  encampment  in Mithrim.  Further, the
  names  Dagor-os-Giliath  and  Eredwethion  are  added  in  pencil
  in AB I, whereas in AV they appear in the text as first written,
  and   Erydlomin   still   means   the  Shadowy   Mountains  (see
  p. 333). That AB I is  later than  Q is  shown by  a multiplicity
  of features, as will be seen from the Commentary.                
    There follows the text of AB I.                                
                                                                  
                         ANNALS OF BELERIAND.                      
                                                                  
    Morgoth flees from Valinor with the Silmarils, the magic       
  gems of Feanor, and returns into the Northern World and,         
  rebuilds his fortress of Angband beneath the Black Moun-         
  tain, Thangorodrim. He devises the Balrogs and the Orcs.         
  The Silmarils are set in Morgoth's iron crown.                   
    The Gnomes of the eldest house, the Dispossessed, come         
  into the North under Feanor and his seven sons, with their       
  friends Orodreth, Angrod, and Egnor, sons of Finrod.' They       
  burn the Telerian ships.                                         
    First of the Battles with Morgoth,' the Battle under Stars.    
  Feanor defeats the Orcs, but is mortally wounded by              

 Gotmog captain of Balrogs, and dies. Maidros, his eldest
 son, is ambushed and captured and hung on Thangorodrim.
 The sons of Feanor camp about Lake Mithrim in the North-
 west, behind the Shadowy Mountains.(3)
                                                             
 Year 1.     Here Sun  and Moon,  made by  the Gods  after the
             death of the Two Trees  of Valinor,  appear. Thus
             measured  time  came   into  the   Hither  Lands.
             Fingolfin leads  the second  house of  the Gnomes
             over the straits of Grinding Ice into  the Hither
             Lands.  With   him  came   the  son   of  Finrod,
             Felagund,4  and  part  of  the third  or youngest
             house.  They  march  from  the  North as  the Sun
             rises, and unfurl their banners; and they come to
             Mithrim,  but  there  is  feud' between  them and
             the sons of  Feanor. Morgoth  at coming  of Light
             retreats into his deepest dungeons,  but smithies
             in secret, and sends forth black clouds.         
                                                             
     2.      Fingon son of Fingolfin heals the feud  by rescu-
             ing Maidros.                                     
                                                             
   1-100.    The  Gnomes  explore  and  settle  Beleriand, and
             all the vale of Sirion from' the Great Sea to the
             Blue Mountains,' except for  Doriath in  the cen-
             tre where Thingol and Melian reign.              
                                                             
      20.    Feast  and Games  of Reuniting  were held  in Nan
             Tathrin, the Land of Willows,  near the  delta of
             Sirion,  between the  Elves of  Valinor returning
             and  the  Dark-elves, both  those of  the Western
             Havens (Brithombar and  Eldorest)(8) and  the scat-
             tered  Wood-elves  of  the West,  and ambassadors
             of Thingol. A time of peace followed.(9)         
                                                             
      50.    Morgoth's might begins to move once more.        
                                                             
             Earthquakes  in  the  North.  Orc-raids begin.
             Turgon son  of Fingolfin  is great  in friendship

 with   Felagund  son   of  Finrod;   but  Orodreth,
 Angrod,  and  Egnor,  sons  of Finrod,  are friends
 of  the  sons  of  Feanor, especially  Celegorm and
 Curufin.                                          
                                                  
50. Turgon  and  Felagund  are troubled  by dreams
 and  forebodings.  Felagund  finds  the  caves  of
 Narog  and   established  his   armouries  there.(10)
 Turgon   alone  discovers   the  hidden   vale  of
 Gondolin. Being still troubled  in heart  he gath-
 ers  folk  about  him  and  departs  from Hithlum,
 the  Land  of  Mist   about  Mithrim,   where  his
 brother Fingon remains.                           
                                                  
 51 The Gnomes drive back the  Orcs again,  and the
 Siege  of  Angband  is laid.  The North  has great
 peace  and  quiet   again.  Fingolfin   holds  the
 North-west  and  all Hithlum,  and is  overlord of
 the Dark-elves west of Narog.  His might  is gath-
 ered  on  the  slopes  of  Erydlomin(11) the Shadowy
 Mountains  and  thence  watches and  traverses the
 great  plains  of  Bladorion  up  to the  walls of
 Morgoth's   mountains   in  the   North.  Felagund
 holds  the vale  of Sirion  save Doriath,  and has
 his  seat"  beside  Narog  in  the South,  but his
 might is gathered  in the  North guarding  the ac-
 cess to  Sirion's vale  between Erydlomin  and the
 mountainous  region  of  Taur-na-Danion,  the for-
 est of pines. He has a fortress on a rocky isle in
 the midst of Sirion, Tolsirion. His brothers dwell
 in  the  centre  about  Taur-na-Danion  and  scour
 Bladorion thence, and  join in  the East  with the
 sons  of  Feanor.  The  fortress  of  the  sons  of
 Feanor  is  upon  Himling, but  they roam  and hunt
 all the  woods of  East Beleriand  even up  to the
 Blue  Mountains.  Thither  at  times  many  of the
 Elf-lords go for hunting. But  none get  tidings of
 Turgon and his folk.                              

                          
                                                          
    70.  Beor born in the East.                            
                                                          
 88. 90. Haleth, and Hador the Goldenhaired, born in the
                                                          
         East.                                             
                                                          
   100.  Felagund hunting in the East comes upon Beor      
         the mortal and his Men who have wandered into     
         Beleriand. Beor becomes a vassal of Felagund      
         and goes west with him. Bregolas son of Beor      
         born.                                             
                                                          
   102.  Barahir son of Beor born.                         
                                                          
   120.  Haleth   comes  into   Beleriand;  also   Hador  the
         Goldenhaired  and  his   great  companies   of  Men.
         Haleth  remains  in  Sirion*s  vale,  but  Hador be-
         comes  a  vassal  of  Fingolfin and  strengthens his
         armies and is given lands in Hithlum.             
                                                          
         113 Hundor  son  of  Haleth  born.  117  Gundor son
         of  Hador  born.  119 Gumlin  son of  Hador born.'-'
                                                          
   122.  The   strength   of   Men   being   added   to   the
         Gnomes,   Morgoth   is   straitly    enclosed.   The
         Gnomes  deem   the  siege   of  Angband   cannot  be
         broken,  but  Morgoth   ponders  new   devices,  and
         bethinks  him  of  Dragons.  The  Men  of  the three
         houses  grow  and multiply,  and are  gladly subject
         to  the  Elf-lords,  and  learn  many crafts  of the
         Gnomes.  The  Men  of  Beor   were  dark   or  brown
         of  hair  but  fair  of  face,  with  grey  eyes; of
         shapely  form,  of  great  courage   and  endurance,
         but little greater than the Elves  of that  day. The
         folk  of  Hador  were  yellow-haired  and  blue-eyed
         and of great  stature and  strength. Like  unto them
         but  somewhat  shorter  and  more  broad   were  the
         folk of Haleth.                                   

 124. 128.  Baragund and Belegund, sons of Bregolas son       
            of Beor, born.                                    
                                                             
       132. Beren, after named the Ermabwed (14) or One-          
            handed," son of Barahir, born.                    
                                                             
       141. Hurin the Steadfast, son of Gumlin, born,         
                                                             
            Handir son of Hundor son of Haleth born.          
                                                             
       144. Huor Hurin's brother born.                        
                                                             
       145. Morwen  Elfsheen,  daughter  of   Baragund,  born.
                                                             
       150. Rian  daughter  of   Belegund,  mother   of  Tuor,
            born. Beor  the Old,  Father of  Men, dies  of old
            age in Beleriand. The Elves see for the first time
            the  death  of  weariness,  and  sorrow  over  the
            short  span  allotted to  Men. Bregolas  rules the
            house of Beor.                                    
                                                             
 *   155.   Morgoth  unlooses  his might,  and seeks  to break
            into  Beleriand.  The  Battle  begins on  a sudden
            on  a  night  of mid-winter  and falls  first most
            heavily  on  the  sons of  Finrod and  their folk.
            This is the Battle of Sudden Fire. Rivers  of fire
            flow  from   Thangorodrim.  Glomund   the  golden,
            Father  of  Dragons,   appears."  The   plains  of
            Bladorion are turned into  a great  desert without
            green, and called  after Dor-na-Fauglith,  Land of
            Gasping Thirst.                                   
               Here were Bregolas slain, and the  greater part
            of  the  warriors  of  Beor's  house.  Angrod  and
            Egnor sons of  Finrod fell.  Barahir and  his cho-
            sen   champions   saved  Felagund   and  Orodreth,
            and Felagund swore a great  oath of  friendship to
            his  kin and  seed. Barahir  rules the  remnant of
            the house of Beor.                                

  
                                                       
 155 Fingolfin and Fingon marched to the aid of their
 kin,  but  were  driven  back  with  great  loss. Hador,
 now  aged,  fell  defending  his  lord   Fingolfin,  and
 with  him  Gundor  his  son.   Gumlin  took   the  lord-
 ship of Hador's house.                                 
   The   sons   of   Feanor    were   not    slain,   but
 Celegorm   and   Curufin   were   defeated    and   fled
 with  Orodreth   son  of   Finrod.  Maidros   the  left-
 handed  did   deeds  of   great  prowess,   and  Morgoth
 did  not  take  Himling  as  yet,  but  he   broke  into
 the  passes  east  of  Himling  and  ravaged  into  East
 Beleriand   and   scattered   the  Gnomes   of  Feanor's
 house.                                                 
   Turgon  was  not  at  that   battle,  nor   Haleth  or
 any  but  few of  his folk.  It is  said that  Hurin was
 at  foster  with  Haleth,  and  that  Haleth  and  Hurin
 hunting   in   Sirion's   vale   came   upon   some   of
 Turgon's  folk,  and  were   brought  into   the  secret
 vale  of  Gondolin,  whereof   of  those   outside  none
 yet   knew   save   Thorndor   King   of   Eagles;   for
 Turgon   had   messages   and   dreams   sent   by   the
 God   Ulmo,   Lord   of   Waters,   up   Sirion  warning
 him   that   help   of  Men   was  necessary   for  him.
 But   Haleth   and   Hurin   swore   oaths   of  secrecy
 and   never  revealed   Gondolin,  but   Haleth  learned
 something   of   the  counsels   of  Turgon,   and  told
 them  after  to  Hurin.  Great  liking  had  Turgon  for
 the  boy  Hurin   and  would   keep  him   in  Gondolin,
 but  the  grievous  tidings  of  the  great  battle came
 and   they   departed.   Turgon  sends   secret  messen-
 gers  to  Sirion's  mouths  and  begins  a  building of
 ships.  Many  set  sail  for   Valinor,  but   none  re-
 turn.'"                                                
   Fingolfin  seeing  the  ruin   of  [the]   Gnomes  and
 the  defeat  of  all  their   houses  was   filled  with
 wrath  and  despair,  and  rode  alone  to the  gates of
 Angband    and    challenged    Morgoth     to    single
 con;bat.   Fingolfin  was   slain,  but   Thorndor  res-

       cued his body, and set it in a  cairn on  the moun-
       tains north of  Gondolin to  guard that  valley, and
       so  came  the  tidings  thither.  Fingon  ruled  the
       royal house of [the] Gnomes.                       
                                                         
  157. Morgoth  took  Tolsirion  and pierced  the passes
       into  West  Beleriand.  There he  set Thu  the wiz-
       ard,  and  Tolsirion  became  a  place   of  evil.(20)
       Felagund  and   Orodreth,  together   with  Celegorm
       and  Curufin,  retreated  to Nargothrond,  and made
       there a great  hidden palace  after the  fashion of
       Thingol in" the Thousand Caves in Doriath.         
           Barahir will not retreat and holds out still in
       Taur-na-Danion.   Morgoth   hunts  them   down  and
       turns   Taur-na-Danion  into   a  region   of  great
       dread, so  that it  was after  called Taur-na-Fuin,
       the   Forest   of   Night,    or   Math-Fuin-delos (22)
       Deadly  Nightshade.  Only   Barahir  and   his  son
       Beren,  and  his   nephews  Baragund   and  Belegund
       sons   of   Bregolas   and   a  few   men  remain.(23) The
       wives   of   Baragund   and   Belegund   and   their
       young   daughters   Morwen   and  Rian   were  sent (24)
       into Hithlum to the keeping of Gumlin.             
                                                         
  158. Haleth and his folk lead a woodland life in        
       woods about Sirion on the west marches o           
       Doriath and harry the Orc-bands.(25)               
                                                         
  160. Barahir  was  betrayed  by   Gorlim,  and   all  his
       company  is  slain  by  the  Orcs  save   Beren  who
       was  hunting  alone.  Beren  pursues  the  Orcs  and
       slays  his  father's  slayer  and  retakes  the ring
       which  Felagund  gave   to  Barahir.   Beren  becomes
       a solitary outlaw.                                 
                                                         
  162. Renewed assaults of Morgoth. The Orc-raids en-     
       compass Doriath, protected by the magic of Me-     
       lian the divine, west down Sirion and eas          

 
                                                 
 beyond  Himling.  Beren   is  driven   south  and
 comes  hardly  into Doriath.  Gumlin slain  in an
 assault  upon  the fortress  of Fingon  at Sirion's
 Well  in  the  west of  Erydlomin.(27) Hurin  his son
 is  mighty  in  strength.   He  is   summoned  to
 Hithlum  and  comes  there  hardly. He  rules the
 house of Hador and serves Fingon.                
                                                 
 163  The  Swarthy  Men first  come into  East Be-
 leriand. They were short, broad, long  and strong
 in  the  arm,  growing  much  hair  on  face  and
 breast,  and this  was dark  as were  their eyes;
 their skins were  sallow or  dark, but  most were
 not  uncomely.  Their   houses  were   many,  and
 many had liking  rather for  the (28) Dwarves  of the
 mountains, of  Nogrod and  Belegost, than  for the
 Elves. Of the Dwarves the Elves first  learned in
 these days, and their friendship was small. It is
 not  known whence  they are,  save that  they are
 not of Elf-kin, nor of mortal, nor of Morgoth,
 But  Maidros  seeing the  weakness of  the Gnomes
 and  the waxing  power of  the armies  of Morgoth
 made  alliance  with the  new-come Men,  and with
 the houses of Bor  and of  Ulfand.(30) The  sons of
 Ulfand  were  Uldor,  after called  the Accursed,
 and  Ulfast, and  Ulwar; and  by Cranthir  son of
 Feanor  were  they most  beloved, and  they swore
 fealty to him.                                   
                                                 
 163-4 The great geste of Beren and Luthien.(31) King
 Felagund  of Nargothrond  dies in  Tolsirion (32 in
 the  dungeons  of  Thu.  Orodreth   rules  Nargo-
 thrond  and  breaks  friendship with  Celgorm and
 Curufin  who  are  expelled.(33) Luthien  and Huan
 overthrow   Thu.   Beren   and   Luthien   go  to
 Angband  and recover  a Silmaril.  Carcharoth the
 great wolf of  Angband with  the Silmaril  in his

         belly  bursts  into  Doriath.  Beren md  the hound
         Huan  are  slain  by  Carcharoth,  but  Huan slays
         Carcharoth and the Silmaril is regained.          
           Beren  was  recalled  from  the dead  by Luthien
         and dwelt  with her (34) in the  Land of  Seven Riv-
         ers, Ossiriand, out  of the  knowledge of  Men end
         Elves.(35)                                        
                                                          
  164.   Hurin weds Morwen.                                
                                                          
  165.   Turin son of Hurin born in winter with sad,       
         omens.(35)                                        
                                                          
 165-70. The  Union  of  Maidros.  Maidros   enheartened  by
         the deeds of  Beren and  Luthien plans  a reuniting
         of  forces  for  the  driving  back of  Morgoth. But
         because  of  the  deeds  of  Celegorm  and  Curufin
         he  receives  no  help   from  Thingol,   and  only
         small   support   from   Nargothrond,   where   the
         Gnomes  attempt  to  guard  themselves  by  stealth
         and   secrecy.   He  gathers   and  arms   all  the
         Gnomes  of  Feanor's   house,  and   multitudes  of
         the  Dark-elves,  and  of  Men, in  East Beleriand.
         He  gets  help  in  smithying  of the  Dwarves, and
         sun<mons  yet  more  Men  over  the  mountains  out
         of the East.                                      
           Tidings  come  to  Turgon  the  hidden   king  an
         he prepares in secret for war,  for his  people who
         were  not  at  the  Second Battle  will not  be re-
         strained.                                         
                                                          
  167.   Dior the Beautiful born to Beren and Luthien in   
                                                          
         Ossiriand.                                        
                                                          
    168. Haleth, last of  the Fathers  of Men,  dies. Hundor
         rules his folk.  The Orcs  are slowly  driven back
         out of Beleriand.                                 

            
                                                          
        171 Isfin daughter of Turgon strays out  of Gondolin
        and is taken to wife by Eol a Dark-elf.            
                                                          
     *  172 The year of sorrow. Maidros plans  an assault
        upon  Angband,  from  West  and  East.  Fingon is
        to  march  forth  as soon  as Maidros'  main host
        gives the signal in the East  of Dor-na-Fauglith.
        Huor  son  of  Hador (37) weds  Rian   daughter  of
        Belegund on the  eve of  battle and  marches with
        Hurin his brother in the army of Fingon.           
           The  Battle  of  Unnumbered Tears,"  the third
        battle  of  the  Gnomes  and Morgoth,  was fought
        upon  the  plains  of Dor-na-Fauglith  before the
        pass in which  the young  waters of  Sirion enter
        Beleriand   between   Erydlomin (39) and Taur-na-
        Fuin. The place was long marked  by a  great hill
        in which the  slain, Elves  and Men,  were piled.
        Grass  grew there  alone in  Dor-na-Fauglith. The
        Elves  and  Men were  utterly defeated  and their
        ruin accomplished.                                 
           Maidros  was  hindered  on  the  road  by  the
        machinations   of   Uldor   the   Accursed   whom
        Morgoth's  spies  had  bought.   Fingon  attacked
        without  waiting and  drove in  Morgoth's feinted
        attack,  even  to  Angband.  The  companies  from
        Nargothrond burst  into his  gates, but  they and
        their  leader  Flinding son  of Fuilin<  were all
        taken;  and  Morgoth  now  released  a  countless
        army  and  drove  the  Gnomes back  with terrible
        slaughter. Hundor son  of Haleth  and the  Men of
        the  wood were  slain in  the retreat  across the
        sands.  The  Orcs  got   between  them   and  the
        passes into Hithlum,  and they  retreated towards
        Tolsirion.                                         
           Turgon and  the army  of Gondolin  sound their
        horns  and  issue  out  of  Taur-na-Fuin. Fortune
        wavers  and  the  Gnomes  begin  to  gain ground.
        Glad meeting of Hurin and Turgon.                  

   The  trumpets  of  Maidros  heard  in  the East,
 and  the  Gnomes take heart.  The  Elves  say vic-
 tory might have been theirs yet but for Uldor.
 But Morgoth now sent forth all the folk of       
 Angband   and   Hell   was  emptied.   There  came
 afresh a hundred thousand Orcs and a thousand
 Balrogs, and in the forefront came Glomund the
 Dragon,   and  Elves   and  Men   withered  before
 him. Thus the union of the hosts of Fingon and
 Maidros was broken. But Uldor went over to       
 Morgoth and fell on the right flank of  the sons
 of Feanor.                                       
   Cranthir  slew  Uldor,  but  Ulfast   and  Ulwar
 slew  Bor  and  his  three sons  and many  Men who
 were faithful and  the host  of Maidros  was scat-
 tered to the winds and fled far into hiding into
 East Beleriand and the mountains there.          
   Fingon fell in the  West, and  it is  said flame
 sprang  from  his  helm  as  he  was  smitten down
 by  the  Balrogs.  Hurin  and  the Men  of Hithlum
 of  Hador's  house,  and  Huor his  brother, stood
 firm, and the Orcs could not pass into Beleriand.
 The  stand  of  Hurin  is  the most  renowned deed
 of Men among the Elves. He held the rear while
 Turgon with part of  his battle,  and some  of the
 remnant of Fingon's host,  escaped into  the dales
 and   mountains.  They   vanished  and   were  not
 again found by Elf or by spy of Morgoth until
 Tuor's  day.  Thus  was  Morgoth's  victory marred
 and he was greatly angered.                      
   Hurin fought on after Huor  fell pierced  with a
 venomed  arrow, and  until he  alone was  left. He
 threw  away  his  shield  and  fought with  an axe
 and slew a hundred Orcs.                         
   Hurin   was  taken   alive  by   Morgoth's  com-
 mand   and  dragged   to  Angband   where  Morgoth
 cursed  him  and  his kin,  and because  he would.
 not  reveal  where  Turgon  was  gone  chained him

  with   enchanted   sight   on  Thangorodrim   to  see
  the evil that befell his wife  and children.  His son
  Turin  was  nigh  three  years  old,(41) and  his  wife
  Morwen was again with child.                         
    The    Orcs   piled    the   slain    and   entered
  Beleriand  to  ravage.  Rian  sought  for  Huor,  for
  no tidings  came to  Hithlum of  the battle,  and her
  child  Tuor  son  of  Huor  was  born  to her  in the
  wild.  He  was  taken   to  nurture   by  Dark-elves,
  but  Rian  went  to  the  Mound  of Slain (42) and laid
  her down to die there.(43)                             
                                                      
  173 Morgoth took all Beleriand or filled it with rov-
  ing  bands  of  Orcs  and  wolves,  but   there  held
  still  Doriath.  Of Nargothrond  he heard  little, of
  Gondolin    he    could    discover    nothing.    In
  Beleriand  outside  these  three  places  only  scat-
  tered   Elves   and  Men   lived  in   outlawry,  and
  among  them  the  remnant  of  Haleth's   folk  under
  Handir, son of Hundor, son of Haleth,'4              
    Morgoth   broke   his  pledges   to  the   sons  of
  Ulfand,(45) and  drove  the  evil  Men  into  Hithlum,
  without  reward,  save  that  they  there ill-treated
  and  enslaved the  remnants  of  Hador's  house,  the
  old  men  and  the  women  and  children.   The  rem-
  nants  of  the Elves  of Hithlum  also he  mostly en-
  slaved  and  took  to  the  mines  of   Angband,  and
  others  he  forbade  to   leave  Hithium,   and  they
  were  slain  if  Orcs  found  them  east or  south of
  the   Shadowy   Mountains.(46) Nienor   the  sorrowful,
  daughter  of  Hurin  and  Morwen,  born   in  Hithlum
  in the beginning of the year.                        
    Tuor  grew  up  wild  in  the  woods   among  fugi-
  tive  Elves   nigh  the   shores  of   Mithrim;(47) but
  Morwen   sent   Turin   to   Doriath    begging   for
  Thingol's  fostering   and  aid,   for  she   was  of
  Beren's  kindred.  They  have  a  desperate  journey,
  the boy of seven and his two guides.(48)             

  181    The  power  of  Morgoth  waxes  and  Doriath  is  cut
         off  and  no  tidings  of the  outer world  reach it.
         Turin  though  not  fully  grown  takes  to   war  on
         the marches in company of Beleg.                    
                                                            
  184    Turin slays Orgof, kinsman of the royal house,      
         and flees from Thingol's court.                      
                                                            
 184-7   Turin  an  outlaw  in  the woods.  He gathers  a des-
         perate  band,   and  plunders   on  the   marches  of
         Doriath and beyond.                                 
                                                            
         187 Turin's companions capture Beleg. But Turin re-
         leases  him  and they  renew their  fellowship, and
         make  war  on  the  Orcs,  adventuring  far  beyond
         Doriath.(49)                                        
                                                            
  189    Blodrin  Ban's  son betrays  their hiding  place, and
         Turin  is  taken  alive. Beleg  healed of  his wounds
         follows  in  pursuit.  He  comes  upon  Flinding  son
         of  Fuilin,(50) who  escaped  from  Morgoth's mines;
         together  they  rescue  Turin,'rom  the  Orcs.  Turin
         slays Beleg by misadventure.                        
                                                            
  190    Turin  healed  of  his  madness  by   Ivrin's  well,(51)
         and   is   brought   at    last   by    Flinding   to
         Na-gothrond.  They  are  admitted  on  the  prayer of
         Finduilas  daughter  of  Orodreth,  who   had  before
         loved Flinding.                                     
                                                            
 190-5   The   sojourn  of   Turin  in   Nargothrond.  Beleg's
         sword  is  reforged  and  Turin  rejects  his ancient
         name   and   is   renowned   as    Mormegil   (Morma-
         kil)(52) 'Black-Sword'.    He    calls    his   sword
         Gurtholfin   'Wand   of  Death'.   Finduilas  forgets
         her  love  of  Flinding,  and  is  beloved  of Turin,
         who  will not  reveal his  love out  of faithfulness
         to  Flinding;  nonetheless  Flinding  is  embittered.

        
                                                         
        Turin  becomes  a  great  captain.  He   leads  the
        Gnomes  of  Nargothrond  to  victory and  their an-
        cient  secrecy  is  broken.  Morgoth learns  of the
        growing  strength  of  the  stronghold,"   but  the
        Orcs  are  driven  out  of  all  the  land  between
        Narog  and  Sirion  and  Doriath  to the  East, and
        West  to  the  Sea,  and  North  to  Erydlomin.(54) A
        bridge  is  built  over  Narog.  The   Gnomes  ally
        them with Haleth's folk under Handir.             
                                                         
  192   Meglin comes to Gondolin and is received by       
                                                         
        Turgon as his sister's child.                     
                                                         
  194   In this time of betterment Morwen and Nienor      
        leave Hithlum and seek tidings of Turin in        
        Doriath. There many speak of the prowess of       
        Mormakil,(55) but of Turin none know tidings.      
                                                         
  195   Glomund   with   a   host   of   Orcs   comes  over
        Erydlomin   and   defeats   the    Gnomes   between
        Narog and Taiglin. Handir  is slain.  Flinding dies
        refusing succour  of Turin.  Turin hastens  back to
        Nargothrond  but it  is sacked  ere his  coming. He
        is    deceived    and   spellbound    by   Glomund.
        Finduilas   and  the   women  of   Nargothrond  are
        taken  as  thralls, but  Turin deceived  by Glomund
        goes to Hithlum to seek Morwen.                   
           News  comes  to  Doriath  that   Nargothrond  is
        taken and Mormakil is Turin.                      
           Tuor  was  led out  of Hithlum  by a  secret way
        under  Ulmo's  guidance,  and  journeyed  along the
        coast  past  the  ruined  havens of  Brithombar and
        Eldorest (56) and reached Sirion's mouth."           
                                                         
 195-6  Turin  goes  to  Hithlum   and  finds   his  mother
        gone.  He slays  Brodda and  escapes. He  joins the
        Woodmen  and  becomes  their  lord,  since  Brandir
        son  of  Handir  is lame  from childhood.  He takes

        name of Turambar (Turumarth)(58) 'Conqueror of       
        Fate'.                                            
                                                         
 196    Here  Tuor  meets   Bronweg  at   Sirion's  mouth.
        Ulmo himself  appears to  him in  Nan-tathrin; ang
        Tuor   and   Bronweg    guided   by    Ulmo   find
        Gondolin.  They  are  received  after questioning,
        and  Tuor  speaks  the  embassy  of  Ulmo.  Turgon
        does not now harken to it,  partly because  of the
        urging  of  Meglin.  But  Tuor  for  his kindred's
        sake is held in great honour.                     
           Morwen    goes    to    Nargothrond,    whither
        Glomund has returned and lies  on the  treasure of
        Felagund. She seeks for  tidings of  Turin. Nienor
        against her bidding rides in disguise with her es-
        cort of Elves of the folk of Thingol.             
           Glomund  lays  a  spell  on  the   company  and
        disperses it.  Morwen vanishes  in the  woods; and
        a great darkness of mind comes on Nienor.         
           Turin  found  Nienor  hunted  by  the  Orcs. He
        names  her  Niniel,  the  tearful, since  she knew
        not her name, and himself Turambar.               
                                                         
 197-8  Nienor  Niniel  dwells  with  the Woodfolk  and is
        beloved   by  Turin   Turambar  and   Brandir  the
        lame.                                             
                                                         
  198   Turin weds Nienor.                                
                                                         
  199   Glomund   seeks  out   the  dwellings   of  Turin.
        Turin  slays  him with  Gurtholfin his  sword; but
        falls  aswoon  beside him.  Nienor finds  him, but
        Glomund  ere  death  releases  her from  the spell
        and  declares  her  kindred. Nienor  casts herself
        away over the waterfall  in that  place.(59) Brandir
        reveals the truth to  Turin and  is slain  by him,
        Turin bids Gurtholfin  slay him,  and he  dies. So
        ended  the  worst  of  Morgoth's  evil;  but Hurin

            
                                                       
     was  released  from  Angband,  bowed  as  with age,
     and sought for Morwen.                             
      Tuor   weds   Idril   Celebrindal    daughter   of
     [Turgon  of]  Gondolin, and  earns the  secret hate
     of Meglin.                                         
                                                       
 200 Here was born Earendel the Bright, the star of
     the   Two   Kindreds,  unto   Tuor  and   Idril  in
     Gondolin.  Here  was  born  also Elwing  the White,
     fairest  of  women  save  Luthien,  unto   Dior  in
     Ossiriand.                                         
      Hurin  gathers  men  unto   him.  They   find  the
     treasure   of   Nargothrond   and   slay   Mim  the
     Dwarf  who had  taken it  to himself.  The treasure
     is  cursed.  The  treasure  is brought  to Thingol.
     But   Hurin  departs   from  Doriath   with  bitter
     words, but  of his  fate and  of Morwen's  after no
     certain tidings are known.                         
                                                       
 201 Thingol employs the Dwarves to smithy  his gold
     and  silver  and  the treasure  of Narog,  and they
     make   the   renowned   Nauglafring,(60) the  Dwarf-
     necklace,  whereon  is  hung  the  Silmaril. Enmity
     awakes (60) between  the   Elves  and   Dwarves,  and
     the Dwarves are driven away.                       
                                                       
 202  Here  the  Dwarves  invaded  Doriath  aided by
     treachery,  for  many  Elves  were smitten  with the
     accursed lust  of the  treasure. Thingol  was slain
     and  the  Thousand  Caves  sacked.  But  Melian the
     divine  could   not  be   taken  and   departed  to
     Ossiriand.                                         
        Beren"   summoned   by   Melian   overthrew  the
     Dwarves  at  Sarn-Athra (63) and  cast the  gold into
     the  River  Asgar,  which  afterwards   was  called
     Rathlorion (64) the  Golden-bed;  but   the  Naugla-
     fring and the  Silmaril he  took. Luthien  wore the
     necklace  and  the  Silmaril  on  her  breast. Here

       Beren  and  Luthien  depart  out  of  men's knowl-
       edge and their deathday is  not known;  save that
       at night  a messenger  brought the  necklace unto
       Dior  in  Doriath, and  the Elves  said: 'Luthien
       and Beren are dead as Mandos doomed.'            
          Dior  son  of  Luthien  and  Beren,  Thingol's
       heir, returned unto Doriath and  for a  while re-
       established it, but Melian  went back  to Valinor
       and he had no longer her protection.             
                                                       
  203  The  necklace  came to  Dior; he  wore it  on his
       breast.                                          
                                                       
  205  The sons of Feanor hear  tidings of  the Silmaril
       in the East, and gather  from wandering  and hold
       council.  They  summon  Dior   to  give   up  the
       jewel.                                           
                                                       
  206  Here Dior fought the sons of Feanor on the east .
       marches of Doriath. but he was slain. Celegorm:
       and Curufin and Cranthir fell in battle. The     
       young sons of Dior, Elboron and Elbereth, were
       slain by the evil men of Maidros' host, and      
       Maidros bewailed the foul deed. The maiden       
       Elwing was saved by faithful Elves and taken to
       Sirion's mouth, and with them they took the     
       jewel and the necklace.                          
          Meglin was taken in the hills and betrayed
       Gondolin to Morgoth.                             
                                                       
  207  Here Morgoth loosed  a host  of dragons  over the
       mountains  from  the  North  and  Gondolin's vale
       was  taken  and  the  city  besieged.   The  Orcs
       sacked  Gondolin  and  destroyed  the   king  and
       most of his  people; but  Ecthelion of  the Foun-
       tain slew there  Gothmog lord  of Balrogs  ere he
       fell.                                            

       
                                                        
         Tuor  slew  Meglin.  Tuor,  Idril,  and Earendel
       escaped  by  a  secret  way  devised by  Idril and
       came to Cristhorn, Eagles' Cleft,  a high  pass be-
       neath Fingolfin's cairn  in the  North. Glorfindel
       was  there  slain  in  an  ambush,   but  Thorndor
       saved  the  remnant  of  Gondolin,  and  they  es-
       caped at last into the vale of Sirion.            
         The  ruin  of  the   Elves  was   now  well-nigh
       complete, and no refuge or  strong place  or realm
       remained to them.                                 
                                                        
  208  Here  the  wanderers  from  Gondolin  reached  the
       mouths  of  Sirion  and  joined  with  the slender
       company  of  Elwing.  The  Silmaril  brings bless-
       ing  upon  them  and  they  multiply,   and  build
       ships  and  a  haven,  and  dwell  upon  the delta
       amid the waters. Fugitives gather to them.      
                                                        
  210  Maidros hears of the  upspringing of  Sirion's Ha-
       ven and that a Silmaril is there, but he forswears
       his oath.                                         
                                                        
  224  The  Unquiet  of  Ulmo  comes  upon  Tuor  and  he
       builds the  ship Earame,  Eagle's Pinion,  and de-
       parts with Idril into the West and is heard  of no
       more.  Earendel  weds  Elwing and  is lord  of the
       folk of Sirion.                                   
                                                        
  225  Torment  of  Maidros and  his brothers  because of
       their oath. Damrod and Diriel  resolve to  win the
       Silmaril if Earendel will not yield it.           
          Here   unquiet  came   upon  Earendel   and  he
       voyaged the  seas afar  seeking Tuor,  and seeking
       Valinor, but  he found  neither. The  marvels that
       he  did  and  saw  were  very  many  and renowned.
       Elrond Half-elfin, son of Earendel, was born.     
          The  folk  of  Sirion  refused  to give  up the

         Silmaril in Earendel's absence, and they thought
         their joy and prosperity came of it.            
                                                        
  229    Here  Damrod  and  Diriel  ravaged   Sirion,  and
         were  slain.  Maidros  and Maglor  gave reluctant
         aid. Sirion's folk were slain  or taken  into the
         company  of  Maidros.  Elrond  was taken  to nur-
         ture  by  Maglor.  Elwing  cast herself  with the
         Silmaril into the sea, but by  Ulmo's aid  in the
         shape of a bird  flew to  Earendel and  found him
         returning.                                      
                                                        
  230    Earendel  binds  the  Silmaril  on  his  brow and
         with Elwing sails in search of Valinor.         
                                                        
  233    Earendel  comes  unto Valinor  and speaks  on be-
         half of both races.                             
                                                        
  240    Maglor,  Maidros,  and   Elrond  with   few  free
         Elves, the last  of the  Gnomes, live"  in hiding
         from  Morgoth,  who rules  all Beleriand  and the
         North, and thrusts ever East and South.         
                                                        
 233-43  The  sons  of  the Gods (66) under Fionwe  son of
         Manwe  prepare  for  war.  The  Light-elves  arm,
         but the Teleri do not leave Valinor,  though they
         built a countless host of ships.                
                                                        
  247    Fionwe's  host  draws  nigh  to the  Hither Lands
         and his trumpets from the sea  ring in  the west-
         ern  woods.  Here  was   fought  the   Battle  of
         Eldorest,(67) where  Ingwil (68) son of Ingwe  made a
         landing.  Great  war  comes  into  Beleriand, and
         Fionwe  summons  all  Elves,  and   Dwarves,  and
         Men,  and  Beasts,  and  birds to  his standards,
         who do not elect  to fight  for Morgoth.  But the
         power  and  dread  of  Morgoth  was   very  great,
         and many did not obey.                          

       
                                                                       
* 250. Here Fionwe fought the last battle of the ancient                
   North,   the  Great   or  Terrible   Battle.  Morgoth                
   came  forth,  and  the hosts  were arrayed  on either                
   side  of  Sirion.  But  the  host  of   Morgoth  were                
   driven  as  leaves  and  the  Balrogs  destroyed  ut-                
   terly,  and  Morgoth  fled  to  Angband   pursued  by                
   the hosts of Fionwe.                                                 
   He  loosed  thence  all   the  winged   Dragons,  and                
   Fionwe   was   driven   back   upon  Dor-na-Fauglith,                
   but   Earendel   came  in   the  sky   and  overthrew                
   Ancalagon  the   Black  Dragon,   and  in   his  fall                
   Thangorodrim was broken.(69)                                         
   The   sons   of  the   Gods  wrestled   with  Morgoth                
   in  his  dungeons  and  the   earth  shook   and  all                
   Beleriand   was  shattered   and  changed   and  many                
   perished, but Morgoth was bound.                                     
   Fionwe   departed   to   Valinor   with   the  Light-                
   elves  and  many   of  the   Gnomes  and   the  other                
   Elves  of  the  Hither  Lands, but  Elrond Half-elfin                
   remained  and  ruled  in  the  West  of   the  world.                
   Maidros  and  Maglor  perished  in (70) a last endeav-                
   our  to  seize  the   Silmarils  which   Fionwe  took                
   from  Morgoth's  crown.(71) So  ended  the   First  Age                
   of the World and Beleriand was no more.                              
                                                                       
                       NOTES.                                           
                                                                       
 1 This sentence, with their friends Orodreth,  Angrod, and  Egnor, sons
 of Finrod, was an early addition; cf, the addition made to AV, note 21.
 2 Later addition: Dagor-os-Giliath, which is found in AV as first writ-
 ten, entry Valian Year 2996.                                           
 3 Later addition: (Eredwethion), which is found in AV as first written,
 entry Valian Year 2996.- Pencilled in the margin against  this passage,
 but then struck out, is:  The passage  of the  Gnomes into  Mithrim oc-
 cupied equivalent of 10 years of' later time or 1 Valinorian  year. Cf,
 AV, p. 318.                                                            
 4 This is an early alteration, going with that given in note l, of With
 him come the sons of Finrod; cf. the  alteration made  to AV,  note 23,
 An early alteration from: They march to Mithrim as  the Sun  rises, and
 unfurl their banners; but there is feud ...                            

  6    Later addition: Belegar. This name  occurs in  the Old  English version
       II of AV, p. 340 line 47.                                              
  7    Later addition: Eredlindon.  This name  occurs in  late additions  to Q
       ($9 note 3) and AV (note 14).                                         
  8    Eldorest  >  Eglarest  >  Eglorest  (cf.  notes 56,  67). On  the Westward
       extension  of  the  first  map  (see p.  281; see  insert) the  name is
       Eldorest; in an  interpolation to  AV (note  18) it  is Eglorest;  in The
       Silmarillion it is Eglarest.                                           
  9    The conclusion  of this  annal (very  probably changed  at the  time of
       composition)  was originally:  A time  of peace  and growth.  Before the
       Sun were only the pines and firs and dark....                          
 10    Later addition: at Nargothrond.                                        
  11   Erydlomin  >  Eredwethion  (twice;  later  changes).  See  note  3, and
       pp. 233-4; 272.                                                        
  12   Later addition: at Nargothrond.                                        
  13   These three annals are placed here and written thus in  the manuscript,
       and enclosed  in square  brackets. The  brackets perhaps  only indicate
       that the annals are an addition (Gumlin's birth was first placed in the
       annal 122, but  struck out  probably at  the time  of writing,  and the
       mention of the  birth of  Handir son  of Hundor  was an  early addition
       to annal 141).                                                         
  14   Later  change:  Ermabwed  >  Ermabuin.  Ermabwed  is  the  form  in the
       Lay of the Children of Hurin and in Q ($10).                           
  15   Later addition: or Mablosgen the Empty-handed.                         
  16   Most of  the birth-dates  from 124  to 150  were changed  by a  year or
       two, but since the figures were overwritten  the underlying  dates can-
       not all be made out with certainty. The entry for the birth of Rian was
       first given a separate entry under  the year  152; Rian  the sorrowful,
       daughter of Belegund, born.                                            
  17   Later addition: Dagor Hurbreged.                                       
  18   Later addition: in full might.                                         
  19   These two sentences were an addition,  though a  very early  one: hence
       the change of tense.                                                   
  20   Later addition: Tol-na-Gaurhoth, Isle of Werewolves.                   
  21   Later  addition:  Menegroth. This  name occurs  in an  interpolation to
       AV (note 18) and in the Old English version II, p. 343 line 164.       
  22   Math-Fuin-delos   >  Gwath-Fuin-daidelos   (late  change).   On  delos,
       daidelos see p. 307 third footnote and p. 322 note 27.                 
  23   Later addition: Gorlim,  Radros, Dengar,  & 7  others. Above  Dengar is
       written (later) Dagnir.                                                
  24   This sentence was struck through in pencil  and the  following replace-
       ment written in: Their  wives and  children were  captured or  slain by
       Morgoth,   save   Morwen  Eledwen   Elfsheen  (daughter   of  Baragund)
       and Rian (daughter of Belegund), who were sent, &c.                    
  25   Following this the original text had: Haleth, last of the Fathers      

                                 
                                                                                  
        Men,  dies  in  the  woods.  Hundor  his  son  rules  his  folk.  This was
       struck  out  while  the Annals  were in  course of  composition, for  it re-
       appears    later,    and    not    as    an    insertion     (year    168).
   26  Sirion's Well > Eithyl Sirion  (later change).  Eithyl (of  which the  v is
        uncertain) replaces an earlier form, probably Eothlin.                     
   27  Erydlomin    >     Eredwethion    (later     change;    cf.     note    11)
   28  Later  addition:  nauglar  or (i.e.  for the  Nauglar or  Dwarves). Nauglar
                                                                                  
        seems to have been changed from nauglir, the form in Q                     
   29  These two sentences, from Of the Dwarves..., bracketed in pencil;           
                                                                                  
        see pp. 404 - S.                                                           
   30  Ulfand is an early emendation from Ulband, and so also in the next         
                                                                                  
        sentence.                                                                  
   31   Later addition: Tinuviel, daughter of Thingol of Doriath.- For the         
        word geste see III. 154.                                                   
   32   Tolsirion > Tol-na-Gaurhoth (later change; cf. note 20),                   
                                                                                  
   33 Later addition: Nargothrond is hidden.                                       
   34 Later addition: among the Green-elves.                                       
                                                                                  
   35  Elves  >  Gnomes  (later  change,  depending  on  that  given in  note 34).
   36  These two  entires, for  the years  164 arid  165, are  early replacements
        of  essentially  the  same  entries  originally placed  under 169  and 170;
        Hurin   son   of   Hador   weds  Morwen   Elfsheen  daughter   of  Baragund
        son of Beor, and Turin son of Hurin born. The first of these contains
        two  errors, which  cannot be  other than  the merest  slips in  rapid com-
        position,  for  son  of  Gumlin son  of Hador  and son  of Bregolas  son of
        Beor. Similarly in the entry for 172 Huor is called son of Hador.           
   37   Huor son of Hador: an error; see note 36.                                  
   38   Later  addition:  Nirnaith  Irnoth,  changed  to  Nirnairh Dirnoth.  In the
        Lay of the Children  of Hurin  there are  many different  forms of  the Ei-
        vish  name  of  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered  Tears, one  replacing another:
        the  last  are  Nirnaith  Unoth  replaced  by  Nirnaith  Ornoth  (the final
        form Nirnaith Arnediad is also found in the poem, written in, at  a later
        period, as in Q $11, note 16).                                            
   39   Erydlomin > Erydwethion (later change; cf. notes 11, 27).                  
   40   Flinding  first  >  Findor;  then  Flinding  son of  Fuilin >  Gwindor son
        of Guilin (later changes).                                                  
   41   Turin was nigh three years old  depends on  the earlier  date of  his birth
        in the year 170: see note 36.                                              
   42   Later  addition:  Cum-na-Dengin.  The   name  Amon   Dengin  is   found  in
        a late rewriting of a passage in Q $16, note 3.                            
   43   This  passage  replaced,  at  the  time  of  writing,  the  original:  Rian
        sought for Huor and died beside his body. See note 46.                     
   44   The  date  173  was  added  subsequently, though.  early, to  this passage.
        It  remains  in  its  original  place,  not  struck out though  not included
        here,  at  the   beginning  of   the  next   passage,  Morgoth   broke  his
        pledges...                                                                 

   45    Ulfand early < Ulband, as previously (note 30).                           
   46    The  original  text  had  here:  Tuor  son  of  Huor  was  born  in sorrow,
         which  was  struck  out at  the time  of writing  when the  additional pas-
         sage concerning Tuor at the end of annal 172 was written in (note         
         43).  The  sentence  concerning  Nienor  that  follows  was  an  early addi-
         tion.                                                                     
   47    This  sentence  is  roughly  marked  for  transference  to  between  the an-
         nals 184 and 184 - 7.                                                     
   48    This  paragraph,  from  Tuor  grew  up...,  was  dated  177,  but   the  date
         was  struck  out.  As  the  Annals  were first  written, Turin's  birth was
         placed in the year 170, but this entry was rejected and replaced under    
         165 (note 36). When the present passage was dated 177, therefore,         
         Turin was 7 when he went to  Doriath; but  with the  striking out  of this
         date the passage belongs under 173, and the years of Turin's life in      
         Hithlum  become  165  -  73,  which  may  or  may not  signify a  change in
         his age  when he  went to  Doriath. In  The Silmarillion  (p. 198)  he wag
         eight; but the statement here that he was seven is left unchanged,        
   49    After this annal another  was inserted  in the  later, pencilled  layer of
         emendation:  188.  Halmir  son  of  Orodreth  trapped and  hung to  a tree
         by Orcs.                                                                  
   50    Flinding  son  of  Fuilin  >  Gwindor  son  of  Guilin (later  change; cf.
         note  40).  Flinding  >  Gwindor  at all  occurrences of  the name  in an-
         nals 190, 190-5, 195.                                                     
   51    Ivrin 's well > the well of Ivrineithil (later change).                   
   57    Mormegil  (Mormakil)  >  Mormael  (Q.   Mormakil)  (later   change).  This
         is the  first occurrence  of the  form Mormegil;  for earlier  forms see
         p. 222.                                                                   
   53    Morgoth learns  of the  growing strength  of the  stronghold is  an early'
         change from Morgoth learns of the stronghold.                             
   54    Erydlomin  >  Erydwethion,  as  previously  (later  change); again  in an-
         nal 195.                                                                  
   55    Mormakil > Mormael (Mormakil) (later change; cf. note 52).                
   56    Eldorest > Eglorest (later change; cf. note 8).                           
   57    This  entry,  from  Tuor  was  led  out  of  Hirhlum...,  originally dated
         196, was changed (early) to 195,  but left  where it  was, with  its date,
         after that for 195 - 6. A pencilled direction places it in the position is
         which it is printed here.                                                 
   58    The h of  Turumarth circled  in pencil  for deletion.  The sentence  is an
         early addition.                                                           
   59    Later  addition:  Silver  Bowl  (Celebrindon).  This  was  struck  out and
         the  following  substituted:  which  was called  Celebros Silver  Foam but
         after Nen Girith Shuddering Water.                                        
   60    Nauglafring > Nauglamir (later change); again in annal 202.               
   61    Enmity awakes is an early change from War ensues.                         
   62    Later addition: and the Green-elves (cf. note 34).                        

  63 Sarn-Athra > Sarn-Athrad (later change). The same change is made        
     in Q ($14, note 8).                                                  
  64 Rathlorion > Rathloriel (later change). The same change is made in
     Q ($14, note 11).                                                    
  65 Later addition: Upon Amon Ereb the Lonely Hill in East Beleriand.      
     Above East Beleriand is written in the South.                        
  66 the Gods > the Valar that is the Gods (later change).                
  67 Eldorest > Eglarest > Eglorest (later changes; cf. notes 8, 56),      
  68 Ingwil > Ingwiel (later change). Ingwiel is the form in an addition to
     Q (Q II, $17, note 19).                                              
  69 Written hastily in the margin against this paragraph: This great war
     lasted 50 years.                                                     
  70 perished in > made (later change),                                   
  71 Later addition: but Maidros perished and his Silmaril went into the
     bosom of the earth, and Maglor cast his into the sea, and wandered
     for ever on the shores of the world.                                 
                                                                         
              Commentary on the Annals of Beleriand (text AB I).           
                                                                         
    This commentary follows the annal-sections of the text (in            
  some cases groups of annals).                                            
                                                                         
  Opening  section  (before  the   rising  of   the  Sun).   Morgoth  're-
  builds  his  fortress  of  Angband'.  This  is  as  in  S and  Q, before
  Utumna   reappeared,   as   it   does   in   the  Ambarkanta   (see  pp.
  303-4, 306  -  7);  AV  is  not  explicit, mere1y  saying (p.  315) that
  he   're-established   his   stronghold'.   Angband   is   'beneath  the
  Black Mountain, Thangorodrim'; on this see pp. 270, 306 - 7.            
    There   is   here   the   remarkable   statement  that   Morgoth  'de-
  vises  the  Balrogs  and  the  Orcs',  implying  that  it  was  only now
  that  they  came  into  being.  In  Q  ($2),  following  S,  they origi-
  nated  (if  the  Balrogs  were  not  already  in  existence) in  the an-
  cient   darkness   after   the   overthrow  of   the  Lamps,   and  when
  Morgoth   returned   to   Angband    'countless   became    the   number
  of  the  hosts  of  his  Orcs   and  demons'   ($4);  similarly   in  AV
  (p.  315)  he  'bred  and   gathered  once   more  his   evil  servants,
  Orcs  and  Balrogs'.  A  note  written  against  the  passage  in  Q  $4
  directs,   however,   that   the   making   of   the   Orcs   should  be
  brought  in  here  rather  than  earlier  (note 8):  and in  the version
  of  'The  Silmarillion'  that  followed  Q  (later  than  these  Annals)
  this was in fact done: when Morgoth returned,                           

 countless  became  the  hosts  of  his  beasts  and demons;  and he
 brought  into  being  the  race  of  the  Orcs,  and they  grew and
 multiplied in the bowels of the earth.                            
                                                                  
 (The  subsequent  elaboration  of the  origin of  the Orcs  is ex-
 tremely  complex  and  cannot be  entered into  here.) It  is clear,
 therefore, that these words in AB I, despite the fact of its being
 evidently earlier than AV, look  forward to  the later  idea (itself
 impermanent)   that   the   Orcs   were   not  made   until  after
 Morgoth's return from Valinor.                                    
 According   to   AV  Morgoth   escaped  in   the  course   of  the
 Valian  Years 2990  - 1;  some century  and a  half of  later time
 elapsed, then,  between the  first making  of the  Orcs and  the be-
 ginning of their raids, referred to  under the  first of  the annals
 dated 50.                                                         
 On the addition (notes 1 and 4) that Orodreth, Angrod, an         
 Egnor  came  to  Middle-earth  in  the  ships with  the Feanorians
 while  Felagund  crossed  the  Grinding  Ice  with  Fingolfin, see
 the commentary on AV, p. 332 - 3.                                 
                                                                  
 Annal 1 The reason for the alteration in note 5 is not clear      
 to me; unless the purpose was to emphasize that the second        
 host of the Noldoli came 'from the North'. i.e. from the Grind-
 ing Ice, not from Drengist.                                       
                                                                  
 Annals 20 to 51 The 'Feast of Reuniting' is the later name,       
 as in The Silmarillion (p. 113); in Q ($9) it is the 'Feast of    
 Meeting'. But it is still held in the Land of Willows (see        
 p. 210). Now appear at the Feast ambassadors out of Doriath,      
 and Elves from the Western Havens Brithombar and Eldorest         
 (> Eglorest): for the growth of the idea of the Havens            
 p. 281, entry Brithombar. Whereas in Q the Feast took pl          
 within the period of the Siege of Angband, it now preceded        
 laying of the Siege, which in the later story began after         
 Glorious Battle (Dagor Aglareb) - of which the earthquakes        
 and the Orc-raids of the years 50 - 51 are the first suggestio
 In the second annal dated 50 a major new feature emerges:         
 the story of the dreams and forebodings of Turgon and             
 Felagund, leading to the foundation of Nargothrond and            

  Gondolin. (A  later note  in Q  refers to  'the Foreboding  of the
  Kings',  $9  note  15.) In  Q Nargothrond  was founded  after the
  escape  of  Felagund  from the  Battle of  Sudden Flame  (p. 128),
  and  the  hidden  valley  of  Gondolin  was  never   known  until
  Turgon's  scouts,  in the  flight from  the Battle  of Unnumbered
  Tears, climbed the heights above the  vale of  Sirion and  saw it
  beneath them ($15, p. 163; later rewritings to Q alter the story:
  notes 1 and 2). But in AB I Turgon's  departure with  his people
  from  Hithlum  to Gondolin  took place  immediately on  his find-
  ing of the secret valley, whereas in the  later story  he remained
  still in Vinyamar (of which  there is  as yet  no sign)  for long
  years after his discovery (The Silmarillion pp. 115, 125 - 6).
    The  definition  of  Hithlum  as  'the   Land  of   Mist  about
  Mithrim'  may imply  that Mithrim  was still  only the  name of
  the Lake; see AV, entry 2995, and commentary p. 330,             
    Fingon  is  now so  named in  the text  as written,  not Finweg
  > Fingon as in Q.                                                
    Fingolfin  is  now  named  as  the overlord  of all  the 'Dark-
  elves' west of Narog,  and his  power is  gathered in  the north-
  ward  range  of  the  Shadowy  Mountains,  whence he  can watch
  the  plain  of  Bladorion  (which  is named  in AV,  entry 2996).
  The  island  on  which  the  tower  of  Felagund  stood   is  now
  named Tolsirion, and Felagund  is alone  associated with  it (cf,
  Q $9 'A tower  they [the  sons of  Finrod] had  on an,  island in
  the river Sirion', but also $10 'Felagund they buried on  the top
  of his own island  hill'); the  pre-eminence of  Felagund among
  his brothers is firmly established, and his isolation from them.
    In Q 49, note 1, the name of the great pineclad  highland be-
  fore it was turned to a place of evil first  appears, in  the form
  Taur  Danin;  Taur-na-Danion occurs  in the  list of  Old English
  names (p. 258). It is said of the sons of Feanor in Q  ($9) that
  'their watchtower was the high  hill of  Himling, and  their hid-
  ing place the Gorge of Aglon'.                                   
                                                                  
  Annals 70 to 150  In the  entries giving  the birth-dates  of the
  Beorians  is  seen  the  emergence  of an  elder line  of descent
  from  Beor the  Old beside  Barahir and  Beren: Barahir  now has
  a  brother  Bregolas, whose  sons are  Baragund and  Belegund (in
  this History all three have been  named in  rewriting of  the Lay

  of Leithian, III. 335, but that belongs to a  much later  time). In
  this line  Morwen  and  Rian  are  genealogically  placed,   and  as
  the daughters  of   Baragund  and   Belegund  become   cousins.  But
  though nothing has  been said  before of  Rian's kindred,  the idea
  that  Morwen  was  related  to  Beren  goes right  back to  the Tale
  of  Turambar, where  (as that  text was  first written,  when Beren
  was a  Man)  Mavwin  was  akin  to Egnor,  Beren's father  (see II.
  71, 139).                                                          
  The Beorian  house  is  thus  now  in  its final  form in  the last
  and most  important  generations,   though  Barahir   and  Bregolas
  were  later  to  be  removed  by  many  steps  from  Beor  with the
  lengthening  of  the  years  of  Beleriand from  the rising  of the
                                                                    
  Sun.                                                               
    By  this  genealogical  development,  too,  Turin and  Tuor are
  descended  both  from  the  house  of  Beor  and  from the  house of
  Hador;    and    they    become    cousins    on    both    sides.
  Haleth,  who  in  Q  was  the  son  of  Hador,  now   becomes  inde-
  pendent, a Father of Men ., cf. the pencilled  alterations to  Q $9
  (note  11  and  pp.  210 -  11), where  Haleth 'the  Hunter' enters
  Beleriand shortly before Hador - as is  implied also  in AB  I. The
  account  of  the  physical  characters  of  the  Men  of  the Three
  Houses of the Elf-friends is the origin of that in The Silmarillion
  (p. 148); but at this  stage the  people of  Haleth are  likened to
  those of Hador rather than to  the Beorians,  and this  is undoubt-
  edly a reflection of the fact that  the 'Hadorian'  and 'Halethian'
  houses had only just been divided (see pp. 210 - 11).              
    In Q ($13, p. 155),  Brandir the  Lame was  the son  of Handir,
  son  of Haleth;  but now  in AB  I a  new generation  is introduced
  in  the  person  of  Hundor,  by  early addition  to the  text (see
  note 13).                                                          
    In  the  house  of  Hador the  removal of  Haleth as  Hador's el-
  der  son  leads to  the appearance  of Gundor,  as seen  already in
  the later alteration to Q $9 (note 11 and pp.  211 -  12). In  AB I
  Hador  is  spelt  both  Hador  and  Hador,  and  on  the assumption
  that  the  accent  must  be  intended whereas  its absence  may not
  I have extended the form Hador throughout.                         
    The  genealogies  of  the  Three Houses  of the  Elf-friends, to-
  gether with  their dates  as given  in AB  I (after  revision), are
  now therefore as shown on p. 377.                                  

    That  Hador  became  a  vassal  of  Fingolfin  (annal  120)  is ex-
  tended  from  the  statement in  Q $9,  'the sons  of Hador  were al-
  lied  to  the  house  of Fingolfin',  with the  addition that  he was
  given  lands  in  Hithlum.  That  his grandson  Hurin had  his house
  in Hithlum is of course an ancient feature of the legends.          
    Beren's  name   Mablosgen,  the   Empty-handed  (note   15)  first
  appears here (Camlost in The Silmarillion).                        
    The  sadness  of  the  Elves  who  witnessed  it  at  Beor's death
  'of  weariness'  (annal   150)  foreshadows   the  passage   in  The
  SilmariL!ion, p. 149.                                               
                                                                     
  Annals  155  to   157  In   these  annals   (to  be   compared  with
  Q  $9)  are  many  new  details  and  one  major  development.  In a
  later addition (note 17) the Battle of  Sudden Fire  (itself appear-
  ing,  as the  Battle of  Sudden Flame,  in a  later addition,  to Q,
  note   19)   receives   the   Elvish   name  Dagor   Hurbreged;  and
  Glomund  is  present  at  the  battle  -  by another  later addition
  (note 18) now in his  'full might'.  At each  stage, in  addition to
  S, in Q, in. addition to Q, in AB,  and in  addition to AB,  the
  history  of Glomund  is pushed  further back;  for the  details see
  pp. 219 - 20. In The Silmarillion p.151 the same pressiov,'i n
  his  full  might'  is  used  of  Glaurung  at  the Battle  of Sudden
  Flame, where  the statemeni  !-.as the  point that  at his first ap-
  pearance (p. 116) he was not yet full-grown: see pp. 405 - 6.       
    The death of Bregolas and the  greater part  of the  warrios of
  Beor's house is recorded ( f. The  Silmarillion pp.  151 -  2), as
  aiso  is  the  death of  Hador 'now  aged' and  his son  Gundor, de-
  fending  Fingolfin  (in  The  Silmarillion   they  fell   at  Eithel
  Sirion).  Orodreth  as weil  as Felagund  is said  to have  been res-
  cued  by  Barahir:  this is  not at  all suggested  in Q,  where he
  came  to  Nargothrod with  Celegorm  and  Curufin  only  'after a
  time of hreathless flight  and perilous  wanderings*. and  it seems
  naturai  to  suppose  that  he   had  escaped   from  Taur-ra-Danion
  (Taur-ra-Fuin)when his brothers Angrod and Egnor were
  slain. On this matter see further below, annal 157.               
    Whereas in Q Himling  is said  to have  been 'fortified'  by the
  sons  of  Feanor at  this time  (p. 128.,  previously it  was their
  'watchtower', p. 125). in  AB it  has been  said earlier  (annal 5l)

         
                                                                  
 that Himling  was  their  'fortress',  and  it  is  now  told that
 through  the  prowess  of  Maidros  it  was  not  lost to  them. The
 passage  of  Orcs  through 'the  passes east  of Himling'  into East
 Beleriand,  and  the  scattering  of   'the  Gnomes   of  Feanor*s
 house,  are  now  first  mentioned: in  The Silmarillion  (p. 153)
 this     is                much                amplified.
 Much   the   most   important   and  interesting   development  in
 these annals  is  the  sojourn  of  Hurin  in  Gondolin,  of which
 there has been  no hint  hitherto; but  there are  many differences
 from the  story  in  The  Silmarillion  (p.  158).  In  AB  it was
 Haleth and  his  fosterling  Hurin  (a boy  of fourteen)  who were
 brought to  Gondolin,  having  been  found  by  some  of  Turgon's
 people in the vale of Sirion; and  it is  suggested that  this was
 done   because   Turgon   had   been   warned  by   messages  from
 Ulmo that  'the  help  of  Men was  necessary for  him' -  this be-
 ing  an  element in  Ulmo's message  to Turgon  by the  mouth of
 Tuor  at a  much later  time in  Q: 'without  Men the  Elves shall
 not  prevail  against  the Orcs  and Balrogs'  (pp. 170,  176). In
 this  earliest  version  of  the  story  Haleth  and   Hurin  left
 Gondolin  because of  the tidings  of the  Battle of  Sudden Fire.
 In  the later  legend, on  the other  hand, it  was Hurin  and his
 brother  Huor  who  were  brought  (by  the  Eagles)  to Gondolin,
 and this happened during the battle itself; they left the city be-
 cause  they  desired  to  return  to the  world outside,  and they
 were  permitted  to  go (despite  Maeglin) because  having been
 brought by the  Eagles, they  did not  know the  way. This  was an
 important  element  in  the  later  story,  since Hurin  could not
 reveal  the  secret  of  Gondolin  whether  he  would  or  no. The
 messages  and  dreams  sent  by  Ulmo,  which  caused   Turgon  to
 receive  Hurin  and  Huor  well when  he found  them in  his city,
 counselled  him expressly  'to deal  kindly with  the sons  of the
 house  of  Hador,  from  whom help  should come  to him  at need'.
 Of course  the essential  element of  Turgon's leaving  arms at
 Vinyamar  on  Ulmo's  command  was  not  yet  present.  The  story
 in  AB has  however the  liking of  Turgon for  Hurin and  his de-
 sire to keep him in Gondolin, the  oath of  secrecy, and  the fos-
 tering  of   Hurin   among   the  people   of  Haleth   (with  whom,
 however, the 'Hadorians' were not yet allied  by intermarriage).
 Now  too  appears  Turgon's  sending  of  messages  to Sirion's

  mouths and the building of ships for vain embassage to Valinor
  (The Silmarillion p. 159).                                      
    The annal 157 introduces the interval of two years between
  the Battle of Sudden Fire and the taking of Tolsirion, which
  thenceforward was the Isle of Werewolves (and by the later ad
  dition given in note 20 receives the Elvish name Tol-na-        
  Gaurhoth); cf. The Silmarillion p. 155. But in this annal it is
  said that not only Orodreth and Celegorm and Curufin re-        
  treated to Nargothrond at this time, but Felagund also, and that
  they made there a great hidden palace. It is difficult to know
  what to make of this, since in the entry for the year 50 it is
  said that Felagund 'established his armouries' in the caves of
  Narog, and in that for 51 'he has his seat beside Narog in the
  South' (though his power is centred on Tolsirion). Possibly the
  meaning is that though Nargothrond had existed for more than
  a hundred years as a Gnomish stronghold it was not until the
  Battle of Sudden Fire that it was made into a great subterra-
  nean dwelling or 'palace', and the centre of Felagund's power.
  Even so, the story still seems very confused. In annal 155      
  'Barahir and his chosen champions saved Felagund and            
  Orodreth', but also 'Celegorm and Curufin were defeated and     
  fled with Orodreth', while two years later, in 157, 'Felagund
  and Orodreth, together with Celegorm and Curufin, retreated to
  Nargothrond'.                                                   
    The implication of the last two of these statements is surely
  that Celegorm and Curufin fled west with Orodreth after Taur-
  na-Danion was overrun and took refuge with Felagund on          
  Tolsirion; and when Tolsirion was taken two years later all     
  four went south to Narog. If this is so, it seems to contradict
  the first statement, that Barahir saved Felagund and Orodreth
  at the Battle of Sudden Fire in 155. Perhaps the fact that the
  annal heading 155 is written twice hints at an explanation. The
  second heading is written at the top of a manuscript page       
  <which finishes at the end of the entry for 157); and it may be
  that this page is a revision which was not properly integrated
  into the narrative.                                             
    In the second paragraph of 157 various new elements ap-       
  pear: the sending of Morwen and Rian to Hithlum (cf. The        
  Silmarillion p. 155); Morwen's name Eledwen (note 24; she is

                                                           
                                                                 
 called  'Elfsheen'  in  Q  $9 and  in annal  145); the  presence of
 Baragund  and  Belegund  in  Barahir's band,  and (by  later addi-
 tion, note 23) the  names of  two others  (in addition  to Gorlim):
 Radros   and   Dengar   (>  Dagnir).   Dagnir  remains   in  The
 Silmarillion; Radros became Radhruin.                            
                                                                 
 It  may  be  noticed  here  that  while  my  father  subsequently
 greatly  expanded  the duration  of Beleriand  from the  rising of
 the  Sun to  the end  of the  Elder Days,  this expansion  was not
 achieved  by a  general, proportionate  enlargement of  the inter-
 vals between major  events. Rather,  he increased  (in successive
 versions of the Annals) the lapse of time in the earlier  part of
 the  period,  the  Siege  of  Angband  being  enormously extended;
 and the relative dating of the later  events remained  little af-
 fected. Thus in AB I  the Battle  of Sudden  Fire took  place in
 the year 155, the attack on the fortress of Sirion's Well in 162,
 and  the  Fall  of  Nargothrond  in 195;  in The  Silmarillion the
 dates are 455 (p. 150), 462 (p. 160), and 495 (p. 211).           
                                                                 
 Annal  162  The  renewed  assault  of  Morgoth seven  years after
 the Battle of Sudden Fire, and  the death  of Gumlin  at Sirion's
 Well, are referred to in  The Silmarillion,  p. 160  (with Galdor
 for Gumlin). Sirion's Well is referred to in the Lay of the Chil-
 dren of Hurin (line 1460)  and marked  on the  map (p.  222): but
 'in the west of (the Shadowy  Mountains)' in  this annal  must be
 a slip for 'east'. The Elvish name Eithyl  Sirion (note  26) here
 first occurs.                                                  
   Hurin was 'summoned to Hithlum', clearly, because he was       
 at that time still with his fosterfather Haleth in the vale of
 Sirion.                                                          
                                                                 
 Annal   163   The   Swarthy   Men   were  referred   to  somewhat
 obliquely in Q $11, as first written: 'Men  from East  and South'
 came  to  Maidros'  banner  (p.  141), and  'the swart  Men, whom
 Uldor the Accursed  led, went  over to  the foe'  (p. 142).  In a
 later  interpolation  (note  14) the  Men from  the East  are 'the
 swarthy  Men' and  'the Easterlings',  and 'the  sons of  Bor and
 Ulfang'  are referred  to, Uldor  the Accursed  being the  son of
 Ulfang. It is not  made clear  in Q  when these  Men came  out of

  the  East.  In  AB  they  entered  Beleriand  in  the   year  following
  the  attack  on  Eithel Sirion,  while in  The Silmarillion  their com-
  ing  is  put  somewhat  earlier  (p.  157);  but  the   description  of
  them  in  AB  is  preserved  closely  in  The  Silmarillion,  with  the
  mention   of   their   liking   (clearly  boding   no  good)   for  the
  Dwarves  of  the  mountains.  The  interpolation  in  Q  has  the final
  form  Ulfang,  whereas  in  AB  he  is  Ulfand  (<  Ulband,  notes  30,
  45);*  his  sons  are  Uldor,  Ulfast,  whose  names  were  not  after-
  wards   changed,   and   Ulwar,   who   became  Ulwarth.   The  associ-
  ation  of  Cranthir  (Caranthir)  with  these  Men  also  now  appears.
  With   the   words   of   AB   concerning  the   Dwarves  cf.   Q  $9,
  p. 126.                                                                
                                                                        
  Annal   163-4   On   the   Green-elves   of  Ossiriand,   appearing  in
  a  later  interpolation  (note  34, and  again subsequently,  note 62),
  see AV note 14, and p. 329.                                            
                                                                        
  Annal   165-70   There   is   some   slight   difference  in   the  ac-
  counts  in  Q  $11  and  in  AB:  thus  the  deeds  of   Celegorm  and
  Curufin  are  here  made  the  reason  for  Thingol's  refusal  to join
  the   Union  of   Maidros,  and   the  reluctance   of  the   Elves  of
  Nargothrond  is  due  to  their  strategy   of  stealth   and  secrecy,
  whereas  in Q  (as in  The Silmarillion,  pp. 188  - 9)  Thingol's mo-
  tive  is  the  demand  made  on  him  by  the  Feanorians for  the re-
  turn  of  the  Silmaril,  and  it   is  the   deeds  of   Celegorm  and
  Curufin  that  determine  Orodreth's  policy.   There  is   possibly  a
  suggestion  in  the  words  'for  his  people  will not  be restrained'
  that   the   emergence   of   the   host   of   Gondolin   was  against
  Turgon's  wisdom;  in  Q  $11  as  rewritten  (in  note  7,  where the
  story  of  the  much  earlier  foundation  of  Gondolin   had  entered)
  Turgon 'deemed that the hour of deliverance was at hand'.              
                                                                        
  Annal   168    'The   Orcs    are   slowly    driven   back    out   of
  Beleriand':  cf.  the  rewritten  passage  in  Q  $11,  note  14,  'Now
  for  a  while  the  Gnomes  had  victory,  and  the  Orcs  were  driven
  out  of  Beleriand.'  But  this  comes after  'Having gathered  at last
                                                                        
  (*My father doubtless had both Q and AB in front of him as working texts
  for a considerable time, and some emendations to Q are later  than some
  emendations to AB.)                                                     

 
                                                                    
 all the strength  that  he  might  Maidros  appointed  a  day'.  as I
 noted  (p.  216),  the  two  phases  of  the  war  are  not  clearly
 distinguished  - or  else it  is only  with the  Annals that  the first
 successes  against  the  Orcs  are  moved  back,  with   the  concom-
 itant idea that Maidros 'made trial  of his  strength too  soon, ere
 his plans were full-wrought' (The Silmarillion p. 189),              
                                                                    
 Annal 171  In  Q  $15  Isfin  was  lost  after  the  Battle  of  Un-
 numbered  Tears,  and  Eol  'had  deserted  the  hosts ere  the bat-
 tle'.                                                                
                                                                    
 Annal   172   In   this   account   of   the  Battle   of  Unnumbered
 Tears,  with  which  is  to  be  compared  that in  Q $11,  the Annals
 introduce  many  new  details  that  were  to  endure.  Thus it  is now
 told that  Huor  wedded  Rian  on  the  eve  of  battle'; and that
 there  was to  be a  visible signal  from Maidros  to the  hosts wait-
 ing  in  the  West.  The  doubt  concerning  the part of  the people
 of Haleth  (see  p.  218)  is  now  resolved,  and  'Hundor  son of
 Haleth  and  the  Men  of  the  wood  were  slain  in   the  retreat
 across  the  sands',  and  'glad  meeting of  Hurin and  Turgon' now
 arises  out  of the  story first  told in  annal 155;  Balrogs smote
 down  Fingon,  though  Gothmog  is  not  yet  named  as  his slayer;
 Turgon  took  with him  in his  retreat a  remnant of  Fingon's host
 (so  in  The  Silmarillion  p. 194);  Huor died  of a  venomed arrow
 (ibid); Hurin threw away his shield (ibid. p. 195).                 
    The  change  of  Flinding  son  of  Fuilin  to  Gwindor   son  of
 Guilin  (note  40),  which  is made  also in  Q, clearly  occurs for
 the  first  time  in AB,  since Flinding  here became  Findor before
 he became Gwindor.                                                  
    In  a  few  points  AB  differs  from  the  later   story.  Here,
 Tugon's  host  descended  out  of  Taur-na-Fuin,  whereas  in  Q (as
 rewritten,  note  7)  'they encamped  before the  West Pass  in sight
 of  the  walls of  Hithlum', just  as in  The Silrmrillion  (p. 192)
 the  host  of  Gondolin  'had  been  stationed   southward  guarding
 the Pass of  Sirion'. The  loyalty of  Bor and  his sons,  not men-
 tioned  in  Q,  now  appears,   but  whereas   in  the   later  story
 Maglor   slew  Uldor,   and  the   sons  of   Bor  slew   Ulfast  and
 Ulwarth  'ere  they  themselves  were  slain',  in  AB  Cranthir slew

  Uldor,  and  Ulfast and  Ulwar slew  Bor and  his three  sons. The
  number  of  a  thousand  Balrogs  who  came  from   Angband  when
  'Hell  was  emptied'  shows  once  again  (see II.  212 -  13 and
  p. 207), and  more clearly  than ever,  that Morgoth's  demons of
  fire were not conceived as rare or  peculiarly terrible  - unlike
  the Dragon.                                                      
    The  passage  at  the  end  of  annal  172  concerning  Rian and
  Tuor, with the further reference  to Tuor  in annal  173, follows
  the rewriting of Q $16, note  3; and  here as  there there  is no
  mention  of  Tuor's  slavery  among  the  Easterlings,  which was
  however referred to in Q as first written.                      
                                                                  
  Annal 173 The words 'others [Morgoth] forbade to leave           
  Hithlum, and they were slain if Orcs found them east or south
  of the Shadowy Mountains' must refer to those Elves who          
  were not enslaved in Angband; but this is surprising. Cf. Q      
  $12, where it is told that Morgoth penned the Easterlings be-
  hind the Shadowy Mountains in Hithlum 'and slew them if          
  they wandered to Broseliand or beyond', similarly in The         
  Silmarillion (p. 195) it was the Easterlings that Morgoth would
  not permit to leave.                                             
    In Q $12, as in S, and as in The Silmarillion (pp. 198 - 9),   
  Turin left his home before his sister Nienor was born (see       
  p. 70). The entry in AB for Nienor's birth is an early addition
  and certainly belongs with the revised dating of Turin's birth   
  (i.e. in the year 165, not 170, see note 36) and of his journey
  to Doriath (i.e. in 173 not 177, see note 48): thus Turin left af-
  ter his sister's birth.                                          
                                                                  
  Annals  181  to  199  In  the  legend  of  the  Children of Hurin
  there  is virtually  no development  from its  form in  the Quenta,
  from  which  the  Annals  doubtless  derive  it direct.  The compres-
  sion  is  very  great,  and  AB  was  obviously  not  intended as an
  independent  composition  -  thus   Turin's  slaying   of  Brodda is
  recorded  in  the  annal  195  -  6  without  any  indication  of the
  cause,  and  Brodda  has  not  even  been  mentioned.   The  passage
  in  the  entry  for  196:  'Glomund  lays  a  spell  on  the company
  and disperses it. Morwen vanishes in the woods; and a great      

                                                           
                                                                 
 darkness  of  mind  comes  on  Nienor'  is  hardly  recognisable  as
 an account  of  the events  known from  the Tale,  S, Q,  and The
 Silmarillion; but the general concurrence of all these  other ver-
 sions  shows  that  the  wording of  AB is  the result  of severe
 compression  of  the  narrative,  composed  very   rapidly  (see
 p, 351). It is here, however,  that the  only development  in the
 story appears: Morwen 'vanishes in the woods', and is not, as
   Q $13, led back in safety to Doriath.                          
   The dates in these annals  are of  much interest  as indicating
 my father's conception of the duration and  intervals of  time in
 the legend, concerning which the other early texts give  very lit-
 tle idea. Thus Turin's  life as  an outlaw  after his  flight from
 Doriath and until the capture  of Beleg  lasted three  years, and
 a further two until the band  was betrayed  by Blodrin;  he spent
 five years in Nargothrond, and was thirty years  old at  the time
 of  its  fall.  Nienor  dwelt  among the  Woodmen for  some three
 years;  she was  twenty-six years  old when  she died,  and Turin
 Turambar was thirty-four.                                        
                                                                 
 Annal 181  The first  sentence of  this annal  refers to  the time
 when tidings of  Morwen ceased  - seven  years after  Turin's ar-
 rival in Doriath according to the Tale of  Turambar (II.  90) and
 the first version of the Lay of the Children of Hurin  (line 333),
 nine according to the second version  of the  Lay (line  693) and
 in The Silmarillion (p. 199). In AB it is  eight years  since his
 Coming to Doriath.                                               
                                                                 
 Annal  184  Turin,  born  in  165,  was  thus  nineteen  when he
 slew  Orgof,  as  in the  Tale of  Turambar and  the Lay  of the
 Children of Hurin; see II. 142.                                  
                                                                 
 Annal  188  In  the  entry for  this year  added later  in pencil
 (note 49) the story of the  slaying of  Orodreth's son  Halmir by
 Orcs  re-emerges from  the Lay  of the  Children of  Hurin, lines
 2137 - 8, where Orodreth's hatred for 'the broods of Hell' is ex-
 plained:                                                          
                                                                 
          his son had they slain, the swift-footed                
          Halmir the hunter of hart and boar,                     

  This  disappeared again  later, and  the name  Halmir came  to be
  borne by one of the Lords of  Brethil, when  that line  was much
  changed and extended. (In the list of Old English names  of the
  Noldorin princes  (p. 261)  Orodreth has  two sons,  Ordhelm and
  Ordlaf, without Elvish equivalents given.)                      
                                                                 
  Annal  190  The added  Elvish name  Ivrineithil (note  51) first
  occurs here (Eithel Ivrin in The Silmarillion).                 
    'They are admitted on the prayer of  Finduilas' is  a reminis-
  cence of the Lay (lines 1950ff.).                               
                                                                 
  Annal  190-195  In  this annal  is the  first occurrence  of the
  form  Mormegil  (Mormaglir  in Q),  though here  corrected later
  (notes 52, 55) to Mormael.                                      
    The  early  emendation  given  in  note  53  is  curious: from
  'Morgoth learns  of the  stronghold' to  'Morgoth learns  of the
  growing strength of the stronghold'. It looks as if  this change
  was made in order to get rid of the  idea that  the loss  of the
  'ancient secrecy' of the  Elves of  Nargothrond in  Turin's time
  led to Morgoth's discovery of its site. I have  said in  my com-
  mentary on  Q $13  (p. 222)  that while  there is  no suggestion
  that  Turin's  policy  of  open  war  revealed   Nargothrond  to
  Morgoth. this element  goes back  to the  Tale !>f  Turambar and
  its absence  from Q  must be  due to  compression (earlier  in Q,
  at the end of $11, it is said that after the Battle of Unnumbered
  Tears Morgoth paid little heed to Doriath and Nargothrond       
  'maybe because he knew little of them').  In The  Silmarillion it
  is said  (p. 211)  'Thus Nargothrond  v as  revealed to  the wrath
  and  hatred of  Morgoth'. and  this is  an important  element in
  contention  over  policy  between  Turin  and  Gwindor  in  a late
  passage that was not fully assimilated  to the Narn  i Hin  Hurin
  (Unfinished Tales p. 156):                                       
                                                                 
    You  speak  of  secrecy,  and  say  that  therein  lies  the only
    hope;   but   could   you   ambush   and   waylay   every  scout and
    spy  of Morgoth  to the  last and  least, so  that none  came ever
    hack  with  tidings  to  Angband,  yet,'rom  that  he  would  learn
    that you lived and guess where.                               

 
                                                                    
   The  alliance  of  the  Gnomes  of  Nargothrond  with  the people
 of Handir  (Haleth's  grandson)  is not  found in  The Silmarillion.
 In AB (annal 195)  Handir was  slain in  the battle  of the  fall of
 Nargothrond:  in  The  Silmarillion  (p.  212)  he  was slain  in the
 year of the fall, but before it, when Orcs invaded his land.        
                                                                    
 Annal 192 Cf, the beginning of Q $16, and note 1.                  
                                                                    
 Annal 195 'Glomund with a host of Orcs comes over
 Erydlomin (> Erydwethion, note 54) and defeats the Gnomes
 between Narog and Taiglin' shows that, as in Q, the battle be-
 fore the Sack of Nargothrond was not fought at the later site,
 between Ginglith and Narog; see p. 222.
   That Glomund passed over the Shadowy Mountains implies
 that he came from Angband by way of Hithlum, and it seems
 strange that he should not have entered Beleriand by the Pass
 of Sirion; but in the next major version of the Annals of
 Beleriand it is said expressly that he 'passed into Hithlum and
 did great evil' before moving south over the mountains. There
 is no indication of why Morgoth commanded, or permitted,
 this.
  In the redating of the entry (196 > 195, see note 57) con-
 cerning Tuor's journey from. Hithlum to the sea and along the
 coast to the mouths of Sirion there is a foreshadowing of the
 situation in The Silmarillion, where (p. 238) 'Tuor dwelt in
 Nevrast alone, and the summer of that year passed, and the
 doom of Nargothrond drew near', thus it was that Tuor and
 Voronwe on their journey to Gondolin saw at Ivrin, defiled by
 the passage of Giaurung on his way to Nargothrond, a tall man
 hastening northwards and bearing a black sword, though 'they
 knew not who he was. nor anything of what had befallen in the
 south' (p, 239).
   Why were the havens of Brithombar and Eidorest (> Eglo-
 rest) 'ruined'? Nothirgh has been said anywhere of the destruc-
 tion of the Havens. In the next version of the Annals of
 Beleriand the same remains true, and the Havens are again
 said, in the corresponding passage, to be in ruins. Later, the
 Havens were besieged and destroyed in the year after the Bat-
 tle of Unnumbered Tears (The Silmarillion p. 296), and I have

  suggested (p.  282) that  the statement  on the  Westward exten-
  sion  of the  first map  'Here Morgoth  reaches the  shores' may
  be a reference to this story: it seems then that it  was present,
  though my father neglected to refer to it until much later.     
                                                                 
  Annal  195-6  If  the  h of  Turumarth was  to be  deleted (note
  58) this was a reversion  of the  form in  the Tale  of Turambar
  (II.  70,  86).  In  Q  $13  Turumarth  was  later   changed  to
  Turamarth (note 12).                                            
                                                                 
  Annal  199  The  addition  Silver  Bowl (Celebrindon)  (note 59)
  is another case, like that of Flinding > Gwindor in  annal 172,:
  where the  alteration to  AB preceded  that made  to Q.  This is
  shown by the first,  rejected form  Celebrindon, whereas  in the
  addition to Q ($13, note 14) there is only Celebros (translated,
  as here, 'Foam-silver').                                        
    Tuor entered Gondolin in 196, and thus  dwelt there  for three
  years  before  he  wedded Idril.  This agrees  with S  ($16, see
  p. 80); in Q nothing is said on the subject.                    
                                                                 
  Annal  200  Hurin's  band  is  now  composed  of  Men,  not Elves:
  (see II. 137: in Q  $14 they  are only  described as  'outlaws of
  the wood-'); but the story as very briefly  given in  AB does not
  advance matters  at this  difficult point  (see my  discussion, p.
  227).  Hurin's  fate.  and  Morwen's,  is  now  unknown;   in  Q
  'some have  said that  he cast  himself at  last into  the western
  sea',  and  (at the  end of  $13) 'some  have said  that Morwen,
  wandering  woefully  from  Thingol's  halls...  came  on   a  time
  to that stone and read it, and there died'.                     
                                                                 
  Annals   201   and   202   In   the   story  of   the  Nauglafring
  (> Nauglamir, note 60) there is  very little  narrative develop-
  ment  from  Q  ($14); but  the change  from 'War  ensues between
  the  Elves  and  Dwarves'  to  'Enmity  awakes' (note  61) suggests
  that my  father was  revising the  story at  this point.  The war'
  is  the  fighting  in  the  Thousand  Caves  which first  enters the
  narrative in Q, and of which the slain  were buried  in Cum-nan-
  Arasaith, the Mound of Avarice.                                 
    The  name  of  the  river  in  which  the  gold   was  drowned,

                                                               
                                                                      
 Asgar,  is  found  also in  the list  of Old  English names  (p. 256);
 in  Q,  and  on  the  Eastward  extension  of  the  map,  as   in  The
 Silmarillion,      the           form           is           Ascar.
 It   is   made   clear   that   Luthien   died   as   a   mortal  (see
 pp.230  -  1),  and  the  suggestion  is  that she  and Beren  died at
 the same  time. It  is seen  from the  dates that  they lived  on only
 a very  brief while  after the  coming of  the Silmaril  to Ossiriand:
 cf. Q 'the  brief hour  of the  loveliness of  the land  of Rathlorion
 departed'.  Here  is  first  mentioned  the  bringing  of  the  Silmaril
 to Dior in Doriath by night.                                          
                                                                      
 Annal 206  A  minor  addition  to  the  story  in  Q  ($14)   is  that
 the battle  between  the  Elves  of  the   renewed  Doriath   and  the
 Feanorians  took  place  on  the  eastern  marches  of the  realm; and
 the  young   sons   of   Dior  were   slain  'by   the  evil   men  of
 Maidros   host   -   which   does  not   necessarily  mean   that  the
 Feanorians  came  upon  Doriath  with   mortal  allies,   since  'men'
 is  used  in  the  sense  'male  Elves'.  The  sons  of   Dior,  named
 Eldun  and  Elrun  in  an  addition  to  Q  (note  14), here  bear the
 names  Elboron  and  Elbereth;  the  latter must  be the  first occur-
 rence  of  Elbereth  in  my  father's  writings. It  is seen  from the
 next  version  of  the  Annals  of  Beleriand  that  the  names  Eldun
 and Elrun replaced those given here.                                  
                                                                      
 Annal 207 As with the legend of the Necklace of the                   
 Dwarves, the extremely abbreviated account of the Fall of             
 Gondolin in AB shows no change from that in Q $16.                    
                                                                      
 Annals  208  to  233  In  annal  210  it  is  said that  Maidros actu-
 ally  forswore  his  oath  (although  in  the  final  annal  he  still
 strives to fulfil it); and this is clearly to be related to his revul-
 sion  at  the  killing of  Dior's sons  in the  annal for  206. Damrod
 and  Diriel  now  emerge  as  the  most  ferocious  of  the  surviving
 sons of  Feanor, and  it is  on them  that the  blame for  the assault
 on  the  people  of  Sirion  is  primarily  laid:  Maidros  and Maglor
 only  'gave  reluctant  aid'.  This  develops  further  an  increasing
 emphasis  in  these  texts  on  the  weariness  and  loathing  felt by
 Maidros and Maglor for the duty they felt bound to.                   
   In  annal  229  Maglor,  rather  than  Maidros  as  in  Q  $17,  be-

  comes the saviour of Elrond; this change is made also in a late
  rewriting  of  Q  II  ($17  note  10),  where  however  Elrond'g
  brother Elros also emerges, as is not the case in AB.           
    The  story  of  Elwing  and  Earendel  follows  that  in  Q II:
  Elwing bearing the Silmaril is borne up out of  the sea  by Ulmo
  in the form of a bird  and comes  to Earendel  as he  returns in
  his ship, and they voyage together in search of Valinor;  and it
  is Earendel's 'embassy of the  two kindreds'  that leads  to the
  assault on Morgoth (see p. 238).                                
                                                                 
  Annal 240 This is the first mention of any kind  of the  life of
  the few surviving Gnomes  who remained  free after  the destruc-
  tion of the people of Sirion; and in a later addition  {note 65)
  is the first appearance of Amon  Ereb, the  Lonely Hill  in East
  Beleriand, where they lurked.                                   
                                                                 
  Annal 233 - 43 The refusal of the Teleri to leave Valinor at all
  (though they built a great number of  ships) seems  to be  a re-
  version to the story in Q I $17 (p. 178); in Q II (p. 185) 'they
  went not forth save  very few',  and those  that did  manned the
  fleet that bore the hosts of Valinor.  But AB  may here  be sim-
  ply very compressed.                                            
                                                                 
  Annals  247  and  250  In   the  account   of  the   assault  on
  Morgoth from the West there are some additions to the narra-
  tive in Q ($17): the Battle  of Eldorest  (> Eglorest),  where
  Ingwil (> Ingwiel) landed in Middle-earth (Ingwiel is  the form
  in an addition to Q II, note 19: the form Ingwil in AB  preceded
  this),  the  summons  of  Fionwe  to  all  Elves,  Dwarves, Men,
  beasts and birds to come  to his  banners, and  the array  of the
  hosts of West and North on either side of Sirion.               
    The statement (subsequently corrected, notes 70  - 1)  that both
  Maglor and Maidros 'perished in a last endeavour to seize the   
  Silmarils'  seems  to suggest  a passing  movement to  yet another
  formulation of the story (see the table on p.  246); but  may well
  have been a slip due to hasty composition and compression.      
    It remains to notice the chronology of the last years of      
  Beleriand that now emerges. Tuor wedded Idril in the year       
  (199) of the deaths of Turin and Nienor; and both Earendel     

 
                                                                  
 and  Elwing  were  born in  the following  year, five  years after
 the  Fall  of  Nargothrond  (195).  Dior's  re-establishment  of
 Thingol's  realm  lasted  no  more  than  four  years  (202-6), and
 the Fall of Gondolin followed only  one year  after the  final ruin
 of Doriath (in the old Tale of  the Nauglafring,  II. 242, the two
 events took place on the very same  day), and  one year  after the
 capture of Meglin in the hills.  Earendel was  seven years  old at
 the Fall of Gondolin (as stated in Q  $16), and  thirty-three years
 old  when  he  came  to Valinor.  The settlement  at the  delta of
 Sirion lasted twenty-three years from Elwing's coming there.       
   The  shortness  of the  time as  my father  at this  period con-
 ceived  it  is  very remarkable,  the more  so in  comparison with
 the later lavish millennia  of the  Second and  Third Ages,  not to
 mention the aeons allowed to the  ages before  the rising  of the
 Sun  and  Moon.  The  history  of  Men  in Beleriand  is comprised
 in  150  years  before   the  beginning   of  the   Great  Battle;
 Nargothrond,  Doriath,  and  Gondolin  were  all  destroyed within
 thirteen years; and the entire history from the rising of  the Sun
 and Moon  and the  coming of  the exiled  Noldoli to  the destruc-
 tion of Beleriand and the  end of  the Elder  Days covers  two and
 half centuries (or three according to the  addition given  in note
 69: 'This great war lasted fifty years').                         
                                                                  
      The second version of the earliest Annals of Beleriand.     
                                                                  
   This brief text, 'AB II', is in the  first annals  closely based
 on  AB  I,  with  some  minor  developments,  but  from  the entry
 for the year  51 becomes  a new;  work, and  an important  step in
 the  evolution  of  the  legendary history.  The text  was lightly
 emended  in  pencil,  and  these  few  changes  are  given  in the
 notes,  apart  from  one or  two small  alterations of  wording or
 sentence-order that are taken up silently. As to its date, it v as
 later than AV if one  judges from  the fact  that the  crossing to
 Middle-earth  of  Orodreth, Angrod,  and Egnor  in the  ships with
 the Feanorians is embodied in  the text,  whereas in  AV it  is an
 insertion (note 21)                                              

              ANNALS OF BELERIAND.                                
                                                                 
              Translation of AElfwine.                            
                                                                 
 Before  the  Uprising  of  the  Sun  Morgoth  fled   from  Valinor
 with the Silmarils  the magic  gems of  Feanor, and  returned into
 the  Northern  regions  and  rebuilt  his  fortress of  Angband be-
 neath   the   Black   Mountains,  where   is  their   highest  peak
 Thangorodrim.  He  devised  the  Balrogs  and  the  Orcs;  and  he
 set the Silmarils in his iron crown.                             
  The  Gnomes  of   the  eldest   house,  the   Dispossessed,  came
 into  the  North  under  Feanor  and  his  seven sons,  with their
 friends  Orodreth,  Angrod,  and  Egnor,  sons  of   Finrod.  They
 burned the Telerian ships. They fought soon  after the  First Bat-
 tle with Morgoth, that is Dagor-os-Giliath, or  the 'Battle-under-
 Stars',   and  Feanor   defeated  the   Orcs,  but   was  mortally
 wounded  by  Gothmog,  captain  of  Balrogs,  and  died  after  in
 Mithrim.                                                         
  Maidros,   his  eldest   son,  was   ambushed  and   captured  by
 Morgoth,  and  hung  on  Thangorodrim;  but  the  other   sons  of
 Feanor  camped  about  Lake   Mithrim  behind   Eredwethion,  that
 is the 'Shadowy Mountains'.                                      
                                                                 
         Years of the Sun                                         
         1 Here the Moon and Sun, made  by the  Gods after        
         the death of the Two Trees of Valinor,  first ap-        
         peared. Thus measured time  came into  the Hither        
         Lands.'  Fingolfin  (and  with him  came Felagund        
         son  of  Finrod)  led  the  second  house  of the        
         Gnomes  over  the  straits  of Grinding  Ice into        
         the Hither Lands.  They came  into the  North even       
         with the first Moonrise, and the first dawn shone        
         upon  their  march  and  their  unfurled banners.        
         And  Morgoth  at  the  coming  of  Light withdrew        
         dismayed into his deepest  dungeons, but  there he       
         smithied in secret, and sent forth  black smokes.        
         But  Fingolfin  blew his  trumpets in  defiance be-      
         fore the gates of Angband, and came south to             
         Mithrim; but the sons of Feanor withdrew to its          

                                                   
                                                         
         south  shores,  and there  was feud  between the
         houses, because of the burning of the ships, and
         the lake lay between them.                       
                                                         
    2    Here Fingon son of Fingolfin healed the feud, by
         rescuing  Maidros  with  the  help  of Thorndor,
         king of Eagles.                                  
                                                         
 1-50    Here  the  Gnomes  wandered  far  and  wide over
         Beleriand exploring it, and settling it  in many
         places,  from  the  Great  Sea, Belegar,  to the
         Eredlindon, that is the 'Blue Mountains', and all
         Sirion's vale, save Doriath in the middle, which
         Thingol and Melian held.                         
                                                         
   20    Here the 'Feast and Games of Reuniting' (that is
         in  Gnomish  Mereth Aderthad)  were held  in Nan
         Tathrin, the 'Land of Willows', near the delta of
         Sirion, and there were the Elves of  Valinor, of
         the three houses  of the  Gnomes, and  the Dark-
         elves,  both  those   of  the   Western  Havens,
         Brithombar  and  Eglorest,'  and  the  scattered
         Wood-elves  of  the  West,  and  ambassadors  of
         Thingol. But  Thingol would  not open  his king-
         dom,  or remove  the magic  that fenced  it, and
         trusted not in the restraint of Morgoth  to last
         long. Yet a time of peace,  of growth  and blos-
         soming, and of prosperous mirth followed.        
                                                         
     50  Here  unquiet  and  troubled  dreams  came  upon
         Turgon  son  of  Fingolfin  and   Felagund,  his
         friend, son of Finrod, and they sought for places
         of refuge,  lest Morgoth  burst from  Angband as
         their dreams foreboded.  And Felagund  found the
         caves of Narog  and began  there to  establish a
         strong place and armouries, after the fashion of
         Thingol's abode at Menegroth;  and he  called it
         Nargothrond.  But  Turgon journeying  alone dis-

 covered by the grace of Ulmo the hidden vale of
 Gondolin, and he told no man as yet.              
                                                  
 51  Now  Morgoth's  might  began suddenly  to  move
 once  more;  there  were  earthquakes  in  the North
 and  fire  came  from the  mountains, and  the Orcs
 raided into Beleriand. But Fingolfin and  Maidros .
 gathered  their  forces,  and  many  of  the  Dark-
 elves, and they destroyed all the Orcs that  were .
 without  Angband,  and  they  fell  upon   an  army
 that gathered upon Bladorion,  and before  it could
 retreat to  Morgoth's walls  they destroyed  it ut-
 terly; and this was the 'Second Battle', Dagor
 Aglareb,  'the  Glorious  Battle'.   And  afterward
 they  laid  the  Siege  of  Angband   which  lasted
 more  than  two'   hundred  years;   and  Fingolfin
 boasted  that  Morgoth could  never burst  from his
 leaguer,  though  neither  could  key  take Angband
 nor  recover  the Silmarils.  But war  never ceased
 utterly in all this time, for Morgoth  was secretly
 arming, and ever  and anon  would try  the strength
 and watchfulness of his foes.(4)                    
   But Turgon being still troubled  in heart  took a
 third  part  of  the  Gnomes of  Fingolfin's house,
 and  their  goods,  and  their  womenfolk,  and de-
 parted   south   and   vanished,   and   none  knew
 whither  he  was  gone;  but  he  came  to Gondolin
 and  built  a  city  and fortified  the surrounding
 hills.                                            
                                                  
   But the rest beleaguered Angband in  this wise.
 In the West,  were Fingolfin  and Fingon,  and they
 dwelt  in  Hithlum,  and  their  chief fort  was at
 'Sirion's Well'  (Eithel Sirion),  on the  east of
 Eredwethion,  and  all  Eredwethion   they  manned,
 and   watched  Bladorion   thence  and   rode  often
 upon that plain, even  to the  feet of  the mountains
 of Morgoth; and their horses multiplied for the

       
                                                 
 grass  was  good.  Of  those  horses many  of the
 sires came from Valinor. But  the sons  of Finrod
 held  the  land from  Eredwethion to  the eastern
 end of Taur-na-Danion the  Forest of  Pines, from
 whose   northern   slopes   also   they   guarded
 Bladorion.  But  Fingolfin  was  overlord  of the
 Dark-elves as far south as Eglorest' and  west of
 Eglor; and he was  King of  Hithlum, and  Lord of
 the  Falas  or  Western  Shore; and  Felagund was
 King of Narog,  and his  brothers were  the Lords
 of Taur-na-Danion, and his vassals;  and Felagund
 was lord of the lands east and  west of  Narog as
 far  south  as  Sirion's  mouths,  from  Eglor to
 Sirion, save for part of Doriath that lay west of
 Sirion  between  Taiglin  and  Umboth-Muilin. But
 between  Sirion  and  Mindeb  no  man  dwelt; and
 in Gondolin,  south-west of  Taur-na-Danion, was
 Turgon, but that was not known.                  
  And  King   Felagund  had   his  seat   at  Nar-
 gothrond  far  to  the  South,  but his  fort and
 strong place was in the North,  in the  pass into
 Beleriand   between   Eredwethion   and  Taur-na-
 Danion, and it was upon an isle in the  waters of
 Sirion that was called Tolsirion. South  of Taur-
 na-Danion  was  a  wide space  untenanted between
 the fences of Melian and the regions  of Finrod's
 sons, who held  most to  the northern  borders of
 the    wooded   mountains.    Easternmost   dwelt
 Orodreth,  nighest  to  his  friends the  sons of
 Feanor. And  of these  Celegorm and  Curufin held
 the  land between  Aros and  Celon even  from the
 borders of Doriath to the  Pass of  Aglon between
 Taur-na-Danion and the Hill of Himling,  and this
 pass  and  the  plains  beyond they  guarded. But
 Maidros  had  a  strong  place  upon the  Hill of
 Himling, and the  lower hills  that lie  from the
 Forest  even  to   Eredlindon  were   called  the
 Marches  of  Maidros,  and   he  was   much  in

 the plains to the North, but held also the woods       
 south between Celon and Gelion; and to the East        
 Maglor held the land even as far  as Eredlindon;       
 but Cranthir ranged in the wide lands between          
 Gelion and the Blue Mountains; and all East            
 Beleriand  behind was  wild and  little tenanted       
 save by scattered Dark-elves,  but it  was under       
 the  overlordship   of  Maidros   from  Sirion's       
 mouths to Gelion (where it joins with Brilthor),       
 and Damrod and Diriel were there, and  came not:       
 much to war in the North. But Ossiriand  was not       
 subject to  Maidros or  his brethren,  and there       
 dwelt the Green-elves  between Gelion  and Ascar       
 and Adurant, and the mountains. Into East              
 Beleriand many of the  Elf-lords even  from afar       
 came at times for hunting in the wild woods.           
                                                       
51 - 255 (6) This time is called the Siege of Angband and
  was  a  time  of bliss,  and the  world had  peace and
  light,   and   Beleriand   became   exceedingly  fair,
  and  Men   waxed  and   multiplied  and   spread,  and
  had  converse  with  the   Dark-elves  of   the  East,
  and  learned  much  Of  them,   and  they   heard  ru-
  mours  of  the  Blessed  Realms  of  the  West  and of
  the  Powers  that  dwelt  there,  and  many  in  their
  wanderings moved slowly thither.                      
    In   this   time   Brithombar   and   Eglorest  were
  builded  to  fair  towns  and  the  Tower  of Tindobel
  was  set  up  upon  the  cape  west  of   Eglorest  to
  watch   the   Western  Seas;   and  some   went  forth
  and  dwelt  upon the  great isle  of Balar  that lieth
  in  the  bay  of  Balar   into  which   Sirion  flows.
  And   in   the  East   the  Gnomes   clomb  Eredlindon
  and gazed afar, but came  not into the lands be-
  yond;   but   in   those   mountains   they   met  the
  Dwarves,  and   there  was   yet  no   enmity  between
  them  and  nonetheless  little  love.  For  it  is not
  known whence the Dwarves came, save that the          

                
                                                        
       are not of Elf-kin or mortal kind or  of Morgoth's
       breed. But in those regions  the Dwarves  dwelt in
       great mines and cities in  the East  of Eredlindon
       and far south of Beleriand, and the chief of these
       were Nogrod and Belegost.                         
                                                        
  102  About this  time the  building of  Nargothrond and
       of Gondolin was wellnigh complete.                
                                                        
  104  About  this  time  Cranthir's  folk first  met the
       Dwarves  as  is  told above;  for the  Dwarves had
       of old a  road into  the West  that came  up along
       Eredlindon  to  the  East  and passed  westward in
       the  passes  south  of  Mount  Dolm  and  down the
       course of [the] R[iver] Ascar  and over  Gelion at
       the ford Sarn Athrad and so to Aros.(7)            
                                                        
  105  Morgoth  endeavoured  to  take  Fingolfin  at  un-
       awares  and  an  army,  but  a small  one, marched
       south,  west  of  Eredlomin,  but  were  destroyed
       and  passed not  into Hithlum,  but the  most were
       driven into the sea in the firth at  Drengist; and
       this  is  not  reckoned  among the  great battles,
       though the slaughter of Orcs was great.           
        After  this  was  peace a  long while,  save that
       Glomund  the  first  of  Dragons  came  forth from
       Angband's  gate  at night  in 155  and he  was yet
       young.  And  the  Elves  fled  to  Eredwethion and
       Taur-na-Danion,   but   Fingon  with   his  horsed
       archers  rode  up  and   Glomund  could   not  yet
       withstand their darts, and fled back and  came not
       forth again for a long time.                      
                                                        
  170  Here Beor was born east of Eredlindon.            
                                                        
  188  Here Haleth was born east of Eredlindon.          

  190 Here Hador the Goldenhaired was born east of                         
          Eredlindon.                                                      
                                                                          
  200 Meeting of Felagund and Beor. Bregolas born.                         
                                                                          
  202 War on east marches. Beor and Felagund there.                        
          Barahir born.                                                    
                                                                          
  220  Unfriendliness of  sons of  Feanor to  Men -                
          because of lies  of Morgoth:  - hence  tragedy of                
          their treaty in end of need to the worst Men, and                
          their betrayal by them.(8)                                       
                                                                          
                                 NOTES.                                    
                                                                          
1 Added  in pencil;  At this  time Men first awoke  in the  midst [emended
 to east] of  the world.  In the  meantime (Fingolfin,  &c.) In  the second
 sentence led was changed to had led.                                      
2 Eglorest is an early change in ink from Eglarest; cf. AB I, notes 8, 67,
3 two was changed from one while these  Annals were  in process  of com-
 position; see note 6.                                                     
4  This  sentence  was  an early  addition, probably  made when  my father
 was writing the annal for 105.                                            
5 Eglorest < Eglarest, as in note  2. At  the occurrences  of the  name in
 the annal 51 - 255 it was written Eglorest.                              
6 255 is a change in pencil from 155.  hut it  obviously belongs  with the
 change  given in  note 3,  made while  the Annals  were being  written, as
 can be seen  from the  reference in  annal 105  to Glomund's  emergence in
 155, which took place  during the  Siege. My  father must  have overlooked
 the need to change the date, and put it in later when he noticed it.      
7 Added in pencil: But they came not  into Beleriand  after the  coming of
 the  Gnomes,  until  the power  of Maidros  and Fingon  fell in  the Third
 (Fourth) Battle.                                                          
8 At the end the text was  written at  increasing speed  and the  last few
 lines are a scrawl. The unfilled annal 220 was to be  the entry  of Haleth
 and Hador into Beleriand. In the final  sentence 'tragedy'  replaced 'jus-
 tice' at the time of writing.                                             
                                                                          
            Commentary on the Annals of Beleriand (text AB II).           
                                                                          
 The revised dates. The period of the Siege of Angband is ex-              
 tended by a hundred years, and now lasts from  51 (as  in AB              

    
                                                                  
 I)to 255 (notes 3 and 6). The birth dates of Beor, Haleth,
 Hador, Bregolas, and Barahir, and the meeting of Felagund
 with Beor, are all increased pari passu with the lengthening of
 the Siege by a hundred years from AB I.
                                                                  
 This  commentary   again  follows   the  annal-sections   of  the
 text. The  many cases  where names  pencilled on  the AB  I man-
 uscript  are  embodied  in  the  text of  AB II  can be  noticed to-
 gether;   Dagor-os-Giliath,   Eredwethion,    Belegar,   Eredlindon,
 Eglorest  (<  Eglarest),  Eithel  Sirion,  Sarn Athrad   (for  Sarn
 Athra).  Menegroth  in  annal  50  occurs  in  an  addition  to  AV
 (note 18) and in the Old English version II (p. 343),             
                                                                  
 Opening section and Annals 1 to 51 As I have said, while     
 AB II is here closely based on AB I, there are some minor de-
 velopments. Where in AB I Thangorodrim is called 'the Black
 Mountain', it is now the highest peak of 'the Black Moun-     
 tains', Whether the story of the Battle-under-Stars had yet     
 shifted is not clear; the statement that the sons of Feanor en-
 camped about Lake Mithrim after the capture of Maidros be-
 longs to the older story (see p. 352), whereas Feanor's death
 'in Mithrim' (which shows that Mithrim was a region and not
 only the name of the lake) suggests the later. Fingolfin's defi-
 ance  before  Angband  is  now  present,  and  the removal  of the
 Feanorians  to  the southern  shores of  the lake  when Fingolfin's
 people arrived, as they are in AV (p. 320).                       
 In  annal  20  the  Elvish  name  Mereth  Aderthad  for  the Feast
 of Reuniting now appears  for the  first time;  and a  little more
 is said of Thingol's policies at this time  (a passage  that reap-
 pears in The Silmarillion, p. 111), though nothing of  his hostil-
 ity to the Gnomes.                                                
 In  AB  I  Turgon's  departure  to  Gondolin  is  given  under the
 year 50, but in AB II it was in  this year  that he  discovered it
 ('by  the  grace  of  Ulmo'), and  in 51  he departed  from Hithlum
 (with  a  third  of the  Gnomes of  the second  house: so  also in
 Be Silmarillion, p. 126). Under 102 it is  stated that  the build-
 ing  of  Gondolin  was  'wellnigh  complete', and  this (relative)
 dating  survived into  The Silmarillion  (p. 125),  where Gondolin

  was  'full-wrought  after  two  and fifty  years of  secret toil'
  though in the final story it  was only  then that  Turgon himself
  abandoned his halls of Vinyamar.                                 
                                                                  
  Annal 51 The Glorious Battle, of which there is only a sug-      
  gestion in AB I (under the years 50 - 51), now becomes a de-     
  terminate event with a name (and the Elvish Dagor Aglareb      
  appears), and the driving back of the Orcs becomes the de        
  struction of an Orc-host on Baldorion; cf. The Silmarillion      
  p. 115. Fingolfin's boast that Morgoth could never break the     
  Siege goes back to Q $9: 'The Gnomes boasted that never          
  could he break their leaguer.'                                   
    In AB II the passage concerning the disposition of the         
  Gnomish princes during the years of the Siege is greatly ex-
  panded, with much new detail (later appearing in The             
  Silmarillion in chapter 14, Of Beleriand and its Realms). It was
  clearly composed very rapidly.                                   
    We now hear of the horses of the Lords of Hithlum that pas-
  tured on Bladorion, many of whose sires came from Valinor        
  (cf. The Silmarillion p. 119). In AB I Fingolfin was overlord
  of 'the Dark-elves west of Narog' (which no doubt implies the
  relatively small importance of Nargothrond before the Battle of 
  Sudden Flame), but here his authority is over the Dark-elves     
  west of the river Eglor (Eldor on the Westward extension of      
  the first map, p. 281; see insert), and he is 'Lord of the Falas'
  (cf. Falasse on the Ambarkanta map IV, p. 303; see insert);      
  while Felagund is lord of the whole territory between Eglor      
  and Sirion except for Doriath-beyond-Sirion. In The              
  Silmarillion (p. 120) Felagund (there called Finrod) likewise
  'became the overlord of all the Elves of Beleriand between'      
  Sirion and the sea, save only in the Falas', but the Falas were
  ruled by Cirdan the Shipwright, of whom there is still no trace.
  Felagund's brothers have now become his vassals, as they are     
  in The Silmarillion (p. 120).                                    
    Between Sirion and Mindeb (see pp. 273-4) is a land where     
  'no man dwelt', but it is not named; in The Silmarillion (p.     
  121) it is 'the empty land of Dimbar'. 'A wide space unten-      
  anted' lay between the Girdle of Melian in the North and Taur-
  na-Danion, but Nan Dungorthin (see pp. 273 - 4) is not named.

             
                                                                   
 Orodreth's  land is  now specifically  in the  east of  the great
 pine-forested  highlands,  where  he  is  near to  his friends
 Celegorm  and   Curufin,  whose   territory  between   Aros  and
 Celon (afterwards  called  Himlad)  and  extending up  through the
 Pass of  Aglon  is  now  made  definite,  and as  it was  to remain.
 The  territories  of  the  other  sons  of  Feanor  are  also given
 clearer  bounds,  with  mention  for  the first  time of  the Marches
 of  Maidros,  of  Maglor's  land  in  the  East  'even  as  far  as
 Eredlindon'  (afterwards  'Maglor's Gap'),  of Cranthir's  (not yet
 called  Thargelion)  between  Gelion  and   the  mountains,   and  of
 the territory  of  Damrod  and   Diriel  in   the  South   of  East
 Beleriand.  I  do  not know  why Maidros'  overlordship is  said to
 extend  from  Sirion's  mouths  to Gelion  'where it  joins with
 Brilthor'. At this time Brilthor was  the fifth  (not as  later the
 fourth) of   the  tributaries   of  Gelion   coming  down   from  the
 mountains, the sixth and  most southerly  being Adurant  (p. 283;
 see also insert).                                                
                                                                   
 Annal 51-255   With the opening paragraph of this annal cf.               
 Q $6:                                                             
                                                                   
 The  Dark-elves  they  met  and  were  aided  by  them,  and  were
 taught  by  them  speech  and  many  things  beside,   and  became
 the  friends  of  the  children  of  the  Eldalie  who  had  never
 found  the  paths  to  Valinor,  and knew  of the  Valar but  as a
 rumour and a distant name.                                         
                                                                   
 The  reference  to  the  building  of  Brithombar and  Eglorest 'to
 fair towns' is found in The Silmarillion (p. 120), but there with
 the  addition  of the  word 'anew',  this is  because in  the later
 narrative  the  Havens  of the  Falas had  long existed  under the
 lordship of  Cirdan, and  were rebuilt  with the  aid and  skill of
 the  Noldor  of  Felagund's following.  In the  same passage  it is
 said  that Felagund  'raised the  tower of  Barad Nimras  to watch
 the western  sea',  and  also that  some of  the Elves  of Nargoth-
 rond 'went  forth  and explored  the great  Isle of  Balar', though
 'it was not  their  fate that  they should  ever dwell  there', The
 present  annal  is  the  first occurrence  of the  Isle and  Bay of

  Balar.  The  Tower  of  Tindobel,  forerunner  of Barad  Nimras, is
  marked on the Westward extension of the first map (see insert).     
    The   climbing   of   Eredlindon   by   the   Gnomes   and  their
  meeting with  the Dwarves  is in  The Silmarillion  (pp. 112  - 13)
  ascribed specifically to Caranthir's people settled in             
  Thargelion.  The  Dwarf-cities  are  in  AB  II  still  placed  'far
  south  of  Beleriand',  as  on  the Eastward  extension of  the map
  (p.  285;  see  insert).  The  view of  the Gnomes'  relations with
  the   Dwarves,  and   of  the   Dwarves  themselves,   though  very
  briefly  expressed,  is  much  as  in the  passage of  Q $9  on the
  subject  -  as  emended  (note  4)  from  'There  they   made  war
  upon  the  Dwarves  of  Nogrod  and  Belegost'  to 'There  they had
  converse with' them: there is no suggestion here  that there  was .
  fighting  between  the  peoples,  though there  is also  no mention
  of  traffic  between  them, which  is much  emphasized in  the pas-
  sage that 'structurally' corresponds in The Silmarillion           
                                                                    
  (p 113).                                                           
                                                                    
  Annal  104  In  AB  I it  is not  until annal  163 that  the Elves'
  first  encounter  with  the  Dwarves  is  mentioned;  this  passage
  was  bracketed  (note  29),  obviously  because  the matter  was to
  be introduced earlier.                                             
    The  description of  the Dwarf-road  agrees precisely  with the
  later  course  of the  road on  the Eastward  extension of  the map
  (see  p.  285  and  insert).  Mount  Dolm, which  is marked  on the
  map, is here first named in the narrative texts. It is notable that
  the  Dwarves are  here said  to have  had this  road 'of  old'; and
  the pencilled interpolation given  in note  7 certainly  means that
  they  no  longer  came  into  Beleriand  after  the  return  of the
  Noldoli. In Q $14 is it  recorded that  'Dwarves first  spread west
  from Eryd-luin, the Blue Mountains, into Beleriand after the       
  Battle of Unnumbered Tears'. In The Silmarillion (p. 91)           
  Dwarves  entered  Beleriand  and  its  history  very  long  before: 'It
  came  to  pass  during  the  second  age of  the captivity  of Melkor
  that Dwarves came over the Blue Mountains of Ered Luin into        
  Beleriand',   and   it   was  Dwarves   of  Belegost   who  devised the
  mansions   of    Thingol.   the    Thousand   Caves.    'And   when the
  building   of  Menegroth   was  achieved...   the  Naugrim   yet  came
  ever and anon over the mountains and went in traffic about the     

              
                                                                   
 lands.' Annal 104 in  AB II  must be  the first  sign of  this im-
 portant structural change in the history; and it is  probably sig-
 nificant  that  the  reference  is  to the  first encounter  of the
 Gnomes   (not   of   Elves   in   general)   with    the   Dwarves.
 The next  version  of  the  Annals  of  Beleriand  makes  it  clear
 that the reference  in the  interpolated passage  (note 7)  to 'the
 Third (Fourth)  Battle'  is to  the Battle  of Sudden  Flame, despite
 the naming  of Fingon  rather than  Fingolfin. In  AB II  the first
 battle is  Dagor-os-Giliath,  the  second  Dagor  Aglareb,  and  the
 third (though  AB  II  did  not  reach  it)  the  Battle   of  Sudden
 Flame.  This  interpolation  shows my  father already  thinking of
 what became  the  First  Battle  of  Beleriand, in  which Denethor
 of the Green-elves was slain,  and which  is first  hinted at  in a
 pencilled addition to  AV (note  18); after  the inclusion  of this
 battle in  the  great  Battles  of Beleriand,  that of  Sudden Flame
 became the fourth.                                               
                                                                   
 Annal  105  In  this  annal  are  described  for  the  first  time
 Morgoth's tests of the  strength and  watchfulness of  the besieg-
 ers,  referred  to   in  annal   51,  and   which  remain   in  The
 Silmarillion  (p.  116).  The  first  of  these  is  there said  to have
 taken  place nearly  a hundred  years since  Dagor Aglareb.  not as
 here  fifty-four:  but  the route  taken by  Morgoth's host  is the
 same  in  both  accounts,  southwards   down  the   coast  between
 Ered  Lomin and  the sea  to the  Firth of  Drengist. The  story of
 the emergence  of  Glomund,  not  yet  full-grown,  from  the gates
 of  Angband  by  night,  the  flight  of  the Elves  to Eredwethion
 and  Taur-na-Danion,  and   the  rout   of  Glomund   by  Fingon's
 horsed archers, is very close to the  account in  The Silmarillion,
 where  however  it  took  place  a hundred  years after  the attack
 that ended at Drengist: in  AB II,  again, the  time was  only half
 as long.  These  differences  are  associated  with  further  great
 lengthening of the duration of the Siege.                             
  The  addition  'in  full  might'  (of  Glomund  at  the  Battle of
 Sudden  Flame)  made  to  AB  I  (note  18)  clearly  depends  on this
 stage   in   the   backward    movement   of    Glomund's   entries
 into the  history:  see  p.  380.  Some  lines  of Old  English verse
 accompanying  the  lists  of  Old English  names refer  to Fingon's
 victory over the Dragon:                                               

      Pa com of Mistoran meare ridan                            
      Finbrand felahror flanas sceotan;                          
      Glomundes gryre grimmum straelum                            
      for( afliemde.                                             
                                                                
 Finbrand is given as AElfwine's rendering of Fingon (p. 261);
 Mistora is Mithrim (p. 258).                                    
                                                                
  The concluding, hastily scrawled, sentence of AB II is inter-
 esting. In The Silmarillion the Haladin (the 'People of Haleth')
 dwelt in the south of Thargelion after crossing the Blue Moun-
 tains, and there 'the people of Caranthir paid little heed to   
 them' (p. 143); after their brave defence of their homes        
 Caranthir 'looked kindly upon Men', and 'seeing, over late,     
 what valour there was in the Edain' offered them free lands to  
 dwell in further North under the protection of the Eldar: an of-
 fer which was refused. This is the only reference in The        
 Silmarillion to 'unfriendliness' on the part of the Feanorians  
 towards Men (though one could well imagine it); but it is note-
 worthy, in respect of the last words of these Annals, that it was
 to Cranthir (Caranthir) that the treacherous sons of Ulfang     
 were allied (AB I annal 163, The Silmarillion p. 157).          
                                                                
                             APPENDIX.                           
                                                                
          Old English version of the Annals of Beleriand         
                    made by AElfwine or Eriol.                   
                                                                
 This is the only further fragment of AElfwine's work in Tol     
 Eressea in his own language. Its relation to the Modem En-      
 glish version is puzzling, since, though it largely corresponds
 closely to AB II, it also has features of the AB I text. For in-
 stance, the defiance of Fingolfin before Angband and the with-  
 drawal of the Feanorians to the southern shore of the lake is   
 absent from annal I; the date 'I - C' follows AB I; while Mereth
 Aderthad in annal XX agrees with AB II the annal is otherwise   
 as AB I; and annal L is a confused mixture. The simple expla-   
 nation that my father made the Old English version after AB I   

  but before AB II (and hence the headnote to AB II 'Translation
  of AElfwine') comes up against the difficulty  that in  the Old
  English  the  Siege  of Angband  lasted tu  hund geara  odde ma
  (line 81),  whereas  AB II  has 'one  hundred' emended  to 'two
  hundred'.   But    the   matter    is   not    of   importance.
   Like version II of the Old English Annals of Valinor,  the text
  breaks  off in  mid-sentence. My  father composed  these annals,
  like the others, fluently and rapidly  (hence such  variations as
  Maegdros,  Maegedros,  Maidros); but  he was  interrupted, no
  doubt, and never took them up again. I suspect that AElfwine's
  version of the Annals of Beleriand was the last,               
                                                                
                      Beleriandes Geargesaegen.                   
                                                                
         Fore     sunnan    upgange:     Morgop   gefleah      
         Godedel   paet   is   Falinor,   ond    genom   pa      
         eorclanstanas  Feanores,  and  pa  com he  eft on      
         Norpdaelas   ond   getimbrode   paer on   niwan  his      
         faesten  Angband  (paet  is  Irenhell)   under  pam   5
         Sweartbeorgum.   He   of  searucrafte   gescop  pa      
         Balrogas  ond  pa  orcas;  ond   pa  eorclanstanas      
         sette  he  on  his  isernan  helme.  Pa  comon  pa      
         Noldielfe  paere  yldestan  maegpe,  pe  Ierfeloran      
         hatton,  ond  sohton  to  lande,  and  gelaedde hie  10
         Feanor  and  his  seofon  suna.   Paer forbaerndon      
         hie   pa  Teleriscan   scipu;  and   hie  gefuhton      
         sippan  wip  Morgopes  here  and  gefliemde  hine:      
         paet waes  paet aereste   gefeoht,  and   hatte  on      
         noldisce  Dagor-os-Giliad,   paet is   on  Englisc    15
         gefeoht  under   steorrum  oppe   Tungolgup.  Paer      
         Feanor   geweold    waelstowe   ond    adraefde   pa      
         orcas,   ac   weard  self  forwundod   pearle  of      
         Gopmoge    Balroga   heretoga,    Morgogs   pegne,      
         and   swealt   sippan   on   Miprime.   Pa   weard    20
         Maegdros   his    yldesta    sunu    of    Morgope      
         beswicen,   and   weard   gefangen,   and  Morgop      
         het    hine    ahon    be   paere   rihthande   on      
         Pangorodrim.   Pa    gedydon   pa    opere   suna      

 Feaanores ymb Mithrim pone mere on                25
 Northwestweardum landum, behindan Scuge-            
 beorge (Eredwepion).                               
                                                    
 AEfter sunnan upgange.                               
                                                    
 Sunnan  gear  I  Her  aetiewdon  on  aerest  se     
 mona  7  seo  sunne,  and  pa  Godu  scopon hie     
 aefter  pam  pe Morgop  fordyde pa  Beamas, for   30
 pon  pe  hie  naefdon  leoht. Swa  com gementen     
 Tid  on  middangeard.  Fingolfin   gelaedde  pa     
 opere   maegpe  para  Noldielfa   on  Norpdaelas     
 ofer   Isgegrind    oppe  Helcarakse    on   pa     
 Hinderland;  ond  pa  for  Felagund   mid  sume   35
 paere  priddan  maegpe.  Pa  foron   hie  ealle     
 norpan  mid  pam  pe  seo  sunne  aras,  and pa     
 onbrugdon   hie   hira   gupfanan,   and  comon     
 sippan  mid  micle   prymme  on   Miprim.  Paer     
 waes pa   giet  him  faehp betwux paere  maegpe   40  
 Feanores  ond  pam  oprum.  Morgoth  mid  py pe     
 leoht aetiewde beah on his deopestan gedelf, ac     
 sippan  smipode  paer  fela pinga  dearnunga and     
 sende forp sweartne smic.                           
                                                    
II. Her Fingon  Fingolfines sunu  sibbe geniwode   45
 betwux  pam  maegpum  for  pam  pe   he  ahredde     
 Maegedros.                                          
                                                    
I-C.  Her   geondferdon   and   gesceawoden  pa     
 Noldelfe Beleriand  and gesaeton hit missenlice     
 ond  eal  Sirigeones   dene  of   Garsecge  (pe   50
 Noldelfe   Belegar   hatad)   op   Haewengebeorg     
 (paet  sind   Eredlindon),  butan   Doriade  on     
 middan   pam   lande   pe  Pingol   and  Melian     
 ahton.                                              
                                                    
XX. Her  weard se  gebeorscipe and  se freolsdaeg  55   
 and   se  plega   pe  Noldelfe   Merep Aderpad     

 nemnad (paet  is  Sibbegemotes   freols)  on      
 Wiligwangas    gehealden,   pe    Noldielfe      
 Nantaprin  hatad,  neah  Sirigeones  mupum, and      
 paer  wurdon  gesamnode ge  elfe of  Godedle ge   60
 deorcelfe   ge   eac  sume   a  elfe   of  pam      
 Westhypum   and   of   Doriade    of   Pingole      
 gesende. Pa weard long sibbtid.                     
                                                    
 Her  wearp  eft unfridu  aweht of  Morgope, ond      
 wurdon  micle  eorpdynas  on  Nordaelum,  ond     65
 pa  orcas  hergodon  floccmaelum  on  Beleriand      
 ond pe elfe hie fuhton wid.                          
                                                    
 Her  wurdon Turgon  Fingolfines sunu  7 Inglor      
 Felagund  Finrodes  sunu  his  freond   7  maeg      
 yfelum  swefnum  geswenct.  7  hie   faesten 7    70
 fripstowa   gesohton  aer   pon   pe   Morgop      
 aetburste  swa  hira  swefn  him   manodon.  Pa      
 funde  Felagund  pa  deopan  scrafu  be Naroge      
 streame, 7 he paer ongann burg gestadelian and      
 waepenhord   samnian,  aefter  paere  wisan  pe   75
 Pingol   bude   Menegrop,   7  he   paet heald      
 Nargoprond  nemnde.  Ac  Turgon  ana  ferde 7      
 be  Ulmoes  lare  funde  Gondoelin  pa dieglan      
 dene, ne saegde nanum menn pa giet.                  
                                                    
 Her ongann  Morgop eft  his maegen  styrian; 7    80
 wearp  oft   unfridu  aweht   on  Beleriandes      
 gemaerum.    Micle    eorddynas    wurdon    on      
 norddaelum,  7  pa  orcas  hergodon  floccmaelum      
 on Beleriand, ac pa elfe fuhton hie wid 7 hie      
 gefliemdon.                                       85
                                                    
LI. Her gegaderode Morgod medmicelne here, and      
 fyr  abaerst  of  pam  nordernum   beorgum;  ac      
 Fingolfin 7  Maidros  fierda   gesamnodon  and      
 manige  para  deorcelfa  mid,  7  hie fordydon      
 pone orchere to nahte, and aslogon ealle pe hie   90

            utan Angbande gemetton, and hie ehton paes                           
            heriges geond pone feld Baldorion, paet nan eft                      
            to Angbandes durum comon. Pis gefeoht hatte                         
            siddan Dagor Aglareb, aet is Hrepgup on                               
            Englisc. Sippan gesetton hie 'Angbandes          95            95     
            Ymbsetl', and paet gelaeston hie tu hund geara                        
            odde ma, 7 Fingolfin beotode paet Morgop                             
            naefre from pam ymbhagan aetberstan mihte.                            
            He ne mihte self swapeah Angband abrecan ne                         
            pa Silmarillan ahreddan. Unfridu weard naefre    100            100     
            ealunga aswefed on pisse langan tide, for                       
            paem pe Morgop d... lice hine gewaepnode 7                          
            aefre ymbe stunde wolde fandian paere strengu                         
            and paere waecene his gefana.                                         
               Turgon cyning swapeah                                      105
                                                                               
                                        NOTES.                                  
                                                                               
   1 - 20    Another, earlier, Old English account of these events is found at
             the end of version I of the Annals of Valinor. p. 336.             
                                                                               
        3    eorclanstanas: see p. 283. As in the Old English version I of AV
             the name Silmaril is also treated  as an  Old English  noun, with
             plura1 Silmarillan (line 84) (in the AV version Silmarillas).     
                                                                               
        9    Ierfeloran: with variant vowels Erfeloran, Yrfeloran in  the Old
             English version II of AV (line 135), and in the list of Old English
             names, p. 212,                                                     
                                                                               
       16  Tungolgup occurs also in the Old English version I of AV, line 55.
                                                                                
       37  sunne: sunnan MS.                                                     
                                                                               
       58  Wiligwangas is a pencilled correction from Wiligleagas.               
                                                                               
       61  pam: pa MS.                                                           
                                                                               
    64-85    The text of this annal is confused. The first paragraph follows the
             beginning of the first  entry numbered  50 in  AB I:  the second
             paragraph corresponds closely to AB II annal 50: and the third re-
             peats the first.                                                   

       
                                                                   
 78  Gondoelin is clearly written thus,                              
                                                                   
 102 The illegible word is not dirnlice 'secretly'                  
                                                                   
        New Old English names in this text are;                     
                                                                   
    Sweartbeorgas  (line  6) 'Black  Mountains' (O.E.  sweart 'black,
    dark');                                                         
  Scugebeorg (lines 26 - 7) = Eredwethion (O.E. scua 'shadow');     
  Isgegrind (line 34) = Helcarakse (O.E. gegrind 'grinding together,
    clashing');                                                    
  Haewengebeorg (line 51) = Eredlindon (O.E. haewen 'blue');          
  Wiligwangas (line 58) =  Nan Tathrin  (O.E. wilig  'willow', wang
    'meadow. flat place'  (cf. Wetwang  in The  Lord of  the Rings);
    the  rejected  name  Wiligleagas  contains leah,  Modern English
    lea).                                                           
  Westhypum (line 62, dative plural) = Western Havens  (cf. Eifethyd
    = Swanhaven, p. 337; Modern English hithe).                     
  Hrepgup (line 94) = Dagor Aglareb (O.E. hrep 'glory').            
                                                                   
 The  most  notable  name  here  is   Inglor  Felagund   (line  68).
 This is the first occurrence of Inglor,  which remained  his 'true'
 name  for  many  years, though  its existence  is indicated  by the
 Old English equivalent Inglaf Felahror (p. 261).                   
