                              PREFACE.                            
                                                                 
 This book brings  the 'History  of Middle-earth'  to some  time in
 the  1930s: the  cosmographical work  Ambarkanta and  the earliest
 Annals of Valinor and Annals  of Beleriand,  while later  than the
 Quenta Noldorinwa - the 'Silmarillion'  version that  was written,
 as I believe, in 1930 - cannot themselves be more precisely dated.
   This  is  the  stage  at which  my father  had arrived  when The
 Hobbit  was  written.  Comparison  of  the  Quenta  with  the pub-
 lished Silmarillion will show that the essential character  of the
 work  was  now  fully  in  being; in  the shape  and fall  of sen-
 tences, even of whole passages,  the one  is constantly  echoed in
 the other;  and yet  the published  Silmarillion is  between three
 and four times as long.                                          
   After the hasty  'Sketch of  the Mythology'  (chapter II in this
 book), the Quenta Noldorinwa was  in fact  the only  complete ver-
 sion of 'The Silmarillion' that my father  ever made.  Towards the
 end  of  1937  he  interrupted  work  on  a  new  version,  Quenta
 Silmarillion,  which  extended  to part way  through the  story of
 Turin  Turambar,  and began The Lord  of the  Rings (see  The Lays
 of Beleriand pp. 364 -  7). When  after many  years he returned to
 the First Age, the vast extension of the world  that had  now come
 into  being  meant that  the Quenta  Silmarillion, which  had been
 stopped in full flight, could not be taken up  from where  it fell;
 and  though  he  undertook exceedingly  complex revisions  and en-
 largements of  the earlier  parts during  the following  years, he
 never achieved again  a complete  and coherent  structure. Especial-
 ly in its concluding chapters  the Quenta  Noldorinwa is  thus one
 of the primary elements in the study of the work as a whole.     

               
                                                                           
   In  the  Annals  of  Valinor  and  the  Annals of  Beleriand am          
 seen  the  beginnings  of the  chronological structure  which was          
 to  become  a  central  preoccupation.  The Annals  would develop          
 into a separate 'tradition', parallel to and overlapping but dis-          
 tinct from 'The Silmarillion' proper, and (after  intervening ver-          
 sions)  emerging  in the  years following  the completion  of The          
 Lord of the Rings in  two chief  works of  the Matter  of Middle-          
 earth,  the  Annals  of  Aman  and the  Grey Annals  of Beleriand          
 (see  pp.  310,  351). With  the Quenta  and with  these earliest          
 versions  of the  Annals I  give the  brief texts  in Anglo-Saxon          
 feigned  to have  been made  by AElfwine  (Eriol) from  the works          
 that he studied in Tol Eressea, the Lonely Isle.                           
   The  commentaries  are largely  concerned to  relate geography,          
 names,  events, relationships  and motives  to what  preceded and          
 what followed; inevitably this entails a great deal  of reference          
 back  to the  previous books,  and the  text of  the commentaries          
 is hardly enticing  (though being  in smaller  print they  can be          
 readily distinguished from the original works).  My object  is to          
 try  to  show,  and not  merely impressionistically,  how Middle-          
 earth and its history was built up gradually and  delicately, and          
 how a long  series of  small shifts  or combinations  would often          
 lead  to  the  emergence of  new and  unforeseen structures  - as          
 far example in the story of Gwindor of Nargothrond (p. 217).               
   The  arrangement of  the texts  of the  'Sketch of  the Mythol-          
 ogy'  and  the  Quenta, split  into numbered  sections comparable          
 from one text to the other, is  explained on  p. 11.  The earlier          
 volumes in the  series are  referred to  as I  (The Book  of Lost          
 Tales Part I), II (The Book of Lost Tales Part II), and  III (The          
 Lays of Beleriand).*                                                       
   The  maps  and  diagrams  in  the  book  are   reproduced  with          
 the permission of the Bodleian Library, Oxford,  and I  thank the          
 staff of the Department  of Western  Manuscripts at  the Bodleian          
 for their assistance.                                                      
   The  fifth volume  will contain  my father's  unfinished 'time-          
 travel' story, The Lost  Road, together  with the  earliest forms          
 of  the  legend  of Numenor,  which were  closely related  to it;          
 the  Lhammas  or  Account  of Tongues,  Etymologies; and  all the          
 writings concerned with the  First Age  up to  the time  when The          
 Lord of the Rings was begun.                                               
                                                                           
 (* Note that all page numbers refer to the hardcover Houghton Mifflin editions.)
