     APPENDIX.
               
 THE GENEALOGIES.
               
   THE LIST OF
      NAMES     
               
       AND      
               
    THE SECOND
  'SILMARILLION'
       MAP.     

                              I THE GENEALOGIES.                             
                                                                            
 These  belong  essentially  with  the  earliest  Annals  of  Beleriand,  but
 though I knew of their existence (since they are referred to in the  List of
 Names)  I  presumed  them  lost,  and  only  recently discovered  this small
 manuscript,  after  the  work  on  Vol.  IV  was  completed. It  consists of
 genealogical  tables  of  the  Elvish princes,  of the  three houses  of the
 Fathers of Men,  and of  the houses  of the  Eastern Men.  There is  no need
 to reproduce these tables, but only to mention certain details that  are not
 found elsewhere. In the first of them are some additional persons:          
  Elwe,  Lord  of  the  Teleri (who  is called  'Lord of  Ships'), has  a son
 Elulindo;                                                                   
  Fingon has  a son  Findobar (this  name, simply  as a  name, occurs  in the
 Etymologies under the stems PHIN (written Findabar) and MBAR);              
  Orodreth, in addition to his son Halmir, has a younger son Orodlin.        
  The  genealogies  of  Men  have  dates  of  birth and  death. These  were a
 good deal emended, changing them by a  year or  two, but  in the  result are
 almost  exactly  as  in  the  earlier  version  of AB  i. The  following are
 however  not  given in  the Annals  in any  version (if  they had  been they
 would of course have been extended in two  steps, first  by a  hundred years
 and then by two hundred years).                                             
  Elboron  son  of  Dior  born  192;  Elbereth  his  brother  born  195  (they
 were thus fourteen and eleven years old at their deaths, AB 2 annal 306);
  Hurin died in '? 200' (in annal zoo in AB i, repeated in AB 2, 'of his fate
 no certain tidings are known');                                             
  Ulfand  the  Swart  born  100,  died  170;  Uldor  the Accursed  born 125,
 Ulfast born 128, Ulwar born 130;                                           
  Bor   the  Faithful   born  120;   Borlas  born   143;  Boromir   born  145;
 Borthandos born 147.                                                        
  In  addition  to  the  genealogical  tables there  is also  a table  of the
 divisions of  the Qendi  which is  almost the  same as  that given  with the
 lhammas  on p.  197, and  together with  this table  is a  list of  the many
 names  by which  the Lindar,  Noldor, and  Teleri were  known. This  list is
 a first form of that in QS $29 (note to the text), and  all the  names found
 here are found also in the longer list in QS; but there  are here  also many
 Elvish names which (apart from Soloneldi) are not found in QS:              
  The   Lindar   are   named   also   Tarqendi  'High-elves',   Vanimor  'the
 Beautiful' [> Irimor 'the Fair Ones'], and Ninqendi 'White-elves';          
  The   Noldor  are   named  also   Nurqendi  Deep-elves,   Ainimor  [written
 above: Istimor] 'the Wise', and Kuluqendi 'Golden-elves',                   
  The   Teleri   are   named   also   Falmarindi   'Foam-riders',   Soloneldi
 'Musicians of the shore', and Veaneldar 'Sea-elves'.                        
  The name Vanimor is used in A V 2 of  the lesser  spirits of  Valarin race,

 among  whom  were  'later  numbered'  also  the  Valarindi,  the   Children  of
 the  Valar  (pp.  110, 121);  the latter  are the  Vanimor in  the Etymologies,
 stem   BAN,   but   under   the   negative   stems   UGU,   UMU  the   name  is
 translated   'fair   folk   =   (men   and)   elves'.   Some  other   of  these
 names   also   appear   in   the    Etymologies:   Tarqendi    (TA),   Nurqendi
 (NU),  Istimor  (is),   Falmarindi  (PHAL),   Soloneldi  (SOL).   With  Irimor
 cf. Irima ye Numenor in The Lost Road (p. 72), and see stem ID.                
                                                                               
                              II. THE LIST OF NAMES.                             
                                                                               
 During  the  1930S  my  father  began the  task of  making an  alphabetic list,
 with definitions, of  all the  names in  his works  concerned with  the legends
 of the Elder Days. A list of sources is attached to this list, and  the entries
 are  accompanied  by  full  references  to  sources  (by page-number  or annal-
 date) - but  these references  are almost  entirely confined  to the  Annals of
 Beleriand and the Genealogies: the only  others are  a few  to the  first pages
 of  the  Qenta  Noldorinwa  (Q)  and two  to the  Map. In  the list  of sources
 'Annals of Beleriand' and 'Genealogies'  are marked  with a  tick; it  is clear
 then  that  my  father  had  indexed  these  and  made  a  beginning on  Q when
 he stopped.                                                                    
   As  the  List  of Names  was originally  written the  references are  only to
 the  first  version  of  AB  i  (but  include  additions  made  to   that  text
 subsequently and given in the notes in I V. 310 - 13). But after the list was
 abandoned  as  a  methodical  work  of  reference  my father  added to  it more
 haphazardly,  without  references,  and  these  later  additions  show  use  of
 the  second  version of  AB i,  as well  as some  names that  do not  appear in
 any of the texts; entries were also substantially modified and extended.       
   The  majority  of  the  entries  do  not  in  fact  add  anything   in  their
 definitions to what is available in the  sources, and  it is  quite unnecessary
 to  give  the  work  in full.  There follows  here a  small selection  from the
 material, this  being restricted  to those  entries or  parts of  entries which
 have  some  particular  feature  of  interest   (mostly  concerning   names  or
 name-forms).                                                                   
                                                                               
   Aldaron  The  Noldorin  equivalent  is  given  as  Galadon, which  does not
   appear elsewhere.                                                            
 Balrog  is  said  to  be  an   Orc-word  with   no  pure   Qenya  equivalent:
   'borrowed   Malaroko-';   contrast  the   Etymologies,  stems   NCWAL,  RUK.
   Beleriand  'Originally  land  about  southern  Sirion,  named  by  the  Elves
   of  the  Havens  from  Cape  Balar,  and  Bay  of  Balar  into  which  Sirion
   flowed;  extended  to  all  lands  south   of  Hithlum   and  Taur-na-Danion,
   and   west  of   Eredlindon.  Its   southern  borders   undefined.  Sometimes
   includes  Doriath  and  Ossiriand.'  With  this  statement  of the  extent of
   Beleriand  cf.  QS  $ 108;  and with  the derivation  of the  name Beleriand
   from  Cape  Balar,  Bay  of  Balar, cf.  the Etymologies,  stem BAL.  This is

 the first occurrence of Cape Balar, which was however marked in on              
 the second Map as originally drawn and lettered.                                
 Beren   The  surnames   of  Beren   were  first   given  as   Mablosgen  'Empty-
 handed'   and   Ermabuin   'One-handed'   (as   in   AB   z   annal   232).  The
 former   was   changed   to   Mablothren  and   then  to   Camlost  (and   in  a
 separate  entry  Mablosgen  >  Mablost);  the  latter   to  Erchamui   and  then
 to Erchamion  (again  as  in  AB  z,  note  22).  From  the   Etymologies  (stems
 KAB,  MAP)  it  appears  that  the  names  containing   the  element   mab  are
 Ilkorin   (Doriathrin)   names,   while   those   containing   cam,   cham   are
 Noldorin.                                                                       
 Cinderion   'Gnomish   name   =   Hither   Lands'.   This   name  has   no  ref-
 erence to a source;  it is  found nowhere  else, nor  any form  at all  like it.
 Cristhorn  was  emended  first  to  Cil-thorn   and  then   to  Cil-thor(o)ndor,
 with   the   definition  'Eagle-cleft   of  Thorondor   King  of   Eagles'.  The
 forms  Cilthoron   and  Cilthorondor   are  found   in  the   Etymologies  (stem
 KIL), as also is Cristhoron (KIRIS).                                          
 Dagor   Delothrin   'The   Last   Battle,  "the   Terrible  Battle",   in  which
 Fionwe  overcame  Morgoth.'  The  reference  given  is  to   AB  x   annal  250,
 where  however  no  Elvish  name  is   found.  In   a  cross-reference   in  the
 list to the Last Battle it is called also 'the Long Battle' (for it lasted fifty
 years).                                                                         
 Dagor Nirnaith is given as a name of the Battle of Unnumbered Tears.             
 Dark-elves  'Translation  of   Moreldar  (also   called  Ilkorindi,   those  who
 came  not  to  Kor),  the  name  of  all  the   Elves  who   remained  wandering
 in   the  Hither   Lands...'  The   term  Moreldar   is  not   found  elsewhere.
 The  nomenclature  here  is  of  course  that  of  Q  ($2),  where Eldar  = 'all
 Elves'  and  the  Ilkorindi  or  Dark-elves  are  those  who  were  lost  on the
 Great March.                                                                    
 Bor-deloth,   or   Dor-na-Daideloth   '"Land   of   Dread"   or  "Land   of  the
 Shadow   of   Dread",   those  regions   east  of   Eredwethion  and   north  of
 Taur-na-Danion   which   Morgoth    ruled;   but    its   borders    were   ever
 increased southward, and early it included Taur-na-Fuin.'                       
 Dorthanion  is  stated  to  be  a   Doriathrin  name:   thanion  =   'of  pines'
 (than). See the Etymologies, stem THON.                                         
 Dwarves   'Called   by   the  Dark-elves   (and  so   by  the   Gnomes)  Nauglar
 (singular  Naugla).'Nauglar  appears  in  an  addition  to  AB r  (IV. 311);
 the QS form is Naugrim.                                                         
 Elivorn  'Lake-Black  in  Dor  Granthir.'  This  was  a  latter addition  to the
 list  and  has  no  source-reference.  Elivorn  may  well  have  been  the  form
 erased  and  replaced  by  Helevorn  in QS  $ 118. Dor  Granthir is  found in
 the same passage in QS.                                                         
 Eredlindon    '"Blue    Mountains"    (lind    blue),    eastern    bounds    of
 Beleriand.' See the commentary on QS $ 108.                                    
 Eredlumin   '"Gloomy   Mountains",   mountains   to   east   [read    west]   of
 Hithlum,  overlooking  the  Seas.'  As  the  list  was  originally  made,  Ered-
 lomin  was  at  both  occurrences   written  Ered-lumin.   I  have   noted  (IV.

 192  -  3) that  both the  meaning of  the name  and its  application were
 changed,  so  that  Ered-lomin  'Shadowy  Mountains',  to  the   east  and
 south  of  Hithlum,  as  in  Q,  became  Ered-lomin  'Echoing  Mountains',
 the coastal range west of Hithlum;  and at  the same  time the  meaning of
 Dor-lomin  changed  from  'Land  of  Shadows'  to  'Land  of  Echoes'.  In
 the  List  of  Names as  originally made  the new  name for  the mountains
 east   and   south   of   Hithlum,   Eredwethion   'Shadowy   Mountains',
 already  appears  (with  the  etymology  gwath  'shadow'),  and  there  is
 here  therefore  a  halfway  stage,  when  Ered-lomin (-lumin)  had become
 the  name  of  the coastal  range but  did not  yet have  the significance
 'Echoing'.  There  is  no  doubt  an  etymological  halfway   stage  also,
 which  I  take  to  be  the  explanation  of  the  lumin form  (found also
 in  Dor-lumin  on  the  second  Map):   the  source   was  now   the  stem
 LUM,  given  in  the  Etymologies  as  the  source of  Hith-lum (and  of Q
 Hisilumbe,  changed  to  Hisilome  under  the  influence of  lome 'night':
 Q   lumbe   'gloom,   shadow').   Hence   the  translation   here  'Gloomy
 Mountains',  which  is  not  found  elsewhere. Finally  the interpretation
 'Echoing' arose, with derivation of -lomin from the stem LAM.             
 Fingolfin The cairn of Fingolfin is called Sarnas Fingolfin.               
 Fuin  Daidelos  'Night  of  Dread's  Shadow'  or  'Deadly  Nightshade'  is
 given as a name of Taur-na-Fuin.                                          
 Gothmog   '=   Voice  of   Goth  (Morgoth),   an  Orc-name.'   Morgoth  is
 explained  at its  place in  the list  as 'formed  from his  Orc-name Goth
 "Lord or Master", with  mor "dark  or black"  prefixed.' These  entries in
 the List of Names have been discussed in II. 67.  In the  Etymologies the
 element  goth  is  differently  explained  in Gothmog  (GOS, GOTH)  and in
 Morgoth  (KOT,  but  with  a suggestion  that the  name 'may  also contain
 GOTH ).                                                                   
 Gurtholfin   was   subsequently   changed  to   Gurtholvin  and   then  to
 Gurtholf.  Gurtholfin  >  Gurtholf  also  in  AB  2,  note  39;   see  the
 Etymologies, stems GOLOB and NGUR.                                        
 Hithlum  is  translated  'Mist-and-Dusk';   see  the   Etymologies,  stems
 KHIS and LUM.                                                             
 Kuivienen  The Noldorin  name Nen  Echui is  given; this  is found  in the
 Etymologies, stem KUY.                                                    
 Morgoth See Gothmog.                                                      
 Orcs  'Gnomish  orch,  pl.  eirch,  erch;  Qenya ork, orqui  borrowed from
 Gnomish.  A  folk  devised and  brought into  being by  Morgoth to  war on
 Elves  and  Men;  sometimes  translated  "Goblins",   but  they   were  of
 nearly human stature.' See the entry OROK in the Etymologies.             
 Sarn Athrad is translated 'Stone of Crossing'.                             
 Sirion The length  of Sirion  is given  as 'about  goo miles'  from Eithil
 Sirion to the Delta. In QS $ 107 the length of the river from the Pass of
 Sirion to the Delta is 121 leagues, which if measured  in a  straight line
 from  the  northern  opening  of  the Pass  agrees with  the scale  on the
 second Map of 3'2  Cm. =  50 miles  (see p.  272). But  the List  of Names

  and  the  original  drawing  of  the  second  Map  were  associated,  and two
  of the references given in the list are made to the Map,  so that  the figure
  of goo miles (300 leagues) is hard to account for.                          
    Sirion's   Haven:   '(Siriombar),   the   settlement   of   Tuor   and  the
  remnants  of  Doriath  at   Eges-sirion;  also   called  Sirion.'   The  name
  Siriombar only occurs here; cf. Brithornbar.                                
    Mouths  of  Sirion:  '(Eges-sirion),  the  various  branches  of  Sirion at
  its delta, also the region of the delta.' Above the  second s  of Eges-sirion
  (a  name  not  found  elsewhere)  is  written  an  h,  showing the  change of
  original s to h in medial position.                                         
    Sirion's Well: '(Eithil or Eithil Sirion), the sources of Sirion,  and the
  fortress of Fingolfin and Fingon near the spring.'                          
  Tol Thu is another name for Tol-na-Gaurhoth.                                
  Tulkas  'The  youngest and  strongest of  the nine  Valar.' The  reference is
  to Q, IV. 79, but it is not said there that  Tulkas was  the youngest  of the
  Valar.                                                                      
                                                                             
                       III THE SECOND 'SILMARILLION' MAP                      
                                                                             
 The  second  map  of Middle-earth  west of  the Blue  Mountains in  the Elder
 Days  was  also  the  last.  My  father  never  made  another; and  over many
 years this  one became  covered all  over with  alterations and  additions of
 names and features, not a few of them so hastily or  faintly pencilled  as to
 be more or  less obscure.  This was  the basis  for my  map in  the published
 'Silmarillion'.                                                              
  The  original  element  in  the  map  can   however  be   readily  perceived
 from  the  fine and  careful pen  (all subsequent  change was  roughly done);
 and I give here on  four successive  pages a  reproduction of  the map  as it
 was  originally  drawn  and lettered.  I have  taken pains  to make  this as
 close a copy of the original as I could, though I do not guarantee  the exact
 correspondence of every tree.                                                
  It is clear that  this second  map, developed  from that  given in  Vol. IV,
 belonged in its original form with the earlier work of the  1930S: it  was in
 fact closely associated with the List of Names  - which  in two  cases (Eglor
 and  Eredlumin,  although  Eredlumin  is  not  marked   on  the   map)  gives
 'Map'  as  the  source-reference  -  as  is   shown  by   certain  name-forms
 common  to  both,  e.g.  Dor-deloth,  Dor-lumin,  Eithil  Sirion, and  by the
 occurrence in both of  Cape Balar  (see the  entry Beleriand  in the  List of
 Names).  Moreover  the  date  in  'Realm  of  Nargothrond  Beyond  the  river
 (until 195)' on the map associates it with the original Annals  of Beleriand,
 where the fall of the redoubt took place in that year (IV. 305), as does the
 river-name Rathlorion (later Rathloriel).                                    
  The   map  is   on  four   sheets,  originally   pasted  together   but  now
 separate,  in  which  the  map-squares  do  not  entirely  coincide  with the
 sheets.  In  my reproductions  I have  followed the  squares rather  than the

  original sheets. I  have numbered  the squares  horizontally right  across the
  map from 1 to 15, and  lettered them  vertically from  A to  M, so  that each
  square  has  a  different  combination  of  letter  and figure  for subsequent
  reference. I hope later to  give an  account of  all changes  made to  the map
  afterwards,  using  these  redrawings as  a basis.  The scale  is 50  miles to
  3'2 cm. (the length of the sides of the squares); see p. 272.                 
    There  are  various  developments  in  the  physical  features of  the lands
  from the first  Map (such  as the  large island  lying off  the coast  west of
  Drengist;   the   Mountains  of   Mithrim;  the   eastern  tributary   arm  of
  Gelion; the isle of Balar), but I shall  not here  make a  detailed comparison
  between  the  two.  It  will  be  seen that  at this  stage my  father entered
  remarkably  few  names on  the new  map -  far fewer  than were  in existence,
  in  marked  contrast  to  the  old  one,  which  names   Ivrin,  Thangorodrim,
  Angband,  Mount  Dolm,  the   Hill  of   Spies,  the   great  mountain-chains,
  etc.  On  the  second  map  such  features as  Lake Ivrin  and Mount  Dolm are
  nonetheless  shown,  and  of  course  some  names   added  in   roughly  later
  may well go back to the early period; but as this is impossible to tell I have
  omitted everything in the  redrawing that  is not  original. I  cannot explain
  the  mountain  blacked-in  to the  west of  Ivrin (square  D5), nor  the large
  mound,  if  that is  what it  is, between  Sirion and  Mindeb (E8),  nor again
  the  curious  circular  bay  on  the coast  below Drengist  (C3). On  the very
  strange  representation  of  Thangorodrim,  isolated  in  a circle  of smaller
  peaks, see p. 271.                                                            
    Especially  interesting  is  the  appearance  of Tavrobel  in the  Forest of
  Brethil. In the literary texts of this period  Tavrobel is  named only  in the
  preamble  to  AV  i  (cited  on  p. 201),  as Pengolod's  home in  Tol Eressea
  'after  his  return  unto  the West',  where AElfwine  (Eriol) saw  and trans-
  lated  the  Annals;  from this  preamble was  developed that  to QS  (p. 203),
  where  however  the  name  is  written Tathrobel.  On the  other hand,  in the
  Etymologies  (stem  PEL(ES))  Tavrobel  is  mentioned   as  the   'village  of
  Turin in  the forest  of Brethil,  and name  of village  in Tol  Eressea'; the
  first  element is  Noldorin tafr,  tavor, 'woodpecker'  (TAM), and  the second
  means  '(fenced)  village'  (Qenya  opele,  Noldorin  gobel).   The  following
  evidences                             thus                             appear:
  (1)   In   the   earliest  legends   Tavrobel  (originally   translated  'wood-
  home',  I.  267)  had  likewise  a  double  meaning: it  was Great  Haywood in
  Staffordshire   in   England,   and   it  bore,   according  to   complex  and
  changing conceptions by this time long  since lost,  a particular  relation to
  Gilfanon's  home  of  the same  name in  Tol Eressea  (see II.  292 -  3 310).
  (2)   Haywood   was   in   Old   English   baeg-wudu   'enclosed   wood'  (II.
                                                                               
  328).                                                                         
  (3)  Later  (in  the  post-Lord  of  the  Rings period)  the dwellings  of the
  Men  of  Brethil  to  whom  Turin   came  were   ca1led  Ephel   Brandir  'the
  encircling fence of Brandir' (ephel  derived from  et-pel 'outer  fence'), and
  this  village  was  on   an  eminence   in  the   forest  called   Amon  Obel.
  (4)  In  the  Etymologies,  Tavrobel  is  still  the  name  of two  places, the

  village  of  the  Woodmen  in  Brethil,  and  a  village  in  Tol  Eressea,  where (in
  the  preambles  to  A  V  x  and  QS)  Pengolod  (successor,  as  I  have   argued  in
  IV. 274, to Gilfanon) dwelt.                                                          
    But  there  is  no  indication  at  all  why  Tavrobel  should  still be  used twice
  in  this  way.  It  may  be  thought  that  my   father  did   not  wish   finally  to
  abandon  this  old  and  deep   association  of   his  youth;   and  it   is  tempting
  therefore  to  see  his  bestowal  at  this  time  of  the name  Tavrobel in  this way
  and  in  this  place  as  an  echo  of  Great  Haywood,   and  perhaps   not  entirely
  fanciful   to   wonder  whether   he  was   influenced  by   the  confluence   of  the
  two  rivers,  Taiglin  and  Sirion,  not  wholly  unlike,  in  their  relative courses
  here, that of the Sow and the Trent at Great Haywood (I. 396).*                       
                                                                                       
  (* Gilfanon's   house,   the   House  of   the  Hundred   Chimneys,  stood   near  the
  bridge  of  Tavrobel  (I.  174-5),  where  two  rivers, Gruir  and Afros,  joined (II.
  284, 287). I noted (I. 196 note 5) the possibility that there was, or is, a house that
  gave  rise  to  Gilfanon's; and  it has  been pointed  out to  me by  Mr G.  L. Elkin,
  Acting  Director  of  the  Shugborough  Estate,  who  has  kindly  supplied   me  with
  photographs  and  a  detailed  map,  that  Shugborough  Hall,  the  home of  the Earls
  of Lichfield and now the property of the National Trust, is  near the  end of  the old
  packhorse  bridge  (called  the  Essex  Bridge)  which  crosses  the  rivers  at their
  confluence,  and  that  the  chimneys  of  the  mansion  are  a  prominent  feature. It
  seems very likely that it was my father's sight of the great  house through  the trees
  and  its  smoking  chimneys  as  he  stood  on the  bridge that  lies, in  some sense,
  behind  the  House  of  the  Hundred  Chimneys  in  the  old  legend.  Mr   Elkin  has
  further  suggested  that the  High Heath  or Heath  of the  Sky-roof, where  the great
  battle  was  fought, so  that it  became the  Withered Heath  (II. 284,  287-8), might
  be Hopton Heath (where  a battle  of the  Civil War  was fought  in 1643),  which lies
  a few miles to the North-west.)                                                       
