                                         I.                                     
                                                                                
                             THE EARLY HISTORY OF THE                            
                                      LEGEND.                                    
                                                                                
 In  February  1968  my  father  addressed  a  commentary  to  the  authors  of an
 article  about  him  (The  Letters of J. R. R.  Tolkien no.  294). In  the course
 of this he recorded that 'one  day' C.  S. Lewis  said to  him that  since 'there
 is too little of what we really like in stories' they would have to try  to write
 some themselves. He went on:                                                    
  We  agreed  that  he  should  try  'space-travel',  and  I  should   try  'time-
 travel'.  His  result  is  well  known.   My  effort,   after  a   few  promising
 chapters,  ran  dry:  it  was  too  long  a  way  round to  what I  really wanted
 to  make,  a  new  version  of  the  Atlantis  legend.  The final  scene survives
 as The Downfall of Numenor.*                                                   
 Afewyearsearlier,    in a letter of July  1964 (Letters no.    257), he gave some
 account of his book, The Lost Road:                                              
  When  C.  S.  Lewis  and  I  tossed  up,  and  he was  to write  on space-travel
 and  I  on  time-travel,  I  began  an  abortive  book  of  time-travel  of which
 the  end  was  to  be  the  presence  of  my  hero in  the drowning  of Atlantis.
 This  was  to  be  called  Numenor,  the  Land  in  the  West.  The   thread  was
 to  be   the  occurrence   time  and   again  in   human  families   (like  Durin
 among  the  Dwarves)  of  a  father  and  son  called  by  names  that  could  be
 interpreted  as  Bliss-friend   and  Elf-friend.   These  no   longer  understood
 are  found  in  the  end  to  refer  to  the  Atlantid-Numenorean  situation  and
 mean  'one  loyal  to  the  Valar,   content  with   the  bliss   and  prosperity
 within  the  limits   prescribed'  and   'one  loyal   to  friendship   with  the
 High-elves'.  It   started  with   a  father-son   affinity  between   Edwin  and
 Elwin  of  the  present,  and  was  supposed  to  go  back  into  legendary  time
 by  way  of  an  Eadwine  and  AElfwine   of  circa   A.D.918,  and   Audoin  and
 Alboin  of  Lombardic  legend,  and  so  to  the  traditions  of  the  North  Sea
 concerning  the  coming  of  corn  and  culture   heroes,  ancestors   of  kingly
 lines,  in  boats  (and  their  departure  in  funeral  ships).  One  such Sheaf,
 or  Shield  Sheafing,  can  actually   be  made   out  as   one  of   the  remote
 ancestors  of  the  present  Queen.  In  my  tale  we  were  to  come at  last to
 Amandil  and  Elendil  leaders   of  the   loyal  party   in  Numenor,   when  it
 fell   under   the   domination   of   Sauron.   Elendil  'elf-friend'   was  the
 founder  of  the  Exiled  kingdoms   in  Arnor   and  Gondor.   But  I   found  my
                                                                                
 (* This  is  Akallabeth,  The  Downfall  of  Numenor,  posthumously  published in
 The Silmarillion, pp. 259-82.)                                                  

                                          
                                                                                       
     real interest was only in the upper end, the Akallabeth or Atalantie*              
     ('Downfall' in Numenorean and Quenya), so I brought  all the  stuff I              
     had  written  on  the  originally unrelated  legends of  Numenor into              
     relation with the main mythnlogy.                                                  
  I  do  not  know   whether  evidence   exists  that   would  date   the  conversation
  that  led  to  the  writing  of  Out  of  the Silent  Planet and  The Last  Road, but
  the   former   was   finished   by   the  autumn   of  1937,   and  the   latter  was
  submitted,  so  far  as  it  went,   to  Allen   and  Unwin   in  November   of  that
  year (see 1 II.364).                                                                  
     The  significance  of  the  last  sentence  in  the  passage  just  cited  is  not
  entirely  clear.  When  my  father  said  'But  I  found  my  real interest  was only
  in  the  upper  end,  the   Akallabeth  or Atalantie'   he  undoubtedly   meant  that
  he  had  not  been  inspired  to  write  the  'intervening'   parts,  in   which  the
  father  and  son  were  to  appear  and  reappear  in  older  and  older   phases  of
  Germanic   legend;  and   indeed  The   Lost  Road   stops  after   the  introductory
  chapters  and  only  takes  up  again  with   the  Numenorean   story  that   was  to
  come  at  the  end.   Very  little   was  written   of  what   was  planned   to  lie
  between.  But  what  is  the  meaning  of  'so  I  brought  all   the  stuff   I  had
  written  on  the  originally  unrelated  legends  of   Numenor  into   relation  with
  the   main   mythology'?  My   father  seems   to  be   saying  that,   having  found
  that  he  only  wanted  to  write  about   Numenor,  he   therefore  and   only  then
  (abandoning   The   Last   Road)   appended   the   Numenorean   material   to   'the
  main   mythology',   thus   inaugurating   the   Second   Age   of  the   World.  But
  what   was   this   material?   He   cannot   have   meant   the   Numenorean  matter
  contained  in  The  Lost  Road  itself,  since  that  was  already  fully  related to
  'the  main  mythology'.  It  must  therefore  have   been  something   else,  already
  existing   when   The   last   Road   was  begun,   as  Humphrey   Carpenter  assumes
  in  his  Biography  (p.  170):  'Tolkien's  legend   of  Numenor...   was  prohably
  composed   some   time  before   the  writing   of  "The   Lost  Road",   perhaps  in
  the  late  nineteen-twenties  or  early  thirties.'  But,  in  fact,  the  conclusion
  seems to me inescapable that my father erred when he said this.                       
     The  original  rough  workings  for  The  Lost  Road  are  extant,  but  they  are
  very  rough,  and   do  not   form  a   continuous  text.   There  is   one  complete
  manuscript,  itself   fairly  rough   and  heavily   emended  in   different  stages;
  and   a  professional   typescript  that   was  done   when  virtually   all  changes
  had  been  made  to  the  manuscript.  f  The  typescript  breaks  off   well  before
                                                                                       
     <It  is  a curious  chance that  the stem  talat used  in Q[uenya]  for 'slipping,
  sliding,  falling  down',  of  which  atalantie  is a  normal (in  Q) noun-formation,
  should  so   much  resemble   Atlantis.  [Footnote   to  the   letter.]  -   See  the
  Etymologies, stem TALAT. The very early Elvish  dictionary described  in I.  246 has
  a verb talte 'incline (transitive), decline, shake at foundations, make totter, etc.'
  and an adjective talta 'shaky, wobbly, tottering - sloping, slanting.'                
     +'This typescript  was made  at Allen  and Unwin,  as appears  from a  letter from
  Stanley  Unwin  dated  30th  November  1937:  The  Lost  Road:   We  have   had  this
  typed  and  are  returning the  original herewith.  The typed  copy will  follow when
  we have had an opportunity of reading it.' See further p. 73 note 14.                 

  the  point   where  the   manuscript  comes   to  an   end,  and   my  father's
  emendations  to  it  were  very  largely  corrections  of the  typist's errors,
  which  were  understandably  many;  it  has   therefore  only   slight  textual
  value, and the manuscript is very much the primary text.                       
    The  Lost Road  breaks off  finally in  the course  of a  conversation during
  the  last  days  of  Numenor  between  Elendil  and  his  son Herendil;  and in
  this  Elendil speaks  at length  of the  ancient history:  of the  wars against
  Morgoth,  of  Earendel,  of  the  founding  of  Numenor,  and  of   the  coming
  there  of  Sauron.  The  Lost  Road  is  therefore,  as  I have  said, entirely
  integrated  with  'the  main  mythology'  -  and  this is  true already  in the
  preliminary drafts.                                                            
    Now  as  the  papers  were found,  there follows  immediately after  the last
  page  of  The  Lost  Road  a  further  manuscript  with  a  new page-numbering,
  but no title. Quite apart from its being so  placed, this  text gives  a strong
  physical  impression  of  belonging  to  the same  time as  The Last  Road; and
  it is closely associated in content with the last part of The Last Road, for it
  tells the  story of  Numenor and  its downfall  - though  this second  text was
  written with a different purpose, to be a  complete if  very brief  history: it
  is  indeed  the  first  fully-written  draft of  the narrative  that ultimately
  became  the  Akallabeth.  But  it  is  earlier  than The  Lost Road;  for where
  that has Sauron and Tarkalion this has Sur and Angor.                          
    A   second,   more   finished   manuscript   of   this  history   of  Numenor
  followed, with the title (written  in afterwards)  The Last  Tale: The  Fall of
  Numenor.  This  has  several   passages  that   are  scarcely   different  from
  passages  in  The  Lost  Road,  but  it  seems  scarcely  possible to  show for
  certain  which  preceded  and  which  followed,  unless  the evidence  cited on
  p. 74, note 25, is  decisive that  the second  version of  The Fall  of Numenor
  was  the later  of the  two; in  any case,  a passage  rewritten very  near the
  time of the original composition of this  version is  certainly later  than The
  Last  Road, for  it gives  a later  form of  the story  of Sauron's  arrival in
  Numenor (see pp. 26 - 7).                                                      
    It is  therefore clear  that the  two works  were intimately  connected; they
  arose  at  the  same  time  and  from the  same impulse,  and my  father worked
  on them together. But still more  striking is  the existence  of a  single page
  that can only be  the original  'scheme' for  The Fall  of Numenor,  the actual
  first  writing  down  of  the  idea.  The  very  name Numenor  is here  only in
  process  of  emergence.  Yet  in  this  primitive  form of  the story  the term
  Middle-earth  is  used,  as  it  never  was in  the Quenta:  it did  not appear
  until  the  Annals  of  Valinor   and  the   Ambarkanta.  Moreover   the  form
  Ilmen  occurs,  which suggests  that this  'scheme' was  later than  the actual
  writing   of  the   Ambarkanta,  where   Ilmen  was   an  emendation   of  Ilma
  (earlier Silma): IV.240, note 3.                                               
    I  conclude  therefore  that   'Numenor'  (as   a  distinct   and  formalised
  conception,  whatever  'Atlantis-haunting',  as  my   father  called   it,  lay
  behind) arose in the  actual context  of his  discussions with  C. S.  Lewis in
  (as seems probable) 1936. A  passage in  the 1964  letter can  be taken  to say

  precisely that: 'I began an abortive book of time-travel of which  the end
  was to be the presence of my hero in the drowning of Atlantis. This was to
  be  called  Numenor,  the  Land  in  the  West.'  Moreover,  'Numenor' was
  from the  outset conceived  in full  association with  'The Silmarillion';
  there never was  a time  when the  legends of  Numenor were  'unrelated to
  the main mythology'.  My father  erred in  his recollection  (or expressed
  himself obscurely,  meaning something  else); the  letter cited  above was
  indeed written nearly thirty years later.                                 

                                      II.                                    
                              THE FALL OF NUMENOR.                           
                                                                            
                                      (i)                                    
                                                                            
                             The original outline.                           
                                                                            
 The text of the original 'scheme' of the legend, referred to in  the previous
 chapter,  was  written  at such  speed that  here and  there words  cannot be
 certainly  interpreted.  Near  the  beginning  it  is  interrupted by  a very
 rough  and  hasty  sketch,  which  shows  a  central  globe,   marked  Ambar,
 with two circles around it;  the inner  area thus  described is  marked Ilmen
 and  the  outer  Vaiya.  Across  the  top  of Ambar  and cutting  through the
 zones of Ilmen and Vaiya is a straight line extending to the outer  circle in
 both directions. This  must be  the forerunner  of the  diagram of  the World
 Made   Round   accompanying   the   Ambarkanta,   IV.247.   The   first  sen-
 tence of the text, concerning Agaldor (on  whom see  pp. 78  - 9)  is written
 separately from the rest, as if it were a false start, or the beginning  of a
 distinct outline.                                                           
                                                                            
  Agaldor chieftain of a people who live upon the N.W. margin of             
 the Western Sea.                                                            
                                                                            
  The  last  battle  of the  Gods. Men  side largely  with Morgoth.          
 After the victory  the Gods  take counsel.  Elves are  summoned to          
 Valinor. [Struck out: Faithful men dwell in the Lands]                      
  Many  men had  not come  into the  old Tales.  They are  still at          
 large on earth. The Fathers of Men are given a  land to  dwell in,          
 raised by  Osse and  Aule in  the great  Western Sea.  The Western          
 Kingdom  grows  up.   Atalante.  [Added   in  margin:   Legend  so          
 named  it  afterward  (the   old  name   was  Numar   or  Numenos)          
 Atalante = The  Falling.] Its  people great  mariners, and  men of          
 great skill and wisdom. They range from Tol-eressea to  the shores          
 of  Middle-earth.  Their  occasional  appearance  among  Wild Men,          
 where  Faithless   Men  also   [?ranged  corrupting   them].  Some          
 become lords in the East. But the Gods will not allow them to land          
 in  Valinor  -  and  though  they  become long-lived  because many          
 have been bathed  in the  radiance of  Valinor from  Tol-eressea -          
 they are mortal  and their  span brief.  They murmur  against this          
 decree.  Thu  comes  to  Atalante,  heralded [read  heralding] the          
 approach  of  Morgoth.  But  Morgoth  cannot  come  except   as  a          

                                                                   
                                                                          
  spirit,  being  doomed  to  dwell  outside  the   Walls  of   Night.  The
  Atalanteans  fall,  and  rebel.  They  make  a  temple   to  Thu-Morgoth.
  They  build  an  armament  and  assail  the  shores  of  the   Gods  with
  thunder.                                                                 
     The   Gods   therefore   sundered   Valinor   from   the   earth,  and
  an   awful  rift   appeared  down   which  the   water  poured   and  the
  armament  of  Atalante  was   drowned.  They   globed  the   whole  earth
  so  that  however  far  a  man  sailed  he  could  never again  reach the
  West,  but  came  back  to  his  starting-point.  Thus  new   lands  came
  into  being  beneath  the  Old  World;  and  the   East  and   West  were
  bent  back  and  [?water  flowed  all  over  the round]  earth's surface
  and there  was a  time of  flood. But  Atalante being  near the  rift was
  utter[ly]   thrown   down   and   submerged.   The  remnant   of  [struck
  out  at  time  of   writing:  Numen   the  Lie-numen]   the  Numenoreans
  in  their  ships  flee  East  and  land  upon Middle-earth.  [Struck out:
  Morgoth induces many to believe that this is a natural cataclysm.]       
     The  [?longing]  of  the  Numenoreans.  Their  longing  for   life  on
  earth.  Their  ship  burials,  and  their  great  tombs.  Some  evil  and
  some  good.  Many  of  the  good  sit  upon  the  west shore.  These also
  seek  out  the  Fading  Elves.  How  [struck  out  at  time  of  writing:
  Agaldor]  Amroth  wrestled  with  Thu  and  drove   him  to   the  centre
  of the Earth and the Iron-forest.                                        
     The  old  line of  the lands  remained as  a plain  of air  upon which
  only   the   Gods  could   walk,  and   the  Eldar   who  faded   as  Men
  usurped  the  sun.  But   many  of   the  Numenorie   could  see   it  or
  faintly  see  it;  and  tried to  devise ships  to sail  on it.  But they
  achieved  only  ships  that  would sail  in Wilwa  or lower  air. Whereas
  the  Plain  of  the  Gods  cut  through  and  traversed Ilmen  [in] which
  even  birds  cannot  fly,  save  the  eagles  and  hawks  of  Manwe.  But
  the  fleets  of  the  Numenorie  sailed  round  the  world; and  Men took
  them for gods. Some were content that this should be so.                 
                                                                          
  As  I  have said,  this remarkable  text documents  the beginning  of the
  legend  of  Numenor,  and  the  extension  of  'The Silmarillion'  into a
  Second  Age  of the  World. Here  the idea  of the  World Made  Round and
  the Straight Path was first set down, and here appears the first  germ of
  the story of the Last Alliance,  in the  words 'These  also seek  out the
  Fading  Elves.  How  [Agaldor  >]  Amroth  wrestled  with  Thu  and drove
  him to the centre of the Earth' (at the beginning of the text  Agaldor is
  named as the chief of a people living on the North-west coasts of Middle-
  earth). The longevity of the  Numenoreans is  already present,  but (even
  allowing for the compression and distortion  inherent in  such 'outlines'
  of my father's, in  which he  attempted to  seize and  dash onto  paper a

                                                                           
                                                                                 
  bubbling  up  of  new  ideas)  seems  to  have  far  less  significance  than  it
  would  afterwards  attain;  and  is  ascribed,  strangely,  to  'the  radiance of
  Valinor',  in  which  the  mariners  of  Numenor   were  'bathed'   during  their
  visits to Tol-eressea,  to which  they were  permitted to  sail. Cf.  the Quenta,
  IV.98: Still therefore is the light  of Valinor  more great  and fair  than that
  of  other  lands,  because  there  the  Sun  and  Moon  together  rest   a  while
  before  they  go  upon  their  dark  journey  under  the  world';  but  this does
  not  seem  a  sufficient  or satisfactory  explanation of  the idea  (see further
  p.  20).  The   mortuary  culture   of  the   Numenoreans  does   indeed  appear,
  but  it  arose  among  the  survivors  of  Numenor  in  Middle-earth,  after  the
  Downfall;  and  this  remained  into  more  developed  forms  of  the  legend, as
  did the idea of the flying ships which the exiles built, seeking  to sail  on the
  Straight  Path  through  Ilmen,  but  achieving  only  flight  through  the lower
  air, Wilwa.*                                                                    
      The  sentence   'Thu  comes   to  Atalante,   herald[ing]  the   approach  of
  Morgoth'  certainly   means  that   Thu  prophesied   Morgoth's  return,   as  in
  subsequent  texts.  The  meaning  of  'But  Morgoth  cannot  come  except   as  a
  spirit' is made somewhat clearer in the next version, $5.                       
                                                                                 
                                        (ii)                                      
                                                                                 
                      The first version of The Fall of Numenor.                   
                                                                                 
  The  preliminary  outline   was  the   immediate  precursor   of  a   first  full
  narrative   -  the   manuscript  described   above  (p.   9),  placed   with  The
  Lost  Road.  This was  followed by  further versions,  and I  shall refer  to the
  work  as  a  whole  (as  distinct  from  the  Akallabeth,   into  which   it  was
  afterwards  transformed)  as  The   Fall  of   Numenor,  abbreviated   'FN';  the
  first text has no title, but I shall call it 'FN I'.                            
      FN  I  is  rough  and  hasty, and  full of  corrections made  at the  time of
  composition;  there  are  also  many  others,  mostly  slight,  made   later  and
  moving  towards  the  second  version  FN  II.  I  give  it  as  it  was written,
  without  the  second  layer  of  emendations  (except  in  so  far as  these make
  small  necessary  corrections  to  clarify  the  sense).  As  explained   in  the
  Preface,  here  as  elsewhere  I  have  introduced  paragraph  numbers  into  the
  text   to   make   subsequent   reference   and   comparison   easier.   A   com-
  mentary, following the paragraphing of the text, follows at its end.            
                                                                                 
  $1  In  the  Great  Battle  when  Fionwe   son  of   Manwe  over-               
  threw  Morgoth and  rescued the  Gnomes and  the Fathers  of Men,               
  many  mortal  Men  took part  with Morgoth.  Of these  those that               
  were not destroyed fled into the East and South of the World, and               
  the  servants of  Morgoth that  escaped came  to them  and guided               
                                                                                 
    (* Although this text has the final form Ilmen, beside Silma > Ilma >  Ilmen in
  the Ambarkanta, Wilwa was replaced in the Ambarkanta by Vista).                

 them;  and  they  became  evil,  and  they  brought  evil  into many
 places where wild Men dwelt at large in the empty lands.  But after
 their  victory,  when  Morgoth  and  many   of  his   captains  were
 bound,  and  Morgoth  was  thrust  again  into  the  Outer Darkness,
 the  Gods  took  counsel.  The  Elves were  summoned to  Valinor, as
 has been told,  and many  obeyed, but  not all.  But the  Fathers of
 Men,  who  had  served  the  Eldar,  and  fought   against  Morgoth,
 were  greatly  rewarded.  For  Fionwe  son   of  Manwe   came  among
 them  and  taught  them,  and  gave  them  wisdom,  power  and  life
 stronger than any others of the Second Kindred.                    
   $2. And  a  great  land  was made  for them  to dwell  in, neither
 part of Middle-earth nor wholly  separate from  it. This  was raised
 by Osse out  of the  depths of  Belegar, the  Great Sea,  and estab-
 lished  by Aule,  and enriched  by Yavanna.  It was  called Numenor,
 that is Westernesse, and Andunie  or the  Sunsetland, and  its chief
 city in the midmost of its  western coasts  was in  the days  of its
 might called Numar or Numenos; but after  its fall  it was  named in
 legend Atalante, the Ruin.                                         
   $3. For  in  Numenore  a great  people arose,  in all  things more
 like the First Kindred than any other races of  Men that  have been,
 yet less fair and wise than they, though greater in body.  And above
 all  their  arts the  people of  Numenor nourished  shipbuilding and
 sea-craft,  and  became mariners  whose like  shall never  be again,
 since  the  world  was  diminished.  They  ranged  from Tol-eressea,
 where for many ages they still  had converse  and dealings  with the
 Gnomes,  to the  shores of  Middle-earth, and  sailed round  to the
 North  and  South,  and  glimpsed  from their  high prows  the Gates
 of  Morning  in  the  East. And  they appeared  among the  wild Men,
 and  filled  them  with  wonder  and  also   with  fear.   For  many
 esteemed  them  to be  Gods or  sons of  Gods out  of the  West, and
 evil men had told them lies concerning  the Lords  of the  West. But
 the  Numenoreans  tarried not  long yet  in Middle-earth,  for their
 hearts  hungered  ever westward  for the  undying bliss  of Valinor.
 And they were restless and pursued  with desire  even at  the height
 of their glory.                                                    
        But the Gods  forbade them  to sail  beyond the  Lonely Isle,
 and would not permit any save their kings (once in each  life before
 he  was  crowned)  to  land in  Valinor. For  they were  mortal Men,
 and it was not in the power and right of Manwe to alter  their fate.
 Thus  though  the  people  were  long-lived,  since  their  land was
 more nigh  than other  lands to  Valinor, and  many had  looked long
 on the radiance of the Gods that came  faintly to  Tol-eressea, they

 remained mortal, even their  kings, and  their span  brief in  the eyes
 of  the  Eldar.  And  they murmured  against this  decree. And  a great
 discontent  grew  among  them;  and  their   masters  of   lore  sought
 unceasingly  for  the  secrets  that  should  prolong their  lives, and
 they  sent  spies  to  seek  these  in  Valinor.  And  the   Gods  were
 angered.                                                              
         And  in  time  it  came  to  pass  that  Sur  (whom  the Gnomes
 called  Thu)  came  in  the  likeness of  a great  bird to  Numenor and
 preached  a  message  of  deliverance,  and  he  prophesied  the second
 coming  of  Morgoth.  But  Morgoth   did  not   come  in   person,  but
 only  in  spirit  and  as a  shadow upon  the mind  and heart,  for the
 Gods  shut  him  beyond  the  Walls  of  the  World.  But Sur  spake to
 Angor  the  king  and  Istar  his  queen,  and  promised  them  undying
 life  and  lordship  of  the  Earth.  And  they  believed him  and fell
 under  the  shadow,  and  the greatest  part of  the people  of Numenor
 followed  them.  Angor  raised  a  great  temple  to  Morgoth   in  the
 midst of the land, and Sur dwelt there.                               
   $6. But  in  the  passing  of the  years Angor  felt the  oncoming of
 old  age,  and  he  was  troubled;  and  Sur  said  that  the  gifts of
 Morgoth  were withheld  by the  Gods, and  t hat  to  obtain  plenitude
 of  power  and  undying   life  he   must  be   master  of   the  West.
 Wherefore   the   Numenoreans   made  a   great  armament;   and  their
 might  and  skill  had  in  those  days  become exceedingly  great, and
 they  had  moreover  the  aid  of  Sur. The  fleets of  the Numenoreans
 were like a great land of many islands, and their  masts like  a forest
 of  mountain-trees,  and  their  banners  like   the  streamers   of  a
 thunderstorm,  and  their  sails  were  black.  And  they  moved slowly
 into the West, for all the winds were stilled and the world  lay silent
 in the fear of that time. And they passed Tol-eressea,  and it  is said
 that the Elves  mourned and  grew sick,  for the  light of  Valinor was
 cut  off  by  the  cloud  of  the Numenoreans.  But Angor  assailed the
 shores  of  the  Gods,  and  he cast  bolts of  thunder, and  fire came
 upon the sides of Taniquetil.                                         
         But  the  Gods  were  silent.  Sorrow  and  dismay were  in the
 heart  of  Manwe,  and  he  spoke  to  Iluvatar,  and  took  power  and
 counsel from the Lord of All;  and the  fate and  fashion of  the world
 was  changed.  For  the  silence  of  the  Gods  was  broken  suddenly,
 and  Valinor  was  sundered  from  the  earth, and  a rift  appeared in
 the  midst  of Belegar  east of  Tol-eressea, and  into this  chasm the
 great seas plunged, and the noise of the falling waters filled  all the
 earth  and  the  smoke  of  the cataracts  rose above  the tops  of the
 everlasting  mountains.  But  all  the  ships  of  Numenor   that  were

 west  of  Tol-eressea  were  drawn  down  into  the  great   abyss  and
 drowned,  and  Angor the  mighty and  Istar his  queen fell  like stars
 into  the  dark,  and  they  perished  out  of  all knowledge.  And the
 mortal  warriors  that  had  set  foot  in  the land  of the  Gods were
 buried  under  fallen  hills,  where  legend  saith  that they  lie im-
 prisoned  in  the  Forgotten  Caves  until  the  day  of  Doom  and the
 Last  Battle. And  the Elves  of Tol-eressea  passed through  the gates
 of  death,  and  were  gathered  to their  kindred in  the land  of the
 Gods,  and  became  as they;  and the  Lonely Isle  remained only  as a
 shape of the past.                                                    
   $8. But  Iluvatar  gave  power  to  the  Gods,  and  they  bent  back
 the  edges  of  the Middle-earth,  and they  made it  into a  globe, so
 that  however  far  a  man  should  sail  he  could  never  again reach
 the  true  West,  but  came  back  weary at  last to  the place  of his
 beginning.   Thus   New  Lands   came  into   being  beneath   the  Old
 World,  and  all  were  equally distant  from the  centre of  the round
 earth; and  there was  flood and  great confusion  of waters,  and seas
 covered  what  was  once  the  dry,  and  lands  appeared  where  there
 had  been  deep  seas. Thus  also the  heavy air  flowed round  all the
 earth in that time, above  the waters;  and the  springs of  all waters
 were cut off from the stars.                                          
   $9. But  Numenor  being  nigh  upon the  East to  the great  rift was
 utterly   thrown   down  and   overwhelmed  in   sea,  and   its  glory
 perished.  But  a  remnant  of  the  Numenoreans  escaped  the  ruin in
 this manner. Partly by the  device of  Angor, and  partly of  their own
 will  (because  they  revered  still  the  Lords of  the West  and mis-
 trusted  Sur) many  had abode  in ships  upon the  east coast  of their
 land, lest the issue of war be  evil. Wherefore  protected for  a while
 by the  land they  avoided the  draught of  the sea,  and a  great wind
 arose  blowing from  the gap,  and they  sped East  and came  at length
 to   the   shores   of    Middle-earth   in    the   days    of   ruin.
 $10.  There   they   became   lords   and  kings   of  Men,   and  some
 were evil and some were of good will.  But all  alike were  filled with
 desire of long  life upon  earth, and  the thought  of Death  was heavy
 upon  them;  and  their  feet were  turned east  but their  hearts were
 westward.  And  they  built  mightier  houses for  their dead  than for
 their  living,  and   endowed  their   buried  kings   with  unavailing
 treasure.  For  their wise  men hoped  ever to  discover the  secret of
 prolonging life and maybe the recalling of it. But it is said  that the
 span of their lives, which had of old been greater than that  of lesser
 races,  dwindled  slowly,  and  they  achieved  only  the  art  of pre-
 serving  uncorrupt  for  many  ages  the dead  flesh of  men. Wherefore

 the  kingdoms  upon  the  west  shores   of  the   Old  World   became  a
 place  of tombs,  and filled  with ghosts.  And in  the fantasy  of their
 hearts,   and   the  confusion   of  legends   half-forgotten  concerning
 that  which  had  been, they  made for  their thought  a land  of shades,
 filled  with  the  wraiths  of  the  things  of  mortal  earth.  And many
 deemed  this  land  was  in  the  West,  and  ruled  by  the   Gods,  and
 in  shadow  the  dead,   bearing  the   shadows  of   their  possessions,
 should  come  there,  who  could  no  more  find  the  true  West  in the
 body.  For  which  reason  in  after  days  many  of  their  descendants,
 or  men  taught  by  them, buried  their dead  in ships  and set  them in
 pomp   upon   the   sea   by   the   west  coasts   of  the   Old  World.
 $11. )u$

 round.  And  many  abandoned  the  Gods,  and  put  them  out  of  their
 legends,  and  even  out  of  their  dreams.  But  Men  of  Middle-earth
 looked  on  them  with  wonder  and  great  fear,  and  took them  to be
 gods;   and   many   were    content   that    this   should    be   so.
 $13. But  not  all  the  hearts  of   the  Numenoreans   were  crooked;
 and  the  lore  of  the  old days  descending from  the Fathers  of Men,
 and  the  Elf-friends,  and  those  instructed   by  Fionwe,   was  pre-
 served  among  some.  And  they  knew  that  the  fate  of  Men  was not
 bounded  by  the  round  path  of  the  world,  nor  destined   for  the
 straight  path.  For  the  round  is  crooked  and  has  no  end  but no
 escape;  and the  straight is  true, but  has an  end within  the world,
 and that is the fate of the Elves. But the  fate of  Men, they  said, is
 neither  round  nor  ended,  and  is  not  within  the  world.  And they
 remembered  from  whence  the  ruin  came,  and   the  cutting   off  of
 Men  from  their just  portion of  the straight  path; and  they avoided
 the  shadow  of  Morgoth  according  to  their  power,  and  hated  Thu.
 And  they  assailed  his  temples  and  their  servants, and  there were
 wars  of  allegiance  among  the  mighty  of this  world, of  which only
 the                            echoes                            remain.
 $14. But  there  remains  still  a  legend of  Beleriand: for  that land
 in  the  West  of  the  Old  World,  although  changed and  broken, held
 still in ancient days to  the name  it had  in the  days of  the Gnomes.
 And  it  is  said  that  Amroth  was  King  of  Beleriand;  and  he took
 counsel  with Elrond  son of  Earendel, and  with such  of the  Elves as
 remained  in  the  West;  and  they  passed   the  mountains   and  came
 into inner lands far from  the sea,  and they  assailed the  fortress of
 Thu.  And  Amroth  wrestled  with  Thu  and  was  slain;  but   Thu  was
 brought  to  his  knees,  and  his  servants  were  dispelled;  and  the
 peoples   of   Beleriand   destroyed  his   dwellings,  and   drove  him
 forth, and he fled to a dark  forest, and  hid himself.  And it  is said
 that the  war with  Thu hastened  the fading  of the  Eldar, for  he had
 power   beyond   their   measure,  as   Felagund  King   of  Nargothrond
 had  found  in  the  earliest  days;  and  they expended  their strength
 and substance in the  assault upon  him. And  this was  the last  of the
 services of the older race to Men, and it is held the last of  the deeds
 of  alliance  before the  fading of  the Elves  and the  estrangement of
 the  Two  Kindreds.  And  here  the tale  of the  ancient world,  as the
 Elves keep it, comes to an end.                                        
                                                                       
          Commentary on the first version of The Fall of Numenor.        
                                                                       
   $1.   As Q $18 was first written (IV. 158), it was permitted by Fionwe
   that 'with the Elves should those of the race of Hador and Beor      

  alone  be  suffered to  Jepart, if  they would.  But of  these only  Elrond was
  now  left...'  On  this   extremely  puzzling   passage  see   the  commentary,
  IV. zoo,  where I  suggested that  obscure as  it is  it represents  'the first
  germ  of  the  story  of  the  departure  of  the  Elf-friends to  Numenor.' It
  was   removed   in   the   rewriting,  Q   II  $18,   where  there   appears  a
  reference  to  Men  of  Hithlum  who  'repentant  of  their evil  servitude did
  deeds  of  valour,  and  many  beside  of  Men  new  come  out  of  the  East',
  but  now  no  mention  of  the  Elf-friends.  A  final  hasty  revision  of the
  passage (IV. 163, notes 2 and 3) gave:                                       
     And it is said that all that were left of the three  Houses of  the Fathers
  of   Men  fought   for  Fionwe,   and  to   them  were   joined  some   of  the
  Men  of  Hithlum  who  repenting  of   their  evil   servitude  did   deeds  of
  valour...  But  most  Men,   and  especially   those  new   come  out   of  the
  East, were on the side of the Enemy.                                          
  This  is  very  close  to,  and  no  doubt  belongs  in fact  to the  same time
  as,  the  corresponding  passage  in  the  following   version  of   'The  Sil-
  marillion'  (QS*,  p.  328  $16),  which  however  omits  the  reference to
  the  Men  of  Hithlum.  I  have little  doubt that  this development  came in
  with the emergence of Numenor.                                                
     Here  first  appear  the  names  Andunie'  (but  as  a  name of  the island,
  translated  'the  Sunsetland'),  and  Numenor  itself  (which  does  not  occur
  in   the   preliminary   outline,   though   the   people   are   there  called
  Numenorie'   and   Numenoreans).   The   chief   city   is   called   Numar  or
  Numenos,  which  in  the  outline  were  the  names  of  the  land.   The  name
  Belegar was emended later, here and in $7, to Belegaer.                       
     After  the  words  enriched   by  Yavanna   the  passage   concerning  names
  was early replaced as follows:                                                
     It  was  called  by  the  Gods  Andor,  the  Land  of Gift,  but by  its own
  folk   Vinya,  the   Young;  but   when  the   men  of   that  land   spake  of
  it   to   the   men   of   Middle-earth   they  named   it  Numenor,   that  is
  Westernesse,  for  it  lay  west  of  all  lands inhabited  by mortals.  Yet it
  was  not  in  the  true  West,  for  there  was  the  land  of  the  Gods.  The
  chief  city  of  Numenor  was  in  the  midmost  of  its  western  coasts,  and
  in  the  days  of  its  might  it  was  called  Andunie,  because it  faced the
  sunset; but after its fall it was  named in  the legends  of those  that fled
  from it Atalante the Downfall.                                                
  Here  first  appears  Andor,  Land  of  Gift, and  also the  name given  to the
  land  by  the  Numenoreans,  Vinya,  the  Young,  which  did  not   survive  in
  the   later   legend   (cf.   Vinyamar,   Vinyalonde',   Index   to  Unfinished
  Tales);  Andunie'  now  becomes  the name  of the  chief city.  In the  text as
  originally  written  the  name  Atalante'  could  refer either  to the  land or
  the  city,  but  in  the  rewriting it  can only  refer to  the city.  It seems
                                                                               
   (* Throughout this book the abbreviation 'QS' (Quenta Silmarillion) is used for
 the version interrupted near the end of I937; see pp. 107- 8).                

 unlikely that my father intended  this; see  the corresponding  passage in
 FN II and commentary.                                                     
 $3.  The permission given to the  Numenoreans to  sail as  far west  as Tol-
 eressea,  found  already  in  the  original  outline,  contrasts  with the
 Akallabeth (pp. 262 - 3), where it is  told that  they were  forbidden 'to
 sail  so  far  westward  that  the coasts  of Numenor  could no  longer be
 seen', and  only the  most keen-sighted  among them  could descry  far off
 the tower of Avallone on the Lonely Isle.                                 
   The  Gates  of  Morning  reappear,  remarkably,  from  the   Lost  Tales
 (I.  216).  In  the  original astronomical  myth the  Sun passed  into the
 Outer  Dark  by  the  Door  of  Night  and  re-entered  by  the  Gates  of
 Morn;  but  with  the  radical  transformation  of  the myth  that entered
 with  the  Sketch  of  the Mythology  (see IV.  49), and  is found  in the
 Quenta  and  Ambarkanta,  whereby  the  Sun  is drawn  by the  servants of
 Ulmo  beneath  the  roots  of the  Earth, the  Door of  Night was  given a
 different significance and the Gates of  Morn no  longer appear  (see IV.
 252,  255).  How  the  reference  to  them  here  (which  survives  in the
 Akallabeth, p. 263) is to be understood I am unable to say.               
   In this paragraph is the first  occurrence of  the expression  The Lords
 of the West.                                                              
   The words save their kings (once in  each life  before he  was crowned)
 were early placed  in square  brackets. In  the conclusion  of QS  (p. 326
 $$8 - 9) the prohibition appears to be absolute, not to  be set  aside for
 any  mortal;  there  Mandos  says of  Earendel 'Now  he shall  surely die,
 for he  has trodden  the forbidden  shores', and  Manwe says  'To Earendel
 I remit  the ban,  and the  peril that  he took  upon himself.'  Later (as
 noted  under  $3 above)  the Ban  extended also,  and inevitably,  to Tol-
 eressea ('easternmost of the Undying Lands', the Akallabeth, p. 263).     
   The  ascription  of the  longevity of  the Numenoreans  to the  light of
 Valinor appeared already in the original outline, and I cited (p. 13) the
 passage from the Quenta where it  is said  that the  light of  Valinor was
 greater and fairer  than in  the other  lands 'because  there the  Sun and
 Moon together rest a while.' But the  wording here,  'the radiance  of the
 Gods  that  came  faintly  to Tol-eressea',  surely implies  a light  of a
 different  nature  from  that  of  the  Sun and  Moon (which  illumine the
 whole  world).  Conceivably,  the  further  idea   that  appears   in  the
 corresponding  passage  in  QS  ($79)  is  present  here:   'moreover  the
 Valar store  the radiance  of the  Sun in  many vessels,  and in  vats and
 pools  for  their  comfort  in  times  of  dark.'  The  passage  was later
 enclosed  in  brackets,  and  it  does  not  appear  in  FN  II; but  at a
 subsequent  point  in  the  narrative  ($6)   the  Elves   of  Tol-eressea
 mourned  'for  the  light  of  Valinor  was cut  off by  the cloud  of the
 Numenoreans',  and this  was not  rejected. Cf.  the Akallabeth  (p. 278):
 'the Eldar mourned, for the light of the setting  sun was  cut off  by the
 cloud of the Numenoreans.'                                                
   With what is said here of Morgoth's  not returning  'in person',  for he

   was shut beyond the Walls  of the  World, 'but  only in  spirit and  as a
   shadow upon the mind and  heart', cf.  the Quenta  (IV. 164):  'Some say
   also that Morgoth at whiles secretly as a  cloud that  cannot be  seen or
   felt...  creeps back  surmounting the  Walls and  visiteth the  world' (a
   passage that survived in QS, pp. 332-3 $30).                            
      The  concluding  sentence  concerning  the  Elves  of  Tol-eressea was
   an addition, but one that looks as if it belongs with the writing  of the
   text. It is very hard to interpret. The  rift in  the Great  Sea appeared
   east of Tol-eressea, but the ships that were west of the isle  were drawn
   down  into  the  abyss; and  it might  be concluded  from this  that Tol-
   eressea also was swallowed  up and  disappeared: so  the Elves  who dwelt
   there 'passed  through the  gates of  death, and  were gathered  to their
   kindred in the land of the Gods', and 'the Lonely  Isle remained  only as
   a shape of the past.' But this would be very strange, for it  would imply
   the  abandonment  of  the  entire  story  of  AElfwine's  voyage  to Tol-
   eressea  in  ages after;  yet AElfwine  as recorder  and pupil  was still
   present in my father's writings after the completion of  The Lord  of the
   Rings.  On  the  diagram  of  the  World  Made  Round   accompanying  the
   Ambarkanta (IV. 247) Tol-eressea is marked  as a  point on  the Straight
   Path. Moreover, much later, in  the Akallabeth  (pp. 278  - 9),  the same
   is  told  of  the  great  chasm:  it  opened  'between  Numenor  and  the
   Deathless  Lands',  and  all  the  fleets of  the Numenoreans  (which had
   passed  on  to  Aman and  so were  west of  Tol-eressea) were  drawn down
   into it; but 'Valinor and Eressea were  taken from  [the world]  into the
   realm of hidden things.'                                                
                                                                          
 $8   The concluding sentence ('Thus also the heavy air...') is a          
                                                                          
   marginal  addition  which  seems  certainly to  belong with  the original
   text. It has no mark for insertion, but must surely be placed here.     
 $10  The  desire  to prolong  life was  already a  mark of  the Numenoreans
 ($4), but the dark picture in the Akallabeth (p.  266) of  a land  of tombs
 and  embalming,  of  a  people  obsessed  with death,  was not  present. At
 this stage in the evolution of the  legend, as  already in  the preliminary
 outline,  the  tomb-culture  arose  among   the  Numenoreans   who  escaped
 the  Downfall  and  founded  kingdoms  in  the  'Old  World':   whether  of
 good or evil disposition 'all alike were  filled with  desire of  long life
 upon  earth,  and  the  thought  of  Death  was  heavy  upon them',  and it
 was  the  life-span of  the Exiles,  as it  appears, that  slowly dwindled.
 There  are  echoes  of  the present  passage in  the Akallabeth  account of
 Numenor  after  the  Shadow  fell  upon  it  in  the  days  of Tar-Atanamir
 (cf. Unfinished Tales p. 221);  but in  the very  different context  of the
 original  story,  when  this  culture  arose among  those who  survived the
 Cataclysm  and  their  descendants,  other elements  were present:  for the
 Gods  were  now  removed  into  the  realm  of  the  unknown   and  unseen,
 and  they  became  the  'explanation'  of  the  mystery  of   death,  their
 dwelling-place in the far West  the region  to which  the dead  passed with
 their possessions.                                                        

                                                           
                                                                             
 In   'The   Silmarillion'   the   Gods   are  'physically'   present,  because
 (whatever  the  actual  mode  of  their  own  being)  they  inhabit  the  same
 physical world, the  realm of  the 'seen';  if, after  the Hiding  of Valinor,
 they  could  not  be reached  by the  voyages sent  out in  vain by  Turgon of
 Gondolin,   they   were   nonetheless  reached   by  Earendel,   sailing  from
 Middle-earth  in  his  ship  Wingelot,  and  their  physical  intervention  of
 arms  changed  the  world  for  ever  through  the  physical   destruction  of
 the  power  of  Morgoth.  Thus  it  may  be  said  that in  'The Silmarillion'
 there  is  no  'religion',  because  the Divine  is present  and has  not been
 'displaced';  but  with  the  physical   removal  of   the  Divine   from  the
 World  Made   Round  a   religion  arose   (as  it   had  arisen   in  Numenor
 under   the   teachings   of   Thu  concerning   Morgoth,  the   banished  and
 absent  God),  and  the  dead  were  despatched,  for  religious  reasons,  in
 burial     ships     on     the     shores      of     the      Great     Sea.
 $12  'But  upon  the  straight  road  only  the  Gods  and the  vanished Elves
 could  walk,  or  such  as  the  Gods  summoned  of  the  fading Elves  of the
 round  earth,  who  became  diminished  in  substance   as  Men   usurped  the
 sun.' Cf. the Quenta, IV.  100  -  1, as  emended (a  passage that  goes back
 to the Sketch of the Mythology, IV. 21):                                     
     In  after  days,  when  because  of  the  triumph  of  Morgoth  Elves  and
 Men  became  estranged,  as  he  most  wished,  those  of  the   Eldalie  that
 still  lived  in  the  world  faded,  and  Men  usurped  the   sunlight.  Then
 the  Eldar  wandered  in  the  lonelier  places  of   the  Outer   Lands,  and
 took  to  the  moonlight  and  to  the  starlight,  and   to  the   woods  and
 caves,   and  became   as  shadows,   wraiths  and   memories,  such   as  set
 not sail unto the West and vanished from the world.                          
  This passage survived very little changed in QS ($87).                      
     I  believe  that  the  story  of  the  flying  ships  built by  the exiled
 Numenoreans,  found  already  in  the  preliminary  draft  (p.  12),   is  the
 sole  introduction  of  aerial  craft  in all  my father's  works. No  hint is
 given  of  the  means  by  which  they  rose  and  were  propelled;   and  the
 passage did not survive into the later legend.                               
 $I3. It  is a  curious feature  of the  original story  of Numenor  that there
 is  no  mention  of  what  befell  Thu  at  the  Downfall (cf.  the Akallabeth
 p.  280);  but  he  reappears  here as  a master  of temples  (cf. the  Lay of
 Leithian lines 2064 - 7), dwelling in a fortress ($14), an object  of hatred
 to  those  of  the  survivors  of  Numenor  who  retained  something   of  the
 ancient knowledge.                                                           
 $14. In  the  Quenta  (IV.  160  -  1)  it is  told that  in the  Great Battle
 the  Northern  regions  of  the  Western  world  were  rent  and   riven,  and
 the   sea   roared   in  through   many  chasms,   and  there   was  confusion
 and  great  noise;  and  the  rivers  perished  or  found  new paths,  and the
 valleys  were  upheaved  and  the  hills   trod  down,   and  Sirion   was  no
 more.  Then  Men  fled  away...   and  long   was  it   ere  they   came  back
 over the mountains to where Beleriand once had been.                         
  The  last  words  of  the  earliest  Annals  of Beleriand  (IV. 310)  are 'So

  ended  the  First  Age of  the World  and Beleriand  was no  more.' It  is also
  said in  the Quenta  (IV. 162) that  after the  War was  ended 'there  was a
  mighty   building   of  ships   on  the   shores  of   the  Western   Sea,  and
  especially  upon  the  great  isles, which  in the  disruption of  the Northern
  world were fashioned of ancient Beleriand.'                                   
     In  FN  a  rather  different  conception  is  suggested.   Though  Beleriand
  had been 'changed and broken', it is  spoken of  as 'that  land', it  was still
  called  Beleriand,  and  it  was peopled  by Men  and Elves,  able to  form an
  alliance  against  Thu.  I  would  suggest  (though  hesitantly) that  with the
  emergence,   here   first   glimpsed,   of   a   Second  Age   of  Middle-earth
  consequent   on   the   legend   of   Numenor,   the   utter   devastation   of
  Beleriand,  suitable  to  the  finality  of  the  conclusion  of   the  earlier
  conception,  had  been  diminished."  Moreover  it  seems  that  at  this  time
  my  father  did  not  conceive   of  any   further  destruction   of  Beleriand
  at  the  time  of  the  Downfall  of  Numenor,  as  he  would  do   later  (see
                                                                               
  p. 32).                                                                        
     At  this  stage  there  is  no  mention  of  a  first  and  founder  king of
  Numenor.  Elrond  was  still  the  only  child  of  Earendel  and  Elwing;  his
  brother  Elros  has  appeared  only in  late additions  to the  text of  Q (IV.
  155),  which  were  inserted  after   the  Numenorean   legend  had   begun  to
  develop.  In  the  oldest  conception  in  the  Sketch  of the  Mythology (IV.
  38) Elrond 'bound by his  mortal half  elects to  stay on  earth' (i.e.  in the
  Great  Lands),  and  in  Q  (IV.  158)  he  'elected  to  remain,  being  bound
  by  his  mortal  blood  in  love  to  those  of  the  younger  race',   see  my
  remarks  on  the  Choice  of  the  Half-elven, IV.  70. Elrond  is here,  as it
  seems,  a  leader  of  the  Elves  of  Beleriand,  in  alliance   with  Amroth,
  predecessor  of  Elendil.  The  Last  Alliance  leading  to  the  overthrow  of
  Thu  is  seen  as the  last intervention  of the  Elves in  the affairs  of the
  World  of  Men,  in  itself  hastening  their  inevitable  fading.   The  'dark
  forest' to which Thu fled (cf. the  'Iron-forest' in  the original  outline) is
  doubtless  Mirkwood.   In  The   Hobbit  all   that  had   been  told   of  the
  Necromancer   was  that   he  dwelt   in  a   dark  tower   in  the   south  of
  Mirkwood.+                                                                  
                                                                               
                                      (iii)                                     
                                                                               
                    The second version of The Fall of Numenor                   
                                                                               
 FN II  is a  clear manuscript,  made by  my father  with FN  I before  him and
 probably  soon  after  it.  It  has  many  emendations  made  in  the   act  of
                                                                               
   <The passages cited  here from  Q were  rather surprisingly  retained almost
 unaltered in QS: see p. 337.                                                   
                                                                               
   +Cf. Letters no. 257, referring to The Hobbit: 'the (originally) quite casual
 reference to the Necromancer, whose function was hardly more than to  provide a
 reason for Gandalf going away and  leaving Bilbo  and the  Dwarves to  fend for
 themselves, which was necessary for the tale.'                                 

                                                                  
                                                                            
 composition, and  none that  seem to  have been  made after  any significant
 interval, apart from the title, which was inserted later in pencil,  and the
 rejection of a sentence in $7. In  contrast to  my father's  common tendency
 to begin a new  text keeping  close to  the antecedent  but then  to diverge
 ever more strongly as he proceeded, in this  case the  earlier part  is much
 changed  and expanded  whereas the  latter is  scarcely altered,  other than
 in  very  minor  improvements  to  the run  of sentences,  until the  end is
 reached. To give the  whole of  FN II  is therefore  unnecessary. Retaining
 the paragraph numbering of FN I, I give $$ 1 - 5 and 14 in full, and  of the
 remainder only such short passages as were significantly altered.           
                                                                            
                      THE LAST TALE: THE FALL OF NUMENOR                     
                                                                            
 $1.   In  the  Great  Battle  when Fionwe  son of  Manwe overthrew          
 Morgoth and rescued the  Exiles, the  three houses  of the  Men of          
 Beleriand fought  against Morgoth.  But most  Men were  allies of          
 the Enemy; and after the victory of  the Lords  of the  West those          
 that were not destroyed fled eastward  into Middle-earth;  and the          
 servants  of  Morgoth  that  escaped  came  to them,  and enslaved          
 them. For the Gods  forsook for  a time  the Men  of Middle-earth,          
 because  they  had disobeyed  their summons  and hearkened  to the          
 Enemy.  And   Men  were   troubled  by   many  evil   things  that          
 Morgoth  had  made  in  the  days  of  his  dominion:  demons  and          
 dragons  and  monsters,  and  Orcs,  that  are  mockeries  of  the          
 creatures of Iluvatar; and their  lot was  unhappy. But  Manwe put          
 forth  Morgoth,  and  shut  him  beyond  the  world  in  the  Void          
 without; and he cannot return  again into  the world,  present and          
 visible, while the Lords  are enthroned.  Yet his  Will remaineth,          
 and guideth  his servants;  and it  moveth them  ever to  seek the          
 overthrow of the Gods and the hurt of those that obey them.                 
   But  when  Morgoth  was  thrust  forth,  the Gods  held council.          
 The  Elves  were summoned  to return  into the  West, and  such as          
 obeyed  dwelt  again  in  Eressea,  the  Lonely Island,  which was          
 renamed Avallon: for it is hard by Valinor. But  Men of  the three          
 faithful  houses  and  such as  had joined  with them  were richly          
 rewarded.  For   Fionwe  son   of  Manwe   came  among   them  and          
 taught them; and  he gave  them wisdom,  power, and  life stronger          
 than any others have of the mortal race.                                    
   $2.  And a  great land  was made  for them  to dwell  in, neither          
 part of Middle-earth nor wholly separate from it. It was raised by          
 Osse out of the depths of the Great Sea,  and established  by Aule          
 and enriched  by Yavanna;  and the  Eldar brought  thither flowers          
 and fountains out of Avallon  and wrought  gardens there  of great          
 beauty, in which  the Gods  themselves at  times would  walk. That          

 land was  called by  the Valar  Andor, the  Land of  Gift, and  by its
 own folk it was at first called Vinya, the Young; but  in the  days of
 its  pride  they named  it Numenor,  that is  Westernesse, for  it lay
 west of all lands inhabited by mortals; yet it was  far from  the true
 West, for that is Valinor, the land of  the Gods.  But its  glory fell
 and its name perished; for after its ruin it was named in  the legends
 of those that fled from it Atalante, the Downfallen. Of old  its chief
 city and haven was  in the  midst of  its western  coasts, and  it was
 called Andunie, because it  faced the  sunset. But  the high  place of
 its king was at Numenos in the heart of the land.  It was  built first
 by  Elrond  son  of  Earendel,  whom the  Gods and  Elves chose  to be
 the lord of that land; for in  him the  blood of  the houses  of Hador
 and Beor  was mingled,  and with  it some  part of  that of  the Eldar
 and  Valar,  which  he  drew   from  Idril   and  from   Luthien.  But
 Elrond  and  all  his  folk  were  mortal;  for  the  Valar   may  not
 withdraw  the  gift  of  death,  which  cometh  to Men  from Iluvatar.
 Yet they took on the speech of the Elves of the  Blessed Realm,  as it
 was  and  is  in  Eressea,  and  held  converse  with  the  Elves, and
 looked afar upon Valinor;  for their  ships were  suffered to  sail to
 Avallon and their mariners to dwell there for a while.               
   $3.  And  in  the  wearing  of  time  the  people  of   Numenor  grew
 great and glorious, in  all things  more like  the Firstborn  than any
 other races of Men that have  been; yet  less fair  and wise  than the
 Elves,  though  greater in  stature. For  the Numenoreans  were taller
 even than the tallest of the sons  of Men  in Middle-earth.  Above all
 their  arts  they  nourished  shipbuilding  and sea-craft,  and became
 mariners whose like shall  never be  again, since  the world  has been
 diminished. They  ranged from  Eressea in  the West  to the  shores of
 Middle-earth,  and  came  even into  the inner  seas; and  they sailed
 about  the  North  and  the  South,  and  glimpsed  from   their  high
 prows  the  Gates  of  Morning   in  the   East.  And   they  appeared
 among  the  wild  Men  and  filled  them with  wonder and  dismay, and
 some  esteemed  them  to  be  Gods  or  the  sons of  Gods out  of the
 West;  and  the  Men  of  Middle-earth  feared  them,  for  they  were
 under  the  shadow   of  Morgoth,   and  believed   the  Gods   to  be
 terrible  and  cruel.  The  Numenoreans  taught   them  such   of  the
 truth  as  they  could  comprehend, but  it became  only as  a distant
 rumour   little   understood;   for  as   yet  the   Numenoreans  came
 seldom  to Middle-earth  and did  not tarry  there long.  Their hearts
 were set  westward, and  they began  to hunger  for the  undying bliss
 of Valinor;  and they  were restless  and pursued  by desire  as their
 power and glory grew.                                                

        For  the Gods  forbade them  to sail  beyond the  Lonely Isle,
 and  would  not  permit  any   to  land   in  Valinor,   because  the
 Numenoreans  were  mortal;   and  though   the  Lords   had  rewarded
 them with  long life,  they could  not take  from them  the weariness
 of the world that cometh at last; and they died, even their  kings of
 the seed of Earendel, and their  span was  brief in  the eyes  of the
 Elves. And  they began  to murmur  against this  decree; and  a great
 discontent  grew  among  them.  Their  masters  of  knowledge  sought
 unceasingly for  secrets that  should prolong  their lives;  and they
 sent  spies  to seek  forbidden lore  in Avallon.  But the  Gods were
 angered.                                                            
        And  it came  to pass  that Sauron,  servant of  Morgoth, grew
 mighty  in  Middle-earth;  and  the   mariners  of   Numenor  brought
 rumour of him. Some said that  he was  a king  greater than  the King
 of Numenor;  some said  that he  was one  of the  Gods or  their sons
 set  to  govern  Middle-earth.  A few  reported that  he was  an evil
 spirit,  perchance  Morgoth himself  returned. But  this was  held to
 be  only a  foolish fable  of the  wild Men.  Tar-kalion was  King of
 Numenor  in  those days,  and he  was proud;  and believing  that the
 Gods  had delivered  the dominion  of the  earth to  the Numenoreans,
 he  would  not  brook  a  king  mightier  than  himself in  any land.
 Therefore  he  purposed  to  send  his servants  to summon  Sauron to
 Numenor,  to  do  homage  before  him.  The  Lords  sent  messages to
 the  king  and  spake  through  the  mouths  of  wise  men  and coun-
 selled  him against  this mission;  for they  said that  Sauron would
 work evil if he  came; but  he could  not come  to Numenor  unless he
 was  summoned  and  guided  by  the   king's  messengers.   But  Tar-
 kalion in his pride put aside the counsel, and he sent many ships.
   Now  rumour  of  the  power of  Numenor and  its allegiance  to the
 Gods came also to  Sauron, and  he feared  lest the  Men of  the West
 should  rescue  those  of  Middle-earth  from  the Shadow;  and being
 cunning and filled with  malice he  plotted in  his heart  to destroy
 Numenor,  and  (if  he  might)   to  bring   grief  upon   the  Gods.
 Therefore  he  humbled  himself  before  the  messengers,   and  came
 by ship to Numenor.  But as  the ships  of the  embassy drew  nigh to
 the land an unquiet came upon the sea, and it  arose like  a mountain
 and cast  the ships  far inland;  and the  ship whereon  Sauron stood
 was set upon a hill. And Sauron stood  upon the  hill and  preached a
 message  of  deliverance  from  death  to  the  Numenoreans;  and  he
 beguiled  them  with  signs  and  wonders.  And  little by  little he
 turned  their  hearts  toward  Morgoth,  his  master;  and   he  pro-
 phesied  that  ere  long  he  would  come again  into the  world. And

 Sauron  spake  to  Tar-kalion  the  king,  and  to  Tar-ilien  his queen,
 and  promised  them  life  unending  and  the dominion  of the  earth, if
 they  would  turn  unto  Morgoth.  And  they   believed  him,   and  fell
 under  the  Shadow,  and  the  greatest  part  of  their  people followed
 them.  And  Tar-kalion  raised  a  great  temple  to  Morgoth   upon  the
 Mountain  of  Iluvatar  in  the  midst  of  the  land;  and  Sauron dwelt
 there and all Numenor was under his vigilance.                           
                                                                         
 [The greater part of $5 was replaced by  the following  shorter version:]
                                                                         
   And  it  came   to  pass   that  Sauron,   servant  of   Morgoth,  grew
 strong in Middle-earth;  and he  learned of  the power  and glory  of the
 Numenoreans,  and  of  their  allegiance  to  the  Gods,  and  he  feared
 lest  coming  they  should  wrest  the  dominion  of  the  East  from him
 and  rescue  the   Men  of   Middle-earth  from   the  Shadow.   And  the
 king  heard  rumour  of  Sauron;  and  it  was  said that  he was  a king
 greater  than  the  King  of  Numenor.  Wherefore,  against  the  counsel
 of  the  Gods,  the  king  sent  his  servants  to  Sauron, and  bade him
 come   and   do   homage.   And   Sauron,   being  filled   with  cunning
 and   malice,   humbled   himself   and   came;   and  he   beguiled  the
 Numenoreans  with  signs  and  wonders.  But  little  by   little  Sauron
 turned  their  hearts  towards  Morgoth;  and  he  prophesied   that  ere
 long  he  would  come  again  into  the  world.   And  Sauron   spake  to
 Tar-kalion King of Numenor and to Tar-ilien his queen...                 
                                                                         
   For the remainder of FN II, until the final paragraph, I note only the
 few differences from FN I that are of any substance. The changes of Sur,
 Angor, and Istar to Sauron,  Tar-kalion, and  Tar-ilien are  not noticed.
                                                                         
 $6. 'And  they  passed  Tol-eressea  >  'And  they  encompassed Avallon';
 'fire  came  upon  the sides  of Taniquetil'  > 'fire  came upon  Kor and
 smokes rose about Taniquetil.'                                           
       In  FN  II  the  paragraph  opens:  'But the  Gods made  no answer.
 Then many  of the  Numenoreans set  foot upon  the forbidden  shores, and
 they camped in might upon the borders of Valinor.'                       
   'Angor the mighty and  Istar his  queen' >  'Tar-kalion the  golden and
 bright  Ilien  his  queen',  'the Forgotten  Caves' )  'the Caves  of the
 Forgotten'.                                                              
   The  mysterious  concluding  sentence concerning  the Elves  of Eressea
 (see the commentary on FN I) was retained but struck out later in pencil.
 $8.  The  concluding  sentence  does  not  appear;  see the  commentary on
 FN                                                                     I.
 $9. 'Partly  by  the  [desire  >]  command of  Tar-kalion, and  partly by
 their own will  (because some  still revered  the Gods  and would  not go

  with  war  into  the  West)  many  had  remained  behind,  and  sat  in their
  ships...'                                                                    
    There   is   now   no   mention   of   the    great   wind    that   arose.
  $10.  The   paragraph   now   opens:   'There,   though   shorn    of   their
  former  power,  and  few  in number  and scattered,  they after  became lords
  and kings of Men.  Some were  evil and  forsook not  Sauron in  their hearts;
  and  some  were  of  good  will  and  retained  memory of  the Gods.  But all
  alike...'                                                                    
    In 'the span of their lives, which had of old been greater than that of the
  lesser races' the words 'greater than' > 'thrice'.                           
    The  concluding  sentence  reads:  'For  which  reason  in after  days they
  would bury their dead in ships, or set them in pomp...'                      
          'And the spell that lay there was not  wholly vain'  > 'And  this was
  not wholly fantasy', but this was struck out.                                
    'For the ancient line of the  world remained  in the  mind of  Iluvatar and
  in the thought of the Gods, and in the memory of the world...'               
    At  the end  of the  paragraph is  added: 'Therefore  they built  very high
  towers                   in                    those                   days.'
  $12.     The  paragraph  now begins:  'But most,  who could  not see  this or
  conceive  it  in  thought,  scorned the  builders of  towers, and  trusted to
  ships that sailed upon water.  But they  came only  to the  lands of  the New
  World, and found them like to those  of the  Old, and  subject to  death; and
  they  reported that  the world  was round.  But upon  the Straight  Road only
  the  Gods  could  walk,  and only  the ships  of the  Elves of  Avallon could
  journey.  For  the  Road  being straight,  whereas the  surface of  the earth
  was bent...'                                                                 
    The  paragraph  concludes:   'Therefore  many   abandoned  the   Gods,  and
  put  them  out  of  their  legends. But  Men of  Middle-earth looked  up with
  wonder upon them, and with great  fear, for  they descended  out of  the air;
  and  they  took  the  Numenoreans  to  be  Gods, and  some were  content that
  this should be so.'                                                          
    $13.  The   paragraph   begins:   'But   not   all   the   hearts   of  the
  Numenoreans   were   crooked;   and   the  knowledge   of  the   days  before
  the  ruin,  descending  from  their  fathers and  the Elf-friends,  and those
  that  had  held  converse  with  the  Gods,  was  long  preserved  among  the
  wise. And they said that the fate of Men...'                                 
    'But the fate of Men... is not complete within the world.'                 
    'there were wars of faith among the mighty of Middle-earth'                
           But  there  remains  still  a  legend  of  Beleriand: for  that land
  in  the  West   of  the   North  of   the  Old   World,  where   Morgoth  had
  been  overthrown,  was  still  in  a  measure  blessed  and  free   from  his
  shadow;   and   many   of   the   exiles   of   Numenor  had   come  thither.
  Though  changed  and   broken  it   retained  still   in  ancient   days  the
  name  that  it  had  borne  in  the  days  of  the  Gnomes.  And  it  is said
  that  in  Beleriand  there  arose  a  king,  who  was  of   Numenorean  race,

 and  he  was  named  Elendil,  that  is  Elf-friend.  And he  took counsel
 with  the   Elves  that   remained  in   Middle-earth  (and   these  abode
 then  mostly  in  Beleriand);  and  he  made   a  league   with  Gil-galad
 the   Elf-king   who  was   descended  from   Feanor.  And   their  armies
 were  joined,  and  passed  the  mountains  and  came  into   inner  lands
 far  from  the  Sea.  And  they  came  at  last even  to Mordor  the Black
 Country,   where   Sauron,   that   is   in   the  Gnomish   tongue  named
 Thu,  had  rebuilt  his  fortresses.  And  they  encompassed  the  strong-
 hold,  until  Thu  came  forth  in  person,  and  Elendil   and  Gil-galad
 wrestled   with   him;   and  both   were  slain.   But  Thu   was  thrown
 down,   and   his   bodily   shape  destroyed,   and  his   servants  were
 dispelled,  and  the  host  of  Beleriand  destroyed  his   dwelling;  but
 Thu's  spirit  fled  far  away,  and  was  hidden  in  waste  places,  and
 took no shape  again for  many ages.  But it  is sung  sadly by  the Elves
 that  the  war  with  Thu  hastened the  fading of  the Eldar,  decreed by
 the  Gods;  for  Thu  had  power  beyond   their  measure,   as  Felagund,
 King   of   Nargothrond,    had   found    aforetime;   and    the   Elves
 expended  their  strength  and   substance  in   the  assault   upon  him.
 And this was the last  of the  services of  the Firstborn  to Men,  and it
 is  held  the  last  of the  deeds of  alliance before  the fading  of the
 Elves   and   the   estrangement   of   the   Two   Kindreds.   And   here
 endeth the tale of the ancient world as it is known to the Elves.         
                                                                          
          Commentary on the second version of The Fall of Numenor.         
                                                                          
    On 'Orcs, that are mockeries of the creatures of Iluvatar' see QS $18 
   and commentary. - It was  said in  FN I  $5 that  Morgoth 'did  not come
   in person, but only in spirit and as a shadow upon the mind  and heart.'
   Now the idea of his 'return' in any sense seems to be denied;  but there
   appears  the concept  of his  malevolent and  guiding Kill  that remains
   always in the world.                                                    
    'such  as  obeyed  dwelt again  in Eressea':  in FN  I 'the  Elves were
   summoned to Valinor, as has been told,  and many  obeyed, but  not all.'
   In  the  Quenta  (IV.  162)  'the  Gnomes  and Dark-elves  rehabited for
   the  most  part  the  Lonely  Isle...  But   some  returned   even  unto
   Valinor, as all were free to do who willed' (retained in QS, pp.  33 I-2
   $27). The name Avallon ('for it is hard by Valinor')  appears, but  as a
   new name for Tol Eressea; afterwards, in the form  Avallone ('for  it is
   of all cities the nearest to Valinor'), it became the name of a haven in
   the isle: Akallabeth p. 260.                                            
    At first my father preserved  exactly the  rewriting of  FN I  given in
   the commentary on FN  I $2,  whereby Atalante  is the  name of  the city
   Andunie after the Downfall. I  have suggested  that he  did not  in fact

  intend this; at any rate  he corrected  it here,  so that  Atalante' again
  becomes   the   name   of   Numenor   drowned.   Numenos   now   reappears
  from  FN  I  $2  as  originally  written,  where  it was  the name  of the
  western city, but becomes the name of the high  place of  the king  in the
  centre of the land (afterwards Armenelos).                                
    Elrond  (see  the  commentary  on  FN  I  $14)  now  becomes  the  first
  King  of  Numenor  and  the  builder  of  Numenos;  his brother  Elros has
  still not emerged.                                                        
    The  statement  here that  the Numenoreans  'took on  the speech  of the
  Elves of the Blessed Realm, as  it was  and is  in Eressea'  suggests that
  they  abandoned  their  own  Mannish   tongue;  and   that  this   is  the
  meaning  is shown  in The  Lost Road  (p. 68).  In the  Lhammas it  is said
  (p. 179) that 'already  even in  [Hurin's father's]  day Men  in Beleriand
  forsook  the  daily  use  of  their  own  tongue and  spoke and  gave even
  names  unto  their  children  in the  language of  the Gnomes.'  The words
  'as it was and is in Eressea' would  contradict any  idea that  the Lonely
  Isle  was  destroyed  in the  Downfall (see  the commentary  on FN  I $7).
  But the difficult passage which suggests it was  preserved in  the present
  text, $7 (though subsequently struck out).                                
     The  association  of  the  longevity  of   the  Numenoreans   with  the
  radiance  of  Valinor  (see  the  commentary  on  FN  I $4)  is abandoned,
  and is attributed solely to the gift of the Valar.                        
    In  all  probability  the  name  Sauron  (replacing Sur  of FN  I) first
  occurs here or in the closely related passage  in The  last Road  (p. 66).
  Its first occurrence in the 'Silmarillion' tradition is  in QS  $143. The
  story  of  Sauron's  coming  to  Numenor  is  changed from  that in  FN I,
  and  it is  explicit that  he could  not have  come had  he not  been sum-
  moned. The story as told in  the first  version here,  in which  the ships
  returning  from  Middle-earth  were  cast  upon  Numenor  far inland  by a
  great  wave,  and  Sauron stood  upon a  hill and  'preached a  message of
  deliverance', is told  in more  detail in  The Lost  Road; but  the second
  version in FN II, omitting the element of the great wave, looks as  if it
  were substituted  for the  first almost  immediately (on  the significance
  of this see p. g).                                                        
    The   temple  to   Morgoth  is   now  raised   upon  the   Mountain  of
  Iluvatar in the midst of the land, and this (or in The  Lost Road)  is the
  first  appearance  of  the Meneltarma.  The story  was later  rejected: in
  the Akallabeth 'not even Sauron dared to defile the  high place',  and the
  temple was built in Armenelos (pp. 272 - 3).                              
     The  addition  in  FN  II, 'Therefore  they built  very high  towers in
  those  days', must  be the  first reference  to the  White Towers  on Emyn
  Beraid, the Tower Hills. Cf. The Lord of  the Rings  Appendix A  (I. iii),
  where it is told of the palantir of Emyn Beraid that 'Elendil set it there
  so that he could look back with "straight  sight" and  see Eressea  in the
  vanished  West;  but  the  bent  seas  below  covered  Numenor  for ever.'
  Cf. also Of the Rings of Power in The Silmarillion, p, 292. But  when the

  present text was written the palantiri had not  (so far  as one  can tell)
  been conceived.                                                          
      The  rewriting  of  the  passage  concerning Beleriand  reinforces the
  suggestion in FN I that  it remained  a country  less destroyed  after the
  Great Battle than is  described in  the other  texts: it  was 'still  in a
  measure  blessed'  -  and  moreover  the  Elves  who  remained  in Middle-
  earth  'abode  mostly  in Beleriand'.  Here Elendil  'Elf-friend' appears,
  displacing  Amroth  of  FN  I.  It  might  be thought  from the  words 'in
  Beleriand there arose  a king,  who was  of Numenorean  race' that  he was
  not a survivor of the Downfall; but this is clearly not  the case.  In The
  Lost  Road,  closely  connected  with FN  II, Elendil  (the father  in the
  Numenorean  incarnation  of  'Elwin-Edwin')  is a  resolute foe  of Sauron
  and  his  dominance  in  Numenor;  and  though  The  Lost Road  breaks off
  before the sailing  of Tar-kalion's  fleet, Elendil  must have  been among
  those who 'sat in their ships upon  the east  coast of  the land'  (FN $9)
  and so escaped the Downfall.                                             
    Here is certainly  the first  appearance of  Gil-galad, the  Elf-king in
  Beleriand,  descended from  Feanor (it  would be  interesting to  know his
  parentage), and  the story  of the  Last Alliance  moves a  stage further;
  and there seems no question but that it  was in  this manuscript  that the
  name Mordor, the Black Country, first emerged in narrative.              
                                                                          
                                    (iv)                                   
                                                                          
               The further development of The Fall of Numenor.             
                                                                          
 FN  II was  followed by  a typescript  made on  my father's  typewriter of
 that period, but not typed by him. This is  seen from  its being  an exact
 copy of FN II after all corrections had been made to it,  and from  two or
 three misreadings of the manuscript. I have no  doubt that  the typescript
 was made soon afterwards. In itself it has no textual value, but my father
 used it as the basis for certain further changes.                         
  Associated  with  it  is a  loose manuscript  page bearing  passages that
 relate closely to changes made to the typescript. There is here a textual
 development that has important bearings on the dating in general.         
  Two  passages  are  in  question.  The  first  concerns  $8   (which  had
 remained  unchanged  from  FN  I,  apart  from  the omission  in FN  II of
 the  concluding sentence).  The loose  page has  here two  forms of  a new
 version of the paragraph, of which  the first,  which was  struck through,
 reads as follows:                                                         
                                                                          
    Then  Iluvatar  cast back  the Great  Sea west  of Middle-earth  and the
  Barren  Land  east  of  Middle-earth  and  made  new  lands  and  new seas
  where  aforetime  nought  had  been  but the  paths of  the Sun  and Moon.
  And  the  world  was  diminished;  for  Valinor  and  Eressea  were  taken
  into  the  Realm  of  Hidden  Things,  and  thereafter  however far  a man
  might sail he could never again  reach the  True West.  For all  lands old

 and  new  were  equally distant  from the  centre of  the earth.  There was
 [flood  and  great  confusion  of waters,  and seas  covered what  once was
 dry,   and  lands   appeared  where   there  had   been  deep   seas,)  and
 Beleriand fell into the sea in  that time,  all save  the land  where Beren
 and  Luthien  had  dwelt  for  a  while,  the  land  of Lindon  beneath the
 western feet of the [struck out: Ered] Lunoronti.                          
                                                                           
 (The  section  enclosed  in  square  brackets is  represented in  the manu-
 script by  a mark  of omission,  obviously meaning  that the  existing text
 was to be followed.)  Here the  words '[the  Gods] bent  back the  edges of
 the Middle-earth' have disappeared; it  is the  Great Sea  in the  West and
 'the Barren Land' in the East that are 'cast back' by  Iluvatar. It  is now
 said  that the  new lands  and new  seas came  into being  'where aforetime
 nought had been but the paths of the Sun and  Moon' (i.e.  at the  roots of
 the world, see  the Ambarkanta  diagrams IV.  243, 245).  This was  in turn
 lost  in  the further  rewriting (below),  where the  final and  very brief
 statement found in the Akallabeth (p. 279) is reached.                     
 This passage  is very  notable, since  the drowning  of all  Beleriand west
 of Lindon is here ascribed  to the  cataclysm of  the Downfall  of Numenor;
 see  the  commentaries  on FN  I and  II, $14. The  name Lunoronti  of the
 Blue  Mountains  has  not  occurred  previously  (but see  the Etymologies,
 stem LUG^2); and this is perhaps the  first occurrence  of the  name Lindon
 for the ancient Ossiriand, or such of it as remained above the sea (see the
 commentary on QS $108).                                                   
 The  second  form  of  this revised  version of  $8 follows  immediately in
 the manuscript:                                                            
                                                                           
 Then  Iluvatar  cast  back  the  Great  Sea west  of Middle-earth,  and the
 Empty  Land east  of it,  and new  lands and  new seas  were made;  and the
 world  was  diminished: for  Valinor and  Eressea were  taken from  it into
 the  realm  of  hidden  things. And  thereafter however  a man  might sail,
 he  could  never  again  reach  the True  West, but  would come  back weary
 at last to the place of his beginning; for all lands and seas  were equally
 distant from the centre of the earth, and  all roads  were bent.  There was
 flood and great  confusion of  waters in  that time,  and sea  covered much
 that  in  the  Elder  Days  had  been  dry, both  in the  West and  East of
 Middle-earth.                                                              
                                                                           
 Thus the passage concerning the drowning of  Beleriand at  the time  of the
 Numenorean  cataclysm  and  the  survival  of  Lindon  was  again  removed.
 In this form my father then copied it onto the  typescript, with  change of
 Empty Land to Empty Lands.  (If this  region, called  in the  first version
 the Barren Land, is to be related to the  Ambarkanta map  V (IV.  251) it
 must be what is there called the Burnt Land  of the  Sun; perhaps  also the
 Dark  Land,  which  is  there  shown as  a new  continent, formed  from the
 southern part  of Pelmar  or Middle-earth  (map IV)  after the  vast exten-
 sion of the former inland  sea of  Ringil at  the time  of the  breaking of

 
                                                                           
 Utumno). - The expression Elder Days  is not  found in  any writing  of my
 father's before this.                                                      
                                                                           
   The  second  passage  is  the  concluding  paragraph in  FN II  $14, con-
 cerning  Beleriand  and  the Last  Alliance. Here  a few  pencilled changes
 were  made  to  the typescript:  Thu was  changed to  Sauron except  in the
 sentence  'that  is  in  the  Gnomish  tongue  named  Thu',  where   Thu  >
 Corthu (see p. 338); 'in Beleriand there  arose a  king' >  'in Lindon...';
 and Gil-galad  is descended  from Finrod,  not Feanor.  The passage  in the
 typescript  was  then  struck  through,  with  a  direction to  introduce a
 substitute.  This  substitute is  found on  the reverse  of the  loose page
 giving the two forms of the rewriting of $8, and  was obviously  written at
 the same time as those. It reads as follows:                               
                                                                           
   But  there  remains  a  legend  of  Beleriand.  Now  that  land   had  been
   broken  in  the  Great  Battle  with Morgoth;  and at  the fall  of Numenor
   and  the  change  of  the fashion  of the  world it  perished; for  the sea
   covered  all that  was left  save some  of the  mountains that  remained as
   islands, even up to the  feet of  Eredlindon. But  that land  where Luthien
   had  dwelt  remained,  and  was  called  Lindon.  A  gulf  of the  sea came
   through  it,  and  a  gap  was  made  in  the  Mountains through  which the
   River Lhun flowed out. But in the  land that  was left  north and  south of
   the  gulf  the  Elves  remained,  and  Gil-galad  son  of  Felagund  son of
   Finrod  was  their  king.  And  they  made  Havens  in  the  Gulf  of  Lhun
   whence any of their people, or any other of  the Elves  that fled  from the
   darkness  and  sorrow  of  Middle-earth,  could  sail  into  the  True West
   and  return  no  more.  In Lindon  Sauron had  as yet  no dominion.  And it
   is said that the brethren Elendil and  Valandil escaping  from the  fall of
   Numenor came  at last  to the  mouths of  the rivers  that flowed  into the
   Western  Sea.  And  Elendil  (that  is   Elf-friend),  who   had  aforetime
   loved the folk of  Eressea, came  to Lindon  and dwelt  there a  while, and
   passed  into  Middle-earth  and  established  a  realm  in  the  North. But
   Valandil  sailed  up  the  Great  River  Anduin  and   established  another
   realm  far to  the South.  But Sauron  dwelt in  Mordor the  Black Country,
   and  that  was  not  very  distant from  Ondor the  realm of  Valandil; and
   Sauron  made  war  against  all  Elves  and  all  Men  of   Westernesse  or
   others  that  aided  them,  and  Valandil   was  hard   pressed.  Therefore
   Elendil  and  Gil-galad  seeing  that  unless some  stand were  made Sauron
   would  become  lord  of  [?all]  Middle-earth  they took  counsel together,
   and  they  made  a  great league.  And Gil-galad  and Elendil  marched into
   the  Middle-earth  [?and  gathered  force  of  Men  and  Elves,   and  they
   assembled at Imladrist].                                                 
                                                                           
 Towards the end the text degenerates into  a scribble  and the  final words
 are a bit doubtful. If the name Imladrist is correctly interpreted there is
 certainly a further letter after the s, which must be a t .Cf. The Tale of

 Years  in  The  Lord  of   the  Rings   (Appendix  B):   Second  Age   3431    'Gil-
 galad and Elendil march east to Imladris.'                                         
   All  this  passage  was  in  turn  struck  through,  and  not  copied  into  the
 typescript.  It  will  be  seen  that  it  brings  in  the  new  matter concerning
 Beleriand  and  Lindon  which  appeared  in  the  first  form  of the  revision of
 $8  but  was  then  removed  (pp.  31   -  2);  and  in  addition  many  important
 new  elements  have  entered.  Gil-galad  is  the  son  of  Felagund;  it  is  now
 explicit  that  Elendil  was  one  of  the  survivors  of  Numenor,  and he  has a
 brother  named  Valandil  (the  name  of  his  father  in  The  Lost   Road);  the
 river  Lhun  appears,  and  its  gulf,  and   the  gap   in  the   Blue  Mountains
 through  which  it  flowed;  the  Elves  of  Lindon  built  havens  on   the  Gulf
 of   Lhun;   Elendil   established   a  kingdom   in  the   North,  east   of  the
 mountains,  and  Valandil,   sailing  up   the  Anduin,   founded  his   realm  of
 Ondor not far from Mordor.                                                         
   Now  there  is  no  question  that  the  entire  conception  of Gondor  arose in
 the  course  of  the  composition  of  The   Lord  of   the  Rings.   Moreover  my
 father  pencilled  the  following  notes  (also  struck  through)  at  the  end of
 the typescript:                                                                    
                                                                                   
        More of this is told in The Lord of the Rings                               
        Only alteration required is this:                                           
        (1) Many Elves remained behind                                              
        (2) Beleriand was all sunk except for a few islands = mountains,            
        and part of Ossiriand (called Lindon) where Gil-galad dwelt.                
        (3) Elrond remained with Gil-galad. Or else sailed back to                  
        Middle-earth. The Half-elven.                                               
                                                                                   
 The  second  of  these  is  decisive,   since  the   passage  last   given  clearly
 contains a working-up of this  note; and  it is  clear that  all the  rewritings of
 the   second  version   of  The   Fall  of Numenor   considered  here   come  from
 several  years  later.  FN  II  represents  the  form  of  the  work  at  the  time
 when   The   Lord   of   the   Rings   was   begun.  On   the  other   hand,  these
 revisions  come  from  a  time  when  it  was  a  long way  from completion,  as is
 seen   by   the   form   Ondor,  and   by  the   brothers  Elendil   and  Valandil,
 founders of the Numenorean kingdoms in Middle-earth.                               
   Apart   from   these   major   passages   of  revision   there  were   few  other
 changes  made  to  the  typescript  copy  of  FN  II, and  those very  minor, save
 for  the  substitution  of  Elros  for  Elrond  at  both  occurrences  in  $2.  This
 belongs  to  the  pre-Lord  of  the  Rings  period,  as  is  seen from  the appear-
 ance of Elros in the conclusion of QS (see p. 337, commentary on $28).*            
                                                                                   
   <The third 'alteration' required (in the notes on the typescript of FN I I), that
 'Elrond  remained with  Gil-galad, or  else sailed  back to  Middle-earth', presum-
 ably  takes  account  of  this  change,  and  means  that  my  father  had  not yet
 determined  whether  or  not  Elrond originally  went to  Numenor with  his brother
 Elros.                                                                             

 Years  in  The  Lord  of   the  Rings   (Appendix  B):   Second  Age   3431    'Gil-
 galad and Elendil march east to Imladris.'                                         
   All  this  passage  was  in  turn  struck  through,  and  not  copied  into  the
 typescript.  It  will  be  seen  that  it  brings  in  the  new  matter concerning
 Beleriand  and  Lindon  which  appeared  in  the  first  form  of the  revision of
 $8  but  was  then  removed  (pp.  31   -  2);  and  in  addition  many  important
 new  elements  have  entered.  Gil-galad  is  the  son  of  Felagund;  it  is  now
 explicit  that  Elendil  was  one  of  the  survivors  of  Numenor,  and he  has a
 brother  named  Valandil  (the  name  of  his  father  in  The  Lost   Road);  the
 river  Lhun  appears,  and  its  gulf,  and   the  gap   in  the   Blue  Mountains
 through  which  it  flowed;  the  Elves  of  Lindon  built  havens  on   the  Gulf
 of   Lhun;   Elendil   established   a  kingdom   in  the   North,  east   of  the
 mountains,  and  Valandil,   sailing  up   the  Anduin,   founded  his   realm  of
 Ondor not far from Mordor.                                                         
   Now  there  is  no  question  that  the  entire  conception  of Gondor  arose in
 the  course  of  the  composition  of  The   Lord  of   the  Rings.   Moreover  my
 father  pencilled  the  following  notes  (also  struck  through)  at  the  end of
 the typescript:                                                                    
                                                                                   
        More of this is told in The Lord of the Rings                               
        Only alteration required is this:                                           
        (1) Many Elves remained behind                                              
        (2) Beleriand was all sunk except for a few islands = mountains,            
        and part of Ossiriand (called Lindon) where Gil-galad dwelt.                
        (3) Elrond remained with Gil-galad. Or else sailed back to                  
        Middle-earth. The Half-elven.                                               
                                                                                   
 The  second  of  these  is  decisive,   since  the   passage  last   given  clearly
 contains a working-up of this  note; and  it is  clear that  all the  rewritings of
 the   second  version   of  The   Fall  of Numenor   considered  here   come  from
 several  years  later.  FN  II  represents  the  form  of  the  work  at  the  time
 when   The   Lord   of   the   Rings   was   begun.  On   the  other   hand,  these
 revisions  come  from  a  time  when  it  was  a  long way  from completion,  as is
 seen   by   the   form   Ondor,  and   by  the   brothers  Elendil   and  Valandil,
 founders of the Numenorean kingdoms in Middle-earth.                               
   Apart   from   these   major   passages   of  revision   there  were   few  other
 changes  made  to  the  typescript  copy  of  FN  II, and  those very  minor, save
 for  the  substitution  of  Elros  for  Elrond  at  both  occurrences  in  $2.  This
 belongs  to  the  pre-Lord  of  the  Rings  period,  as  is  seen from  the appear-
 ance of Elros in the conclusion of QS (see p. 337, commentary on $28).*            
                                                                                   
   (*The third 'alteration' required (in the notes on the typescript of FN II), that
 'Elrond  remained with  Gil-galad, or  else sailed  back to  Middle-earth', presum-
 ably  takes  account  of  this  change,  and  means  that  my  father  had  not yet
 determined  whether  or  not  Elrond originally  went to  Numenor with  his brother
 Elros).                                                                             

    My father next  wrote a  fine new  manuscript incorporating  the changes
  made  to  the  typescript  of FN  II -  but now  wholly omitting  the con-
  cluding passage ($14)   concerning  Beleriand and  the Last  Alliance, and
  ending  with  the  words  'there  were  wars among  the mighty  of Middle-
  earth, of which only the echoes  now remain.'  This version,  improved and
  altered in detail, shows however very little further advance  in narrative
  substance, and clearly belongs to the same period as the revisions studied
  in this section.                                                          

                                       III.                                    
                                                                              
                                  THE LOST ROAD.                               
                                                                              
                                       (i)                                     
                                                                              
                              The opening chapters.                           
                                                                              
 For the texts of The Lost Roar( and its relation to The  Fall of  Numenor see
 pp. 8 - g.  I give  here the  two completed  chapters at  the beginning  of the
 work, following them with a brief commentary.                                 
                                                                              
                                    Chapter I                                  
                                                                              
                         A Step Forward. Young Alboin *                        
                                                                              
  'Alboin! Alboin! '                                                           
  There was no answer. There was no one in the play-room.                      
  'Alboin!' Oswin Errol stood at the door and called into the small           
 high  garden  at  the back  of his  house. At  length a  young voice          
 answered, sounding  distant and  like the  answer of  someone asleep          
 or just awakened.                                                             
  'Yes?'                                                                      
  'Where are you?'                                                            
  'Here! '                                                                     
  'Where is "here"?'                                                           
  'Here: up on the wall, father.'                                              
  Oswin  sprang  down  the  steps  from  the  door  into  the garden,          
 and walked along the flower-bordered path. It led after a turn  to a          
 low  stone  wall, screened  from the  house by  a hedge.  Beyond the          
 stone wall there was a brief space of turf,  and then  a cliff-edge,          
 beyond   which   outstretched,   and  now   shimmering  in   a  calm          
 evening,  the  western sea.  Upon the  wall Oswin  found his  son, a          
 boy about twelve years old, lying gazing out to sea with his chin in          
 his hands.                                                                    
  'So there you are!' he said. 'You take a  deal of  calling. Didn't          
 you hear me?'                                                                
  'Not before the time when I answered,' said Alboin.                          
  'Well,  you must  be deaf  or dreaming,'  said his  father. 'Dream-          
                                                                              
  (*The title was put in afterwards, as was that of Chapter II; see p. 78).      

                    
                                                                     
 ing, it looks like. It is getting very near bed-time; so, if you want
 any story tonight, we shall have to begin at once.'                  
  'I am sorry, father, but I was thinking.'                           
  'What about? '                                                      
  'Oh,  lots  of  things  mixed  up:  the  sea,  and  the  world,  and
 Alboin.'                                                             
  'Alboin? '                                                          
  'Yes.  I  wondered  why  Alboin.  Why  am  I  called   Alboin?  They
 often ask  me "Why  Alboin?" at  school, and  they call  me All-bone.
 But I am not, am I?'                                                 
  'You look rather bony,  boy; but  you are  not all  bone, I  am glad
 to say. I am afraid  I called  you Alboin,  and that  is why  you are
 called it. I am sorry: I never meant it to be a nuisance to you.'
  'But it is a real name, isn't it?' said Alboin eagerly. 'I  mean, it
 means  something,  and  men  have  been  called  it?  It  isn't  just
 invented? '                                                          
  'Of course not. It is just as real and just as good as Oswin; and it
 belongs  to  the  same  family,  you  might  say.  But  no  one  ever
 bothered  me  about  Oswin.  Though  I  often  used  to   get  called
 Oswald  by  mistake.  I  remember  how  it used  to annoy  me, though
 I can't think why. I was rather particular about my name.'           
  They  remained  talking  on the  wall overlooking  the sea;  and did
 not go  back into  the garden,  or the  house, until  bed-time. Their
 talk, as often happened, drifted into  story-telling; and  Oswin told
 his son the tale of Alboin son of  Audoin, the  Lombard king;  and of
 the  great  battle  of  the  Lombards and  the Gepids,  remembered as
 terrible even in the grim sixth century; and  of the  kings Thurisind
 and  Cunimund,  and  of  Rosamunda.  'Not  a  good  story   for  near
 bed-time,'  he  said,  ending  suddenly  with Alboin's  drinking from
 the jewelled skull of Cunimund,                                      
  'I don't like that Alboin much,' said  the boy.  'I like  the Gepids
 better,  and  King Thurisind.  I wish  they had  won. Why  didn't you
 call me Thurisind or Thurismod?'                                     
  'Well,  really  mother  had  meant  to call  you Rosamund,  only you
 turned  up  a  boy. And  she didn't  live to  help me  choose another
 name, you know. So I took one out  of that  story, because  it seemed
 to fit. I mean, the name  doesn't belong  only to  that story,  it is
 much  older.  Would  you  rather  have  been  called  Elf-friend? For
 that's what the name means.'                                         
  'No-o,'  said  Alboin  doubtfully.  'I  like  names  to  mean  some-
 thing, but not to say something.'                                    
  'Well, I  might have  called you  AElfwine, of  course; that  is the

                             
                                                                        
 Old English form of  it. I  might have  called you  that, not  only after
 AElfwine of Italy, but after all the Elf-friends of old;  after AElfwine,
 King  Alfred's  grandson,  who  fell  in  the great  victory in  937, and
 AElfwine  who  fell  in  the  famous  defeat  at  Maldon, and  many other
 Englishmen  and  northerners  in  the  long  line  of Elf-friends.  But I
 gave you a latinized form.  I think  that is  best. The  old days  of the
 North  are  gone  beyond  recall,  except  in  so far  as they  have been
 worked  into  the  shape  of  things  as  we  know it,  into Christendom.
 So I took  Alboin; for  it is  not Latin  and not  Northern, and  that is
 the  way  of  most  names  in the  West, and  also of  the men  that bear
 them.  I  might  have  chosen  Albinus,  for  that  is  what  they  some-
 times  turned  the  name  into;  and  it  wouldn't  have   reminded  your
 friends  of  bones.  But  it  is  too  Latin,  and  means   something  in
 Latin.  And  you are  not white  or fair,  boy, but  dark. So  Alboin you
 are. And that is all there is to it, except bed.' And they went in.     
                                                                        
   But  Alboin  looked  out  of  his  window  before  getting   into  bed;
 and he could see the sea  beyond the  edge of  the cliff.  It was  a late
 sunset,  for  it  was  summer.  The  sun  sank  slowly  to  the  sea, and
 dipped   red   beyond   the   horizon.   The   light  and   colour  faded
 quickly  from  the water:  a chilly  wind came  up out  of the  West, and
 over  the  sunset-rim  great  dark  clouds  sailed  up,  stretching  huge
 wings southward and northward, threatening the land.                    
   'They  look  like  the  eagles  of  the  Lord of  the West  coming upon
 Numenor,'   Alboin   said  aloud,   and  he   wondered  why.   Though  it
 did  not  seem  very  strange  to  him. In  those days  he often  made up
 names.  Looking  on   a  familiar   hill,  he   would  see   it  suddenly
 standing  in  some  other  time  and  story:  'the  green   shoulders  of
 Amon-ereb,'  he  would  say.  'The  waves  are  loud  upon the  shores of
 Beleriand,'  he  said  one  day,  when  storm  was  piling  water  at the
 foot of the cliff below the house.                                      
   Some  of  these  names  were   really  made   up,  to   please  himself
 with their sound  (or so  he thought);  but others  seemed 'real',  as if
 they  had  not  been  spoken first  by him.  So it  was with  Numenor. 'I
 like that,' he said to himself. 'I could think of a long story  about the
 land of Numenor.'                                                       
   But  as  he  lay  in  bed,  he  found  that  the  story  would  not  be
 thought.   And   soon   he   forgot   the   name;   and   other  thoughts
 crowded  in, partly  due to  his father's  words, and  partly to  his own
 day-dreams before.                                                      
   'Dark  Alboin,' he  thought. 'I  wonder if  there is  any Latin  in me.
 Not much, I think. I  love the  western shores,  and the  real sea  - it

 is  quite different  from the  Mediterranean, even  in stories.  I wish
 there  was  no  other  side  to  it. There  were darkhaired  people who
 were  not  Latins.  Are  the  Portuguese  Latins?  What  is   Latin?  I
 wonder  what  kind  of  people   lived  in   Portugal  and   Spain  and
 Ireland and  Britain in  old days,  very old  days, before  the Romans,
 or  the  Carthaginians.  Before  anybody  else. I  wonder what  the man
 thought who was the first to see the western sea.'                    
   Then  he  fell  asleep,  and  dreamed.  But  when  he woke  the dream
 slipped beyond recall, and  left no  tale or  picture behind,  only the
 feeling  that  these  had  brought:  the  sort  of feeling  Alboin con-
 nected  with  long   strange  names.   And  he   got  up.   And  summer
 slipped by, and he went to school and went on learning Latin.         
   Also  he  learned Greek.  And later,  when he  was about  fifteen, he
 began  to learn  other languages,  especially those  of the  North: Old
 English,  Norse,  Welsh,  Irish.  This  was   not  much   encouraged  -
 even  by  his  father,  who  was  an  historian.  Latin  and  Greek, it
 seemed   to   be   thought,   were  enough   for  anybody;   and  quite
 old-fashioned  enough,  when  there  were  so  many  successful  modern
 languages  (spoken  by  millions  of  people);  not  to  mention  maths
 and all the sciences.                                                 
   But  Alboin  liked  the  flavour  of  the  older  northern languages,
 quite  as  much as  he liked  some of  the things  written in  them. He
 got to know a bit about linguistic  history, of  course; he  found that
 you  rather  had  it  thrust on  you anyway  by the  grammar-writers of
 'unclassical'  languages.  Not  that  he  objected:  sound-changes were
 a hobby of his,  at the  age when  other boys  were learning  about the
 insides  of  motor-cars.  But,  although  he  had  some  idea  of  what
 were  supposed  to  be  the  relationships  of  European  languages, it
 did not seem to him quite  all the  story. The  languages he  liked had
 a definite flavour - and to some  extent a  similar flavour  which they
 shared.  It  seemed,  too,  in some  way related  to the  atmosphere of
 the legends and myths told in the languages.                          
   One  day,  when Alboin  was nearly  eighteen, he  was sitting  in the
 study  with  his  father.  It  was  autumn,  and  the  end   of  summer
 holidays  spent  mostly  in  the  open.  Fires  were  coming  back.  It
 was the time  in all  the year  when book-lore  is most  attractive (to
 those who really like  it at  all). They  were talking  'language'. For
 Errol  encouraged  his  boy to  talk about  anything he  was interested
 in;   although   secretly  he   had  been   wondering  for   some  time
 whether  Northern  languages  and  legends  were  not  taking  up  more
 time and energy than their practical value in  a hard  world justified.
 'But I had better know what is  going on,  as far  as any  father can,'

 he thought. 'He'll go on anyway, if he really has a bent - and  it had
 better not be bent inwards.'                                         
   Alboin  was  trying   to  explain   his  feeling   about  'language-
 atmosphere'.  'You  get  echoes  coming through,  you know,'  he said,
 'in  odd  words  here and  there -  often very  common words  in their
 own  language,  but  quite  unexplained  by  the etymologists;  and in
 the  general  shape  and  sound  of  all  the  words,  somehow;  as if
 something was peeping through from deep under the surface.'          
   'Of course, I am not a philologist,' said his  father; 'but  I never
 could  see  that  there  was  much  evidence  in  favour  of ascribing
 language-changes  to  a  substratum.   Though  I   suppose  underlying
 ingredients do have an influence, though it is not easy to  define, on
 the final mixture in the case of peoples taken  as a  whole, different
 national  talents  and  temperaments,  and  that  sort  of  thing. But
 races, and cultures, are different from languages.'                  
   'Yes,'  said Alboin;  'but very  mixed up,  all three  together. And
 after  all,  language  goes back  by a  continuous tradition  into the
 past, just as much as the other two. I  often think  that if  you knew
 the living faces of any man's ancestors,  a long  way back,  you might
 find some queer  things. You  might find  that he  got his  nose quite
 clearly  from,  say,  his  mother's  great-grandfather;  and  yet that
 something about his nose, its expression  or its  set or  whatever you
 like  to  call  it,  really came  down from  much further  back, from,
 say,  his  father's  great-great-great-grandfather or  greater. Anyway
 I  like to  go back  - and  not with  race only,  or culture  only, or
 language; but with all three. I wish I  could go  back with  the three
 that are mixed in us,  father; just  the plain  Errols, with  a little
 house in Cornwall in the summer. I wonder what one would see.'       
   'It depends how far you went back,'  said the  elder Errol.  'If you
 went  back  beyond  the  Ice-ages,  I imagine  you would  find nothing
 in these parts; or at  any rate  a pretty  beastly and  uncomely race,
 and  a  tooth-and-nail  culture,  and  a  disgusting language  with no
 echoes for you, unless those of food-noises.'                        
   'Would you?' said Alboin. 'I wonder.'                             
   'Anyway  you can't  go back,'  said his  father; 'except  within the
 limits  prescribed  to  us  mortals.  You can  go back  in a  sense by
 honest  study,  long  and  patient  work.  You  had  better go  in for
 archaeology  as  well  as  philology:  they  ought  to go  well enough
 together, though they aren't joined very often.'                     
   'Good  idea,'  said  Alboin.  'But  you  remember,  long   ago,  you
 said  I was  not all-bone.  Well, I  want some  mythology, as  well. I
 want myths, not only bones and stones.'                              

   'Well, you can have 'em! Take  the whole  lot on!  ' said  his father
 laughing.  'But  in  the  meanwhile  you  have a  smaller job  on hand.
 Your  Latin  needs  improving  (or  so  I  am  told),  for  school pur-
 poses.  And scholarships  are useful  in lots  of ways,  especially for
 folk like you  and me  who go  in for  antiquated subjects.  Your first
 shot is this winter, remember.'                                       
   'I  wish  Latin  prose  was  not  so important,'  said Alboin.  'I am
 really much better at verses.'                                        
   'Don't  go  putting  any  bits  of your  Eressean,or Elf-latin,o r
 whatever you call it, into your verses  at Oxford.  It might  scan, but
 it wouldn't pass.                                                     
   'Of  course  not!'  said  the  boy,  blushing.  The  matter  was  too
 private,  even  for  private  jokes.  'And  don't  go   blabbing  about
 Eressean  outside  the  partnership,'  he  begged; 'or  I shall  wish I
 had kept it quiet.'                                                   
   'Well,  you  did  pretty  well. I  don't suppose  I should  ever have
 heard  about  it,  if  you  hadn't  left your  note-books in  my study.
 Even so  I don't  know much  about it.  But, my  dear lad,  I shouldn't
 dream  of  blabbing,  even if  I did.  Only don't  waste too  much time
 on it. I  am afraid  I am  anxious about  that schol[arship],  not only
 from the highest motives. Cash is not too abundant.'                  
   'Oh, I haven't done anything of that sort for a long while,  at least
 hardly anything,' said Alboin.                                        
   'It isn't getting on too well, then?'                               
   'Not lately. Too  much else  to do,  I suppose.  But I  got a  lot of
 jolly  new  words  a  few  days  ago:  I   am  sure   lomelinde'  means
 nightingale,  for  instance, and  certainly lome  is night  (though not
 darkness).  The  verb  is  very sketchy  still. But  - '  He hesitated.
 Reticence  (and  uneasy  conscience)  were  at  war  with his  habit of
 what  he  called  'partnership  with  the  pater',  and  his  desire to
 unbosom the secret anyway. 'But,  the real  difficulty is  that another
 language  is  coming  through,  as  well.  It seems  to be  related but
 quite  different,  much  more  -  more  Northern.  Alda  was a  tree (a
 word I got a long  time ago);  in the  new language  it is  galadh, and
 orn.  The  Sun  and  Moon  seem   to  have   similar  names   in  both:
 Anar and Isil beside Anor and Ithil. I like first one, then  the other,
 in  different  moods.  Beleriandic  is really  very attractive;  but it
 complicates things.'                                                  
   'Good  Lord!'  said  his  father,  'this is  serious! I  will respect
 unsolicited secrets. But do have a conscience as well  as a  heart, and
 - moods. Or get a Latin and Greek mood!'                             
   'I do. I have had one for  a week,  and I  have got  it now;  a Latin

 one luckily, and Virgil in particular. So here we part.' He got  up. 'I
 am going to do a bit of reading. I'll look  in when  I think  you ought
 to go to bed.' He closed the door on his father's snort.              
   As a matter of fact Errol did not really like  the parting  shot. The
 affection  in  it warmed  and saddened  him. A  late marriage  had left
 him  now  on  the  brink  of  retirement  from  a  schoolmaster's small
 pay  to  his  smaller  pension,   just  when   Alboin  was   coming  of
 University  age.  And  he  was  also (he  had begun  to feel,  and this
 year to admit in his heart) a  tired man.  He had  never been  a strong
 man.  He  would   have  liked   to  accompany   Alboin  a   great  deal
 further  on  the  road,  as  a  younger  father  probably   would  have
 done;  but  he  did  not  somehow  think  he would  be going  very far.
 'Damn it,' he  said to  himself, 'a  boy of  that age  ought not  to be
 thinking  such  things,   worrying  whether   his  father   is  getting
 enough rest. Where's my book?'                                        
                                                                      
   Alboin  in  the  old  play-room,  turned  into  junior  study, looked
 out into the dark. He did not for a long  time turn  to books.  'I wish
 life was not so short, ' he thought. 'Languages take  such a  time, and
 so do all the things  one wants  to know  about. And  the pater,  he is
 looking tired. I want him  for years.  If he  lived to  be a  hundred I
 should be only  about as  old as  he is  now. and  I should  still want
 him.  But  he  won't,  I  wish  we  could stop  getting old.  The pater
 could  go  on  working  and  write  that  book he  used to  talk about,
 about  Cornwall;  and  we  could  go  on talking.  He always  plays up,
 even  if  he does  not agree  or understand.  Bother Eressean.  I wish
 he hadn't mentioned it. I am sure I shall dream tonight;  and it  is so
 exciting. The  Latin-mood will  go. He  is very  decent about  it, even
 though he thinks I am making it all up. If I were, I  would stop  it to
 please him. But it comes, and I simply can't let it slip when  it does.
 Now there is Beleriandic.'                                            
   Away  west  the  moon  rode  in  ragged  clouds.  The  sea  glimmered
 palely  out  of the  gloom, wide,  flat, going  on to  the edge  of the
 world.  'Confound  you, dreams!  ' said  Alboin. 'Lay  off, and  let me
 do  a  little  patient work  at least  until December.  A schol[arship]
 would brace the pater.'                                               
   He  found  his  father asleep  in his  chair at  half past  ten. They
 went  up  to  bed  together.  Alboin  got  into bed  and slept  with no
 shadow  of  a   dream.  The   Latin-mood  was   in  full   blast  after
 breakfast;  and  the  weather  allied  itself  with  virtue   and  sent
 torrential rain.                                                      

                          
                                                                      
                            Chapter II.                                
                                                                      
                        Alboin and Audoin.                             
                                                                      
 Long   afterwards   Alboin   remembered   that   evening,   that   had
 marked  the  strange,  sudden,  cessation  of the  Dreams. He  had got
 a  scholarship (the  following year)  and had  'braced the  pater'. He
 had  behaved  himself  moderately  well  at the  university -  not too
 many  side-issues  (at  least  not  what he  called too  many); though
 neither the  Latin nor  the Greek  mood had  remained at  all steadily
 to   sustain   him  through   'Honour  Mods.'   They  came   back,  of
 course,  as  soon  as  the  exams  were  over.  They  would.   He  had
 switched over, all the  same, to  history, and  had again  'braced the
 pater'  with  a  'first-class'.  And  the  pater  had  needed bracing.
 Retirement  proved  quite  different  from  a  holiday: he  had seemed
 just  to  slip slowly  out. He  had hung  on just  long enough  to see
 Alboin into his first job: an assistant  lecturership in  a university
 college.                                                              
  Rather  disconcertingly  the  Dreams  had  begun  again  just  before
 'Schools', and were  extraordinarly strong  in the  following vacation
 - the last he and his father had  spent together  in Cornwall.  But at
 that time the Dreams had taken a new turn, for a while.               
  He  remembered  one  of the  last conversations  of the  old pleasant
 sort  he  had  been  able  to  have  with  the old  man. It  came back
 clearly to him now.                                                   
  'How's  the  Eressean  Elf-latin,  boy?'  his father  asked, smiling,
 plainly  intending  a  joke, as  one may  playfully refer  to youthful
 follies long atoned for.                                              
  'Oddly  enough,'  he  answered,  'that  hasn't  been  coming  through
 lately. I have got a lot of different stuff. Some  is beyond  me, yet.
 Some might be Celtic, of a sort. Some seems  like a  very old  form of
 Germanic; pre-runic, or I'll eat my cap and gown.'                    
  The  old  man  smiled,  almost  raised a  laugh. 'Safer  ground, boy,
 safer ground for an historian. But you'll get into trouble, if you let
 your cats out of the bag among the philologists  - unless,  of course,
 they back up the authorities.'                                        
  'As a matter of fact, I rather think they do,' he said.              
  'Tell  me  a bit,  if you  can without  your note-books,'  his father
 slyly said.                                                           
   Westra lage wegas rehtas, nu isti sa wraithas. ' He  quoted that,
 because it had stuck in  his mind,  though he  did not  understand it.
 Of  course  the  mere  sense  was  fairly plain:  a straight  road lay
 westward,  now  it  is  bent.  He remembered  waking up,  and feeling

 it  was  somehow  very  significant.  'Actually  I got  a bit  of plain
 Anglo-Saxon   last  night,'   he  went   on.  He   thought  Anglo-Saxon
 would please his father; it was  a real  historical language,  of which
 the  old  man  had  once known  a fair  amount. Also  the bit  was very
 fresh  in  his  mind, and  was the  longest and  most connected  he had
 yet  had.  Only  that  very  morning  he  had  waked  up late,  after a
 dreamful  night,  and  had found  himself saying  the lines.  He jotted
 them  down  at  once,  or  they  might  have  vanished  (as  usual)  by
 breakfast-time,  even  though  they  were  in   a  language   he  knew.
 Now waking memory had them secure.                                     
                                                                       
             'Thus cwaeth AElfwine Widlast:                            
             Fela bith on Westwegum werum uncuthra                      
             wundra and wihta, wlitescene land,                         
             eardgeard elfa, and esa bliss.                             
             Lyt aenig wat hwylc his longath sie                        
             tham the eftsithes eldo getwaefeth.'                        
                                                                       
    His  father  looked  up  and  smiled  at   the  name   AElfwine.  He
 translated the lines for him; probably  it was  not necessary,  but the
 old  man  had   forgotten  many   other  things   he  had   once  known
 much better than Anglo-Saxon.                                          
    'Thus said AElfwine  the far-travelled:  "There is  many a  thing in
 the  West-regions  unknown  to  men,  marvels  and  strange  beings,  a
 land fair and lovely, the homeland of the Elves, and  the bliss  of the
 Gods.  Little  doth  any  man  know what  longing is  his whom  old age
 cutteth off from return."'                                             
    He suddenly  regretted translating  the last  two lines.  His father
 looked  up  with  an  odd  expression.  'The old  know,' he  said. 'But
 age  does  not  cut  us  off from  going away,  from -  from forthsith.
 There is  no eftsith:  we can't  go back.  You need  not tell  me that.
 But good for AElfwine-Alboin. You could always do verses.'             
    Damn it - as if he would make up stuff like that, just to tell it to
 the old man, practically  on his  death-bed. His  father had,  in fact,
 died during the following winter.                                      
                                                                       
    On the whole  he had  been luckier  than his  father; in  most ways,
 but not in one. He had  reached a  history professorship  fairly early;
 but he had lost his wife, as  his father  had done,  and had  been left
 with an only child, a boy, when he was only twenty-eight.              
    He was, perhaps,  a pretty  good professor,  as they  go. Only  in a
 small  southern  university,  of  course,  and  he  did not  suppose he
 would get a move. But at any  rate he  wasn't tired  of being  one; and

                         
                                                                       
 history,  and  even teaching  it, still  seemed interesting  (and fairly
 important).  He  did  his  duty,  at   least,  or   he  hoped   so.  The
 boundaries  were  a  bit  vague.  For, of  course, he  had gone  on with
 the  other  things, legends  and languages  - rather  odd for  a history
 professor.  Still  there it  was: he  was fairly  learned in  such book-
 lore, though a lot of it was well outside the professional borders.
  And   the   Dreams.   They  came   and  went.   But  lately   they  had
 been  getting   more  frequent,   and  more   -  absorbing.   But  still
 tantalizingly  linguistic.  No  tale,   no  remembered   pictures;  only
 the feeling that  he had  seen things  and heard  things that  he wanted
 to  see,  very  much,  and  would  give  much  to see  and hear  again -
 and  these  fragments  of  words,  sentences,  verses.  Eressean  as  he
 called  it as  a boy  - though  he could  not remember  why he  had felt
 so  sure  that  that  was  the   proper  name   -  was   getting  pretty
 complete.  He  had  a  lot  of  Beleriandic, too,  and was  beginning to
 understand  it,  and  its  relation  to Eressean.  And he  had a  lot of
 unclassifiable  fragments,  the  meaning  of  which  in  many  cases  he
 did  not  know,  through  forgetting  to  jot  it  down  while  he  knew
 it.   And   odd  bits   in  recognizable   languages.  Those   might  be
 explained  away,   of  course.   But  anyway   nothing  could   be  done
 about  them:  not  publication  or  anything  of  that  sort. He  had an
 odd  feeling  that  they  were  not  essential:  only  occasional lapses
 of  forgetfulness   which  took   a  linguistic   form  owing   to  some
 peculiarity  of  his  own  mental  make-up.  The  real  thing   was  the
 feeling  the  Dreams  brought  more  and  more  insistently,  and taking
 force  from  an  alliance  with  the  ordinary  professional occupations
 of  his mind.  Surveying the  last thirty  years, he  felt he  could say
 that  his   most  permanent   mood,  though   often  overlaid   or  sup-
 pressed,  had  been  since  childhood  the  desire to  go back.  To walk
 in  Time,  perhaps,  as  men walk  on long  roads; or  to survey  it, as
 men  may  see  the  world  from  a mountain,  or the  earth as  a living
 map  beneath  an  airship.  But  in  any case  to see  with eyes  and to
 hear with  ears: to  see the  lie of  old and  even forgotten  lands, to
 behold  ancient  men  walking,   and  hear   their  languages   as  they
 spoke  them,  in  the  days  before  the  days,  when  tongues  of  for-
 gotten  lineage  were heard  in kingdoms  long fallen  by the  shores of
 the Atlantic.                                                          
  But  nothing  could  be  done  about  that desire,  either. He  used to
 be able, long ago, to talk about it, a little and not too  seriously, to
 his father. But for a long  while he  had had  no one  to talk  to about
 that  sort  of  thing.  But  now there  was Audoin.  He was  growing up.
 He was sixteen.                                                        

   He  had  called  his  boy  Audoin,  reversing  the  Lombardic order.
 It seemed  to fit.  It belonged  anyway to  the same  name-family, and
 went with his own name.  And it  was a  tribute to  the memory  of his
 father  -  another  reason  for  relinquishing   Anglo-Saxon  Eadwine,
 or  even  commonplace   Edwin.  Audoin   had  turned   out  remarkably
 like  Alboin,  as  far  as  his memory  of young  Alboin went,  or his
 penetration  of  the  exterior  of  young  Audoin.  At  any   rate  he
 seemed  interested  in  the  same  things,  and  asked the  same ques-
 tions;  though  with  much less  inclination to  words and  names, and
 more  to things  and descriptions.  Unlike his  father he  could draw,
 but  was  not  good  at  'verses'.  Nonetheless  he  had,  of  course,
 eventually  asked  why  he  was  called   Audoin.  He   seemed  rather
 glad  to  have  escaped  Edwin. But  the question  of meaning  had not
 been quite so easy to answer. Friend of fortune, was  it, or  of fate,
 luck, wealth, blessedness? Which?                                    
   'I like Aud,' young Audoin  had said  - he  was then  about thirteen
 -'if it means all that. A  good beginning  for a  name. I  wonder what
 Lombards looked like. Did they all have Long Beards?'                
   Alboin   had  scattered   tales  and   legends  all   down  Audoin's
 childhood and  boyhood, like  one laying  a trail,  though he  was not
 clear what trail or where it led. Audoin was a voracious  listener, as
 well (latterly)  as a  reader. Alboin  was very  tempted to  share his
 own odd  linguistic secrets  with the  boy. They  could at  least have
 some  pleasant  private  fun.  But  he could  sympathize with  his own
 father now - there was a limit to time. Boys have a lot to do.       
   Anyway,   happy   thought,   Audoin   was   returning   from  school
 tomorrow.  Examination-scripts  were  nearly  finished  for  this year
 for  both  of them.  The examiner's  side of  the business  was decid-
 edly  the  stickiest  (thought  the  professor),  but  he  was  nearly
 unstuck  at  last.  They  would be  off to  the coast  in a  few days,
 together.                                                            
                                                                     
   There  came  a night,  and Alboin  lay again  in a  room in  a house
 by the sea: not the little house of his boyhood, but the same  sea. It
 was a calm night, and the water lay like a vast  plain of  chipped and
 polished flint, petrified under the cold light of  the Moon.  The path
 of moonlight lay from the shore to the edge of sight.                
   Sleep  would not  come to  him, although  he was  eager for  it. Not
 for rest - he was not  tired; but  because of  last night's  Dream. He
 hoped  to  complete  a  fragment  that had  come through  vividly that
 morning. He had it at hand in a  note-book by  his bed-side;  not that
 he was likely to forget it once it was written down.                 

                                                                      
                                                                        
 ar sauron tule nahamna... lantier turkildi                              
 and ? came ? ... they-fell ?                                            
                                                                        
 unuhuine     ...        tarkalion ohtakare  valannar ...           
 under-Shadow ...          ?       war-made on-Powers ...        
                                                                        
 herunumen  ilu terhante  ... iluvataren  ... eari                       
 Lord-of-West world broke ... of-Iluvatar ... seas                       
                                                                        
 ullier kilyanna ... numenore ataltane ...                               
 poured in-Chasm ... Numenor down-fell                                   
                                                                        
 Then there had seemed to be a long gap.                                 
                                                                        
                 malle tera lende numenna ilya si maller                 
                road straight went Westward all now roads                
                                                                        
 raikar                  ..... turkildi romenna... nuruhuine mel-lumna
 bent                    ..... ? eastward ... Death-shadow us-is-heavy
                                                                        
    ...vahaya sin atalante.                                              
    ...far-away now ?                                                    
                                                                        
 There  were  one  or  two  new  words  here,  of   which  he   wanted  to
 discover  the  meaning:  it  had escaped  before he  could write  it down
 this   morning.   Probably   they  were   names:  tarkalion   was  almost
 certainly  a  king's  name, for  tar was  common in  royal names.  It was
 curious  how  often  the   remembered  snatches   harped  on   the  theme
 of  a  'straight  road'. What  was atalante?  It seemed  to mean  ruin or
 downfall, but also to be a name.                                        
 Alboin  felt  restless.  He  left  his  bed  and went  to the  window. He
 stood there a long while  looking out  to sea;  and as  he stood  a chill
 wind  got  up  in  the  West.  Slowly  over  the  dark  rim  of  sky  and
 water's   meeting  clouds   lifted  huge   heads,  and   loomed  upwards,
 stretching out vast wings, south and north.                             
 'They   look   like   the   eagles  of   the  Lord   of  the   West  over
 Numenor,'  he  said  aloud,  and  started.  He   had  not   purposed  any
 words.  For  a  moment  he  had  felt  the oncoming  of a  great disaster
 long  foreseen.  Now  memory  stirred,  but  could  not  be  grasped.  He
 shivered.  He  went  back  to  bed  and   lay  wondering.   Suddenly  the
 old  desire  came  over  him.  It  had  been  growing  again  for  a long
 time, but he had not felt it like this, a feeling as  vivid as  hunger or
 thirst, for years, not since he was about Audoin's age.                 
 'I  wish  there  was  a  "Time-machine",'  he   said  aloud.   'But  Time
 is  not  to  be  conquered  by  machines.  And  I  should  go  back,  not
 forward; and I think backwards would be more possible.'                 

   The  clouds  overcame  the  sky,  and  the  wind  rose  and   blew;  and
 in his ears, as he fell asleep at last, there was a roaring in  the leaves
 of  many  trees,  and  a  roaring  of  long  waves  upon  the  shore. 'The
 storm  is  coming  upon  Numenor!'  he  said,  and  passed  out   of  the
 waking world.                                                            
                                                                         
   In a wide shadowy place he heard a voice.                              
   'Elendil!' it said. 'Alboin, whither are you wandering?'               
   'Who are you?' he answered. 'And where are you?'                     
   A tall figure appeared, as if descending an unseen stair towards       
 him.  For  a  moment  it  flashed  through  his  thought  that  the  face,
 dimly seen, reminded him of his father.                                  
   'I  am  with  you.  I  was  of  Numenor,  the  father  of  many  fathers
 before  you.  I  am  Elendil,  that  is  in  Eressean   "Elf-friend",  and
 many have been called so since. You may have your desire,'               
   'What desire? '                                                        
   'The long-hidden and the half-spoken: to go back.'                     
   'But that cannot be, even if I wish it. It is against the law.'        
   'It  is  against  the  rule.  Laws are  commands upon  the will  and are
 binding. Rules are conditions; they may have exceptions.'                
   'But are there ever any exceptions?'                                   
   'Rules  may  be  strict,  yet  they  are  the  means,  not the  ends, of
 government.  There  are  exceptions;  for  there  is  that  which  governs
 and is above  the rules.  Behold, it  is by  the chinks  in the  wall that
 light  comes  through,  whereby  men  become  aware   of  the   light  and
 therein  perceive  the  wall and  how it  stands. The  veil is  woven, and
 each  thread  goes  an  appointed  course,  tracing  a  design;   yet  the
 tissue  is  not  impenetrable,  or  the  design  would  not   be  guessed;
 and   if   the  design   were  not   guessed,  the   veil  would   not  be
 perceived,  and  all  would  dwell   in  darkness.   But  these   are  old
 parables,  and  I  came  not  to  speak such  things. The  world is  not a
 machine  that  makes  other   machines  after   the  fashion   of  Sauron.
 To  each  under  the  rule  some  unique   fate  is   given,  and   he  is
 excepted  from  that  which  is  a  rule  to  others. I  ask if  you would
 have your desire?'                                                      
   'I would.'                                                             
   'You ask not: how or upon what conditions.'                            
   'I  do  not  suppose  I  should  understand  how, and  it does  not seem
 to  me  necessary.  We  go  forward,  as  a  rule,  but  we  do  not  know
 how. But what are the conditions?'                                       
   'That  the  road  and  the  halts  are   prescribed.  That   you  cannot
 return at your  wish, but  only (if  at all)  as it  may be  ordained. For

 you shall not be as one reading a book or looking in a mirror,  but as
 one  walking  in  living  peril.  Moreover  you  shall  not  adventure
 yourself alone.'                                                     
   'Then  you  do  not  advise  me  to  accept? You  wish me  to refuse
 out of fear?'                                                        
   'I  do  not  counsel,  yes  or no.  I am  not a  counsellor. I  am a
 messenger,  a  permitted  voice.  The  wishing  and  the  choosing are
 for you.'                                                            
   'But I do not understand the conditions,  at least  not the  last. I
 ought to understand them all clearly.'                               
   'You  must,  if  you  choose  to  go back,  take with  you Herendil,
 that is in other tongue Audoin,  your son;  for you  are the  ears and
 he is the eyes. But you may not ask  that he  shall be  protected from
 the  consequences  of  your  choice,  save  as   your  own   will  and
 courage may contrive.'                                               
   'But I can ask him, if he is willing?'                             
   'He  would  say  yes, because  he loves  you and  is bold;  but that
 would not resolve your choice.'                                      
   'And when can I, or we, go back?'                                  
   'When you have made your choice.'                                  
                                                                     
   The figure  ascended and  receded. There  was a  roaring as  of seas
 falling from a great height. Alboin  could still  hear the  tumult far
 away,  even  after  his  waking  eyes  roamed  round  the room  in the
 grey  light  of  morning.  There  was  a  westerly  gale  blowing. The
 curtains  of  the open  window were  drenched, and  the room  was full
 of wind.                                                             
   He sat silent at the breakfast-table.  His eyes  strayed continually
 to his son's  face, watching  his expressions.  He wondered  if Audoin
 ever  had  any  Dreams.  Nothing  that  left  any  memory,   it  would
 appear.  Audoin  seemed  in  a  merry  mood,  and  his  own  talk  was
 enough for him, for a  while. But  at length  he noticed  his father's
 silence, unusual even at breakfast.                                  
   'You  look glum,  father,' he  said. 'Is  there some  knotty problem
 on hand?'                                                            
   'Yes  -  well  no,  not  really,'  answered Alboin.  'I think  I was
 thinking, among other  things, that  it was  a gloomy  day, and  not a
 good end to the holidays. What are you going to do?'                 
   'Oh, I say! ' exclaimed  Audoin. 'I  thought you  loved the  wind. I
 do. Especially a good old West-wind. I am going along the shore.'
   'Anything on?'                                                     
   'No, nothing special - just the wind.'                             

   'Well,  what  about  the  beastly   wind?'  said   Alboin,  unaccount-
 ably irritated.                                                         
   The boy's face fell. 'I don't know,' he said. 'But I like to be in it,
 especially by the sea; and I thought you did.' There was a silence.     
   After  a  while  Audoin  began  again,  rather  hesitatingly:  'Do you
 remember  the  other  day   upon  the   cliffs  near   Predannack,  when
 those  odd  clouds  came  up  in  the  evening,  and  the wind  began to
 blow?'                                                                 
   'Yes,' said Alboin in an unencouraging tone.                          
   'Well,  you  said  when  we  got  home  that it  seemed to  remind you
 of  something,  and  that  the wind  seemed to  blow through  you, like,
 like, a legend  you couldn't  catch. And  you felt,  back in  the quiet,
 as if you had listened to a long  tale, which  left you  excited, though
 it left absolutely no pictures at all.'                                 
   'Did  I?'  said  Alboin.  'I  can  remember  feeling  very  cold,  and
 being glad to  get back  to a  fire.' He  immediately regretted  it, and
 felt  ashamed.  For Audoin  said no  more; though  he felt  certain that
 the   boy  had   been  making   an  opening   to  say   something  more,
 something  that  was  on  his  mind.  But  he  could  not  help  it.  He
 could  not  talk  of  such  things  to-day.  He  felt  cold.  He  wanted
 peace, not wind.                                                        
   Soon  after  breakfast  Audoin  went  out,  announcing  that   he  was
 off  for  a  good  tramp,  and  would  not  be back  at any  rate before
 tea-time.  Alboin  remained   behind.  All   day  last   night's  vision
 remained   with  him,   something  different   from  the   common  order
 of  dreams.  Also  it  was  (for  him)  curiously unlinguistic  - though
 plainly  related,  by  the  name  Numenor,   to  his   language  dreams.
 He   could  not   say  whether   he  had   conversed  with   Elendil  in
 Eressean or English.                                                    
   He  wandered  about  the   house  restlessly.   Books  would   not  be
 read,  and  pipes  would not  smoke. The  day slipped  out of  his hand,
 running  aimlessly  to  waste.  He  did  not  see his  son, who  did not
 even  turn  up  for  tea, as  he had  half promised  to do.  Dark seemed
 to come unduly early.                                                   
   In the late evening  Alboin sat  in his  chair by  the fire.  'I dread
 this  choice,'  he  said  to  himself. He  had no  doubt that  there was
 really  a  choice  to  be  made.  He would  have to  choose, one  way or
 another,  however  he  represented  it  to  himself.  Even  if  he  dis-
 missed  the  Dream  as  what is  called 'a  mere dream',  it would  be a
 choice - a choice equivalent to no.                                     
   'But  I  cannot  make  up  my  mind to  no,' he  thought. 'I  think, I
 am  almost  sure,  Audoin  would  say  yes.  And  he  will  know  of  my

 choice sooner or later. It is getting more and more difficult  to hide
 my  thoughts  from  him:  we  are  too  closely  akin,  in  many  ways
 besides  blood,  for  secrets.  The  secret  would  become unbearable,
 if  I  tried  to  keep  it.  My  desire  would become  doubled through
 feeling  that  I  might  have,  and  become  intolerable.  And  Audoin
 would probably feel I had robbed him through funk.                   
   'But  it  is  dangerous,  perilous  in  the  extreme  -  or so  I am
 warned. I don't  mind for  myself. But  for Audoin.  But is  the peril
 any greater than fatherhood lets in? It is perilous  to come  into the
 world at any point in Time. Yet I feel the shadow  of this  peril more
 heavily.  Why?  Because  it  is  an  exception  to  the  rules?  Or am
 I   experiencing  a   choice  backwards:   the  peril   of  fatherhood
 repeated?  Being  a father  twice to  the same  person would  make one
 think.  Perhaps  I am  already moving  back. I  don't know.  I wonder.
 Fatherhood is a choice,  and yet  it is  not wholly  by a  man's will.
 Perhaps  this peril  is my  choice, and  yet also  outside my  will. I
 don't know. It is getting very dark. How  loud the  wind is.  There is
 storm over Numenor.' Alboin slept in his chair.                      
                                                                     
   He  was  climbing  steps, up,  up on  to a  high mountain.  He felt,
 and   thought   he   could  hear,   Audoin  following   him,  climbing
 behind  him.  He  halted,  for  it  seemed somehow  that he  was again
 in the same place as  on the  previous night;  though no  figure could
 be seen.                                                             
   'I have chosen,' he said. 'I will go back with Herendil.'          
   Then he lay down, as  if to  rest. Half-turning:  'Good night!  ' he
 murmured.   'Sleep  well,   Herendil!  We   start  when   the  summons
 comes.'                                                              
   'You  have  chosen,'  a  voice said  above him.  'The summons  is at
 hand.'                                                               
   Then  Alboin seemed  to fall  into a  dark and  a silence,  deep and
 absolute. It was as if  he had  left the  world completely,  where all
 silence is on the edge  of sound,  and filled  with echoes,  and where
 all  rest is  but repose  upon some  greater motion.  He had  left the
 world and gone out. He was silent and at rest: a point.              
   He was poised; but it was clear to him that he had only to  will it,
 and he would move.                                                   
   'Whither?'  He  perceived  the  question,  but  neither  as  a voice
 from outside, nor as one from within himself.                        
   'To whatever place is appointed. Where is Herendil?'               
   'Waiting. The motion is yours.'                                    
   'Let us move! '                                                    

   Audoin  tramped  on,  keeping  within  sight  of  the  sea as  much as
 he  could.  He  lunched  at  an   inn,  and   then  tramped   on  again,
 further  than  he  had  intended.  He  was  enjoying  the  wind  and the
 rain,  yet  he  was  filled  with  a  curious  disquiet. There  had been
 something odd about his father this morning.                           
   'So  disappointing,'  he said  to himself.  'I particularly  wanted to
 have  a  long  tramp  with  him to-day.  We talk  better walking,  and I
 really  must  have  a  chance  of telling  him about  the Dreams.  I can
 talk about that sort of  thing to  my father,  if we  both get  into the
 mood together. Not that he  is usually  at all  difficult -  seldom like
 to-day.  He  usually  takes  you  as  you  mean  it: joking  or serious;
 doesn't  mix  the  two,  or  laugh  in  the wrong  places. I  have never
 known him so frosty.'                                                  
   He  tramped  on.  'Dreams,'  he  thought.  'But  not  the  usual sort,
 quite  different:  very  vivid;  and  though  never quite  repeated, all
 gradually fitting into  a story.  But a  sort of  phantom story  with no
 explanations.  Just  pictures,  but  not  a  sound,  not  a  word. Ships
 coming   to   land.   Towers   on  the   shore.  Battles,   with  swords
 glinting  but  silent.  And  there  is that  ominous picture:  the great
 temple  on  the  mountain,  smoking  like  a  volcano.  And  that  awful
 vision  of  the  chasm  in  the  seas, a  whole land  slipping sideways,
 mountains rolling  over; dark  ships fleeing  into the  dark. I  want to
 tell  someone  about  it, and  get some  kind of  sense into  it. Father
 would  help: we  could make  up a  good yarn  together out  of it.  If I
 knew  even  the name  of the  place, it  would turn  a nightmare  into a
 story.                                                                 
   Darkness  began  to  fall  long  before  he got  back. 'I  hope father
 will  have  had  enough  of   himself  and   be  chatty   to-night,'  he
 thought. 'The fireside is next best  to a  walk for  discussing dreams.'
 It was already night as he  came up  the path,  and saw  a light  in the
 sitting-room.                                                          
   He  found  his  father  sitting  by  the  fire.  The room  seemed very
 still, and quiet - and too hot after a day in the open. Alboin  sat, his
 head  rested  on  one  arm.  His  eyes  were  closed. He  seemed asleep.
 He made no sign.                                                       
   Audoin  was  creeping  out  of  the   room,  heavy   with  disappoint-
 ment.  There  was  nothing  for  it  but  an  early  bed,   and  perhaps
 better  luck  tomorrow.  As  he   reached  the   door,  he   thought  he
 heard  the  chair  creak,  and  then  his father's  voice (far  away and
 rather   strange  in   tone)  murmuring   something:  it   sounded  like
 herendil.                                                              
   He  was  used  to  odd  words  and  names  slipping  out  in  a murmur

 from his father. Sometimes his father would spin a long tale round              
 them. He turned back hopefully.                                                 
   'Good night! ' said Alboin. 'Sleep well, Herendil! We start when              
 the summons comes.' Then his head fell back against the chair.                  
   'Dreaming,' thought Audoin. 'Good night! '                                    
   And he went out, and stepped into sudden darkness.                            
                                                                                
                         Commentary on Chapters I and II                         
                                                                                
 Alboin's  biography  sketched  in  these  chapters is  in many  respects closely
 modelled  on  my  father's  own  life  - though  Alboin was  not an  orphan, and
 my  father  was  not  a widower.  Dates pencilled  on the  covering page  of the
 manuscript   reinforce   the   strongly   biographical   element:   Alboin   was
 born  on  February  4,  (1891  >)  1890,  two  years  earlier  than  my  father.
 Audoin was born in September 1918.                                              
   'Honour  Mods.'  (i.e.  'Honour  Moderations'),  referred  to  at  the  begin-
 ning  of  Chapter  II,  are  the  first  of  the two  examinations taken  in the
 Classical  languages  at  Oxford,  after  two  years  (see  Humphrey  Carpenter,
 Biography, p.  62); 'Schools',  in the  same passage,  is a  name for  the final
 Oxford examinations in all subjects.                                            
   Alboin's  father's name  Oswin is  'significant': os  'god' and  nine 'friend'
 (see I V. 208, 212); Elendil's father was Valandil (p. 60). That Errol  is to
 be  associated  in  some  way  with  Eriol  (the  Elves'  name for  AElfwine the
 mariner, IV. 206) must be allowed to be a possibility.*                        
                                                                                
   The Lombardic legend.                                                          
        The Lombards ('Long-beards': Latin Langobardi, Old English Long-         
 beardan)   were   a   Germanic   people  renowned   for  their   ferocity.  From
 their   ancient   homes  in   Scandinavia  they   moved  southwards,   but  very
 little is known of  their history  before the  middle of  the sixth  century. At
 that  time  their  king  was  Audoin,  the  form  of  his  name in  the Historia
 Langobardorum   by  the   learned  Paul   the  Deacon,   who  died   about  790.
 Audoin  and  Old  English  Eadwine   (later  Edwin)   show  an   exact  corres-
 pondence,  are  historically  the  same  name  (Old  English  ea   derived  from
 the  original  diphthong  au).  On  the  meaning  of  ead  see  p.  46,  and cf.
 Eadwine as a name in Old English of the Noldor, IV. 212.                    
   Audoin's  son  was  Alboin,  again  corresponding   exactly  to   Old  English
 AElfuine  (Elwin).  The  story  that  Oswin  Errol  told  his  son  (p.   37)  is
 known  from  the  work  of  Paul  the Deacon.  In the  great battle  between the
 Lombards   and   another   Germanic   people,   the   Gepids,   Alboin   son  of
 Audoin   slew  Thurismod,   son  of   the  Gepid   king  Thurisind,   in  single
 combat;  and  when  the  Lombards  returned  home   after  their   victory  they
                                                                                
   (*It is worth mentioning that Oswin Errol's frequent address to Alboin as 'boy'
 is not intended to suggest an aloofly schoolmasterish tone. My father frequently
 used it to his sons as a term of friendship and affection).                      

  asked Audoin to give his son the rank of a companion of his table,  since it
  was by his  valour that  they had  won the  day. But  this Audoin  would not
  do, for, he said, 'it is not the custom among us that the king's  son should
  sit  down with  his father  before he  has first  received weapons  from the
  king  of  some  other people.'  When Alboin  heard this  he went  with forty
  young  men  of  the  Lombards  to  king  Thurisind to  ask this  honour from
  him.  Thurisind  welcomed  him,  invited him  to the  feast, and  seated him
  at his right hand, where his dead son Thurismod used to sit.                
    But as the feast  went on  Thurisind began  to think  of his  son's death,
  and seeing Alboin his  slayer in  his very  place his  grief burst  forth in
  words: 'Very pleasant to me is the seat,' he said, 'but hard  is it  to look
  upon  him  who sits  in it.'  Roused by  these words  the king's  second son
  Cunimund  began  to  revile  the  Lombard  guests;  insults were  uttered on
  both  sides,  and  swords  were  grasped.  But on  the very  brink Thurisind
  leapt  up  from  the  table,  thrust  himself  between  the  Gepids  and the
  Lombards,  and  threatened  to  punish the  first man  who began  the fight.
  Thus he allayed the quarrel; and taking  the arms  of his  dead son  he gave
  them to Alboin, and sent him back in safety to his father's kingdom.        
    It is agreed that behind this Latin prose tale of Paul the Deacon, as also
  behind his story of  Alboin's death,  there lies  a heroic  lay: as  early a
  vestige of such ancient Germanic poetry as we possess.                      
    Audoin died some ten years  after the  battle, and  Alboin became  king of
  the  Lombards  in  565.  A  second  battle  was  fought against  the Gepids,
  in  which  Alboin   slew  their   king  Cunimund   and  took   his  daughter
  Rosamunda  captive.  At  Easter  568  Alboin  set  out  for the  conquest of
  Italy; and in 572 he was murdered.  In the  story told  by Paul  the Deacon,
  at  a  banquet  in  Verona  Alboin gave  his queen  Rosamunda wine  to drink
  in a cup made from  the skull  of king  Cunimund, and  invited her  to drink
  merrily with her father  ('and if  this should  seem to  anyone impossible,'
  wrote  Paul,  'I  declare  that I  speak the  truth in  Christ: I  have seen
  [Radgisl] the prince holding  the very  cup in  his hand  on a  feastday and
  showing it to those who sat at the table with him.')                        
    Here  Oswin  Errol  ended  the  story,  and  did  not  tell  his  son  how
  Rosamunda  exacted  her  revenge.  The  outcome  of  her   machinations  was
  that  Alboin  was  murdered  in his  bed, and  his body  was buried  'at the
  going up of the  stairs which  are near  to the  palace,' amid  great lamen-
  tation  of  the  Lombards.  His  tomb  was opened  in the  time of  Paul the
  Deacon  by  Gislbert  dux  Veronensium,  who   took  away   Alboin's  sword
  and other gear that  was buried  with him;  'wherefore he  used to  boast to
  the ignorant with his usual vanity that he has seen Alboin face to face.'
    The fame of this  formidable king  was such  that, in  the words  of Paul,
  'even  down  to  our  own  day,  among  the  Bavarians  and  the  Saxons and
  other  peoples  of kindred  speech, his  open hand  and renown,  his success
  and  courage  in  war,  are  celebrated  in  their songs.'  An extraordinary
  testimony  to  this  is  found in  the ancient  English poem  Widsith, where
  occur the following lines:                                                  

                                            
                                                                                  
          Swylce ic waes on Eatule mid AElfwine:                                  
          se haefde moncynnes mine gefraege                                        
          leohteste hond lofes to wyrcenne,                                        
          heortan unhneaweste hringa gedales,                                      
          beorhta beaga, bearn Eadwines.                                            
                                                                                  
 (I  was  in  Italy  with  Alboin:  of  all men  of whom  I have  heard he  had the
 hand  most  ready  for  deeds of  praise, the  heart least  niggard in  the giving
 of rings, of shining armlets, the son of Audoin.)*                               
  In  my  father's letter  of 1964  (given on  pp. 7  - 8)  he wrote  as if  it had
 been his  intention to  find one  of the  earlier incarnations  of the  father and
 son  in  the  Lombard  story:  'It  started  with  a  father-son  affinity between
 Edwin   and  Elwin   of  the   present,  and   was  supposed   to  go   back  into
 legendary  time  by  way  of  an  Eadwine   and  AElfwine   of  circa   A.D.  918,
 and   Audoin   and   Alboin   of   Lombardic   legend...'   But   there    is   no
 suggestion  that  at  the  time  this  was any  more than  a passing  thought; see
 further pp. 77 - 8.                                                               
                                                                                  
  The two Englishmen  named AElfwine (p.  38). King  Alfred's youngest             
 son was named AEthelweard, and it is recorded  by the  twelfth century             
 historian William of Malmesbury that  AEthelweard's sons  AElfwine and             
 AEthelwine both fell at the battle of Brunanburh in 937.                           
  Years later my father celebrated the AElfwine who died at  Maldon in             
 The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth,  where Torhthelm  and Tidwald  find his             
 corpse among the slain: 'And here's AElfwine: barely bearded, and his             
 battle's over.'                                                                   
                                                                                  
  Oswin  Errol's  reference  to  a  'substratum '  (p. 40) .  Put very  simply, the
 substratum   theory   attributes   great   importance,   as   an   explanation  of
 linguistic  change,  to  the  influence   exerted  on   language  when   a  people
 abandons  their  own  former  speech  and  adopts  another;  for  such   a  people
 will  retain  their  habitual  modes  of  articulation  and  transfer them  to the
 new   language,   thus   creating   a   substratum   underlying    it.   Different
 substrata  acting  upon  a  widespread  language  in  different  areas  is  there-
 fore regarded as a fundamental cause of divergent phonetic change.                
                                                                                  
  The  Old  English   verses  of AElfwine   Widlast  (p.44).  These   verses,  in
 identical  form  except  for  certain  features  of  spelling,  were  used  in the
 title-pages to the Quenta Silmarillion (p. 203); see also p. 103.                 
                                                                                  
  (*The  generous  heart  of  Alboin, the  hand ready  for deeds  of praise,  made a
 different impression on the  stricken population  of Italy  in the  sixth century.
 From  the walls  of Rome  Pope Gregory  the Great  watched men  being led  away by
 'the unspeakable Lombards', tied together at the neck to be sold as slaves; and in
 one  of  his  letters  he  welcomed  the advent  of bubonic  plague, for  'when we
 consider the way in which other men have  died we  find a  solace in  reflecting on
 the form of  death that  threatens us.  What mutilations,  what cruelties  we have
 seen inflicted upon men, for which death is  the only  cure, and  in the  midst of
 which life is a torture! ')                                                        

    Names  and  words  in   the  Elvish   languages.  Throughout,   the  term
  Eressean  was  a  replacement  of  Numenorean.  Perhaps  to be  compared is
  FN II, $2: 'Yet  they [the  Numenoreans) took  on the  speech of  the Elves
  of the Blessed Realm, as it was and is in  Eressea.' The  term 'Elf-latin',
  applied  by Alboin  to 'Eressean'  (pp. 41,  43), is  found in  the Lhammas
  (p. 172). There it refers to the archaic speech of the First Kindred of the
  Elves (the  Lindar), which  'became early  fixed... as  a language  of high
  speech and of writing,  and as  a common  speech among  all Elves;  and all
  the folk of Valinor learned and knew this language.'  It was  called Qenya,
  the  Elvish  tongue,  tarquesta  high-speech,  and  parmalambe   the  book-
  tongue. But it is not explained  in The  Lost Road  why Alboin  should have
  called the language that 'came through' to him by this term.               
    Amon-ereb (p.  38): the  rough draft  of this  passage had  Amon Gwareth,
  changed  more  than  once  and  ending  with  Amon  Thoros. Amon  Ereb (the
  Lonely Hill) is found in the Annals of  Beleriand (p.  143, annal  340) and
  in QS $ 113.                                                               
    'The shores of Beleriand' (p. 38): the draft has here  'the rocks  of the
  Falasse'.'  The  form  Falasse'  occurs  on  the  Ambarkanta  map  IV  (IV.
                                                                            
  249).                                                                      
    'Alda was a tree (a word I got a long time ago)' (p. 41). Alda  'tree' is
  found in the very early 'dictionary' (I. 249), where also occurs  the word
  lome, which Alboin also  refers to  here, with  the meanings  'dusk, gloom,
  darkness' (I. 255).                                                        
    Anar, Isil, and Anor, Ithil (p. 41): in QS $75 the names  of the  Sun and
  Moon given by  the Gods  are Urin  and Isil,  and by  the Elves  Anar and
  Rana (see the commentary on that passage).                                 
    The  Eressean  fragment  concerning  the  Downfall  of  Numenor  and  the
  Straight Road (p. 47) is slightly different in the draft text:             
                                                                            
    Ar Sauron  lende numenorenna...  lantie nu  huine... ohtakarie           
    valannar... manwe ilu terhante. eari lantier kilyanna numenor           
    atalante... malle tera lende numenna,  ilya si  maller raikar.           
    Turkildi romenna... nuruhuine me lumna.                                  
    And Sauron  came to-Numenor...  fell under  Shadow... war-made           
    on-Powers...   ?   ?   broke.  seas fell   into-Chasm.  Numenor           
    down-fell. road straight went westward, all now roads  bent. ?           
    eastward. Death-shadow us is-heavy.                                      
                                                                            
  The name  Tar-kalion is  here not  present, but  Sauron is  (see p.  9), and
  is  interpreted  as  being  a name.  Most notably,  this version  has manwe
  (which  Alboin  could not  interpret) for  herunumen 'Lord-of-West'  of the
  later; on this see p. 75.                                                  
    On the name Herendil     (=Audoin,      Eadwine)     see the Etymologies, stem
  KHER.                                                                      

                                      (ii).                                    
                                                                             
                            The Numenorean chapters.                           
                                                                             
 My father said in his letter of 1964 on the subject that 'in my tale  we were
 to  come  at  last  to  Amandil  and  Elendil  leaders of  the loyal  party in
 Numenor,  when  it fell  under the  domination of  Sauron.' It  is nonetheless
 plain that he did not reach this conception until  after the  extant narrative
 had  been  mostly  written,  or  even  brought  to  the  point  where  it  was
 abandoned.  At  the  end  of  Chapter  II  the  Numenorean story  is obviously
 just   about   to  begin,   and  the   Numenorean  chapters   were  originally
 numbered  continuously  with  the  opening  ones.  On   the  other   hand  the
 decision  to  postpone  Numenor  and  make  it  the  conclusion and  climax to
 the  book  had  already  been  taken  when  The  Last Road  went to  Allen and
 Unwin in November 1937.                                                      
  Since  the  Numenorean  episode  was   left  unfinished,   this  is   a  con-
 venient  point  to  mention  an  interesting  note  that my  father presumably
 wrote while it  was in  progress. This  says that  when the  first 'adventure'
 (i.e. Numenor) is  over 'Alboin  is still  precisely in  his chair  and Audoin
 just shutting the door.'                                                     
  With    the    postponement    of    Numenor    the    chapter-numbers   were
 changed,  but  this  has  no  importance  and I  therefore number  these 'III'
 and 'IV'; they have no titles. In this case I have  found it  most convenient
 to annotate the text by numbered notes.                                      
                                                                             
                                  Chapter III.                                
                                                                             
 Elendil  was  walking  in  his  garden,  but  not  to  look  upon  its  beauty
 in   the   evening  light.   He  was   troubled  and   his  mind   was  turned
 inward.   His   house   with   its   white  tower   and  golden   roof  glowed
 behind  him  in  the  sunset,  but  his  eyes  were  on  the  path  before his
 feet.  He  was  going  down  to  the  shore,  to  bathe in  the blue  pools of
 the  cove  beyond  his  garden's  end,  as  was  his  custom  at   this  hour.
 And  he  looked  also  to  find  his   son  Herendil   there.  The   time  had
 come when he must speak to him.                                              
  He  came  at  length   to  the   great  hedge   of  lavaralda^1  that  fenced
 the  garden  at  its   lower,  western,   end.  It   was  a   familiar  sight,
 though  the  years  could  not  dim  its  beauty.  It  was  seven  twelves  of
 years'  or  more  since  he  had   planted  it   himself  when   planning  his
 garden  before  his   marriage;  and   he  had   blessed  his   good  fortune.
 For   the   seeds   had  come   from  Eressea   far  westward,   whence  ships
 came   seldom   already  in   those  days,   and  now   they  came   no  more.
 But  the  spirit  of  that  blessed land  and its  fair people  remained still
 in  the   trees  that   had  grown   from  those   seeds:  their   long  green
 leaves  were  golden  on  the  undersides,  and  as  a  breeze  off  the water

 stirred them  they whispered  with a  sound of  many soft  voices, and
 glistened  like  sunbeams  on  rippling waves.  The flowers  were pale
 with a yellow flush, and laid thickly  on the  branches like  a sunlit
 snow; and their odour filled all  the lower  garden, faint  but clear.
 Mariners in the old days  said that  the scent  of lavaralda  could be
 felt on the air long ere the land of Eressea could  be seen,  and that
 it brought a desire of rest and great content. He  had seen  the trees
 in flower day after day, for they rested from  flowering only  at rare
 intervals.  But  now,  suddenly, as  he passed,  the scent  struck him
 with  a  keen  fragrance,  at  once  known  and  utterly  strange.  He
 seemed  for  a  moment  never to  have smelled  it before:  it pierced
 the  troubles  of   his  mind,   bewildering,  bringing   no  familiar
 content, but a new disquiet.                                         
   'Eressea, Eressea!'  he said.  'I wish  I were  there; and  had not
 been  fated  to  dwell  in  Numenor'  half-way  between   the  worlds.
 And least of all in these days of perplexity! '                      
   He  passed  under  an  arch  of shining  leaves, and  walked swiftly
 down  rock-hewn  steps  to  the  white  beach.  Elendil  looked  about
 him, but he  could not  see his  son. A  picture rose  in his  mind of
 Herendil's  white  body, strong  and beautiful  upon the  threshold of
 early manhood, cleaving  the water,  or lying  on the  sand glistening
 in  the  sun.  But  Herendil  was  not  there,  and  the  beach seemed
 oddly empty.                                                         
   Elendil  stood  and  surveyed  the  cove  and  its rocky  walls once
 more; and  as he  looked, his  eyes rose  by chance  to his  own house
 among  trees  and  flowers  upon  the  slopes  above the  shore, white
 and  golden,  shining in  the sunset.  And he  stopped and  gazed: for
 suddenly  the  house  stood  there,  as  a  thing  at  once  real  and
 visionary,  as  a  thing  in  some  other  time and  story, beautiful,
 beloved, but strange, awaking desire as if it were  part of  a mystery
 that was still hidden. He could not interpret the feeling.           
   He sighed. 'I suppose it is the threat  of war  that maketh  me look
 upon  fair  things  with such  disquiet,' he  thought. 'The  shadow of
 fear is between us and the sun, and all  things look  as if  they were
 already lost. Yet they  are strangely  beautiful thus  seen. I  do not
 know.  I  wonder.  A  Numenore!  I  hope  the  trees  will  blossom on
 your hills  in years  to come  as they  do now;  and your  towers will
 stand white in the Moon  and yellow  in the  Sun. I  wish it  were not
 hope,  but  assurance  -  that assurance  we used  to have  before the
 Shadow.  But  where  is Herendil?  I must  see him  and speak  to him,
 more clearly than we have spoken yet. Ere it is too late. The  time is
 getting short.'                                                      

   'Herendil!'  he  called,  and  his  voice  echoed  along  the hollow
 shore above the soft sound of the light-falling waves. 'Herendil!'
   And even  as he  called, he  seemed to  hear his  own voice,  and to
 mark  that  it  was  strong and  curiously melodious.  'Herendil!' he
 called again.                                                        
   At length  there was  an answering  call: a  young voice  very clear
 came from some distance away - like a bell out of a deep cave.       
   'Man-ie, atto, man-ie?'                                            
   For  a  brief  moment  it  seemed  to  Elendil  that the  words were
 strange.  'Man-ie,  atto?  What  is  it,  father?'  Then  the  feeling
 passed.                                                              
   'Where art thou?'                                                  
   'Here! '                                                           
   'I cannot see thee.'                                               
   'I am upon the wall, looking down on thee.'                        
   Elendil  looked  up;  and  then  swiftly  climbed  another  flight of
 stone steps at the northern end of the cove. He came  out upon  a flat
 space  smoothed  and levelled  on the  top of  the projecting  spur of
 rock.  Here there  was room  to lie  in the  sun, or  sit upon  a wide
 stone seat with its back  against the  cliff, down  the face  of which
 there fell a cascade of trailing stems rich with garlands of  blue and
 silver flowers. Flat upon the stone with his chin in  his hands  lay a
 youth. He was looking out to sea,  and did  not turn  his head  as his
 father came up and sat down on the seat.                             
   'Of what art thou dreaming, Herendil, that thy ears hear not?'     
   'I am thinking; I am not dreaming. I am a child no longer.'        
   'I know thou art not,' said Elendil; 'and for  that reason  I wished
 to find thee and  speak with  thee. Thou  art so  often out  and away,
 and so seldom at home these days.'                                   
   He  looked  down  on  the  white  body  before him.  It was  dear to
 him,  and  beautiful.  Herendil  was  naked,  for  he had  been diving
 from the high point, being a daring diver and proud  of his  skill. It
 seemed  suddenly  to  Elendil  that  the  lad  had  grown  over night,
 almost out of knowledge.                                             
   'How  thou  dost  grow!'  he  said.  'Thou  hast  the makings  of a
 mighty man, and have nearly finished the making.'                    
   'Why  dost  thou  mock  me?'  said  the  boy.  'Thou  knowest  I  am
 dark,  and  smaller  than  most  others  of  my  year.  And that  is a
 trouble  to  me. I  stand barely  to the  shoulder of  Almariel, whose
 hair is of shining gold, and she is a maiden,  and of  my own  age. We
 hold that we are of the blood of kings, but I  tell thee  thy friends'
 sons make  a jest  of me  and call  me Terendul(4)  - slender  and dark;

 and  they say  I have  Eressean blood,  or that  I am  half-Noldo. And
 that is not said with love in these days. It is but a step  from being
 called  half  a  Gnome  to  being  called  Godfearing;  and   that  is
 dangerous.'                                                          
   Elendil  sighed.  'Then  it  must  have  become  perilous to  be the
 son of him that is  named elendil;  for that  leads to  Valandil, God-
 friend, who was thy father's father.'                                
   There  was  a  silence.  At  length Herendil  spoke again:  'Of whom
 dost thou say that our king, Tarkalion, is descended?'               
   'From  Earendel  the  mariner,  son  of  Tuor  the  mighty  who  was
 lost in these seas.'                                                 
   'Why  then  may  not  the  king  do  as  Earendel  from  whom  he is
 come? They say that he should follow him, and complete his work.'
   'What  dost  thou  think  that  they  mean?  Whither  should  he go,
 and fulfil what work?'                                               
   'Thou   knowest.   Did   not  Earendel   voyage  to   the  uttermost
 West, and set foot in that land that is forbidden to  us? He  doth not
 die, or so songs say.'                                               
   'What  callest  thou  Death?  He  did  not  return.  He  forsook all
 whom  he  loved,  ere  he  stepped  on  that  shore.'  He   saved  his
 kindred by losing them.'                                             
   'Were the Gods wroth with him?'                                    
   'Who  knoweth?  For  he  came  not back.  But he  did not  dare that
 deed  to  serve  Melko, but  to defeat  him; to  free men  from Melko,
 not from the Lords; to win us the earth,  not the  land of  the Lords.
 And  the  Lords  heard  his prayer  and arose  against Melko.  And the
 earth is ours.'                                                      
   'They  say  now  that  the tale  was altered  by the  Eresseans, who
 are slaves of the  Lords: that  in truth  Earendel was  an adventurer,
 and  showed  us  the  way,  and that  the Lords  took him  captive for
 that  reason;  and  his  work  is  perforce unfinished.  Therefore the
 son  of  Earendel,  our  king,  should  complete it.  They wish  to do
 what has been long left undone.'                                     
   'What is that?'                                                   
   'Thou knowest: to set foot  in the  far West,  and not  withdraw it.
 To conquer new  realms for  our race,  and ease  the pressure  of this
 peopled  island,  where  every road  is trodden  hard, and  every tree
 and grass-blade  counted. To  be free,  and masters  of the  world. To
 escape  the  shadow  of  sameness,  and  of  ending.  We   would  make
 our  king   Lord  of   the  West:   Nuaran  Numenoren(9).Death  comes
 here slow and seldom; yet it cometh. The  land is  only a  cage gilded
 to look like Paradise.'                                              

                                       
                                                                       
  'Yea,  so  I  have  heard   others  say,'   said  Elendil.   'But  what
 knowest   thou   of   Paradise?   Behold,   our  wandering   words  have
 come  unguided  to  the  point  of  my  purpose.  But  I  am  grieved to
 find thy mood is of  this sort,  though I  feared it  might be  so. Thou
 art  my only  son, and  my dearest  child, and  I would  have us  at one
 in all our choices. But choose we must, thou as well as I  - for  at thy
 last  birthday  thou  became  subject  to arms  and the  king's service.
 We  must  choose  between  Sauron  and  the   Lords  (or   One  Higher).
 Thou  knowest,  I  suppose,  that   all  hearts   in  Numenor   are  not
 drawn to Sauron? '                                                     
  'Yes.  There  are  fools  even  in  Numenor,'   said  Herendil,   in  a
 lowered  voice.  'But  why  speak  of  such things  in this  open place?
 Do you wish to bring evil on me?'                                     
  'I bring no evil,' said Elendil. 'That  is thrust  upon us:  the choice
 between  evils:  the  first  fruits  of  war.  But  look,  Herendil! Our
 house   is  one   of  wisdom   and  guarded   learning;  and   was  long
 revered for it. I followed my father, as  I was  able. Dost  thou follow
 me?  What  dost  thou  know  of  the  history of  the world  or Numenor?
 Thou  art  but  four  twelves,(10) and  wert  but  a  small  child  when
 Sauron   came.   Thou   dost   not  understand   what  days   were  like
 before then. Thou canst not choose in ignorance.'                      
  'But  others  of  greater  age  and knowledge  than mine  - or  thine -
 have  chosen,'  said  Herendil.  'And they  say that  history confirmeth
 them,  and  that  Sauron  hath  thrown  a new  light on  history. Sauron
 knoweth history, all history.'                                         
  'Sauron  knoweth,  verily;  but  he   twisteth  knowledge.   Sauron  is
 a liar! ' Growing anger caused Elendil to raise his  voice as  he spoke.
 The words rang out as a challenge.                                     
  'Thou  art  mad,'  said  his  son, turning  at last  upon his  side and
 facing  Elendil,  with  dread and  fear in  his eyes.  'Do not  say such
 things to me! They might, they might...'                               
  'Who are they,  and what  might they  do?' said  Elendil, but  a chill
 fear passed from his son's eyes to his own heart.                      
  'Do  not  ask! And  do not  speak -  so loud!  ' Herendil  turned away,
 and lay prone with his face  buried in  his hands.  'Thou knowest  it is
 dangerous  -  to  us  all.  Whatever  he  be,  Sauron  is   mighty,  and
 hath  ears.  I  fear  the  dungeons.  And  I  love  thee,  I  love thee.
 Atarinya tye-melane.'                                                  
  Atarinya  tye-melane,  my  father,  I  love  thee:  the  words  sounded
 strange,  but  sweet:  they smote  Elendil's heart.  'A yonya  inye tye-
 mela: and I too, my son, I love  thee,' he  said, feeling  each syllable
 strange but vivid as he spoke it. 'But let us go within! It is  too late

 to bathe, The sun is all  but gone.  It is  bright there  westwards in
 the  gardens  of  the  Gods.  But  twilight  and  the dark  are coming
 here, and the dark  is no  longer wholesome  in this  land. Let  us go
 home.  I must  tell and  ask thee  much this  evening -  behind closed
 doors,  where  maybe  thou  wilt  feel safer.'  He looked  towards the
 sea, which he loved, longing to  bathe his  body in  it, as  though to
 wash away weariness and care. But night was coming.                   
   The  sun had  dipped, and  was fast  sinking in  the sea.  There was
 fire upon far waves, but it faded almost  as it  was kindled.  A chill
 wind  came  suddenly out  of the  West ruffling  the yellow  water off
 shore. Up over  the fire-lit  rim dark  clouds reared;  they stretched
 out great wings, south and north, and seemed to threaten the land.
   Elendil  shivered.  'Behold,  the  eagles  of the  Lord of  the West
 are coming with threat to Numenor,' he murmured.                      
   'What dost thou say?'  said Herendil.  'Is it  not decreed  that the
 king of Numenor shall be called Lord of the West? '                   
   'It  is  decreed  by  the  king;  but  that  does  not make  it so,'
 answered  Elendil.  'But  I  meant  not  to  speak  aloud  my  heart's
 foreboding. Let us go! '                                              
                                                                      
   The light was  fading swiftly  as they  passed up  the paths  of the
 garden  amid  flowers  pale and  luminous in  the twilight.  The trees
 were  shedding  sweet  night-scents. A  lomelinde began  its thrilling
 bird-song by a pool.                                                  
   Above  them  rose  the  house.  Its  white   walls  gleamed   as  if
 moonlight  was  imprisoned  in  their  substance;  but  there  was  no
 moon  yet, only  a cool  light, diffused  and shadowless.  Through the
 clear sky like fragile glass small stars stabbed their white flames. A
 voice  from  a  high  window came  falling down  like silver  into the
 pool of twilight where  they walked.  Elendil knew  the voice:  it was
 the  voice  of  Firiel,  a  maiden  of  his  household,   daughter  of
 Orontor.  His  heart  sank,  for  Firiel  was  dwelling  in  his house
 because  Orontor  had  departed.  Men said  he was  on a  long voyage.
 Others said  that he  had fled  the displeasure  of the  king. Elendil
 knew  that  he  was on  a mission  from which  he might  never return,
 or return too late." And he loved Orontor, and Firiel was fair.       
                                                                      
   Now  her  voice  sang  an  even-song  in  the  Eressean  tongue, but
 made by men,  long ago.  The nightingale  ceased. Elendil  stood still
 to listen; and the words came  to him,  far off  and strange,  as some
 melody in archaic speech  sung sadly  in a  forgotten twilight  in the
 beginning of man's journey in the world.                              

     Illu Iluvatar en kare eldain a firimoin                            
     ar antarota mannar Valion: numessier.....                         
                                                                      
 The Father made the World for elves and mortals, and he gave          
 it into the hands of the Lords, who are in the West.                  
                                                                      
 So sang Firiel on high,  until her  voice fell  sadly to  the question
 with   which   that  song   ends:  man   tare  antava   nin  Iluvatar,
 Iluvatar,  enyare  tar  i   tyel  ire   Anarinya  qeluva?   What  will
 Iluvatar,  0  Iluvatar,  give  me  in  that day  beyond the  end, when
 my Sun faileth? '(12)                                                    
 'E  man  antavaro?  What  will  he  give  indeed?'  said  Elendil; and
 stood in sombre thought.                                              
 'She  should  not  sing  that song  out of  a window,'  said Herendil,
 breaking  the  silence.  'They  sing  it  otherwise now.  Melko cometh
 back, they say, and the king shall give us the Sun forever.'          
 'I know what they say,' said Elendil. 'Do  not say  it to  thy father,
 nor  in  his  house.'  He  passed  in  at a  dark door,  and Herendil,
 shrugging his shoulders, followed him.                                
                                                                      
                              Chapter IV.                               
                                                                      
 Herendil  lay  on the  floor, stretched  at his  father's feet  upon a
 carpet  woven  in a  design of  golden birds  and twining  plants with
 blue flowers.  His head  was propped  upon his  hands. His  father sat
 upon  his  carved  chair, his  hands laid  motionless upon  either arm
 of it, his  eyes looking  into the  fire that  burned bright  upon the
 hearth. It was not cold, but  the fire  that was  named 'the  heart of
 the  house'  (hon-maren)(13) burned  ever  in  that  room. It  was more-
 over  a  protection  against the  night, which  already men  had begun
 to fear.                                                              
 But  cool  air  came  in  through  the   window,  sweet   and  flower-
 scented. Through it could  be seen,  beyond the  dark spires  of still
 trees,  the  western  ocean,  silver  under  the  Moon,  that  was now
 swiftly following the Sun to the gardens  of the  Gods. In  the night-
 silence Elendil's words fell softly. As he spoke he listened, as if to
 another that told a tale long forgotten."                             
 'There"  is  Iluvatar,  the  One;  and  there   are  the   Powers,  of
 whom the eldest in  the thought  of Iluvatar  was Alkar  the Radiant;"
 and  there  are  the  Firstborn of  Earth, the  Eldar, who  perish not
 while  the  World  lasts;  and  there are  also the  Afterborn, mortal
 Men,  who are  the children  of Iluvatar,  and yet  under the  rule of
 the  Lords.  Iluvatar  designed  the  World,  and revealed  his design

 to the Powers; and of these some  he set  to be  Valar, Lords  of the
 World  and  governors  of  the  things that  are therein.  But Alkar,
 who had  journeyed alone  in the  Void before  the World,  seeking to
 be  free,  desired the  World to  be a  kingdom unto  himself. There-
 fore he descended into it like a falling fire; and  he made  war upon
 the  Lords,  his  brethren.  But they  established their  mansions in
 the  West, in  Valinor, and  shut him  out; and  they gave  battle to
 him  in  the  North,  and  they bound  him, and  the World  had peace
 and grew exceeding fair.                                            
   'After a great age it came to pass that Alkar sued for  pardon; and
 he  made  submission  unto  Manwe, lord  of the  Powers, and  was set
 free.  But  he  plotted  against  his brethren,  and he  deceived the
 Firstborn  that  dwelt  in Valinor,  so that  many rebelled  and were
 exiled  from the  Blessed Realm.  And Alkar  destroyed the  lights of
 Valinor and fled  into the  night; and  he became  a spirit  dark and
 terrible, and  was called  Morgoth, and  he established  his dominion
 in  Middle-earth.  But  the  Valar  made the  Moon for  the Firstborn
 and  the  Sun  for Men  to confound  the Darkness  of the  Enemy. And
 in that time at the rising  of the  Sun the  Afterborn, who  are Men,
 came forth in the East of the world; but they  fell under  the shadow
 of the Enemy.  In those  days the  exiles of  the Firstborn  made war
 upon  Morgoth;  and  three  houses  of  the   Fathers  of   Men  were
 joined  unto  the  Firstborn:  the house  of Beor,  and the  house of
 Haleth, and the house  of Hador.  For these  houses were  not subject
 to Morgoth. But Morgoth had the victory, and brought all to ruin.
   'Earendel  was son  of Tuor,  son of  Huor, son  of Gumlin,  son of
 Hador;  and  his  mother was  of the  Firstborn, daughter  of Turgon,
 last king of the  Exiles. He  set forth  upon the  Great Sea,  and he
 came at last unto the realm of the  Lords, and  the mountains  of the
 West. And he  renounced there  all whom  he loved,  his wife  and his
 child, and all his kindred, whether of the Firstborn  or of  Men; and
 he  stripped  himself."  And  he  surrendered  himself   unto  Manwe,
 Lord  of  the  West;  and  he  made  submission  and  supplication to
 him.  And  he  was  taken  and came  never again  among Men.  But the
 Lords  had  pity,  and  they  sent  forth  their  power, and  war was
 renewed  in  the North,  and the  earth was  broken; but  Morgoth was
 overthrown. And the Lords put him forth into the Void without.      
   'And  they  recalled  the  Exiles  of  the  Firstborn  and pardoned
 them;  and  such as  returned dwell  since in  bliss in  Eressea, the
 Lonely Isle, which is Avallon, for it is within sight of  Valinor and
 the  light  of  the  Blessed  Realm.  And  for the  men of  the Three
 Houses  they  made  Vinya,  the  New  Land,  west of  Middle-earth in

 the midst of the  Great Sea,  and named  it Andor,  the Land  of Gift;
 and  they  endowed  the  land  and  all that  lived thereon  with good
 beyond  other  lands  of  mortals.  But  in Middle-earth  dwelt lesser
 men,  who  knew  not  the  Lords  nor  the  Firstborn save  by rumour;
 and  among  them  were  some  who  had  served  Morgoth  of  old,  and
 were  accursed.  And  there  were  evil things  also upon  earth, made
 by  Morgoth  in  the  days  of  his dominion,  demons and  dragons and
 mockeries  of  the  creatures  of  Iluvatar.(18)  And  there too  lay hid
 many of his servants, spirits of  evil, whom  his will  governed still
 though  his  presence  was  not  among  them.  And  of   these  Sauron
 was  the  chief,  and  his  power grew.  Wherefore the  lot of  men in
 Middle-earth  was  evil,  for  the   Firstborn  that   remained  among
 them  faded  or departed  into the  West, and  their kindred,  the men
 of Numenor, were  afar and  came only  to their  coasts in  ships that
 crossed  the  Great Sea.  But Sauron  learned of  the ships  of Andor,
 and  he  feared them,  lest free  men should  become lords  of Middle-
 earth and  deliver their  kindred; and  moved by  the will  of Morgoth
 he  plotted  to  destroy  Andor, and  ruin (if  he might)  Avallon and
 Valinor.(19)                                                            
   'But  why  should  we  be  deceived,  and  become  the tools  of his
 will?  It  was not  he, but  Manwe the  fair, Lord  of the  West, that
 endowed  us  with  our  riches.  Our  wisdom cometh  from  the Lords,
 and  from  the  Firstborn  that  see them  face to  face; and  we have
 grown to be higher and greater  than others  of our  race -  those who
 served  Morgoth   of  old.   We  have   knowledge,  power,   and  life
 stronger  than they.  We are  not yet  fallen. Wherefore  the dominion
 of the world is ours, or shall be, from Eressea to the East.  More can
 no mortals have.'                                                    
   'Save to escape from Death,' said Herendil, lifting his face  to his
 father's.  'And  from  sameness.  They  say  that  Valinor,  where the
 Lords dwell, has no further bounds.'                                 
   'They  say  not  truly. For  all things  in the  world have  an end,
 since  the  world  itself is  bounded, that  it may  not be  Void. But
 Death is not decreed by the Lords: it is the  gift of  the One,  and a
 gift which in the wearing of  time even  the Lords  of the  West shall
 envy.(20) So  the  wise  of  old  have  said. And  though we  can perhaps
 no  longer  understand  that  word,  at  least  we have  wisdom enough
 to know that we cannot escape, unless to a worse fate.'              
   'But  the decree  that we  of Numenor  shall not  set foot  upon the
 shores of the Immortal, or walk in their land - that is only  a decree
 of  Manwe  and  his  brethren.  Why  should  we  not?  The  air  there
 giveth enduring life, they say.'                                     

   'Maybe it doth,' said Elendil; 'and maybe  it is  but the  air which
 those  need  who  already  have  enduring  life. To  us perhaps  it is
 death, or madness.'                                                  
   'But  why  should we  not essay  it? The  Eresseans go  thither, and
 yet our mariners in the old days  used to  sojourn in  Eressea without
 hurt.'                                                               
   'The  Eresseans are  not as  we. They  have not  the gift  of death.
 But what doth it profit  to debate  the governance  of the  world? All
 certainty is lost. Is it not sung that the earth was made for  us, but
 we  cannot  unmake it,  and if  we like  it not  we may  remember that
 we shall leave it. Do not the Firstborn call us  the Guests?  See what
 this spirit  of unquiet  has already  wrought. Here  when I  was young
 there was no  evil of  mind. Death  came late  and without  other pain
 than  weariness.  From  Eresseans  we  obtained  so  many   things  of
 beauty that our land became  well nigh  as fair  as theirs;  and maybe
 fairer to mortal hearts. It is said that of  old the  Lords themselves
 would  walk at  times in  the gardens  that we  named for  them. There
 we  set  their  images, fashioned  by Eresseans  who had  beheld them,
 as the pictures of friends beloved.                                  
   'There  were  no  temples  in  this  land.  But  on the  Mountain we
 spoke  to  the  One,  who  hath  no image.  It was  a holy  place, un-
 touched  by  mortal  art.  Then  Sauron  came.   We  had   long  heard
 rumour  of  him  from  seamen  returned  from  the  East.   The  tales
 differed:  some  said  he  was  a  king  greater  than  the   king  of
 Numenor;  some  said  that  he  was  one  of  the  Powers,   or  their
 offspring  set  to  govern Middle-earth.  A few  reported that  he was
 an  evil  spirit,  perchance  Morgoth  returned;   but  at   these  we
 laughed. (21)                                                             
   'It  seems  that  rumour  came also  to him  of us.  It is  not many
 years  -  three  twelves  and  eight (22) -  but it  seems many,  since he
 came  hither. Thou  wert a  small child,  and knew  not then  what was
 happening  in  the  east  of this  land, far  from our  western house.
 Tarkalion  the  king  was  moved  by  rumours  of  Sauron,   and  sent
 forth a mission to  discover what  truth was  in the  mariners' tales.
 Many  counsellors  dissuaded  him.  My  father  told  me,  and  he was
 one  of  them,  that  those  who  were wisest  and had  most knowledge
 of  the  West  had  messages from  the Lords  warning them  to beware.
 For  the Lords  said that  Sauron would  work evil;  but he  could not
 come   hither   unless   he  were   summoned.(23)  Tarkalion   was  grown
 proud,  and  brooked  no  power  in  Middle-earth  greater   than  his
 own.  Therefore  the  ships  were  sent,   and  Sauron   was  summoned
 to do homage.                                                        

   'Guards  were  set  at  the  haven of  Morionde in  the east  of the
 land,(24)  where  the  rocks  are  dark, watching  at the  king's command
 without ceasing for the ships' return. It was night,  but there  was a
 bright  Moon.  They  descried  ships far  off, and  they seemed  to be
 sailing  west  at a  speed greater  than the  storm, though  there was
 little  wind.  Suddenly  the  sea  became  unquiet;  it rose  until it
 became  like  a  mountain,  and  it  rolled upon  the land.  The ships
 were lifted up, and cast far inland, and lay in the fields.  Upon that
 ship which was cast  highest and  stood dry  upon a  hill there  was a
 man, or one in  man's shape,  but greater  than any  even of  the race
 of Numenor in stature.                                               
   'He  stood  upon  the  rock (25) and  said: "This  is done  as a  sign of
 power.  For  I  am  Sauron   the  mighty,   servant  of   the  Strong"
 (wherein  he  spoke   darkly).  "I   have  come.   Be  glad,   men  of
 Numenor,  for  I  will  take thy  king to  be my  king, and  the world
 shall be given into his hand."                                       
   'And  it  seemed  to  men  that  Sauron   was  great;   though  they
 feared the light  of his  eyes. To  many he  appeared fair,  to others
 terrible; but to some evil. But they led him to the  king, and  he was
 humble before Tarkalion.                                             
   'And behold  what hath  happened since,  step by  step, At  first he
 revealed  only  secrets  of  craft,  and  taught  the  making  of many
 things  powerful  and  wonderful;  and  they  seemed  good.  Our ships
 go  now  without  the  wind,  and   many  are   made  of   metal  that
 sheareth  hidden  rocks,  and  they  sink  not in  calm or  storm; but
 they  are  no  longer  fair  to  look  upon.  Our  towers   grow  ever
 stronger  and  climb  ever  higher,  but  beauty  they   leave  behind
 upon  earth.  We  who  have  no  foes  are embattled  with impregnable
 fortresses - and mostly on  the West.  Our arms  are multiplied  as if
 for an agelong war, and men are ceasing to  give love  or care  to the
 making  of  other  things  for  use  or delight.  But our  shields are
 impenetrable,  our  swords  cannot  be withstood,  our darts  are like
 thunder  and  pass  over  leagues  unerring.  Where  are  our enemies?
 We  have  begun   to  slay   one  another.   For  Numenor   now  seems
 narrow,  that  was  so  large.  Men covet,  therefore, the  lands that
 other families have long possessed. They fret as men in chains.      
   'Wherefore  Sauron   hath  preached   deliverance;  he   has  bidden
 our king to stretch forth his hand  to Empire.  Yesterday it  was over
 the East. To-morrow - it will be over the West.                      
   'We  had  no  temples.  But  now  the  Mountain  is  despoiled.  Its
 trees are felled, and it stands naked; and upon its summit there  is a
 Temple. It is of marble, and of gold, and of glass  and steel,  and is

 wonderful,  but  terrible.  No  man  prayeth  there.  It  waiteth. For
 long Sauron  did not  name his  master by  the name  that from  old is
 accursed here. He  spoke at  first of  the Strong  One, of  the Eldest
 Power,  of  the  Master.  But  now  he speaketh  openly of  Alkar,(26) of
 Morgoth.  He  hath  prophesied  his return.  The Temple  is to  be his
 house.  Numenor  is  to  be   the  seat   of  the   world's  dominion.
 Meanwhile  Sauron  dwelleth  there.  He  surveys  our  land  from  the
 Mountain,  and  is  risen  above  the king,  even proud  Tarkalion, of
 the line chosen by the Lords, the seed of Earendel.                   
   'Yet  Morgoth  cometh  not.  But  his  shadow  hath  come;  it lieth
 upon  the  hearts  and  minds  of  men.  It  is  between them  and the
 Sun, and all that is beneath it.'                                     
   'Is there a shadow? ' said Herendil. 'I have not seen it. But I have
 heard others speak of  it; and  they say  it is  the shadow  of Death.
 But  Sauron did  not bring  that; he  promiseth that  he will  save us
 from it.'                                                             
   'There is a shadow, but it is the shadow of the  fear of  Death, and
 the shadow of greed. But there  is also  a shadow  of darker  evil. We
 no longer see our king. His displeasure  falleth on  men, and  they go
 out; they are in the evening,  and in  the morning  they are  not. The
 open  is  insecure;  walls  are dangerous.  Even by  the heart  of the
 house  spies  may  sit.  And  there are  prisons, and  chambers under-
 ground. There are torments;  and there  are evil  rites. The  woods at
 night,  that  once  were fair  - men  would roam  and sleep  there for
 delight, when thou  wert a  babe -  are filled  now with  horror. Even
 our gardens are not wholly clean, after  the sun  has fallen.  And now
 even  by  day  smoke  riseth from  the temple:  flowers and  grass are
 withered where it  falleth. The  old songs  are forgotten  or altered;
 twisted into other meanings.'                                         
   'Yea: that one learneth  day by  day,' said  Herendil. 'But  some of
 the new songs  are strong  and heartening.  Yet now  I hear  that some
 counsel  us  to  abandon  the  old  tongue. They  say we  should leave
 Eressean,  and  revive the  ancestral speech  of Men.  Sauron teacheth
 it. In this at least I think he doth not well.'                       
   'Sauron  deceiveth  us  doubly.  For  men  learned  speech   of  the
 Firstborn,  and  therefore  if  we  should  verily  go  back   to  the
 beginnings we should find  not the  broken dialects  of the  wild men,
 nor the simple speech of our fathers, but a  tongue of  the Firstborn.
 But the Eressean is of all the tongues of  the Firstborn  the fairest,
 and  they use  it in  converse with  the Lords,  and it  linketh their
 varied kindreds one to another, and them to us. If  we forsake  it, we
 should  be  sundered  from  them,  and  be   impoverished."  Doubtless

  that  is  what  he  intendeth. But  there is  no end  to his  malice. Listen
  now,  Herendil,  and  mark  well.  The  time  is  nigh  when  all  this evil
  shall bear bitter fruit, if  it be  not cut  down. Shall  we wait  until the
  fruit be ripe, or hew the tree and cast it into the fire?'                  
    Herendil  got  suddenly  to  his  feet,  and  went to  the window.  'It is
  cold,  father,'  he  said;  'and the  Moon is  gone. I  trust the  garden is
  empty.   The   trees   grow   too  near   the  house.'   He  drew   a  heavy
  embroidered   cloth   across   the  window,   and  then   returned,  crouch-
  ing by the fire, as if smitten by a sudden chill.                           
    Elendil  leant  forward  in  his  chair,  and   continued  in   a  lowered
  voice.  'The  king  and  queen  grow  old,  though  all  know  it  not,  for
  they  are  seldom  seen.   They  ask   where  is   the  undying   life  that
  Sauron   promised   them   if    they   would    build   the    Temple   for
  Morgoth.   The   Temple   is   built,   but   they   are   grown   old.  But
  Sauron  foresaw  this,  and  I  hear  (already  the  whisper is  gone forth)
  that   he   declareth   that   Morgoth's   bounty   is  restrained   by  the
  Lords,  and  cannot  be  fulfilled  while  they  bar  the  way. To  win life
  Tarkalion   must   win   the   West. (28)  We   see  now   the  purpose   of  the
  towers  and  weapons.  War  is  already  being  talked  of  -   though  they
  do  not  name  the  enemy.  But  I  tell  thee:  it  is  known to  many that
  the  war  will  go  west  to  Eressea:  and   beyond.  Dost   thou  perceive
  the  extremity  of  our  peril,  and  the  madness  of  the  king?  Yet this
  doom   draws   swiftly   near.   Our   ships    are   recalled    from   the
  [?corners]  of  the  earth.  Hast   thou  not   marked  and   wondered  that
  so  many  are  absent,  especially  of   the  younger   folk,  and   in  the
  South  and  West  of  our  land  both  works   and  pastimes   languish?  In
  a  secret  haven  to  the  North  there  is  a  building  and  forging  that
  hath been reported to me by trusty messengers.'                             
    'Reported    to   thee?    What   dost    thou   mean,    father?'   asked
  Herendil as if in fear.                                                     
    'Even  what  I  say.  Why  dost  thou  look  on  me  so  strangely?  Didst
  thou  think  the  son  of  Valandil,  chief  of  the  wise  men  of Numenor,
  would  be  deceived  by  the  lies  of  a  servant of  Morgoth? I  would not
  break  faith  with  the  king,  nor  do  I  purpose  anything  to  his hurt.
  The  house  of  Earendel  hath  my  allegiance  while  I  live.  But   if  I
  must   choose  between   Sauron  and   Manwe,  then   all  else   must  come
  after. I will not bow unto Sauron, nor to his master.'                      
    'But thou speakest as if thou wert a 1eader in this matter - woe i s
  me,  for  I  love thee;  and though  thou swearest  allegiance, it  will not
  save  thee  from  the  peril  of  treason.  Even  to  dispraise   Sauron  is
  held rebellious.'                                                           
    'I  am  a  leader,  my  son.  And  I  have  counted  the  peril  both  for

 myself and  for thee  and all  whom I  love. I  do what  is right  and my
 right  to  do,  but  I  cannot  conceal  it longer  from thee.  Thou must
 choose  between  thy  father  and  Sauron.  But  I  give thee  freedom of
 choice  and  lay  on thee  no obedience  as to  a father,  if I  have not
 convinced thy  mind and  heart. Thou  shalt be  free to  stay or  go, yea
 even to report as may seem  good to  thee all  that I  have said.  But if
 thou  stayest  and  learnest  more,  which  will involve  closer counsels
 and  other  [?  names]  than  mine,  then  thou wilt  be bound  in honour
 to hold thy peace, come what may. Wilt thou stay?'                        
   'Atarinya  tye-melane,'  said  Herendil  suddenly,  and   clasping  his
 father's knees he laid his [?head there] and  wept. 'It  is an  evil hour
 that  [?putteth]  such  a  choice  on  thee,' said  his father,  laying a
 hand  on  his  head.  'But  fate  calleth  some to  be men  betimes. What
 dost thou say? '                                                          
   'I stay, father.'                                                       
                                                                          
   The narrative ends  here. There  is no  reason to  think that  any more
 was  ever  written.  The  manuscript,  which  becomes  increasingly rapid
 towards the end, peters out in a scrawl.                                  
                                                                          
             Notes on the Numenorean chapters of The Lost Road.             
                                                                          
 1. Lavaralda  (replacing  lavarin)  is  not  mentioned  in A  Description of
    Numenor  (Unfinished  Tales  p.  167)  among  the  trees brought  by the
    Eldar                          from                          Tol-eressea.
 2. seven twelves of years is an emendation  of four  score of  years (first
    written three score of years); see note 10.                           
 3. Vinya is written above Numenor in the manuscript; it occurs again
    in a part of the text that was rewritten (p. 64), rendered 'the New
    Land'.  The  name  first  appeared  in  an  emendation  to  FN I  (p. 19,
                                                                          
    $2)                                                                    
 4. For Terendul see the Etymologies, stem TER, TERES.
 5. As the text was originally written there followed here:
     Poldor called me Earendel yesterday.'
        Elendil sighed. 'But that is a fair name. I love the story above
     others; indeed I chose thy name because it recalleth his. But I did
       not presume to give his name even to thee, nor to liken myself to
      Tuor the mighty, who first of Men sailed these seas. At least thou
         canst answer thy foolish friends that Earendel was the chief of
             mariners, and surely that is still held worthy of honour in
                                                              Numenor? '
           'But they care not for Earendel. And neither do I. We wish to
                                                do what he left undone.'
                                                  'What dost thou mean?'
       'Thou knowest; to set foot in the far West...' (&c. as on p. 60).

                          
                                                                                 
 6.  This   is   the   earliest   appearance  of   a  Numenorean   named  Valandil.
     In  later  rewriting  of  FN  II  Valandil  is  Elendil's  brother,  and  they
     are   the   founders    of   the    Numenorean   kingdoms    in   Middle-earth
     (pp.  33  -  4).  The   name  was   afterwards  given   to  both   an  earlier
     Numenorean  (the  first   Lord  of   Andunie)  and   a  later   (the  youngest
     son  of  Isildur  and  third  King  of  Arnor):  Index  to   Unfinished  Tales,
     entries Valandil and references.                                             
 7.  In the Quenta (IV. 151) it is not told that Tuor was 'lost'. When  he felt
     old  age  creeping  on  him  'he built  a great  ship Earame,  Eagle's Pinion,
     and  with  Idril  he  set  sail  into  the sunset  and the  West, and  came no
     more  into any  tale or  song.' Later  the following  was added  (I V.  x 55):
     'But  Tuor  alone  of  mortal  Men   was  numbered   among  the   elder  race,
     and  joined  with  the  Noldoli  whom  he  loved,  and  in  after  time  dwelt
     still, or so it hath been said, ever upon his  ship voyaging  the seas  of the
     Elven-lands,  or  resting  a  while  in  the  harbours  of  the Gnomes  of Tol
     Eressea; and his fate is sundered from the fate of Men.'                     
 8.  This  is  the  final  form  in  the   Quenta  of   the  story   of  Earendel's
     landing  in  Valinor,   where  in   emendations  made   to  the   second  text
     Q II  (I  V.  156)  Earendel  'bade  farewell  to  all  whom he  loved upon
     the  last   shore,  and   was  taken   from  them   for  ever,'   and  'Elwing
     mourned   for   Earendel   yet   found   him   never   again,  and   they  are
     sundered  till  the  world  endeth.'  Later  Elendil  returns  more  fully  to
     the  subject  (p.  64).  In  QS  the  story  is   further  changed,   in  that
     Elwing entered Valinor (see pp. 324 - 5 $$1-2, and commentary).           
 9.  Nuaran  Numenoren:  the   letters  or   were  scratched   out  in   the  type-
     script (only).                                                               
 10. Thou  art  but  four  twelves  replaced  Thou  art   scarce  two   score  and
     ten.  As  in  the   change  recorded   in  note   z,  a   duodecimal  counting
     replaces  a  decimal;  but  the  number  of  years  is  in  either  case  very
     strange.  For  Herendil  has  been  called a  'boy', a  'lad', and  a 'youth',
     and  he  is  'upon  the  threshold  of  early  manhood'  (p.  58);   how  then
     can  he  be  forty-eight  years  old?  But  his  age is  unequivocally stated,
     and  moreover  Elendil  says  later  (p.  66)  that  it   is  44  years  since
     Sauron  came  and  that  Herendil  was  then  a  small  child;  it   can  only
     be   concluded   therefore   that   at   this  time   the  longevity   of  the
     Numenoreans   implied  that   they  grew   and  aged   at  a   different  rate
     from  other  men,  and  were  not  fully  adult until  about fifty  years old.
     Cf. Unfinished Tales pp. 224 - 5.                                            
 11. Orontor's  mission,  from  which  he   might  never   return,  seems   like  a
     premonition  of  the  voyage  of  Amandil  into  the   West,  from   which  he
     never returned (Akallabeth pp. 275 - 6).                                     
 12. The  manuscript  (followed  by  the  typescript)   is  here   confused,  since
     in  addition  to  the  text  as  printed the  whole song  that Firiel  sang is
     given  as  well,  with  translation;  thus  the  two   opening  and   the  two
     closing  lines  and  their  translations  are  repeated.  It is  clear however
     from  pencilled  markings  on  the   manuscript  that   my  father   moved  at

      once to a second version (omitting the greater part of the song)
                                       without striking out the first.
        The text of the song was emended in three stages. Changes made
       probably very near the time of writing were Valion numenyaron
 (translated 'of the Lords of the West') > Valion: numessier in line 2,
      and hondo-ninya > indo-ninya in line 9; Vinya was written above
    Numenor as an alternative in line 8 (cf. note 3). Before the later
                                        emendations the text ran thus:
                                Ilu Iluvatar en kare eldain a firimoin
                                 ar antarota mannar Valion: numessier.
                              Toi aina, mana, meldielto - enga morion:
                                talantie. Mardello Melko lende: marie.
                            Eldain en karier Isil, nan hildin Ur-anar.
                             Toi irimar. Ilqainen antar annar lestanen
                                   Iluvatiren. Ilu vanya, fanya, eari,
                                i-mar, ar ilqa imen. Irima ye Numenor.
                                Nan uye sere indo-ninya simen, ullume;
                           ten si ye tyelma, yeva tyel ar i-narqelion,
                           ire ilqa yeva notina, hostainieva, yallume:
                                        ananta uva tare farea, ufarea!
                                Man tare antava nin Iluvatar, Iluvatar
                               enyare tar i tyel, ire Anarinya qeluva?
       The Father made the World for Elves and Mortals, and he gave it
     into the hands of the Lords. They are in the West. They are holy,
      blessed, and beloved: save the dark one. He is fallen. Melko has
        gone from Earth: it is good. For Elves they made the Moon, but
         for Men the red Sun; which are beautiful. To all they gave in
  measure the gifts of Iluvatar. The World is fair, the sky, the seas,
         the earth, and all that is in them. Lovely is Numenor. But my
   heart resteth not here for ever; for here is ending, and there will
       be an end and the Fading, when all is counted, and all numbered
     at last, but yet it will not be enough, not enough. What will the
          Father, 0 Father, give me in that day beyond the end when my
                                                          Sun faileth?
            Subsequently Mardello Melko in line 4 was changed to Melko
                                        Mardello, and lines 5-6 became
                              En karielto eldain Isil, hildin Ur-anar.
                             Toi irimar. Ilyain antalto annar lestanen
       Then, after the typescript was made, Melko was changed to Alkar
                                in text and translation; see note 15.
   The thought of lines 5 - 6 of the song reappears in Elendil's words
       to Herendil later (p. 64): 'But the Valar made the Moon for the
         Firstborn and the Sun for Men to confound the Darkness of the
     Enemy.' Cf. QS $75 (The Silmarillion p. 99): 'For the Sun was set
   as a sign for the awakening of Men and the waning of the Elves; but
                                     the Moon cherishes their memory.'

                                                                  
                                                                      
 13. For hon-maren 'heart of the house' see the Etymologies, stem KHO-N.
 14. Here the typescript made at Allen and Unwin (p. 8, footnote) ends.
    The publishers' reader (see p. 97) said that 'only the preliminary
      two chapters... and one of the last chapters... are written.' It
     might be supposed that the typescript ended where it does because
   no more had been written at that time, but I do not think that this
  was the reason. At the point where the typescript breaks off (in the
     middle of a manuscript page) there is no suggestion at all of any
    interruption in the writing, and it seems far more likely that the
       typist simply gave up, for the manuscript here becomes confused
                    and difficult through rewriting and substitutions.
            In the previous parts of The Lost Road I have taken up all
      corrections to the manuscript, however quickly and lightly made,
  since they all appear in the typescript. From this point there is no
         external evidence to show when the pencilled emendations were
        made; but I continue to take these up into the text as before.
 15. Elendil's long tale to Herendil of the ancient history, from 'There is
   Iluvatar, the One' to 'and ruin (if he might) Avallon and Valinor' on
    p. 65, is a replacement of the original much briefer passage. This
     replacement must be later than the submission of The Lost Road to
     Allen and Unwin, for Morgoth is here called Alkar as the text was
  first written, not  Melko, whereas in the song sung by Firiel in the
      previous chapter Melko was only changed in pencil to Alkar, and
  this was not taken up into the typescript. The original passage read
                                                                 thus:
            He spoke of the rebellion of Melko [later > Alkar and sub-
      sequently], mightiest of the Powers, that began at the making of
     the World; and of his rejection by the Lords of the West after he
     had wrought evil in the Blessed Realm and caused the exile of the
       Eldar, the firstborn of the earth, who dwelt now in Eressea. He
      told of Melko's tyranny in Middle-earth, and how he had enslaved
             Men; of the wars which the Eldar waged with him, and were
          defeated, and of the Fathers of Men that had aided them; how
             Earendel brought their prayer to the Lords, and Melko was
         overthrown and thrust forth beyond the confines of the World.
           Elendil paused and looked down on Herendil. He did not move
             or make a sign. Therefore Elendil went on. 'Dost thou not
      perceive then, Herendil, that Morgoth is a begetter of evil, and
             brought sorrow upon our fathers? We owe him no allegiance
      except by fear. For his share of the governance of the World was
    forfeit long ago. Nor need we hope in him: the fathers of our race
       were his enemies; wherefore we can look for no love from him or
          any of his servants. Morgoth doth not forgive. But he cannot
       return into the World in present power and form while the Lords
       are enthroned. He is in the Void, though his Will remaineth and
     guideth his servants. And his will is to overthrow the Lords, and

       return,   and   wield  dominion,   and  have   vengeance  on   those  who
       obey the Lords.                                                          
            'But why should we be deceived...' (&c. as on p. 65).               
       The  closing  sentences  ('But  he  cannot  return  into  the  World...')
       closely echo, or perhaps rather  are closely  echoed by  (see note  25) a
       passage in FN II ($1).                                                 
  16.  In  QS $ 10 it  is said  that Melko  was 'coeval  with Manwe'.  The name
       Alkar  'the Radiant'  of Melko  occurs, I  believe, nowhere  outside this
       text.                                                                    
  17.  See  note  8.  The  reference to  Earendel's child  shows that  Elros had
       not yet emerged, as he had not in FN II (p. 34).                        
  18.  'mockeries  of  the  creatures  of  Iluvatar':  cf.  FN  II $1  and com-
       mentary.                                                                 
  19.  Here  the  long  replacement  passage  ends  (see  note  15),  though  as
       written  it continued  in much  the same  words as  did the  earlier form
       ('For  Morgoth  cannot  return  into  the  World  while  the   Lords  are
       enthroned...'); this passage was afterwards struck out.                  
  20.  The words 'a gift which  in the  wearing of  time even  the Lords  of the
       West  shall envy'  were a  pencilled addition  to the  text, and  are the
       first appearance of this idea:  a closely  similar phrase  is found  in a
       text  of  the  Ainulindale  written  years  later (cf.  The Silmarillion
       p. 42: 'Death is their fate, the gift  of Iluvatar,  which as  Time wears
       even the Powers shall envy.')                                            
  21.  Cf. FN I I $5: Some said  that he  was a  king greater  than the  King of
       Numenor; some said  that he  was one  of the  Gods or  their sons  set to
       govern  Middle-earth.  A  few  reported  that  he  was  an  evil  spirit,
       perchance  Morgoth  himself  returned.  But this  was held  to be  only a
       foolish fable of the wild Men.'                                          
  22.  This  duodecimal  computation  is  found  in  the  text  as  written; see
       note 10.                                                                 
  23.  Cf.  FN  II  $5:  for [the  Lords] said  that Sauron  would work  evil if
       he   came;   but   he   could  not   come  to   Numenor  unless   he  was
       summoned and guided by the king's messengers.'                           
  24.  The  name  Morionde  occurs,  I  think,   nowhere  else.   This  eastern
       haven is no doubt the forerunner of Romenna.                             
  25.  This is the story of  the coming  of Sauron  to Numenor  found in  FN II
       $5, which was replaced soon after by a  version in  which the  lifting up
       of the ships by a great wave and the casting of them  far inland  was re-
       moved; see pp. 9, 26 - 7. In the first FN II version the sea rose like a
       mountain,  the  ship  that  carried  Sauron  was  set  upon  a  hill, and
       Sauron stood  upon the  hill to  preach his  message to  the Numenoreans.
       In  The  Lost  Road  the  sea  rose  like  a hill,  changed in  pencil to
       mountain, Sauron's  ship was  cast upon  a high  rock, changed  in pencil
       to hill,  and Sauron  spoke standing  on the  rock (left  unchanged). This
       is the best evidence I can  see that  of these  two companion  works (see
       notes 15, 21, 23) The Lost Road was written first.                       

 26. Alkar: pencilled alteration of Melko: see note 15.                   
 27. On  Eressean  ('Elf-latin',  Qenya),  the  common  speech of  all Elves,
    see p. 56. The present passage  is the  first appearance  of the  idea of
    a  linguistic  component  in  the  attack  by  the   Numenorean  'govern-
    ment'  on  Eressean  culture  and  influence;  cf. The  Line of  Elros in
    Unfinished  Tales  (p.  222),  of Ar-Adunakhor,  the twentieth  ruler of
    Numenor: 'He  was the  first King  to take  the sceptre  with a  title in
    the  Adunaic  tongue...  In   this  reign   the  Elven-tongues   were  no
    longer  used,  nor  permitted  to  be  taught,  but  were  maintained  in
    secret  by  the Faithful';  and of  Ar-Gimilzor, the  twenty-third ruler:
    'he forbade utterly the use of  the Eldarin  tongues' (very  similarly in
    the Akallabeth, pp.  267 -  8). But  of course  at the  time of  The Lost
    Road  the  idea  of  Adunaic  as  one  of  the  languages of  Numenor had
    not  emerged,  and the  proposal is  only that  'the ancestral  speech of
    Men' should be 'revived'.                                                
 28. This goes back  to FN  I $6:  'Sur said  that the  gifts of  Morgoth were
    withheld  by  the  Gods,  and  that  to  obtain  plenitude  of  power and
    undying life he [the king Angor] must be master of the West.'            
                                                                            
   There  are  several  pages of  notes that  give some  idea of  my father's
 thoughts - at a certain stage - for the continuation of the story beyond the
 point where he abandoned it.  These are  in places  quite illegible,  and in
 any  case  were  the  concomitant of  rapidly changing  ideas: they  are the
 vestiges  of  thoughts,  not  statements  of  formulated  conceptions.  More
 important,  some  at  least  of  these  notes  clearly  preceded  the actual
 narrative  that  was  written  and  were taken  up into  it, or  replaced by
 something different, and it may very well be that this is true of  them all,
 even  those  that refer  to the  latter part  of the  story which  was never
 written. But they  make it  very clear  that my  father was  concerned above
 all with the relation between the father  and the  son, which  was cardinal.
 In  Numenor  he  had  engendered  a  situation  in   which  there   was  the
 potentiality  of  anguishing  conflict   between  them,   totally  incommen-
 surate  with  the  quiet  harmony  in  which  the Errols  began -  or ended.
 The  relationship  of  Elendil  and  Herendil  was  subjected to  a profound
 menace.  This  conflict  could  have  many   narrative  issues   within  the
 framework of the  known event,  the attack  on Valinor  and the  Downfall of
 Numenor,  and  in  these  notes  my  father  was  merely sketching  out some
 solutions, none of which did he develop or return to again.                 
   An apparently minor  question was  the words  'the Eagles  of the  Lord of
 the  West':  what  did  they  mean,  and  how  were  they placed  within the
 story? It seems that he  was as  puzzled by  them as  was Alboin  Errol when
 he used  them (pp.  38, 47).  He queries  whether 'Lord  of the  West' means
 the  King  of Numenor,  or Manwe,  or whether  it is  the title  properly of
 Manwe but taken  in his  despite by  the King;  and concludes  'probably the
 latter'. There  follows a  'scenario' in  which Sorontur  King of  Eagles is
 sent by Manwe,  and Sorontur  flying against  the sun  casts a  great shadow

  on  the  ground.  It  was  then  that  Elendil  spoke  the  phrase,  but   he  was
  overheard,   informed   upon,   and   taken   before   Tarkalion,   who   declared
  that  the  title was  his. In  the story  as actually  written Elendil  speaks the
  words  to  Herendil  (p.  62),  when  he  sees clouds  rising out  of the  West in
  the  evening  sky  and  stretching  out  'great  wings'   -  the   same  spectacle
  as   made   Alboin   Errol   utter   them,  and   the  men   of  Numenor   in  the
  Akallabeth  (p.  277);  and  Herendil  replies  that  the  title has  been decreed
  to  belong  to  the  King.  The  outcome  of  Elendil's arrest  is not  made clear
  in  the  notes, but  it is  said that  Herendil was  given command  of one  of the
  ships,  that  Elendil  himself  joined   in  the   great  expedition   because  he
  followed  Herendil,  that  when  they  reached   Valinor  Tarkalion   set  Elendil
  as  a  hostage  in  his  son's  ship,  and  that  when they  landed on  the shores
  Herendil  was   struck  down.   Elendil  rescued   him  and   set  him   on  ship-
  board,  and  'pursued  by  the  bolts  of  Tarkalion' they  sailed back  east. 'As
  they   approach   Numenor   the   world   bends;  they   see  the   land  slipping
  towards  them';  and  Elendil  falls  into   the  deep   and  is   drowned.>  This
  group  of  notes  ends  with  references  to  the  coming  of  the  Numenoreans to
  Middle-earth,  and  to  the  'later  stories';  'the  flying ships',  'the painted
  caves', 'how Elf-friend walked on the Straight Road'.                             
    Other  notes  refer  to  plans  laid by  the 'anti-Saurians'  for an  assault on
  the  Temple,  plans   betrayed  by   Herendil  'on   condition  that   Elendil  is
  spared';  the  assault  is  defeated  and  Elendil  captured.   Either  associated
  with  this  or distinct  from it  is a  suggestion that  Herendil is  arrested and
  imprisoned  in  the   dungeons  of   Sauron,  and   that  Elendil   renounces  the
  Gods to save his son.                                                             
    My  guess  is  that  all  this  had  been  rejected  when  the  actual narrative
  was  written,  and  that  the  words  of  Herendil  that  conclude  it  show  that
  my  father  had  then  in  mind  some  quite distinct  solution, in  which Elendil
  and  his  son  remained   united  in   the  face   of  whatever   events  overtook
  them.+                                                                            
                                                                                   
    In  the  early  narratives  there  is  no  indication  of  the  duration  of the
  realm  of  Numenor  from  its  foundation  to  its  ruin;  and  there is  only one
  named  king.  In  his  conversation  with  Herendil,  Elendil  attributes  all the
  evils  that   have  befallen   to  the   coming  of   Sauron:  they   have  arisen
  therefore  in  a  quite  brief  time  (forty-four  years, p.  66); whereas  in the
  Akallabeth,   when   a   great   extension   of   Numenorean  history   had  taken
                                                                                   
  (* It  would  be  interesting  to know  if a  tantalisingly obscure  note, scribbled
  down in isolation, refers to this dimly-glimpsed story: 'If either fails the other
  they perish and do not return. Thus  at the  last moment  Elendil must  prevail on
  Herendil  to hold  back, otherwise  they would  have perished.  At that  moment he
  sees himself  as Alboin:  and realises  that Elendil  and Herendil  had perished.'
  + I have  suggested  (p.  31)  that  since  Elendil  of Numenor  appears in  FN II
  ($ 14) as king in Beleriand he must have been among those who took no part in the
  expedition of Tar-kalion, but 'sat in their ships upon the east coast of the land'
  (FN $9).                                                                          

  place, those evils began long before, and are indeed traced  back as  far as
  the  twelfth  ruler,  Tar-Ciryatan  the  Shipbuilder,  who took  the sceptre
  nearly  a  millennium and  a half  before the  Downfall (Akallabeth  p. 265,
  Unfinished Tales p. 221).                                                   
                                                                             
    From  Elendil's  words  at  the  end  of  The  Lost  Road there  emerges a
  sinister picture: the withdrawal  of the  besotted and  aging king  from the
  public  view,  the  unexplained  disappearance  of  people   unpopular  with
  the 'government', informers, prisons, torture, secrecy,  fear of  the night;
  propaganda in  the form  of the  'rewriting of  history' (as  exemplified by
  Herendil's  words  concerning  what  was  now said  about Earendel,  p. 60);
  the multiplication  of weapons  of war,  the purpose  of which  is concealed
  but  guessed at;  and behind  all the  dreadful figure  of Sauron,  the real
  power,  surveying  the  whole  land  from  the  Mountain  of   Numenor.  The
  teaching of Sauron has led to the invention of ships of metal  that traverse
  the seas without sails, but which are hideous in the eyes of those  who have
  not  abandoned  or  forgotten  Tol-eressea;  to  the  building of  grim for-
  tresses and unlovely towers; and  to missiles  that pass  with a  noise like
  thunder  to  strike  their  targets  many miles  away. Moreover,  Numenor is
  seen  by  the  young  as  over-populous,  boring, 'over-known':  'every tree
  and  grass-blade  is  counted',  in  Herendil's  words;  and  this  cause of
  discontent is used, it seems, by Sauron to further the policy  of 'imperial'
  expansion and ambition that he presses  on the  king. When  at this  time my
  father reached back to the world of  the first  man to  bear the  name 'Elf-
  friend' he found there  an image  of what  he most  condemned and  feared in
  his own.                                                                    
                                                                             
                                     (iii)                                    
                                                                             
                            The unwritten chapters.                          
                                                                             
  It  cannot be  shown whether  my father  decided to  alter the  structure of
  the  book  by  postponing  the  Numenorean  story  to  the  end   before  he
  abandoned the fourth chapter at Herendil's  words 'I  stay, father';  but it
  seems perfectly possible that the decision in fact  led to  the abandonment.
  At  any  rate,  on a  separate sheet  he wrote:  'Work backwards  to Numenor
  and make that last', adding a proposal that in each tale a man  should utter
  the words about the Eagles of  the Lord  of the  West, but  only at  the end
  would it be discovered what they meant (see pp.  75 -  6). This  is followed
  by  a  rapid  jotting  down  of ideas  for the  tales that  should intervene
  between  Alboin  and  Audoin  of  the  twentieth  century  and  Elendil  and
  Herendil   in  Numenor,   but  these   are  tantalisingly   brief:  'Lombard
  story?'; 'a Norse story of ship-burial  (Vinland)'; 'an English  story -  of the
  man  who  got  onto  the  Straight  Road?';  'a  Tuatha-de-Danaan  story, or
  Tir-nan-Og'  (on  which  see  pp.  81  -  3);  a  story  concerning 'painted
  caves'; 'the Ice Age - great figures in ice', and 'Before  the Ice  Age: the
  Galdor story'; 'post-Beleriand and the  Elendil and  Gil-galad story  of the

  assault  on  Thu';  and  finally  'the  Numenor  story'.  To  one  of   these,  the
  'English  story  of  the  man  who  got  onto  the  Straight  Road',  is  attached a
  more extended note, written at great speed:                                             
    But  this  would  do  best  of  all  for  introduction  to  the  Lost  Tales:  How
  AElfwine  sailed  the  Straight  Road.  They  sailed  on,  on,  on  over   the  sea;
  and  it  became  very   bright  and   very  calm,   -  no   clouds,  no   wind.  The
  water   seemed   thin   and   white   below.   Looking   down    AElfwine   suddenly
  saw   lands   and   mt  [i.e.   mountains  or   a  mountain]   down  in   the  water
  shining   in   the   sun.   Their  breathing   difficulties.  His   companions  dive
  overboard   one   by   one.   AElfwine   falls   insensible   when   he   smells   a
  marvellous  fragrance  as  of  land  and  flowers.  He  awakes  to  find   the  ship
  being  drawn  by  people  walking  in   the  water.   He  is   told  very   few  men
  there  in  a  thousand  years  can  breathe  air  of  Eressea  (which  is  Avallon),
  but  none  beyond.  So  he  comes   to  Eressea   and  is   told  the   Lost  Tales.
  Pencilled  later  against  this  is  'Story  of  Sceaf  or Scyld';  and it  was only
  here,  I  think,  that  the  idea  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  episode  arose   (and  this
  was  the  only  one  of  all these  projections that  came near  to getting  off the
  ground).                                                                                
    This  note  is  of  particular  interest  in  that  it  shows my  father combining
  the  old story  of the  voyage of  AElfwine to  Tol-eressea and  the telling  of the
  Lost  Tales  with  the  idea  of  the  World  Made  Round  and  the  Straight  Path,
  which   entered   at   this   time.  With   the  words   about  the   difficulty  of
  breathing  cf.  FN  $ 12,  where it  is said  that the  Straight Path  'cut through
  the  air  of  breath  and  flight  [Wilwa,  Vista],  and  traversed Ilmen,  in which
  no flesh can endure.'                                                                   
    My  father  then  (as  I  judge)  roughed  out  an  outline  for the  structure of
  the  book  as  he  now  foresaw  it.   Chapter  III   was  to   be  called   A  Step
  Backward: AElfwine   and   Eadzvine *  -   the   Anglo-Saxon   incarnation   of  the
  father   and   son,   and  incorporating   the  legend   of  King   Sheave;  Chapter
  IV   'the   Irish   legend   of   Tuatha-de-Danaan   -   and   oldest  man   in  the
  world';  Chapter  V  'Prehistoric  North:  old  kings  found  buried  in  the  ice':
  Chapter   VI   'Beleriand';   Chapter   VIII   (presumably    a   slip    for   VII)
  'Elendil  and  Herendil  in  Numenor'.  It  is  interesting  to  see  that  there is
  now no mention of the Lombard legend as an ingredient: see p. 55.                       
    This   outline   structure  was   sent  to   Allen  and   Unwin  with   the  manu-
  script and was incorporated in the typescript made there.                               
                                                                                         
    Apart   from   the   Anglo-Saxon   episode,   the   only   scrap    of   connected   
  writing   for   any   of   the  suggested   tales  is   an  extremely   obscure  and
  roughly-written  fragment  that  appears  to  be  a  part  of  'the   Galdor  story'
  (p.  77).  In  this,  one  Agaldor  stands  on  a  rocky shore  at evening  and sees
  great  clouds  coming  up,  'like  the  very  eagles of  the Lord  of the  West'. He
  is  filled  with  a  formless  foreboding  at  the  sight  of  these clouds;  and he
                                                                                         
  (* I think it almost certain that the titles of Chapters I and 11 were put in at this
  time: as the manuscript was written they had no titles.)                                

                     
                                                                              
 turns  and  climbs  up the  beach, passing  down behind  the land-wall  to the
 houses where lights are already  lit. He  is eyed  doubtfully by  men sitting
 at a door, and after he has gone by they speak of him.                        
    'There  goes  Agaldor again,  from his  speech with  the sea:  earlier than
 usual,'  said  one.  'He  has  been  haunting  the  shores  more than  ever of
 late.'  'He  will  be  giving  tongue soon,  and prophesying  strange things,'
 said   another;   'and   may   the   Lords   of  the   West  set   words  more
 comforting  in  his  mouth  than  before.' 'The  Lords of  the West  will tell
 him  naught,'  said  a third.  'If ever  they were  on land  or sea  they have
 left  this  earth,  and  man  is  his  own  master from  here to  the sunrise.
 Why  should  we  be  plagued  with  the  dreams  of  a   twilight-walker?  His
 head  is  stuffed  with  them, and  there let  them bide.  One would  think to
 hear  him  talk  that the  world had  ended in  the last  age, not  new begun,
 and we were living in the ruins.'                                             
    'He is one of the old folk,  and well-nigh  the last  of the  long-lived in
 these  regions,'  said  another.  'Those  who  knew  the  Eldar  and  had seen
 even  the  Sons  of  the  Gods  had  a  wisdom  we  forget.'  'Wisdom  I  know
 not,' said the other, 'but woe certainly in  abundance if  any of  their tales
 are  true.  I know  not (though  I doubt  it). But  give me  the Sun.  That is
 glory... I  would that  the long  life of  Agaldor might  be shortened.  It is
 he that  holds [??  nigh] this  sea-margin -  too near  the mournful  water. I
 would  we  had  a  leader  to  take us  East or  South. They  say the  land is
 golden in the [??domains) of the Sun.'                                        
                                                                              
 Here  the  fragment ends.  Agaldor has  appeared in  the original  outline for
 The  Fall  of  Numenor:  'Agaldor  chieftain  of  a people  who live  upon the
 N.W. margin  of the  Western Sea'  (p. 11), and  later in  that text  it was
 Agaldor  who  wrestled   with  Thu,   though  the   name  was   there  changed
 at  the  time  of  writing  to  Amroth  (p. 12).  That this  is a  fragment of
 'the  Galdor story'  seems to  be shown  by a  pencilled and  partly illegible
 scrawl  at  the  head  of the  page, where  Galdor appears;  but the  story is
 here significantly different.                                                 
                                                                              
  Galdor  is  a  good  man [?among]  the exiles  (not a  Numenorean) -  not a
  long-liver   but  a   prophet.  He   prophesies  [?coming]   of  Numenoreans
  and  [?salvation]  of  men.  Hence holds  his men  by sea.  This foreboding
  passage  heralds  the  Ruin   and  the   Flood.  How   he  escapes   in  the
  flood.....  of  land.  The  Numenoreans  come  -  but  appear  no  longer as
  good  but  as  rebels  against  the  Gods.  They  slay  Galdor and  take the
  chieftainship.                                                               
                                                                              
 There is very little to build on here, and I shall not offer any speculations.
 The   story  was   abandoned  without   revealing  how   the  AElfwine-Eadwine
 element would enter.                                                          
                                                                              
  Turning  now  to  'the  AElfwine  story',  there are  several pages  of very
 rough  notes  and  abandoned  beginnings.  One  of  these  pages  consists of
 increasingly rapid and abbreviated notes, as follows:                         

  AElfwine and Eadwine  live in  the time  of Edward  the Elder,  in North
  Somerset.  AElfwine  ruined by  the incursions  of Danes.  Picture opens
  with the attack (c. 915) on Portloca (Porlock)  and Waeced.  AElfwine is
  awaiting Eadwine's return  at night.  (The attack  actually historically
  took place in autumn, at harfest).                                      
     Conversation  of  AElfwine  and Eadwine.  Eadwine is  sick of  it. He
  says  the  Danes  have  more sense;  always pressing  on. They  go west.
  They pass round and go  to Ireland;  while the  English sit  like Wealas
  waiting to be made into slaves.                                         
     Eadwine says he has heard strange tales from Ireland.  A land  in the
  North-west filled with ice, but fit for men to dwell - holy hermits have
  been  driven  out  by   Norsemen. AElfwine  has   Christian  objections.
  Eadwine  says  the  holy  Brendan  did so  centuries ago  - and  lots of
  others,  [as] Maelduin.  And they  came back  - not  that he  would want
  to.        Insula        Deliciarum        -        even       Paradise.
  AElfwine objects that  Paradise cannot  be got  to by  ship -  there are
  deeper  waters  between  us  than  Garsecg.  Roads  are  bent:  you come
  back in the end. No escape by ship.                                     
     Eadwine says he does not think it true - and hopes  it isn't.  At any
  rate their ancestors had won new lands by ship.  Quotes story  of Sceaf.
  In  the end  they go  off with  ten neighbours.  Pursued by  Vikings off
  Lundy. Wind  takes them  out to  sea, and  persists. Eadwine  falls sick
  and says odd things. AElfwine dreams too. Mountainous seas.             
     The   Straight   Road.....  water   (island  of   Azores?).....  off.
  AElfwine [?restores? restrains] Eadwine. Thinks it a vision of delirium.
  The vision of Eressea and the sound  of voices.  Resigns himself  to die
  but  prays  for  Eadwine.  Sensation  of  falling.  They  come  down  in
  [?real]  sea  and west  wind blows  them back.  Land in  Ireland (impli-
  cation is they settle there, and this leads to Finntan).                
                                                                         
 I add some notes on this  far-ranging outline.  Edward the  Elder, eldest
 son of King Alfred, reigned  from 900  to 924.  In the  year 914  a large
 Viking fleet, coming from Brittany, appeared in the Bristol  Channel, and
 began ravaging in the lands beyond  the Severn.  According to  the Anglo-
 Saxon  Chronicle  the  leaders  were  two  jarls  ('earls')  named  Ohtor
 and  Hroald.  The  Danes  were  defeated  at  Archenfield   (Old  English
 Ircingafeld) in Herefordshire and forced  to give  hostages in  pledge of
 their departure. King Edward was  in arms  with the  forces of  Wessex on
 the south side of  the Severn  estuary, 'so  that', in  the words  of the
 Chronicle, 'they did not dare to attack the land  anywhere on  that side.
 Nonetheless they twice stole  inland by  night, on  one occasion  east of
 Watchet and on the other at Porlock (aet oprum  cierre be  eastan Waeced,
 and aet  oprum cierre  at Portlocan).  Each time  they were  attacked and
 only those escaped who swam out to the  ships; and  after that  they were
 out on the island of Steepholme, until  they had  scarcely any  food, and
 many died of  hunger. From  there they  went to  Dyfed [South  Wales] and

                    
                                                                           
 from  there  to  Ireland;  and  that  was in  the autumn  (and pis  waes on
 harfest).'                                                                 
  Porlock and Watchet  are on  the north  coast of  Somerset; the  island of
 Steepholme lies to the North-east, in the  mouth of  the Severn.  My father
 retained this historical mise-en-scene in the draft  of a  brief 'AElfwine'
 narrative given  below, pp.  83 -  4, and  years later  in The  Notion Club
 Papers (1945).                                                             
  Wealas: the British  (as distinct  from the  English or  Anglo-Saxons); in
 Modern  English  Wales, the  name of  the people  having become  the name
 of the land.                                                               
                                                                           
 'A land in the North-west filled with ice, but fit for men to dwell - holy
 hermits have been driven out by Norsemen.' It is certain that by the end
       of the eighth century (and how much earlier cannot be said) Irish
  voyagers had reached Iceland, in astounding journeys achieved in their
  boats called curachs, made of hides over a wooden frame. This is known
   from the work of an Irish monk named Dicuil, who in his book Liber de
 Mensura Orbis Terrae (written in 825) recorded that
 It is now thirty years since certain priests who lived in that island from
 the first day of February to the first day of August told me that not only
 at the summer solstice, but also in the days before and after, the setting
 sun at evening hides itself as if behind a little hill, so that it does not
 grow dark even for the shortest period of time, but whatever task a man
 wishes to perforni, even picking the lice out of his shirt, he can do it
     just as if it were broad daylight.
    When the first Norsemen came to Iceland (about 860) there were Irish
 hermits living there. This is recorded by the Icelandic historian Ari the
                                      Learned (1067 - 1148), who wrote:
     At that time Christian men whom the Norsemen call papar dwelt here;
         but afterwards they went away, because they would not live here
       together with heathen men, and they left behind them Irish books,
         bells, and croziers; from which it could be seen that they were
                                                               Irishmen.
 Many places in the south of Iceland, such as Papafjordr and the island of
    Papey, still bear names derived from the Irish papar. But nothing is
 known of their fate: they fled, and they left behind their precious things.
                                                                           
  Brendan;  Maelduin;  Insula  Deliciarum.  The  conception  of  a  'blessed
 land' or 'fortunate isles' in the Western Ocean is  a prominent  feature of
 the  old  Irish legends:  Tir-nan-Og, the  land of  youth; Hy  Bresail, the
 fortunate  isle;  Insula  Deliciosa;  etc.  Tir-nan-Og  is  mentioned  as a
 possible story for The Lost Road, p. 77.                                   
  The  holy  Brendan  is  Saint  Brendan  called  the Navigator,  founder of
 the  Abbey  of  Clonfert  in  Galway, and  the subject  of the  most famous
 of the tales of seavoyaging (imrama)  told of  early Irish  saints. Another
 is  the  Imram  Maelduin,  in  which  Maelduin and  his companions  set out
 from Ireland in a  curach and  came in  their voyaging  to many  islands in

                                                                     
                                                                              
 succession,  where  they  encountered   marvel  upon   marvel,  as   did  Saint
 Brendan.                                                                      
   My  father's  poem  Imram,  in which  Saint Brendan  at the  end of  his life
 recalls  the  three  things  that  he  remembers  from  his  voyage,  was  pub-
 lished in 1955, but  it originally  formed a  part of  The Notion  Club Papers.
 Many  years  before,  he  had  written  a  poem  (The  Nameless  Land)  on  the
 subject  of  a   paradisal  country   'beyond  the   Shadowy  Sea',   in  which
 Brendan is named. This poem and  its later  forms are  given in  a note  at the
 end of this chapter, pp. 98 ff.; to the final version is attached a  prose note
 on AElfwine's voyage that relates closely to  the end  of the  present outline.
                                                                              
  Garsecg: the Ocean. See II. 312 and note 19; also the Index to Vol. I V,
 entry Belegar.                                                                
   Sceaf: see pp. 7, 78, and 85 ff.                                            
   Lundy: an island off the west coast of Devon.                               
   It is unfortunate that the last part of this outline is so illegible. The
 words  following  'The Straight  Road' could  be interpreted  as 'a  world like
 water'.  After  the  mysterious reference  to the  Azores the  first word  is a
 noun or name in the plural, and is perhaps followed by 'driven'.              
   Finntan:  An  isolated  note  elsewhere  among   these  papers   reads:  'See
 Lit.  Celt.  p.  137. Oldest  man in  the world  Finntan (Narkil  White Fire).'
 The  reference  turns  out  to  be  to a  work entitled  The Literature  of the
 Celts,  by  Magnus  Maclean  (1906).  In  the  passage   to  which   my  father
 referred the  author wrote  of the  history of  Ireland according  to mediaeval
 Irish annalists:                                                              
   Forty  days  before  the  Flood,  the Lady  Caesair, niece  or granddaughter
 of  Noah  -  it  is  immaterial which  - with  fifty girls  and three  men came
 to  Ireland.  This,  we  are  to   understand,  was   the  first   invasion  or
 conquest   of   that   country.  All   these  were   drowned  in   the  Deluge,
 except  Finntan,  the  husband  of  the  lady,  who   escaped  by   being  cast
 into  a  deep  sleep,  in  which he  continued for  a year,  and when  he awoke
 he  found  himself  in  his  own  house  at  Dun   Tulcha....  At   Dun  Tulcha
 he  lived  throughout  many  dynasties  down  to  the  sixth  century   of  our
 era,  when  he  appears  for  the  last  time  with  eighteen companies  of his
 descendants  engaged  in  settling  a  boundary   dispute.  Being   the  oldest
 man  in   the  world,   he  was   ipso  facto   the  best   informed  regarding
 ancient landmarks.                                                            
    After   the   Flood  various   peoples  in   succession  stepped   onto  the
 platform  of  Irish  history.  First  the   Partholans,  then   the  Nemedians,
 Firbolgs,   Tuatha   de   Danaan,  and   last  of   all  the   Milesians,  thus
 carrying  the  chronology  down  to  the  time  of  Christ.  From  the  arrival
 of  the  earliest  of  these  settlers,  the  Fomorians  or  'Sea  Rovers'  are
 represented  as  fighting  and   harassing  the   people.  Sometimes   in  con-
 junction  with  the  plague,  at  other  times with  the Firbolgs  and Gaileoin
 and   Fir-Domnann,   they   laid   waste   the   land.   The   Partholans   and
 Nemedians  were  early  disposed  of.   And  then   appeared  from   the  north

                  
                                                                       
 of Europe, or from heaven, as one  author says,  the Tuatha  de Danann,
 who  at  the  great  battle  of  Moytura  South overcame  the Firbolgs,
 scattering  them  to  the  islands  of  Aran,  Islay, Rathlin,  and the
 Hebrides,  and  afterwards  defeating the  Fomorians at  Moytura North,
 thus gaining full possession of the land.                              
 The Tuatha de Danann are twice  mentioned (pp.  77 -  8) as  a possible
 narrative element in The Lost Road.                                    
                                                                       
 The only  actual narrative  concerning AElfwine  from this  time (apart
 from some beginnings abandoned after a few lines) is brief  and roughly
 scrawled; but it was to be used afterwards, and in places quite closely
 followed, in The Notion Club Papers.                                  
                                                                       
 AElfwine  awoke  with  a  start  -  he  had  been  dozing  on  a  bench
 with  his  back  to  a  pillar.  The  voices  poured in  on him  like a
 torrent.  He  felt  he  had  been  dreaming;  and  for  a   moment  the
 English  speech  about  him  sounded  strange,  though  mostly  it  was
 the  soft speech  of western  Wessex. Here  and there  were men  of the
 Marches,  and  a  few  spoke  oddly,  using  strange  words  after  the
 manner  of  those   among  whom   the  Danes   dwelt  in   the  eastern
 lands.  He  looked  down  the  hall,  looking for  his son  Eadwine. He
 was due on leave from the fleet, but had not yet come.                 
 There  was  a  great  crowd  in  the  hall, for  King Edward  was here.
 The fleet  was in  the Severn  sea, and  the south  shore was  in arms.
 The  jarls  had  been  defeated  far  north  at  Irchenfield,  but  the
 Danish ships were still at large  on the  Welsh coast;  and the  men of
 Somerset         and         Devon        were         on        guard.
 AElfwine  looked  down  the  hall.  The  faces  of  the  men,  some old
 and  careworn,  some  young  and  eager,  were  dim,  not  only because
 the torchlight  was wavering  and the  candles on  the high  table were
 guttering.  He  looked  beyond   them.  There   was  a   wind  blowing,
 surging   round  the   house;  timbers   creaked.  The   sound  brought
 back  old longings  to him  that he  had thought  were long  buried. He
 was  born  in  the  year  the  Danes  wintered in  Sheppey, and  he had
 sailed  many  seas  and  heard  many  winds  since  then. The  sound of
 the west wind and the fall of  seas on  the beaches  had always  been a
 challenging  music  to  him.  Especially  in  spring.  But  now  it was
 autumn,  and  also  he  was  growing  old.  And  the  seas  were  wide,
 beyond  the  power  of  man  to  cross  - to  unknown shores:  wide and
 dangerous.  The  faces  of  the  men  about him  faded and  the clamour
 of  their  voices  was  changed.  He heard  the crash  of waves  on the
 black cliffs and the  sea-birds diving  and crying;  and snow  and hail
 fell.  Then  the  seas  opened  pale  and  wide; the  sun shone  on the
 land  and  the sound  and smell  of it  fell far  behind. He  was alone

 going west towards the setting sun with fear and longing  in his           
 heart, drawn against his will.                                             
    His dream was broken by calls for the minstrel. 'Let AElfwine           
 sing!  ' men  were crying.  The king  had sent  to bid  him sing           
 something. He lifted up his voice and chanted aloud, but  as one           
 speaking to himself alone:                                                 
                                                                           
                Monad  modes lust mid mereflode                             
                ford to feran, paet ic feor heonan                           
                ofer hean holmas, ofer hwaeles edel                         
                elpeodigra eard gesece.                                     
                Nis me to hearpan hyge ne to hring pege                      
                ne to wife wyn ne to worulde hyht                           
                ne ymb owiht elles nefne ymb yda gewealc.                   
                                                                           
 'The  desire  of  my  spirit  urges me  to journey  forth over  the flowing
 sea,  that far  hence across  the hills  of water  and the  whale's country
 I  may  seek  the land  of strangers.  No mind  have I  for harp,  nor gift
 of  ring,  nor  delight  in  women,  nor  joy  in  the  world,  nor concern
 with aught else save the rolling of the waves.'                            
   Then  he  stopped  suddenly.  There   was  some   laughter,  and   a  few
 jeers,  though  many  were  silent,  as  if  feeling  that  the  words were
 not  spoken  to  their  ears  -  old and  familiar as  they were,  words of
 the  old  poets  whom  most  men  had  heard  often.  'If  he  has  no mind
 to  the  harp  he  need  expect  no  [?wagesj,'  said  one.  'Is   there  a
 mortal  here  who  has  a  mind?' 'We  have  had  enough  of the  sea,' said
 another.  'A  spell  of  Dane-hunting  would  cure   most  men's   love  of
 it.' 'Let  him go  rolling on  the waves,'  said another.  'It is  no great
 sail  to  the...  Welsh  country,  where  folk  are  strange  enough  - and
 the Danes to talk to as well.'                                             
   'Peace! '  said an  old man  sitting near  the threshold.  'AElfwine has
 sailed  more  seas  than  you  have  heard  of;  and  the  Welsh  tongue is
 not  strange  to  him.....  His  wife  was  of  Cornwall.  He  has  been to
 Ireland  and  the  North,  and  some  say  far  to the  west of  all living
 lands.  Let  him  say  what  his  mood  bids.' There  was a  short silence.
                                                                           
   The text ends here. The historical situation is slightly filled out, with
 mention of the Viking jarls and their defeat at  Irchenfield (Archenfield),
 on  which  see  p.  So.  AElfwine  'was   born  in   the  year   the  Danes
 wintered  in  Sheppey'  (the  isle  of  Sheppey  off  the  north  coast  of
 Kent).   The   Anglo-Saxon   Chronicle   records   under   the   year   855:
 Her haepne  men  aerest on  Sceapige ofer winter saetun  (In this  year heathen
 men for the first time stayed in Sheppey  ['Sheep-isle'] over  the winter);
 but  an  earlier  wintering  on  Thanet  is   recorded  under   851.  These

  winterings  by  Vikings were  ominous of  what was  to come,  a sign  of the
  transition from isolated raids followed by  a quick  departure to  the great
  invasions  in  the time  of AEthelred  and Alfred.  - AElfwine  was therefore
  approaching sixty at this time.                                             
    The  verses  that  AElfwine  chanted  are  derived  from  the  Old English
  poem  known  as  The  Seafarer,  with the  omission of  five lines  from the
  original after line 4, and some alterations of wording. The third line is an
  addition (and is enclosed, both in the Old English  and in  the translation,
  in square brackets in the manuscript).                                      
    With  the  reference to  AElfwine's wife  who came  from Cornwall  cf. the
  old tale of AElfwine  of England, where his mother came 'from the West,
  from Lionesse' (II. 313).                                                  
                                                                             
    It seems to me  certain that  what was  to follow  immediately on  the end
  of this brief narrative was the legend of King Sheave, which in one  of the
  three texts is  put into  AElfwine's mouth  (and which  follows here  in The
  Notion Club Papers,  though it  is not  there given  to AElfwine).  There is
  both a prose and a verse form of King Sheave; and  it may  well be  that the
  prose version, which I give first,  belongs very  closely with  the AElfwine
  narrative; there is no  actual link  between them,  but the  two manuscripts
  are very similar.                                                           
                                                                             
    To  the  shore  the  ship  came  and  strode   upon  the   sand,  grinding
  upon  the  broken  shingle.  In  the  twilight  as  the  sun  sank  men came
  down  to  it,  and  looked  within.  A boy  lay there,  asleep. He  was fair
  of  face   and  limb,   dark-haired,  white-skinned,   but  clad   in  gold.
  The  inner  parts  of  the  boat  were  gold-adorned,   a  vessel   of  gold
  filled  with  clear  water  was  at  his side,  [added: at  his right  was a
  harp,]  beneath  his  head  was  a  sheaf of  corn, the  stalks and  ears of
  which  gleamed  like  gold  in  the  dusk.  Men  knew  not  what it  was. In
  wonder  they  drew  the  boat  high  upon  the  beach,  and  lifted  the boy
  and  bore  him  up,  and  laid  him  sleeping  in  a  wooden house  in their
  burh. They set guards about the door.                                       
    In  the   morning  the   chamber  was   empty.  But   upon  a   high  rock
  men  saw  the  boy  standing.  The  sheaf  was  in  his  arms. As  the risen
  sun  shone  down,  he  began  to  sing  in  a   strange  tongue,   and  they
  were  filled  with  awe.  For  they  had  not  yet  heard singing,  nor seen
  such  beauty.  And  they   had  no   king  among   them,  for   their  kings
  had   perished,   and   they   were   lordless   and   unguided.   Therefore
  they  took  the  boy  to  be  king,  and they  called him  Sheaf; and  so is
  his  name  remembered  in   song.  For   his  true   name  was   hidden  and
  is  forgotten.  Yet  he  taught  men  many  new  words,  and   their  speech
  was   enriched.   Song   and   verse-craft   he   taught  them,   and  rune-
  craft,  and  tillage  and  husbandry,  and  the   making  of   many  things;
  and  in  his  time  the  dark  forests  receded  and  there was  plenty, and

 corn grew in the land; and the  carven houses  of men  were filled               
 with gold and storied  webs. The  glory of  King Sheaf  sprang far               
 and wide in the isles  of the  North. His  children were  many and               
 fair, and it is sung that of them are come the kings of men of the               
 North Danes  and the  West Danes,  the South  Angles and  the East               
 Gothfolk. And in the time of  the Sheaf-lords  there was  peace in               
 the  isles,  and  ships  went  unarmed from  land to  land bearing               
 treasure  and  rich  merchandise. And  a man  might cast  a golden               
 ring upon the  highway and  it would  remain until  he took  it up               
 again.                                                                           
   Those days songs have called the golden  years, while  the great               
 mill of Sheaf was  guarded still  in the  island sanctuary  of the               
 North;  and  from the  mill came  golden grain,  and there  was no               
 want in all the realms.                                                          
   But it came to  pass after  long years  that Sheaf  summoned his               
 friends and counsellors, and he  told them  that he  would depart.               
 For the shadow of old age was fallen  upon him  (out of  the East)               
 and  he  would  return  whence  he  came.  Then  there  was  great               
 mourning. But Sheaf laid him upon  his golden  bed, and  became as               
 one  in deep  slumber; and  his lords  obeying his  commands while               
 he yet ruled and had command of speech set him in  a ship.  He lay               
 beside  the  mast,  which  was  tall, and  the sails  were golden.               
 Treasures of gold and of gems and fine  raiment and  costly stuffs               
 were laid beside him. His golden  banner flew  above his  head. In               
 this manner he was  arrayed more  richly than  when he  came among               
 them; and they thrust him forth to sea, and the sea took  him, and               
 the ship bore him unsteered far away into  the uttermost  West out               
 of the sight or thought of men. Nor do any  know who  received him               
 in what haven at the end of his journey. Some have said  that that               
 ship found the Straight Road. But  none of  the children  of Sheaf               
 went that way, and many in the beginning lived to a great age, but               
 coming under the shadow of the East they were laid in  great tombs               
 of stone or in mounds like green hills; and most of these  were by               
 the western sea, high and broad  upon the  shoulders of  the land,               
 whence  men  can  descry  them  that  steer  their ships  amid the               
 shadows of the sea.                                                              
                                                                                 
   This is a  first draft,  written at  speed and  very roughly;  but the  form in
 alliterative verse is very finished, so far as it goes (it does not extend to the
 departure  of  Sheaf,  or  Sheave,  and  was not  added to  for its  inclusion in
 The  Notion  Club  Papers).  There  are  two  texts  of  the  verse  form:  (i) a
 clear  manuscript  in  which  the  poem  is  written  out  as  prose, and  (ii) a
 more  hasty  text  in  which  it is  written out  in verse-lines.  It is  hard to

  decide which of  the two  came first,  but the  poem is  in any  case almost
  identical  in  the  two  versions, which  were obviously  closely contempor-
  ary. I print it here in lines,  with breaks  introduced from  the paragraphs
  of the 'prose' form. Version (i) has a formal title, King Sheave; (ii) has a
  short  narrative  opening,  which could  very well  follow the  words 'There
  was a short silence' on p. 84.                                              
                                                                             
    Suddenly  AElfwine  struck  a  note   on  his   harp.  'Lo!'   he  cried,
  loud  and  clear,  and  men  stiffened to  attention. 'Lo!  ' he  cried, and
  began  to  chant  an  ancient  tale,  yet  he  was  half  aware that  he was
  telling   it   afresh,   adding  and   altering  words,   not  so   much  by
  improvisation  as  after   long  pondering   hidden  from   himself,  catch-
  ing at the shreds of dreams and visions.                                    
                                                                             
       In days of yore out of deep Ocean                                      
       to the Longobards, in the land dwelling                                
       that of old they held amid the isles of the North,                     
       a ship came sailing, shining-timbered                                  
       without oar and mast, eastward Hoating.                                
       The sun behind it sinking westward                                     
       with flame kindled the fallow water.                                   
       Wind was wakened. Over the world's margin                              
       clouds greyhelmed climbed slowly up                                    
       wings unfolding wide and looming,                                    10
       as mighty eagles moving onward                                         
       to eastern Earth omen bearing.                                         
       Men there marvelled, in the mist standing                              
       of the dark islands in the deeps of time:                              
       laughter they knew not, light nor wisdom;                              
       shadow was upon them, and sheer mountains                              
       stalked behind them stern and lifeless,                                
       evilhaunted. The East was dark.                                        
                                                                             
       The ship came shining to the shore driven                              
       and strode upon the strand, till its stem rested                     20
       on sand and shingle. The sun went down.                                
       The clouds overcame the cold heavens.                                  
       In fear and wonder to the fallow water                                 
       sadhearted men swiftly hastened                                        
       to the broken beaches the boat seeking,                                
       gleaming-timbered in the grey twilight.                                
       They looked within, and there laid sleeping                            
       a boy they saw breathing softly:                                       
       his face was fair, his form lovely,                                    

                    
                                                     
 his limbs were white, his locks raven              30
 golden-braided. Gilt and carven                      
 with wondrous work was the wood about him.           
 In golden vessel gleaming water                      
 stood beside him; strung with silver                 
 a harp of gold neath his hand rested;                
 his sleeping head was soft pillowed                  
 on a sheaf of corn shimmering palely                 
 as the fallow gold doth from far countries           
 west of Angol. Wonder filled them.                   
                                                     
 The boat they hauled and on the beach moored it    40
 high above the breakers; then with hands lifted      
 from the bosom its burden. The boy slumbered.        
 On his bed they bore him to their bleak dwellings
 darkwalled and drear in a dim region                 
 between waste and sea. There of wood builded         
 high above the houses was a hall standing            
 forlorn and empty. Long had it stood so,             
 no noise knowing, night nor morning,                 
 no light seeing. They laid him there,                
 under lock left him lonely sleeping                50
 in the hollow darkness. They held the doors.         
 Night wore away. New awakened                        
 as ever on earth early morning;                      
 day came dimly. Doors were opened.                   
 Men strode within, then amazed halted;               
 fear and wonder filled the watchmen.                 
 The house was bare, hall deserted;                   
 no form found they on the Hoor lying,                
 but by bed forsaken the bright vessel                
 dry and empty in the dust standing.                60
                                                     
 The guest was gone. Grief o'ercame them.             
 In sorrow they sought him, till the sun rising       
 over the hills of heaven to the homes of men         
 light came bearing. They looked upward               
 and high upon a hill hoar and treeless               
 the guest beheld they: gold was shining              
 in his hair, in hand the harp he bore;               
 at his feet they saw the fallow-golden               
 cornsheaf lying. Then clear his voice                
 a song began, sweet, unearthly,                    70

                     
                                                        
 words in music woven strangely,                        
 in t./, " ~r dim houses. Doors were opened                
 and gates unbarred. Gladness wakened.                   
 To the hill they thronged, and their heads lifting      
 on the guest they gazed. Greybearded men                
 bowed before him and blessed his coming               90
 their years to heal; youths and maidens,                
 wives and children welcome gave him.                    
 His song was ended. Silent standing                     
 he looked upon them. Lord they called him;              
 king they made him, crowned with golden                 
 wheaten garland, white his raiment,                    
 his harp his sceptre. In his house was fire,            
 food and wisdom; there fear came not.                   
 To manhood he grew, might and wisdom.                   
                                                        
 Sheave they called him, whom the ship brought them,   100
 a name renowned in the North countries                  
 ever since in song. For a secret hidden                 
 his true name was, in tongue unknown                    
 of far countries where the falling seas                 
 wash western shores beyond the ways of men              
 since the world worsened. The word is forgotten         
 and the name perished.                                  
                                                        
                   Their need he healed,                 
 and laws renewed long forsaken.                         

  Words he taught them wise and lovel> -                                       
  their tongue ripened in the time of Sheave                              110
  to song and music. Secrets he opened                                         
  runes revealing. Riches he gave them,                                        
  reward of labour, wealth and comfort                                         
  from the earth calling, acres ploughing,                                     
  sowing in season seed of plenty,                                             
  hoarding in garner golden harvest                                            
  for the help of men. The hoar forests                                        
  in his days drew back to the dark mountains;                                 
  the shadow receded, and shining corn,                                        
  white ears of wheat, whispered in the breezes                           120
  where waste had been. The woods trembled.                                    
                                                                              
  Halls and houses hewn of timber,                                             
  strong towers of stone steep and lofty,                                      
  golden-gabled, in his guarded city                                           
  they raised and roofed. In his royal dwelling                                
  of wood well-cari en the walls were wrought;                                 
  fair-hued figures filled with silver,                                        
  gold and scarlet, gleaming hung there,                                       
  stories boding of strange countries,                                         
  were one wise in wit the woven legends                                  130
  to thread with thought. At his throne men found                              
  counsel and comfort and care's healing,                                      
  justice in judgement. Generous-handed                                        
  his gifts he gave. Glory was uplifted.                                       
  Far sprang his fame over fallow water,                                       
  through Northern lands the renown echoed                                     
  of the shining king, Sheave the mighty.                                      
                                                                              
 At the end of (ii) occur eight lines  which seem  to have  been added  to the
 text; they were also inserted in pencil to the 'prose' text (i), here written
 in as verse-lines, with a further eight lines following (the whole passage of
 sixteen  lines  was  struck  through,  hut  it  was  used  afterwards  in The
 Notion Club Papers, in the form of an addition to the poem proper).           
                                                                              
  Seven sons he begat, sires of princes,                                       
  men great in mind, mighty-handed                                             
  and high-hearted. From his house cometh                                      
  the seeds of kings, as songs tell us,                                        
  fathers of the fathers, who before the change                                
  in the Elder Years the earth governed,                                       
  Northern kingdoms named and founded,                                         

            shields of their peoples: Sheave begat them:                          
            Sea-danes and Goths, Swedes and Northmen,                             
            Franks and Frisians, folk of the islands,                             
            Swordmen and Saxons, Swabes and English,                              
            and the Langobards who long ago                                       
            beyond Myrcwudu a mighty realm                                     150
            and wealth won them in the Welsh countries                            
            where AElfwine Eadwine's heir                                         
            in Italy was king. All that has passed.                               
                                                                                 
                                  Notes on King Sheave.                           
                                                                                 
 References in the following notes are given to the lines of the poem.            
                                                                                 
  1-3.    On   the   association   of   Sheave   with  the   Longobards  (Lombards)
          see p. 93.                                                              
  7.      The  word  fallow   ('golden,  golden-brown')   is  used   several  times
          in  this  poem  of  water,  and  once  of  gold (38);  the corn  sheaf is
          fallow-golden (68). See III. 369.                                     
  8-12.   The   'eagle-clouds'   that   precede   Sheave's   coming  in   the  poem
          do       not       appear        in       the        prose       version.
   39.    Angol:  the  ancient  home  of  the   English  before   their  migration
          across the North Sea. See I. 24, 252 (entry Eriol).                     
 142-3.   I am at a  loss to  say what  is referred  to in  these lines,  where the
          'fathers  of  the  fathers'  who  founded  kingdoms  in  the  North,  the
          descendants   of   Sheave,   'governed  the   earth  before   the  change
          in the Elder Years'.                                                    
 148.     Swordmen:  it  is  evident  that  this  is  intended  as  the  name  of a
          people,  but  it  is  not  clear  to  me  which  people.  Conceivably, my
          father  had  in  mind   the  Brondingas,   ruled  by   Breca,  Beowulf's
          opponent   in   the    swimming-match,   for    that   name    has   been
          interpreted to contain the word brond (brand) 'sword'.                  
          Swabes:   this   reading   seems   clear   (Swabians   in   The  Notion
          Club   Papers).   The   Old   English   form    was   Swaefe:    thus   in
          Widsith   is   found   Engle   and   Swaefe,  and   Mid  Englum   ic  waes
          rind  mid  Swaefum.  The  Suevi  of  Roman   historians,  a   term  used
          hroadly   to   cover   many   Germanic   tribes,   but   here   evidently
          used  as  in  Widsith  to  refer  particularly  to Swabians  dwelling in
          the North and neighbours of the Angles.                                 
 150.     Myrcwudu   (Old   English):   'Mirkwood'.   This   was    an   ancient
          Germanic   legendary   name   for    a   great    dark   boundary-forest,
          found   in   various   quite   different   applications.   The  reference
          here is to the Eastern Alps (see note to line 151).                  
 151.     Welsh:  'foreign'  (Roman).  My  father  used  the   word  here   in  the
          ancient  sense.  The  old   Germanic  word   walhoz  meant   'Celtic  or
          Roman  foreigner';   whence  in   the  plural   the  Old   English  Walas

             (modern  Wales),  the  Celts  of  Britain.  So  in  Widsith  the
             Romans  are  called  Rum-walas,  and  Caesar  ruled   over  the
             towns and riches of Wala rice, the realm of the Walas. A line in
             King Sheave  rejected in  favour of  150 - 1 reads  Wide realms
             won them beyond  the Welsh  Mountains, and  these are  the Alps.
             The ancient meaning  survives in  the word  walnut, 'nut  of the
             Roman lands'; also in Wallace, Walloon.                          
                                                                             
  152 - 3.  See pp. 54-5.                                                     
                                                                             
         The roots of King Sheave lie far back in Northern Germanic legend.
  There  are  three  primary  sources:  Beowulf,  and  the statements  of two
  later chroniclers writing  in Latin, AEthelweard (who  died about  the year
  1000), and  William of  Malmesbury (who  died in  1143).  I give  those of
  the historians first.                                                       
     In AEthelweard's  Chronicle  the  genealogy  of  the English  kings ends
  with  the  names  Beo  -  Scyld  -  Scef  (which  mean Barley,  Shield, and
  Sheaf; Old English sc = 'sh'); and of Scef he says:                         
     This Scef came in a swift boat, surrounded by arms, to an island  of the
  ocean  called  Scani,  and  he was  a very  young boy,  and unknown  to the
  people of  that country;  but he  was taken  up by  them, and  they watched
  over him attentively  as one  of their  own kin,  and afterwards  chose him
  to be their king.                                                           
     William  of  Malmesbury  (a writer  notable for  his drawing  on popular
  stories and songs) has likewise in his genealogy the three figures Beowius
  - Sceldius - Sceaf, and he tells this of Sceaf:                             
     He, as they say, was brought as a child  in a  boat without  any oarsman
  to  Scandza, a  certain island  of Germany....  He was  asleep, and  by his
  head  was  placed  a  handful  of  corn,  on  which  account he  was called
  'Sheaf'. He was regarded as a  marvel by  the people  of that  country, and
  carefully  fostered;  when  he was  grown he  ruled in  the town  which was
  then  called  Slaswic,  hut  now  Haithebi.  That  region  is   called  Old
  Anglia, whence the Angli came to Britain.                                   
     The prologue, or as my father called it the exordium, to Beowulf, 1 give
  from his prose translation of the poem.                                     
                                                                             
  Lo! the glory of the  kings of  the people  of the  Spear-Danes in  days of
  old we have  heard tell,  how those  princes deeds  of valour  wrought. Oft
  Scyld  Scefing  robbed  the  hosts  of  foemen, many  peoples of  the seats
  where  they  drank  their mead,  laid fear  upon men,  who first  was found
  in  poverty;  comfort  for  that  he  lived  to  know,  mighty  grew  under
  heaven, throve in  honour, until  all that  dwelt nigh  about over  the sea
  where  the  whale  rides  must hearken  to him  and yield  him tribute  - a
  good king was he!                                                           
     To  him  was  an  heir  afterwards  born,  a young  child in  his courts
  whom  God sent  for the  comfort of  the people:  perceiving the  dire need
  which  they  long  while  endured  aforetime  being  without  a  prince. To

  him  therefore  the  Lord  of  Life  who  rules  in  glory  granted honour
  among  men:  Beowulf  was  renowned,  far  and  wide  his  glory  sprang -
  the heir of Scyld in Scedeland. Thus  doth a  young man  bring it  to pass
  with good deed and gallant gifts, while he dwells  in his  father's bosom,
  that after in his age there cleave to him loyal knights of his  table, and
  the  people  stand  by  him  when  war  shall  come.  By  worthy  deeds in
  every folk is a man ennobled.                                             
    Then at  his allotted  hour Scyld  the valiant  passed into  the keeping
  of the Lord; and to the flowing sea his  dear comrades  bore him,  even as
  he  himself had  bidden them  while yet  their prince  he ruled  them with
  his words - beloved lord of the  land, long  was he  master. There  at the
  haven stood with ringed  prow, ice-hung,  eager to  be gone,  the prince's
  bark; they laid then their beloved king, giver of rings,  in the  bosom of
  the  ship,  in  glory by  the mast.  There were  many precious  things and
  treasures brought from regions far away; nor  have I  heard tell  that men
  ever  in  more  seemly  wise  arrayed  a  boat  with  weapons  of  war and
  harness of battle; on his lap lay treasures heaped that  now must  go with
  him far into the dominion of the sea. With lesser gifts  no whit  did they
  adorn  him, with  treasures of  that people,  than did  those that  in the
  beginning  sent  him forth  alone over  the waves,  a little  child. More-
  over, high  above his  head they  set a  golden standard  and gave  him to
  Ocean, let the sea bear him.  Sad was  their heart  and mourning  in their
  soul. None can report with  truth, nor  lords in  their halls,  nor mighty
  men beneath the sky, who received that load.                              
                                                                           
  There  is also  a reference  to a  king named  Sheaf (Sceafa)  in Widsith,
  where in a list of rulers and the peoples they ruled occurs Sceafa [weold]
  Longbeardum,  'Sheaf ruled  the Lombards';  at the  beginning of  the poem
  King Sheave it is to the Lombards that the boat  bearing the  child comes.
  This is obviously not the place to enter into  elaborate discussion  of so
  intricate a subject as that of Scyld Scefing: 'a most astonishing tangle',
  my father  called it.  His lectures  at Oxford  during these  years devote
  many  pages  to  refined  analysis  of  the  evidences,  and  of competing
  theories  concerning  them.  The   long-fought  argument   concerning  the
  meaning of 'Shield Sheafing'  in Beowulf  - does  'Sheafing' mean  'with a
  sheaf' or 'son of Sheaf', and is 'Shield' or 'Sheaf' the original ancestor
  king? - could in my father's opinion be settled with some certainty.  In a
  summarising statement of his views in another lecture (here  very slightly
  edited) he said:                                                          
    Scyld  is the  eponymous ancestor  of the  Scyldingas, the  Danish royal
  house  to  which  Hrothgar King  of the  Danes in  this poem  belongs. His
  name is simply 'Shield': and he  is a  'fiction', that  is a  name derived
  from  the  'heraldic'  family  name Scyldingas  after they  became famous.
  This process was aided by  the fact  that the  Old English  (and Germanic)
  ending  -ing,  which   could  mean   'connected  with,   associated  with,
  provided  with',  etc.,  was  also  the   usual  patronymic   ending.  The

            
                                                                           
 invention  of  this  eponymous  'Shield'  was   probably  Danish,   that  is
 actually the  work of  Danish dynastic  historians (pylas)  and alliterative
 poets (scopas) in the  lifetime of  the kings  of whom  we hear  in Beowulf,
 the certainly historical Healfdene and Hrothgar.                           
       As for Scefing, it can thus, as we see, mean  'provided with  a sheaf,
 connected in some  way with  a sheaf  of corn',  or son  of a  figure called
 Sheaf.  In  favour  of  the  latter  is  the  fact  that  there  are English
 traditions  of  a  mythical  (not  the  same  as  eponymous  and fictitious)
 ancestor  called  Sceaf,  or  Sceafa,  belonging  to  ancient  culture-myths
 of  the  North;  and of  his special  association with  Danes. In  favour of
 the former is the fact  that Scyld  comes out  of the  unknown, a  babe, and
 the name of his father, if he  had any,  could not  be known  by him  or the
 Danes  who  received  him.  But  such  poetic   matters  are   not  strictly
 logical.  Only  in  Beowulf  are  the  two  divergent  traditions  about the
 Danes  blended  in  this way,  the heraldic  and the  mythical. I  think the
 poet  meant  (Shield)  Sheafing  as  a  patronymic.  He  was   blending  the
 vague  and  fictitious  warlike  glory  of  the  eponymous  ancestor  of the
 conquering   house   with   the   more  mysterious,   far  older   and  more
 poetical  myths  of  the  mysterious arrival  of the  babe, the  corn-god or
 the culture-hero his  descendant, at  the beginning  of a  people's history,
 and  adding  to  it  a  mysterious  Arthurian   departure,  back   into  the
 unknown,  enriched  by  traditions of  ship-burials in  the not  very remote
 heathen  past  -  to  make  a  magnificent  and  suggestive   exordium,  and
 background to his tale.                                                    
 Beowulf,  son  of  Scyld  Scefing, who  appears in  the exordium  (to every
 reader's initial confusion, since he is wholly unconnected with the  hero of
 the poem) my father held to be a corruption of Beow  ('Barley') -  which is
 the name found in the genealogies (p. 92).                                 
   To my  mind it  is overwhelmingly  probable [he  wrote] that  the Beowulf
 name  properly  belongs  only  to  the  story  of the  bear-boy (that  is of
 Beowulf the Geat); and that it  is a  fairy-tale name,  in fact  a 'kenning'
 for bear: 'Bee-wolf', that  is 'honey-raider'.  Such a  name would  be very
 unlikely to  be transferred  to the  Scylding line  by the  poet, or  at any
 time  while  the  stories  and  legends  which  are the  main fabric  of the
 poem  had  any  existence  independent  of  it.  I  believe  that  Beow was
 turned  into  Beowulf  after  the poet's  time, in  the process  of scribal
 tradition,  either  deliberately  (and  unhappily),  or merely  casually and
 erroneously.                                                               
 Elsewhere he wrote:                                                        
   A complete and entirely satisfactory explanation  of the  peculiarities of
 the  exordium  has  naturally never  been given.  Here is  what seems  to me
 the most probable view.                                                    
       The exordium is poetry, not (in intent) history.  It was  composed for
 its  present  place,  and  its  main purpose  was to  glorify Scyld  and his
 family,  and  so  enhance  the  background  against  which  the  struggle of
 Grendel  and  Beowulf  takes  place.  The  choice  of  a  marvellous legend,

                    
                                                                            
 rather  than  a  mere dynastic  invention, was  therefore natural.  That our
 author  was  working  principally  on  the  blended  form:  Beow <  Scyld <
 Sceaf [found in the genealogies, see  p. 92]  is shown  by his  retention of
 the patronymic Scefing. This title has indeed little  point in  his version,
 and  certainly  would  not have  appeared, had  he really  drawn on  a story
 in which it  was Scyld  that came  in a  boat; while  certain points  in his
 account  (the  little destitute  child) belong  clearly to  the Sheaf-Barley
 legends.                                                                    
    Why then did  he make  Scyld the  child in  the boat?  - plainly  his own
 device:  it  occurs nowhere  else. Here  are some  probable reasons:  (a) He
 was  concentrating  all  the  glamour  on  Scyld  and  the   Scylding  name.
 (b)  A  departure  over sea  - a  sea-burial -  was already  associated with
 northern  chieftains  in  old  poems  and  lore,  possibly already  with the
 name  of  Scyld.  This  gains  much  in  power  and suggestiveness,  if the
 same  hero  arrives  and  departs  in  a  boat. The  great heights  to which
 Scyld  climbed  is  also  emphasized  (explicitly)  by  the   contrast  thus
 made             with            his             forlorn            arrival.
 (c)  Older  and  even  more  mysterious  traditions  may  well   still  have
 been  current  concerning  Danish  origins:  the  legend  of  Ing  who  came
 and went back over the waves [see  II. 305].  Our poet's  Scyld has  (as it
 were) replaced Ing.                                                         
    Sheaf  and Barley  were after  all in  origin only  rustic legends  of no
 great  splendour.   But  their   legend  here   catches  echoes   of  heroic
 traditions  of  the  North  going  back  into  a  remote  past,   into  what
 philologists  would  call  Primitive  Germanic  times, and  are at  the same
 time  touched  with  the  martial  glories of  the House  of the  Shield. In
 this way the poet contrives to clothe the lords of the  golden hall  of Hart
 with  a  glory  and  mystery,  more  archaic  and  simple  but  hardly  less
 magnificent  than  that  which  adorns  the  king  of  Camelot,  Arthur  son
 of  Uther.  This  is  our  poet's  way  throughout,  seen especially  in the
 exaltation  among  the  great  heroes  that  he has  achieved for  the Bear-
 boy of the old  fairy-tale, who  becomes in  his poem  Beowulf last  king of
 the Geatas.                                                                 
 I give a final quotation from my father's lectures on this subject, where in
 discussing   the   concluding   lines   of   the   exordium   he   wrote  of
 the suggestion - it is hardly more; the poet is not  explicit, and  the idea
 was  probably  not  fully  formed  in  his mind  - that  Scyld went  back to
 some   mysterious   land  whence   he  had   come.  He   came  out   of  the
 Unknown  beyond  the  Great  Sea,  and  returned   into  It:   a  miraculous
 intrusion into history, which  nonetheless left  real historical  effects: a
 new  Denmark,  and  the  heirs  of  Scyld  in  Scedeland.  Such   must  have
 been his feeling.                                                           
    In  the  last  lines  'Men  can  give  no certain  account of  the havens
 where  that  ship  was  unladed' we  catch an  echo of  the 'mood'  of pagan
 times   in  which   ship-burial  was   practised.  A   mood  in   which  the
 symbolism  (what we  should call  the ritual)  of a  departure over  the sea

                       
                                                                             
    whose  further  shore  was  unknown;  and  an  actual  belief  in  a magical
    land or otherworld located  'over the  sea', can  hardly be  distinguished -
    and for  neither of  these elements  or motives  is conscious  symbolism, or
    real  belief,  a  true  description.  It  was  a  murnende mod,  filled with
    doubt and darkness.                                                       
                                                                             
  There remains to  notice an  element in  my father's  legend of  Sheaf which
  was  not derived  from the  English traditions.  This is  found only  in the
  prose  version  (p. 86),  where in  the account  of the  great peace  in the
  Northern isles in the time of 'the Sheaf-lords' (so deep a peace that a gold
  ring lying on the highway would be left  untouched) he  wrote of  'the great
  mill of Sheaf',  which 'was  guarded still  in the  island sanctuary  of the
  North.'  In  this  he  was  drawing on  (and transforming)  the Scandinavian
  traditions concerned with Freyr, the  god of  fruitfulness, and  King Frothi
  the Dane.                                                                   
    I cite here the story told by the Icelander Snorri Sturluson  (c. 1179 -
  1241) in his work known as the Prose Edda,  which is  given to  explain the
  meaning of the 'kenning' mjol  Froda ('Frothi's  meal') for  'gold'. Accord-
  ing to  Snorri, Frothi  was the  grandson of  Skjoldr (corresponding  to Old
  English Scyld).                                                             
                                                                             
    Frothi  succeeded  to  the  kingdom  after  his  father,  in  the  time when
    Augustus  Caesar  imposed   peace  on   the  whole   world;  in   that  time
    Christ  was  born.  But because  Frothi was  the mightiest  of all  kings in
    the  Northlands  the  peace  was  named  after   him  wherever   the  Danish
    tongue  was  spoken,  and  men  call  it  the  Peace   of  Frothi.   No  man
    injured another, even though  he met  face to  face with  the slayer  of his
    father or of his brother, free or bound; and  there was  no thief  or robber
    in  those  days,  so  that  a  gold  ring  lay  long  on  Ialangrsheidi  [in
    Jutland]. King Frothi  went to  a feast  in Sweden  at the  court of  a king
    named   Fjolnir.   There   he   bought  two   bondwomen  called   Fenia  and
    Menia;  they  were  big  and  strong.  At  that time  there were  in Denmark
    two  millstones  so  huge  that  no  man  was  strong  enough to  turn them;
    and  the  nature  of  these  stones  was  such that  whatever he  who turned
    them asked for was  ground out  by the  mill. This  mill was  called Grotti.
    King  Frothi  had  the  bondwomen  led  to  the  mill,  and  he   bade  them
    grind gold; and they did so, and  at first  they ground  gold and  peace and
    happiness  for  Frothi.  Then  he  gave them  rest or  sleep no  longer than
    the cuckoo was silent or a song could  be sung.  It is  said that  they sang
    the song  which is  called the  Lay of  Grotti, and  this is  its beginning:
                                                                             
             Now are come to the king's house                                 
             The two foreknowing ones, Fenia and Menia;                       
             They are by Frothi, son of Frithleif,                            
             The mighty maidens, as bondslaves held.                          

                                 
                                                                                 
 And before  they ended  their song  they ground  out a  host against             
 Frothi, so that on that very night the  sea-king named  Mysing came,             
 and slew Frothi, and took much plunder; and then the Peace of Frothi             
 was ended.                                                                       
                                                                                 
 Elsewhere  it  is said  that while  the Danes  ascribed the  peace to  Frothi the
 Swedes   ascribed  it   to  Freyr;   and  there   are  close   parallels  between
 them.  Freyr  (which  itself  means  'the  Lord')  was  called inn  Frodi, which
 almost  certainly  means  'the  Fruitful  One'.  The legend  of the  great peace,
 which  in  my  father's  work  is ascribed  to the  time of  Sheaf and  his sons,
 goes  back  to  very  ancient   origins  in   the  worship   of  a   divinity  of
 fruitfulness  in  the  great  sanctuaries  of  the  North:  that  of   Freyr  the
 Fruitful  Lord  at  the   great  temple   of  Uppsala,   and  (according   to  an
 extremely  plausible  theory)  that  on  the  island  of   Zealand  (Sjaelland).
 Discussion  of  this  would  lead  too  far  and into  evidences too  complex for
 the purpose  of this  book, but  it may  be said  at least  that it  seems beyond
 question  that  Heorot,  hall  of  the Danish  kings in  Beowulf, stood  where is
 now the village  of Leire,  about three  miles from  the sea  on the  north coast
 of   Zealand.   At   Leire   there   are  everywhere   huge  grave   mounds;  and
 according   to   an   eleventh-century   chronicler,   Thietmar   of   Merseburg,
 there  was  held  at  Leire  in every  ninth year  (as also  at Uppsala)  a great
 gathering,  in  which  large  numbers  of  men  and  animals  were  sacrificed. A
 strong   case   can   be   made   for   supposing   that  the   famous  sanctuary
 described  by  Tacitus  in  his  Germania  (written  near  the  end of  the first
 century   A.D.)   where   the  goddess   Nerthus,  or   Mater  Terra,   was  wor-
 shipped   'on   an  island   in  the   ocean',  was   indeed  on   Zealand.  When
 Nerthus  was  present  in  her  sanctuary  it  was  a  season  of  rejoicing  and
 peace, when 'every weapon is laid aside.'*                                       
 In  my  father's  legend  of  Sheaf  these  ancient  echoes   are  used   in  new
 ways   and   with   new   bearings;  and   when  Sheaf   departed  on   his  last
 journey  his  ship  (as  some  have  said)  found  the  Straight  Road  into  the
 vanished West.                                                                   
 A  brief   but  perceptive   report  on   The  Lost   Road,  dated   17  December
 1937,  was  submitted  by   a  person   unknown  invited   by  Allen   and  Unwin
 to  read the  text. It  is to  be remembered  that the  typescript that  had been
 made  extended  only  to  the beginning  of the  fourth chapter  (p. 73  note 14)
 -  and  also, of  course, that  at this  time nothing  concerning the  history of
 Middle-earth,  of  the  Valar  and  Valinor,  had  been  published.   The  reader
 described  it  as  'immensely  interesting  as  a  revelation  of   the  personal
 enthusiasms  of  a  very  unusual  mind',  with  'passages of  beautiful descrip-
 tive  prose';  but  found  it difficult  to imagine  this novel  when completed
 receiving  any  sort  of  recognition  except   in  academic   circles.'  Stanley
                                                                                 
  (*In Norse mythology the  name of  the goddess  Nerthus survives  in that  of the
 god Njorth, father of Freyr. Njorth was especially associated with ships and the
 sea; and in very early writing of my father's Xeorth briefly appears for Ulmo (II.
 375, entry Neorth)) .                                                             

  Unwin,  writing  to  my  father  on  20  December  1937,  said  gently   that  he
  had  no  doubt  of its  being a succes  d'estime, but  while he  would 'doubtless
  want  to  publish  it'  when  complete,  he  could  not  'hold  out  any  hope of
  commercial  success  as  an  inducement  to  you  to  give  the  finishing  of it
  prior  claim  upon  your time.'  He wrote  this on  the day  after my  father had
  written to say  that he  had finished  the first  chapter of  'a new  story about
  Hobbits'(see III. 366).                                                          
    With  the  entry  at  this  time  of  the  cardinal  ideas  of the  Downfall of
  Numenor,   the   World   Made   Round,   and   the   Straight   Road,   into  the
  conception  of  'Middle-earth',  and  the  thought  of  a 'time-travel'  story in
  which   the   very  significant   figure  of   the  Anglo-Saxon   AElfwine  would
  be  both  'extended'   into  the   future,  into   the  twentieth   century,  and
  'extended'  also  into  a  many-layered   past,  my   father  was   envisaging  a
  massive  and  explicit  linking  of  his  own  legends with  those of  many other
  places  and  times:  all concerned  with the  stories and  the dreams  of peoples
  who  dwelt  by  the  coasts  of the  great Western  Sea. All  this was  set aside
  during  the  period  of  the  writing  of  The  Lord  of   the  Rings,   but  not
  abandoned:   for   in   1945,   before  indeed   The  Lord   of  the   Rings  was
  completed,  he  returned  to  these   themes  in   the  unfinished   Notion  Club
  Papers.  Such  as  he  sketched  out  for these  parts of  The Last  Road remain,
  as  it  seems  to  me,  among  the  most  interesting  and  instructive   of  his
  unfinished works.                                                                
                                                                                  
              Note on the poem 'The Nameless Land' and its later form.             
                                                                                  
  The  Nameless  Land*  is  written  in  the  form  of  the  mediaeval  poem Pearl,
  with  both rhyme  and alliteration  and partial  repetition of  the last  line of
  one stanza in the beginning of the  next. I  give it  here in  the form  in which
  it was published; for Tir-nan-Og the typescripts have Tir na nOg.                
                                                                                  
                                 THE NAMELESS LAND.                               
                                                                                  
                        There lingering lights do golden lie                       
                       On grass more green than in gardens here,                   
                     On trees more tall that touch the sky                         
                       With silver leaves a-swinging clear:                        
                     By magic dewed they may not die                               
                       Where fades nor falls the endless year,                     
                     Where ageless afternoon goes by                               
                       O'er mead and mound and silent mere.                        
                                                                                  
  (* The Nameless Land was  published in  Realities: an  Anthology of  Verse, edited
  by  G.  S.  Tancred  (Leeds, at  the Swan  Press; London,  Gay and  Hancock Ltd.;
  1927). A note on one of the typescripts states that it was written in May 1924 in
  the  house  at  Darnley  Road,  Leeds  (Carpenter,  Biography,  p. 107),  and was
  'inspired by reading Pearl for examination purposes').                            

            There draws no dusk of evening near,
              Where voices move in veiled choir,
    Or shrill in sudden singing sheer.             
      And the woods are filled with wandering fire.
                                                  
     The wandering fires the woodland fill,        
       In glades for ever green they glow,         
 In dells that immortal dews distill               
   And fragrance of all flowers that grow.         
 There melodies of music spill,                    
   And falling fountains plash and flow,           
     And a water white leaps down the hill         
      To seek the sea no sail doth know.           
   Its voices fill the valleys low,                
      Where breathing keen on bent and briar       
       The winds beyond the world's edge blow      
        And wake to flame a wandering fire.        
                                                  
 That wandering fire hath tongues of flame         
   Whose quenchless colours quiver clear           
 On leaf and land without a name                   
   No heart may hope to anchor near.               
 A dreamless dark no stars proclaim,               
   A moonless night its marches drear,             
 A water wide no feet may tame,                    
   A sea with shores encircled sheer.              
   A thousand leagues it lies from here,           
      And the foam doth flower upon the sea        
   'Neath cliffs of crystal carven clear           
      On shining beaches blowing free.             
                                                  
 There blowing free unbraided hair                 
   Is meshed with light of moon and sun,           
    And tangled with those tresses fair            
      A gold and silver sheen is spun.             
   There feet do beat and white and bare           
       Do lissom limbs in dances run,              
 Their robes the wind, their raiment air -         
       Such loveliness to look upon                
      Nor Bran nor Brendan ever won,               
            Who foam beyond the furthest sea       
         Did dare, and dipped behind the sun       
        On winds unearthly wafted free.            
                                                  
      Than Tir-nan-Og more fair and free,          
       Than Paradise more faint and far,           
         O! shore beyond the Shadowy Sea,          
   O! land forlorn where lost things are,          

         O! mountains where no man may be!                                    
                     The solemn surges on the bar                             
                  Beyond the world's edge waft to me;                         
                     I dream I see a wayward star,                            
            Than beacon towers in Gondobar                                    
                More fair, where faint upon the sky                           
            On hills imagineless and far                                      
                      The lights of longing flare and die.                    
                                                                             
  My father turned again later to The Nameless Land, and altered the          
 title first to AElfwine's Song calling upon Earendel and then to The Song of
 AElfwine (on seeing the uprising of Earendel). There are many texts, both
 manuscript and typescript, of The Song of AElfwine, forming a continuous       
 development. That development, I feel certain, did not all belong to the     
 same time, but it seems impossible to relate the different stages to         
 anything external to the poem. On the third text my father wrote             
 afterwards 'Intermediate Version', and I give this here; my guess is - but
 it is no more than a guess - that it belongs to about the time of The Last
 Road. Following it are two further texts which each change a few lines,      
 and then a final version with more substantial changes (including the loss
 of a whole stanza) and an extremely interesting prose note on AElfwine's     
 voyage. This is certainly relatively late: probably from the years after     
 The Lord of the Rings, though it might be associated with the Notion Club
 Papers of 1945 - with the fifth line of the last verse (a line that entered
 only in this last version) 'The white birds wheel; there flowers the Tree!' ]
 compare the lines in the poem Imram (see p. 82), of the Tree full of birds
 that Saint Brendan saw:                                                      
                                                                             
         The Tree then shook, and flying free                                 
            from its limbs the leaves in air                                  
         as white birds rose in wheeling flight,                              
            and the lifting boughs were bare.                                 
                                                                             
 Of  course  the  imrama  of  Brendan  and  AElfwine are  in any  case closely
 associated.  -  There  follow  the  texts  of  the  'intermediate'  and final
 versions.                                                                    
                                                                             
         THE SONG OF AELFWINE.                                                 
                                                                             
         (on seeing the uprising of Earendel)                                 
                                                                             
            There lingering lights still golden lie                           
            on grass more green than in gardens here,                         
         On trees more tall that touch the sky                                
            with swinging leaves of silver clear.                             
            While world endures they will not die,                            
            nor fade nor fall their timeless year,                            

   As morn unmeasured passes by              
   o'er mead and mound and shining mere.     
 When endless eve undimmed is near,          
   o'er harp and chant in hidden choir       
 A sudden voice upsoaring sheer              
   in the wood awakes the Wandering Fire.
                                            
   The Wandering Fire the woodland fills:
   in glades for ever green it glows,        
 In dells where immortal dew distils         
   the Flower that in secret fragrance grows.
   There murmuring the music spills,         
   as falling fountain plashing flows,       
 And water white leaps down the hills        
   to seek the Sea that no sail knows.       
 Through gleaming vales it singing goes,     
   where breathing keen on bent and briar
 The wind beyond the world's end blows       
   to living flame the Wandering Fire.       
                                            
 The Wandering Fire with tongues of flame
   with light there kindles quick and clear
 The land of long-forgotten name:            
   no man may ever anchor near;              
 No steering star his hope may aim,          
   for nether Night its marches drear,       
 And waters wide no sail may tame,           
   with shores encircled dark and sheer.     
 Uncounted leagues it lies from here,        
   and foam there flowers upon the Sea       
 By cliffs of crystal carven clear           
   on shining beaches blowing free.          
                                            
 There blowing free unbraided hair           
   is meshed with beams of Moon and Sun,     
 And twined within those tresses fair        
   a gold and silver sheen is spun,          
 As fleet and white the feet go bare,        
   and lissom limbs in dances run,           
 Shimmering in the shining air:              
   such loveliness to look upon              
 No mortal man hath ever won,                
   though foam upon the furthest sea         
 He dared, or sought behind the Sun          
   for winds unearthly flowing free.         
                                            
 O! Shore beyond the Shadowy Sea!            
  O! Land where still the Edhil are!         

        O! Haven where my heart would be!                                
            the waves that beat upon thy bar                             
        For ever echo endlessly,                                         
            when longing leads my thought afar,                          
        And rising west of West I see                                    
            beyond the world the wayward Star,                           
        Than beacons bright in Gondobar                                  
            more clear and keen, more fair and high:                     
        O! Star that shadow may not mar,                                 
            nor ever darkness doom to die!                               
                                                                        
 In  the  final  version  of  the  poem  that now  follows the  prose note
 concerning AElfwine's voyage is linked by an asterisk to  the name AElfwine
 in the title.                                                           
                                                                        
                           THE SONG OF AELFWINE.                          
                    on seeing the uprising of Earendil                   
                             Eressea! Eressea!                           
                   There elven-lights still gleaming lie                 
            On grass more green than in gardens here,                    
        On trees more tall that touch the sky                            
                      With swinging leaves of silver clear.              
                     While world endures they will not die,              
                     Nor fade nor fall their timeless year,              
        As morn unmeasured passes by                                     
            O'er mead and mount and shining mere.                        
        When endless eve undimmed is near,                               
            O'er harp and chant in hidden choir                          
        A sudden voice up-soaring sheer                                  
            In the wood awakes the wandering fire.                       
                                                                        
              With wandering fire the woodlands fill:                    
                 In glades for ever green it glows;                      
                   In a dell there dreaming niphredil                    
            As star awakened gleaming grows,                             
        And ever-murmuring musics spill,                                 
            For there the fount immortal flows:                          
            Its water white leaps down the hill,                         
              By silver stairs it singing goes                           
             To the field of the unfading rose,                          
                          Where breathing on the glowing briar           
                  The wind beyond the world's end blows                  
                   To living flame the wandering fire.                   
                                                                        
        The wandering fire with quickening flame                         
            Of living light illumines clear                              

              
                                                                           
                          That land unknown by mortal name                  
                           Beyond the shadow dark and drear                 
               And waters wild no ship may tame.                            
                 No man may ever anchor near,                               
                        To haven none his hope may aim                      
       Through starless night his way to steer.                             
               Uncounted leagues it lies from here:                         
                 In wind on beaches blowing free                            
                     Neath cliffs of carven crystal sheer                   
       The foam there flowers upon the Sea.                                 
                                                                           
                          O Shore beyond the Shadowy Sea!                   
                         O Land where still the Edhil are!                  
                          O Haven where my heart would be!                  
                         The waves still beat upon thy bar,                 
      The white birds wheel; there flowers the Tree!                        
       Again I glimpse them long afar                                       
      When rising west of West I see                                        
       Beyond the world the wayward Star,                                   
      Than beacons bright in Gondobar                                       
       More fair and keen, more clear and high.                             
                       0 Star that shadow may not mar,                      
                         Nor ever darkness doom to die.                     
                                                                           
 AElfwine  (Elf-friend)  was  a  seaman  of  England   of  old   who,  being
 driven  out  to  sea  from  the coast  of Erin  [ancient name  of Ireland],
 passed  into  the  deep  waters  of the  West, and  according to  legend by
 some strange chance or  grace found  the 'straight  road' of  the Elvenfolk
 and  came  at  last  to  the  Isle of  Eressea in  Elvenhome. Or  maybe, as
 some say, alone in the waters, hungry and  athirst, he  fell into  a trance
 and was granted a vision of  that isle  as it  once had  been, ere  a West-
 wind  arose  and drove  him back  to Middle-earth.  Of no  other man  is it
 reported that he ever  beheld Eressea  the fair.  AElfwine was  never again
 able to rest for long on land, and sailed the western seas until his death.
 Some  say  that  his  ship was  wrecked upon  the west  shores of  Erin and
 there his body lies; others say that at the end of his  life he  went forth
 alone into the deeps again and never returned.                             
 It is reported that before he set  out on  his last  voyage he  spoke these
 verses:                                                                    
                                                                           
    Fela bid on Westwegum werum uncudra                                     
    wundra and wihta, wlitescyne lond,                                      
    eardgeard Ylfa and Esa bliss.                                           
    Lyt aenig wat hwylc his longad sy                                       
    pam pe eftsides yldu getwaefed.                                          
                                                                           
 'Many  things  there  be  in   the  West-regions   unknown  to   Men,  many
 wonders  and  many  creatures:  a land  lovely to  behold, the  homeland of

                                              
                                                                            
  the  Elves  and  the  bliss  of the  Valar. Little  doth any  man understand
  what  the  yearning  may  be  of  one   whom  old   age  cutteth   off  from
  returning thither.'                                                        
                                                                            
 Here reappears the idea  seen at  the end  of the  outline for  the AElfwine
 story in The Lost Road (p. 80), that after seeing a vision of Eressea he was
 blown back again  by a  wind from  the West.  At the  time when  the outline
 was written the story that AElfwine  actually came  to Tol-eressea  and was
 there told 'the Lost Tales' was also present (p. 78), and in the same way it
 seems from the present passage  that there  were the  two stories.  The idea
 that AElfwine never in fact reached the Lonely Isle is found in a version of
 the old tale of  AElwine of  England, where  he did  not leap  overboard but
 returned east with his companions (II. 332 - 3).                           
  The  verses that  he spoke  before his  last voyage  are those  that Alboin
 Errol spoke  and translated  to his  father in  The Lost  Road (p. 44), and
 which  were  used  also  in  the  title-pages  to  the  Quenta  Silmarillion
                                                                            
 (P 203).                                                                     
  The  retention  of  the  name  Gondobar  right   through  from   The  Name-
 less Land is notable. It is found in the late version of the poem  The Happy
 Mariners,  which  my  father  afterwards  dated  '1940?' (II.  274 - 5): 'O
 happy  mariners  upon  a journey  far, /  beyond the  grey islands  and past
 Gondobar'.  Otherwise  Condobar  'City  of  Stone'  is  one  of   the  Seven
 Names of Gondolin (II. 158, 172; III. 145 - 6).                             
                                                                            
                                                                          
