   PART THREE.
            
      THE
  ETYMOLOGIES.

                                THE ETYMOLOGIES.                             
                                                                            
 The  mode  of my  father's linguistic  construction, which  as is  well known
 was  carried  on  throughout  his  life  and  in very  close relation  to the
 evolution  of  the  narratives,  shows  the  same  unceasing  movement  as do
 they: a quality fundamental to the art, in which (as I believe)  finality and
 a system  fixed at  every point  was not  its underlying  aim. But  while his
 'language'  and his  'literature' were  so closely  interwoven, to  trace the
 history of the literary  process through  many texts  (even though  the trail
 might  be  greatly obscured)  is of  its nature  enormously much  easier than
 to  trace  the  astounding  complexity  of  the phonological  and grammatical
 evolution of the Elvish languages.                                          
  Those  languages  were  conceived,  of  course,  from  the   very  beginning
 in a deeply 'historical' way: they were  embodied in  a history,  the history
 of the Elves who  spoke them,  in which  was to  be found,  as it  evolved, a
 rich terrain for linguistic separation and interaction: 'a  language requires
 a suitable habitation, and a history in  which it  can develop'  (Letters no.
 294,  p.  375).  Every  element  in  the  languages,  every element  in every
 word, is  in principle  historically 'explicable'  - as  are the  elements in
 languages  that  are  not  'invented' -  and the  successive phases  of their
 intricate evolution were the delight of their  creator. 'Invention'  was thus
 altogether distinct from 'artificiality'. In his essay  'A Secret  Vice' (The
 Monsters  and  the  Critics  and  Other  Essays,  1983,  p.  198)  my  father
 wrote of his liking for Esperanto, a liking which, he said, arose  'not least
 because it is the creation ultimately of one man, not  a philologist,  and is
 therefore  something  like  a  "human language  bereft of  the inconveniences
 due to too many successive cooks" -  which is  as good  a description  of the
 ideal artificial language (in a particular sense) as I can give.'  The Elvish
 languages  are,  in  this  sense,  very inconvenient  indeed, and  they image
 the  activities  of  countless cooks  (unconscious, of  course, of  what they
 were  doing  to  the  ingredients  they had  come by):  in other  words, they
 image language not as 'pure structure', without 'before' and 'after',  but as
 growth, in time.                                                            
  On  the  other  hand,  the linguistic  histories were  nonetheless 'images',
 invented by an inventor, who was  free to  change those  histories as  he was
 free to change the story of the world in which  they took  place; and  he did
 so abundantly. The difficulties inherent in the study of  the history  of any
 language  or  group  of  languages  are here  therefore compounded:  for this
 history is not a datum of historical fact to be  uncovered, but  an unstable,
 shifting  view  of what  the history  was. Moreover,  the alterations  in the
 history were not confined to features  of 'interior'  linguistic development:
 the  'exterior'  conception of  the languages  and their  relations underwent

  change,  even  profound  change;  and  it  is  not to  be thought  that the
  representation of the languages in letters, in tengwar, should be exempt.
    It  must  be  added  that  my  father's characteristic  method of  work -
  elaborate   beginnings  collapsing   into  scrawls;   manuscripts  overlaid
  with  layer  upon  layer  of  emendation  -  here  find their  most extreme
  expression; and also that the philological papers were left in the greatest
  disorder.  Without  external  dating,  the only  way to  determine sequence
  (apart  from  the  very  general  and  uncertain  guide  of  changing hand-
  writing) is in the internal evidence of the changing philology  itself; and
  that, of its nature, does not offer the sort of clues that lead through the
  maze of the literary  texts. The  clues it  does offer  are very  much more
  elusive.  It is  also unfortunately  true that  hasty handwriting  and ill-
  formed  letters  are  here far  more destructive;  and a  great deal  of my
  father's late philological writing is, I think, strictly unusable.         
    It will be seen then that the philological component in the  evolution of
  Middle-earth  can  scarcely  be  analysed,  and  most  certainly  cannot be
  presented, as can the literary texts. In  any case,  my father  was perhaps
  more interested in the processes of change  than he  was in  displaying the
  structure and use of the languages at any given  time -  though this  is no
  doubt due to some extent to his so  often starting  again at  the beginning
  with  the  primordial  sounds  of  the Quendian  languages, embarking  on a
  grand design that could not  be sustained  (it seems  indeed that  the very
  attempt to write  a definitive  account produced  immediate dissatisfaction
  and the desire  for new  constructions: so  the most  beautiful manuscripts
  were soon treated with disdain).                                           
    The most surprising thing, perhaps, is  that he  was so  little concerned
  to  make  comprehensive  vocabularies  of  the  Elvish  tongues.  He  never
  made again anything  like the  little packed  'dictionary' of  the original
  Gnomish language on which  I drew  in the  appendices to  The Book  of Lost
  Tales.  It may  be that  such an  undertaking was  always postponed  to the
  day,  which  would  never  come,  when  a  sufficient  finality   had  been
  achieved; in the meantime, it was  not for  him a  prime necessity.  He did
  not, after all, 'invent' new words and names arbitrarily: in  principle, he
  devised  them  from within  the historical  structure, proceeding  from the
  'bases' or primitive stems, adding suffix or  prefix or  forming compounds,
  deciding (or, as  he would  have said,  'finding out')  when the  word came
  into the language, following through the  regular changes  of form  that it
  would thus have  undergone, and  observing the  possibilities of  formal or
  semantic influence from other words in the  course of  its history.  Such a
  word  would  then  exist  for  him,  and  he  would know  it. As  the whole
  system  evolved  and  expanded,  the  possibilities   for  word   and  name
  became greater and greater.                                                
    The nearest  he ever  came to  a sustained  account of  Elvish vocabulary
  is  not  in  the  form  of nor  intended to  serve as  a dictionary  in the
  ordinary sense, but  is an  etymological dictionary  of word-relationships:
  an alphabetically-arranged list of  primary stems,  or 'bases',  with their

 derivatives  (thus  following  directly   in  form   from  the   original  'Qenya
 Lexicon'  which  I  have described  in I.  246). It  is this  work that  is given
 here.  My  father  wrote  a  good  deal  on  the theory  of sundokarme  or 'base-
 structure' (see suo and KAR in the Etymologies), but like everything else it
 was  frequently  elaborated  and  altered,  and  I  do  not  attempt  its presen-
 tation here.  My object  in giving  the Etymologies * in this  book is  rather as
 an   indication   of   the  development,   and  mode   of  development,   of  the
 vocabularies  of  the Elvish  languages at  this period  than as a first  step in
 the  elucidation  of  the  linguistic  history;  and  also  because they  form an
 instructive companion to the narrative works of this time.                       
    It  is  a  remarkable  document,  which  must  be  reckoned  among   the  most
 difficult  of  all  the  papers  containing  unique  material  which   my  father
 left.  The  inherent  difficulties  of  the text  are increased  by the  very bad
 condition  of  the  manuscript,  which  for  much  of  its  length  is  battered,
 torn, crumpled  at  the  edges,  and  discoloured  (so  that  much that  was very
 lightly  pencilled  is  now  barely  visible  and  extremely  hard  to decipher).
 In  some  sections  the  maze of  forms and  cancellations is  so dense,  and for
 the  most  part  made  so  quickly,  that  one  cannot be  sure what  my father's
 final  intention  was:  in  these  parts  he  was  working  out   potential  con-
 nections  and  derivations  on  the  spot,  by  no  means  setting  down  already
 determined   histories.  There   were  many   routes  by   which  a   name  might
 have  evolved,  and  the  whole  etymological  system  was  like  a kaleidoscope,
 for  a  decision  in  one  place  was  likely  to  set  up disturbing  ripples in
 etymological  relations  among   quite  distinct   groups  of   words.  Moreover,
 complexity was (as it were)  built in,  for the  very nature  of the  'bases' set
 words on phonetic collision courses from their origin.                           
    The  work  varies  a  great  deal,  however, between  its sections  (which are
 the  groups  of  base-stems  beginning  with  the   same  initial   letter).  The
 worst  parts,  both in  their physical  condition and  in the  disorganisation of
 their content, are  the central  letters of  the alphabet,  beginning with  E. As
 the  text  proceeds  the  amount  of  subsequent  alteration  and  addition,  and
 resultant   confusion,   diminishes,   and  when   P  and   R  are   reached  the
 etymologies,   though   rough   and   hasty,   are   more  orderly.   With  these
 groups  my  father  began  to  use  smaller  sheets  of  paper  which   are  much
 better  preserved,  and  from  S  to  the  end  the  material  does  not  present
 serious  difficulty;  while  the  concluding  section  (W)  is  written  out very
 legibly in ink (in this book the last section is  Y, but  that is  not so  in the
 original:  see  p. 346).  These relatively  clear and  orderly entries  are found
 also in the A-stems, while the B-stems  are distinct  from all  the rest  in that
 they  were  written  out  as  a  very finished  and indeed  beautiful manuscript.
 The  entries  under  D  are  in  two   forms:  very   rough  material   that  was
 partly  overwritten  more  legibly  in  ink,  and  then  a  second,  much clearer
 and more ordered version on the smaller sheets.                                  
                                                                                 
 (* On a covering page to the manuscript is written Etymologies, and also           
 Beleriandic and Noldorin names and words: Etymologies.)                          

    I have not been able to reach any  certain interpretation  of all  this, or
  find an explanation that satisfies all the conditions in detail. On the whole
  I  am inclined  to think  that the  simplest is  most likely  to be  right in
  essentials.  I  have  little  doubt  that  the  dictionary was  composed pro-
  gressively, through the letters  of the  alphabet in  succession; and  it may
  be that the very making of such a dictionary led to greater certainty  in the
  whole  etymological  system,  and  greater  clarity  and  assurance   in  its
  setting-out, as the work  proceeded -  but this  also led  to much  change in
  the earlier parts. Having reached  the end  of the  alphabet, my  father then
  turned  back  to the  beginning, with  the intention  of putting  into better
  order  the  sections  which had  been first  made and  had suffered  the most
  alteration; but this impulse petered out after the entries  under D.  If this
  were so, the original A and B  entries were  subsequently destroyed  or lost;
  whereas in the case of D both survive (and it is  noticeable that  the second
  version  of the  D-entries differs  from the  former chiefly  in arrangement,
  rather than in further etymological development).                            
    Turning  now  to  the  question  of  date,   I  give   some  characteristic
  examples of the evidence on which I think firm conclusions can be based.     
    The original entry  ELED gave  the meaning  of the  stem as  'depart', with
  a derivative Elda 'departed'. Since this was the  interpretation of  Eldar in
  the  Lhammas  $2  and  in  QS  $23  as those  works were  originally written,
  and first appears in them,  the original  entries under  E clearly  belong to
  that  time.  This  interpretation  was replaced  in both  the Lhammas  and QS
  by  carefully  made  emendations  changing  the  meaning to  'Star-folk', and
  introducing  the  term  Avari,   with  the   meaning  'Departing'.   Now  the
  meaning  'Star-folk'  appears  in  a  second entry  ELED replacing  the first
  (and  to  all  appearance  made  not  long  after); while  the stem  AB, ABAR
  bore, as first written, the meaning  'depart', and  the derivative  Avari was
  defined as 'Elves  who left  Middle-earth'. Thus  the original  A-entries and
  some at least of the alterations under E belong to the phase of  the earliest
  alterations to QS.                                                           
    In  QS  the  meaning  of  Avari was  then changed  to 'the  Unwilling' (see
  p.  219),  and  at  the  same  time  the  root-meaning  of  AB,  ABAR  in the
  Etymologies was changed to 'refuse,  deny' and  the interpretation  of Avari
  to  'Elves  who  never  left Middle-earth  or began  the march.'  This change
  can  be  dated  from  the  note  of  20 November  1937 (given  on p.  zoo) in
  which my father said that  Avari was  to replace  Lembi as  the name  of the
  Elves who remained  in the  East, while  Lembi were  to be  'Ilkorin Teleri',
  i.e.  the  Eldar  who  remained  in Beleriand  (see QS  $$29-30 and  p. 219).
  These  changes  were incorporated  in the  typescript of  QS, which  seems to
  have  been  in  being  by  the  beginning  of  February  1938 (p. 200). (The
  additional  entry  LEB,  LEM  shows  this development,  since Lembi  is there
  translated as 'Elves remaining behind = Telerin Ilkorins'.)                  
    In  the  note dated 3 February  1938 (p. 200) my  father said  that while
  Tintalle  'Kindler'  could  stand  as  a  name  of Varda,  Tinwerontar 'Queen
  of  Stars'  must  be changed  to Elentari,  because 'tinwe'  in Qenya  only =

 spark  (tinta-  to  kindle).'  In  the  entry  TIN  the names  Tinwetar and
 Tinwerontar  of  Varda were  struck from  the original  material, and  in the
 margin was written:  Tintanie, Tintalle  Kindler =  Varda; Q  tinta- to
 kindle,  make to  spark'. Original  T-entries can  therefore be  dated before
 February 1938.                                                               
   Under  the  stem  MEN  appears  the  form  harmen  'south',  which  was not
 subsequently  changed,  and  again  under  the  (additional) entry  KHAR, but
 in  this  case  the  base-stem  was  afterwards changed  to KHYAR  and harmen
 to  hyarmen.  The insertion  of y  in this  word was  one of  the alterations
 required in the note of 20 November 1937.                                    
   Putting  these  and  a   number  of   other  similar   evidences  together,
 it  seems  to  me  clear  that  despite  their  very  various  appearance the
 Etymologies  were  not  spread  over  a  long  period, but  were contemporary
 with  QS; and  that some  of the  additions and  corrections can  be securely
 dated  to  the  end  of  1937  and  the beginning  of 1938,  the time  of the
 abandonment  of  QS  and  the  beginning  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings.  How
 much  longer my  father kept  the work  in being  with further  additions and
 improvements  is  another  question,  but here  also I  think that  an answer
 can be given sufficient for the purpose. This lies  in the  observations that
 there are relatively few names that belong specifically to The Lord of the
 Rings; that all of them are quite clearly additions to existing entries or
 introduce additional base-stems; that almost all were put in very hastily,
 mere memoranda, and not really accommodated to or explained in
 relation to the base-stems; and that the great majority come from the
 earlier part of The Lord of the Rings - before the breaking of the fellow-
 ship. Thus we find, for example, Baranduin (BARAN); the imperative
 daro! 'stop!' (DAR; this was the sentry's command to the Company of the
 Ring on the borders of Lothlorien); Hollin added under EREK; the
 scrawled addition of a base ETER with the imperative edro! 'open!' (the
 word shouted by Gandalf before the doors of Moria); Celebrimbor
 (KWAR); Caradras (RAS; replacing in the original draft of the chapter The
 Ring Goes South the name Taragaer, itself found in the Etymologies
 under the added base TARAK); Celebrant (RAT); Imladris (RIS). The
 words caras (KAR) and naith (SNAS), both of them additions, probably
 argue the existence of Caras Galadon and the Naith of Lothlorien, and
 the added rhandir 'pilgrim' under RAN, taken with the added mith 'grey'
 under MITH, shows Mithrandir. Clear cases of names from later in The
 Lord of the Rings do occur (so Palantir under PAL and TIR, Dolbaran
 under BARAN), but they are very few.
   I conclude therefore that while my father did for two or three years
 more make rather desultory entries in the Etymologies as new names
 emerged in The lard of the Rings, he gave up even this as the new work
 proceeded; and that the Etymologies as given here illustrate the develop-
 ment of the Quenya and Noldorin (later > Sindarin) lexicons at the
 decisive period reached in this book, and provide in fact a remarkable
 point of vantage.

   The   Etymologies,  then,   reflect  the   linguistic  situation   in  Beleriand
 envisaged   in   the   lhammas   (see   especially   the   third    version,  Lam-
 masethen,  p.  194),  with  Noldorin  fully  preserved  as  the  language  of  the
 Exiles,  though   profoundly  changed   from  its   Valinorian  form   and  having
 complex  interrelations  in  respect  of   names  with   'Beleriandic'  (Ilkorin),
 especially   the   speech  of   Doriath.  Afterwards   my  father   developed  the
 conception   of   a   kind   of   amalgamation  between   Noldorin  and   the  in-
 digenous   speech   of   Beleriand,   though   ultimately   there    emerged   the
 situation  described  in  The  Silmarillion  (p.   129):  the   Noldor  abandoned
 their  own  tongue  and  adopted  that  of  the  Elves  of  Beleriand  (Sindarin).
 So   far-reaching   was   this  reformation   that  the   pre-existent  linguistic
 structures  themselves  were  moved  into  new  historical  relations   and  given
 new  names;  but  there  is   no  need   here  to   enter  that   rather  baffling
 territory.                                                                        
                                                                                  
   The  presentation  of  such  a  text  as  this  can obviously  not be  exact: in
 the  most  chaotic  parts  a  degree  of  personal  interpretation  of   what  was
 meant  is  altogether  inevitable.  There  is  in  any  case   a  great   deal  of
 inconsistency  in  detail  between  the  different  parts  of the  manuscript- for
 example,  in  the  use   of  marks   expressing  length   of  vowel,   which  vary
 unceasingly   between   acute   accent,  macron   (long  mark),   and  circumflex.
 I have  only 'standardized'  the entries  to a  very limited  extent, and  only in
 so far as I have felt confident that I ran little risk  of confusing  the original
 intention.  In  particular,  I  have  done  nothing to  bring divergent  forms, as
 between  one  part  of  the  Etymologies  and  another,  into accord,  seeing that
 the  evolution  of  'bases'  and  derivative  words  is an  essential part  of the
 history;  and  indeed  in  the  most  complex  parts  of  the  manuscript (initial
 letters  E,  G,  K)  I  have attempted  to distinguish  the different  'layers' of
 accretion  and  alteration,  though  elsewhere  I  have  been  very  selective  in
 pointing  out  additions  to  the  original  list.   I  have   'standardized'  the
 entries to  the extent  of giving  the 'bases'  always in  capitals, and  of using
 the  acute  accent  to signify  long vowels  in all  'recorded' forms  (as opposed
 to  'hypothetical'  antecedent  forms),  with  the  circumflex  for   long  vowels
 in stressed final syllables in  Exilic Noldorin  and Ilkorin,  as is  largely done
 in the original. I use y  for j  of the  original throughout  (e.g. KUY,  DYEL for
 KUJ,  DJEL),  since  this  is  less misleading  and was  my father's  own practice
 elsewhere  (found  in  fact  here  and  there  in  the  Etymologies);   the  stems
 with  initial  J,  becoming  Y,  are  moved  forward  from  their  original  place
 before K to the end  of the  list. I  print the  back nasal  (as in  English king)
 with  a  Spanish  tilde  (n),  again  following  my  father's  frequent  practice,
 though  in  the  Etymologies he used special  forms of the  letter n. His
 grammatical abbreviations are retained, as follows:                               
                                                                                  
      adj.      adjective.                     g.sg.       genitive singular.      
      adv.      adverb.                        inf.        infinitive.             
      cpd.      compound.                      intr.       intransitive.           
      f.        feminine.                      m.          masculine.              

                                                                     
                                                                             
   pa.t. past tense.                  q.v. quod vide, 'which see'.            
   pl. plural.                        sg. singular.                           
   p.p. past participle.          tr. transitive.                         
   prep. preposition.                                                         
 The sign + means 'poetic or archaic'. The abbreviations used for the         
 different languages are as follows (there is no explanatory list of them     
 accompanying the manuscript):                                                
   Dan. Danian.                                                               
   Dor. Doriathrin.                                                           
   Eld. Eldarin.                                                              
   EN. Exilic Noldorin (also referred to as 'Exilic', but most often           
                simply as N)                                                  
   Ilk. Ilkorin.                                                 
                                                                             
   L. Lindarin.                                                     
   N. Noldorin.
   ON. Old Noldorin (i.e. the Korolambe' or Kornoldorin, see the  
       Lhammas $5).
   Oss. Ossiriandeb (the name in the Lhammas, where however
        the form Ossiriandic is also found).
   PQ.  Primitive Quendian.
   T.   Telerin.
  An asterisk prefixed to a form means that it is 'hypothetical', deduced to
 have existed from later, recorded forms.
   My own contributions are always enclosed within square brackets. A
 question mark standing within such brackets indicates doubt as to the
 correctness of my reading, but in other cases is original. Where I have
 found words totally illegible or can do no better than a guess (a very small
 proportion of the whole, in fact) I have usually omitted them silently,
                                                                             
 and so also with scattered jottings where no meaning is attached  to forms,
 or  where no  clear connections  are given.  I have  kept my  own notes  to a
 minimum,  and  in  particular  have  very  largely  eschewed  the  temptation
 to discuss  the etymologies  in relation  to earlier  and later  Elvish forms
 published  elsewhere. On  the other  hand, while  my father  inserted many
 internal  references  to  other  stems,  I  have substantially  increased the
 number (those  due to  me being  enclosed within  square brackets),  since it
 is  often  difficult  to find  an element  when it  had been  greatly changed
 from its ultimate 'base'. The Index to the book is further designed to
 assist in the tracing of name-elements that appear in the Etymologies.
                                                                             
                                       A.                                      
                                                                             
  AB-,  ABAR-  refuse,  deny, * abaro  refuser,  one  who  does not  go forth:
  Q  Avar  (or Avaro),  pl.  Avari  =  Elves  who  never left  Middle-earth or
  began the march; N Afor, pl. Efuir, Efyr (ON aboro). Cf. AWA.               
  [This entry as first  written gave  the root-meaning  as 'go  away, depart',

   translated * abaro as 'departer,  one  who  goes  forth', and  defined Avri
   as  'Elves  who  left  Middle-earth'  (see  p. 344).  An   additional  entry
   seems   to   allow  for   both  developments   from  the  root-meaning: 'AB-
   retreat, move back, refuse'.]                                               
   AD-  entrance,  gate, * adno:  Q  ando  gate;  N  annon,  pl.   ennyn  great
   gate, Q andon (pl. andondi).                                                
   AIWE-. (small)  bird.  Q  aiwe,  N  aew.  Cf.  Aiwenor 'Birdland'  = lower
   air.  [For  Awenor(e)  see  the  Ambarkanta and  diagrams, IV.  236 etc.]
   AK-. narrow,  confined. * akra:  Q  arka narrow;  N agr,  agor. Cf.  N Ag-
   lond, Aglon  defile, pass  between high  walls, also  as proper  name; cf.
   lond, lonn path [LOD]. Q aksa narrow path, ravine.                          
 AKLA-R-. See  KAL.  Q  alka  ray  of  light;   alkar  or   alkare  radiance,
   brilliance; alkarinqa radiant, glorious. N aglar glory,  aglareb glorious.
 ALAK-. rushing. * alako rush,  rushing flight,  wild wind:  N alag              
 rushing, impetuous; alagos storm of wind. Cf. Anc-alagon dragon-              
 name [NAK]. Related to LAK(2).              
 (* alk-wa swan: Q alqa; T alpa; ON alpha; N  alf; Ilk.  alch; Dan.              
 ealc. Cf. Alqalonde Swan-road or Swan-haven, city of  the Teleri              
 [LOD].)                                                                       
 ALAM-. elm-tree.  Q  alalme,  also  lalme;  N  lalf  (lelf)  or  lalven, pl.
   lelvin;  Ilk.  lalm,  pl.  lelmin;  Dan.  alm.  The  stem is  perhaps LALAM,
   q.v.,  but  some  hold  it related  to ALA  since the  elm was  held blessed
   and  beloved  by the  Eldar. [The  end of  this entry,  from 'but  some hold
   it',  was  an addition.  Probably at  the same  time a  stem AL-  was added,
   with  derivatives alma  'good fortune',  alya 'rich',  etc.; but  this entry
   was  struck  out.  The  same   derivative  words   are  found   under GALA.]
 ALAT- large, great in size. Q alta (...J alat- as in Alataire = Belegoer
 [AY].                                                                         
 AM(1)- mother. Q anil or amme mother-, Ilk. aman, pl. emuin. (N               
   uses a different word, naneth, hypocoristic [pet-name form] nana            
 [NAN]).                                                                       
 AM(2)- up:   usually  in   form  amba-.   Q  prefix   am-  up;   amba  adv.
   up(wards);   amban   upward    slope,   hill-side;    ambapenda,   ampenda
   uphill  (adj.);  see  PEN.  N  am  up; am-bend,  amben uphill;  amon hill,
   pl.  emuin,   emyn;  am-run   uprising,  sunrise,   Orient  =   Q  ambaron
   (g.sg. ambaronen) or Ambarone.                                              
 ANA(1)- Cf.  NA(1).  to,  towards. * anta-  to  present,  give: Q  anta- give;
   anna  gift;  ante  (f.),  anto  (m.)  giver.  Cf. Yav-anna  [YAB]; Aryante
  [AR(1)]. N anno to give; ant gift. [Added:] Q anta face.                      
 ANA(2)- Cf. NA(2). be, exist. [Added:] anwa real, actual, true.                   
 ANAD-,   ANDA-. * anda   long:   Q   anda;   N    and,   ann.    Cf.   names
   Andram   long-wall   [RAMBA],   Andfang,   Anfang   Longbeard,    one   of
   the tribes of Dwarves (pl. Enfeng) [SPANAG].                                
 ANAK-. Cf. NAK bite. Q anca jaw; N anc; cf. Ancalagon [ALAK].                  
 ANAR-. sun; derivative of NAR(1).* anar-: Q Anar sun; EN Anor.                     
 ANGA-. iron.  Q anga;  N ang.  Q angaina  of iron;  N angren,  pl. engrin.

 ANGWA- or ANGU-. snake. Q ango, pl. angwi; N am- in amlug
  dragon: see LOK.
 AP-. apsa cooked food, meat. N aes; Ilk. ass.
 AR(1)-. day. * ari: Q are, pl. ari; N ar- only in names of week-days, as
  Arvanwe [see LEP]. Cf. name Aryante Day-bringer [ANA'], N Eriant.
  Q arin morning, arinya morning, early; arie daytime; ara dawn;
  Arien the Sun-maiden. N aur day, morning; arad daytime, a day (= Q
  arya twelve hours, day).
 AR(2)-. Q ara outside, beside; also prefix ar- as in Arvalin (= outside
 Valinor). In Q this is purely local in sense. So also in Ilkorin, cf. Argad
 place 'outside the fence', or Argador (in Falathrin dialect Ariad,
  Ariador) lands outside Doriath (in Ilkorin Eglador), especially
  applied to West Beleriand, where there was a considerable dwelling of
  Dark-elves. In N ar- developed a privative sense (as English without),
  probably by blending with * al, which is only preserved in Alchoron =
  Q Ilkorin [LA]. Thus arnediad without reckoning, = numberless
  [NOT]. In this sense Q uses ava-, as avanote (see AWA). Hence Q ar
  and.
  AS-AT-. Q asto dust; N ast.
  ATA-. father. PQ * atu, * atar: Q atar, pl. atari; hypocoristic atto. N
  adar, pl. edeir, eder; ada. Cf. Iluv-atar. Ilk. adar, pl. edrin; adda.
  AT(AT)- again, back. Q ata again, ata-, at- back, again, re-; N ad. Cf.
  TAT, ATTA = two; Q atta two, N tad. N prefix ath- on both sides,
  across, is probably related; athrad ford, crossing (see RAT). Ilk. adu,
  ado double; cf. Adurant, a river in Ossiriand which for a distance has
  divided streams. [Ilk. adu, ado 'double' and the explanation of
  Adurant was an addition; this shows the conception of the island of
  Tol-galen (see the commentary on QS $ 114). Other additions made
  at different times to this entry were Q atwa double, and N eden new,
  begun again.]
  AWA- away, forth; out. Q ava outside; Avakuma [KUM] Exterior
  Void beyond the World; au-, ava- privative prefixes = N ar (see
  AR(2)), as avanote without number, numberless [NOT]. [Added:]
  Avalona, cf. lona [LONO].
  AY- * ai-lin- pool, lake: Q ailin (g.sg. ailinen); N oel, pl. oelin; cf.
  Oelinuial Pools of Twilight [LIN(1); YU, KAL].
  AYAR-, AIR- sea, only used of the inner seas of Middle-earth. Q
  ear (earen) and aire (airen); N oear, oer. Cf. Earrame, a Q name =
  Wings of the Sea, name of Tuor's ship. Belegoer 'great sea', name of
  Western Ocean between Beleriand and Valinor, Q Alataire (see
  ALAT).
  AYAK- sharp, pointed. Q aika sharp, aikale a peak; N oeg sharp,
  pointed, piercing, oegas (= Q aikasse) mountain peak. Cf. N Oeges
  engrin Peaks of Iron, oeglir range of mountain peaks. ?Related is Q
  aiqa steep, cf. Ilk. taig deep (blended with tara, see TA).

 AYAN- See YAN. * ayan- holy: Q Ainu, f. Aini, holy one, angelic spirit;
 aina holy; Ainulindale Music of the Ainur, Song of Creation,               
                                                                          
                                     B.                                    
                                                                          
 [On the distinctive manuscript of the B-entries see p. 343.  The following
 entries  were  added in  pencil: BAD,  BARAN, BARAT,  BARATH, BEN,  and at
 the  same  time certain  changes were  made to  existing entries.  In this
 section I give the original  entries as  they were  written, and  note the
 alterations.]                                                             
                                                                          
 BAD- * bad-  judge.  Cf.  MBAD.  Not  in  Q.  N  baud   (bad-)  judgement;
 badhor, hadron judge. [Pencilled addition.]                               
 BAL- * bala:  Q  Vala  Power,  God  (pl.  Valar  or   Vali  =   PQ * bal-i
 formed  direct  from  stem,  cf. Valinor);  there is  no special  f. form,
 where  necessary  the  cpd.Valatari  'Vala-queen' is  used, f.  of Valatar
 (g.sg.  Valataren)  'Vala-king',  applied  only to  the nine  chief Valar:
 Manwe,   Ulmo,   Aule,   Mandos,   Lorien,   Tulkas,   Osse,   Orome,  and
 Melko.   The   Valatari   were  Varda,   Yavanna,  Nienna,   Vana,  Vaire,
 Este,  Nessa,  Uinen.  T  Bala.  ON  Bala,  and Balano  m., Balane  f.; EN
 Balan m. and f., pl. Belein, Belen. In Ilk. torin 'kings' was used, or the
 cpd. Balthor, Balthorin (* bal'tar-).                                      
   Q  valya  having  (divine)  authority  or power;  valaina of  or belong-
 ing to the Valar, divine;  valasse divinity.  Q Valinor, for * balf-ndore,
 reformed after the simplex  nore 'land',  also in  form Valinore,  land of
 the  Gods   in  the   West;  ON   Balandor (* bala-ndore),   EN  Balannor.
 Cf.  also  ON  Balthil  one of  the names  of the  White Tree  of Valinor,
 usually  named  in Q  Silpion; EN  Belthil, but  this was  usually applied
 to the image of the divine tree made  in Gondolin,  the tree  itself being
 called  Galathilion.  Related  is  probably  the name  Balar of  the large
 island  at  Sirion's  mouth,  where  the Ilkorins  long dwelt  who refused
 to  go  West  with  Ulmo;  from  this  is   named  Beleriand   which  they
 colonized  from  the  island  in  the  dark ages.  Balar is  probably from
 * balare,  and  so  called because  here Osse  visited the  waiting Teleri.
 [The  explanation of  Balar, Beleriand  given here  is not  necessarily at
 variance with the story told in QS  $35 that  the Isle  of Balar  was 'the
 eastern  horn  of  the  Lonely  Isle,  that  broke  asunder  and  remained
 behind,  when Ulmo  removed that  land again  into the  West'; but  it can
 scarcely be brought into accord with the story (QS  $36) that  'the Teleri
 dwelt long  by the  shores of  the western  sea, awaiting  Ulmo's return',
 and that Osse! nstructed the waiting Teleri 'sitting upon  a rock  nigh to
 the margin of  the sea.'  Moreover, the  'colonization' of  Beleriand from
 Balar seems to take no account of Thingol, and those  of his  people 'that
 went  not  because  they  tarried  searching  for  Thingol in  the woods'.
 'and  these  multiplied  and  were  yet  scattered  far  and  wide between

 Eredlindon  and  the  sea'  (Lhammas  $6).  More  must  be  meant  than
 simply  that  Elves  from  Balar  removed  to  the  mainland,  for this
 'colonization'  from  Balar is  here made  the very  basis of  the name
 Beleriand.]                                                            
 BAN- * bana:  Q Vana  name of  the Vala,  wife of  Orome, and  sister of
 Varda  and  Yavanna;  ON  and  T Bana;  in  ON also  called Bana-wende,
 whence  EN  Banwend,  Banwen  (see  WEN). * banya:  Q   vanya  beauti-
 ful; EN bein. Cf. Q vanima fair;  Vanimo, pl.  Vanimor 'the beautiful',
 children  of the  Valar; Uvanimo  monster (creature  of Melko);  EN uan
 (* ubano) monster; uanui monstrous, hideous.                            
 BAR-  Original significance  probably 'raise';  cf. BARAD,  MBAR. Hence
 uplift,  save,  rescue(?). * barna:  Q  varna  safe,  protected, secure;
 [struck out: varne  protection;] varnasse  security. * barya-:  Q varya-
 to protect; EN  berio to  protect. [The  removal of  varne 'protection'
 was  due  to  the  emergence  of  BARAN 'brown'  with the  derivative Q
 varne 'brown'.]                                                        
 BARAD-   [Added:   is   blended  with   BARATH,  g-V.] * barada  lofty,
 sublime:  [added:  ON  barada,  EN  baradh, steep;]  Q Varda,  chief of
 the  Valatari,  spouse  of Manwe;  T Barada  [> Baradis].  [Struck out:
 ON  Bradil,  EN Bredil (* b'radil-).] * b'randa  lofty, noble,  fine: T
 branda;   ON   branda,   EN   brand,   brann   (whence   brannon  lord,
 brennil lady); cf. name Brandir (brand-dir: see DER).                  
 BARAN-  Q  varne  (varni-)  brown,  swart,   dark  brown.   ON  barane,
 EN  baran.  Cf.  river  name   Baranduin,  Branduin.   Dolbaran.  [Pen-
 cilled  addition.  On  Dolbaran  (probably  a  further   addition)  see
                                                                       
 p. 345.]                                                                
 BARAS-  Stem  only  found  in  Noldorin:  * barasa  hot,   burning:  ON
 barasa,  baraha;  EN  bara  fiery,  also  eager; frequent  in masculine
 names  as  Baragund, Barahir  [KHER], etc. * b'ras-se heat:  ON brasse,
 white heat, EN brass: whence brassen white-hot.                        
 BARAT- N barad tower, fortress. [Pencilled addition.]                  
 BARATH-  Probably  related  to  BAR  and   BARAD. * Barathi   spouse  of
 Manwe,  Queen  of  Stars:  ON  Barathi(l);  EN Berethil  and El-bereth.
 Q  Varda,  T  Baradis  show  influence   of  barada   lofty.  [Pencilled
 addition. The application of the name Elbereth to  Varda seems  to have
 arisen in the hymn of the Elves to the Goddess  in the  original second
 chapter (Three is Company) of The Lord of the Rings, written  early in
 1938 (where  in  rough  workings  for  the  song  the name  appears as
 Elberil). Concomitant  with this  the Ilkorin  names Elbereth  (of dif-
 ferent  meaning)  and Elboron  were removed  from the  original entries
 BER  and  BOR.  These  were  the names  of Dior's  sons in  AB r  and 2
 (annal  206/306),  replaced  in  AB  2  (note 42)  by Eldun  and Elrun
 (which were added also to Q $14); Elrun appears in the Etymologies in
 an addition to stem RO.]                                               
 BAT-  tread. * bata:  ON bata  beaten track,  pathway; EN  bad. * batta-
 (with  medial  consonant  lengthened  in  frequentative  formation): ON

 battho- trample, EN batho. ON tre-batie traverse, EN trevedi (pa.t.      
 trevant) [see TER]. Cf. Q vanta- to walk, vanta a walk.                   
                                                                         
 BEL- strong. Cf. BAL(?). Stem not found in Q. T belle (physical)         
 strength, belda strong. Ilk. bel (* bele) strength, Beleg the Strong,     
 name of Ilkorin bowman of Doriath. * belek, * beleka, ON beleka             
 mighty, huge, great; EN beleg great (n.b. this word is distinct in form
 from though related to Ilk. name Beleg); cf. EN Beleg-ol [GAWA] =        
 Q Aule; Belegoer Great Sea [Av], name of sea between Middle-earth      
 and the West; Belegost Great City [os], name of one of the chief         
 places of the Dwarves. T belka 'excessive' is possibly from ON; ON       
 belda strong, belle strength (EN belt strong in body, bellas bodily      
 strength) are possibly from T. Cf. name Belthronding of Beleg's yew-     
 bow: see STAR, DING.                                                     
 BEN- corner (from inside), angle. N bennas angle [NAS]. [Pencilled       
 addition.]                                                               
 BER- valiant. * berya-: Q verya- to dare; verya bold; verie boldness.     
 ON berina bold, brave; bertha- to be bold; EN beren bold, bertho         
 dare; cf. proper name Beren. Ilk. ber valiant man, warrior (*bero);      
 bereth valor; [struck out: cf. Ilk, name El-bereth.] Danian beorn man;
 this is probably blended with * besno: see BES. [On the removal of El-
 bereth see BARATH.]                                                      
 BEREK- * bereka: Q verka wild; EN bregol violent, sudden, cf.             
 proper name Bregolas fierceness; breged violence, suddenness; breitho
 (*b'rekta-) break out suddenly. Cf. Dagor Vregedur [UR] Battle of        
 Sudden Fire (EN bregedur wild-fire). [See MEREK.]                       
 BERETH- T bredele beech-tree; Ilk. breth (*b'retha) beech-mast,          
 but the beech was called galbreth [CALAD] in Falasse, and neldor in      
 Doriath (see NEL). The beech-tree was probably originally called         
 *pheren, Q feren or ferne (pl. ferni), ON pheren; but in EN fer pl.      
 ferin was usually replaced by the Ilk. breth mast, whence EN brethil     
 beech-tree; cf. Brethiliand, -ian 'Forest of Brethil' [see PHER).        
 BES- wed. *besno husband: Q verno; ON benno, EN benn man,                
 replacing in ordinary use the old word dir (see DER); hervenn, herven
 husband (see KHER). Ilk. benn husband; Danian beorn man, blended         
 with *ber(n)o: see BER.                                                  
    *besse wife: Q vesse; ON besse, EN bess woman, replacing old          
 words di, dis (see NI(1), NDIS); herves wife (see KHER). In the f. the shift
 of sense in ON was assisted probably by blending with *dess young        
 woman, ON dissa.                                                         
    *besu dual, husband and wife, married pair: Q veru. Cf. Q             
 Arveruen third day (of the Valinorian week of 5 days) dedicated to       
 Aule and Yavanna [LEP].                                                  
    *besta: Q vesta matrimony; vesta- to wed; vestale wedding.            
 BEW- follow, serve. *beuro follower, vassal: ON biuro, bioro, EN           
 bior, beor; cf. proper name Beor. *beuya- follow, serve: ON buiobe       

                                     
                                                                               
  to  serve,  follow,  EN buio  serve, hold  allegiance to.  T bum  vassal, bua-
  serve. [On the name Beor see the commentary on QS $ 128.]                    
  BIRIT-  Stem  only  found  in  Ilkorin. *b'ritte:  Ilk. brith  broken stones,
  gravel.   Cf.   river   name   Brithon    (whence   is    named   Brithombar)
  'pebbly'. Late Exilic brith gravel is from Ilkorin.                           
 BOR-  endure.  Q  voro  ever,  continually;  prefix  vor,  voro-  as  in voro-
  gandele  'harping  on  one  tune',  continual  repetition;  vorima continual,
  repeated.   "boron-:   ON   boron   (pl.   boroni)  steadfast,   trusty  man,
  faithful vassal; EN bor and  pl. byr  for older  berein, beren;  Ilk. boron,
  pl.  burnin.  Cf.  N  names  given  to the  'Faithful Men':  Bor, Borthandos,
  Borlas,  Boromir.  Borthandos  =  Borth  (see  below)  [but  this  element is
  not  further  mentioned]  +  handos  (see  KHAN).  Borlas   =  Bor   +  glass
  joy  (see  GALAS). Boromir  is an  old N  name of  ancient origin  also borne
  by   Gnomes:   ON   Boronmiro,   Boromiro:   see   MIR.   [Struck   out:  Cf.
  also  Ilk.  boron  in  Dor.  name  El-boron.'  On the  removal of  El-boron see
  BARATH.]                                                                     
  BORON- extension of the above (originally a verbal form of the stem
 seen in *boron- above). Q voronwa enduring, long-lasting; eoronwie
 endurance, lasting quality; cf. name Voronwe = ON Bronwega, EN
 Bronwe [WEG]. ON bronie last, endure, survive; EN bronio endure,
 brono last, survive; bronadui enduring, lasting. *b'rona: ON bruna
 that has long endured, old (only used of things, and implies that they
 are old, but not changed or worn out); EN brun old, that has long
 endured, or been established, or in use.
 Brodda -. Name of a man in Hithlum. He was not one of the Elf-friend
 races, and his name is therefore probably not EN or Ilkorin.
 BUD- jut out. Cf. MBUD.
                                                                               
                                        D.                                      
                                                                               
 [A  very  rough  pencilled  list  was  for  most of  its length  overwritten in
 ink,  and nearly  all these  entries appear  in a  second, pencilled  list, the
 differences  between  the  two  being  largely  a  matter  of  arrangement; see
                                                                             
 p. 343.]                                                                       
                                                                             
 DAB- give way, make room, permit, allow. Q lav- yield, allow, grant.
   N daf permission.
 DAL- flat (variant or alteration of LAD). Q lara 'flat' may derive from
 *dala or *lada. EN dalw flat; dalath flat surface, plane, plain [see
 TIR], ON dalma (probably = dal + ma hand) palm of hand; EN dalf.
 Ilk. dol flat, lowlying vale.
 DAN- Element found in names of the Green-elves, who called them-
 selves Danas (Q Nanar, N Danath), Cf. Dan, Denethor and other
 names. See NDAN?
 DAR- stay, wait, stop, remain. N deri, imperative daro! stop, halt;
 dartha wait, stay, last, endure.

 DARAK- *<d'rak: Q raka wolf; EN draug; Dor. drog.                         
 DARAM-  beat,  hew.  EN  dramb,  dram(m)  a  heavy  stroke,  a  blow  (e.g,
   of  axe);  dravo  to  hew  (pa.t.  drammen,  +  dramp);  drafn  hewn log;
   drambor  clenched  fist,  hence  blow  with  fist  (see  KWAR); gondrafn,
   gondram  hewn  stone.  [Cf. the  name of  Tuor's axe  in the  Lost Tales:
   Drambor, Dramborleg; see II. 337.]                                      
 DAT-,   DANT-  fall   down.  EN   dad  down,   cf.  dadben   downhill  (see
   PEN); dath (*datta) hole, pit, Q latta. Q lanta a fall, lanta- to fall; N
   dant- to fall, dannen fallen. Cf. Atalante  'the Fallen',  and lasselanta
   'leaf-fall', Autumn [see TALAT].                                         
 DAY-  shadow.  Q  leo  (*daio)  shade,  shadow  cast  by any  object, laime
   shade;  laira  shady.  EN  dae  shadow;  cf. Daedelos  = Shadow  of Fear,
   Dor.,  Ilk.  dair  shadow  of  trees;  cf.  names  Dairon  and Nan-dairon.
 DEM-  sad,  gloomy.  Ilk.  dimb  sad  (cf.  Dimbar);  dim  gloom, sadness
   (*dimbe); dem sad, gloomy (*dimba).                                     
 DEN-  hole; gap,  passage. N  din opening,  gap, pass  in mountains,  as in
   Din-Caradras,  Din-Duhir,  etc.  [On  the  first list  DEN was  given the
   meaning  'hillside,  slope',  whence  Q  nende  slope,  nenda  sloping; N
   dend,  denn,  sloping,  daddenn  downhill,  amdenn  uphill.   This  entry
   was  struck  through  and  the   material  transformed   and  transferred
   to  PEN  (whence  dadbenn,  ambenn).  Cf.  AM;  the  A-entries  belong to
   the  second  phase,  later  than  the  first form  of the  D-entries (see
                                                                           
   PP 343-4).]                                                              
   DER- Adult male, man (elf,  mortal, or  of other  speaking race).  Q ner,
   pl. neri, with  n partly  due to  NI, NIS  woman, partly  to strengthened
   stem  ndere  bridegroom,  ON  daer  [see   NDER].  ON   dir,  EN   +  dir
   surviving  chiefly  in  proper  names  (as  Diriel older  Dirghel [GYEL],
   Haldir,  Brandir)  and  as  agental  ending  (as  ceredir  doer,  maker).
   Owing to influence of dir (and of  strengthened ndisi  bride) N  goes the
   opposite  way  to  Q  and has  di woman  (see NDIS).  In ordinary  use EN
   has benn (properly = husband) [see BES].                                 
 DIL- stop up, fill up hole, etc.  EN dil  stopper, stopping,  stuffing, cf.
   gasdil stopgap [GAS]; dilio to stop up. [The rather unlikely  word gasdil
   is mentioned because it was the name of a  sign used  to indicate  that g
   had disappeared; see p. 298, note on Gorgoroth.]                         
 DING-   Onomatopoeic,   var.  of   TING,  TANG,   q.v.  Ilk.   ding,  dang,
   sound; cf. name Bel-thron(d)-ding [BEL, STAR].                            
 DO3,  DO-  Q  lo  night,  a  night;  lome  Night,  night-time,   shades  of
   night.  ON   dogme,  dougme,   doume;  EN   daw  night-time,   gloom;  du
   (associated with  NDU) nightfall,  late evening  - in  EN night,  dead of
   night  is  fuin;  Du(w)ath  night-shade;  dur  dark,  sombre; cf.  Q lona
   dark.  Ilk.  daum  =  N  daw.  Cf.  N  durion  a  Dark-elf =  duredel. Q
   lomelinde  nightingale;  N  dulind,  dulin(n). Cf.  Del-du-thling [DYEL.,
   SLIG.]                                                                   
   DOMO- Possibly related to the preceding (and certainly in some           
   derivatives blended with it); faint, dim. *domi- twilight in Q fell      

 together with do3me from DO3 in lome night. Ilk. dum twilight; Q          
 tindome starry twilight = Ilk. tindum = N tinnu (see TIN).                 
 DORON- oak. Q norno; N doron (pl. deren); Dor., Ilk. dorn. Cf. Q
  lindornea adj. having many oak-trees [LI].
 DRING- Noldorin stem = beat, strike. EN dringo to beat. Cf. sword-
  name Glamdring. [In The Hobbit, Glamdring is rendered 'Foe-
  hammer', called by the Orcs 'Beater'.]
 DUB- lie, lie heavy, loom, hang over oppressively (of clouds). Q
  lumna lying heavy, burdensome, oppressive, ominous; lumna- to lie
  heavy. N dofn gloomy.
 DUI- Ilk. duin water, river; cf. Fsgalduin.C f.d uil r iver i nD uilmen.
 DUL- hide, conceal. N doelio, delio, and doltha conceal, pa.t. $ daul,
  p.p. dolen hidden, secret. Cf. Gondolind, -inn, -in 'heart of
  hidden rock' [see in]. Related is *ndulna secret: Q nulla, nulda-,
  N doll (dolt) obscure. Cf. name Terendul. [See NDUL, and for
  Terendul see TER.]
 DUN- dark (of colour). Dor. dunn black; Dan. dunna; N donn swart,
  swarthy. Cf. Doriath place-name (Nan) Dungorthin = N Nan Don-
  goroth, or Nann Orothvor Vale of Black Horror [see NGOROTH].
 DYEL- feel fear and disgust; abhor. EN delos, deloth (probably < del
   + gos, goth) abhorrence, detestation, loathing, cf. Dor-deloth Loathly
       Land; deleb horrible, abominable, loathsome; delw hateful, deadly,
            fell; cf. Daedhelos Shadow of Abomination, Deldu(w)ath Deadly
           Nightshade, a name of Taur-na-Fuin, Delduthling, N name of Un-
         goliante [DAY, DO3]. Q yelma loathing, yelwa loathsome, yelta- to
                                                                  loathe.
                                                                          
                                     E.                                     
                                                                          
 [The  entries under  E are  particularly confused  and difficult.  A small
 number of original and clear entries  were mostly  struck through  and the
 pages covered with faint pencilled notes often hard to interpret.]        
                                                                          
 EK-,  EKTE-  spear.  Q  ehte   spear,  ehtar   spearman.  N   aith  spear-
 point,  eg  thorn,  cf.  Egthelion,  Ecthelion  [STELEG].  [This  original
 entry  was  retained,  with change  of EKTE  to EKTI,  Q ehtar  to ehtyar,
 and the following additions:) [N] ech spear, Q ekko. Cf. Eg-nor.          
 EL- star. Q poetical el star (elen). Dor. el; N  only in  names, as Elwing.
 [This  original  entry  received many  changes:] EL-  star, starry  sky. Q
 poetical elen (ellen or elena) star. Dor el; N only  in names,  as Elwing,
 Elbereth. Cf. Fled-Starfolk, that is E1ves. Elrond = starry-dome, sky
 [ROD].   [Added  in   margin:]  Q   Elerina  star-crowned   =  Taniquetil;
 Elentari  Star  Queen  =  Varda;  N  Elbereth  =  Varda. [On  Elbereth see
 note to BARATH; on Elerina and Elentari see p. 200.]                      

                                      
                                                                                
        ELED- go, depart,  leave. Q  Elda 'departed'  Elf; N  eledh. Q  lesta- to
        leave, pa.t. lende. [This original entry was  replaced by  the following,
        written as carefully and clearly  as the  first:] ELED-  'Star-folk', Elf
        Q   Elda   (Eldamar  or   Elende  =   Elvenhome,  Eldalie,   Eldarin);  N
        Eledh,  pl.  Elidh,  cf.  Eledhrim,  Eledhwen  [Elf-fair   >]  Elf-maid,
        Elennor  (Eledandore  >  Eledndor).  Dor.  Eld,  pl.  Eldin.  Dan. Elda.
        [The  Dor.  and  Dan.  forms  were  subsequently  struck through  and the
        following  added:]  In  Dor.  and  Dan.  transposed  > edel-  whence Dor.
        Egla,  Eglath  (cf.  Eglamar,  Eglorest);  Dan.  Edel. Eglador  = Doriath
        in  Doriathrin;  Ariador  =  lands  outside of  Eglador. Cf.  Eglor (Elf-
        river), Ilkorin name  of a  river in  W. Beleriand.  [On the  earlier and
        later  entries  ELED  see  p. 344.  Further  faint  pencillings  show my
        father doubtful of the derivation of  Eldar from  a base  meaning 'star',
        and  suggesting  that,  although  the  name  was  so interpreted,  it wag
        probably  in  fact altered  from edela  eldest -  edel, edil  being found
        also  in  Noldorin.  A  base  EDE-,  EDEL-  'precede,  come  forward'  is
        proposed, with derivative edela (= eleda) 'firstborn', but this is struck
        out.]                                                                    
        EN- element or prefix =  over there,  yonder. Q  en there,  look! yonder.
        Adj.   enta   that   yonder.   Entar,   Entarda   (Enta  +   harda [3AR])
        Thither Lands, Middle-earth, Outer Lands, East.                          
  ENED-  centre.  Q   endya,  enya   middle;  ende   middle,  centre.   N  enedh.
        [To  this  original  entry  was   added:]  Endamar   Middle-earth.  Endor
        centre of the world. [See NED.]                                         
  ENEK- six. Q enqe; N eneg.                                                     
  ERE-  be  alone,  deprived.  Q  er  one,  alone;  erya  single,   sole;  eresse
        solitude; eressea lonely. N ereb isolated (* ereqa); eriol  alone, single.
        Cf.  Tol-eressea,  Amon  Ereb.  Q  erume desert,  cf. Eruman  desert N.E.
        of Valinor; N eru waste, desert.                                         
  ERED-  * erede   seed:   Q   erde  seed,   germ;  N   eredh;  Ilk   erdh.  [See
        RED.]                                                                    
  EREK-  thorn.  Q  erka  prickle,  spine;  erka-  to  prick;  erkasse  holly.  N
        ercho to prick; erch a prickle; ereg (and eregdos [TUS]) holly-tree, pl.
        erig.  Cf.  Taur-nan-Erig  or  Eregion  =  Dor.  Forest  of  Region: Dor.
        regorn  holly-tree  (pl.  regin,  g.pl.  region)  [see  OR-NI].  [Further
        addition:] Regornion = Hollin.                                           
  ES- indicate, name. Q esta to name, esse a name.                               
  ESE-, ESET- precede.  Q esta  first; esse  beginning; essea  [? primary];
        Estanesse the  Firstborn. [Neither  of these  two entries  were rejected,
        though  they  are  certainly  mutually  exclusive,  but  the  second  was
        marked with a query.]                                                    
  ESEK-  Ilk.  esg  sedge,   esgar  reed-bed.   Cf.  Esgaroth   Reedlake,  because
        of reed-banks in west.                                                   
  ET-  forth,  out.  Q  prefix  et-,  N  ed-.  Cf.  ehtele  under  KEL.  [To this
        original entry was  added:] etsiri:  Q etsir  mouth of  a river,  N ethir
        [SIR]. ette outside; ettele outer lands; ettelen [?foreign].             

   ETER- Cf. et out. open (come out, of flowers, sun, etc.). edro! open!
   EY- everlasting. Q aira eternal, aire eternity-, ia (*eya) ever. Cf.
   lolosse ever-snow, N Uiloss (*Eigolosse). N uir eternity, uireb eternal.
   [This original entry was struck out, the material reappearing under
   GEY. Iolosse was probably the form underlying the early emendation
   to Oiolosse in QS $ 13. Oiolosse arose with the further transformation of
   this base to OY, q.v.]
   EZDE- 'rest', name of the wife of Lorien. Q Este; ON Ezde, Eide,
   Ide; N Idh. See SED.
   EZGE- rustle, noise of leaves. Q eske; Ilk. esg; cf. Esgalduin. [This,
   which may be one of the original entries, was struck out. Cf. Esek, and
   for Esgalduin see SKAL(1).]
                                                                                
                                         G.                                      
                                                                                
   [The  entries  under  G  present  much  the  same  appearance  as  those under
   E: an initial layer of a few clear entries in ink, and a  mass of  changes and
   additions put in very roughly afterwards.]                                    
                                                                                
    GAL- shine; variant of KAL.
    GALA- thrive (prosper, be in health - be glad). Q 'al in the following
     forms which are not confused with ala- 'not': alya prosperous, rich,
     abundant, blessed; alma good fortune, weal, wealth; almie, almare
     blessedness, 'blessings', good fortune, bliss; almarea blessed. Cf.
     name Almariel. N galw; cf. names Galadhor, Galdor (later Gallor) -
     though these may contain GALAD. N galas growth, plant; galo- to
     grow. Possibly related are GALAD, GALAS. [Almariel is the name of a
     girl in Numenor in The Lost Road, p. 59.]
    GALAD- tree. Q alda; N galadh. Cf. Galadloriel (Galagloriel),
     Galathilvion. [Galadloriel and Galathilion (not as here Galathilvion)
     appear in very early emendations to QS $16. The form Galagloriel is
     found in an early draft for the chapter A Knife in the Dark in The
     Fellowship of the Ring. - This, one of the original entries, was not
     struck out or altered (apart from Galathilvion > Galathilion), but a
     new entry for the stem was made:] GALAD- tree. Q alda; N galadh.
     Cf. names Galadhor, Galdor, etc. Q Aldaron name of Orome.
     Aldalemnar, see LEP. Dor. gald, cf. galbreth beech [BERETH].
    GALAS- joy, be glad. N glas joy; cf. names as Borlas. Q alasse joy,
     merriment.
    GAP- N gamp hook, claw; Q ampa hook.
    GAR- hold, possess. N gar-. [An original entry, struck out; see
    3AR. ]                                                                       
    GAS- yawn, gape. *gassa: N gas hole, gap; gasdil stopgap [DIL]; Q          
    assa hole, perforation, opening, mouth. [Cf. Ilmen-assa, the Chasm           
    of Ilmen,  IV. 240.  - This  original entry  was retained,  but the          

 following addition made:] *gasa: ON gasa = Q kuma; EN gaw,                
 Belego the Void.                                                           
 GAT- Q atsa catch, hook, claw; N gad-, gedi catch.                        
 GAT(H)-  N  gath   (*gatta)  cavern;   Doriath  'Land   of  the   Cave'  is
 Noldorin  name  for  Dor.  Eglador  =  Land  of  the  Elves.  The  Ilkorins
 called  [?themselves]  Eglath  =  Eldar.  Rest  of  Beleriand   was  called
 Ariador  'land  outside'.  N  gadr,  gador  prison, dungeon;  gathrod cave.
 Another  name  is   Garthurian  =   Fenced  Realm   =  N   Ardholen  (which
 was  also  applied to  Gondolin). [Added  to this  later:] Dor.  gad fence;
 argad  'outside  the  fence',  the  exterior,  the  outside.  Cf.  Argador,
 Falathrin Ariador. [See AR(2), CLED, 3AR, LED.]                               
 GAWA-   or   GOWO-   think   out,   devise,   contrive.   Q   auta  invent,
 originate, devise; aule invention,  also as  proper name  of the  god Aule,
 also  called  Martan:  N  Gaul  usually  called Belegol  (= great  Aule) or
 Barthan: see TAN, MBAR. N gaud device, contrivance, machine.               
 GAY- Q aira red, copper-coloured, ruddy; N gaer, goer.                     
 GAYAS-  fear. * gais-:  Q   aista  to   dread;  ON   gaia  dread;   N  gae.
 *gaisra: ON gaesra, gerrha; N gaer dreadful.                                
 GENG-WA-   Q engwa   sickly.   N   gemb,   gem;   cf.   ingem  'year-sick'
 [YEN],  suffering  from  old  age  (new  word  coined  after  meeting  with
 Men).  N  iaur  ancient  [YA],  ifant  'year-full'  [YEN,  KWAT]   did  not
 connote weakness.  [Engwar 'the  Sickly' is  found in  the list  of Elvish
 names for Men in QS $83.]                                                  
 GEY- everlasting. Q ia ever  (* geia); iale  everlasting; ira  eternal; ire
 eternal  [?read  'eternity'];  Iolosse  Everlasting  Snow  (*Geigolosse)  =
 Taniquetil.  N  Guilos, Amon  Uilos (guir  eternity, guireb  eternity [read
 'eternal']).  N  Guir   is  confounded   with  Gui   =  Q   Vaiya  (*waya)
 [WAY].  [This  note,  replacing  the  rejected  entry EY,  was in  its turn
 struck out and replaced by OY.]                                            
 GIL- (cf. GAL., KAL.; SIL., THIL.; GUL., KUL.) shine (white or pale). *gilya:
 N  gil  star (pl.  giliath). [This  original entry  was retained,  with the
 addition  to gil:  'pl. geil,  collective pl.  giliath', and  the following
 also  added:]  gael  pale,  glimmering;  gilgalad   starlight;  Gilbrennil,
 Gilthoniel  =  Varda.  Q  Ilma  starlight  (cf.  Ilmare),  N   [?Gilwen]  or
 Gilith; Ilmen region  above air  where stars  are. [On  Ilma and  Ilmen see
 the commentary on QS $4.)                                                  
 GIR- quiver, shudder. N giri shudder; girith shuddering, horror.           
 GLAM-   N   form   of   LAM,   also  influenced   by  NGAL(AM).   N  glamb,
 glamm  shouting,  confused  noise;  Glamhoth  =  'the barbaric  host', Orcs
 [KHOTH].   glambr,  glamor   echo;  glamren   echoing;  cf.   Eredlemrin  =
 Dor. Lominorthin. glavro to babble, glavrol babbling.                       
 GLAW(-R)-  Q  laure  gold  (properly  the  light of  the Tree  Laurelin); N
 glaur  gold.  The  element  glaur  reduced  in  polysyllables to  glor, lor
 appears  in  many  names,  as  Glorfindel, Glaurfindel,  Galadloriel. [This
 original   entry   was   struck   out   and   replaced   by:]   GLAWAR-   N
 alteration of LAWAR, g.V.                                                  

                        
                                                                             
  GLIN- sing. Q lin-; N glin-. Q linde song, air, tune; N glinn. Cf.
   Laurelin. [Original entry, struck out. See LIN(2).]
  GLINDI- pale blue. N glind, glinn; Q ilin. [Original entry, struck out.
   Cf. the original meaning of Eredlindon, Blue Mountains, commentary
   on QS $108, and see LIN(2).]
  GLING- hang. Q linga; N gling. Cf. Glingal. [Original entry, struck
   out and replaced by:] GLING- N alteration of LING 'hang', q.v.
  GLIR- N form of LIR(1) sing. N glir song, poem, lay; glin to sing, recite
   poem; glar long lay, narrative poem. Q laire poem, lirin I sing.
  GOLOB- *golba branch: Q olwa; N golf. Cf. Gurtholf [> Gurutholf]
   [NGUR]. [For the form Gurtholf (earlier Gurtholfin) see p. 406.]
  GOLOS- Q olosse snow, fallen snow; N gloss snow. Cf. Uilos. N gloss
   also adj. snow-white. [An original entry, this was retained with
   alteration of Q olosse to + olos, + olosse and the note: 'poetical only:
   confused with losse flower, see LOS which is perhaps originally con-
   nected.' The stem in question in fact appears as LOT(H).]
  GOND- stone. Q ondo stone (as a material); N gonn a great stone, or
   rock. [This original entry was retained, but the base was changed to
   GONOD-, GONDO-, and the following added:] Cf. Condolin (see DUL);
   Gondobar (old Gondambar), Gonnobar = Stone of the World =
   Gondolin. Another name of Gondolin Gondost [os], whence Gon-
   dothrim, Gondothrimbar. [Cf. Gondothlim, Condothlimbar in the Lost
   Tales (II. 342).]
  GOR- violence, impetus, haste. Q orme haste, violence., wrath; orna
   hasty. N gormh, gorf impetus, vigour; gorn impetuous. [Apart from
   the removal of the form gormh this original entry was retained, with
   these additions:] Cf. Celegorn [KYELEK]; and cf. Huor, Tuor: Khogore
   [KHO-N], Tugore [TUG].
  GOS-, GOTH- dread. Q osse terror, as name Osse. Cf. Mandos (see
   MBAD). N has Oeros for Osse (*Goss). Cf. Taur-os [TAWAR]. N
   gost dread, terror; gosta- fear exceedingly; cf. Gothrog = Dread
   Demon [RUK]; Gothmog [MBAW]. Gostir 'dread glance', dragon-
   name [THE].
  GU- Prefix gu- no, not, as in Q u- not (with evil connotation);
   Uvanimor [BAN].
  GUL- glow, shine gold or red (cf. GIL); also yul- smoulder [YUL]. N
   goll red (*gulda). [This original entry was struck out. See KUL.]
  GWEN- (distinguish WEN(ED)). Q wenya green, yellow-green, fresh;
   wen greenness, youth, freshness (blended with wende maid). N bein
   fair, blended with BAN. Ilk. gwen greenness; gwene green; cf. Duilwen
   [DUI].                                                                  
   GYEL-  [< GEL-]  Qyello  [<  ello]  call,  shout  of  triumph. N  gell joy,
   triumph;   gellui  triumphant;   gellam   jubilation.  Cf.   Diriel  [DER].
   Gelion  merry  singer,  surname  of  Tinfang.  [Tinfang  Gelion   occurs  in
   the Lay of Leithian: III. 174, 181  - 2.]  Gelion shorter  name of  a great
   river  in  E.  Beleriand;  a  Gnome  interpretation  (this  would  have been

 *Dilion in Ilkorin); cf.  Ilk. gelion  = bright,  root GAL.  [This rather
 perplexing note seems certain in its reading.]                          
 GYER. * gyerna  old,  worn,  decrepit  (of  things):  Q yerna  old, worn,
 yerya to wear (out), get old. N gern worn, old (of things).              
                                                                        
                                     3.                                   
                                                                        
 [The few entries under the  initial back  spirant 3  were struck  out and
 replaced more legibly.]                                                 
                                                                        
 3AN-  male.  Q  hanu  a  male  (of Men  or Elves),  male animal;  ON anu,
 N anw; Dor. ganu. (The feminine is INI.)                               
 3AR-  Stems  3AR  have,  hold,  and  related   GAR,  GARAT,   GARAD  were
 much  blended  in  Eldarin.  From  3AR  Come:  Q  harya-  possess;  hanna
 treasure,  a treasured  thing; harwe  treasure, treasury;  haryon (heir),
 prince;  haran  (pl.  harni)  king,  chieftain  (see  TA).  N  ardh  realm
 (but  Q  arda  <  GAR);  aran king  (pl. erain).  Dor. garth  realm, Gar-
 thurian   (Fenced   Realm  =   Doriath),  garon   lord,  may   come  from
 3AR or GAR.                                                             
    From  GAR:  Q  arda  realm  -  often  in  names  as   Elenarda  'Star-
 kingdom',  upper  sky;  armar  pl.  goods;  aryon  heir; arwa  adj. (with
 genitive) in control of, possessing, etc., and  as semi-suffix  -arwa, as
 aldarwa, having trees,  tree-grown. N  garo- (gerin)  I hold,  have; garn
 'own', property.                                                        
    GARAT-   Q   arta   fort,   fortress.   N  garth:   cf.  Garth(th)oren
 'Fenced  Fort'  =  Gondolin  -  distinguish  Ardh-thoren   =  Garthurian.
 [This note is the final form of two earlier versions, in which  the Qenya
 words are all derived from 3AR. In one of these versions it is  said that
 N  Arthurien  is  a Noldorinized  form of  Garthurian, Arthoren  a trans-
 lation;  in  the  other  that  N  Arthurien  is  'a half-translation  = N
 Arthoren'; see THUR.]                                                   
 3ARAM-  Dor.  garm  wolf;  N  araf.  [Struck  out.  Another  version gave
 also Q harma, Dan. garma.]                                              
 3EL-  sky.  Q  helle,  ON  elle,  sky.  In Noldorin  and Telerin  this is
 confused  with  EL  star.  Other  derivatives:  Q  helwa,  ON  elwa (pale)
 blue,  N  elw;  cf.  name  of Elwe King  of the  Teleri [WEG];  and names
 as  Elulind,  Elwing,  Elrond.  Q  helyanwe  'sky-bridge',  rainbow,  ON
 elyadme,  N  eilian(w)  [YAT].  Dor.  gell  sky,  gelu sky-blue.  [A later
 note directs that Elwe be transferred  to EL  star. Elrond,  Elwing are
 also given under EL.]                                                   
 30- from, away, from  among, out  of. This  element is  found in  the old
 partitive in Q -on (3o + plural  m). Q  ho from;  Ilk. go;  N o  from. In
 Ilk. go was used for patronymics, as go-Thingol.                        

                                     I.                                     
                                                                           
 [The single page of entries  under I  consists only  of very  rough notes.]
                                                                           
 I- that (deictic particle) in Q is indeclinable article 'the'. N  i- 'the',
 plural                     in                     or                    i-.
 intensive  prefix  where  i  is  base  vowel.  ITHIL-  Moon   (THIL,  SIL):
 Q  Isil;  N  Ithil;  Dor. Istil.  INDIS- =  ndis bride;  Indis name  of the
 goddess  Nessa  (see  NDIS, NI).  [Ithil occurs  in The  Lost Road  (p. 41)
 as  the  'Beleriandic'  name  of the  Moon -  i.e. the  name in  a language
 (Noldorin) perceived by Alboin Errol to be spoken in Beleriand.]           
 ID- *idi: heart, desire,  wish. Q  ire desire;  irima lovely,  desirable. Q
 indo  heart,  mood;  cf.  Indlour,  Inglor  (Indo-klar  or  Indo-glaure). N
 inn,   ind  inner   thought,  meaning,   heart;  idhren   pondering,  wise,
 thoughtful;   idher   (*idre)   thoughtfulness.   Cf.    Idhril;   Turin(n)
 [TUR],  Hurin(n)  [KHOR].  [The Q  word irima  occurs in  the song  in The
 Lost Road (p.  72): Toi  irimar; Irima  ye Numenor;  cf. also  Irimor 'Fair
 Ones',  name  of  the  Lindar  in  the  Genealogies,  p.  403.  -  For  the
 original etymology of Idril, Idhril see II. 343. ]                        
 IL- all. Q ilya all, the whole. ILU- universe: Q ilu, iluve:  cf. Iluvatar,
 Ilurambar  Walls  of  the  World.  Ilumire  =  Silmaril.  ilqa  everything.
   ING-  first,  foremost.  inga  first.  Element  in  Elfin  and especially
   Lindarin  names.  Cf.  Ingwe  prince of  Elves. QL  [i.e. Qenya-Lindarin]
   form is always  used (Ingwe):  not ngw  > mb  [i.e. in  Noldorin] because
   the  L  form  persisted and  also the  composition was  felt ing  + wege
   [WEG].  Cf. Ingil.  [Elfin at  this date  is a  strange reversion  to old
   usage.]                                                                  
   INI-  female.  See  NI:  Qenya  ni  female,  woman.  Q hanwa  male, inya
   female; hanuvoite, inimeite. N inw after anw [see 3AN].                 
 INK-, INIK-?  Q intya-  guess, suppose;  intya guess,  supposition, idea;
   intyale imagination. N inc guess, idea, notion.                          
 IS-  Q  ista-  know  (pa.t.  sinte);  ista  knowledge; istima  having know-
   ledge,  wise,  learned,  Istimor  =   Gnomes  [cf.   p.  403].   Q  istya
   knowledge;  istyar  scholar, learned  man. N  ist lore,  knowledge; istui
   learned; isto to have knowledge. Cf. Isfin (= Istfin) [PHIN].            
                                                                           
                                     K.                                     
                                                                           
 [The  numerous  entries  under  K  are  perhaps the  most difficult  in the
 work. A first layer of etymologies written carefully and clearly in ink was
 overlaid  by  a  mass  of  rapid  notes in  pencil that  are now  in places
 almost invisible.]                                                         
                                                                           
 KAB- hollow. Q kambe hollow (of hand); N camb, cam hand, cf.              
  Camlost 'Emptyhand' [LUS] (= Dor. Mablost). Erchamui 'One-

 handed'.  [An  earlier  version  of  this  entry  gives  also  Cambant 'full
 hand'; see KWAT.]                                                          
 KAL-   shine   (general  word).   Variant  forms   AKLA-,  KALAR-,  AKLAR-.
 Q  kala  light;  kalma  a  light,  lamp;  kalya  illuminate;  kalina  light
 (adj.). In  N the  variant GAL  appears: gail  (*galya) bright  light, glaw
 radiance (*g'la, cf. Q kala < *k'la). But in longer forms KAL. also in N,
 as aglar, aglareb, see AKLA-R.  Also celeir  brilliant (*kalarya);  Q kallo
 noble  man,  hero  (*kalro),   N  callon   (*kalrondo)  hero;   N  poetical
 claur splendour, glory- often in names  in form  -glor. gol  light ("gala-)
 in Thingol. [Parts of this original entry were  rejected: the  etymology of
 Thingol  (see  THIN),  and  the  idea that  GAL was  a Noldorin  variant of
 KAL.  It  is  not  clear  at  this  stage  how  these  bases  were related.
 The  entry  was  covered  with  a  maze  of   new  forms,   often  rejected
 as  soon  as  written.  The  following  can  be  discerned:] N  calad light
 (cf.   Gilgalad);   calen   bright-coloured  =   green.  Q   kalta-  shine;
 Kalakilya;    Kalaqendi,    N    Kalamor;    Kalamando    =    Manwe   [see
 MBAD].  Ankale  'radiant  one',  Sun.  yukale,   yuale  twilight,   N  uial
 [YU].                                                                      
 KALPA-  water-vessel.  Q  kalpa;  N  calf.  Q  kalpa-  draw   water,  scoop
 out, bale out. [Added entry.]                                              
 KAN-  dare.  Q  kane  valour;  N  caun,  -gon   (cf.  Turgon,   Fingon).  Q
 kanya   bold.   N   cann   (*kanda).  Eldakan   (name)  =  AElfnop.  [Added
 entry.]                                                                    
 KANAT- four. Q kanta-, kan-; N canad. [Added entry.]                       
 KAP- leap. [Added:] N cabr, cabor frog.                                    
 KAR-  make,  do.  Q  kar  (kard-)  deed;  N  card,  carth  deed,  feat. Cf.
 KYAR  cause.  Q  karo  doer,  actor,  agent;  ohtakaro warrior.  [This stem
 was  very  roughly  rewritten  thus:]  KAR-   make,  build,   construct.  Q
 kar  (kard-)  building,  house;  N  car  house, also  card. Q  karin, karne,
 I  make,  build.  Cf.  KYAR-  cause,  do.  Q  tyaro  doer,   actor,  agent;
 ohtatyaro warrior. N caras a city (built above ground).                     
 KARAK-  sharp  fang,  spike,  tooth.  Q  karakse  jagged  hedge  of spikes;
 cf.  Helkarakse,  N  elcharaes  [KHEL].  [This  entry  was  retained,  with
 KARAK > KARAK and  elcharaes  >  helcharaes,  and  the   following  faintly
 visible  additions  made:] Q  karka tooth,  karkane row  of teeth.  N carag
 spike, tooth of rock; carch tooth, fang (Carcharoth).                      
 KARAN-   red.  Q   karne  (*karani)   red;  N   caran. * k'ranna:   N  crann
 ruddy  (of  face),  cf.  Cranthir  [THE],  [.as  noun]  like   Old  English
 rudu, face, blush, the cheeks. [Added entry.]                              
 KARKA-  crow.  Q   karko;  N   carach.  [This   stem  was   changed  thus:]
 KORKA- crow. Q korko; N corch.                                             
 KAS-  head.  Q  kar  (has-);  N  caw  top.  [Added:] * kas-sa, * kas-ma:  Q
 cassa helmet.                                                              
 KAT-  shape.  Q  kanta  shaped,  and  as  quasi-suffix,  as  in  lassekanta
 leaf-shaped;  kanta-  to  shape;  N  cant.   [The  meaning   'outline'  was
 attributed  to  cant,  and  the  following   added:] * katwa:   ON  katwe

 shaped,  formed,  N   cadw,  -gadu.  * katwara  shapely:   N  cadwor,
 cadwar.  N echedi,  pa.t. echant  (*et-kat) fashion.  [Cf. Im  Narvi hain
 echant above the Doors of Moria.]                                       
 KAY-  lie  down.  Q  kaima  bed.  N caew lair, resting-place;  cael (Q
 kaila) lying in bed, sickness; caeleb bedridden,  sick: cf.  Q kaimasse,
 kaimassea.                                                              
 KAYAN-, KAYAR- ten. Q kainen; N caer. [Added entry.]                     
 KEL- go, run (especially of water). *et-kele spring,  issue of  water: Q
 ehtele, N eithel  (from metathesized  [i.e. with  transposed consonants]
 form * ektele).  Q  kelume  stream,  flow;  N   celon  river,   Q  kelma
 channel.  Cf.  KYEL  run out,  come to  an end;  KWEL fade  away. [These
 changes were made: 'N celon river' >  'Ilk. celon  river, and  as proper
 name, kelu+n'; 'N celw spring, source' added.]                          
 KEM- soil, earth. Q ken (kemen). N coe  earth (indeclinable),  cef soil,
 pl.  ceif.  Q  kemina  of earth,  earthen; [N]  cevn. Q  kemnaro potter.
 [Added entry.]                                                          
 KEPER-  knob,  head,  top [changed  to 'ridge'.  This entry  consists of
 disconnected jottings, all struck out,  but concerned  with N  ceber pl.
 cebir and Sern Gebir, of which the meaning seems  to be  'lone stones'.]
 KHAG-  * khagda   pile,   mound;   Q   hahta;   N  haud   mound,  grave,
 tomb (cf. Haud iNdengin). [Added entry.]                                
 KHAL(1)-  (small)  fish. Q hala;  cf. Qhalatir'fishwatcher',  kingfisher, N
 heledir. [Added entry. The same origin  of halatir  is found  under TIR;
 but here KHAL was changed to KHOL and  the -a-  of the  Q forms  to -o-,
 before the entry was struck out with a reference to base SKAL - which (a
 later addition to the S-stems) is clearly the later formulation.]       
 KHAL(2)- uplift.   ON   khalla   noble,   exalted   (*khalna);  orkhalla
 superior. N hall exalted,  high; orchel  [e uncertain]  superior, lofty,
 eminent. [Added entry.]                                                 
 KHAM-  sit.  Q  ham-  sit. [The  other derivatives  are too  chaotic and
 unclear to present.]                                                    
 KHAN-   understand,   comprehend.  Q   hanya  understand,   know  about,
 be  skilled  in  dealing  with;  hande  knowledge,  understanding; handa
 understanding,  intelligent;  handele intellect;  handasse intelligence.
 EN  henio  understand;  hann,  hand  intelligent;  hannas understanding,
 intelligence. Cf. Handir, Borthandos. [Added entry.]                    
 KHAP-   enfold.   N   hab-   clothe;   hamp  garment;   hamnia-  clothe;
 hammad clothing.                                                        
 KHARAS-  (cf.  KARAK). * khrasse:  precipice:  N  rhass   (i-rass,  older
 i-chrass);   Dan.  hrassa.   Cf.  Gochressiel   [<  Gochrass]   a  sheer
 mountain-wall.   [Added  entry.   For  Gochressiel   see  QS   $147  and
 commentary.]                                                            
 KHAT- hurl.  N hedi,  pa.t. hennin,  hant; hador  or hadron  thrower (of
 spears  or  darts),  cf.  Hador;  hadlath, haglath  a sling  (see LATH).
 [Added entry.]                                                          
 KHAW-  (= KAY,  q.v.)  N haust  bed. [This  original entry  was enlarged

 thus:] KHAW.  rest, lie  at ease  (=kay,  q.v.) N  haust bed  (*khau-sta,
 literally  'rest-ing').  In  N  associated  with  haud  mound  (see  KHAG)
 Cf. Q hauta- cease, take a rest, stop.                                    
   KHAYA-  far,  distant.  Q  haira  adj.   remote,  far,   [?also]  ekkaira,
 avahaira. haya adv. far off, far away. [Added entry.]                     
   KHEL-  freeze. Q  helle frost;  N hell.  KHELEK- ice.  N heleg  ice, helch
 bitter cold; Q helke ice, helk  ice-cold. [The  base KHEL  and derivatives
 were struck out, but KHELEK and derivatives retained.]                    
   KHEN-D-E-  eye.  Q  hen  (hendi);  N  hent,  pl.  hinn  >hent,   hint,  or
 henn, hinn. [N forms changed to hen, hin.)                                
   KHER-  rule,  govern,  possess.  Q  heru  master,  heri lady;  hera chief,
 principal. ON  khero master,  khiril lady;  N hir,  hiril. N  herth house-
 hold,  troop  under  a  hir;   cf.  Bara-chir   [BARAS].  Cf.   N  hervenn
 husband,  hervess  wife  [BES).  Q  heren fortune  (= governance),  and so
 what is in store for one  and what  one has  in store;  herenya fortunate,
 wealthy,   blessed,   rich;   cf.  Herendil   =  Eadwine.   [Added  entry.
 'Herendil   =   Eadwine'  derives   from  The   Lost  Road:   Herendil  is
 Audoin/Eadwine/Edwin  in  Numenor,   son  of   Elendil.  On   the  meaning
 of Old English ead see ibid. p. 46, and cf. IV. 212.]                     
    KHIL-  follow.  Q  hilya-  to follow;  hildi followers  = mortal  men (cf.
 Hildorien), also -hildi as suffix.  In N  fir was  used [PHIR].  Cf. Tarkil
 (*tara-khil). [Added entry. Cf. Romenildi in QS $151.]                    
    KHIM- stick, cleave, adhere. Q himya- to  stick to,  cleave to,  abide by;
 himba  adhering,  sticking.  N  him  steadfast,   abiding,  and   as  adv.
 continually.  Cf.  N  hiw  sticky, viscous  (*khima); hoew  custom, habit
 (*khaime) = Q haime habit. [Added entry.]                                  
    KHIS-,  KHITH-  mist,  fog.  *khithi:   Q  hise;   N  hith,   cf.  Hithlum
 [LUM].  *khithme:  Q  hiswe;  N hithw  fog. *khithwa:  Q hiswa  grey; N
 hethw  foggy,  obscure, vague;  Dor. hedu.  Cf. Hithliniath  or Eilinuial
 =  Dor.  Umboth  Muilin.  [Added  entry. For  Hithliniath 'pools  of mist'
 (LIN') see QS $111.]                                                   
    KHO-N-  heart  (physical).  Q  hon;  N  hun.   Cf.  Hundor.   Kho-gore,  Q
 Huore, N Huor 'heart-vigour', courage [GOR]. [Added entry.]               
    KHOP-   Q   hopa   haven,   harbour,   small   landlocked   bay;   hopasse
 harbourage.  N  hub;  hobas,  cf.  Alfobas  or  hobas  in Elf  = Alqalonde
 capital of the Teleri. [Added entry; see KOP.]                            
    KHOR-  set  going,  put in  motion, urge  on, etc.  Q horta-  send flying,
 speed,  urge,  hortale  speeding,  urging;  horme  urgency  (confused with
 orme  rushing  [GOR]);  hore  impulse,  horea  impulsion.  N   hur  readi-
 ness for action, vigour, fiery spirit; hortha- urge on, speed; horn driven
 under   compulsion,   impelled;   hoeno,    heno   begin    suddenly   and
 vigorously. Cf. Hur-ind, Hurin [ID]. [Added entry.l                      
    KHOTH-  gather.  *khotse  assembly:  N  both  host,  crowd,   frequent  in
 people  -  names  as  Glamhoth.  Cf.  host  gross  (144).  Q   hosta  large
 number, hosta- to collect. N hud assembly.                                
    KHUGAN-      Qhuan(hunen)      hound;      N huan.     [This entry was changed

                           
                                                                            
   to read thus:] KHUG- bark, bay. *khugan: Q huan (hunen) hound;
   N Huan (dog-name); Q huo dog; N hu.
  KHYAR- left hand. Q hyarmen south, hyarmenya southern; hyarya
   left, hyarmaite lefthanded [MA3]. N heir left (hand), hargam left-
   handed [KAB]; harad south, haradren, harn southern. [Added
   entry. The -y- in the base-stem was a further addition, and at the same
   time the Q forms were changed from har- to hyar-; see p. 345.]
  KHYEL(ES)- glass. Q hyelle (*khyelese); ON khelesa, khelelia; N
   hele, cf. Helevorn 'black-glass' [MOR], lake-name. Cf. KHELEK. [Added
   entry. Helevorn is written over an erasure in QS $ 118.]
  KIL- divide (also SKIL). Q kilya cleft, pass between hills, gorge. [The
   base SKIL is not found in the Etymologies. To this entry was added:]
   N cil. Cf. Kalakilya 'Pass of Light', in which Kor was built. N
   Cilgalad; Cilthoron or Cilthorondor.
  KIR- Q kirya ship; N ceir. [Added:] cirdan shipbuilder [TAN].
  KIRIK- Q kirka sickle; N cerch. Q Valakirka, N Cerch iMbelain
   [BAL], Sickle of the Gods = Great Bear. N critho reap (*k'rikta).
  KIRIS- cut. Q kirisse slash, gash; N criss cleft, cut. [Added:]
   Cristhoron - g.sg. of thor eagle. N crist a cleaver, sword. Cf. RIS.
  KOP- Q kopa harbour, bay. [This entry was struck out; see KHOP.]
  KOR- round. *korna: Q korna round, globed; koron (kornen) globe,
   ball; koromindo cupola, dome. Kor round hill upon which Tuna (Tun)
   was built. N corn, coron, Cor (koro). [Cor > Caur, and the following
   added:] [Q] korin circular enclosure [cf. I. 257]; N cerin. N rhin-gorn
   circle [RIN]. Cf. Ilk. basgorn [sc. bast-gorn 'round bread', loaf: MBAS].
  KOT- strive, quarrel. *okta strife: Qohta war. N auth war, battle; cost
   quarrel (kot-t-), Q kosta- quarrel. [The base was changed to KOTH,
   and the following added:] Q kotumo enemy, kotya hostile. [N] coth
   enmity, enemy; cf. Morgoth - but this may also contain GOTH. [See
   OKTA.]                                                                   
   KRAB-  press.  N  cramb,  cram  cake  of compressed  flour or  meal (often
   containing honey and milk) used on long journey. [Added entry.]           
  KU-   * kukuwa  dove;  Q  Au,  kua,  ON  Au,  kua,   (=  kuua);   N  cugu.
   [Added  entry.  The  base-stem  is  not given  but is  taken from  a later
   etymological note.]                                                       
  KUB- Q kumbe mound, heap; N cumb, cum. [Added entry.]                     
  KU3-   bow.  >   kuw:  Q   ku  bow;   N  cu   arch,  crescent;   curan  the
   crescent   moon,   see   RAN.   [Added:]  * ku3na:   N  cun   bowed,  bow-
   shaped, bent; but Ilk. *kogna >coun, caun, Dan. cogn.                     
  KUL-  gold  (metal).  Q  kulu,  N  col;  Q  kuluinn  of  gold.  KULU- gold
   (substance).  Q  kulo.  [This  entry  was  struck  out  and  the following
   roughly  substituted:]  KUL-  golden-red.  Q  +  hullo  red  gold;  kulda,
   kulina   flame-coloured,   golden-red;    kuluina   orange;    kuluma   an
   orange; N coll red (*kulda).                                              
  KUM-  void.  Q  kuma  the  Void;  kumna  empty;  N   cun  empty.   [The  Q
   forms  were  retained,  but  the  Noldorin  altered to  read:] ON  kuma, N

 cofn, caun empty, void, but in EN [the Void was] called Gast,           
 Belegast [cf. GAS].                                                     
 KUNDU-  prince.  Q  kundu;  N  cunn,  especially  in names  as Felagund,
 Baragund. [Added entry.]                                                
 KUR- craft. Q kunrwe  craft. N  curw, curu;  curunir wizard;  cf. Curufin
 [PHIN].  Cf.  N  crum  wile,  guile; conc  cunning, wily.  [Added entry.
 N crum was rejected; see KURUM.]                                        
 KURUM-   N   crum  the   left  hand;   crom  left;   crumui  left-handed
 (*krumbe, -a). [Added entry. Cf. KHYAR.]                                
 KUY- come to life, awake. Q kuile life, being alive; kuina  alive; kuive
 (noun)  awakening;  kuivea  (adj.)  wakening;   kuivie  =   kuive,  cf.
 Kuivienen.  N  cuil  life; cuin  alive; echui(w)  awakening (*et-kuiwe),
 hence   Nen-Echui  =   Q  Kuivienen.   [The  following   additions  were
 made:] N cuino to be  alive; Dor  Firn i  guinar Land  of the  Dead that
 Live.                                                                   
 KWAL-  die  in pain.  Q qalme  agony, death;  qalin dead;  unqale agony,
 death. [Added entry. See WAN.]                                          
 KWAM- Q qame sickness; N paw; Ilk. com. [Added entry.]                
 KWAR-  clutching  hand,  fist.  Q qar  hand (qari);  N paur  fist. [This
 stem was not struck out, but a second form of it was put in elsewhere in
 the   list:]   KWAR-  Q   gare fist;   ON  pore;   N  paur,   -bor,  cf.
 Celebrimbor Silver-fist.                                                
 KWAT-  Q  qanta  full;  ON  panta;  N  pant  full,  cf.   Cambant  [KAB];
 pathred fullness; pannod or pathro fill. [Added entry.]                 
 KWEL-  fade,  wither.  Cf.  Narqelion  fire-fading, autumn,  N lhasbelin
 [LAS(1)]. *kwelett- corpse: Q qelet, qeletsi.                             
 KWEN(ED)-  Elf. *kwenede:  Q   qende  Elf;   N  penedh,   pl.  penidh;
 Dan. cwenda.  Q  Qendelie,  N  Penedhrim.  The  word  Eledh  is usually
 employed. [Added entry.]                                                
 KWES- * kwesse:  Q  qesse feather;  Ilk. cwess  down; N  pesseg pillow
 (Q qesset). [Added entry.]                                              
 KWET-  (and  PET-)  say. * kwetta:  N  peth   word. * kwenta   tale:  N
 pent,  Q  qenta;  N  pennas  history. * kwentro  narrator: Q qentaro; N
 pethron;  Dor.  cwindor.  [Added:]  Q  qetil tongue,  language; qentale
 account,  history;  lumeqentale  history   [LU]. N gobennas history,
 gobennathren  historical.  Q  avaqet-  refuse,  forbid  [AWA].  [For go-
 prefix see wo.]                                                         
 KWIG-  Cf.  KU3 * kwinga:  Q   qinga  bow   (for  shooting);   N  peng.
 [Added entry.]                                                          
 KYAB- taste. Q tyavin I taste.                                         
 KYAR- cause (cf. KAR). Q tyar- cause.                                    
 KYEL- come to an end.  Q tyel-  end, cease;  tyel (tyelde)  end; tyelima
 final. Cf. TELES. [Added entry.]                                        
 KYELEK- swift, agile. Q tyelka; N celeg, cf. Celegorn [GOR].           
 KYELEP-  and  TELEP-  silver.  N  celeb  silver;  Q  telpe   and  tyelpe
 silver; telepsa of silver = telpina, N celebren. Cf. Irilde Taltelepsa =

 Idhril   Gelebrendal.   [celebren,    Gelebrendal   early    changed   from
 celebrin,  Celebrindal.  The  entry  was  rewritten  thus:]   KYELEP-  (and
 TELEP?) silver.  ON kelepe,  N celeb,  silver; Q  telpe and  tyelpe silver;
 telemna,  N  celefn,  celevon  =  telpina,  N  celebren.  Cf.  Irilde  Tal-
 telemna  =  Idhril  Gelebrendal.  T  telpe;  Ilk.  telf.  Q  telpe  may  be
 Telerin  form  (Teleri specially  fond of  silver, as  Lindar of  gold), in
 which  case all  forms may  refer to  KYELEP. [For  Idril (Idhril)  see ID,
 and cf. Irilde Taltelepta in the Lost Tales, II. 216.]                  
                                                                           
                                     L.                                     
                                                                           
 [The L-stems consist of lightly  pencilled entries,  in themselves  hard to
 read, but not much changed subsequently,]                                  
                                                                           
 LA- no,  not. Q  la and  lala, also  lau, laume  (= la  ume [UGU]),  no, no
 indeed  not,  on  the  contrary;  also  used  for asking  incredulous ques-
 tions. As prefix la- > [vocalic] I > Q il, N al, as in Ilkorin, N Alchoron,
 pl. Elcheryn. Q lala- to deny. [See AR(2).]                                  
 LAB-  lick.  Q  lamba  tongue, N  lham(b). Q  lavin I  lick, also  lapsa to
 lick (frequentative). N lhefi (lhaf).                                        
 LAD-  Cf.  DAL, LAT.  Q  landa  wide,  N  lhand,  lhann.  N  camland palm
 of  hand.  Cf.   Lhothland,  Lhothlann   (empty  and   wide),  name   of  a
 region [LUS].                                                             
 LAG-  Q  lango  broad  sword;  also  prow  of  a  ship.  N  lhang  cutlass,
 sword.                                                                     
 LAIK-  keen,  sharp,  acute.  Q   laike,  N   lhaeg.  Q   laike  acuteness,
 keenness  of  perception.  Ilk.  laig keen,  sharp, fresh,  lively (blended
 with laikwa [see LAYAK]).                                                   
 LAK(1)- swallow; cf. LANK. Q lanko throat.                                   
 LAK(2)- swift  (cf. ALAK). * lakra:  Q  larka swift,  rapid, also  alarka; N
 lhagr, lhegin.                                                             
 LALAM-  elm-tree.  Q  alalme;   N  lhalwen   (lehwin),  lhalorn;   D  lalm.
 [See ALAM.]                                                               
 LAM-  Q  lamya  to  sound;  lama  ringing  sound,  echo;  lamma   a  sound;
 lamina  echoing;  nallama  echo.  Dor.  lom  echo,  lomen   echoing.  Thus
 Dor.    Lomendor,    Lominorthin,    Noldorinized    >    Dorlomen,    Ered
 Lomin; pure N Eredlemrin, Dorlamren. See GLAM.                             
 LAN-  weave.  Q  lanya  weave;  lanwa  loom;  lanat  weft;  lanne  tissue,
 cloth.                                                                     
 LANK-  Q  lanko  throat;  N  Ihanc.  [This  stem  was  first  written LANG,
 with derivatives Q lango (*langwi), N lhang. See LAK(1).]                   
 LAP- Q lapse babe; N lhaes,                                                
 LAS(1)- *lasse  leaf: Q  lasse, N  lhass; Q  lasselanta leaf-fall,  autumn, N
 lhasbelin   (*lassekwelene),   cf.   Q   Narqelion    [KWEL].   Lhasgalen

 Greenleaf,  Gnome  name of  Laurelin. (Some  think this  is related  to the
 next  and * lasse 'ear' .  The Quendian  ears were  more pointed  and leaf.
 shaped than [?human].)                                                     
 LAS(2)- listen. N lhaw  ears  (of  one  person), old  dual *lasu  - whence
 singular  lhewig.  Q  lar,  lasta-  listen;  lasta  listening,  hearing  -
 Lastalaika  'sharp-ears',  a  name,  cf.  N  Lhathleg.  N  lhathron hearer,
 listener,  eavesdropper (< * la(n)sro-ndo).,  lhathro or  lhathrado  listen
 in, eavesdrop.                                                             
 LAT-  lie  open.  Q  latin(a)  open,  free, cleared  (of land);  cf. Tumbo-
 latsin.  Cf.  Tumladen  plain  of  Gondolin.  N  lhaden,  pl.  lhedin open,
 cleared;  lhand open  space, level;  lhant clearing  in forest.  [Cf. LAD.]
 LATH-  string,  thong.  Q  latta strap;  N lhath  thong of  [?leather]; cf.
 hadlath, haglath sling (KHAT).                                             
 LAW- warm. *lauka warm: Q lauka, N lhaug.                                  
 LAWAR-,   N   GLAWAR-   *laure   (light  of   the  golden   Tree  Laurelin)
 gold  -  the  metal  was  properly  smalta,  see  SMAL;  Q laure,  N glaur,
 Dor.  Oss.  laur.  Hence  N  glor-,  lor- in  names, as  Glorfindel [SPIN],
 Inglor  [ID].  Cf.  Laurelin,  N Galad-loriel;  Rathloriel [RAT].  N glawar
 sunlight,   radiance   of   Laurelin;  +   Glewellin.  [See GLAW(-R).  Cf.
 QS  $16:  'Glewellin  (which  is  the  same  as  Laurelin song  of gold)'.]
 LAYAK-  *laik-wa:  Q  laiqa  green;  N  lhoeb  fresh  -  'green' only  in Q
 Laiqendi   Green-elves,   N   Lhoebenidh  or   Lhoebelidh.  Ilk.   laig  is
 blended with laika [LAIK].                                                
 LEB-,  LEM-  stay,  stick,  adhere,  remain, tarry.  Q lemba  (*lebna) left
 behind,  pl.   Lembi  Elves   remaining  behind   =  Telerin   Ilkorins;  N
 lhevon, lhifnir. [See p. 344.]                                              
 LED-  go,  fare,  travel.  Cf.  Q  lende  went,  departed  (linna  go).  ON
 lende fared; etledie  go abroad,  go into  exile; N  egledhi or  eglehio go
 into  exile,  egledhron  exile  (ON  etledro),  eglenn exiled  (ON etlenna).
 In  N  egledhron was  often taken  as the  meaning of  Ilk. Eglath  = Eldar
 = Ilkorins [see dr.ED, GAT(H)).                                            
 LEK- loose, let loose, release. N lhein, lhain free(d); lheitho to release,
 set free; lheithian release, freeing. Q leuka,  lehta loose,  slacken. Ilk.
 legol  nimble, active,  running free;  cf. Legolin,  a river-name.  [A note
 on  a  slip  accompanying  these  etymologies gives:  'Leth- set  free (cf.
 LED); EN  leithia to  release, leithian  release; cf.  Lay of  Leithian.' I
 have referred to this note in III. 154, at which  time I  overlooked the
 present entry.]                                                            
 LEP-, LEPET finger. Q lepse; N lhebed.                                     
 Cf.   LEP-   (LEPEN,   LEPEK)   five.   Q   lempe;   N  lheben.   Q  lemnar
 week.   The  Valian   week  had   five  days,   dedicated  (1)   to  Manwe:
 (Ar)Manwen;  (2)   to  Ulmo:   (Ar) Ulmon;  (3)   to  Aule   and  Yavanna:
 (Ar)Veruen,  i.e.  of  the  Spouses  [BES];  (4)  to  Mandos  and  Lorien:
 (Ar)Fanturion  [SPAN];  (5)  to  the  three  younger  Gods,   Osse,  Orome,
 Tulkas,   called   Nessaron   or   Neldion  [NETH,   NEL].  The   73  weeks
 were  divided  into  12  months  of  6  weeks.  In the  middle of  the Year

                                                                       
                                                                           
   there was a  separate week,  Midyear week  or week  of the  Trees, Endien
   [YEN] or Aldalemnar, N Enedhim, Galadlevnar.                             
      N  names:  Ar  Vanwe;  Ar  Uiar  (Ulmo)  [WAY];  Ar  Vedhwen  (Bedu
   +  ina),  or  Ar  Velegol (Aule  [see GAWA]);  Ar Fennuir;  Ar Nethwelein
   = of the young Gods, or Ar Neleduir of the three kings.                  
      [The  dual  form  'husband and  wife' is  given as  besu in  the entry
   BES  'wed',  not  as  here  bedu;  similarly  under  KHER,  NDIS  and  NI
   reference  is made  in the  original to  BED, not  BES. There  is however
   no  suggestion  of  any alteration  in the  entry BES  itself. -  For the
   element  Ar  see  AR(1). In the Quenya names  of the  days Ae  is written
   above  Ar,  but  Ar  is  not  struck  out.  -  For  the 'young  Gods' see
   p. 120.]                                                                
   LI- many. Q lie people; -li pl. suffix, lin- prefix=many, aslintyulussea
   having    many    poplars   [TYUL],    lindornea   having    many   oaks
   [DORON].  In  N  the  ending  -lin 'many'  has been  blended with  rhim >
   lim, rim.                                                                
 LIB(1)- drip. Q limba a drop., cf. helkelimbe [KHELEK].                     
 LIB(2)- *laibe:  Q  laive  ointment.  N  shows GLIB-:  glaew salve. *libda:
   Q lipsa; N [lhud >] glud soap.                                           
 LILT- dance. Q lilta- dance.                                               
 LIN(1)- pool. Q linya pool-, N lhin., Ilk. line. Cf. Ailin [Av], Taiglin.
   LIN(2)- (originally GLIN)  sing.  Q  linde  air, tune;  N lhind,  lhinn. Q
   lindo  singer, singing  bird: cf.  tuilindo swallow,  N tuilinn  [TUY], Q
   lomelinde nightingale,  N dulinn.  Q lindele  music. Cf.  Laurelin (g.sg.
   Laurelinden),  but  this  also  taken  as  'hanging-gold'  (g.sg.  Laure-
   lingen):  see  LING.  Lindon,  Lhinnon Ilk.  name of  Ossiriand: 'musical
   land'  (*Lindan-d),  because  of  water  and  birds; hence  Eredlindon, =
   Mountains of Lindon.                                                     
   [tuilindo  ('spring-singer'):  cf.  I.  269.  On  the  origin  of Lindon,
   Eredlindon see commentary on QS $ 108. - See GLIN.]                      
   LIND- fair (especially of voice); in  Q blended  with slinda  (see SLIN).
   Q linda fair, beautiful, cf. Lindar; N lhend  tuneful, sweet;  Ilk. lind.
   LING-,  N  GLING-  hang.  Q  linga-  hang, dangle;  N gling.  Cf. Glingal
   [and see LIN(2)].                                                          
 LINKWI- Q linqe wet. N lhimp; lhimmid moisten (pa.t. lhimmint).            
   LIP- Q limpe (wine), drink of the Valar. [The first appearance  of limpe
   since the Lost Tales, where it was the drink  of the  Elves; for  the old
   etymology see I. 258.]                                                   
 LIR(1)- sing, trill; in N g-lir- [see GLIR]. Q lirin I chant.                
 LIR(2)- ON  lire  row,  range,  N  lhir  row. Cf.  oeglir range  of mountain
   peaks.                                                                   
 LIS- honey. Q lis (lissen);  N gli,  g-lisi. Cf.  megli (meglin  adj.) bear
   (*mad-li   honey-eater   [MAT],   kenning  for  brog,  see   MOROK).  Cf.
   Meglivorn = Blackbear.                                                   
 LIT- Q litse sand., ON litse > litthe, N lith -, cf. Fauglith [PHAU].      
 LIW- *linwi fish: Q lingwe; N lhimb, lhim; Dor. liw.                   

         
                                                                           
   LOD. * londe narrow  path, strait,  pass: N  lhonn (cf.  Aglon) .,  cf. N
   othlond,  othlon paved  way (ost  city +  lond). Q  londe road  (in sea),
   entrance to harbour, cf. Alqalonde.                                      
 LOK-  great   serpent,  dragon.   Q  loke  (-i)  dragon;   anguloke  dragon
   [ANGWA],  ramaloke   winged  dragon   [RAM],  uruloke   fire-dragon  [UR],
   fealoke   spark-dragon   [PHAY],   lingwiloke   fish-dragon,  sea-serpent
   [LIW]. Cf. N lhug, amlug, lhimlug.                                      
   LOKH- Q lokse hair; N lhaws, lhoch (*lokko) ringlet.                  
 LONO-  lona   island,  remote   land  difficult   to  reach.   Cf.  Avalona
   [AWA]  =  Tol  Eressea =  the outer  isle. [Added  to this  is A-val-lon.
   Avallon first appears in the second version of The Fall of Numenor ($1)
   as  a  name  of  Tol Eressea  with the  explanation that  'it is  hard by
   Valinor'.]                                                               
 LOS-  sleep.  Q  olor  dream,  cf.  Lorien  =  N  Lhuien.  Q  lore slumber,
   lorna asleep. N ol dream, oltha [to dream]. [See OLOS.]                 
 LOT(H)  flower.  Q  lote  (large  single)  flower; losse  blossom (usually,
   owing to association with olosse snow,  only used  of white  blossom [see
   GOLOS]). N lhoth flower;  gwaloth blossom,  collection of  flowers [wo].
   Cf.  Wingelot,  Wingelote  Foamflower,   N  Gwingeloth   [WIG];  Nimloth
   [NIK-W] = Galathilion.                                                   
   LU-  Q  lume   time  (cf.   lumeqenta  history,   chronological  account,
   lumeqentale  history, lumeqentalea  historical); lu  a time,  occasion. N
   lhu. [See KWET.]                                                         
 LUG(1)- *lunga  heavy:  Q  lunga;  N  lhong;  Dor.  lung;  cf.  Dor. Mablung
   [MAP].                                                                   
   LUG(2)- * lugni blue:  Q  lune;  N  lhun  (Dor.  luin  pale,  Dan.  lygn).
   Cf.   Lunoronti   Blue   Mountains,   N   Eredluin   (also   Lhunorodrim,
   Lhundirien   Blue   Towers)   =   Eredlindon   Mountains  of   Lindon  (=
   Ossiriand). [For an occurrence of  Lunoronti see  p. 32.  Luindirien Blue
   Towers occurs in a footnote added to QS $108 (commentary).]           
 LUK-  magic,  enchantment.  N  lhuth  spell,  charm;  Ihutha   to  enchant;
   Lhuthien  enchantress   (Dor.  Luithien).   Q  luke   enchantment;  luhta
   enchant.  [The  etymology  of  Luthien  changed  to  read  thus:] Doriath
   luth, whence Luthien (Noldorized as Lhuthien): *luktiene.                
 LUM-   Q  lumbe   gloom,  shadow;   Hisilumbe,  N   Hithlum  [mrs].   In  Q
   the  form  is  usually  Hisilome  by  attraction of  lome night  [DO3]. N
   lhum shade, lhumren shady.                                               
 LUS-   N   1host  empty,   cf.  [Mablothren   >]  Camlost  [KAB],  Lothlann
   [LAD]. Q lusta void, empty.                                             
 LUT- float, swim. Q lunte boat; N lhunt. N lhoda float.                    
                                                                           
                                       M.                                   
                                                                           
 [The  M-entries  are faint  and difficult  to interpret,  and some  are very
 confused.  My  father  made  a  beginning  on  a  new  list,   writing  the

 etymologies out  afresh and  clearly, but  this petered  out after  he had
 treated the stems in MA- and a few others (MBAD, MBER, MEL).]             
                                                                          
   MAD-  Q  marya  pale,  fallow,  fawn.  N  meid,  maid,   hence  Maidhros
   (anglicized Maidros) = pale-glitter [Rus].                               
   MA3-   hand.   PQ   *ma3   (ma3-)  hand:   Q  ma;   ON  mo   (pl.  mai)
   usually   replaced   by   kamba   (N  camm):   see KAB.   Hence * ma3iti
   handy,  skilled,  Q  maite  (pl. maisi);  ON maite,  N moed. * ma3-ta to
   handle:  Eld. * mahta-:  Q  mahta-,  ON   mattho-be,  N   matho  stroke,
   feel, handle; wield (confused with *makta, see MAK).                    
      Related  is  MAG-  use,  handle,  in * magra  useful,  fit,  good (of
   things):   Q  mara,   N  maer,  * magna  skilled:   ON  magna,   N  maen
   skilled, clever, maenas craft, handicraft, art. [In the original form of
   this  entry  the  name  Maidros   (see  MAD)   was  placed   under  MAG:
   Maedhros < Maenros.]                                                     
   MAK-  sword,  or  as verb-stem:  fight (with  sword), cleave. * makla: Q
   makil  sword;  N  magl,  magol.  * makta:  Q   mahta-  wield   a  weapon
   (blended  with  ma3-ta,  see  MA3),  fight:  hence  mahtar  warrior  = N
   maethor. N maeth battle,  fight (not  of general  host but  of two  or a
   few),  maetha  to  fight.  Cf.  Magladur  [cf.  DO3?]   or  Magladhonn
   =  Black-sword  (as  name).   Q  Makalaure   =  Gold-cleaver,   name  of
   fifth son of Feanor, N Maglor.                                          
      [In the original form of this entry the N forms  of the  noun 'sword'
   were  megil,  magol,  and  the  name   'Black-sword'  was   Megildur  (>
   Magladhur,  Maglavorn).  If  these  forms  were  to  replace Mormakil,
   Mormegil  etc.  as  Turin's  name  in Nargothrond  they never  appear in
   the texts.]                                                             
   MAN-  holy  spirit  (one  who  has  not  been  born  or  who  has passed
   through  death).  Q  manu  departed  spirit;  N man.  Cf. Q  Manwe (also
   borrowed and used in N [see WEG]).                                      
   MANAD-  doom,  final  end,  fate,  fortune  (usually  = final  bliss). Q
   manar,  mande.  N manad. Cf.  N manathon.  In Q this stem  is partly
   blended with MBAD, q.v. and cf. Mandos, Kalamando.                      
   MAP-  lay  hold  of  with  hand, seize.  Q mapa-  grasp, seize.  ON map-
   seize, take away by  force. Ilk.  (Dor.) mab  hand (*mapa),  cf. Mablung
   [LUG(1)]. Ilk. Ermab(r)in   one-handed   (of  Beren:   cf.  Mablosgen
   emptyhanded   =   N   Erchamron, Camlost).   [The    forms   Ermab(r)in
   and Erchamron are certain.]                                              
   MASAG-  knead,  make  soft   by  rubbing,   kneading,  etc.  * mazga:  Q
   maksa  pliant,  soft;  0N mazga  >  maiga,   N  moe,   soft. * mazge:
   Q makse dough, N moeas dough. I1k. maig dough.                         
 MAT- eat. Q mat-; N medi. For megli bear see us.                          
 MBAD-  duress,  prison,  doom,  hell. * mbanda:  N  band,  bann  duress,
   prison;  Angband  Hell  (Iron-prison)  (Q   Angamanda).  Q   Mando  the
   Imprisoner   or   Binder,   usually   lengthened  Mand-os   (Mandosse  =
   Dread  Imprisoner,  N.  Bannos  [GOS]).  Blended  with  Q  with   MAN  -

 hence Kalamando Light Mando = Manwe, Morimando Dark Mando                 
 = Mandos. MBAD is in turn related to BAD, q.v.                            
 MBAKH-   exchange.    Q   manka-    trade;   makar    tradesman;   mankale
 commerce.  N   banc,  banga;   bachor  pedlar;   bach  article   (for  ex-
 change), ware, thing (*mbakha).                                           
 MBAL- Q malle street; ambal shaped stone, flag.                           
 MBAR-   dwell,   inhabit.   Q   a-mbar   (ambaron)    'oikoumene',   Earth;
 Endamar,   Ambarenya    Middle-earth.   N    ambar,   amar    Earth;   Em-
 merein,   Emerin   (Ambarenya)   Middle-earth.    Martan(o)   Earthbuilder
 =   Aule   (N   Barthan)   [TAN].   Gondobar,   Findobar    [PHIN].  [With
 the use of the Greek word oikoumene here cf. Letters no. 154, p. 197. -
 Ambarendya  occurs  in  the  Ambarkanta,  IV.  241  -  3.  -  With  Martan
 cf.  I.  266,  entry  Talka  Marda.  -  Findobar  was  the  son  of Fingon
                                                                          
 (p.403).]                                                                 
 MBARAT-   Q   umbar   (umbarten)   fate,   doom;   N   ammarth.   Q  marta
 fey,   fated;   maranwe   destiny;  martya-   destine.  N   barad  doomed;
 bartho   to   doom.   Cf.  Turamarth,   Q  Turambar   [apparently  written
 thus over Turumbar].                                                      
 MBAS-  knead.  Q  masta-  bake,  masta  bread.   N  bast   bread;  basgorn
 loaf [KOR].                                                               
 MBAW-   compel,  force,   subject,  oppress.   Q  mauya-   compel;  mausta
 compulsion;   maure   need.   N   baug   tyrannous,   cruel,   oppressive;
 bauglo  to  oppress;  bauglir  tyrant,  oppressor;  bui (*mauy-)  (imper-
 sonal), baur need. Cf. Gothmog (*Gothombauk-) [GOS].                      
 MBER-  Q  meren  (merend-)  or  merende  feast,  festival;  N   bereth.  Q
 merya  festive;  meryale  holiday.  N  beren  festive, gay,  joyous. [This
 stem  was  first  MER,  and  the  N words  mereth, meren;  but a  new stem
 MER  was  then  introduced  and  the  former  MER changed  to MBER,  the N
 words  becoming  bereth,  beren.  The  name  Mereth  Aderthad   was  never
 changed in the texts.]                                                    
 MBIRIL-  (compound  of  MIR  and  RIL,  q.v.)  Q  miril  (mirilli) shining
 jewel; mirilya- glitter. Ilk. bril glass, crystal; cf. Brilthor glittering
 torrent.                                                                  
 MBOTH-  Dor.  moth  pool,  umboth  large pool.  Cf. Q  motto blot,  N both
 puddle,  small  pool.   Cf.  Umboth   Muilin  [MUY]   =  N   Elinuial  or
 Hithliniath.                                                              
 MBUD-   project.  * mbundu:   Q   mundo   snout,   nose,  cape;   N  bund,
 bunn.   Cf.  * andambunda   long-snouted,   Q   andamunda    elephant,   N
 andabon, annabon [ANAD].                                                  
 MEL-  love  (as  friend).  Q  mel-;  melin  dear,  melda   beloved,  dear;
 melme  love;  melisse  (f.),  melindo (m.)  lover; melima  loveable, fair,
 Melimar   =   Lindar.   Irregular   vocalism:  * malo   friend,   Q  malo.
 N  meleth  love;  mell  dear;  mellon  friend;  meldir friend,  f. meldis;
 melethron, melethril lover.  mil love,  affection; milui  friendly, loving,
 kind.                                                                     
 MEN-  Q  men  place,  spot;   mena  region.   Cf.  Numen,   Romen,  Harmen

 [see KHYAR], Tormen [which is the form in the Ambarkanta, IV.             
 244- 5, 248 - 9, changed later to Formen (PHOR).]                         
 MER- wish, desire, want. Q mere, pa.t. merne. [See MBER.]                  
 MEREK-  [This  entry  was  struck  out,  and   the  stem   MBEREK  written
 against it. It was the same as the entry  BEREK, q.v.,  except that  the Q
 form was here merka 'wild' for verka, a  N form  brerg 'wild,  fierce' was
 given, and bregol was translated 'fierce'.]                               
 MET-  end.  Q  mente  point,  end;  N  ment  point;  meth   end  (*metta);
 methen end. Q metya- put an end to.                                       
 MI- inside. Q mi in, within;  mir and  minna to  the inside,  into; mitya
 adj. interior.                                                            
 MIL-IK-  Q  milme  desire,  greed;  maile  lust;  mailea  lustful;  milya-
 long  for;  milka  greedy;  Melko  (*Mailiko), N  Maeleg (*-ka).  N melch
 greedy;  mael lust;  maelui lustful.  [The stem  vowel ae  in the  N words
 was  changed  to  oe:  Moeleg,  etc.  The  Gnomish  name  Moeleg  of Melko
 occurs in Q (IV. 79, 164).]                                               
 MINI-  stand  alone,  stick  out. Q  mine one;  minya first;  minda promi-
 nent,  conspicuous;  mindo  isolated  tower.  N  min one,  minei (*miniia)
 single,  distinct,  unique;  minnas  tower,  also  mindon  (*minitaun, cf.
 tunn [see TUN]).                                                          
 MINK-W- Q minqe eleven.                                                   
 MIR-   Q,  ON   mire;  N   mir  jewel,   precious  thing,   treasure.  Cf.
 Nauglamir  (Doriathrin  form).  Mirion  ordinary  N  name of  the Silevril
 (Silmarilli),  pl.  Miruin;  =  N  Golo(d)eir  or  Mir  in   Geleid,  Dor.
 Goldamir. [The name Borommiro is scribbled in: see BOR.]                  
 MIS- go free,  stray, wander.  Q mirima  free; cf.  Mirimor =  the Teleri.
 mista-  stray  about.  N mist  error, wandering;  misto to  stray; mistrad
 straying, error. [In the long note  to QS  $29 giving  names 'in  song and
 tale' of the Kindreds of the Elves a name of the Teleri is 'the Free' (and
 another 'the Wanderers').]                                                
 MISK- Q miksa wet; N mesg, mesc.                                          
 MITH-  N  mith  white  fog,  wet  mist;   cf.  Mithrim   [RINGI].  [Later
 addition: mith = grey.]                                                   
 MIW- whine. Q maiwe gull, N maew. Q miule whining, mewing.               
 MIZD- *mizde:  Q  miste  fine  rain;  N  midh   dew;  Dor.   mid  moisture
 (adj.  med  wet, * mizda);  Dan.  meord  fine rain.  Cf. Dor.  name Dolmed
 'Wet-head'  [NDOL].  [The   stems  MISK-,   MITH-,  MIZD-   are  evidently
 related,  but  it  is scarcely  possible to  see from  the changes  on the
 manuscript what my father finally intended.]                              
 MO-  *mol-:  Q mol  slave, thrall;  N mul.  Q mota-  labour, toil;  N mudo
 (pa.t.   mudas).   [Cf.   Lhammas   $8:   mulanoldorin   >   molanoldorin,
 language of the Noldor enslaved by Morgoth.]                              
 MOR-   *mori   black:   Q   more   black   (N   + mor};   mordo  shadow,
 obscurity,  stain;  more  blackness,  dark,  night; morna  gloomy, sombre;
 morilinde  nightingale  (Ilk.  murulind,  myrilind).  N  maur  gloom; moru
 black.  Ilk.  mor  night.  Meglivorn:  see  LIS,  MAT.  Morgoth  Black Foe

  [KOT]   =   Melko.   Morimando   =   Mandos   [see  MBAD].   Moriqendi  Dark
  Elves   =   Morimor,   N   Duveledh   or   Durion [DO3].  [This   entry  is
  extremely  confused   through  changes   and  afterthought   additions, and
  I have tried to arrange  the material  more sequentially.  It is  not clear,
  however, that all the forms given were intended to stand.]                 
  MOROK- *moroko bear: Q morko; N brog; Ilk. broga. [See LIS.]                
 MOY- Q moina familiar, dear; ON muina, N muin dear. [See TOR.]              
 MU- not, no. [See UGU, UMU.]                                                
 MUY-  Q  muina  hidden,   secret;  muile   secrecy.  Dor.   muilin  secret,
  veiled;  Umboth  Muilin  veiled  pool  =  N Lhin  Uial or  Eilinuial. Dor.
  muil  twilight,   shadow,  vagueness.   (Not  in   N  because   it  became
  identical with moina [MOY].)                                               
                                                                            
                                       N.                                    
                                                                            
 [There  was  no  new  start  made on  the N-entries,  which remain  in their
 extremely  difficult original  form. The  stems with  an initial  back nasal
 consonant  (followed  by the  stop g),  represented in  the manuscript  by a
 special form of the latter n, are here printed NG-.]                        
                                                                            
  NA(1)- [Cf. ANA(1)]  Q  an, ana,  na to,  towards, prefix ana-. N  na with,
  by, prefix an-. Also used as genitive sign.                                
  NA(2)- [Cf. ANA(2)] be. Stem of verb 'to be' in Q. Cf. nat thing, N nad.       
 NAD-   Q   nanda   water-mead,   watered   plain.   N   nand,    nann   wide
  grassland;   nador,   nadras   pasture.   Dor.   nand  field,   valley.  Cf.
  Nandungorthin, Nan Tathren.                                                
 NAK-  [Cf.  ANAK]  bite.  Q  nak-  bite;  N nag-.  Q nahta  a bite;  N naeth
  biting,  gnashing  of   teeth  [see   NAY].  N   naew  (*nakma),  Q nangwa
  jaw.  Cf.  *an-ka  jaw,   row  of   teeth:  Q   anka,  N   anc;  Anc-alagon
  'Biting-Storm', dragon-name [ALAK].                                       
 NAN- N nana (hypocoristic) mother; naneth. [See AM(1).]                       
 NAR(1)- flame,  fire.  Q  nar  and  nare flame, cf.  Anar Sun-,  narwa fiery
  red.  N  naur  flame;  Anar  Sun;  narw,  naru red.  Cf. Egnor  [EK], etc.;
  for   Feanor   see   PHAY.  Q   narqelion  'fire-fading',   autumn  [KWEL].
  [The N form Anar is clear. See ANAR.]                                      
 NAR(2)- (Q nyar-)  tell,  relate.  Q nyare  tale, saga,  history, lumenyare
  [LU]; nyarin I tell.  ON narobe  he tells  a story  (pa. t. narne), trenare
  he recounts, tells to end (inf. trenarie). N + naro tell; treneri (nennar),
  pa.t.  trenor,  trener;  trenarn  account, tale  (ON trenarna);  narn tale,
  saga (Q nyarna). [For prefix tre- see TER.]                                
 NARAK-  tear,  rend  (tr.  and  intr.). *naraka  rushing, rapid,  violent: Q
  naraka  harsh,  rending,  violent;  N  narcha-  to rend,  Q narki.  N Narog
  river-name;  Nar(o)gothrond  [os]   =  fortress   of  Narog;   Narogardh  =
  realm of Narog.                                                            
 NAS-  point,  sharp  end.  Q  nasse  thorn,  spike;  nasta- prick,  sting. N

 nass point, sharp end; angle or corner (cf. BEN); nasta  prick, point,
 stick, thrust. Cf. SNAS, SNAT.                                        
 NAT-  (cf.  NUT)  lace,  weave,  tie. Q  natse web,  net; N  nath web;
 Dor.  nass.  N  nathron weaver,  webster; gonathra-  entangle, enmesh,
 gonathras entanglement. [For prefix go- see wo.]                      
 NAUK-  Q  nauko  dwarf.  N  naug.  Cf.  Nogrod Dwarf-city  [cf. ROD?].
 Also  in  diminutive  form  naugol  (naugl-).  The  name  Nauglamir is
 strictly Doriathric, in which genitive in -a(n)  preceded. The  true N
 idiom is mir na Nauglin or Nauglvir > Nauglavir.                      
 [N  naug  was  struck  out and  replaced by:  'N nawag  (pl. neweig,
 neweg); Dor. naugol, whence EN naugl'; but the rest of the  entry was
 allowed to stand. The stem NAWAK was written beside NAUK.]           
 NAY- lament. naeth (nakt-) 'biting' is associated in N with this stem,
 and gets senses of gnashing teeth in grief: cf. Nirnaeth  Arnediad (or
 Aronoded)  [NOT].  Q  naire lament,  naina- lament.  N noer  adj. sad,
 lamentable; nae alas, Q nai. Q, ON noi,  nui lament  (*naye); Nuinoer,
 Nuinor, name of Turin's sister.                                       
 NAYAK- (or perhaps  NAYKA-, elaboration  of NAK,  q.v.) pain.  Q naike
 sharp  pain; naikele;  naikelea painful.  N naeg  pain; negro to pain.
 NDAK-  slay.  ON  ndakie  to  slay,  pa.t.  ndanke;  ndagno  slain (as
 noun), corpse; ndakro slaughter, battle. N degi to slay;  daen corpse;
 dangen slain, cf. Haudi Ndengin; dagr, dagor battle; dagro  to battle,
 make war. *ndako warrior, soldier: ON  ndoko, N  daug chiefly  used of
 Orcs, also  called Boldog.  [Boldog is  an Orc-captain  in the  Lay of
 Leithian  and  in  Q $10.  The meaning  here is  that Boldog  was used
 beside daug; see NGWAL.]                                              
 NDAM-   hammer,   beat.   Q   namba  a   hammer,  namba-   to  hammer.
 Nambarauto  hammerer  of  copper,  sixth  son  of  Feanor,   N  Damrod
 [RAUTA].  N  dam  a  hammer,  damna-  to  hammer   (pa.t.  dammint).
 NDAN-  back.  (Cf.   Danas;  N   Dan,  pl.   Dein,  Dadrin).   Q  nan-
 (prefix) backwards. Dor. don back (noun). Cf.  Q na,  nan but,  on the
 contrary, on the other hand, a-nanta and yet, but  yet. [See  DAN, and
 commentary on Lhammas $7.]                                            
 NDER-  strengthened  form  of  der  man  (see  DER). * ndero bridegroom
 >  Eldarin  ndaer,  Q ner  man (blended  with der);  ON ndair,  N doer
 bridegroom.  Cf.  Ender  surname  of  Tulkas  (Endero), as  Indis (see
 NDIS) of his wife.                                                    
 NDEW-  follow,  come   behind.  Q   neuna  (*ndeuna)   second; * ndeuro
 follower,  successor:  Q  neuro,  cf.  Dor.  Dior  successor  (i.e. of
 Thingol). The stem is confused with NDU 'sink' in N.                  
 NDIS- Strengthening (parallel to NDER Of DER)  Of NIS  'woman', itself
 elaborated from INI.                                                  
    NDIS-SE/SA  Q  nisse  beside  nis  (see NIS,  NI) woman.  ON ndissa
 young  woman  (in  N  dess  was blended  with bess,  properly 'wife');
 *ndise  bride >  ON ndis,  N dis.  Intensive form * i-ndise =  Q Indis
 'bride', name of the goddess Nessa.                                   

   NDOL-  Q  nola  round  head,  knoll;  N  dol  (ON  ndolo)  head.  Cf.  Q
   Andolat  hill-name,  N  Dolad.  N  dolt  (pl.  dylt)  round  knob, boss.
   Cf.   Dor.   Ndolmed,   Dolmed  =   Wet  Head,   name  of   mountain  in
   Eredlindon.                                                             
 NDOR-  dwell,  stay,  rest,  abide.  Q  nore land,  dwelling-place, region
   where certain people live, as Vali-nore (Valinor). The  long vowel  in Q
   is  due  to  confusion  with  nore  clan (NO,  ONO). N  dor (* ndore);
   dortho-  dwell,  stay.  Cf.  Endor  =  Endamar   Middle-earth.  Doriath:
   see GATH. [Under ENED Endor  is defined  as 'centre  of the  world'. See
   IV. 254 - 5.)                                                           
 NDU- (see  also NU)  go down,  sink, set  (of Sun,  etc). Associated  in N
   with  DO3  night,  also  with  NDEW.  Q numen  west (see  MEN), numenya
   western; nuta  set, sink  (of Sun  or Moon);  andune (*ndune)  sunset. N
   dun  west,  beside  annun  used  as  opposite  of  amrun (see  AM); also
   duven [?southern].                                                      
   [Scribbled  marginal  notes  give:  'Numenore  and  Andunie  =  Land  of
   Great  Men  (after  the  Last  Battle).  NDUR,   NUR  bow   down,  obey,
   serve; num sunset; cf. -dur in name lsildur.' In FN  I ($2)  Andunie was
   likewise the name of the land of Numenor, not (as in FN II) of its chief
   town.]                                                                  
 NDUL-  See  DUL. * ndulla:  Q  nulla  dark, dusky,  obscure; N  doll, cf.
   Terendul.                                                               
 NED-  See  ENED.  middle,  centre.  N  enedh core,  centre; Q  ende. But
   N nedh- as prefix = mid-.                                               
 NEI-  tear.  Q  nire,  nie  tear; cf.  nieninqe snowdrop  [NIK-W], Nienna.
   N  nir  tear, weeping;  nirnaeth lamentation  [NAY]; nin  (*neine) tear,
   ninim snowdrop (nifredil).  Q nite  (*neiti-) moist,  dewy; N  nid damp,
   wet; tearful. *neiniel-: N niniel tearful.                              
 NEL-   three.   NEL-ED-   three:   Q   nelde;   N   neledh   later   neled
   (after  canad  four).  Prefix  nel-  tri-.  nelthil  triangle (neltildi)
   [TIL].  Doriathrin  neldor  beech.  Cf.  Neldoreth  name  of  a  forest
   in  Doriath,  properly  name  of  Hirilorn  the  great beech  of Thingol
   with  three  trunks  =  neld-orn? [see  OR-NI]. The  N name  is brethel,
   pl.  brethil  (cf.  Forest  of  Brethil);  see  BERETH [where  brethil is
   given  as  the  singular).  The proper  Dor. name  was galdbreth  > gal-
   breth [GALAD].                                                         
 NEL-EK- tooth. Q nelet, nelki. ON nele, neleki; N nel, neleg.             
 NEN-  Q  nen  (nen-) water;  N nen  (pl. nin).  Q nelle  (* nen-le) brook;
   nende  pool;  nenda watery,  wet. N  nend, nenn  watery. Cf.  Ui-nend, Q
   Uinen [UY].                                                             
 NEN-WI-   nose.   Q  nengwe,   nengwi;  nengwea   nasal.  N   nemb,  nem;
   Dor. niw.                                                              
 NER- Q  stem for  PQ der-  man, derived  from influence  of ndere  and ni,
   nis: see NI, DER, NDER.                                                 
 NETER- nine. Q nerte; N neder.                                            
 NETH-  young.  Q  Nessa  goddess,  also  called  Indis  (bride):  see  NI,

 NDIS.  nessa  young  (*neth-ra);  nese  or  nesse  youth;  nessima youth-
 ful.  N  nith  youth  (*nethe);  neth  young (nethra);  Neth or  Dineth =
 Indis Nessa.                                                             
 NGAL-  /  NGALAM-  talk  loud  or  incoherently.   Q  nalme   clamour;  N
 glamb,   glamm   (*ngalambe,   influenced   by   lambe  [LAB])  barbarous
 speech;  Glamhoth  =  Orcs.  See  LAM,  GLAM.   [The  stem   was  changed
 subsequently to NGYAL- and Q nalme to yalme.]                            
 NGAN-,  NGANAD-  play  (on   stringed  instrument).   Q  nande   a  harp,
 nandelle   little  harp;   nandele  harping;   nanda-  to   harp; nandaro
 harper.  N  gandel,  gannel  a  harp;  gannado  or  ganno  play  a  harp;
 talagant    [>    talagand]    harper   (*tyalangando),    cf.   Talagant
 [>  Talagand]  of  Gondolin [TYAL].   Ilk.  gangel,   genglin.  [Talagant
 appears in no literary source, but cf. Salgant in the tale of The Fall of
 Gondolin, the cowardly  but not  wholly unattractive  lord of  the People
 of the Harp: II. 173, 190 - I, etc.]                                     
 NGAR(A)M- Dor. garm wolf; N garaf; Q narmo, narmo.                       
 NGAW-  howl.  N  gaur  werewolf;  Q   nauro.  N   gaul,  Q   naule  wolf-
 howl. N gaw- howl; gawad howling.                                        
 NGOL-  wise,  wisdom,  be  wise.  Q  nolwe  wisdom,  secret   lore;  nole
 wisdom;  nola  wise,  learned;  + ingole  deep  lore, magic  (N + angol).
 N + golw  lore,  golwen  (*ngolwina)  wise, learned  in deep  arts; goll
 (*ngolda)  wise;  gollor  magician;  gul  magic.  Dor.  ngol,  gol  wise,
 magical; (n)golo magic, lore; durgul, mor(n)gul sorcery.                 
 NGOLOD-  one  of  the  wise  folk,   Gnome.  Q   noldo;  ON   ngolodo,  N
 golodh, pl. goeloeidh, geleidh,  and golodhrim;  T golodo,  Dor. (n)gold;
 Dan.  golda.  Q  Ingolonde  Land  of  the  Gnomes (Beleriand,  but before
 applied to parts of Valinor); N Angolonn  or Geleidhien.  Golovir (Mir in
 Geleidh) = Silmaril; Dor. Goldamir; Q Noldomire [MIR].                   
 NGOROTH-  horror  (cf.  GOR;   GOS,  GOTH).   N  Gorgoroth   deadly  fear
 (*gor-ngoroth),  cf.  (Fuin)  Gorgoroth, later  name of  Dorthanion, also
 called   Taur-na-Fuin   or   Taur-na-Delduath.   Cf.   Dor.    name   Nan
 Dungorthin  (Dor.  ngorthin  horrible,  dunn  black); Dor.  ngorth horror
 = N goroth, Nan Dongoroth or Nann Orothvor [see DUN].                     
 NGUR-  ON  nguru,   ngurtu;  N   gur  Death,   also  guruth   [see  WAN].
 Q   nuru,   Nuru   (personified)   =   Mandos;   Nurufantur   =   Mandos
 Gugannor   [SPAN].   Cf.   Gurtholv  [>   Gurutholf]  'Wand   of  Death',
 sword-name [GOLOB].                                                     
 NGWAL-   torment.   Q   ungwale  torture;   nwalya-  to   pain,  torment;
 nwalka cruel. N balch cruel; baul torment, cf.  Bal- in  Balrog or Bolrog
 [RUK],   and   Orc-name  Boldog   =  Orc-warrior   'Torment-slayer'  (cf.
 NDAK).                                                                   
 NGYO-,   NGYON-   grandchild,   descendant.   Q   indyo;   T   endo;   ON
 ango (not in N). Cf. YO, YON.                                            
 NI(1).  woman  -  related  to  INI female,  counterpart to  3AN male.  In Q
 ni was archaic and poetic and usually replaced by nis pl. nissi  or nisse
 pl.  nissi.  See  NIS,  NDIS. In  Q, PQ  der 'man'  became ner  (not ler)

 owing  to  blending  with  ndaer 'bridegroom'  and  to influence of  nt, nis
 (see DER, NDER).                                                           
    In  ON  ni  woman'  later  >  di  through influence  of dir  [see DER].,
 but  di was  only rare  and poetical  ('bride, lady'):  it was  replaced in
 sense  'woman' by  bess [see  BES], and  in sense  'bride' by  cpd. di-neth
 {see  NETH).  Dineth  is  also  N  name  for  the goddess  Neth =  Q Nessa,
 and Indis.                                                                 
 NI(2)= I.                                                                   
 NIB- face, front. N nif (*nibe) front, face. Dor. nef face; nivra- to face,
 go   forward;   nivon   west,   Nivrim  West-march,   Nivrost  West-dales
 [Ros(2)].  [Nivrim  'West-march'  occurs  in  QS  $110,  and   Nivrost 'West
 Vale' in QS $106.]                                                         
 NID-  lean  against.  *nidwo  bolster,  cushion:   Q  nirwa;   ON  nidwa,
 N nedhw.                                                                  
 NIK-W-  Q  niqe  snow;  ninqe  white  (*ninkwi);  nieninqe  'white  tear' =
 snowdrop   [NEI];   ninqita-   shine   white;  ninqita-   whiten;  ninqisse
 whiteness.   Taniqetil(de)   =   High   White    Horn   =    N   Nimdil-dor
 (*Ninkwitil(de)   Tara).  N   nimp  (nim)   pale;  nifred   pallor,  fear;
 nimmid   to   whiten   (pa.t.    nimmint);   nifredil    snowdrop;   nimred
 (nimpred) pallor.                                                          
 NIL-,  NDIL-  friend.  Q  nilda  friendly,  loving;  nildo (and  nilmo), f.
 nilde,  friend;  nilme  friendship.  In  names  -nil,  -dil  =  Old English
 wine,  as  Elendil  (*Eled-nil)  =  AElfwine;  Herendil  =   Eadwine  [see
 KHER].                                                                     
 NIN-DI- fragile, thin. Q ninde slender; N ninn.                            
 NIS-  Probably  an  elaboration  of  INI,   NI;  feminine   counterpart  to
 DER 'man'. Q nis, nissi (see NI).                                          
 NO-  (cf.  ONO)  beget.  Q  nore  country,  land, race  (see NDOR).  N nur
 race;  noss  (=  Q nosse)  clan, family,  'house', as  Nos Finrod  House of
 Finrod.  Q  onoro  brother,  onone sister.  ON   wanuro,  N   gwanur  [wo].
 NOL-  smell  (intr.).  Q,  L  holme  odour.  N  ul  odour   (*nole);  angol
 stench.                                                                    
 NOROTH- Q norsa a giant.                                                   
 NOT-  count,  reckon.  Q  not-  reckon,  onot-  count  up;  note  number. N
 noedia   count;   gonod-  count   up,  reckon,   sum  up;   cf.  arnoediad,
 arnediad,   beside   aronoded,  innumerable,  countless,   endless;  gwanod
 tale, number [see wo].                                                     
 NOWO-  think,  form  idea,  imagine.  Q  noa  and  no,  pl.  nowi,  concep-
 tion;  nause  imagination  (*naupe).   N  naze,   pl.  nui,   idea;  nauth-
 thought; nautha- conceive.                                                 
 NU-  Cf.  NDU.  Q  nun  adv.  down  below,  underneath;  no   prep.  under.
 N  no  under, with  article nui  (Dagor nuin  Giliath). *nura,  or separate
 stem  NUR;  Q  nura  deep;  N  nur,   Cf.  Nurqendi   =  Gnomes;  Nuron,  N
 name for Ulmo.                                                             
 NUT-  tie, bind.  Q nutin  I tie;  nute bond,  knot; nauta  bound, obliged.
 N nud-; nud bond; naud bound.                                              

   NYAD- gnaw. *nyadro: Q nyano rat; N nar (< nadr).                        
 NYEL- ring, sing, give out  a sweet  sound. Q  nyello singer;  nyelle bell;
   T  Fallinel  (Fallinelli)  =  Teleri [PHAL]. N  nell bell;  nella- sound
   bells; nelladel ringing of  bells. Q  Solonyeldi =  Teleri (see  SOL); in
   Telerin form Soloneldi,                                                  
                                                                           
                                       O.                                   
                                                                           
   OKTA- See KOT. Q ohta war. N auth. Ilk. oth.                             
   OLOS- dream. Q olor dream, Olofantur (s-f  > f)  = Lorien.  N [olt  >] ol
   (pl.  elei);  oltha-  to  dream  (*olsa-);  Olfannor   (=  Olo(s)-fantur)
   [SPAN] = Lorien. [See LOS.]                                              
 OM- Q oma voice; oman, amandi vowel.                                      
 ONO- beget  (see NO).  Q onta-  beget, create  (pa.t. one,  ontane); onna
   creature; ontaro (ontaro) begetter, parent  (f. ontare);  ontani parents.
   N odhron parent (odhril); (*onro) ed-onna beget; un creature.             
 ORO- up; rise; high; etc.  (cf. RO).  Q ore  rising, anarore sunrise; orta-
   rise, raise. N or prep. above; prefix or- as in orchall, orchel superior,
   eminent (see KHAL(2)); ON  ortie, orie  rise, ortobe  raise; N  ortho raise
   (orthant); erio rise (+ oronte arose).                                    
 OROT-   height,   mountain.   Q  oron   (pl.   oronti)   mountain;  orto
   mountain-top. ON oro, pl. oroti, beside  oroto; N orod (pl.  ereid, ered)
   mountain;  orodrim  range  of  mountains  (see   RIM).  DOr.   orth,  pl.
   orthin.    Cf.    Orodreth;    Eredwethion,    Eredlindon,   Eredlemrin,
   Eredengrin.                                                              
   OR-NI-  high  tree.  Q orne  tree, high  isolated tree.  N, Dor.  orn. In
   Doriath used especially of beech, but as  suffix in  regorn etc.  used of
   any tree of any size. In N used of any large tree - holly, hawthorn, etc.
   were classed as toss (tussa) bush  [TUS]: thus  eregdos =  holly [EREK].
   N orn has pl. yrn.                                                       
   OROK- *orku goblin: Q orko, pl.  orqi. ON  orko, pl.  orkui; N  orch, pl.
   yrch. Dor. urch, pl. urchin. Dan. urc, pl. yrc.                          
 OROM-  * Orome:    Q   Orome;    ON Oroume,    Araume   >    Exilic   Araw,
   also called Tauros. See ROM.                                              
   OS-  round, about.  N o  about, concerning,  h before  vowel as  o Hedhil
   concerning  Elves;  os-  prefix  'about', as  esgeri cut  round, amputate
   (3  sg.  osgar).  Q  osto  city,  town  with wall  round. N  ost; othrond
   fortress, city in underground caves  = ost-rond (see ROD).  Cf. Belegost,
   Nargothrond.                                                             
   OT-  (OTOS,  OTOK)  seven.  Q  otso;  N  odog.  Q  Otselen  Seven  Stars,
   N Edegil, = Great Bear or Valakirka Sickle of the Gods.                  
   OY-  ever,  eternal.  Q oi  ever; oia  (*oiya) everlasting;  otale, oire
   everlasting [?age]; oira eternal. Oiolosse 'Everlasting snow'            
   Taniqetil  =  ON  Uigolosse,  N  Uilos, Amon  Uilos; uir  eternity; uireb
   eternal.  Q  Oiakumi  =   Avakuma.  [This   entry  replaced   that  under
   GEY, which itself replaced EY.]                                          

                                       P.                                   
                                                                           
   PAD- Q panda enclosure. N in cirban haven; pann courtyard.               
 PAL-  wide  (open).  Q  palla  wide,  expansive;  palu-, palya-  open wide,
   spread,  expand,  extend;  N  pelio  spread.  Q  palme surface;  N palath
   surface.  Q  palure  surface,  bosom,  bosom  of  Earth  (=  Old  English
   folde),  hence  Palurien  surname  of  Yavanna. [Later  addition:] palang
   far, distant, wide, to a great extent; palantir a far-seeing stone.      
 PALAP-  Q  palpa-  to beat,  batter. N  blebi for * plebi; blab  flap, beat
   (wing, etc.)                                                             
 PAN- place, set, fix in place (especially of  wood). Q  panya- fix,  set; N
   penio.  Q  pano  piece  of  shaped  wood.  <pano:  plank,   fixed  board,
   especially  in  a  floor: ON  pano, panui,  N pan,  pein; panas  floor. Q
   ampano building (especially of wood), wooden hall.                       
 PAR.  compose,  put   together. * panna:   Q  parma   book,  ON   parma,  N
   parf   (perf).   Q   parmalambe  book-language   =  Qenya.   ON  parthobi
   arrange, compose.                                                        
 PARAK- Q parka dry; ON parkha, N parch.                                     
 PAT-  (cf.  PATH) * panta  open:  Q   panta,  obsolete   in  ON   owing  to
   coalescence with  qanta full.  Q panta-  to unfurl,  spread out,  open. N
   panno to open, enlarge; pann (*patna) wide.                              
 PATH-  *pathna:  ON   pattha,  N   path;  Q   pasta  smooth.  * pathma:  ON
   pathcva, N pathw level space, sward.                                     
 PEG- mouth. Q pe.                                                          
 PEL-  revolve  on  fixed  point. Q  pel- go  round, revolve,  return. *pel-
   takse:  Q  peltas,  pl. peltaksi  pivot; ON  pelthaksa, N  pelthaes pivot
   (see TAK).                                                               
 PEL(ES)- ON pele (pl. pelesi,  peleki) [Old  English] 'tun',  fenced field.
   N pel, pl. peli. Q peler; opele walled house or village, 'town'; N gobel,
   cf.  Tavrobel (village  of Turin  in the  forest of  Brethil, and  name of
   village  in Tol  Eressea) [TAM];  Tindobel =  starlit village  [TIN]. [On
   this remarkable reference to Tavrobel see pp. 412 - 13.]                 
 PEN-,   PENED-    Q    pende    slope,   downslope,    declivity;   ampende
   upward  slope,  penda  sloping  down, inclined.  N pend,  penn declivity;
   ambenn  uphill;  dadbenn  downhill,  inclined,   prone  [see AM(2),  DAT].
   N  pendrad  or pendrath  passage up  or down  slope, stairway.  [See note
   'to DEN.]                                                                
 PER-  divide  in  middle,  halve.  Q  perya, perina;  N perin,  cf. Peringol
 half-Elf,   or   Gnome.   [Cf.   Beringol   and    Peringiul   'Half-elven',
 commentary  on  AB  z   annal  325;   also  Pereldar   'Half-eldar',  Danas,
 in   QS   $28.   The   puzzling   words   'or   Gnome'  should   perhaps  be
 interpreted  as  if  'half-Elf,  or  rather  half-Gnome  (perin  +  ngol)'.]
   PERES-  affect,  disturb,  alter.  N  presto  to affect,  trouble, disturb;
   prestannen  'affected', of  vowel [i.e.  'mutated'];prestanneth 'affection'
   of  vowels.  ON  persos it  affects, concerns.  [This entry  is found  on a
   detached slip.]                                                          

        
                                                                             
  PHAL-,  PHALAS-  foam.  Q   falle  foam;   falma  (crested)   wave;  falmar
  or  falmarin  (falmarindi)  sea-spirit,  nymph;  falasse  beach;  Falanyel,
  pl.  Falanyeldi  =  Solonel,  name  of  the  Teleri,  also in  Telerin form
  Fallinel  (see  NYEL).  N  falf  foam,  breaker;  faltho  (ON  phalsobe) to
  foam; falas (pl. feles) beach,  shore, as  proper name  i Falas  west coast
  (of  Beleriand),  whence  adj.  Falathren.  The  variant  SPALAS  is  seen
  in espalass foaming [? fall];  T spalasta- to  foam, froth.  [With falmarin
  'sea-spirit' cf. Falmarini, spirits of the foam, in the Lost Tales,  I. 66.
  Falmarindi is used of the Teleri: p. 403.]                                  
  PHAR-  reach,  go  all  the way,  suffice. Q  farya- suffice  (pa.t. farne);
  fare sufficiency, plenitude, all that  is wanted;farea  enough, sufficient.
  EN farn enough; far adv. sufficient, enough, quite.                          
 PHAS-  Q  fasse  tangled  hair,  shaggy  lock;  fasta-  tangle.   ON  phasta
  shaggy hair, EN fast (cf. Ulfast [ULUG]).                                  
 PHAU-   gape.   Q   fauka   open-mouthed,   thirsty,   parched;   ON  phauka
  thirsty, N faug thirsty; Dor na Fauglith (thirsty sand, see LIT).            
  PHAY-  radiate,  send  out  rays  of  light.  Q  faina-  emit  light; faire
  radiance;  ON  phaire.  Cf.  * Phay-anaro  'radiant   sun'  >   Q  Feanaro,
  ON  Phayanor,  N  Feanour,  Feanor.  Cf.  N   foen  radiant,   white.  [See
  SPAN.]                                                                      
  PHELEG-  cave.  T felga  cave; Q  felya; ON  phelga, N  fela, pl.  fili; cf.
  Felagund [KUNDU].                                                           
  PHEN- Q fenda threshold; ON phenda, N fend, fenn.                           
  PHER-,   PHEREN-   beech.  Q   feren  or   ferne  (pl.   ferni)  beech-tree;
  ferna  mast,  beechnuts;  ferinya  beechen.  T   ferne.  ON   pheren  beech;
  pherna   mast;   Exilic   fer   was   usually   replaced  by   brethil  (see
  BERETH).                                                                    
  PHEW- feel disgust at, abhor. Q feuya; ON phuiobe, N fuio.                  
  PHI-  Q  fion  (fioni,  fiondi)  [....]  Cf.  Fionwe  son  of   Manwe  [see
  WEG].  [The  meaning  of  Q fion  is  unfortunately  not  certainly  legible;
  the likeliest interpretation would be 'haste', but 'hawk' is a possibility.]
  PHILIK- small bird. Q filit, pl.  filiki; N  filig pl.,  analogical singular
  fileg or filigod.                                                           
  PHIN-  nimbleness,  skill.  ON  phinde   skill,  phinya   skilled; * Phinde-
  rauto,  N  Finrod [RAUTA].  Cf.  Q  Finwe,  ON   Phinwe,  name   of  chief
  Gnome   (Exilic  * Finw,   [see   WEG]).   Find-   occurs   also   in  names
  Findabar    (*Phind-ambar),    Fingon    (*Findekano)  [KAN];    phinya   or
  -phini occurs in  Fingolfin (=  ngolfine 'magic  skill'), Isfin [is], Curufin
  [KUR];  distinguish  SPIN  in  Glorfindel.  [On  the  absence  of  Finw  in
  Exilic Noldorin see also the  passage at  the end  of the  Lhammas $ 11. -
  The   name   Findabar   appears   in   the   entry   MBAR   in    the   form
  Findobar, as also in the Genealogies, p. 403.]                              
  PHIR-  Q  firin  dead  (by  natural  cause),  firima  mortal;   fire  mortal
  man  (firi);  firya  human;  Firyanor  =  Hildorien; ilfirin  (for *ilpirin)
  immortal;  faire  natural death  (as act).  N feir,  pl. fir  mortals; firen
  human; fern,  pl. firn  dead (of  mortals). Dor  firn i  guinar Land  of the

   Dead that Live [KUY]. Firiel = mortal maid, later name of Luthien.     
   PHOR-  right-hand.  Q  forya  right;  formaite  righthanded,  dexterous
   [MA3].  formen  north,  formenya  northern [MEN].  N foeir,  feir right
   (hand);   forgam   righthanded   [KAB];   forven   north,   also  forod;
   forodren   northern.  Cf.   Forodwaith  Northmen,   Northerland  [WEG];
   Forodrim. *phoroti: Q forte. N forn right or north. (Cf. KHYAR.)        
 PHUY-  Q  fuine,   huine  deep   shadow;  Fui,   Hui  Night.   ON  phuine
   night, N fuin; cf. Taur na Fuin = Taure Huineva.                       
   PIK- ON pika small spot, dot; N peg. ON pikina tiny, N pigen.          
 PILIM- Q pilin (pilindi) arrow.                                          
 PIS- Q pirya juice, syrup. N peich; pichen juicy.                        
 PIW- spit. Q piuta; ON puiobe, N puio.                                   
 POL-,  POLOD-  physically  strong.  Q polda strong,   burly.  Cf.poldore,
   adj. Poldorea.                                                         
 POR- *pori: Q pore flour, meal.                                          
 POTO- animal's foot. ON poto, poti, N pod, pyd.                          
 POY- *poika clean, pure: Q poika; N puig clean, tidy, neat.              
 PUS- stop, halt, pause. Q pusta- to stop, put a stop to, and intr. cease,
   stop; pusta (noun) stop, in punctuation full stop. N post  pause, halt,
   rest,  cessation, respite.  [An added  entry gives  PUT-, with  Q putta
   stop (in punctuation), pusta- to stop, punta  a stopped  consonant; but
   the entry PUS- was not cancelled or changed.]                          
                                                                         
                                      R.                                  
                                                                         
   RAB-  *raba  wild, untamed:  Q rava,  N rhaw  wilderness. [Q  rava and
   N rhaw with wholly different  meaning are  also derivatives  from stem
   RAMBA, and N rhaw appears in a third sense under RAW.]                 
   RAD-  back,  return.  Dor.  radhon  east  (cf.  nivon  forward  =  west
   [NIB]);  Radhrim  East-march  (part  of Doriath);  Radhrost East-vale,
   land  of  Cranthir  under  Blue  Mountains [Ros(2)]. *randa  cycle, age
   (100 Valian Years): Q, ON randa; N anrand.                            
 RAG- *ragna: ON ragna crooked, N rhaen.                                  
 RAK-  stretch  out,  reach.  *ranku: Q  ranko arm,  pl. ranqi;  ON ranko,
   pl. rankui; N rhanc, pl. (archaic) rhengy,  usually rhenc,  arm. *rakme
   fathom: Q rangwe; ON ragme, N rhaew.                                 
 RAM.  *rama:  Q  rama  wing,  cf.  Earrame   'Sea-wing'  [Av],   name  of
   Tuor's ship. N  rhenio (*ramya-)  fly, sail,  wander (cf. RAN)., rhofal
   pinion, great wing (of eagle), pl. rhofel (*ramale); rhafn wing (horn),
   extended point at side,  etc. (*ramna).  [With rhofal  cf. 'wide-winged
   Lhandroval' in QS (p. 301); for the first element see LAD.]            
 RAMBA-  Q  ramba  wall,  cf.  Ilurambar;  N   rhamb,  rham,   cf.  Andram
   'Long Walls' [ANAD] in Beleriand. Q rava bank, especially of  a river;
   N rhaw [see RAB, RAW].                                                  

     RAN- wander, stray. *Rana: Q Rana Moon, N Rhan. Q ranya- to
      stray, N rhenio (cf. RAM); Q rane straying, wandering, ranen errant;
     N rhaun, [added later:] N rhandir wanderer, pilgrim.                      
     RAS-  stick  up  (intr.).  Q  rasse  horn  (especially  on  living animal,
     but  also  applied  to  mountains);  N  rhaes,   rhasg;  cf.   Caradras  =
     Redhorn [KARAN]. [This  entry was  an addition  at the  end of  the list.
     The  N  words  and  the  reference  to  Caradras  were scribbled  in still
     later.]                                                                   
    RASAT- twelve. [No other forms are given.]                                 
    RAT-  walk.  "rata:  N  rad  path,  track;  rado  to  make  a  way,  find a
     way;  ath-rado  to  cross,  traverse  [AT(AT)];  athrad   crossing,  ford,
     cf.  Sarn Athrad.  *ratta:  ON  rattha  course,  river-bed,  N  rath  (cf.
     Rathloriel)  [LAWAR].  ostrad  a  street.   [Added:]  rant   lode,  vein;
     Celebrant river-name. Ilk. rant flow, course of river.                    
    RAUTA-  metal.  Q,  ON   rauta;  N   rhaud,  cf.   -rod  in   names  Finrod,
     Angrod,  Damrod  (see  PHIN,  ANGA,  NDAM).   [The  original   meaning  of
     RAUTA was   given  as   'copper',  changed   to  'metal';   cf.  Nambarauto
     (Damrod) 'hammerer of copper' under NDAM.]                                
    RAW- *rau: Q ra (pl. ravi) lion;  ON ro  (pl. rowi),  N rhaw  (pl. rhui).
     [Cf. I. 260,  entry Measse'.  - Distinct  N words  rhaw appear  under RAB
     and RAMBA.]                                                               
     RAYAK- Q raika crooked, bent, wrong; N rhoeg wrong.                       
    RED- (Cf. ERED) scatter, sow. Q rerin I  sow, pa.t. rende; N  rhedi  to
     sow. ? redda 'sown', sown field, acre.                                    
    REG- edge, border, margin. Q rena. N rhein, rhain border; edrein.          
    REP- bend, hook. rempa crooked, hooked.                                    
    RI-   Q   rima  edge,   hem,  border.   Dor.  rim   (as  in   Nivrim [NIB],
     Radhrim [RAD]); N rhif.                                                    
    RIG-  Q  rie  crown  (*rige);  rina  crowned  (cf.  Tinwerina); ON  rige, N
     rhi  crown.  Cf.  Rhian  name   of  a   woman,  =   'crown-gift', rig-anna
     [ANA(1)];  N  rhin  crowned;  rhis queen.  [Elerina, which  was substituted
     for  Tinwerina  in  a note  dated February  1938 (p.  200), appears  in a
     marginal addition to entry EL.)                                           
     RIK(H)-  jerk,  sudden move,  flirt. Q  rihta- jerk,  give quick  twist or
     move,  twitch.  *rinki:  Q rinke  flourish, quick  shake. N  rhitho jerk,
     twitch, snatch; rhinc twitch, jerk, trick, sudden move.                   
    RIL- glitter (cf. SIL., THIL, GIL). Q rilma glittering light; nlya glitter-
     ing,  brilliance. Cf.  Silmarille, Silmaril  (pl. Silmarilli),  N Silevril
     (*silimarille).                                                           
    RIM-  *rimba:   Q   rimba   frequent,   numerous;   ON   rimba,   N  rhemb,
     rhem.  *rimbe  crowd, host;  Q, ON  rimbe, N  rhimb, rhim  - often  as pl.
     -rim [see LI].                                                            
    RIN-  Q  rinde  circle,  rinda  circular.  N  rhind, rhinn  circle; idrind,
     idrin year [YEN]; rhinn circular; rhingorn circle [KOR].                   
    RINGI- cold. Q ringe; ON  ringe, N  rhing; cf.  Ringil name  of one  of the
     great Lamps (pillared on  ice), also  of Fingolfin's  sword. Q  ringe cold

 pool or lake (in mountains); Dor. ring, N rhimb, rhim, as in              
 Mith-rim.                                                                
 RIP- rush, fly, Ring. Q rimpa rushing, flying; N rhib-, rhimp, rhimmo     
 to flow like a [? torrent]; river-name Rhibdath, Rhimdath 'Rushdown'.     
 [This entry was a hasty  scribbled addition  at the  end of  the R-stems.]
 RIS- slash, rip. ON rista- rend,  rip; N  risto. Cf.  Orchrist sword-name.
 [This entry was left unchanged, but a second  form of  it was  added later
 without reference to the first:]                                          
 RIS. Cf. KIRIS, cut, cleave. *rista-: Q rista- cut; rista a cut, N rhisto,
 rhest; Ilk. rest, cf. Eglorest, ghyll or  ravine made  by the  river Eglor
 [see ELED] at its mouth, name  of town  there. *risse-:  N rhis,  rhess a
 ravine, as in Imladris.                                                   
 RO-  (form  of  ORO,  q.v.)  rise.   Q romen   (see  MEN)   east, romenya
 eastern;  rona  east;  contrast  NDU  'down'.  ON   nina  east,   N  rhun,
 amrun (cf.  dun, annun);  + rhufen  east. Cf.  name El-run.  [El-run was
 an addition. See note to BARATH.]                                         
 ROD-  cave.  Q  rondo  cave;  N  rhond,  rhonn,  cf.  Nargothrond, othrond
 (see os). Dor.  roth, pl.  rodhin, as  in Meneg-roth  is probably from roda
 >  rodh   >  roth.   Cf.  ON   rauda  hollow,   cavernous,  N   rhaud.  ON
 rostobe  to  hollow  out,  excavate,  N  rosto.  In  Ilkorin rond  = domed
 roof, hence Elrond (vault of heaven) [EL], name of Earendel's son.        
 ROK- Q rokko horse; N roch horse.                                         
 ROM-  (Cf.  OROM  and  Orome,  Araw)  loud  noise,  horn-blast,   etc.  Q
 romba   horn,   trumpet;   ON  romba,   N   rhom.   Q   roma   loud  sound,
 trumpet-sound; ON ruma, N + rhu in rhomru sound of horns.                 
 ROS'-  distil,  drip.  Q  rosse  fine rain,  dew. N  rhoss rain,  cf. name
 Celebros  Silver-rain  of  a waterfall.  Silivros =  Q Silmerosse,  name of
 Silpion.  [Both  Silivros  and  Silmerosse  are  found in  the list  of the
 names  of the  Trees in  QS )16.  Celebros is  translated 'Silver  Rain' in
 AB 2 annal 299 (previously 'Foam-silver', 'Silver Foam').]                
 ROS(2)-  Dor.  rost  plain,   wide  land   between  mountains;   cf. Nivrost
 [NIB], Radhrost [RAD].                                                      
 ROY'-  chase.  *ronyo  'chaser',  hound  of  chase:  Q ronyo,  N  rhyn.  Q
 roita- pursue; raime hunt, hunting; N rhui(w).                            
 ROY'-  (N GROJ-)  ruddy,  red.  Q roina  ruddy;  N  gruin.   [This  second
 stem ROY was put in very rapidly  at the  end of  the R-stems  and without
 any reference to the former.]                                             
 RUD-  *runda:  Q  runda   rough  piece   of  wood;   ON  runda,   N  grond
 club;  cf.  Grond  name  of  Melko's  mace,  and  name  Celebrond 'Silver-
 mace'.                                                                    
 RUK-    demon.    Q    rauko    demon,   malarauko    (*ngwalarauko,   cf.
 NGWAL); N rhaug, Balrog.                                                 
 RUN-  flat  of  hand or  sole of  foot. Q  runya slot,  footprint; tallune
 (*talrunya) sole of foot, N telloein, tellen [TAL]. N rhoein, rhein slot,
 spoor, track, footprint.                                                  
 RUS-  flash, glitter  of metal.  Q russe  corruscation, +  sword-blade; ON

    russe polished metal (N + rhoss chiefly found in names as Maedhros          
    [MAD], Findros, Celebros etc., owing to coalescence with ROS(1) ).           
    RUSKA- ON ruska, N rhosc brown.                                           
                                                                             
                                       S.                                      
                                                                             
    S- demonstrative stem. su, so  he (cf.  -so inflexion  of verbs);  st*, se
    she  (cf.  -se  inflexion  of verbs).  Cf. N  ho, hon,  hono he;  he, hen,
    bene she; ha, hana it; plurals huin, hin, hein.                           
    SAB- Q sava juice; ON soba, N san, {pl. sui).                             
    SAG-  *sagra:  Q  sara  bitter;  N  saer.  *sagma:  Q  sangwa   poison;  N
     saew.                                                                    
    SALAK-(WE)   Q   salqe   grass;   Ilk.  salch.   ON  salape   herb,  green
    food plant, N salab (pl. seleb) herb.                                     
    SALAP-  lick  up.  Q  salpa-  lick up,  sup, sip;  ON salpha  liquid food,
    soup, broth; N salf broth.                                                
    SAM-  unite,  join.  samnar  diphthongs.  [Hasty  later addition;  see SUD
    and SUS.]                                                                 
    SAR- Q sar, pl. sardi  stone (small);  sarna of  stone; sarne strong place.
    N sarn stone as a material, or as adj.; cf. Sarnathrad.                    
    SAY- know, understand. saira- wise; sairon wizard.                        
    SED- rest (cf. EZDE  'rest', Q  Este, ON  Ezda, wife  of Lorien).  Q sere
    rest, repose, peace; senda resting, at peace; serin I rest. N  sidh peace.
    SEL-D- daughter [see YEL]. Q selde. In  N iell  (poetic sell  girl, maid)
    with i from iondo son [YO]; a change assisted by  the loss  of s  in cpds.
    and  patronymics:  cf.  Tinnuviel   (*tindomiselde,  Q   Tindomerel),  see
    TIN.  [The  meaning  'daughter'  was  later  changed  to  'child',  with Q
    forms seldo, selda added.]                                                
    SER- love, be fond of (of liking, friendship). Q suffix-ser  friend; sermo
    friend (f. serme), also seron. Cf. name Elesser (Eledser) = AElfwine.      
    SI- this, here,  now. Q  si, sin  now; sinya  new. N  sein (pl.  sin) new;
    siniath news, tidings; sinnarn novel tale [NAR(2)].                         
    SIK- Q sikil dagger, knife; N sigil.                                      
    SIL- variant of THIL; 'shine silver'. These in  Q cannot  be distinguished
    normally, but Q Isil Moon, N + Ithil has th. s- appears in  *silime 'light
    of  Silpion',  + silver,  Q silme  (cf. Silmerosse,  N Silivros),  N *silif.
    *silima silver, shining white  (adj.): Q  silma, N *silef, cf.  Silevril, Q
    Silmaril (see RIL). In N Belthil (see BAL) s or th may  be present.  The Q
    name of the Elder Tree is Silpion (see below).                            
      Cf. Dor istel, istil silver light, applied by the Ilkorins to starlight,
    probably  a  Q  form learned  from Melian.  For *silif  N has  silith, by
    assimilation to or from influence of + Ithil.                              
      Related is SILIP whence Q Silpion (N *Silfion, not used).               
    SIR- flow. Q sir-, ON sirya-, N sirio flow. Q,  ON sire,  N sir  river (cf.
    Sirion); Q siril rivulet.                                                 
                                                                             
 i                                                                            

 SIW- excite, egg on,  urge. Q  siule incitement;  ON hyule,  N hul  cry of
 encouragement in battle.                                                 
 SKAL(1)- screen, hide  (from light).  Q halya-  veil, conceal,  screen from
 light;  halda  (*skalna)  veiled,  hidden,  shadowed,  shady  (opposed  to
 helda stripped bare,  see SKEL).  ON skhalia-,  skhalla; N  hall; haltha-
 to  screen.  Ilk.  esgal screen,  hiding, roof  of leaves.  Dan. sc(i)ella
 shade,  screen.  Derivative  name  Haldir  'hidden  hero'  [DER]  (son  of
 Orodreth);  also  Ilk.  Esgalduin  'River  under  Veil'   (of  [?leaves]).
 [There  seems  to be  a query  before the  bracketed words  at the  end of
 the entry.]                                                              
 SKAL(2)-  small  fish.  Q  hala;  halatir(no)  'fishwatcher',  kingfisher; N
 heledir. [This stem was a later addition; see KHAL(1), TIR.]                
 SKAR-  *skarwe:  Q harwe  wound;  N harw.  Cf.   Ilk.  esgar.  *skarna:  Q
 harna  wounded;  N  harn;  harno   to  wound   (Q  harna-).   Root  sense:
 tear,  rend;  cf.  *askara  tearing,  hastening:  N asgar,  ascar violent,
 rushing, impetuous. Ilk. ascar (cf. river-name Askar).                  
 SKAT- break asunder. Q hat-, pa.t. hante; terhat- break apart.           
 SKEL-  *skelma:  Q helma  skin, fell.  N helf  fur, heleth  fur, fur-coat.
 *skelna naked: Q helda; ON skhella, N hell. helta (skelta-) strip.       
 SKWAR-  crooked.  Q  hwarin  crooked;   hwarma  crossbar.   Dan.  swarn
 perverse, obstructive, hard to deal with.                                
 SKYAP-   *skyapat-   shore:  Q   hyapat;  ON   skhapa,  pl.   skhapati;  N
 habad shore (pl. hebeid).                                                
 SLIG-  *sligne, *slinge:  N thling  spider, spider's  web, cobweb.  Q line
 cobweb;  N  thlingril  [r  uncertain]  spider. Q  lia fine  thread, spider
 filament  (*liga);  N  thle,  Q  liante spider.  Cf. Ungoliante  [UNG], N
 Deldu-thling [DO3, DYEL.].                                               
 SLIN-  *slindi  fine,  delicate.  Q  linda 'fair'  is blended  with *linda
 sweet-sounding [see  LIND]. N  thlinn, thlind  fine, slender;  thlein (pl.
 thlin) = *slinya lean, thin, meagre.                                     
 SLIW- sickly. *sliwe sickness: Q live, ON sliwe,  thliwe, N  thliw later
 fliw. *slaiwa sickly, sick, ill; Q laiwa, ON slaiwa, thlaiwa,  N thlaew
 [> thloew] later flaew.                                                
 SLUK- swallow. [No forms given.]                                         
 SLUS-,  SRUS-  whisper. N  thloss (floss)  or thross  a whisper  or rustling
 sound; Q lusse a whispering sound, lussa- to whisper.                    
 SMAG-  soil,  stain.  N  maw  ("maga)  soil,  stain,  mael  (*magla) stain
 and  adj.  stained.  [N  maw  and  mael  changed to  hmas and  hmael; see
 note to SMAL.]                                                           
 SMAL-  yellow.  *smalina:  Q,  ON  malina  yellow,  N  malen  (pl. melin).
 *smalda:  Q  malda  gold  (as  metal),  ON  malda,  N  malt;   N  malthen
 (analogical  for  mallen)  of  gold.   Cf.  Melthinorn,   older Mellinorn.
 *smalu  pollen,  yellow  powder:  Q  malo,  ON  malo  (pl. malui),  N mal,
 pl.   meil   or   mely.   *smahva   fallow,  pale:   Q  malwa,   N  malw.
 *asmale,   *asmalinde   yellow   bird,   'yellow   hammer':    Q   ammale,
 ambale; ON ammale, ammalinde, N em(m)elin, emlin.                        

                                         
                                                                             
 [I give this entry as it was  before it  became confused  by later  changes in
 the  phonology  of  initial  sm-  (ON  retained  sm-,  and  the  N  words have
 (h)m-);  these  were  not  carried  through  consistently. -  Melthinorn 'tree
 of gold' is found in the list of names of the Trees in QS $ 16.]             
 SNAR- tie. Q narda knot; N nard.                                             
 SNAS-,  SNAT-  ?  Q  nasta  spear-head,  point,  gore,  triangle   (cf.  NAS);
 Dan. snaes. N  naith  (natsai  pl.?  )  gore. [Cf.  the Naith  of Loth1orien.
 The question-mark is followed by a drawing of an arrow-head.]                
 SNEW-  entangle.  Q  neuma   snare;  ON   numa,  N   nu  noose,   snare.  [The
 N  forms  were  changed   to  sniuma   and  snyma;   hniof  (pl.   hnyf)  and
 hnuif. See note to SMAL.]                                                    
 SNUR-   twist.   N   norn   twisted,   knotted,   crabbed,   contorted;   nord
 cord.                                                                      
 SOL- Q solor (*solos) surf, cf.  Solonel, pl.  Soloneldi =  Teleri. This  is a
 Telerin form, cf. Fallinel, and cf. pure Q Solonyeldi [see NYEL].            
 SPAL-, SPALAS- variants of PHAL, PHALAS, q.v.                                
 SPAN-   white.   Q   fanya,   fana   cloud.   N   fein   white,   faun   cloud
 (*spana);   T   spania;   Dan.   spenna.   Cf.   Fanyamar  upper   air;  Span-
 turo   'lord   of   cloud',   Q   Fantur   surname   of   Mandos  (Nurufantur,
 N   Gurfannor   'lord   of   Death-cloud')   and   of   his   brother   Lorien
 (Olofantur,   N   Olfannor   'lord   of   Dream-cloud');   N    pl.   i-Fennyr
 or   Fennir   =   Lorien   and   Mandos  [see   NGUR,  or.os].   (Confused  in
 N  with  PHAY,  q.v.)  [The  beginning  of  this   entry  was   first  written
 'fanya   cloud';   'cloud'   was   struck  through,   and  fana   added,  with
 meanings  'white'  and  'cloud',  but  it  is  not  clear  how  they   are  to
 be  applied.  -  For  Fanyamar  see  the   Ambarkanta,  IV.   236  etc.   -  1
 do  not  think  that this  association of  the Fanturi  with 'cloud'  is found
 anywhere else.]                                                              
 SPANAG-   *spanga:   Q   fanga;   T   spanga;  ON   sphanga  beard;   N  fang,
 cf.  An(d)fang  [ANAD]  Longbeard,  one   of  the   tribes  of   Dwarves  (pl.
 Enfeng).  Cf.   Tinfang  'Starbeard',   name  of   an  Elvish   piper;  Ulfang
 [ULUG].                                                                      
 SPAR-   hunt,   pursue.   ON  (s)pharobe   hunt,  (s)pharasse   hunt(ing);  EN
 faras  hunting  (cf.  Taur-na-Faras);  feredir  hunter  (pl.  faradrim);  faro
 to  hunt.  Elfaron  'star-hunter',  Moon.   [With  Taur-na-Faras   (the  Hills
 of  the  Hunters  or  Hunters'  Wold)  cf.  Taur-na-Faroth in  QS $ 112, and
 with the name 'Star-hunter' of the Moon cf. QS $76.]                         
 SPAY-   despise,   contemn.  Q   faika  contemptible,   mean.  N   foeg  mean,
 poor, bad.                                                                   
 SPIN-  *spinde  tress,  braid  of  hair:  Q  finde, ON  sphinde lock  of hair;
 sphindele  (braided)  hair;  N  findel,  finnel,  cf.  Glorfindel.  Cf.  spine
 larch, Q fine.                                                               
 SRIP- scratch. N thribi to scratch.                                          
 STAB-   *stabne,   *stambe:    Q   sambe    room,   chamber;    samna   wooden
 post.  ON  stabne,  sthamne;  N  thafn  post,   wooden  pillar;   tham,  thamb
 hall.   Q   kaimasan,   pl.   kaimasambi    bedchamber  [KAY].    N   thambas,

 thamas great hall. *stabno, *stabro carpenter, wright, builder: Q            
 samno; ON sthabro(ndo), N thavron; Ilk. thavon.                               
 STAG. press, compress. *stanga: Q sanga  crowd, throng,  press, N            
 thang compulsion, duress, need, oppression; cf. Thangorodrim (the            
 mountains  of duress).  Cf. sangahyando  'throng-cleaver' (sword-            
 name),  N  *havathang,  dissimilated  to havathang,  hadafang [see           
 SYAD].                                                                       
 STAK-   split,   insert.  *stanka,   *stakna:  Q   sanka  cleft,   split;  ON
 sthanka,   N    thanc,   cf.   LHamthanc   'forked    tongue',   serpent-name
 [LAB]. ON nestak- insert, stick in, EN nestegi, pa.t. nestanc.              
 STAL- steep. Ilk. thall (*stalre) steep, falling steeply (of river) -, thalos
 torrent (also a proper name) [the river Thalos in Ossiriand].                
 STALAG-   *stalga   stalwart,  steady,   firm:  T   stalga;  ON   sthalga,  N
 thala,   cf.  thalion   (*stalgondo)  hero,   dauntless  man   (pl.  thelyn),
 especially as surname of Hurin Thalion.                                      
 STAN-  fix,  decide.  Cf.  Q  sanda  firm, true,  abiding; N  thenid, thenin.
 Q sanye rule, law; sanya regular, law-abiding, normal.                       
 STAR-  stiff.  Q  sara  stiff  dry grass,  bent; N  thar stiff  grass; tharas
 hassock,   footstool;   gwa-star   hummock   [wo].   ON    stharna   sapless,
 stiff,  rigid,  withered;  N  tharn;  not in  Q since  it would  coalesce with
 *sarna of stone [SAR].                                                       
 STARAN-  Cf.   Ilk.  thron   stiff,  hard   (*starana);  cf.   thron-ding  in
 Balthronding   name  of   Beleg's  bow.   [Under  stems   BEL  and   DING  the
 name is written Bel-.]                                                       
 STELEG-  N  thela  point  (of  spear);  egthel,  ecthel,  cf.  Ecthelion (see
 EK).  [An  illegible  word  after  ecthel  may  read  'same',  i.e.  the same
 meaning as thela.]                                                           
 STINTA-  short.  Q  sinta;  ON  sthinta,  N  thent.  N  thinnas  'shortness',
 name of mark indicating short quality of vowel.                              
 SUD-   base,   ground.   sundo   base,  root,   root-word.  [A   hasty  later
 addition.]                                                                   
 SULUK- Q sulka; ON sulkha, N solch root (especially as edible).              
 SUK-  drink.  Q  sukin  I  drink.  N  sogo,  3 sg.  sog, pa.t.  sunc, asogant
 (sogennen);   N   suth   draught,   Q   suhto;   N   sautha-   drain.  *sukma
 drinking-vessel; Q sungwa; Ilk. saum.                                        
 Variant SUG- in *suglu: Q sulo goblet, N sul.                                
 SUS-  hiss.   surya  spirant   consonant.  [Later   addition  with   SUD  and
 SAM.]                                                                        
 SWAD-    *swanda:   Q    hwan   (hwandi)    sponge,   fungus;    N   chwand,
 chwann, hwand.                                                              
 SWES-  noise  of  blowing  or  breathing.  *swesta-:  Q  hwesta-   to  puff;
 hwesta breath,  breeze, puff  of air:  ON hwesta,  N chwest  puff, breath,
 breeze.                                                                      
 SWIN-  whirl,  eddy.  Q  hwinya-  to  swirl,  eddy,  gyrate;   hwinde  eddy,
 whirlpool.  N  chwinio  twirl,  whirl, eddy;  chwind, chwinn  adj.; chwin
 giddiness, faintness; chwiniol whirling, giddy, fantastic.                  

 SYAD.  shear  through,  cleave.  Q  hyarin  I  cleave.   *syadno,  *syando
 'cleaver',   sword;   cf.   *stangasyando   =   Q   sangahyando   'throng-
 cleaver'  (sword-name)  (see  STAG).  In  N  lost  owing   to  coalescence
 with  KHAD  [a  stem  not  given  in  the  Etymologies],  except  in + had
 [....]   (*syada),  cf.   hadafang  (for   hadathang)  =   Q  sangahyando;
 hasto  hack  through,  from  hast  axe-stroke  (*syad-ta).  Cf.  Q  hyatse
 cleft,  gash  (*syadse  >  syatse), and  N hathel  (*syatsela) broadsword-
 blade,  or  axe-blade.  [The  illegible  word  would  most   naturally  be
 interpreted  as  'throng',  but  this  obviously  cannot  be the  case (or
 cannot have been intended.).]                                             
 SYAL-   *syalma:   Q   hyalma  shell,   conch,  horn   of  Ulmo.   N  half
 seashell.                                                                 
                                                                          
                                     T.                                    
                                                                          
 TA - demonstrative stem  'that'. Q  ta that,  it; tana  that (anaphoric);
 tar thither (*tad), ON to.                                                
 TA-,  TA3-  high, lofty;  noble. *tara  lofty: Q  tara, ON  tara absorbed
 in  N  by  taur  from  PQ  *taura  (see  TAWAR,  TUR).  N  poetic  only or
 in ancient titles taur; often found in  names, as  Tor-, -dor,  The latter
 was  blended  with  taro  king  and  turo   master:  cf.   Fannor  [SPAN].
 *taro king: only  used of  the legitimate  kings of  the whole  tribes, as
 Ingwe  of  the  Lindar,  Finwe  of  the  Noldor  (and later  Fingolfin and
 Fingon of all the exiled Gnomes). The word  used of  a lord  or king  of a
 specified  region  was  aran  (ar),  Q  haran  [see  3AR].  Thus Fingolfin
 taur  egledhriur  'King  of  the  Exiles'  [see  LED], but  Fingolfin aran
 Chithlum 'King of  Hithlum'. Q  tar (pl.  tari). N + taur, Ilk.  tor, only
 used     of     Thingol:     Tor      Thingol     =      King     Thingol.
 <tan  queen,  wife  of  a  *taro:  Q  tari,  but especially  used in  Q of
 Varda (Tinwetari Queen of Stars) - but  in cpds.  and titles  the sexless
 cpd.  form  -tar  was  used:  Tinwetar,  Tinwerontar  Queen  of   Stars  =
 Varda;  Sorontar King  of  Eagles  (name  of  a  great  eagle).  The  word
 survived in Ilk. only in form toril = Melian.  In N  rhien, rhin  was used
 - 'crowned lady'. see RIG.                                                
   Base  stem  TA  appears  in  Q  Taniqetil  (see  NIK-W,  TIL),  where  N
 substitutes  following  adj.:  Nimdil-dor.  But  the  Q  form  is possibly
 reduction  of  tan-nig  with  adjectival  tana  <  *ta3na. The  latter is
 suggested  by  N  taen  height,  summit  of  high mountain,  especially in
 Taen-Nimdil,  Manwe's  hall.  Cf.  also  tarqendi =  Lindar, 'High-elves',
 tarqesta  =  Lindarin,  or  Qenya  'high-speech'.  [On  Tinwetar,  Tinwe-
 rontar see TIN and note.]                                                  
 TAK- fix, make fast. Q take he fastens, pa.t.  tanke; tanka  firm, fixed,
 sure. N  taetho fasten,  tie; tanc  firm; tangado  to make  firm, confirm,
 establish. Ilk. taga he fixes, constructs, makes; tach firm, stiff, solid,
 *tankla  pin,  brooch:  Q  tankil;  Ilk.  tangol;  N  tachl,  tachol. *takse

  nail:  Q  takse;  N  taes; Ilk.  tass pin.  Cf. Q  peltas (peltaksi)  pivot, N
  pelthaes  [PEL].  *takma  'thing  for  fixing':  Q  tangwa hasp,  clasp; N
  taew  holder,  socket,  hasp,  clasp, staple;  Ilk. taum.  *atakwe construc-
  tion, building: Q ataqe; N adab building, house (pl. edeb).                      
  TAL- foot. Q tal (g.sg. talen); N tal, pl. teil; Ilk. tal, pl. tel. Related is
  TALAM   floor,   base,  ground:   Q  talan   (talami)  floor,   ground;  talma
  base,  foundation,  root  (cf.   Martalmar).  N   talaf  ground,   floor,  pl.
  teleif; Ilk. talum, pl. telmin. tal- is often  used for  'end, lower  end': so
  Rhamdal  'Wall's-end',  name  of  a  place  in   East  Beleriand   [RAMBA].  -
  Q  tallune  (*talrunya)  sole  of  foot;  N  tellein,  tellen (see  RUN). [For
  Martalmar  (also  Talmar  Ambaren)  see  the  Ambarkanta,   IV.  241   -  5.]
  TALAT- to slope, lean, tip. Q talta-  to slope;  talta adj.  sloping, tilted,
  leaning;  talta  an  incline.  N  talad  an  incline, slope.  atland sloping,
  tilted; atlant oblique, slanting; atlanno to slope, slant.                       
  [The  entry  was  first  written  thus.  A  first  addition  to  it  was 'Cf.
  Atalante  (see  LANT).'  Subsequently  the  reference  to  LANT  was  changed
  to  DAT  (under  which  stem (DAT,  DANT) are  given Q  lanta a  fall, lanta-
  to fall,  and Atalante  the Fallen);  but either  at the  same time  or later
  this   addition  was   made:  'Atalante   (a-prefix  =   complete)  downfall,
  overthrow,   especially  as   name  of   the  land   of  Numenor.'   Cf.  the
  statement on this subject in my father's letter of July 1964, cited on  p. 8
  (footnote).  -  Other  additions  to  this  entry extended  the meaning  of Q
  talta- ('slope, slip, slide  down') and  added Q  atalta 'collapse,  fall in'
  and N talt 'slipping, falling, insecure.']                                       
  TAM-    (cf.    NDAM)    knock.   *tamro   'woodpecker'   (=    knocker):   Q
  tambaro;  N  tafr  (=  tavr),  tavor,  cf.  Tavr-obel  [PEL(ES)].   N  tamno
  to  knock  (*tamba);  Q  tamin  I   tap,  pa.t.   tamne;  tamba-   to  knock,
  keep on knocking.                                                                
 TAN-   make,   fashion.   *tano:   Q   tano   craftsman,  smith;   Martano  or
  Martan,  surname  of  Aule   (Earth-smith),  N   Barthan  [MBAR].   Q  tanwe
  craft,  thing  made,  device,  construction.  Q  kentano  potter;  N  cennan.
  [Certhan   >]   C(e)irdan   shipbuilder.   Tintanie   star-maker    =   Varda
  (Elbereth);  N Gilthonieth  or Gilthoniel.  [The latter  part of  this entry,
  from   Q   kentano,   was   an   addition.   Under  KEM   a  Q   word  kemnaro
  'potter' is given. The form  Gilthonieth appears  in the  first draft  of the
  hymn  to  Elbereth  in  the  original  second chapter  (Three is  Company) of
  The Lord of the Rings.]                                                          
 TAP- stop. Q tape he stops, blocks (pa.t. tampe); tampa stopper.                  
 TARAG-  *targa  tough,  stiff;  Q  tarya;  ON  targa,  N  tara,   tar-;  Ilk.
  targ.  N  tarlanc  stiff-necked, obstinate;  tarias [s  uncertain] stiffness,
  toughness,  difficulty.  [There   must  be   a  connection   between  tarlanc
  'stiff-necked'  (LANK)  and  Tarlang's   Neck  (The   Return  of   the  King
  V.2),  concerning  which  my  father  noted  (Nomenclature  of  The  Lord  of
  the  Rings,  published  in  Lobdell,  A  Tolkien  Compass,  p.  193)  that it
  was originally the name of a  long ridge  of rock  but was  later taken  as a
  personal name.]                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  j

   TARAK-  horn  (of  animals). Q  tarka horn;  N tarag  horn, also  used of
   steep   mountain  path,   cf.  Tarag(g)aer   =  Ruddihorn   [GAY].  [This
   entry was additional to the main list. On Taragaer see p. 345.]          
 TARAS-  ON  tarsa  trouble,  N   tars,  tass   labour,  task.   trasta-  to
   harass, trouble.                                                         
 TATA-  (cf.  ATA,  ATTA).  N  tad two,  tadol double.  Q tatya-  to double,
   repeat;  tanta double.  [An earlier  entry, struck  out, was  as follows:
   'TAT- oldest  form AT(AT)?  two. Q  atta again,  atta- back  again, re-'.
   See AT(AT).)                                                             
 TATHAR-   *tathar,   *tathare,  *tathre   willow-tree:  Q   tasar,  tasare;
   N tathor (= *tathre), adj. tathren of willow; cf. Nan-tathren.           
 TAWAR-  wood,  forest.  *taure  great  wood,  forest:  Q  taure;   N  taur;
   Ilk.  taur.  N  Tauros  'Forest-Dread'  [GOS],  usual  N by-name  of Orome
   (N  Araw).  *tawar  wood  (material):  Q tavar  wood, taurina  of wood;
   N tawar  often used  = taur;  tawaren wooden  (pl. tewerin).  Ilk. taur
   wood (place and  material). *tawaro/e  dryad, spirit  of woods:  Q tavaro
   or tavaron, f. tavaril [cf. the old name Tavari, I. 66, 267.]            
       Note:  N  adj.  taur  mighty,  vast,  overwhelming,  huge,  awful, is
   blend  of  *tara (=  Q tara  lofty), *taura  masterful, mighty  (TUR). It
   affected the sense of taur forest (only used of huge forests).           
 TAY-  extend,  make  long(er).  Q  taina  lengthened,  extended;  taita  to
   prolong; taile lengthening, extension. N taen long (and thin).           
 TE3- line, direction.  Q tie  path, course,  line, direction,  way (*te3e),
   N te line, way. Q tera, N tir straight, right. [This stem was  changed to
   TEN, and the ulterior form of Q  tera, N  tir given  as *tenra.  There is
   also a very rough additional entry TEN (see below).]                     
 TEK-  make  a  mark,  write  or  draw  (signs or  letters). Q  teke writes;
   tehta a mark (in writing),  sign, diacritic  - as  andatehta 'long-mark'.
   *tekla:  Q   tekil  pen.   *tekme  letter,   symbol:  Q   tengwa  letter,
   tengwanda  alphabet;  tengwe  writing,   tengwesta  grammar.   N  teitho
   write;  teith  mark (as  andeith, ON  andatektha); tiw  letter (*tekme);
   tegl,  tegol pen.  Q tenkele  writing system,  spelling; tekko  stroke of
   pen or brush (') when not used as long mark.                             
   TEL-,  TELU-  *telma,  -e  hood,  covering.  Q  telme (cf.  telmello tel-
   manna  from  hood  to base  [sic], from  crown to  foot, top  to bottom);
   telta-  to  canopy,  overshadow, screen;  telume dome,  (especially) dome
   of heaven. Cf. Telumehtar 'warrior  of the  sky', name  of Orion.  N telu
   dome,  high  roof;  daedelu  canopy  (see  DAY);  ortheli   roof,  screen
   above,  orthelian  canopy.  [Telumehtar  reappears  from  the  Lost Tales
   (Telimektar, Telumektar).]                                               
   TELEK-  stalk,  stem, leg.  Q telko  leg, analogical  pl. telqi;  N telch
   (pl. tilch) stem.                                                        
 TELEP- silver; see KYELEP.                                                 
 TELES-  elf,  sea-elf,  third  tribe  of  the Eldar.  Q Teler,  pl. Teleri;
   Telerin Telerian; general pl. Telelli, Telellie  'Teler-folk'. Originally
   the sense was 'hindmost, tarrier'; cf. Q tella hindmost, last, telle rear

 (*telesa); N tele end,  rear, hindmost  part (pl.  telei); adel  behind, in
 rear  (of).  Some  forms  show  blending  with KYEL,  q.v. [On  the meaning
 of Teleri see the Lhammas $2 and QS $27.]                                  
 TEN-  N  ti  line,  row  (<  *tene);  tar (*tenra)  straight. Q  terna row,
 series, line;  tea straight  line, road.  [See stem  TE3 (changed  to TEN),
 where the derivative words are different formations.]                      
 TER-,  TERES-  pierce.  *terewa  piercing,  keen:  Q  tereva  fine,  acute;
 N trim fine, slender; Ilk. trew. Cf. Q tere, ter  through; N  tri through,
 and as prefix  tre-, tri;  ON tre  unstressed prefix,  see BAT,  NAR; prep.
 tri.  *teren(e):  Q  teren  (terene)  slender;  Terendul,  name  ('slender-
 dark')  [DUL,  NDUL].  [The  name  Terendul  occurs   in  The   Lost  Road
                                                                           
 (p. 59).]                                                                  
 THAR-     across,     beyond.     Thar-gelion;     Thar-bad    [?Crossway].
 [Scribbled additional entry.]                                              
 THE-  look  (see  or  seem).  N  thir  (*there)  look,   face,  expression,
 countenance;    cf,    Cranthir    Ruddy-face  [KARAN],    Gostir    older
 Gorsthir  'dread-glance',  dragon-name  [GOS].  N  thio  to  seem,  thia it
 appears.                                                                   
 THEL-,  THELES-  sister  (cf.  tor,  toron-  brother  [TOR]).   ON  wathel
 sister, associate, N gwathel, pl.  gwethil. N  thel, thelei  sister, also
 muinthel, pl.  muinthil [see  MOY]. Q  seler, pl.  selli sister;  ON thele,
 thelehi (thelesi); Q  oselle [see  wo] sister,  associate. Usually  used of
 blood-kin  in  Q  was  onone,  see  NO,  ONO;  cf.  ON  wanure  kinswoman,
 N gwanur kinsman or kinswoman [wo].                                        
 THIL-  (variant  of  SIL,  q.v.)  N Ithil  poetic name  of the  Moon (Rhan)
 = Q Isil 'the Sheen'; thilio to glister. Cf. Belthil, Galathilion, names of
 the  Elder  of the  Two Trees  - but  these may  contain the  variant SIL..
 THIN-  (cf.  TIN). *thindi  pallid,  grey,  wan: Q  sinde grey.  Sindo name
 of  Elwe's  brother,  in  Telerian  form  Findo,   Ilk.  Thind,   later  in
 Doriath called  Thingol (i.e.  Thind +  gol wise,  see NGOL)  or Torthingol
 [TA]  King  Thingol,  also  with  title  Tor  Tinduma  'King  of  Twilight'
 [TIN],  N  Aran  Dinnu.  N  thind,   thinn  grey,   pale;  Ilk.   thind.  Q
 sinye  evening  (N + thin);  N   thinna.  Q   sinta-  fade   (sintane),  ON
 thintha.                                                                   
 THON-  Ilk.  thon  pine-tree.  N  thaun  pl.  thuin  is  probably  an early
 loan-word, with  Ilk. o  treated as  ON o  ( a.  Ilk. Dor-thonion  'Land of
 Pines',  name  of  mountainous   forest  N.   of  Doriath   and  afterwards
 becoming    Taur-na-Fuin,    a    punning   alteration    of   Dor-na-Thuin
 (Noldorin translation of Ilk. Dor-thonion).                                
 THOR-,  THORON-  Q  soron  (and  sorne),  pl.  sorni   eagle;  N   thor  and
 thoron,  pl.  therein - thoron is  properly old  gen. sg.  = ON  thoronen, Q
 sernen, appearing  in names  as Cil-thoron,  or Cil-thorondor  [KIL]. Ilk.
 thorn,  pl.  thurin.  Q  Sorontar  (name  of) King  of Eagles, N Thorondor,
 Ilk.  Thorntor  =  Torthurnion.  [Added:]  Cf.  name  Elthor(o)n   =  eagle
 of sky.                                                                    
 [The  following  was  added  in  hastily  above  the  entry  THOR,  THORON:

 'THOR-   =   come   swooping   down;  cf.   Brilthor.  Adj.   thor  swooping,
 leaping  down;  thorod  torrent.'  I  take this  to be  an indication  of the
 root-sense of THOR eagle.]                                                   
 THU-  puff,  blow.  Q  suya-  breathe;  sule   breath.  Cf.   Sulimo  surname
 of Manwe (wind-god). N thuio breathe; thul breath.                           
 THUR-  surround,  fence,  ward,  hedge  in,  secrete.  Ilk.  thuren  guarded,
 hidden.   Cf.   Ilk.  Garthurian   Hidden  Realm   (=  Doriath),   sc.  gard-
 thurian;   Noldorinized   as   Arthurien,    more   completely    as   Ar(d)-
 thoren:  thoren  (*thaurena)  pp.   of  thoro-   fence  [see   3AR].  Thurin-
 gwethil   (woman   of)   secret   shadow,   Doriathren  name   (N  Dolwethil)
 assumed  by  Tinuviel  as  a  bat-shaped   fay  [WATH].   [Cf.  the   Lay  of
 Leithian  line  3954,  where  a  marginal  note  explains   Thuringwethil  as
 'she  of  hidden  shadow'  (III. 297,  304). The  present entry  retains the
 story of  the Lay:  it was  Luthien who  called herself  by this  name before
 Morgoth (see III. 306).]                                                    
 THUS-   (related   to   THU?)   *thausa:   Q   saura   foul,   evil-smelling,
 putrid.  N  than:  corrupt,  rotten;  thu  stench, as  proper name  Thu chief
 servant  of  Morgoth,  also  called  Mor-thu,  Q  Sauro or  Sauron or  Suro =
 Thu.  [In the  original draft  for the  chapter A  Knife in  the Dark  in The
 Lord  of  the  Rings  Frodo  (but  not  there  called Frodo)  cries Elbereth!
 Gilthoniel! Gurth i Morthu!]                                                 
 TIK-  (cf.  PIK)  Q  tikse   dot,  tiny   mark,  point;   amatikse,  nuntikse
 [indicated  in  the  manuscript  to   mean  dots   or  points   placed  above
 (amatikse) or below (nuntikse) the line of writing. Added entry.]            
 TIL- point,  horn. Q  tilde point,  horn; cf.  Ta-niqe-til (g.sg.  tilden); N
 tild, till horn.  Q Tilion  'the Horned',  name of  the man  in the  Moon; N
 Tilion.  Q  neltil (neltildi),  N nelthil  triangle (see  NEL). [Cf.  QS $75:
 marginal  note  by  AElfwine  to  the  name  Tilion:  'hyrned'  (Old English,
 horned').  It is  strange that  Tilion is  here the  man in  the Moon:  in QS
 (as in  Q, IV.  97) he  was 'a  young hunter  of the  company of  Orome'. Is
 the implication that in later ages  the myth  of Tilion  became the  story of
 the Man in the Moon? (see I. 202).]                                          
 TIN-  (variant  of  (?)  and  in any  case affected  by THIN,  q.v.) sparkle,
 emit slender (silver, pale)  beams. Q  tine it  glints, tintina  it sparkles;
 *tinme  sparkle,  glint:  Q  tinwe  sparkle (star),  [struck out:  cf. Tin-
 wetar,  Tinwerontar  star-queen,  title  of  Varda;] tin-dome  starlit dusk
 (see DOMO); tingilya, tingilinde a twinkling star (see GIL).                 
    N tinno to glint; tinw spark, small star; tint spark; gildin silver spark
 (see  GIL.);  *tindumh,  tindu,  tinnu  dusk,  twilight,  early  night (with-
 out  moon).  Cf.  Aran  Dinnu  King  of  Twilight,   name  given   by  Gnomes
 to  Thingol,  called  by  Ilkorins  Tor  Tinduma.   Ilk.  tim   spark,  star;
 tingla-  sparkle;  tindum  starlight,  twilight.  Q  tinda  glinting, silver;
 tinde a glint.                                                               
    N   Tindumhiell,   Tinnuviel,   Tinuviel   =   'daughter   of   twilight',
 a   kenning   of   the   nightingale,   Q   Tindomerel   (see   SEL-D:  *Tin-
 domiselde),  name  given  by  Beren  to  Luthien   daughter  of   Thingol.  N

   ordinary  name   of  nightingale   is  dulind,   dulin  [DO3, LIN(2)]; Q
   lomelinde;  Ilk.   mur(i)lind,  myr(i)lind   (see  MOR).   N  moerilind,
   merilin  was  Noldorinized  from  Ilk.  murilind, since  mori did  not =
   'night' in N.                                                              
    The 'twilight' sense was largely due to THIN, q.v.                        
   [Against  this  entry  is  written  in  the margin:  'Tintanie, Tintalle
   Kindler = Varda; Q tinta- to kindle,  make to  spark': see  pp. 344 - 5.
   Other marginal  notes are:  'cf. Timbredil',  which thus  reappears from
   Q, IV. 82 (see BARATH); 'Tindubel twilit city' (see PEL(ES).]              
   TING-,   TANG-  onomatopoeic   (cf.  DING.   Q  tinge,   tango,  twang;
   tinga-; N tang bowstring.                                                  
 TINKO- metal. Q tinko; N tinc.                                               
 TIR- watch, guard. Q tirin I  watch, pa.t.  time; N  tiri or  tirio, pa.t.
   tiriant.  Q  tirion  watch-tower,  tower.  N  tirith  watch,  guard; cf.
   Minnas-tirith   [MINI].   Cf.  Q   halatir  (-tirnen),   PQ  *khalatirno
   'fish-watcher',  N  heledirn  =   kingfisher;  Dalath   Dirnen  'Guarded
   Plain';  Palantir  'Far-seer'.  [For the  etymology of  'kingfisher' see
   KHAL(1), SEAL(2).  -  Palantir  was  a  later   addition,  as   also  under
   PAL.]                                                                      
   TIT- Q titta little, tiny; N tithen (pl. tithin).                          
 TIW- fat, thick. *tiuka: Q tiuka thick, fat;  ON tuka,  N tug;  Ilk. tiog.
   *tiuko thigh: Q tiuko. Q tiuya-  swell, grow  fat; ON  tuio-, N  tuio to
   swell (associated with TUY).                                               
 TOL(1)-OTH/OT eight. Q tolto; N toloth.                                        
 TOL(2)-tollo island: Q tol, pl. tolle; N toll, pl. tyll; cf. Tol-eressea, N
   Toll-ereb.                                                                 
 TOP- cover, roof. "top-: Q topa roof;  topa- to  roof; tope  covers (pa.t.
   tompe). N tobo cover, roof over; tobas roofing.                            
 TOR-  brother  (cf.  THEL-  sister).  ON wator  brother (wa  = together),
   especially used of those not brothers  by blood,  but sworn  brothers or
   associates; N gwador (gwedeir). ON toron brother,  pl. toroni.  N + tor,
   terein; usually used was the  cpd. muindor  with analogical  pl. muindyr
   (see  MOY,  moina).  Q  toron,  torni  brother;  otorno  sworn  brother,
   associate  [wo];  otornasse  brotherhood;  but  usually  of  the  blood-
   kinship  was  used  onoro (*wa-noro  =  of one  kin, see  wo, NO)  = ON
   wanuro, N gwanur kinsman.                                                 
 TOW- Q to wool; toa of wool, woollen; N taw.                                 
 TUB-  *tumbu  deep  valley, under  or among  hills: Q  tumbo, N  tum. Cf.
   Tumladen 'the level  vale' [LAT],  the vale  of Gondolin.  *tubna deep:
   Q  tumna  lowlying,  deep,  low; N  tofn; Ilk.  tovon. *Utubnu  name of
   Melko's  vaults  in  the  North:  Q  Utumno; N  Udun; Ilk.  Uduvon; Dan.
   Utum.                                                                      
 TUG-  *tugu:  Q  tuo;  ON  tugo,  N  tu;  Ilk.  tugh,  tu;  muscle, sinew;
   vigour,  physical  strength.  Cf.  name  Tuor  (older  tughor  =  tu-gor
   'strength-vigour', see GOR). *tunga:  Q tunga  taut, tight  (of strings,
   resonant); N tong; Ilk. tung.                                              
                                                                             
                                                                             ]

 TUK- draw, bring. Q tukin  I draw;  N tegi  (3 sg.  tog) to  lead, bring;
 Ilk. toga he brings.                                                    
 TUL-  come,  approach,  move  towards  (point  of  speaker).  Q  tulin  I
 come; N  teli to  come, tol  he comes.  *tulta make  come: Q  tulta- send
 for, fetch, summon; N toltho fetch; Ilk. tolda he fetches.              
 TULUK-  Q  tulka   firm,  strong,   immoveable,  steadfast;   cf.  Tulkas
 (Tulkatho,   Tulkassen).   tulko   (*tulku)   support,  prop.   EN  tolog
 stalwart,  trusty.  tulu  (*tulukme,  ON  tulugme) support,  prop. Tulkas
 was also called Ender (see NDER), EN Enner.                             
 TUMPU- hump. Q tumpo; N tump.                                           
 TUN-  *tundu:  Q  tundo;  N  tund,  tunn  hill,  mound.  *tunda:  Q tunda
 tall;  N  tond,  tonn;  Ilk.  tund.  *Tuna:  Q  Tun,  Tuna   Elf-city  in
 Valinor;  ON  Tuna,  N  Tun.  Cf.  N  mindon isolated  hill (*minitunda),
 especially  a  hill  with  a  watch-tower.  [Under   MINI  N   mindon  is
 derived from *minitaun.  - I  cannot explain  why Tun  appears here  as a
 Q form: see QS $39, and commentary on $$39, 45.]                        
 TUP- *tupse: Q tupse thatch; N taus; Ilk. tuss.                         
 TUR-  power,  control,  mastery,  victory.  *ture  mastery,   victory:  Q
 ture;  N  tur.  Cf.  name  Turambar,  N   Turamarth  'Master   of  Fate',
 name  taken  in  pride by  Turin (Q  Turindo) -  which contains  the same
 element      tur      victory,     +      indo     mood      (see     m).
 *turo and in  cpds. turo,  tur, master,  victor, lord:  cf. Q  Fantur, N
 Fannor. Q turin I wield, control, govern, pa.t. turne;  N ortheri,  3 sg.
 orthor (*ortur-)  master, conquer;  tortho to  wield, control.  *taura: Q
 taura  mighty;  N  taur vast,  mighty, overwhelming,  awful -  also high,
 sublime   (see  TAWAR).   [Added:]  Turkil,   cf.  Tarkil   =  Numenorean
 [KHIL].                                                                 
   TURUM-  *turuma:  Q  turma  shield;  *turumbe:  T trumbe  shield; Ilk.
   trumb, trum.                                                          
 TUS-  *tussa:  Q  tussa  bush,  N  toss  low-growing  tree   (as  maple,
   hawthorn,  blackthorn, holly,  etc.): e.g.  eregdos =  holly-tree. See
 EREK, OR-NI.                                                            
   TUY-  spring,  sprout  (cf. TIW  grow  fat,  swell?). Q  tuia sprouts,
   springs; N tuio. *tuile: Q tuile spring-time;  also used  = dayspring,
   early morn =  artuile [AR(1)]. Cf.  tuilindo (for *tuilelindo 'spring-
   singer') swallow, N tuilind, tuilin [LIN(2)]. *tuima:  Q tuima  a sprout,
   bud; N tuiw, tui.                                                     
   TYAL- play. Q tyalie sport, play, game; tyalin I play. N telio, teilio
   (*tyalia-) to  play. Cf.  tyalangando =  harp-player (Q  tyalangan): N
   Talagand,  one  of  the  chiefs  of Gondolin  (see NGAN).  N te(i)lien
   sport, play.                                                          
 TYUL-   stand  up   (straight).  *tyulma   mast:  Q   tyulma.  *tyulusse
   poplar-tree: Q tyulusse, N tulus (pl. tylys) [see u].                 

                                        U.                                     
                                                                              
   UB-  abound.  Q  uvea  abundant,  in  very  great  number,  very  large; uve
   abundance,  great  quantity.  N  ofr (ovr),  ovor abundant  (*ubra), ovras
   crowd, heap, etc.; ovro to abound.                                         
 UGU-  and  UMU-  negative  stems:  Q  uin  and   umin  I   do  not,   am  not;
   pa.t.  ume.  Q  prefix u  (< ugu,  or gu)  not, un-,  in- (usually  with bad
   sense),  as  vanimor  fair  folk  =  (men  and)  elves,  uvanimor  monsters.
   Cf.  GU,  MU. [Under  BAN the  Vanimor are  the Children  of the  Valar; see
   pp. 403 - 4. - This entry was first written, like all others in this part of
   the  manuscript,  in  pencil,  but then  overwritten in  ink; it  was struck
   out,  in pencil,  but this  may have  been done  before it  was overwritten.
   Apparently  later  pencilled  additions  are:  [Q]  umea  evil, [N]  um bad,
   evil.]                                                                      
 ULU-  pour,  flow.  Q  ulya-  pour  (intr.  pa.t.  ulle,  tr.  ulyane); ulunde
   flood;  ulea  pouring, flooding,  flowing. *Ulumo  name of  the Vala  of all
   waters:  Q  Ulmo; N  Ulu, usually  called Guiar  (see WAY).  N oeil,  eil it
   is raining (*ulya); *ulda torrent, mountain-stream, EN old, oll.            
 ULUG-   T   ulga,   Ilk.   olg  hideous,   horrible;  *ulgundo   monster,  de-
   formed   and   hideous  creature:   Q  ulundo;   T  ulgundo,   Ilk.  ulgund,
   ulgon,  ulion;  N  ulund,  ulun.  Also  ULGU:  cf.  Ul-  in  Ulfang,  Uldor,
   Ulfast,  Ulwarth,  names  of  Swartmen.  [These  names  of  the  Easterlings
   were of course given  to them  by the  Elves (as  is specifically  stated of
   those  with  the  element  BOR); but  cf. the  Lhammas $ 10, where  this is
   not so.]                                                                    
 UNG-   *ungwe:   Q   ungwe    gloom;   ungo    cloud,   dark    shadow.   Cf.
   Ungweliante,  Ungoliante  the  Spider,  ally  of  Morgoth (cf.  SLIG). Ilk.
   ungol  darkness,  ungor  black,  dark,  gloomy.  In  N  not  used  except in
   name  Ungoliant,  which  is  really  taken from  Q. The  name of  the Spider
   in N is Delduthling (see DYEL, DO3).                                        
 UNU-  (cf.  NU,  NDU).  undu  a  parallel  form  in  Q  made  to   equal  ama,
   amba up [AM ]: down, under, beneath.                                        
 UNUK- Q unqe hollow; unka- hollow out; unqa adj. hollow.                      
 UR- be hot.  Q ur  fire, N  ur. Q  Urin f.  (g.sg. Urinden)  name of  the Sun.
   Q  uruite,  uruva  fiery.  Cf.  Dagor  Vreged-ur   Battle  of   Sudden  Fire
   [BEREK].  Q  urya-  blaze.  [This  entry  was  struck  through,  and  beside
   it  the   following  written   very  roughly:]   UR-  wide,   large,  great.
   Urion. Q ura large; N ur wide.                                              
 USUK- *us(u)k-we: Q usqe reek; N osp; Ilk. usc smoke.                        
 UY-  Q  uile  long  trailing  plant,   especially  seaweed;   earuile  seaweed
   [AY];   Uinen   (Uinenden)   wife   of   Osse,   ON   Uinenda,   EN  Uinend,
   Uinen (cf. NEN); [N] uil seaweed, oeruil.                                   

                                     W.                                    
                                                                          
 [The  stems  in  W-  form the  concluding entries  in the  manuscript, and
 unlike  those  that  precede  were  carefully  written  in ink,  with some
 pencilled changes and additions.]                                         
                                                                          
   WA-,   WAWA-,   WAIWA-   blow.   Q   vaiwa,   waiwa   wind;   N  gwaew;
   Ilk. gwau.                                                              
   WA3.  stain,  soil.  *wa3ra:  Q  vara  soiled,   dirty;  N   gwaur  (ON
   wora);  Ilk.  gor.  *wahta-  to soil,  stain: Q  vahta; N  gwatho (ON
   wattobe); Ilk. goda-. *wahte a stain: ON  watte, N  gwath coalescing
   with *wath, q.v. [WATH]; Ilk.  god dirtiness,  filth. *wahse:  Q vakse
   stain;  ON  wasse, N  gwass. Cf.  Iarwath 'Blood-stain'  [YAR], surname
   of Turin.                                                               
   WAN-  depart,  go  away,  disappear,  vanish.   Q  vanya-   go,  depart,
   disappear, pa.t. vanne;  vanwa gone,  departed, vanished,  lost, past;
   vanwie  the  past,  past  time.  This  stem  in  N  replaced   KWAL  in
   application to death  (of elves  by fading,  or weariness):  thus gwanw
   (*wanwe)  death;  gwanath  death;  gwann  (*wanna)  departed,  dead.
   Note: gwanw, gwanath are the 'act of  dying', not  'death, Death'  as a
   state or abstract: that is guru (see NGUR).  N gwanno  (wanta-) depart,
   die. [The stem WAN was changed in pencil to VAN.]                       
 WA-N- goose: Q van, wan (pl. vani) goose; N gwaun, pl. guin.             
 WAR- give  way, yield,  not endure,  let down,  betray. ON  warie betray,
   cheat; awarta forsake,  abandon. EN  gwerio betray;  gwarth betrayer;
   awartha  forsake;  awarth  abandonment. Cf.  Ulwarth. [This  entry was
   an addition in pencil. On Ulwarth see ULUG and note.]                   
   WATH-  shade.  ON  watha, N  gwath; Ilk.  gwath. Cf.  Ilk. Urthin  (> N
   Eredwethion).  [This  entry  was  an  addition  in pencil.  Above Urthin
   was written Gwethion.]                                                 
 WAY-  enfold.  *waya  envelope,  especially  of  the  Outer  Sea   or  Air
   enfolding  the world  within the  Ilurambar or  world-walls: Q  w- vaia,
   w-  vaiya;  ON  *woia,  uia,  N  ui.  *Vayaro name  of  Ulmo,   lord  of
   Vaiya:  Q  Vaiaro,  N  Uiar  the  usual  N  name of  Ulmo. [The  stem WAY
   was  changed  in pencil  to VAY.  Under ULU  it is  said that  Ulmo was
   usually called Guiar in N.]                                             
   WED-  bind.  *weda:  ON  weda  bond,  N  gwed;  Ilk. gwed.  N gwedi,
   pa.t.  gwend,  gwenn   later  gwedant,   bind.  N   angwed  'iron-bond',
   chain.  *waede  bond,  troth,  compact,  oath:  Q  vere;  ON  waide,  N
   gwaed. *wed-ta: Q vesta- swear  (to do  something), contract,  make a
   compact; vesta contract; vestale oath. N gwest  oath; gwesto  to swear;
   gowest  contract,  compact,  treaty,  Q  ovesta  [wo].  [The   Q  words
   derived from *wed-ta were struck out in pencil, with the note that they
   'all fell with  derivatives of  BES'. These  same words,  with different
   meaning,  are  found  under  BES:  vesta   matrimony,  vesta-   to  wed;

 vestale  wedding.  The  reference  in  the original  here is  to BES  (not as
 previously to BED: see note to LEP).]                                        
 WEG-   (manly)   vigour.   Q   vie  manhood,   vigour  (*we3e);   vea  adult,
 manly,   vigorous;   veaner   (adult)   man   [NER];   veasse   vigour.  veo
 (*wego)  man.  The  latter  in   compound  form   *-wego  is   frequent  in
 masculine  names,  taking  Q  form  -we  (<  weg).   This  can   be  distin-
 guished  from  -we  (-we  abstract  suffix)  by  remaining  -we in  N, from
 ON  -mega.  The  abstract  suffix  occurs  in  the  names   Manwe,  Fionwe,
 Elwe,  Ingwe,   Finwe.   These   names   do  not   occur  in   Exilic  forms
 "Manw,  *Fionw,  *Elw,  *Finw  -  since  Finwe   for  instance   remained  in
 Valinor   [see  PHIN].   These   names   were   used   even   by   Gnomes  in
 Qenya  form,  assisted  by  the  resemblance  to  -we  in  other  names,  as
 Bronwe,   ON   Bronwega   (see  BORON).   In  N   otherwise  this   stem  only
 survives  in  gweth  manhood,  also   used  =   man-power,  troop   of  able-
 bodied   men,   host,   regiment   (cf.   Forodweith   Northmen).   *weg-te
 [This  entry,  the last  under W  as the  manuscript was  originally written,
 was   left   unfinished.   -  Under   PHOR  the   form  is   equally  clearly
 Forodwaith.]                                                                 
 WEN-,   WENED-   maiden.   Q   wende,   vende;   N   gwend,    gwenn.   Often
 found  in  feminine  names,  as  Morwen,  Eledwen:  since  the   latter  show
 no  -d even  in archaic  spelling, they  probably contain  a form  wen-: cf.
 Ilk.   gwen  girl;   Q  wene,   vene  and   venesse  virginity;   N  gweneth
 virginity.  [Added:]  Some  names,  especially  those  of  men,  may  contain
 gwend  bond,  friendship:  see  WED.  [The  N  noun   gwend  is   not  given
 under  WED.  - Against  this entry  is written:  'Transfer to  GWEN'.  - In
 the  narrative  texts (QS  $ 129,  AB 2  annal 245)  the name  Eledhwen was
 interpreted  as  'Elfsheen'  -  and  this  survived  much  later in  the Grey
 Annals;  on  the  other  hand   under  ELED   the  translation   was  changed
 from 'Elf-fair' to 'Elf-maid'.]                                              
 WEY-  wind,  weave.  Q,  owing  to  change  wei  >  wai,  confused  this with
 WAY;  but   cf.  Vaire   (*weire)  'Weaver',   name  of   the  doom-goddess,
 wife   of   Mandos:   N  Gwir.   N  gwi   net,  web.   [The  stem   WEY  was
 changed in pencil to VEY.]                                                   
 WIG-  *winge:  Q winge  foam,  crest  of  wave,  crest.  Cf.  wingil nymph;
 Wingelot,   Wingelote   'foam-flower',   Earendel's   boat    (N   Gwingloth)
 [LOT(H)].  N,  Ilk.  gwing  spindrift,  flying  spray.  [This  entry  was  an
 addition in pencil. - With wingil cf. the  old name  Wingildi, I.  66, 273.]
 WIL- fly, float in air. *wilwa air, lower air, distinct from the 'upper' of
 the  stars,  or  the 'outer'  (see WAY):  Q wilwa  > vilwa;  N gwelw  air (as
 substance);  gwelwen =  Q vilwa;  Ilk. gwelu,  gwelo. Q  vilin I  fly, pa.t.
 ville. N gwilith 'air'  as a  region =  Q vilwa;  cf. gilith  = Q  ilmen (see
 GIL). Q wilwarin (pl.  wilwarindi) butterfly; T vilverin; N gwilwileth;
 Ilk.  gwilwering.  [The  name  Wilwa  of  the  lower  air  is found  also in
 the  preparatory  outline  for  The   Fall  of   Numenor  (p.   12),  whereas
 Wilwa  in  the   Ambarkanta  was   changed  throughout   to  Vista,   and  so
 also   on   the   accompanying   world-diagrams   (IV.   240-7).    By   sub-

 sequent  pencilled changes  the forms  *wilwa, Q  wilwa were  changed to
 *wilma,  Q  wilma;  Q  wilwa >  vilwa was  struck out;  and Q  vilin was
 changed  to  wilin.  A new  stem WIS  with derivative  Q vista  (see below)
 was introduced, either at the same  time or  later, but  the stem  WIL. was
 allowed to stand.]                                                         
 WIN-,  WIND-  *windi  blue-grey,  pale  blue  or grey:  Q vinde,  N gwind,
 gwinn.  *winya:  Q  winya,  vinya   evening;  N   gwein,  pl.   gwin;  Ilk.
 gwini,  gwine.  *winta-  fade:   Q  vinta-,   pa.t.   vinte,   vintane;  ON
 wintha  it  fades,  advesperascit   ['evening  approaches'],   N  gwinna.
 [This  entry  was  struck  out,  and  'see  THIN  written  against  it. The
 following  pencilled addition  may have  been made  either before  or after
 the original entry was rejected, since  it is  not itself  struck through:]
 *windia pale blue: Q win(d)ya, vinya; N gwind.                            
 WIS- Q vista air as substance. [See note to WIL..]                         
 WO-  together.  The  form  wo would  if stressed  > wa  in Eldarin.  In Q
 the  form  wo,  and  the  unstressed  wo,  combined  to produce  prefix o-
 'together': as in o-torno  (see TOR),  o-selle (see  THEL), and  many other
 words,  e.g.  ovesta (see  WED). In  N we  have gwa-  when stressed,  as in
 gwuanur  (=  Q  onoro)  [TOR],  gwuastar  (see  STAR),  and  frequently, but
 only  in  old  cpds.  The  living  form  was  go-,  developed from  gwa- in
 unstressed positions  - originally  mainly in  verbs, but  thence spreading
 to  verbal  derivatives  as in  gowest (see  WED). In  many words  this had
 become  a  fixed element.  Thus not-  count, nut-  tie coalesced  in Exilic
 * nod-;  but  'count'  was  always  expressed by  gonod- unless  some other
 prefix was added, as in arnediad  [AR(2)].  In Ilk.  owing to  coalescence of
 gwo, 30 (in go) this prefix was lost [see 36].                             
                                                                           
                                     Y.                                     
                                                                           
 [As already mentioned (p.  346) I  have changed  the representation  of the
 'semi-vowel' j to y, and therefore give these stems here, at the end of the
 alphabet.  The  section  belongs  however  among  the   entirely  'unrecon-
 structed' parts of the work, and consists, like the  I-stems, only  of very
 rough and difficult notes.]                                                
                                                                           
 YA-  there,  over  there;  of  time, ago,  whereas en  yonder [EN]  of time
 points  to  the  future.  Q  yana  that  (the  former);  ya  formerly, ago:
 yenya  last  year  [YEN];  yara  ancient, belonging  to or  descending from
 former  times;  yare  former  days;  yalume  former  times   [LU];  yasse,
 yalumesse,  yaresse  once  upon  a  time;  yarea,  yalumea  olden.  N  iaur
 ancient, old(er); io (ia?) ago. 'Old' (in mortal sense, decrepit)  is ingem
 of  persons,  yearsick',  old'  (decrepit,  worn) of  things is  gem [GENG-
 WA]. See GYER.                                                             
 YAB-  fruit.  Q  yave  fruit;   N  iau   corn.  Yavanna   Fruit-giver  (cf.
 ANA(1)), N Ivann.                                                            

   YAG- yawn, gape. *yagu- gulf: N ia, chiefly in place-names like Moria
   = Black Gulf. *yagwe: Q yawe ravine, cleft, gulf; N iau. Q  yanga- to
   yawn.                                                                
 YAK-  *yakta-:  Q  yat  (yaht-)  neck;  N iaeth.  Q yatta  narrow neck,
   isthmus.                                                             
 YAN- Cf. AYAN. Q yana holy place, fane, sanctuary; N iaun.             
 YAR-  blood.  Q  yar  (yaren);  N   iar;  Iarwath   Blood-stained  (see
   WA3), surname of Turin. Ilk. or  blood; arn red; cf. Aros (=  N iaros)
   name of river with reddish water.                                    
 YAT-  join.   *yanta  yoke,   beside  *yatma:   Q  yanta   yoke;  yanwe
   bridge, joining, isthmus. N  iant yoke;  ianw bridge  (eilianw 'sky-
   bridge', rainbow, see 3EL).                                        
 YAY- mock. Q yaiwe, ON yaiwe, mocking, scorn; N iaew.                
 YEL- daughter. Q yelde; N iell, -iel. [This entry was removed with the
   change  of  etymology  of  N  iell:  see  SEL-D  and  YO, YON.  A new
   formulation of the stem YEL was introduced, but was in turn rejected.
   This gave:] YEL-  friend: Q  yelda friendly,  dear as  friend; yelme;
   -iel in names = [Old English] -wine (distinguish N -iel derived from
   selda).                                                              
   YEN- year. Q yen (yen-); linyewa,a old, having  many years [LI]. Last
   day  of  year =  qantien, N  penninar [KWAT];  first year,  first day
   minyen  [MINI].  Endien  Midyear  [ENED]  was  a  week   outside  the
   months, between the sixth  and seventh  months, [?dedicated]  to the
   Trees: [also called] Aldalemnar, see  LEP. N  in year;  inias annals;
   idrin  year (=  ien-rinde, see  RIN); edinar  (at-yen-ar) anniversary
   day., ennin = Valian Year., ingem year-sick' = old  (mortally) [GENG-
   WA];  ifant  aged,  long-lived  (=  yen-panta  >  impanta  > in-fant)
   [KWAT]. [The word Inias 'Annals'  occurs in  the title-pages  given on
   p. 202.]                                                             
 YES- desire. Q yesta desire; N iest wish.                              
 YO, YON- son. Q yondo,  -ion; N  ionn, -ion.  [The following  was added
   when  the  entry  YEL  had  been  removed:]  feminine  yen,   yend  =
   daughter; Q yende, yen.                                              
 YU- two, both. N ui- twi-, as uial twilight [KAL]. Q yuyo both.        
 YUK- employ, use. N iuith use, iuitho [?enjoy].                        
 YUL-   smoulder.   Q   yula   ember,   smouldering   wood;   yulme  red
   [?heat], smouldering heat; yulma  brand. ON  iolf brand;  iul embers.
 YUR- run. ON yurine I run, yura course; N ior course.                  
