 At the end of 1937 J. R. R. Tolkien reluctantly set aside  his now
 greatly  elaborated  work  on  the  myths  and  heroic  legends of
 Valinor  and  Middle-earth  and  began  The  Lord  of  the  Rings.
 This  fifth  volume  of  The  History  of Middle-earth,  edited by
 Christopher  Tolkien,  completes  the  presentation  of  the whole
 compass of  his writing  on those  themes up  to that  time. Later
 forms of the Annals  of Valinor  and the  Annals of  Beleriand had
 been  composed,  The  Silmarillion  was  nearing  completion  in a
 greatly  amplified  version,  and  a  new Map  had been  made; the
 myth  of  the  Music  of  Ainur  had become  a separate  work; and
 the legend of the  Downfall of  Numenor had  already entered  in a
 primitive  form,  introducing  the  cardinal  ideas  of  the World
 Made  Round  and  the  Straight  Path  into  the   vanished  West.
 Closely  associated  with  this  was  the  abandoned 'time-travel'
 story  The  Lost  Road,  which was  to link  the world  of Numenor
 and  Middle-earth  with  the  legends  of  many  other  times  and
 people.  A  long  essay  (The  Lhammas)  had  been written  on the
 ever  more  complex  relations  of the  languages and  dialects of
 Middle-earth;   and   an   'etymological   dictionary'   had  been
 undertaken, in  which a  great number  of words  and names  in the
 Elvish languages were registered and  their formation  explained -
 thus  providing  by  far  the  most  extensive  account  of  their
 vocabularies that has appeared.                                  

 Grafton.                                                     
 An Imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers.                       
 77 - 85 Fulham Palace Road,                                  
 Hammersmith, London W6 8JB.                                  
                                                             
 Published by Grafton 1992                                    
 98765432                                                     
                                                             
 First published in Great Britain by                          
 Unwin Hyman 1987                                             
 (C) Unwin Hyman Ltd 1987                                       
                                                             
       TM @ 1990 Frank Richard Williamson                  
                and Christopher Reuel Tolkien,          
                 executors of the estate of the late          
                 John Ronald Reuel Tolkien.                   
                                                             
 ISBN 0 261 10225 7.                                          
                                                             
 Printed in Great Britain by                                  
 HarperCollinsManufacturing Glasgow.                          
                                                             
 All  rights  reserved.  No  part of  this publication  may be
 reproduced,  stored  in a  retrieval system,  or transmitted,
 in  any  form  or  by  any  means,   electronic,  mechanical,
 photocopying,  recording  or  otherwise,  without  the  prior
 permission of the publishers.                                
                                                             
 This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not,
 by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out or
 otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent
 in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it
 is published and without similar condition including this
 condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.         
