 THE HOBBIT.                                                     
 J. R. R. Tolkien.                                               
                                                                
 The  Hobbit  is  a  tale  of  high  adventure,  undertaken  by  a
 company  of  dwarves,  in  search   of  dragon-guarded   gold.  A
 reluctant  partner  in this  perilous quest  is Bilbo  Baggins, a
 comfort-loving,  unambitious hobbit,  who surprises  even himself
 by his resourcefulness and skill as a burglar.                  
    Encounters  with  trolls,  goblins,  dwarves, elves  and giant
 spiders,  conversations  with the  dragon, Smaug  the Magnificent
 and a rather unwilling presence at the Battle of the  Five Armies
 are  some  of  the adventures  that befall  Bilbo. But  there are
 lighter  moments  as  well:   good  fellowship,   welcome  meals,
 laughter and song.                                              
    It is a complete and marvellous  tale in  itself, but  it also
 forms a prelude to The Lord of the Rings.                       
                                                                
 'The Hobbit belongs to  a very  small class  of books  which have
 nothing  in  common  save  that  each  admits  us  to a  world of
 its own. Its place is with Alice  and The  Wind in  the Willows.'
                                     - Times Literary Supplement
                                                                
 'Has  the air  of inventing  nothing. He  has studied  trolls and
 dragons at first hand and describes them with fidelity.'        
                                                     - The Times
                                                                
 'One  of  the  best  loved  characters  in  English  fiction... a
 marvellous fantasy adventure.'                       - Daily Mail

 THE LORD OF THE RINGS.                                              
 J. R. R. Tolkien.                                                   
                                                                    
 Part 1: The Fellowship of the Ring.                                 
 Part 2: The Two Towers.                                             
 Part 3: The Return of the King.                                     
                                                                    
 The  Lord  of  the  Rings  cannot  be  described  in  a  few  words.
 J.  R.  R.  Tolkien's  great  work of  imaginative fiction  has been
 labelled both a  heroic romance  and a  classic of  science fiction.
 It  is,  however,  impossible  to convey  to the  new reader  all of
 the  book's  qualities,  and  the  range of  its creation.  By turns
 comic,  homely,   epic,  monstrous   and  diabolic,   the  narrative
 moves  through  countless  changes  of   scenes  and   character  in
 an  imaginary  world  which  is  totally  convincing in  its detail.
 Tolkien  created  a  new  mythology  in  an  invented   world  which
 has proved timeless in its appeal.                                  
                                                                    
 'An  extraordinary  book.  It  deals  with  a  stupendous  theme. It
 leads   us  through   a  succession   of  strange   and  astonishing
 episodes, some  of them  magnificent, in  a region  where everything
 is invented, forest, moor,  river, wilderness,  town, and  the races
 which  inhabit  them.  As  the  story  goes  on  the  world  of  the
 Ring  grows  more  vast  and  mysterious  and  crowded  with curious
 figures, horrible, delightful or comic. The story itself is superb.'
                                                     - The Observer
                                                                    
 'Among the greatest works  of imaginative  fiction of  the twentieth
 century.'  - Sunday Telegraph                                       
                                                                    
 'The English-speaking world is divided into those who have          
 read The Hobbit and The Lord  of the  Rings and  those who          
 are going to read them.'                              - Sunday Times
                                                                    
 The  Lord  of  the  Rings  is  available as  a three  book paperback
 edition and also in one volume.                                     

 THE SILMARILLION.                                               
 J. R. R. Tolkien.                                               
                                                                
 The  Silmarillion is  the central  stock of  J. R.  R. Tolkien's
 imaginative  writing.  Although  published  posthumously  it  is
 the  story  of  the First  Age in  Tolkien's world,  the ancient
 drama  to which  the characters  in The  Lord of  the Rings,look
 back, and  in whose  events, some  of them,  such as  Elrond and
 Galadriel, took part.                                           
                                                                
 'How, given  little over  half a  century of  work, did  one man
 become  the  creative equivalent  of a  people?' -  The Guardian
                                                                
 'Demanding   to  be   compared  with   English  mythologies...at
 times rises to the greatness  of true  myth.' -  Financial Times
                                                                
 'A  creation  myth  of  singular  beauty...  magnificent  in its
 best moments.'                                 - Washingon Post
                                                                
 'A  grim,  tragic,  brooding  and  beautiful book,  shot through
 with heroism and hope... its power is almost that of mysticism.'
                                           - Toronto Globe & Mail
                                                                
 'Stern,  sweeping  myth...  an  imaginative  work  of staggering
 comprehensiveness.'  - Sydney Morning Herald                    

 THE HISTORY OF MIDDLE-EARTH                                       
 THE BOOK OF LOST TALES PART I.                                    
 J. R. R. Tolkien.                                                 
                                                                  
 Edited by Christopher Tolkien.                                    
                                                                  
 The  Book  of Lost  Tales stands  at the  beginning of  the entire
 conception  of  Middle-earth  and  Valinor  for  the   Tales  were
 the first form of the  myths and  legends that  came to  be called
 The  Silmarillion.   Embedded  in   English  legend   and  English
 association,  they  are  set  in  the narrative  frame of  a great
 westward  voyage  over  the  Ocean  by   a  mariner   named  Eriol
 (or  AElfwine)  to  Tol  Eressea,  the  Lonely  Isle,  where Elves
 dwelt; from them  he learned  their true  history, the  Lost Tales
 of Elfinesse. In  the Tales  are found  the earliest  accounts and
 original  ideas  of Gods  and Elves,  Dwarves, Balrogs,  and Orcs;
 of  the Silmarils  and the  Two Trees  of Valinor;  of Nargothrond
 and   Gondolin;   of   the  geography   and  cosmography   of  the
 invented world.                                                   
                                                                  
 'Affords us an  almost over  the shoulder  view into  the evolving
 creative process and genius of J. R. R. Tolkien in a  new exciting
 aspect, not seen before. In addition, it gives us much information
 and rich detail, often highly illuminating, that  was later  to be
 greatly   compressed  or   passed  over   in  the   published  The
 Silmarillion...  the  superb,  sensitive,  and  extremely  helpful
 commentary  and   editing  done   by  Christopher   Tolkien  makes
 all this possible.'                                     - Mythlore
                                                                  
 'In  these  Lost  Tales  we have  the scholar  joyously gambolling
 in  the  thickets  of  his imagination...  a Commentary  and Notes
 greatly    enrich    the   quest.'           - The Daily Telegraph
                                                                  
 'It is for those who  are already  addicts and  wish to  study the
 origins  of  Tolkien's  gigantic achievement.  They will  love it,
 and  Christopher  Tolkien's  incredible  industry  has  given them
 enough  for  a  life-time  of  study.'   -  The   Birmingham  Post

 THE HISTORY OF MIDDLE-EARTH                                               
 THE BOOK OF LOST TALKS PART 2.                                            
 J. R. R. Tolkien.                                                         
                                                                          
 Edited by Christopher Tolkien.                                            
                                                                          
 Following  on  from  the   Tales  of   Valinor  told   in  Part   1,  this
 second  part   includes  Beren   and  Luthien,   Turin  and   the  Dragon,
 and   the  only   full  narratives   of  the   Necklace  of   the  Dwarves
 and  the  Fall  of  Gondolin.  Each  tale  is  followed  by  a  commentary
 in  the  form  of a  short essay,  together with  the texts  of associated
 poems,    and    each   volume    contains   extensive    information   on
 names and vocabulary in the earliest Elvish languages.                    
                                                                          
 'Part  2  deals  with  the  conflict  between  Elves and  Men, esp-       
 ecially  those  of  Tinuviel,  Turambar,  the  Fall   of  Gondolin,       
 and  Earendel... The  Tales  will  be  appreciated  by   those  who       
 have  read  The  Silmarillion  and  wish  to  examine  how  Tolkien       
 improved  his  story  and  style  from  their  original  form,  and       
 how   eventually   The   Lord   of   the   Rings   came   to  stand       
 independently  with  only  a  few hints  from the  early mythology.       
                                                      - British Book News
                                                                          
 'Readable and enjoyable.'                                     - Amon Hen
                                                                          
 'Great inventive genius.'                             - The Yorkshire Post
                                                                          
 'A tribute to the power of Tolkien's imagination.'                        
                                                    - The Financial Times
                                                                          
 'Christopher  Tolkien  shows  himself to  be his  father's son,           
 delving into the question of Elvish genealogies...he  gives the           
 reader histories of each character's name as it evolved  in the           
 course of Tolkien's revisions...Tolkien devotees will rejoice.'           
                                         - The New York Times Book Review

 THE HISTORY OF MIDDLE-EARTH                                     
 THE LAYS OF BELERIAND.                                          
 J. R. R. Tolkien.                                               
                                                                
 Edited by Christopher Tolkien.                                  
                                                                
 This,  the  third volume  of The  History of  Middle-earth, gives
 us a privileged  insight into  the creation  of the  mythology of
 Middle-earth, through the alliterative verse tales of two  of the
 most  crucial stories  in Tolkien's  world -  those of  Turin and
 Luthien.                                                        
    The first of the poems is the unpublished Lay of  the Children
 of  Hurin,  narrating  on  a  grand  scale  the tragedy  of Turin
 Turambar.                                                       
    The second is  the moving  Lay of  Leithian, the  chief source
 of the tale  of Beren  and Luthien  in The  Silmarillion, telling
 of  the  Quest  of the  Silmaril and  the encounter  with Morgoth
 in his subterranean fortress.                                   
    Accompanying  the  poems  are  commentaries  on  the evolution
 of the history of the Elder  Days. Also  included is  the notable
 criticism of The Lay of  Leithian by  C. S.  Lewis, who  read the
 poem in 1929.                                                   
                                                                
 'Frodo,  Gandalf  and  the  rest  will  never  ride  out  to  new
 adventures  -  saddening  legions  of  us around  the world...but
 the History of  Middle-earth is  still unfolding...Edited  by his
 son Christopher, these epic  poems enshrine  much of  the lineage
 and  legend  at  the  roots  of  J.  R. R.  Tolkien's astonishing
 achievement.  Creating  the  Ring  tales would  have been  a feat
 in its own  right; Professor  Tolkien brought  a whole  world and
 society into being,  languages, religion  and all.  Anyone loving
 the original books will  want to  study this  one.' -  Daily Mail
                                                                
 'The lays afford glimpses of  the otherwise  unstated metaphysics
 underlying  Tolkien's  mythological   invention... The  editorial
 complexities  of  the material  are, as  usual, ably  and lucidly
 navigated   and   charted   by  Christopher   Tolkien...a  worthy
 addition   to   The   History   of   Middle-earth.'   -   Mallorn

 J. R. R. TOLKIEN: A BIOGRAPHY.                                          
 Humphrey Carpenter.                                                     
                                                                        
 In  the  authorised  biography  of J.  R. R.  Tolkien, Humphrey         
 Carpenter  draws  upon  Tolkien's  private papers,  diaries and         
 manuscripts as well as  interviews with  family and  friends to         
 build up a fascinating portrait. He traces Tolkien's childhood,         
 adolescence  and  war  service  and  recounts  how  he achieved         
 high repute as a scholar and university teacher.                        
                                                                        
 Then sitting at his desk in Oxford one day he wrote: 'In a hole         
 in the ground there lived a  hobbit' -  and soon  found himself         
 the author of a best-selling children's book. This book follows         
 the  long  and painful  process of  creation that  produced The         
 Lord of the Rings and charts the growth of The Silmarillion and         
 offers a wealth of information about  Tolkien's life  and work.         
                                                                        
 'Rich and beautifully told.'                           - Sunday Times
                                                                        
 'Absolutely fascinating.'                                  - Daily Mail
                                                                        
 'Intelligent and sympathetic study.'                   - The Listener
 'Painstaking and often moving account.'                                 
                                                                        
                                             - Times Literary Supplement
                                                                        
 'Humphrey Carpenter's plain, unvarnished tale is absolutely             
 gripping.'           - Evening Standard                                 

 THE COMPLETE GUIDE TO MIDDLE-EARTH.                              
 Robert Foster.                                                   
                                                                 
 Middle-earth,  the  world  in  which  the  events of  The Hobbit,
 The Lord  of the  Rings and  The Silmarillion  take place,  is as
 real  and  complex  as  our  own.  Events,  geography,  and names
 were  created  with  care  and loving  attention by  Tolkien, who
 wanted every single detail of his books to  fit into  their total
 pattern. A belief in perfection, the fun of sub-creation  and the
 desire to create something so totally convincing that  the reader
 could believe in it (in a sense) as actual history,  involved him
 in  map-making,  endless  charts  of  dates  and  events  and the
 development of his many invented languages.                      
                                                                 
 The  Complete  Guide to  Middle-earth is  intended to  be supple-
 mentary to the works of Tolkien  and no  more. It  draws together
 in logical sequence facts and information about names, languages,
 places  and  events  from   Tolkien's  books   and  will   be  an
 indispensable aid in every reader's discovery of Tolkien's world.
                                                                 
 'A  concordance  to  the names  of people,  places and  things in
 the Middle-earth fantasies of J. R. R.  Tolkien...page references
 are  supplied  to  all British  hardback and  paperback editions'
                                             - British Book News
                                                                 
 'Middle-earth is the country of J.  R. R.  Tolkien's tales  - the
 territory  of  Sauron,  Bilbo  Baggins,  Gandalf  and  Sam Gamgee
 -  whose  legends,  history,  geography  and  inhabitants combine
 to make a unique fictional world. This  Guide is  a comprehensive
 reference  work  to  every  name  and  event in  Tolkien's books,
 from  The  Hobbit to The Silmarillion'          - Daily Telegraph
