                                 FOREWORD.                              
                                                                       
 The  Quenta  Silmarillion,   with  the   Ainulindale,  the   Annals  of
 Valinor,  and  the  Annals  of   Beleriand,  as   they  stood   when  my
 father  began  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  at  the  end  of   1937,  were
 published  six  years  ago  in  The  Lost   Road  and   Other  Writings.
 That  was  the  first  great  break  in  the  continuous  development of
 The  Silmarillion  from  its  origins  in  The Book  of Lost  Tales; but
 while  one may  indeed regret  that matters  fell out  as they  did just
 at  that  time,  when  the  Quenta  Silmarillion  was  in  sight  of the
 end,  it was  not in  itself disastrous.  Although, as  will be  seen in
 Part   One   of  this   book,  a   potentially  destructive   doubt  had
 emerged   before  my   father  finished   work  on   The  Lord   of  the
 Rings,  nonetheless  in   the  years   that  immediately   followed  its
 completion   he   embarked   on   an   ambitious   remaking    and   en-
 largement  of  all  the  Matter  of  the  Elder Days,  without departure
 from the essentials of the original structure.                         
   The  creative  power  and  confidence  of   that  time   is  unmistak-
 able.  In  July  1949, writing  to the  publishers on  the subject  of a
 sequel  to  Farmer  Giles  of  Ham,  he  said that  when he  had finally
 achieved  The  Lord   of  the   Rings  'the   released  spring   may  do
 something';  and  in  a  letter  to  Stanley  Unwin  of  February  1950,
 when,  as  he  said,  that  goal  had  been reached  at last,  he wrote:
 'For me the chief thing  is that  I feel  that the  whole matter  is now
 "exorcized",  and  rides  me  no  more.  I  can  turn  now   to  other
 things...' It is very significant also, I believe, that at that  time he
 was   deeply   committed   to  the   publication  of   The  Silmarillion
 and  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  'in  conjunction or  in connexion'  as a
 single work, 'one long Saga of the Jewels and the Rings'.              
   But  little  of  all  the  work  begun  at  that  time  was completed.
 The  new  Lay  of  Leithian,  the  new  tale  of  Tuor  and the  Fall of
 Gondolin,  the  Grey  Annals  (of  Beleriand),   the  revision   of  the
 Quenta  Silmarillion,  were  all  abandoned.  I  have little  doubt that
 despair  of  publication,  at  least  in  the form  that he  regarded as
 essential,  was  the   prime  cause.   The  negotiations   with  Collins
 to  publish  both  works  had  collapsed.  In  June  1952  he  wrote  to
 Rayner Unwin:                                                          

   As for The  Lord  of the  Rings and  The Silmarillion,  they are
 where  they  were.  The one  finished (and  the end  revised), and
 the  other  still  unfinished (or  unrevised), and  both gathering
 dust.  I  have  been  both  off  and  on   too  unwell,   and  too
 burdened   to   do   much   about   them,  and   too  downhearted.
 Watching   paper-shortages   and   costs   mounting   against  me.
 But  I  have  rather  modified  my  views.  Better  something than
 nothing!  Although  to  me  all  are  one,  and  the 'Lord  of the
 Rings' would be better far  (and eased)  as part  of the  whole, I
 would gladly consider the publication of any  part of  this stuff.
 Years are becoming precious...                                   
 Thus he bowed to necessity, but it was a grief to him.           
   This  second  break  was destructive  - in  the sense,  that The
 Silmarillion would  never now  be finally  achieved. In  the years
 that  followed  he was  overwhelmed: the  demands of  his position
 in the University, and the necessity of moving  house, led  him to
 declare  that  the  preparation  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings for
 publication, which  should have  been 'a  labour of  delight', had
 been  'transformed  into  a  nightmare'. Publication  was followed
 by  a   huge  correspondence   of  discussion,   explanation,  and
 analysis, of  which the  examples retrieved  and published  in the
 volume of his letters provide abundant evidence.  It seems  not to
 have  been  until  the  end  of  the  1950s  that he  turned again
 seriously to the Silmarillion narrative (for  which there  was now
 an insistent demand). But it was too late. As will be seen  in the
 latter  part  of  this  book, much  had changed  since (and,  as I
 incline to think, in direct  relation to)  the publication  of The
 Lord of  the Rings  and its  immediate aftermath.  Meditating long
 on  the  world  that  he  had brought  into being  and was  now in
 part  unveiled,  he  had become  absorbed in  analytic speculation
 concerning its underlying  postulates. Before  he could  prepare a
 new and final Silmarillion he must satisfy  the requirements  of a
 coherent  theological  and   metaphysical  system,   rendered  now
 more complex  in its  presentation by  the supposition  of obscure
 and conflicting elements in its roots and its tradition.         
   Among  the  chief  'structural'  conceptions  of  the  mythology
 that  he  pondered  in  those years  were the  myth of  Light; the
 nature  of Aman;  the immortality  (and death)  of the  Elves; the
 mode of their reincarnation;  the Fall  of Men  and the  length of
 their early history; the origin of  the Orcs;  and above  all, the
 power   and   significance  of   Melkor-Morgoth,  which   was  en-
 larged  to  become  the  ground  and source  of the  corruption of

                    
                                                                   
 Arda. For this reason  I have  chosen Morgoth's  Ring as  the title
 of  this  book.  It  derives from  a passage  in my  father's essay
 'Notes on motives in the Silmarillion' (pp. 394  ff.), in  which he
 contrasted  the  nature  of  Sauron's  power,  concentrated  in the
 One  Ring,  with  that  of  Morgoth,  enormously greater,  but dis-
 persed or disseminated  into the  very matter  of Arda:  'the whole
 of Middle-earth was Morgoth's Ring'.                               
                                                                   
  Thus  this  book  and  (as  I  hope)  its  successor   attempt  to
 document  two  radically  distinct  'phases':  that  following  the
 completion  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings,  and that  following its
 publication.  For a  number of  reasons, however,  I have  found it
 more  satisfactory  in  presentation  to  divide the  material, not
 according to these two  'phases', but  by separating  the narrative
 into two parts. While this division is artificial, I have been able
 to include in this book  a high  proportion of  all that  my father
 wrote  in  the  years  after The  Lord of  the Rings  was finished,
 both  in  narrative  and  discussion  (to  which  must be  added of
 course all the material in the volume  of letters),  concerning the
 Elder  Days  before  the Hiding  of Valinor.  The next  volume will
 contain, according to my intention, all or at any rate most  of the
 original texts relating  to the  legends of  Beleriand and  the War
 of the Jewels, including the  full text  of the  Grey Annals  and a
 major   narrative   remaining   unpublished   and    unknown,   The
 Wanderings of Hurin.                                               
                                                                   
  The publication of the  texts in  this book  makes it  possible to
 relate, if not at all points or in every  detail, the  first eleven
 chapters  (with  the  exception   of  Chapter   II  'Of   Aule  and
 Yavanna'  and  Chapter  X  'Of  the   Sindar')  of   the  published
 Silmarillion to their sources. This is not the purpose of the book,
 and I have  not discussed  the construction  of the  published text
 at large; I have presented the material in  terms of  its evolution
 from earlier forms, and in  those parts  that concern  the revision
 and  rewriting  of  the  Quenta  Silmarillion  I have  retained the
 paragraph  numbers from  the pre-Lord  of the  Rings text  given in
 Volume  V,  so  that comparison  is made  simple. But  the (inevit-
 ably  complex)  documentation  of  the  revised   Quenta  Silmaril-
 lion is intended to show clearly its  very curious  relationship to
 the  Annals  of  Aman,  which  was  a  major  consideration  in the
 formation of the text in the first part of the published work.     
  I  am  much  indebted  to  Mr  Charles  Noad,  who has  once again
 undertaken  the  onerous  task  of  reading   the  text   in  proof

 independently  and  checking  all  references  and  citations  with
 scrupulous care, to its great improvement.                         
                                                                   
   I  am  very  grateful for  the following  communications concern-
 ing  Volume  IX,  Sauron   Defeated.  Mr   John  D.   Rateliff  has
 pointed out an entry  in the  diary of  W. H.  Lewis for  22 August
 1946   (Brothers  and   Friends:  The   Diaries  of   Major  Warren
 Hamilton Lewis, ed.  C. S.  Kilby and  M. L.  Mead, 1982,  p. 194).
 In this entry Warnie Lewis  recorded that  at the  Inklings meeting
 that evening my father read 'a  magnificent myth  which is  to knit
 up and conclude his  Papers of  the Notions  [sic] Club.'  The myth
 is  of  course  the  Drowning  of  Anadune. I  was present  on this
 occasion  but  cannot  recall  it  (in  this connection  see Sauron
 Defeated p. 389).                                                  
   Mr  William  Hicklin  has  explained   why  John   Rashbold,  the
 undergraduate  member  of  the  Notion   Club  who   never  speaks,
 should  bear  the  second  name  Jethro.   In  the   Old  Testament
 Moses'  father-in-law  is  named  both  Jethro  and  Reuel  (Exodus
 2:18  and  3:1);  thus John  Jethro Rashbold  = John  Reuel Tolkien
 (see Sauron Defeated pp. 151, 160).                                
   I  was  unable  to explain  the reference  (pp. 277  - 8)  to the
 retreat of the  Danes from  Porlock in  Somerset to  'Broad Relic',
 but  Miss  Rhona  Beare  has  pointed  out  that 'Broad  Relic' and
 'Steep  Relic'  are  in  fact  names  used  in  manuscripts  of the
 Anglo-Saxon   Chronicle   for   the   islands   of   Flatholme  and
 Steepholme at  the mouth  of the  river Severn  (see The  Lost Road
 and  Other  Writings  p.  80);  according  to  Earle  and  Plummer,
 Two  of  the Saxon  Chronicles Parallel  (1892; II.128),  'The name
 "Relic"  may  point to  some Irish  religious settlements  on these
 islands; "relicc" (=  reliquiae) is  the regular  Irish name  for a
 cemetery.'                                                         
   I take this opportunity  to notice  two important  misprints that
 entered the text of Sauron Defeated at a late  stage. The  first is
 on  p.  297,  where  line  45  of  the  poem  Imram should  read We
 sailed then on till all winds failed, etc. The second is on p. 475,
 where in  Index II  a line  was dropped  after the  entry Pharazir;
 the  following  should  be  restored:  Pillar  of Heaven,  The 238,
 241-2,249,302,315,317,335,353.                                     
                                                                   
   Lastly, I should mention that after the text of this book  was in
 print I added a discussion  of the  significance of  the star-names
 that appear on p. 160 to the head-note to the Index.               
