   PART ONE.
            
  AINULINDALE.

                                AINULINDALE.                               
                                                                          
 The  evidence  is  clear  that  when  The Lord  of the  Rings was  at last
 completed  my  father returned  with great  energy to  the legends  of the
 Elder Days.  He was  working on  the new  version of  the Lay  of Leithian
 in 1950 (III.330); and he  noted (V.294)  that he  had revised  the Quenta
 Silmarillion  as  far  as  the end  of the  tale of  Beren and  Luthien on
 10  May  1951.  The  last  page  of  the  later  Tale  of Tuor,  where the
 manuscript is  reduced to  notes before  finally breaking  off (Unfinished
 Tales  p.  56),  is  written  on  a  page  from  an   engagement  calendar
 bearing the  date September  1951, and  the same  calendar, with  dates in
 September,  October,  and  November  1951,  was  used  for riders  to Tuor
 and the Grey Annals (the last  version of  the Annals  of Beleriand  and a
 close  companion  work  to the  Annals of  Aman, the  last version  of the
 Annals  of  Valinor).  The  account,  some  ten  thousand  words  long, of
 the  'cycles'  of the  legends, written  to Milton  Waldman of  the London
 publisher Collins and given in part  in The  Letters of  J. R.  R. Tolkien
 (no.131), was very probably written towards the end of that year.         
   Until  recently I  had assumed  without question  that every  element in
 the  new  work on  the Elder  Days belonged  to the  years 1950  and 1951;
 but  I  have  now  discovered  unambiguous  evidence  that  my  father had
 in fact turned again  to the  Ainulindale some  years before  he finished
 The  Lord  of  the  Rings.  As will  be seen,  this is  no mere  matter of
 getting the textual history right, but is of great significance.          
   I had long  been aware  of extremely  puzzling facts  in the  history of
 the  rewriting  of  the  Ainulindale.  The  fine  pre-Lord  of  the Rings
 manuscript, lettered 'B', was  described and  printed in  V.155 ff.;  as I
 noted  there  (p.  156)  'the  manuscript  became  the vehicle  of massive
 rewriting  many  years  later,  when  great  changes  in  the cosmological
 conception had entered.' So drastic was  the revision  (with a  great deal
 of  new material  written on  the blank  verso pages)  that in  the result
 two distinct texts of the  work, wholly  divergent in  essential respects,
 exist  physically  in  the  same  manuscript.  This   new  text   I  shall
 distinguish as 'C'.                                                       
   But there is  another text,  a typescript  made by  my father,  that was
 also directly based  on Ainulindale'  B of  the 1930s;  and in  this there
 appears  a  much  more  radical  - one  might say  a devastating  - change
 in the cosmology:  for in  this version  the Sun  is already  in existence
 from the beginning of Arda. I shall refer to this typescript as 'C *'.
   A peculiarity of C* is that for a long stretch it proceeds in very close
 relationship to C, but yet constantly  differs from  it, though  always in

  quite insignificant ways. In many cases my  father later  wrote in  the C
  reading on the typescript. I will illustrate this by a single  example, a
  passage in $25 (p. 15). Here C*, as typed, has:                          
                                                                          
    But  when  they  clad  themselves  the  Valar  arrayed themselves  in the
    form  and  temper  some  as  of  male  and  some  as  of female;  and the
    choice   that   they   made  herein   proceeded,  doubtless,   from  that
    temper  that  each  had  from  their  uttermost  beginning; for  male and
    female  are  not  matters  only  of  the  body  any  more  than   of  the
    raiment.                                                               
                                                                          
  The C text has here:                                                     
                                                                          
    But  when  they  clad  themselves  the  Valar  arrayed  them in  the form
    some as of male  and some  as of  female; for  that difference  of temper
    they had even from their beginning,  and it  is but  bodied forth  in the
    choice  of  each,  not  made  by  the choice;  even as  with us  male and
    female may be shown by the raiment, but is not made thereby.           
                                                                          
  Now in C this passage was written at the  same time  as what  precedes it
  and what follows it - it is all of a  piece; whereas  in C*  the original
  typed passage was struck through and the C text substituted in pencil.
    There  seemed  no  other  explanation  possible  but  that C*  preceded
  C; yet it seemed extraordinary,  even incredible,  that my  father should
  have  first  made  a  clear  new  typescript  version  from  the   old  B
  manuscript  and then  returned to  that manuscript  to cover  it somewhat
  chaotically  with  new  writing  - the  more so  since C*  and C  are for
  much of their length closely similar.                                    
    When  working  on  The  Notion   Club  Papers   I  found   among  rough
  notes  and  jottings  on  the Adunaic  language a torn half-sheet  of the
  same paper as carries a passage from the Ainulindale', written  in pencil
  in  my father's  most rapid  hand. While  not proof  that he  was working
  on the Ainulindale' so early as  1946 (the  year to  which I  ascribe the
  development  of  Adunaic,  when  The  Lord  of  the  Rings had  been long
  halted and The Return of the King  no more  than begun:  see IX.12  - 13,
  147) this strongly suggested it; and as will be seen in a moment there is
  certain evidence  that the  text C*  was in  existence by  1948. Moreover
  in a main structural feature C* follows this bit of text,  as C  does not
  (see p. 42); it seemed  very probable  therefore that  C* was  typed from
  a very rough text of which the torn half-sheet is all that remains.       
    Here  it  must be  mentioned that  on the  first page  of C*  my father
  wrote  later  'Round  World Version',  and (obviously  at the  same time)
  on the title-page of B/C he  wrote 'Old  Flat World  Version' -  the word
  'Old'  being  a  subsequent   addition.  It   would  obviously   be  very
  interesting  to  know  when  he  labelled  them thus;  and the  answer is
  provided by the following evidences. The first is a  draft for  a letter,
  undated and with no indication of whom he was addressing:                

                                    
                                                                      
 These tales are feigned to be translated from  the preserved  works of
 AElfwine  of  England  (c.900 A.D.),  called by  the Elves  Eriol, who
 being  blown  west  from  Ireland eventually  came upon  the 'Straight
 Road' and found Tol Eressea the Lonely Isle.                          
  He  brought  back copies  and translations  of many  works. I  do not
 trouble you with the Anglo-Saxon forms.  (The only  trace of  these is
 the use of c for k as in Celeb- beside Keleb-.)                       
  All  these  histories  are  told  by  Elves  and  are  not  primarily
 concerned with Men.                                                   
  I have ventured to include 2 others.                                 
  (1) A 'Round World' version of the 'Music of the Ainur'.             
  (2)  A  'Man's'  version  of  the  Fall  of  Numenor told  from men's
 point  of  view,  and  with  names  in   a  non-Elvish   tongue.  'The
 Drowning of Anadune . This also is Round World'.(1)                   
  The  Elvish  myths  are 'Flat  World'. A  pity really  but it  is too
 integral to change it.                                                
                                                                      
 On the back of the paper he wrote: 'For the moment  I cannot  find the
 Tale called The Rings of Power', and referred again  in much  the same
 terms to 'two other tales' that he was 'enclosing'.                   
 There is another  draft for  this letter  which, while  again undated,
 was  written  from  Merton  College  and  addressed to  Mrs. Katherine
 Farrer, the wife of  Dr. Austin  Farrer, theologian  and at  that time
 Chaplain of Trinity College:                                          
                                                                      
 Dear Mrs. Farrer,                                                     
  These tales are feigned (I  do not  include their  slender framework)
 to  be  translated  from  the  preserved work  of AElfwine  of England
 (c.900  A.D.),  who  being  blown  west  from Ireland  eventually came
 upon  the  'straight  road' and  found the  Lonely Isle,  Tol Eressea,
 beyond the seas.                                                      
  There  he  learned ancient  lore, and  brought back  translations and
 excerpts  from  works  of  Elvish  lore. The  specimen of  the 'Anglo-
 Saxon' original is not included.                                      
  NB All these histories are told by the Elves,  and are  not primarily
 concerned with Men.                                                   
  I  have  ventured  to'  include, besides  the 'Silmarillion'  or main
 chronicle,  one  or  two other  connected 'myths':  'The Music  of the
 Ainur', the Beginning;  and the  Later Tales:(2) 'The Rings  of Power',
 and  'The  Fall of  Numenor', which  link up  with Hobbit-lore  of the
 later or 'Third Age'.                                                 
                                 Yours                                 
                                  JRRT.                                 
                                                                      
 The end of this, from 'and the Later Tales', was struck out and marked
 'not included'.                                                       
 It cannot be doubted that these were drafts for the undated  letter to

  Katherine Farrer which is printed as no.115 in  The Letters  of J.  R. R.
  Tolkien, for though  there is  not much  left from  these drafts  in that
  form of it, it contains the  words 'I  am distressed  (for myself)  to be
  unable  to  find  the  <Rings  of   Power>,  which   with  the   Fall  of
  Numenor" is the link between the Silmarillion and the Hobbit world.'     
    My father said in the first of the two drafts given  above that  he was
  including in the materials to be lent to  Katherine Farrer  'two others',
  one  of  which  was   'a  "Round   World"  version   of  the   "Music  of
  Ainur"'; and  this can  be taken  to mean  that he  was giving  her two
  versions,  'Flat  World'  and  'Round  World'. Now  there is  preserved a
  portion of a letter to him from Katherine Farrer, and  on this  my father
  pencilled  a  date: 'October  1948'. She  had by  this time  received and
  read what he had  given to  her, and  in the  course of  her illuminating
  and deeply enthusiastic remarks she said: 'I like the Flat Earth versions
  best.  The  hope  of  Heaven  is  the  only  thing  which   makes  modern
  astronomy  tolerable:  otherwise there  must be  an East  and a  West and
  Walls: aims and choices and not an endless circle of wandering.'         
    It must  have been  when he  was preparing  the texts  for her  that he
  wrote  the  words  'Flat  World  Version'  and  'Round World  Version' on
  the texts B/C and C* of  the Ainulindale'.  Beyond this  one can  only go
  by  guesswork; but  my guess  is that  the 'Flat  World Version'  was the
  old  B  manuscript  before  it had  been covered  with the  revisions and
  new  elements  that  constitute  version  C.  It  may  be  that Katherine
  Farrer's  opinion  had some  influence on  my father  in his  decision to
  make this  new version  C on  the old  manuscript -  deriving much  of it
  from C', and emending C' in conformity with new readings. Thus:          
  -  Ainulindale  B,  a  manuscript  of  the  1930s.  When lending  this to
  Katherine Farrer in 1948 he wrote on it 'Flat World Version'.            
  -  A new version, lost apart from a  single torn sheet, written  in 1946.
  -  A typescript,  Ainulindale C*, based  on this  text. When lending this
  in 1948 he wrote on it 'Round World Version'.                            
  -  Ainulindale' C, made after  the return  of the  texts by  covering the
  old  B  manuscript  with  new  writing,  and  removing  certain radically
  innovative elements present in C*.                                       
  It would in this way be entirely explicable  how it  came about  that the
  typescript  C*  preceded the  complicated and  confusing revision  (C) on
  the old manuscript - this being the precursor of the last version  of the
  work  that my  father wrote,  Ainulindale' 'D',  made in  all probability
  not long after C.                                                        
    Ainulindale  C*  was  thus  an  experiment,  conceived   and  composed,
  as  it  appears,  before  the  writing  of  The Return  of the  King, and
  certainly before The Lord of the Rings  was finished.  It was  set aside;
  but  as  will appear  later in  this book,  it was  by no  means entirely
  forgotten.                                                               
                                                                          
     C* should therefore in strict chronology be given first; but in view

  of  its peculiarities  it cannot  be made  the base  text. It  is necessary
  therefore to change the  chronological order,  and I  give first  version C
  in full, following it with a full account of the  development in  the final
  text D, and postponing consideration of C' to the end of Part One.         
    Before  giving  the  text  of   C,  however,   there  is   another  brief
  document  that has  value for  dating: this  is a  brief, isolated  list of
  names and their definitions headed Alterations in last revision 1951.(3)   
                                                                            
      Atani N[oldorin] Edain = Western Men or Fathers of Men                 
    Pengolod(4)                                                              
    Aman name of land beyond Pelori or  mountains of  Valinor, of            
      which Valinor is part                                                  
    Melkor (5)                                                               
    Arda Elvish name of Earth = our world. Also Kingdom of Arda =            
      fenced region. Field of Arda.                                          
    Illuin Lamp of North = Helkar (6)                                        
    Ormal Lamp of South = Ringil (6)                                         
    Isle of Almaren in the Great Lake                                        
    Valaroma = Horn of Orome                                                 
    Eru = Iluvatar                                                           
    Ea = Universe of that which Is                                           
                                                                            
  Not  all these  names were  'newly devised  at this  time, of  course: thus
  Eru  and  Arda  go  back  to  my father's  work on  The Notion  Club Papers
  and  The  Drowning  of  Anadune,  as  also  does  Aman  (where  however  it
  was the Adunaic name of Manwe).                                            
    In  Ainulindale'  C  appear  Arda,  Melkor,  and  Pelori,  but  the Lamps
  are called Foros and  Hyaras, not  Illuin and  Ormal, and  the Isle  in the
  Great  Lake  is  Almar,  not  Almaren.  The  final  text  D,  as originally
  written,  has  Atani,  Almaren and  Aman,  but  Aman   did  not   mean  the
  Blessed  Realm;  the  Lamps  are  named  Foronte  and  Hyarante,  and the
  Horn  of  Orome  is  Rombaras.  These  differences  from  the  '1951  list'
  show that Ainulindale' D was made before that time.                        
    I  give now  the text  of Ainulindale  C in  full. Since  despite radical
  changes  in the  structure and  the addition  of much  new material  a good
  deal of the old form does survive, it is not really necessary to do so, but
  to  give  it  partly  in  the  form  of  textual   notes  would   make  the
  development  very  difficult  to  follow;  and Ainulindale  C is  an import-
  ant  document  in  the  history  of  the  mythological  conception  of  the
  created  Universe.  The  remodelling  that constituted  C out  of B  was in
  fact done at different times,  and is  in places  chaotic, full  of changes
  and substitutions; I do not  attempt to  disentangle the  different layers,
  but give the final form  after all  changes, with  a few  developments that
  took place while C  was in  the making  recorded in  the notes  that follow
  the  text  (p.  22).  I  have  numbered  the  paragraphs  as  a  convenient
  means of reference subsequently.                                           

 On the title-page the original words 'This was written by Rumil of         
 Tun' (V.156) were extended thus:                                           
                                                                           
                      This was written by Rumil of Tuna                     
                     and was told to AElfwine in Eressea                    
                               (as he records)                              
                            by Pengolod the Sage                            
 The  form  Tuna  for  Tun  as  the  name  of  the  city  came  in  with the
 earliest  layer  of emendation  to QS  (pre-Lord of  the Rings,  see V.225,
 $39).  Since  the  city is  Tirion in  The Lord  of the  Rings it  might be
 thought that this extension of the title  was made  in the  earlier period;
 but in a later version of the title-page (p. 30) my father  retained 'Rumil
 of  Tuna',  and  in  the  Annals of  Aman he  frequently used  Tuna (beside
 Tirion) in general reference to 'the city on the hill' (see p. 90, $67).
 It is not said in any of the title-pages to the texts of the earlier period
 that  Pengolod  (Pengolod)  actually  instructed  AElfwine  himself  he  is
 cited as the author of works which AElfwine saw and translated.(7)         
                                                                           
                           The Music of the Ainur                           
                         and the Coming of the Valar.                       
                                                                           
 These    are    the    words    that    Pengolod (8) spake to    AElfwine
 concerning the beginning of the World.                                     
 $1   There  was   Iluvatar,  the   All-father,  and   he  made   first  the
 Ainur,  the  Holy   Ones,  that   were  the   offspring  of   his  thought,
 and   they   were   with   him  before   aught  else   was  made.   And  he
 spoke   to  them,   propounding  to   them  themes   of  music,   and  they
 sang  before  him,  and  he  was  glad.  But  for  a  long while  they sang
 only  each  alone,  or  but  few  together,   while  the   rest  hearkened;
 for   each  comprehended   only  that   part  of   the  mind   of  Iluvatar
 from  which  he  came,  and   in  the   understanding  of   their  brethren
 they  grew  but  slowly.   Yet  ever   as  they   listened  they   came  to
 deeper understanding, and increased in unison and harmony.                 
 $2  And  it  came   to  pass   that  Iluvatar   called  together   all  the
 Ainur,  and  declared   to  them   a  mighty   theme,  unfolding   to  them
 things   greater   and   more   wonderful   than   he  had   yet  revealed;
 and  the   glory  of   its  beginning   and  the   splendour  of   its  end
 amazed  the  Ainur,   so  that   they  bowed   before  Iluvatar   and  were
 silent.                                                                    
 $3  Then  said  Iluvatar:   'Of  the   theme  that   I  have   declared  to
 you,   I   will   now   that   ye   make  in   harmony  together   a  Great
 Music.   And  since   I  have   kindled  you   with  the   Flame  Imperish-
 able,  ye  shall   show  forth   your  powers   in  adorning   this  theme,
 each  with  his  own  thoughts  and  devices, if  he will.  But I  will sit

 and  hearken  and  be  glad that  through you  great beauty  has been
 wakened into song.'                                                 
   $4  Then  the  voices  of  the  Ainur, like  unto harps  and lutes,
 and  pipes  and  trumpets,  and  viols  and  organs,  and  like  unto
 countless  choirs  singing  with  words, began  to fashion  the theme
 of  Iluvatar  to  a  great  music;  and  a  sound  arose  of  endless
 interchanging  melodies,  woven  in   harmony,  that   passed  beyond
 hearing  into  the depths  and into  the heights,  and the  places of
 the  dwelling  of  Iluvatar  were  filled  to  overflowing,  and  the
 music  and  the echo  of the  music went  out into  the Void,  and it
 was  not  void.  Never  since  have  the  Ainur  made any  music like
 to this music, though it has been said that a greater still  shall be
 made before  Iluvatar by  the choirs  of the  Ainur and  the Children
 of  Iluvatar  after  the  end  of days.(9) Then  shall  the  themes of
 Iluvatar be  played aright,  and take  Being in  the moment  of their
 utterance, for all shall then  understand his  intent in  their part,
 and  shall  know  the  comprehension  of  each,  and  Iluvatar  shall
 give to their thoughts the secret fire, being well pleased.         
   $5  But  now  Iluvatar  sat   and  hearkened,   and  for   a  great
 while  it  seemed  good  to  him,  for  in  the  music there  were no
 flaws.  But  as  the  theme  progressed,  it came  into the  heart of
 Melkor  to  interweave  matters  of  his  own  imagining   that  were
 not  in  accord with  the theme  of Iluvatar;  for he  sought therein
 to increase  the power  and glory  of the  part assigned  to himself.
 To  Melkor  among  the  Ainur had  been given  the greatest  gifts of
 power and  knowledge, and  he had  a share  in all  the gifts  of his
 brethren;  and  he  had  gone  often  alone  into  the   void  places
 seeking  the  Imperishable  Flame.  For  desire  grew hot  within him
 to bring into Being  things of  his own,  and it  seemed to  him that
 Iluvatar  took  no  thought  for the  Void, and  he was  impatient of
 its emptiness. Yet he found not the  Fire, for  it is  with Iluvatar.
 But  being  alone  he  had  begun  to  conceive  thoughts of  his own
 unlike those of his brethren.                                       
   $6  Some  of  these  thoughts  he  now  wove  into  his  music, and
 straightway  discord  arose  about  him,  and  many  that  sang  nigh
 him  grew  despondent  and  their  thought  was  disturbed  and their
 music  faltered;  but  some  began  to  attune  their  music  to  his
 rather  than  to  the  thought  which  they  had  at first.  Then the
 discord  of  Melkor  spread  ever  wider, and  the melodies  that had
 been heard at first foundered in a sea of turbulent sound. But
 Iluvatar sat and  hearkened, until  it seemed  that about  his throne
 there  was  a  raging  storm,  as of  dark waters  that made  war one

 upon the other in an endless wrath that would not be assuaged.
   $7  Then  Iluvatar  arose,  and  the  Ainur  perceived  that  he
 smiled; and he  lifted up  his left  hand, and  a new  theme began
 amid the storm, like and yet unlike  to the  former theme,  and it
 gathered  power  and  had new  beauty. But  the discord  of Melkor
 arose  in  uproar and  contended with  it, and  there was  again a
 war of sound more  violent than  before, until  many of  the Ainur
 were  dismayed  and  played   no  longer,   and  Melkor   had  the
 mastery.  Then  again  Iluvatar  arose,  and  the  Ainur perceived
 that his countenance was stern; and he lifted  up his  right hand;
 and behold,  a third  theme grew  amid the  confusion, and  it was
 unlike the others. For it seemed at first soft  and sweet,  a mere
 rippling of gentle sounds in delicate melodies,  but it  could not
 be  quenched,  and  it  grew,  and  it  took  to itself  power and
 profundity.  And  it  seemed at  last that  there were  two musics
 progressing  at one  time before  the seat  of Iluvatar,  and they
 were utterly at  variance. One  was deep  and wide  and beautiful,
 but   slow  and   blended  with   an  immeasurable   sorrow,  from
 which  its  beauty  chiefly  came.  The other  had now  achieved a
 unity  of  its  own;  but  it  was loud,  and vain,  and endlessly
 repeated,  and  it  had  little  harmony,  but rather  a clamorous
 unison  as  of  many  trumpets braying  upon a  few notes.  And it
 essayed to drown the  other music  by the  violence of  its voice,
 but it seemed that  its most  triumphant notes  were taken  by the
 other and woven into its own solemn pattern.                     
  $8  In the midst of this  strife, whereat  the halls  of Iluvatar
 shook  and  a  tremor  ran  out  into  the  silences  yet unmoved,
 Iluvatar arose a third time, and his face was terrible  to behold.
 Then he raised up both his hands,  and in  one chord,  deeper than
 the  Abyss,  higher  than  the Firmament,  more glorious  than the
 Sun,  piercing  as the  light of  the eye  of Iluvatar,  the Music
 ceased.                                                          
   $9  Then Iluvatar  spoke, and  he said:  'Mighty are  the Ainur,
 and  mightiest  among  them  is  Melkor;  but  that  he  may know,
 and all the Ainur, that I am Iluvatar, those  things that  ye have
 sung  and played,  lo! I  will show  them forth,  that ye  may see
 what  ye  have done.  And thou,  Melkor, shalt  see that  no theme
 may be played that has  not its  uttermost source  in me,  nor can
 any alter the music  in my  despite. For  he that  attempteth this
 shall  be  but  mine  instrument  in the  devising of  things more
 wonderful, which he himself hath not imagined.'                  
   $10  Then  the  Ainur  were  afraid,  and   they  did   not  yet

 comprehend  the  words  that  were  said  to  them;  and  Melkor was
 filled with shame, of which  came secret  anger. But  Iluvatar arose
 in  splendour,  and  he  went forth  from the  fair regions  that he
 had made for the Ainur; and the Ainur followed him.                
   $11  But  when  they  were  come  into  the  Void,  Iluvatar  said
 to  them:  'Behold  your  Music!' And  he showed  to them  a vision,
 giving  to  them  sight  where  before  was  only hearing;  and they
 saw  a  new  World  made  visible  before  them,  and it  was globed
 amid the Void,  and it  was sustained  therein, but  was not  of it.
 And  as  they  looked  and  wondered  this  World  began  to  unfold
 its history, and it seemed to them that it lived and grew.         
   $12  And  when  the  Ainur  had  gazed  for   a  while   and  were
 silent,  Iluvatar  said  again:  'Behold  your  Music! This  is your
 minstrelsy;  and  each  of  you  that  had  part  in  it  shall find
 contained there, within the design that I set before you,  all those
 things  which  it may  seem that  he himself  devised or  added. And
 thou, Melkor, wilt  discover all  the secret  thoughts of  thy mind,
 and  wilt  perceive  that  they  are  but  a part  of the  whole and
 tributary to its glory.'                                           
   $13  And  many  other  things  Iluvatar  spoke  to  the  Ainur  at
 that  time,  and  because  of  their  memory of  his words,  and the
 knowledge  that  each  has  of  the  music  which  he  himself made,
 the  Ainur  know  much  of what  was, and  is, and  is to  come, and
 few  things  are  unseen  by them.  Yet some  things there  are that
 they  cannot  see,  neither  alone nor  taking counsel  together (as
 thou shalt hear,  AElfwine); for  to none  but himself  has Iluvatar
 revealed  all that  he has  in store,  and in  every age  there come
 forth  things  that are  new and  have no  foretelling, for  they do
 not spring from the past. And so it was that, as this vision  of the
 World  was  played  before  them,  the Ainur  saw that  it contained
 things  which  they  had  not  thought.  And  they  saw  with amaze-
 ment  the coming  of the  Children of  Iluvatar, and  the habitation
 that  was  prepared  for   them;  and   they  perceived   that  they
 themselves  in  the labour  of their  music had  been busy  with the
 preparation  of  this dwelling,  and yet  knew not  that it  had any
 purpose  beyond  its  own  beauty.  For  the  Children  of  Iluvatar
 were  conceived  by  him  alone;  and  they  came  with   the  Third
 Theme,(10) and  were  not  in  the  theme  which  Iluvatar  propounded
 at  the  beginning,  and  none  of  the  Ainur  had  part  in  their
 making.  Therefore  when  they  beheld  them,  the  more   did  they
 love them,  being things  other than  themselves, strange  and free,
 wherein  they  saw  the   mind  of   Iluvatar  reflected   anew  and

                   
                                                                      
  learned  yet  a  little  more  of  his  wisdom,  which  otherwise  had
  been hidden even from the Holy Ones.                                 
     $14  Now  the  Children  of  Iluvatar  are   Elves  and   Men,  the
  Firstborn  and  the  Followers.  And  amid all  the splendours  of the
  World, its vast  halls and  spaces, and  its wheeling  fires, Iluvatar
  chose  a  place  for  their  habitation in  the Deeps  of Time  and in
  the  midst  of  the  innumerable  Stars.  And  this  habitation  might
  seem a little  thing to  those who  consider only  the majesty  of the
  Ainur,  and  not their  terrible sharpness  - as  who should  take the
  whole field of the Sun as  the foundations  of a  pillar and  so raise
  it until the cone of its summit  was more  bitter than  a needle  - or
  who   consider   only   the  immeasurable   vastness  of   the  World,
  which  still  the  Ainur  are  shaping, and  not the  minute precision
  to  which  they  shape  all  things  therein.  But  thou  must  under-
  stand,  AElfwine,  that  when  the  Ainur  had beheld  this habitation
  in  a  vision and  had seen  the Children  of Iluvatar  arise therein,
  then  many  of  the  most  mighty  of  the  Holy  Ones bent  all their
  thought  and   their  desire   towards  that   place.  And   of  these
  Melkor  was  the  chief,  even  as  he  was   in  the   beginning  the
  greatest  of  the  Ainur  who  took   part  in   the  Music.   And  he
  feigned, even to himself at first, that he desired  to go  thither and
  order  all  things  for  the  good  of   the  Children   of  Iluvatar,
  controlling  the  turmoils  of  the heat  and the  cold that  had come
  to  pass through  him. But  he desired  rather to  subdue to  his will
  both  Elves   and  Men,   envying  the   gifts  with   which  Iluvatar
  promised   to   endow   them;   and   he   wished   himself   to  have
  subjects  and servants,  and to  be called  Lord, and  to be  a master
  over other wills.                                                    
    $15   But  the  other  Ainur  looked  upon  this  habitation  in the
  Halls  of  Aman,(11) which  the   Elves  call   Arda,  the   Earth,  and
  looking  upon  light  they  were  joyful, and  their eyes  seeing many
  colours  were  filled  with gladness;  but because  of the  roaring of
  the  sea  they  felt  a  great  unquiet. And  they observed  the winds
  and  the   air,  and   the  matters   whereof  the   Middle-earth  was
  made,(12)  of iron   and   stone   and  silver   and  gold   and  many
  substances;  but of  all these  water they  most greatly  praised. And
  it is said by the Eldar that in water there lives yet the echo  of the
  Music  of  the   Ainur,  and   many  of   the  Children   of  Iluvatar
  hearken  still unsated  to the  voices of  the sea,  and yet  know not
  for what they listen.                                                
     $16  Now  to  water  had  that   Ainu  whom   we  call   Ulmo  most
  turned  his  thought,  and  of all  most deeply  was he  instructed by

 Iluvatar  in  music.  But  of  the  airs  and  winds Manwe  most had
 pondered,  who  was  the  noblest  of  the Ainur.  Of the  fabric of
 Earth  had  Aule  thought,  to  whom  Iluvatar  had given  skill and
 knowledge  scarce less  than to  Melkor; but  the delight  and pride
 of  Aule  was in  the deed  of making,  and in  the thing  made, and
 not  in  possession  nor  in  himself, wherefore  he became  a maker
 and teacher, and none have called him lord.                        
   $17  Now  Iluvatar  spake  to  Ulmo  and  said:  'Seest  thou  not
 here in this little realm in the Deeps of Time and  in the  midst of
 the  innumerable   Stars  how   Melkor  hath   made  war   upon  thy
 province?  He  hath  bethought  him   of  bitter   cold  immoderate,
 and  yet  hath not  destroyed the  beauty of  thy fountains,  nor of
 thy clear pools. Behold  the snow,  and the  cunning work  of frost!
 Behold  the  towers  and  mansions  of  ice!  Melkor   hath  devised
 heats  and  fire  without  restraint,  and  hath  not  dried  up thy
 desire, nor utterly quelled the music of the sea. Behold  rather the
 height  and  glory  of the  clouds, and  the everchanging  mists and
 vapours,  and listen  to the  fall of  rain upon  the Earth!  And in
 these  clouds  thou  art  drawn  yet  nearer  to  Manwe,  thy friend
 whom thou lovest.'                                                 
   $18   Then   Ulmo   answered:  'Yea,   truly,  Water   is  become
 now  fairer  than  my   heart  imagined,   neither  had   my  secret
 thought  conceived  the  snow-flake,  nor  in   all  my   music  was
 contained the falling of the rain. Lo!  I will  seek Manwe,  that he
 and I may  make melodies  for ever  and ever  to thy  delight!' And
 Manwe  and  Ulmo  have  from  the  beginning  been  allied,  and  in
 all things have served most faithfully the purpose of Iluvatar.
   $19  But  behold!  even  as  Ulmo  spoke,  and  while   the  Ainur
 were  yet  gazing upon  this vision,  it was  taken away  and hidden
 from their sight; and it  seemed to  them that  in that  moment they
 perceived  a  new  thing,  Darkness,  which   they  had   not  known
 before,  except  in  thought.  But  they  had  become  enamoured  of
 the beauty  of the  vision, and  engrossed in  the unfolding  of the
 World  which  came  there  to  being,  and  their minds  were filled
 with  it;  for  the  history  was  incomplete  and  the  circles not
 full-wrought  when  the  vision  was  taken  away,  and   there  was
 unrest among them.                                                 
   $20  Therefore  Iluvatar  called  to  them and  said: 'I  know the
 desire  of  your  minds  that what  ye have  seen should  verily be,
 not only in your thought,  but even  as ye  yourselves are,  and yet
 other. Therefore I say: Let these things Be! And  I will  send forth
 the flame imperishable into the Void, and it shall  be at  the heart

 of the  World, and  the World  shall Be;  and those  of you  that will
 may  go  down  into  it.'  And  suddenly  the  Ainur  saw  afar  off a
 light, as  it were  a cloud  with a  living heart  of flame;  and they
 knew  that  this  was no  vision only,  but that  Iluvatar had  made a
 new thing.                                                           
   $21  Thus  it  came  to  pass  that  of  the  Holy  Ones  some abode
 still  with Iluvatar  beyond the  confines of  the World;  but others,
 and  among  them  many  of  the  greatest  and  most  fair,  took  the
 leave  of  Iluvatar  and  descended  into   it.  But   this  condition
 Iluvatar  made,  or  it  is the  necessity of  their love,  that their
 power   should   henceforth   be   contained   and   bounded   in  the
 World, and be within it for ever, so that they are its life and  it is
 theirs.  And  therefore,  AElfwine,  we  name  them  the   Valar,  the
 Powers of the World.                                                 
   $22   But   behold!   when   the  Valar   entered  into   the  World
 they were at first astounded and at a loss,  for it  was as  if naught
 was  yet  made  which  they had  seen in  vision, and  all was  but on
 point  to begin,  and yet  unshapen; and  it was  dark. For  the Great
 Music  had  been  but  the  growth  and  flowering  of thought  in the
 Timeless  Halls,  and  the   Vision  only   a  foreshowing;   but  now
 they  had  entered  in  at  the  beginning  of  Time,  and  the  Valar
 perceived   that   the   World   had   been   but   foreshadowed   and
 foresung, and they must achieve it.                                  
   $23  So  began  their  great  labours   in  wastes   unmeasured  and
 unexplored,  and  in  ages  uncounted  and  forgotten,  until  in  the
 Deeps  of  Time  and  in  the  midst  of the  vast.halls of  the World
 there  came  to  be  that  hour  and  that  place  where was  made the
 habitation  of  the  Children  of  Iluvatar.  And  in  this  work  the
 chief   part   was   taken   by   Manwe   and   Aule  and   Ulmo.  But
 Melkor, too, was  there from  the first,  and he  meddled in  all that
 was  done,  turning  it,  if  he  might,  to   his  own   desires  and
 purposes;  and  he  kindled  great  fires.  When  therefore  Earth was
 young  and  full  of  flame  Melkor  coveted  it, and  he said  to the
 Valar:  'This  shall  be  my  own   kingdom!  And   I  name   it  unto
 myself!'                                                             
   $24  But  Manwe  was  the  brother  of  Melkor   in  the   mind  of
 Iluvatar,  and  he  was  the  chief  instrument  of  the  second Theme
 that  Iluvatar  had  raised  up  against  the  discord of  Melkor; and
 he  called  unto  himself  others  of  his kin  and many  spirits both
 greater  and  less,  and  they  went  down  into  the  Halls  of  Aman
 and  aided  Manwe,  lest  Melkor  should  hinder  the   fulfilment  of
 their  labour  for  ever,  and   the  Earth   should  wither   ere  it

 flowered.  And  Manwe  said  unto   Melkor:  'This   kingdom  thou
 shalt not take  for thine  own, wrongfully,  for many  others have
 laboured here no  less than  thou.' And  there was  strife between
 Melkor  and  the  Valar,  and  for  a  time  Melkor  departed  and
 withdrew to other regions  and did  there what  he would,  but the
 Earth  he  could  not  put  from  his  heart.  For  he  was alone,
 without  friend  or  companion,  and  he  had  as  yet  but  small
 following; since of those that had attuned their  music to  his in
 the beginning not all had been willing  to go  down with  him into
 the  World,  and  few  that   had  come   would  yet   endure  his
 servitude.                                                       
   $25  But  the  Valar  now  took  to  themselves shape  and form;
 and because they were drawn thither  by love  for the  Children of
 Iluvatar,  for  whom  they  hoped,  they  took  shape  after  that
 manner  which  they  had beheld  in the  Vision of  Iluvatar; save
 only  in  majesty  and splendour,  for they  are mighty  and holy.
 Moreover  their  shape  comes  of  their  knowledge and  desire of
 the visible World, rather than of the World itself, and  they need
 it not,  save only  as we  use raiment,  and yet  we may  be naked
 and suffer  no loss  of our  being. Therefore  the Valar  may walk
 unclad,  as  it  were,  and  then  even  the Eldar  cannot clearly
 perceive  them,  though  they  be  present.  But  when  they  clad
 themselves the  Valar arrayed  them in  the form  some as  of male
 and some  as of  female; for  that difference  of temper  they had
 even  from  their beginning,  and it  is but  bodied forth  in the
 choice  of each,  not made  by the  choice; even  as with  us male
 and  female  may  be  shown  by  the  raiment,  but  is  not  made
 thereby.  And  Manwe  and  Ulmo  and  Aule  were  as   Kings;  but
 Varda  was  the  Queen  of  the  Valar, and  the spouse  of Manwe,
 and  her  beauty  was high  and terrible  and of  great reverence.
 Yavanna   was  her   sister,  and   Yavanna  espoused   Aule;  but
 Nienna  dwells  alone,  even   as  does   Ulmo.  And   these  with
 Melkor are the Seven Great Ones of the Kingdom of Arda.(13)      
 But think not, AElfwine, that  the shapes  wherein the  Great Ones
 array themselves are at all times  like unto  the shapes  of kings
 and queens of the  Children of  Iluvatar; for  at whiles  they may
 clothe them in their own thought, made  visible in  forms terrible
 and wonderful.  And I  myself, long  years agone,  in the  land of
 the Valar (14) have seen Yavanna in the likeness of a Tree; and the
 beauty and majesty of that form could  not be  told in  words, not
 unless all the things that grow in the earth, from the  least unto
 the greatest,  should sing  in choir  together, making  unto their

 queen an offering of song to be laid before the throne of           
 Iluvatar.                                                           
                                                                    
  $26   And   behold!  the   Valar  drew   unto  them   many  compan-
 ions, some less,  some well-nigh  as great  as themselves,  and they
 laboured  in  the  ordering  of the  Earth, and  the curbing  of its
 tumults.  Then  Melkor  saw  what  was  done,  and  that  the  Valar
 walked upon  Earth as  powers visible,  clad in  the raiment  of the
 World,  and  were  lovely  and  glorious to  see, and  blissful; and
 that  Earth  was  become  as  a  garden for  them, for  its turmoils
 were  subdued.  His  envy  grew  then  the  greater within  him; and
 he  also  took  visible  form,  but  because  of  his mood,  and the
 malice  that  increased  in him,  that form  was dark  and terrible.
 And  he  descended  upon   Earth  in   power  and   majesty  greater
 than any other of the Valar,  as a  mountain that  wades in  the sea
 and has its head above the  clouds and  is clad  in ice  and crowned
 with fire and smoke;  and the  light of  his eyes  was like  a flame
 that withers with heat and pierces with a deadly cold.              
   $27  Thus  began  the  first battle  of the  Valar and  Melkor for
 the  dominion  of Arda;  and of  those tumults  we know  but little;
 for know  thou, AElfwine,  what I  have declared  unto thee  is come
 from  the  Valar  themselves,  with  whom  we  of the  Eldalie spoke
 in  the  land  of  Valinor,  and  we  were  instructed by  them; but
 little would they ever tell of  the days  of war  ere the  coming of
 the  Elves.  But  this  we  know: that  the Valar  endeavoured ever,
 in despite of Melkor, to rule the Earth  and to  prepare it  for the
 coming  of  the  Children;   and  they   built  lands,   and  Melkor
 destroyed  them;  valleys  they  delved and  Melkor raised  them up;
 mountains  they  carved  and  Melkor  threw  them  down;  seas  they
 hollowed  and  Melkor  spilled  them;  and  naught  might   come  to
 peace  or  lasting  growth,  for  as  surely  as  the Valar  began a
 labour  so  would  Melkor  undo  it  or  corrupt  it. And  yet their
 labour  was  not  vain,  and slowly  the Earth  was shaped  and made
 firm.                                                               
                                                                    
  $28  But of  all such  matters, AElfwine,  others shall  tell thee,
 or thou shalt read in other lore; for it is not my part at this time
 to  instruct  thee  in  the history  of the  Earth. And  now behold!
 here is the habitation of  the Children  of Iluvatar  established at
 the last  in the  deeps of  Time and  amidst the  innumerable stars.
 And here  are the  Valar, the  Powers of  the World,  contesting for
 the possession of the jewel of Iluvatar;  and thus  thy feet  are on
 the beginning of the road.                                          

 Words of Pengolod (15)                                            
                                                                  
    $29  And  when  he  had  ended the  Ainulindale', such  as Rumil
 had  made  it,  Pengolod  the  Sage  paused  a while;  and AElfwine
 said to him: Little, you say, would the Valar tell to the  Eldar of
 the  days  before  their  coming:  but  do not  the wise  among you
 know more  of those  ancient wars  than Rumil  has here  set forth?
 Or will you not tell me more of the Valar as  they were  when first
 your kindred beheld and knew them?                                
    $30  And  Pengolod  answered:  Much  of  what  I  know  or  have
 learned from the elders in lore, I  have written;  and what  I have
 written  thou  shalt  read, if  thou wilt,  when thou  hast learned
 better  the  tongue  of  the  Noldor and  their scripts.  For these
 matters are too great and  manifold to  be spoken  or to  be taught
 in speech within  the brief  patience and  heedfulness of  those of
 mortal race. But some little  more I  may tell  to thee  now, since
 thou askest it of me.                                             
    $31 This tale I  have heard  also among  the loremasters  of the
 Noldor in ages past. For  they tell  us that  the war  began before
 Arda  was full-shaped,  and ere  yet there  was anything  that grew
 or  walked  upon earth,  and for  long Melkor  had the  upper hand.
 But  in  the  midst  of  the  war  a spirit  of great  strength and
 hardihood  came  to  the  aid  of  the  Valar,  hearing in  the far
 heaven  that  there was  battle in  the Little  World. And  he came
 like  a  storm of  laughter and  loud song,  and Earth  shook under
 his great golden feet. So came  Tulkas, the  Strong and  the Merry,
 whose  anger  passeth  like  a  mighty  wind, scattering  cloud and
 darkness  before  it.  And  Melkor  was shaken  by the  laughter of
 Tulkas, and fled from the  Earth; and  there was  peace for  a long
 age.  And  Tulkas  remained  and  became  one of  the Valar  of the
 kingdom  of  Arda;  but  Melkor  brooded  in  the  outer  darkness,
 and his hate was given to Tulkas for ever after.  In that  time the
 Valar  brought  order  to  the  seas  and the  lands and  the moun-
 tains, and they planted seeds; and since, when  the fires  had been
 subdued or buried  beneath the  primeval hills,  there was  need of
 Light  they  wrought  two  mighty  lamps  for  the  enlightening of
 the Middle-earth  which they  had built  amid the  Encircling Seas,
 and they set the lamps upon high pillars, loftier  far than  any of
 the mountains of the later days. And  one they  raised near  to the
 North  of  Middle-earth,  and  it  was named  Foros; and  the other
 they  raised  in  the  South, and it was called Hyaras.(16) And the
 light of the lamps of the  Valar went  out over  the Earth  so that

 all was lit as it were in a changeless day. Then the seeds  that the
 Valar  had  planted  began  swiftly  to sprout  and to  burgeon, and
 there  arose  a  multitude  of  growing  things  great   and  small,
 grasses,  and  flowers  of  many  colours,  and trees  whose blossom
 was   like   snow.  upon   the  mountains'   but  whose   feet  were
 wrapped  in  the  shadow  of  their  mighty  limbs.  And  beasts and
 birds came forth  and dwelt  in the  green plains  or in  the rivers
 and  the  lakes,  or  walked  in  the  darkness  of  the  woods. And
 richest  was  the growth  of plant  and beast  in the  midmost parts
 of  the  Earth  where  the  lights  of  both  lamps  met   and  were
 blended.  And there  upon the  isle of Almar (18) in a great  lake was
 the  first  dwelling  of  the gods,  when all  things were  new, and
 green was yet a marvel in the eyes of the makers.                  
   $32  But  at  length  Melkor returned  in secret,  and far  in the
 North  where  the  light  of  Foros was  only dim  he made  a hidden
 dwelling.  And  he sent  forth his  power and  turned again  to evil
 much  that  had  been  well  begun,  so  that  fens became  rank and
 poisonous  and  forests  perilous  and  full  of  fear,  and  beasts
 became  monsters  of  horn  and  ivory  and  dyed  the   Earth  with
 blood.  And  when  he  saw  his  time he  revealed himself  and made
 war  again  on  the  Valar,  his  brethren;  and  he threw  down the
 lamps,  and  a  new  darkness  fell  on the  Earth, arid  all growth
 ceased; and in the fall  of the  lamps (which  were very  great) the
 seas  were  lifted  up  in fury,  and many  lands were  drowned. And
 the  Valar  at  that  time  had  long  dwelt upon  an island  in the
 midst of  the Earth,(19) but now they were  forced to  depart again.,
 and  they  made  their  home  in  the   uttermost  West,(20) and they
 fortified it; and they  built many  mansions in  that land  upon the
 borders of  the World  which is  called Valinor;  and to  fence that
 land from the East  they built the Pelori  Valion,(21) the Mountains
 of  Valinor  that  were  the  highest upon  Earth. Thence  they came
 with  war  against  Melkor;  but  he  had   grown  in   stature  and
 malice, so  that they  could not  at that  time either  overcome him
 or  take  him captive,  and he  escaped from  their wrath  and built
 himself  a  mighty  fortress  in  the  North  of  Middle-earth,  and
 delved   great   caverns  underground,   and  gathered   there  many
 lesser  powers  that  seeing  his  greatness  and  growing  strength
 were  now willing  to serve  him; and  the name  of that  strong and
 evil place was Utumno.                                             
   $33  Thus  it  was  that  Earth  lay  wrapped  in  darkness again,
 save  in Valinor,  as the  ages drew  on to  the hour  appointed for
 the coming  of the  Firstborn of  the Children  of Iluvatar.  And in

                                               
                                                                   
  the  darkness  Melkor  dwelt,  and  still  often  walked  abroad in
  Middle-earth; and he wielded cold and  fire, from  the tops  of the
  mountains  to  the  deep  furnaces  that  are  beneath   them,  and
  whatsoever was violent or cruel or  deadly in  those days  was laid
  to his charge.                                                    
      $34  And  in  Valinor  dwelt the  Valar and  all their  kin and
  folk, and because of the bliss and  beauty of  that land  they came
  seldom  to  Middle-earth.  Yet  Yavanna,  to  whom all  things that
  grow are dear,  forsook not  the Earth (22) utterly, and leaving the
  house of Aule  and the  light of  Valinor she  would come  at times
  and heal the hurts  of Melkor;  and returning  she would  ever urge
  the Valar to that war  with his  evil power  that they  must surely
  wage  ere  the  coming  of  the  Firstborn.  And  Orome  also,  the
  hunter,  rode  at  whiles  in  the darkness  of the  unlit forests,
  sounding  his  mighty   horn,  whereat   the  shadows   of  Utumno,
  and even Melkor himself, would flee away.                         
      $35  In  the  midst  of  the  Blessed  Realm  Aule  dwelt,  and
  laboured long, for in the making of all things in that land  he had
  the  chief  part;  and  he  wrought  there  many  fair  and shapely
  things  both  openly  and  in  secret.  Of him  comes the  love and
  knowledge of the Earth and of  all those  things that  it contains,
  whether the lore of those who  do not  make but  seek only  for the
  understanding  of what  is, studying  the fabric  of the  Earth and
  the  blending  and mutation  of its  elements, or  the lore  of all
  craftsmen:  the  tiller  and  the   husbandman,  the   weaver,  the
  shaper of wood,  or the  forger of  metals. [And  Aule we  name the
  Friend  of  the  Noldor,  for  of  him they  learned much  in after
  days, and they are the wisest and  most skilled  of the  Elves. And
  in their own fashion, according to their  own gifts  which Iluvatar
  gave  to  them,  they  added  much to  his teaching,  delighting in
  tongues  and  alphabets  and  in  the   figures  of   broidery,  of
  drawing,  and  of  carving.  And  the  Noldor  it was  who achieved
  the invention of gems,  which were  not in  the world  before their
  coming; and the fairest of all  gems were  the Silmarils,  and they
  are lost.](23)                                                    
      $36  But  Manwe  Sulimo,  highest  and  holiest  of  the Valar,
  sat upon  the borders  of the  West, forsaking  not in  his thought
  the  Outer  Lands.  For  his  throne  was set  in majesty  upon the
  pinnacle  of  Taniquetil, which  was the  highest of  the mountains
  of the world, standing upon the margin of the Seas. Spirits  in the
  shape of hawks  and eagles  flew ever  to and  from his  halls; and
  their eyes could see to the depths of the sea and could  pierce the

 hidden  caverns  under  the  world,  and  their  wings  could  bear
 them  through  the  three  regions  of  the  firmament  beyond  the
 lights  of  heaven  to  the  edge  of  Darkness. Thus  they brought
 word  to  him  of well  nigh all  that passed  in Aman:(24) yet some
 things  were  hidden  even  from  the  eyes  of  Manwe,  for  where
 Melkor  sat  in  his  dark thought  impenetrable shadows  lay. With
 Manwe   dwelt   Varda   the   most   beautiful,  whom   the  Noldor
 name  Elbereth,  Queen of  the Valar;  she it  was who  wrought the
 stars.  And  the  children  of  Manwe  and  Varda are  Fionwe Urion
 their son, and Ilmare their  daughter;(25) and these were  the eldest
 of  the  children of  the Valar.  They dwelt  with Manwe,  and with
 them were a great host of fair spirits in great  blessedness. Elves
 and  Men  revere  Manwe  most  of  all  the  Valar,  for he  has no
 thought for his own honour, and is  not jealous  of his  power, but
 ruleth all to peace. [The Lindar he  loved most  of all  the Elves,
 and  of  him  they  received  song  and  poesy.  For  poesy  is the
 delight  of  Manwe,  and  the  song  of  words  is   his  music.](26)
 Behold, the raiment of Manwe is blue, and blue is  the fire  of his
 eyes,  and  his  sceptre is  of sapphire  which the  Noldor wrought
 for him; and he is King of  the world  of gods  and elves  and men,
 and the chief defence against Melkor.                             
   $37  But  Ulmo  was  alone,  and  he  abode  not in  Valinor, but
 dwelt from the beginning of Arda in  the Outer  Ocean, as  he still
 does;  and  thence  he  governed  the  flowing  of all  waters, and
 the courses of  all rivers,  the replenishment  of springs  and the
 distilling  of  rain  and  dew  throughout the  world. In  the deep
 places he gives thought to music great and  terrible; and  the echo
 thereof runs through all the veins of the Earth,(27) and its joy is as
 the joy of a fountain in the sun whose springs are in the  wells of
 unfathomed  sorrow  at  the  foundations of  the world.  The Teleri
 learned  much  of him,  and for  this reason  their music  has both
 sadness   and  enchantment.   Salmar  came   with  him,   who  made
 the  conches  of  Ulmo;  and  Osse  and  Uinen,  to  whom  he  gave
 control  of  the  waves  and  of the  inner  seas; and  many other
 spirits beside. And  thus even  under the  darkness of  Melkor life
 coursed  still through  many secret  lodes, and  the Earth  did not
 die; and ever afterward to all who  were lost  in that  darkness or
 wandered  far  from  the light  of the  Valar the  ear of  Ulmo was
 open,  nor  has  he  ever  forsaken  Middle-earth,  and  whatsoever
 may since have  befallen of  ruin or  change he  has not  ceased to
 take thought for it, nor will until the end.(28)                  
   $38 After the departure  of the  Valar there  was silence  for an

     
                                                                      
 age,  and  Iluvatar  sat alone  in thought.  Then Iluvatar  spake, and
 he said:  'Behold I  love the  world, and  it is  a mansion  for Elves
 and Men.  But the  Elves shall  be the  fairest of  earthly creatures,
 and  they  shall  have  and  shall  conceive more  beauty than  all my
 children, and  they shall  have greater  bliss in  this world.  But to
 Men I will give a new gift.'                                          
    $39  Therefore  he  willed  that  the  hearts  of  Men  should seek
 beyond  the  world  and  find no  rest therein;  but they  should have
 a virtue to fashion their  life, amid  the powers  and chances  of the
 world,  beyond  the  Music  of  the  Ainur,  which is  as fate  to all
 things  else.  And  of  their  operation  everything  should   be,  in
 shape  and  deed,  completed, and  the world  fulfilled unto  the last
 and  smallest.  Lo!  even  we, Elves,  have found  to our  sorrow that
 Men  have a  strange power  for good  or ill,  and for  turning things
 aside  from  the purpose  of Valar  or of  Elves; so  that it  is said
 among us  that Fate  is not  master of  the children  of Men;  yet are
 they blind, and their joy is small, which should be great.            
    $40  But  Iluvatar  knew  that  Men,  being   set  amid   the  tur-
 moils  of  the  powers  of  the  world, would  stray often,  and would
 not  use their  gift in  harmony; and  he said:  'These too,  in their
 time, shall find that  all they  do redounds  at the  end only  to the
 glory  of  my work.'  Yet the  Elves say  that Men  are often  a grief
 even  unto  Manwe,  who  knows  most  of  the  mind  of  Iluvatar. For
 Men  resemble  Melkor  most  of  all  the  Ainur,  and  yet   he  hath
 ever  feared  and  hated  them,  even  those who served him.(29) It is
 one with this  gift of  freedom that  the children  of Men  dwell only
 a short space in the world alive,  and yet  are not  bound to  it, and
 depart  whither  we  know   not.  Whereas   the  Eldar   remain  until
 the end of days, and  their love  of the  world is  deeper, therefore,
 and more  sorrowful. But  they die  not, till  the world  dies, unless
 they  are  slain  or  waste  in  grief  -  for  to both  these seeming
 deaths  they  are  subject  -  nor  does  age  subdue  their strength,
 unless  one  grow  weary   of  ten   thousand  centuries;   and  dying
 they  are  gathered  in  the  halls  of  Mandos  in   Valinor,  whence
 often  they  return and  are reborn  in their  children. But  the sons
 of  Men  die  indeed,  and  leave  the   World;  wherefore   they  are
 called the Guests, or the Strangers. Death is their fate, the  gift of
 Iluvatar  unto  them,  which  as  Time  wears  even  the  Powers shall
 envy.  But  Melkor  hath  cast  his  shadow  upon  it,  and confounded
 it  with  darkness,  and  brought  forth  evil out  of good,  and fear
 out of hope. Yet it is said that they  will join  in the  Second Music
 of   the   Ainur,   whereas   Iluvatar  has   not  revealed   what  he

 purposes for Elves and Valar after the World's end; and Melkor
 has not discovered it.                                        

                              NOTES.                                      
                                                                         
  1. It  was  not until  after the  publication of  Sauron Defeated  that I
     remembered  the  existence  of  this  reference  to  The  Drowning  of
     Anadune  as  'a  "Man's"  version  of  the Fall  of Numenor  told from
     men  s  point  of  view,  and the  description of  it as  Round World,
     see IX.394 - 5, 406.                                                 
  2. The  first  page  of  the  third  version  of  The  Fall   of  Numenor
     (IX.331)  is headed  'The Last  Tales', and  the tale  itself numbered
     '1'.                                                                 
  3. I have referred to this list before, in V.294 and  338. In  the latter
     passage I took the 'revision' to be that  of the  Quenta Silmarillion;
     but since not all the names in the list occur in it the  reference may
     be more general.                                                     
  4. Pengolod: i.e. not Pengolod. See note 15.                            
  5. Melkor: i.e. not Melko; see V.338.                                   
  6. The  names  Helkar  and  Ringil  were  struck through  at the  time of
     writing;  this  was  a  shorthand, meaning  'llluin and  Ormal replace
     Helkar and Ringil, which are rejected.' See note 16.                 
  7. On AElfwine in Tol Eressea see my summary in IX.279 - 80.            
  8. Rumil in Ainulindale' B (V.156).                                     
  9. See V.164 note 2.                                                    
 10. There  was no  suggestion in  the earlier  versions that  the Children
     of Iluvatar entered the Music with the Third Theme.                  
 11. Here  and  in  $24  my  father  wrote  the  Halls  of  Anar,  changing
     Anar  to  Aman  later  (cf.  notes  13 and  24). On  the use  of these
     names see pp. 28, 44.                                                
 12. See V.164 note 9.                                                    
 13. Kingdom   of  Arda   replaced  Kingdom   of  Anar   at  the   time  of
     writing; cf. note 11.                                                
 14. Pengolod refers to the time before the Flight of the Noldor.         
 15. These  words  were  pencilled  lightly  on  the  manuscript.  The name
     is  clearly spelt  Pengolod here  and in  the paragraph  that follows,
     but Pengolod in $30.                                                 
 16. In  the  Ambarkanta  the  northern  lamp  was  Helkar,   the  southern
     Ringil; see p. 7 and note 6, and IV.256.                             
 17. In  the  Quenta  Silmarillion  $38  (V.222),  repeating  the  words of
     the Quenta  (IV.87), it  was said  that 'the  first flowers  that ever
     were  east  of  the  Mountains  of  the Gods'  bloomed on  the western
     shores of Tol  Eressea in  the light  of the  Trees that  came through
     the Pass of Kalakilya.                                               
 18. The name of the isle was first  written Eccuile,  changed at  once to

       Eremar,  which  was   subsequently  altered   to  Almar   (Almaren  in
       the list of alterations made in 1951, p. 7).                          
  19.  The  concluding  sentence  of  $31  concerning  the  dwelling  of  the
       Valar on 'the isle of Almar in a great  lake' was  an addition  to the
       main body of the new text; hence the repetition here.                 
  20.  My father first wrote here: 'in the uttermost parts of Andune'.       
  21.  The name Pelori (Valion) first occurs  here; it  is found  also (under
       Aman) in the list of alterations made in 1951 (p. 7).                 
  22.  My father first wrote here 'world',  changing it  at once  to 'earth',
       which  I  have  capitalised  -  as  also  at  two  other  occurrences:
       capitalisation is inconsistent in Ainulindale' C, partly owing  to the
       retention of passages from the original text B.                       
  23.  The   square   brackets   enclosing   this  passage   (developed  from
       Ainulindale' B, V.162) probably imply its proposed exclusion.         
  24.  The  words  in  Aman  were  added  later,  at  the  same  time  as the
       change of the Halls of  Anar to  the Halls  of Aman  in $$15,  24 (see
       note 11).                                                             
  25.  See V.165 note 20.                                                    
  26.  As note 23.                                                           
  27.  Ainulindale' B has 'all the veins of the world':  this was  changed to
       'of  the  Earth',  I  think  simply  to  avoid  repetition,  since the
       sentence ends with 'the foundations of the world'.                    
  28.  From  this  point  there  is  no  indication on  the manuscript  of my
       father's intention, but in view of the next version  D it  seems clear
       that  we are  to continue  with the  concluding portion  of the  old B
       text  (from  'After the  departure of  the Valar  ...', V.163).  In D,
       however,  there  is  an  intervening  passage  (see pp.  35 -  6) that
       makes  the  conclusion  more  integral  with  what  precedes.  - These
       final  paragraphs  ($$38  -  40) were  left largely  unchanged (though
       with significant alterations in $40) from the text of B, but I give it
       in full in order to provide a complete text at this point.            
  29.  This  was  changed  from  the  B  version  'For  Men   resemble  Melko
       most of all the Ainur, and yet have ever feared and hated him.'       

                   Commentary on the Ainulindale text C.                 
                                                                         
 The revision C  introduces a  radical re-ordering  of the  original matter
 of the Ainulindale', together with much that is new; and it is  easiest to
 show this in the form of a table. This table is in no sense a  synopsis of
 the content, but simply a  scheme to  show the  structural interrelations.
                                                                         
        B                                                      C          
                                                                         
 The playing of the Music                    The playing of the Music     
  Discord of Melko, the Three                 Discord of Melkor, the Three                
  Themes                                      Themes                      

  Declaration of Iluvatar to the Ainur:   Declaration of  Iluvatar to  the Ainur:
  the  Music  has  been   given  Being;   'I  will  show  forth  the  things that
  the  things  that  Melko  has  intro-   you have played'                      
  duced into the Design                                                         
                                                                               
 The Ainur see the World made real        The  Ainur  see  the  World  in vision;
                                          they  see  the  coming of  the Children
                                          of Iluvatar                           
                                                                               
                                          Elves  and  Men  made  by Iluvatar
                                          alone; the love  of the  Ainur for
                                          them                                  
                                                                               
                                          Desire  of  the  Ainur for  the World,
                                          and  the  desire  of  Melkor  to  have
                                          dominion in it                        
                                                                               
  Joy of the Ainur  in the  elements of   Joy  of  the Ainur  in the  elements of
  the Earth                               the Earth                             
                                                                               
  Ulmo's  concern  with   waters,  Man-   Ulmo's   concern   with   waters,  Man-
  we's with the  airs, Aule's  with the   we's  with  the  airs, Aule's  with the
  fabric of the Earth                     fabric of the Earth                   
                                                                               
  Desire  of the  Ainur for  the World,                                         
  and  the  desire  of  Melko  to  have                                        
  dominion in it                                                                
                                                                               
  Elves  and   Men  made   by  Iluvatar                                         
  alone;  nature  of  the  Children and                                         
  their relations with the Ainur                                                
                                                                               
                                          The vision of the World taken away;
                    l                     unrest of the Ainur                   
                                                                               
                                         Iluvatar gives Being to  the vision
 Entry of the Ainur into the World       Entry  of  the  Ainur into  the World
                                                                               
  Melko  walked  alone;  Ulmo  dwelt in                                         
  the  Outer  Ocean;  Aule  in Valinor;                                         
  Manwe   with  Varda   on  Taniquetil.                                         
  Relations  with  the  Teleri, Noldor,                                         
  Lindar                                                                        
                                                                               
  The  forms taken  by the  Valar, some                                         
  male, some female                                                            
                                                                               
                                          The World unshaped; agelong           
                                          labours of the Valar                  
                                                                               
                                          Strife between  Melkor and  the Valar;
                                          withdrawal   of   Melkor    from   the
                                          Earth                                 
                                                                               
                                          The  forms  taken  by the  Valar, some
                                          male,  some   female:  'I   have  seen
                                          Yavanna'                              

                                       Melkor's return; first battle of the             
                                       Valar  for  the  dominion  of  Arda;             
                                       elemental strife                                 
                                                                                       
                                       End of the Ainulindale' of Rumil                 
                                        told to AElfwine by Pengolod                  
                                             Words of Pengolod                     
                                       Question of AElfwine and reply of                  
                                        Pengolod:                                        
                                       Coming of Tulkas and rout of Mel-                  
                                        kor                                              
                                                                                       
                                       Building of the Lamps. Earth illu-               
                                        mined; arising of birds and beasts               
                                        and flowers                                      
                                                                                       
                                       Dwelling of the Valar on the island in           
                                        the great lake                                   
                                                                                       
                                       Secret return of Melkor; blight and              
                                        monstrosity  spread  from  his hid-              
                                        den dwelling in the North;  he cast              
                                        down the Lamps                                   
                                                                                       
                                       Retreat of the Valar into the West               
                                        and foundation of Valinor                        
                                                                                       
                                       The Valar came with war against                  
                                        Melkor  but could  not overcome                  
                                        him; Melkor built Utumno                         
                                                                                       
                                       Melkor walked abroad in Middle-                  
                                        earth                                            
                                                                                       
                                       The Valar came seldom to Middle-                            
                                        earth save Yavanna and Orome                              
                                                                                       
                                       Aule dwelt in Valinor; Manwe with
                                        Varda on Taniquetil; Ulmo in the
                                        Outer Ocean. Relations with the                  
                                        Noldor, Lindar, Teleri                           
                                                                                       
           After the departure  of the  Valar, Iluvatar's                               
           silence, and  then his  declaration concerning                               
           Elves and Men: the gift  of freedom  and death                               
           to Men; nature of the immortality of the Elves                               
                                                                                       
 End of the Ainulindale spoken                                                          
 by Rumil to AElfwine                                                                   
                                                                                       
 The central shift in the myth of the Creation lies of course in the fact               
 that in the  old form,  when the  Ainur contemplate  the World  and find               
 joy in its contemplation and desire it, the World  has been  given Being               
 by Iluvatar, whereas in C it is a Vision that has not been  given Being.               
 With  this  may  be compared  my father's  words in  the account  of his               

 works written for Milton Waldman in 1951 (Letters no.131, p. 146):      
                                                                        
   They [the Valar] are 'divine',  that is,  were originally  'outside' and
   existed  'before'  the  making  of  the  world.  Their power  and wisdom
   is  derived  from  their  Knowledge  of  the  cosmogonical  drama, which
   they perceived first as a drama (that is as in a  fashion we  perceive a
   story composed by someone else), and later as a 'reality'.            
                                                                        
 In the Vision,  moreover, in  which the  Ainur see  the unfolding  of the
 history of the World as yet  unmade, they  see the  arising within  it of
 the Children of  Iluvatar ($13);  and when  the Vision  is made  real and
 the Ainur descend into the World, it is their knowledge  and love  of the
 Children of Iluvatar  who are  to be  that directs  their shape  and form
 when they make themselves visible ($25). Several  passages in  letters of
 my  father from  the years  1956 -  8 bear  closely on  these conceptions
 (see Letters nos.181, 200, 212).                                        
   But the nature and extent of the Ainulindale' is also  greatly changed;
 it  contains  now  the  first  battle of  Melkor with  the Valar  for the
 dominion  of  Arda,  but  it  does  not  contain the  original concluding
 passage  concerning  Iluvatar's  Gift  to  Men,   nor  the   accounts  of
 Manwe,   Ulmo   and   Aule:   these  latter,   together  with   much  new
 material  concerning the  first wars  in Arda,  are placed  in a  sort of
 Appendix,  the  Words  of Pengolod  to AElfwine.  This is  reminiscent of
 the  original  Music  of  the  Ainur  in  The  Book  of Lost  Tales, with
 AElfwine (Eriol) appearing in person as questioner.                     
   In the pre-Lord of the  Rings texts  Melko's part  in the  beginning of
 Earth's  history  was  conceived  far  more  simply.   As  late   as  the
 Ambarkanta (IV.238) the story was that                                  
                                                                        
   the  Valar  coming  into  the  World  descended first  upon Middle-earth
   at  its  centre, save  Melko who  descended in  the furthest  North. But
   the  Valar  took  a  portion  of land  and made  an island  and hallowed
   it, and set it in the Western  Sea and  abode upon  it, while  they were
   busied in the exploration and first ordering  of the  World. As  is told
   they  desired  to  make  lamps,  and  Melko  offered  to  devise  a  new
   substance of great strength and beauty to be their  pillars. And  he set
   up  these  great  pillars  north  and  south of  the Earth's  middle yet
   nearer  to  it  than  the  chasm; and  the Gods  placed lamps  upon them
   and the Earth had light for a while.                                  
                                                                        
 In  the  Quenta  Silmarillion  (V.208)  and the  Later Annals  of Valinor
 (V.110-11)  there is  no suggestion  that Melko  departed from  the Earth
 after the first coming of the Valar, and  indeed the  cosmology described
 in the  Ambarkanta could  not allow  of it:  as I  said in  my commentary
 (IV.253):                                                               
                                                                        
   It  is  not indeed  explained in  the Ambarkanta  how the  Valar entered
   the  world  at  its  beginning,  passing  through the  impassable Walls,

 and  perhaps  we should  not expect  it to  be. But  the central  idea at
 this  time is  clear: from  the Beginning  to the  Great Battle  in which
 Melko  was   overthrown,  the   world  with   all  its   inhabitants  was
 inescapably  bounded;  but at  the very  end, in  order to  extrude Melko
 into the Void, the Valar were able to pierce the Walls by a Door.        
                                                                         
 The  far  more  complex  account  in  the  new work  of the  movements of
 Melkor  and  of  his  strife  with the  Valar is  an indication  at once,
 therefore, that shifts have taken place in the cosmology.                
 In  the  Ainulindale'  proper  it  is  now told  that Melkor  entered the
 World with the other  Ainur at  the beginning  - he  'was there  from the
 first',  and  claimed  Earth for  his own  ($23); but  he was  alone, and
 unable to resist the  Valar, and  he 'withdrew  to other  regions' ($24).
 There followed the labours of the Valar  'in the  ordering of  the Earth,
 and the curbing of its  tumults', and  Melkor saw  from afar  that 'Earth
 was  become  as  a  garden  for  them';  then  in  envy  and   malice  he
 'descended  upon  Earth'  to  begin 'the  first battle  of the  Valar and
 Melkor  for  the  dominion of  Arda' ($$26 - 7).    The words  'Earth was
 become as a garden for them' are not to be interpreted as a  reference to
 the 'Spring of Arda', for the description of this follows in the Words of
 Pengolod;  where  appears  also the  wholly new  element that  Tulkas was
 not  one  of  the  Ainur  who  entered  the World  at the  beginning, but
 came only when 'in the far heaven'  he heard  of the  war 'in  the Little
 World' ($31).                                                            
 Then  follows  the  building of  the Lamps  and the  Spring of  Arda; for
 Melkor  had fled  from the  Earth a  second time,  routed by  Tulkas, and
 'brooded in  the outer  darkness'. At  the end  of 'a  long age'  he came
 back in secret to the far North  of Middle-earth,  whence his  evil power
 spread,  and  whence  he  came  against  the  Valar  in renewed  war, and
 cast  down  the  Lamps  ($32). Then  the Valar  departed from  the island
 of  Almar in  the great  lake and  made their  dwelling in  the uttermost
 West;  and  from  Valinor  they  came  against  Melkor  again.  But  they
 could not defeat him; and at that time  he built  Utumno. There  are thus
 four distinct  periods of  strife between  Melkor and  the Valar,  and he
 departed out of Arda and returned to it twice.                           
 We  are  brought  therefore  to  the  forbidding  problem  of  the under-
 lying conception of the World in this  phase of  my father's  later work.
 In the original Music of the  Ainur in  The Book  of Lost  Tales Iluvatar
 'fashioned  [for  the  Ainur]  dwellings  in  the  void, and  dwelt among
 them' (I.52); at the end of the Music he 'went forth from  his dwellings,
 past those fair  regions he  had fashioned  for the  Ainur, out  into the
 dark  places'  (I.55);  and  'when  they  reached  the midmost  void they
 beheld a  sight of  surpassing beauty  and wonder  where before  had been
 emptiness':  'the  Ainur  marvelled  to  see  how  the  world  was globed
 amid the void and  yet separated  from it'  (1.55-6). This  may not  be a
 simple conception, but it is pictorially simple. In Ainulindale' B it was

  not  changed  (V.159).  In the  Ambarkanta 'the  World' (Ilu)  is 'globed'
  within  the  invisible,  impassable  Walls of  the World  (Ilurambar), and
  'the  World  is  set  amid  Kuma,  the  Void,  the  Night without  form or
  time'  (IV.235-7).  I  take  these  accounts  to  be  in  agreement.  'The
  World'  comprises  'the  Earth'  (Ambar),  the  region  of   the  heavenly
  bodies that pass over it, and  the Outer  Sea (Vaiya),  'more like  to sea
  below  the Earth  and more  like to  air above  the Earth',  which enfolds
  or 'englobes' all (IV.236).                                               
    In C, likewise, Iluvatar 'went forth from the fair  regions that  he had
  made  for  the Ainur',  and they  came into  the Void  ($$10 -  11). There
  Iluvatar  showed  them  a  Vision,  'and  they saw  a new  World... globed
  amid  the  Void,  and  it  was  sustained  therein,  but  was  not  of it'
  (repeating  the  words  of  B, though  they were  here written  out anew).
  But  then it  is said  in C  ($14) that  'amid all  the splendours  of the
  World, its vast halls and spaces, and its wheeling fires, Iluvatar chose a
  place  for  their  habitation  [i.e.  the  habitation  of the  Children of
  Iluvatar]  in  the  Deeps of  Time and  in the  midst 'of  the innumerable
  Stars.' This habitation is 'Arda, the Earth',  which is  'in the  Halls of
  Aman'  ($15).  When Iluvatar  gave Being  to the  Vision, he  said ($20):
  'Let these things Be! And I will  send forth  the flame  imperishable into
  the Void, and it shall be at the heart of the World,  and the  World shall
  Be; and those of you that will may  go down  into it.'  Some of  the Ainur
  'abode still with Iluvatar beyond the  confines of  the World'  ($21); but
  those who 'entered  into the  World' ($22)  are the  Valar, the  Powers of
  the  World,  and  they  laboured  'in  wastes  unmeasured  and  unexplored
  ... until in the Deeps of Time and in the midst of the  vast halls  of the
  World  there  came  to  be that  hour and  that place  where was  made the
  habitation of the Children of Iluvatar' ($23). It is also said  ($24) that
  the  lesser  spirits  who  aided  Manwe  'went  down  into  the  Halls  of
  Aman'.  It  is  clear  that  'the Halls  of Aman'  are equivalent  to 'the
  World' (and indeed in the following text D the  reading of  C in  $23 'the
  vast halls of the World' becomes 'the vast  halls of  Aman'). I  am unable
  however  to  cast  any light  on the  use of  the name  Aman in  the later
  Ainulindale'  texts.  In  The   Drowning  of   Anadune,  where   it  first
  appeared,  it  was  the  Adunaic  name  of  Manwe,  but  that  meaning  is
  surely not present here.                                                  
    It  emerges  then  that the  word 'World'  is explicitly  used in  a new
  sense.  In  the  Ambarkanta  diagram I  (IV.243) Ilu  is 'the  World', the
  Earth and Sky, two  halves of  a globe  itself globed  within Vaiya.  In C
  Arda,  the  Earth,  the  habitation  of  Elves  and  Men, is  within 'the
  World', 'the Halls of Aman'.  The evident  fact that  my father  also used
  'World' in another sense in  C (the  clearest case  being 'that  land upon
  the borders of  the World  which is  called Valinor',  $32) does  not make
  matters any easier, but does not contradict this distinction.             
    In order to understand the implications  of this  change, it  must first

                                                          
                       
                                                                         4
  be  asked:  What  can  be  said  of  the  nature  of   Arda  in   this  new
  conception?                                                               
     In  the  Ambarkanta  diagram  I  my   father  long   afterwards  changed
  the  title-word  Ilu to  Arda (IV.242).  He would  scarcely have  done this
  if  the  conceptions  behind  the  two  names  did not  continue to  bear a
  substantial  resemblance  to   each  other.   Arda,  then,   retains  major
  characteristics of the image of Ilu, and this is shown by  what is  said in
  the text of C itself: as that  Ulmo 'dwelt  from the  beginning of  Arda in
  the Outer Ocean' and  the echo  of his  music 'runs  through all  the veins
  of the Earth ($37), or that the spirits flying  from Manwe  s halls  in the
  shape  of  hawks  and  eagles  were  borne  by  their  wings  'through  the
  three regions of the firmament' ($36).                                    
     On  this  basis it  may be  said that  the major  difference in  the new
  conception is  that while  Arda is  physically the  same as  Ilu, it  is no
  longer  'the  World  globed  amid  the  Void':  for  Arda  is  within  'the
  World' - which is itself 'globed amid the Void' ($11).                    
     But  we  at  once  meet with  a serious  difficulty -  and there  was no
  second Ambarkanta  to help  in resolving  it. For  'the World',  'the Halls
  of  Aman',  which  surrounds  Arda,  is  not the  Void: though  Arda 'might
  seem  a  little  thing  to  those  ... who  consider only  the immeasurable
  vastness of the  World' ($14),  the World  is spatially  defined ('globed',
  $11), and it  contains 'splendours  ... and  wheeling fires';  and Iluvatar
  chose  the habitation  of the  Children, which  is Arda,  'in the  midst of
  the   innumerable   Stars'.  How   can  this   possibly  be   brought  into
  agreement  with  the idea  (IV.241, 243)  of the  Tinwe-malle, the  path of
  the stars, which is the 'middle  air' of  Ilmen, the  second region  of the
  firmament  of Ilu?  Yet in  C ($36)  the spirits  that fly  from Taniquetil
  pass  through  'the three  regions of  the firmament  beyond the  lights of
  heaven  to  the  edge  of  Darkness'.  Since  this  derives  without change
  from B (V.162), and  since C  is a  reworking of  the actual  B manuscript,
  it might be  thought that  this passage  was retained  unintentionally; but
  in fact it comes in a part of the text that was written entirely  anew, not
  emended  on  the  original  manuscript   (much  of   C  was   written  anew
  even when the old text was being largely followed).                       
     It has been seen (p.  27) that  the greatly  enlarged history  of Melkor
  and  the  Valar  in  the  beginning   depends  in   part  on   the  changed
  cosmology, for  he twice  departed out  of Arda.  This raises  the question
  of the passage of the  Walls of  the World,  and indeed  of the  form which
  that conception  now took:  for, as  will be  seen, the  idea of  the Walls
  had  not  been  abandoned.  But  I  postpone  further  discussion  of  this
  baffing topic until subsequent texts that bear on it are reached.          
                                                                           
                                Ainulindale D.                             
                                                                           
  This next version of the Ainulindale is a manuscript of unusual     

  splendour, with illuminated capitals and a beautiful script, in  which for
  a part of  its length  my father  made use  of Anglo-Saxon  letter-forms -
  even to the extent of using old abbreviations, as the letter  'thorn' with
  a stroke across the stem for 'that'.  This feature  at once  associates it
  closely  with  Ainulindale'  C,  where in  the long  passages of  new text
  written  on  the  old manuscript  he did  the same  here and  there. There
  can in any case be little question that this  new version  belongs closely
  in time with C, which was a  very difficult  and chaotic  text and  had to
  be given more lucid form; and it shares the  common characteristic  of the
  various series of my father's manuscripts of beginning as a  close (indeed
  in this case  almost an  exact) copy  of the  exemplar but  diverging more
  and more markedly as it proceeds. In this case I give  the full  text only
  for certain passages,  and for  the rest  list the  changes (other  than a
  small  number  of  slight  stylistic  changes  of  a  word or  two without
  significance for the conception) by reference to the paragraphs of C.
    The  text  of  D  was  subsequently  emended,  though not  very heavily,
  in several 'layers', the earlier made with care, the later  roughly; where
  of  any  importance these  are shown  as such  in the  textual representa-
  tion that follows.                                                       
                                                                          
    D  has a  fine separate  title-page, with  Ainulindale' in  tengwar, and
  then:                                                                    
                                 Ainulindale                               
                               The Music of the                            
                                    Ainur                                  
                 This was made by Rumil of Tuna in the Elder               
                 Days. It is here written as it was spoken in              
               Eressea to AElfwine by Pengolod the Sage. To it             
                  are added the further words that Pengolod                
                 spoke at that time concerning the Valar, the              
                  Eldar and the Atani; of which more is said               
                                  hereafter                                

 The first  page of  the text  is headed  Ainulindale' (written  also in
 tengwar), and is then as in  C (p.  8), with  the following  added sub-
 sequently: 'First he recited to him the Ainulindale as Rumil made it.'
 $13  '(as thou shalt hear, AElfwine)' omitted.                         
 $14  'the whole field of the Sun'; D 'the whole field of Arda'         
 $15  'the  Halls  of  Aman'  as  in  C;  not subsequently  emended (see
      p. 37).                                                               
 $16  As written, D retained  the reading  of C:  'and not  in possession
      nor  in  himself,  wherefore  he  became  a  maker  and   teacher,  and
      none  have  called  him  Lord.'  This  was  emended  to:  'and  neither
      in  possession  nor  in  his  own  mastery;  wherefore  he   gives  and
      hoards  not,  and  is  free  from  care,  passing ever  on to  some new

        work.'  The new  text being  in the  present tense  conflicts with
        'the  delight  ...  of  Aule  was  in  the  deed  of  making' just
        preceding.                                                        
  $17   'Behold  the  towers  and  mansions  of  ice!'   omitted,  perhaps
        inadvertently.                                                    
  $19   After 'when the vision was taken  away' there  is a  footnote that
        seems to have been an early addition:                             
          And some have  said that  the Vision  ceased ere  the fulfilment
        of  the  Dominion  of  Men  and  the  fading  of   the  Firstborn;
        wherefore,  though  the  Music  is  over all,  the Valar  have not
        seen as with  sight the  Later Ages  or the  ending of  the World.
        Quoth Pengolod                                                    
  $20   Before  'Let these  things Be!'  the word  'Ea!' was  added subse-
        quently;  and  after  'Iluvatar had  made a  new thing'  was added
        'Ea, the World that Is.'                                          
  $23   'in the midst of the vast halls of the World'; D 'in the  midst of
        the vast halls of Aman'; 'Aman'  here later  emended to  'Ea' (see
        note 15 above, and p. 37).                                        
  $24   'they  went  down  into  the  Halls  of Aman';  D 'they  came down
        into the fields of Arda'                                          
        'but the Earth he could not put from his heart'; D 'but he did not
        put the desire of the kingdom of Arda from his heart'             
        The  concluding  passage  of  this  paragraph,  from  'For  he was
        alone, without friend or companion...', omitted.                  
  $25   'shape and form'; 'form' emended in D to 'hue'.                   
  $27   But  this  we know:,.  D But  this said  Rumil in  the end  of the
        Ainulindale' which I have recounted to thee."                     
        'the coming of the Children'; D 'the coming of the Firstborn'     
        'And  yet  their labour  was not  vain, and  slowly the  Earth was
        shaped and made  firm'; D  'And yet  their labour  was not  all in
        vain;  and  though  nowhere  and  in  no work  was their  will and
        purpose wholly fulfilled,  and all  things were  in hue  and shape
        other than the Valar had at first intended, slowly nonetheless the
        Earth was fashioned and made firm.'                               
                                                                         
  Heading before $29: 'Words of Pengolod'; D 'Here are the words of       
        Pengolod to AElfwine'                                             
  $29  'Pengolod'; D  'Pengolod' (but  'Pengolod' in  C $30)              
  $31  'the loremasters of the Noldor'; D 'the loremasters'                
       'the Little World'; D 'the Little Kingdom'                        
                                                                         
    After the passage about the coming of Tulkas in $31 the text of D     
  shows so many changes from C that I give the next part in full.         

 In that time the Valar  brought order  to the  seas and  the lands
 and  the mountains,  and Yavanna  planted at  last the  seeds that
 she  had  long  devised.  And  since,  when  the  fires  had  been
 subdued or buried beneath the  primeval hills,  there was  need of
 light,  Aule  wrought two  mighty lamps  for the  enlightenment of
 the  Middle-earth  which he  had built  amid the  Encircling Seas.
 Then Varda  filled  the  lamps  and   Manwe  hallowed   them,  and
 the Valar set them upon high pillars, more lofty far than  are any
 mountains of  the later  days. One  lamp they  raised near  to the
 North  of  Middle-earth,  and  it  was  named [Foronte  >] Illuin;
 and  the  other  was  raised  in  the  South,  and  it  was  named
 [Hyarante  >] Ormal;  and  the light  of the  Lamps of  the Valar
 flowed out ever the Earth, so that  all was  lit as  it were  in a
 changeless Day.                                                  
   Then  the  seeds  that  Yavanna  had   sown  began   swiftly  to
 sprout  and to  burgeon, and  there arose  a multitude  of growing
 things great and small, [grasses,  and flowers  of many  hues, and
 trees  whose blossom  was like  snow upon  the mountains,  so tall
 were  they,  >]  mosses and  grasses, and  great ferns,  and trees
 whose  tops  were  crowned   with  cloud   as  they   were  living
 mountains,  / but  whose feet  were wrapped  in a  green twilight.
 And beasts [struck out:  and birds]  came forth  and dwelt  in the
 grassy plains, or in the rivers and  the lakes,  or walked  in the
 shadow of  the woods.  [And richest  was the  growth of  plant and
 beast  in the  midmost >]  As yet  no flower  had bloomed  nor any
 bird had sung, for  these things  waited still  their time  in the
 bosom  of Palurien;  but wealth  there was  of her  imagining, and
 nowhere  more  rich  than  in the  midmost /  parts of  the Earth,
 where  the  light of  both the  Lamps met  and blended.  And there
 upon  the  Isle  of  Almaren  in  the  Great  Lake  was  the first
 dwelling  of the  gods when  all things  were young,  and new-made
 green was yet  a marvel  in the  eyes of  the [makers.  >] makers;
 and they were long content.                                      
   $32  But at length  Melkor returned  in secret,  and far  in the
 North,  where  the  beams  of  [Foronte  >]  Illuin were  cold and
 dim, he made a  hidden dwelling.  Thence he  sent forth  his power
 and turned again to evil much that  had been  well begun;  so that
 green things fell  sick and  rotted, and  rivers were  choked with
 weeds  and  slime,  and fens  were made,  rank and  poisonous, and
 the breeding place of flies; and forests  grew dark  and perilous,
 the  haunts  of  fear;  and  beasts  became  monsters of  horn and
 ivory and dyed the earth  with blood.  And when  he saw  his time,

 Melkor  revealed  himself,  and  he  made  war  again on  the Valar
 his   brethren;  and   he  threw   down  the   Lamps,  and   a  new
 darkness  fell,  and  all  growth ceased.  And in  the fall  of the
 Lamps, which  were very  great, the  seas were  lifted up  in fury,
 and  many  lands  were   drowned.  Then   the  Valar   were  driven
 from  their   abode  in   Almaren,  and   they  removed   from  the
 Middle-earth,  and  made  their  horne   in  the   uttermost  West,
 [added:] in Aman the Blessed, / and they  fortified it  against the
 onslaught  of  Melkor.  Many  mansions  they  built  in  that  land
 upon  the  borders  of  the  world which  is since  called Valinor,
 whose western  marges fall  into the  mists of  the Outer  Sea, and
 whose fences against  the East  are the  [Pelori >]  Pelore Valion,
 the Mountains of Valinor, highest upon Earth.                      
   Thence they came at  last with  a great  host against  Melkor, to
 wrest  from  him  the  rule  of  the Middle-earth;  but he  now had
 grown  in  malice  and  in   strength  and   was  master   of  many
 monsters  and  evil things,  so that  they could  not at  that time
 overcome  him  utterly,  nor  take  him  captive;  and  he  escaped
 from their  wrath, and  lay hid  until they  had departed.  Then he
 returned to his dwelling in the North, and there built  for himself
 a  mighty  fortress,  and delved  great caverns  underground secure
 from  assault,  and  he  gathered  to him  many lesser  powers that
 seeing  his  greatness  and  growing strength  were now  willing to
 serve him; and the name of that evil fastness was Utumno.          
   $33  Thus it was  that the  Earth lay  darkling again,  save only
 in  Valinor,  as  the  ages  drew  on  to  the  hour  appointed  by
 Iluvatar  for  the  coming of  the Firstborn.  And in  the darkness
 Melkor  dwelt, and  still often  walked abroad,  in many  shapes of
 power and fear;  and he  wielded cold  and fire,  from the  tops of
 the  mountains  to  the deep  furnaces that  are beneath  them; and
 whatsoever was cruel or violent or deadly in those days is  laid to
 his charge.                                                        
   $34  But  in  Valinor  the  Valar  dwelt with  all their  kin and
 folk,  and  because  of  the beauty  and bliss  of that  realm they
 came  seldom  now  to  Middle-earth,  but gave  to the  Land beyond
 the Mountains their chief care and love.                           
                                                                   
   D omits the remainder of C $34 concerning  the visits  of Yavanna
 and  Orome  to  Middle-earth (see  p. 35),  and continues  from the
 beginning of C $35: 'And in the midst of the Blessed Realm were the
 mansions of Aule, and there he  laboured long.'  From this  point D
 becomes again much closer to C, and the differences can be given in
 the form of notes.                                                 

  $35  'Of him comes the love and knowledge of the Earth'; D 'Of him         
       comes the lore...' (both readings certain).                           
                                                                            
       'the fabric of the Earth'; D 'the fabric of the world'                
                                                                            
       'the  tiller  and  the  husbandman,  the weaver,  the shaper  of wood,
       or  the forger  of metals';  D 'the  weaver, the  shaper of  wood, and
       the  worker  in  metals;  and  the  tiller  and  the  husbandman also.
       Though  these  last  and  all  that  deal  with  things that  grow and
       bear  fruit  must  'look  also   to  the   spouse  of   Aule,  Yavanna
       Palurien.'                                                            
                                                                            
       The   passage   concerning   the   Noldor,   bracketed   in   C,   was
       retained  in  D,  with change  of 'and  they are  the wisest  and most
       skilled of the Elves' to 'and they are the most skilled of  the Elves'
  $36  'all that passed in Aman' retained in D (cf. note to $23 above).      
                                                                            
       'from the eyes of Manwe'; D 'from the eyes of Manwe and the           
       servants of Manwe'                                                    
                                                                            
       'she it was who  wrought the  Stars' altered  (late) in  D to  'she it
       was who wrought the Great Stars'                                      
                                                                            
       Immediately  following  this  a  passage  in D  is very  heavily inked
       out, so that it is totally illegible; but it was obviously the passage
       that  follows  here  in  C:  'And  the  children  of  Manwe  and Varda
       are  Fionwe  Urion  their son,  and Ilmare  their daughter;  and these
       were  the  eldest  of  the  children  of  the  Valar. They  dwelt with
       Manwe'.   A   semi-colon   was   placed  after   'Stars',  and   D  as
       emended  continues  with  'and  with them  were a  great host  of fair
       spirits', &c.                                                        
                                                                            
       The passage concerning the Lindar, bracketed in C, was re-            
       tained in D, with a late change of 'Lindar' to 'Vanyar'.              
                                                                            
       'and the chief defence against Melkor'; D 'the vicegerent of          
       Iluvatar, and the chief defence against the evil of Melkor.'          

   From the beginning of $37 I give the text of D in full to the end of
 the work.                                                             
                                                                      
   $37  But  Ulmo  was  alone,  and  he  abode  not  in   Valinor,  nor
 ever  came  thither  unless  there was  need for  a great  council: he
 dwelt  from  the  beginning  of  Arda  in the  Outer Ocean,  and still
 he  dwells  there.  Thence  he  governed  the  flowing of  all waters,
 and the ebbing, the  courses of  all rivers  and the  replenishment of
 springs, the distilling of  all dews  and rain  in every  land beneath
 the  sky. In  the deep  places he  gives thought  to musics  great and
 terrible;  and  the echo  thereof runs  through all  the veins  of the
 world in sorrow and in joy; for if joyful is  the fountain  that rises
 in  the sun,  its springs  are in  the wells  of sorrow  unfathomed at

 the foundations of the Earth. The Teleri  learned much  of Ulmo,          
 and for this reason their  music has  both sadness  and enchant-          
 ment. Salmar  came with  him to  Arda, he  who made  the conches          
 of  Ulmo  that none  may ever  forget who  once has  heard them;          
 and  Osse  and Uinen  also, to  whom he  gave the  government of          
 the waves and the movements of  the Inner  Seas, and  many other          
 spirits  beside.  And  thus  it  was  [added:]  by the  power of          
 Ulmo I that even under the darkness of Melkor life coursed still          
 through many secret lodes, and the Earth did not die; and to all          
 who were lost in that darkness or wandered far from the light of          
 the  Valar  the  ear  of  Ulmo was  ever open;  nor has  he ever          
 forsaken  Middle-earth, and  whatso may  since have  befallen of          
 ruin or of change he has not ceased to take thought for  it, and          
 will not until the end of days.                                           
                                                                          
   The following passage concerning Yavanna and Orome derives              
 from $34 in C; it was omitted at that point in D (p. 33).                 
                                                                          
   [$34]  And in  that time  of dark  Yavanna also  was unwilling          
 utterly to forsake the outer lands; for all things that grow are          
 dear to her, and she mourned for  the works  that she  had begun          
 in  Middle-earth but  Melkor had  marred. Therefore  leaving the          
 house  of  Aule  and the  flowering meads  of Valinor  she would          
 come at times and heal the  hurts of  Melkor; and  returning she          
 would ever urge the  Valar to  that war  with his  evil dominion          
 that they must surely wage ere the coming of the  Firstborn. And          
 Orome tamer of beasts would ride too at  whiles in  the darkness          
 of the unlit forests; as a mighty hunter he came with  spear and          
 bow [pursuing to the death  the monsters  and fell  creatures of          
 the kingdom of Melkor. Then borne upon  his tireless  steed with          
 shining  mane and  golden hoof,  he would  sound the  great horn          
 Rombaras, whereat >] upon his tireless  steed with  shining mane          
 and golden hoof,  pursuing to  the death  the monsters  and fell          
 creatures of the kingdom of Melkor. Then in the twilight  of the          
 world  he would  sound his  great horn,  the Valaroma,  upon the          
 plains of Arda,  whereat I  the mountains  echoed and  the shad-          
 ows of Utumno fled away, and  even the  heart of  Melkor himself          
 was shaken, foreboding the wrath to come.                                 
                                                                          
   The  following  paragraph,  after  Pengolod's  address to  AElfwine (not
 in C), takes up a passage in Ainulindale' B, V.160 - 1 (itself not greatly
 modified  from  the  original  Music  of  the  Ainur in  The Book  of Lost
 Tales, 1.57), which was not used in C:                                    

          
                                                                    
  Now all is  said to  thee, AElfwine,  for this  present, concerning
 the  manner of  the Earth  and its  rulers in  the time  before days
 and  ere  the  world  became  such  as the  Children have  known it.
 Of these thou hast not asked, but a little  I will  say and  so make
 an  end.  For  Elves  and  Men  are  the  Children;  and  since they
 understood  not  fully  that theme  by which  they entered  into the
 Music, none of the  Ainur dared  to add  anything to  their fashion.
 For  which  reason  the  Valar  are to  these kindreds  rather their
 elders and their chieftains than their masters; and if ever in their
 dealings  with  Elves  and  Men  the   Ainur  have   endeavoured  to
 force  them  when  they  would  not  be  guided,  this   has  seldom
 turned  to  good,  howsoever good  the intent.  The dealings  of the
 Ainur  have  been  mostly  with  the  Elves,  for Iluvatar  made the
 Eldar more like in nature  to the  Ainur, though  less in  might and
 stature, whereas to Men he gave strange gifts.                      
  $38 For it  is said  that after  the departure  of the  Valar there
 was silence and for an age Iluvatar  sat alone  in thought.  Then he
 spoke,  and he  said: 'Behold  I love  the Earth,  which shall  be a
 mansion for the  Eldar and  the Atani!  But the  Eldar shall  be the
 fairest  of all  earthly creatures,  and they  shall have  and shall
 conceive  and  bring  forth more  beauty than  all my  children; and
 they shall have the greater bliss in this world.  But to  the Atani
 (which are Men) I will give a new gift.'                            
  $39  Therefore  he  willed  that  the  hearts  of  Men  should seek
 beyond  the  world  and  should  find  no  rest  therein;  but  they
 should  have  a  virtue  to shape  their life,  amid the  powers and
 chances  of  the  world,  beyond the  Music of  the Ainur,  which is
 as  fate  to  all  things  else; and  of their  operation everything
 should  be, in  form and  deed, completed,  and the  world fulfilled
 unto  the  last  and  smallest. [The  following passage  struck out:
 Lo!  even  we  of  the  Eldalie have  found to  our sorrow  that Men
 have a strange power for  good or  for ill,  and for  turning things
 aside from the purpose  of Valar  or of  Elves; so  that it  is said
 among us that Fate is not  the master  of the  children of  Men; yet
 they are blind, and their joy is small, which should be great.]     
  $40  But  Iluvatar  knew  that  Men,  being   set  amid   the  tur-
 moils  of  the powers  of the  world, would  stray often,  and would
 not use their gifts in  harmony; and  he said:  'These too  in their
 time shall find that all that they do  redounds at  the end  only to
 the glory of my  work.' Yet  we of  the Eldar  believe that  Men are
 often  a  grief  to   Manwe,  who   knows  most   of  the   mind  of
 Iluvatar.  For  it  seems  to us  that Men  resemble Melkor  most of

 all  the  Ainur,  and  yet  he  has  ever  feared  and  hated   them,  even
 those that served him.                                                     
   It  is  one  with  this  gift  of  freedom  that  the  children   of  Men
 dwell  only  a  short  space  in  the  world  alive, and  are not  bound to
 it,   and   depart   soon   whither   we  know   not.  Whereas   the  Eldar
 remain  until  the  end  of  days,  and  their  love of  the Earth  and all
 the   world  is   more  single   and  poignant,   therefore,  and   as  the
 years   lengthen   ever  more   sorrowful.  Memory   is  our   burden.  For
 the  Eldar  die  not  till  the  world  dies,  unless  they  are  slain  or
 waste   in   grief   (and   to   both   these   seeming  deaths   they  are
 subject);  neither  does  age  subdue  their  strength,  unless   one  grow
 weary  of  ten  thousand  centuries;  and  dying   they  are   gathered  in
 the   halls  of   Mandos  in   Valinor,  whence   often  they   return  and
 are   reborn   among   their   children.   But   the   sons   of   Men  die
 indeed,  and  leave   the  World   (it  is   said)-;  wherefore   they  are
 called  the Guests,  or the  Strangers. Death  is their  fate, the  gift of
 Iluvatar,  which  as   Time  wears   even  the   Powers  shall   envy.  But
 Melkor   has   cast   his   shadow   upon  it,   and  confounded   it  with
 darkness,  and  brought  forth  evil  out   of  good,   and  fear   out  of
 hope.  Yet  of  old  the  Valar said  unto us  that Men  shall join  in the
 Second   Music   of   the   Ainur,  whereas   Iluvatar  has   not  revealed
 what   he   purposes   for   the   Elves   after   the  World's   end,  and
 Melkor has not discovered it.                                              
                                                                           
                    Commentary on the Ainulindale text D.                   
                                                                           
 It will be seen that this  text, which  can only  in part  be called  a new
 version, does not  extend, contradict,  or clarify  the 'new  cosmology' in
 any respect - that is to say, as D was  originally written.  The alteration
 in  $24 of  'they went  down into  the Halls  of Aman'  to 'they  came down
 into  the  fields  of  Arda'  only  makes  this  particular   passage  more
 coherent: for Arda had now  been established,  and it  was to  the conflict
 in  Arda  that  those  other spirits  came. The  change in  $23 of  'in the
 midst of the vast halls of the World' to 'in the midst of the vast halls of
 Aman' is presumably not significant,  since the  one is  clearly equivalent
 to the other (see p. 28) ..                                                
   With  additions  and  corrections  to  the text,  however, a  new element
 enters: Ea. This was  the word  that Iluvatar  spoke at  the moment  of the
 Creation  of the  World: 'Ea!  Let these  things Be!';  and the  Ainur knew
 that 'Iluvatar  had made  a new  thing, Ea,  the World  that Is'  ($20). In
 $23,  where  the reading  of C  'the vast  halls of  the World'  had become
 in D 'the vast halls of  Aman', 'Aman'  was replaced  by 'Ea'.  The failure
 to  change  'the  Halls  of  Aman'  to  'the  Halls  of  Ea'  in   $15  was
 obviously  an  oversight.  The  later  meaning   of  'Aman',   the  Blessed

  Realm, appears in an addition to the text in $32.                          
   There  can be  no doubt that Ea,  the Word  of Creation  that is  also the
  word  for  the  World  Created,  functions  here as  did Aman;  the 'Being'
  that  the  word.contained  and   brought  forth   was  the   'new  World...
  globed  amid  the  Void'  that  the  Ainur  had seen  in vision  ($11), and
  which now they saw as a light far off, 'as it  were a  cloud with  a living
  heart  of  flame'  ($20),  and  into  which  those   of  them   who  wished
  descended.                                                                 
    But it is perfectly explicit that  the Ainur,  created by  Iluvatar ($1),
  dwelt in 'fair  regions' that  Iluvatar had  made for  them ($10);  some of
  them  remained  'beyond  the  confines  of  the World'  ($21) -  and Tulkas
  heard  'in  the  far heaven'  of the  War in  Arda. How  then can  the word
  Ea be defined in the list of '1951 alterations' (p. 7) as 'Universe of that
  which  Is'?  This  expression  can surely  not be  made equivalent  to 'the
  World that Is'  ($20). Must  not the  'Universe of  that which  Is' contain
  'Ea, the World', and the Ainur who saw it created?                         
                                                                            
    Other  points  arising  from  differences  between  C  and  D,  and  from
  emendations  made  to  D,  are referred  to under  the paragraphs  in which
  they occur:                                                                
                                                                            
  $31   The omission  of the  words 'of  the Noldor'  after 'loremasters'
        was  probably  made  because  Pengolod  is  expressly  a  Noldo:  cf.
  $36   where D has 'whom we Noldor name Elbereth'.                     
          In  the  substantially  revised  latter  part  of   this  paragraph
        (p. 32;  C text  p. 17)  the names  of the  Lamps are  changed again,
        from  Foros  and  Hyaras  to  Foronte  and  Hyarante; and  by early
        emendation  they  reach  at  last  the final  forms Illuin  and Ormal
        (as  given  in  the  list  of '1951  alterations', p.  7). Now  it is
        specifically  Yavanna  who  planted  seeds  in  Middle-earth;  and it
        is  Aule  who  made  the  Lamps  -  but  this  was  told in  both the
        earlier  and  later  Annals  of Valinor  (IV.263, V.110),  and indeed
        goes back to the original Music of the Ainur (1.69).                 
          In the correction made  to the  passage about  the first  growth in
        Arda  under  the light  of the  Lamps the  narrative is  brought back
        to the older tradition  concerning the  first flowers  (yet 'grasses'
        already appeared); see p. 22 note 17.                                
          'Almaren  in  the  Great Lake',  as in  the 1951  list (p.  7), now
        replaces 'Almar in a great lake'.                                    
                                                                            
  $32   Aman, in an addition to  the manuscript,  now acquires  its later
        meaning.  -  The  account  of  the  assault  on  Melkor by  the Valar
        coming  forth  from  Valinor  is  slightly extended  in D:  they came
        'with a great host', and Melkor  'lay hid  until they  had departed',
        then  'returned  to  his  dwelling  in  the  North',  where  he built
        Utumno.                                                              
                                                                            
  $36   The late change of 'she it was who wrought the Stars' to 'she it

      was who wrought the Great Stars' is notable:  the suggestion                 
      must be that Varda only made the Great Stars. See p. 376 and                 
      note 4.                                                                      
                                                                             
 $34  (p.  35;  passage  omitted  at  its  place in  C). The  name Rombaras
      for  the   Horn  of   Orome  is   found  uniquely   here;  the   name  that
      replaces  it  in  the  revision  of  the  passage,  Valaroma,   appears  in
      the 1951 list (p. 7).                                                        
                                                                             
 D  was  the  last  version  of  the  Ainulindale'. A  typescript was  made of
 it,  but  this  is  an amanuensis  text of  no significance,  save for  a few
 notes  that  my  father  made  on  it.  This  text  was  taken  from  D  when
 most, but not all, the corrections had been  made to  it. At  the top  of the
 first page he pencilled  the following  (unfortunately not  entirely legible)
 note:                                                                        
                                                                             
          The World should be equivalent to Arda (the realm) = our planet.
      Creation the Universe (........ universe) should be Ea, What Is.        
                                                                             
 This  raises  again,  and  again  inconclusively,  the question  discussed on
 pp. 37 - 8. The note is at least clear to this extent, that 'the World' is no
 longer  to  be  the  'new  World  ...  globed  amid   the  Void'   which  the
 Ainur saw ($11), but is  to be  applied to  Arda -  and this  is of  course a
 reversion,  so  far  as  the  word  is  concerned,  to   the  stage   of  the
 Ambarkanta,  where  Ilu (Arda)  is  'the   World'  (see   p.  28).   But  the
 difficulty with the definition of Ea as the  'Universe of  that which  Is' in
 the  1951  list,  or  as  'Creation  the  Universe'  in  the   present  note,
 remains  -  remains,  that  is,  if the  conception of  a 'World  globed amid
 the  Void'  and  separate  from   the  Void   remained.  It   looks,  indeed,
 rather as if  my father  were thinking  in quite  different terms:  Arda, the
 World,  is  set  within  an indefinite  vastness in  which all  'Creation' is
 comprehended;  but  there  is  no  way   of  knowing   when  this   note  was
 written. See further pp. 62-4.                                               
 Another  pencilled  note  on  the  first  page   of  the   typescript  reads:
 'Iluvatar  All-father  (iluve "the  whole")';  cf.  the  Etymologies (V.361):
 stem  IL  'all',  ILU  'universe',  Quenya  ilu,  iluve;  Iluvatar.  For the
 original etymology of Iluvatar ('Sky-father') see 1.255.                     
 On  the  title-page  of  the  typescript  my  father  wrote:  'Atani (Second)
 Followers  =  Men'.  Atani  (which  is  listed  among  the  1951 alterations)
 is not found in Ainulindale' C, but appears in D (title-page and $38).       
                                                                             
                               Ainulindale C *.                              
                                                                             
 I  have  already  discussed   the  relationship   of  this   very  remarkable
 version  to  Ainulindale'  C,  and  shown   that  it   preceded  C   and  was
 composed  before  The  Lord of  the Rings  was finished  (see pp.  3 -  6). I
 have  noted  also  that  when   lending  the   typescript  C *  to  Katherine
 Farrer  in  1948  my  father  labelled  it  'Round  World Version',  and that

  he gave her  also the  old B  manuscript (in  all probability  before he
  covered it with new writing to form version C), which he  labelled 'Flat
  World Version'.                                                         
    There are-only two details to be observed  in the  first part  of this
  version. In $15 C* had, as did C, 'the Halls of Anar', and again as in C
  this  was  later emended  to 'the  Halls of  Aman'. This  emendation was
  made  at  the  same time  on both  texts; but  on C*  my father  added a
  footnote: 'Anar  = the  Sun' (see  p. 44).  And in  $19, whereas  both C
  and  D  have  'for  the  history  was  incomplete  and  the  circles not
  full-wrought when the vision  was taken  away', C*  has 'the  circles of
  time' (this reading was adopted in the published Silmarillion, p. 20).
    But from part way through  $23 to  the end  of $24 C* develops  the B
  text quite differently from C:                                          
                                                                         
    $23   So  began   their  great   labours  [rejected   immediately:  in
  the  beginning  of  Time  and  in   the  immeasurable   ages  forgotten]
  in   wastes   unmeasured   and   unexplored,   and  in   ages  uncounted
  and  forgotten,  until in  the Deeps  of Time  and in  the midst  of the
  vast  halls  of the  World there  came to  be that  hour and  that place
  where  was  made  the  habitation  of  the  Children  of  Iluvatar.  And
  many  of  the  Valar  repaired  thither  from  the  uttermost  parts  of
  heaven.  But  the  first  of  these  was  Melkor.  And  Melkor  took the
  Earth,  while  it  was  yet  young  and  full  of  fire,  to be  his own
  kingdom.                                                                
    $24  But  Manwe  was   the  brother   of  Melkor,   and  he   was  the
  chief  instrument  of  the  second  Theme   that  Iluvatar   had  raised
  up  against  the  discord  of  Melkor.  And   he  called   unto  himself
  others  of  his  brethren  and  many  spirits  both  greater  and  less,
  and  he  said  to  them:  'Let  us  go  to  the   Halls  of   Anar  [not
  emended],  where  the  Sun  of  the  Little   World  is   kindled,  and
  watch that Melkor bring it not all to ruin!'                           
    And   they   went   thither,   Manwe   and   Ulmo   and    Aule,   and
  others   of   whom   thou   shalt  yet   hear,  AElfwine,   and  behold!
  Melkor  was  before  them;  but  he  had  little  company,  save  a  few
  of those lesser  spirits that  had attuned  their music  to his;  and he
  walked  alone"and  the  Earth  was   in  flames.   The  coming   of  the
  Valar  was  not   indeed  welcome   to  Melkor,   for  he   desired  not
  friends  but  servants,  and  he  said:  This  is  my  kingdom,  which I
  have  named  unto  myself.'  But  the  Valar   answered  that   this  he
  could  not  lawfully  do,  for  in  making   and  governance   they  had
  all  their  part.   And  there   was  strife   between  the   Valar  and
  Melkor;   and   for  a   time  Melkor   departed  and   withdrew  beyond
  the arrows of the Sun, and brooded on his desire.                      

    On the two sentences  which I  have italicised  see pp.  43 -  4. The
  narrative in this version  differs from  that of  C, since  here Melkor
  preceded  the  other  Ainur,  and  Manwe's  summons  was  not  made out
  of Arda to other spirits that had not yet come,  but was  an invitation
  to enter Arda with him.                                                
    From  the  beginning  of  $25  C*  reverts to  the common  text (more
  accurately, from this point C follows C*); the expression  'Kingdom of
  Anar'  in  $25  was  later  emended  to  'Kingdom of  Arda' (in  C this
  change was made in the act of writing, p. 22 note 13). But near the end
  of $27 C* diverges again:                                              
                                                                        
  ...  for  as  surely  as  the  Valar  began  a  labour so  would Melkor
  undo  it or  corrupt it;  so that  forests became  fierce and  rank and
  poisonous,  and  beasts  became  monsters  of   horn  and   ivory,  and
  they fought, and dyed the earth with blood.                            
                                                                        
    In C this passage comes in later ($32), and the  corruption described
  is that worked by Melkor on the living things that came to being in the
  light of the Lamps; but in C*, as will be seen, the story of  the Lamps
  had been abandoned (p. 43).                                            
    C* then jumps from the end of $27 to  $31, which  in C  is a  part of
  the  words  of  Pengolod (Pengolod)  after the  end of  the Ainulindale
  proper, and proceeds as follows:                                       
                                                                        
    $31  And  this  tale  also  I  have  heard  among  the  sages  of the
  Noldor in  ages past:  that in  the midst  of the  War, and  before yet
  there  was  any  thing  that  grew  or  walked  on  Earth, there  was a
  time  when  the  Valar  came  near  to  the  mastery;  for a  spirit of
  great  strength  and  hardihood  came  to  their  aid,  hearing  in the
  far  heaven  that  there  was  battle  in  the  Little  World.  And  he
  came  like  a  storm  of  laughter  and  loud   song,  and   the  Earth
  shook  under  his  great  golden  feet.  So  came  Tulkas,  the  Strong
  and   the   Merry,   whose   anger   passeth   like   a   mighty  wind,
  scattering  cloud  and  darkness  before  it.  And  Melkor  was  shaken
  by  the  laughter  of  Tulkas  and  fled  from   the  Earth.   Then  he
  gathered  himself  together  and  summoned  all   his  might   and  his
  hatred, and he  said: 'I  will rend  the Earth  asunder, and  break it,
  and none shall possess it.'                                            
    But  this  Melkor  could   not  do,   for  the   Earth  may   not  be
  wholly  destroyed  against  its  fate;   nevertheless  Melkor   took  a
  portion of it, and seized  it for  his own,  and reft  it away;  and he
  made  it  a little  earth of  his own,  and it  wheeled round  about in
  the  sky,  following  the greater  earth wheresoever  it went,  so that
  Melkor   could   observe   thence   all   that   happened   below,  and

 could  send  forth  his  malice  and  trouble  the  seas and  shake the
 lands.  And  still  there  is  rumour  among  the Eldar  of the  war in
 which  the  Valar  assaulted  the  stronghold   of  Melkor,   and  cast
 him  out,  and  removed  it  further  from  the  Earth, and  it remains
 in  the   sky,  Ithil   whom  Men   call  the   Moon.  There   is  both
 blinding  heat  and cold  intolerable, as  might be  looked for  in any
 work  of Melkor,  but now  at least  it is  clean, yet  utterly barren;
 and  nought  liveth  there,  nor ever  hath, nor  shall. And  herein is
 revealed  again  the  words  of  Iluvatar;  for  Ithil  has   become  a
 mirror  to  the  greater  Earth, catching  the light  of the  Sun, when
 she  is  invisible;  and  because  of  malice silver  has been  made of
 gold,  and  moonlight  of  sunlight,  and  Earth  in  its  anguish  and
 loss has been greatly enriched.                                        
   But of all such matters, AElfwine, others shall tell thee...         
                                                                       
   These  last  words are  the beginning  of $28  in C,  the end  of the
 Ainuliedale proper, and the paragraph appears in  C* in  almost exactly
 the  same  form.  After  this  C*  ends  abruptly  with  the concluding
 passage,  C   $$38-40, in   which  however   there  are   some  notable
 differences. $38 reads thus in C*:                                     
                                                                       
   But  out  beyond  the  World   in  the   Timeless  Halls   after  the
 departure  of  the  Valar  there  was  silence,  and  Iluvatar  sat  in
 thought,  and  the  Holy  Ones   that  stood   nigh  moved   not.  Then
 Iluvatar  spoke  and  he said:  'Verily I  love the  World and  am glad
 that  it  Is.  And  my  thought  is bent  to that  place where  are the
 mansions  of  the  Elves  and  of  Men.  Behold!  the  Eldar  shall  be
 the  fairest  of  Earthly  creatures,  and  they  shall have  and shall
 conceive  more  beauty  than  all  other   offspring  of   my  thought;
 and  they  shall have  the greater  bliss in  the World.  But to  Men I
 will give a new gift.'                                                 
                                                                       
   It  is  to  be  noted  that the  scrap of  manuscript found  with the
 Adunaic papers, discussed on p. 4, has precisely  the structure  of C*:
 it begins with 'But of all such matters, AElfwine ...' and continues to
 the end of the paragraph '... and thus thy feet are on the beginning of
 the  road',  following  this  with  'But  out beyond  the World  in the
 Timeless Halls...'                                                     
   $39 is virtually the same in both texts; but  $40, after  the opening
 sentence  (Iluvatar's  words  concerning  Men),  continues thus  to the
 end:                                                                   
                                                                       
 Yet the Eldar know that Men have  often been  a grief  to the          
 Valar that love them, not least to Manwe,  who knows  most of          
 the mind of Iluvatar. For Men resemble Melkor most of all the          

 Ainur;  and  yet  he  hath  ever  feared  and  hated  them,  even  those
 that serve him.                                                         
   It  is  one  with  this  gift  of  freedom  that  the Children  of Men
 dwell  only  a  short  space  in  the  world  alive,  and  yet  are  not
 bound  to  it,  nor  shall perish  utterly for  ever. Whereas  the Eldar
 remain  until  the  end  of  days,  and  therefore  their  love  of  the
 world  is  deeper  and  more  joyous,  save  that when  evil is  done to
 it, or  its beauty  is despoiled,  then they  are grieved  bitterly, and
 the  sorrow  of  the  Elves  for that  which might  have been  fills now
 all  the  Earth  with  tears  that  Men hear  not. But  the sons  of Men
 die  indeed  and  leave  what  they  have  made   or  marred.   Yet  the
 Valar  say  that  Men  shall  join  in  the Second  Music of  the Ainur,
 but  Manwe   alone  knoweth   what  Iluvatar   hath  purposed   for  the
 Elves  after  the  World's  end:   the  Elves   know  not,   and  Melkor
 hath not discovered it.                                                 
                                                                        
   The concluding section $$38 - 40  was struck  through, and  against it
 my father wrote a question, whether to place it 'in The Silmarillion' or
 to insert it 'in modified form' earlier in the present text.            
                                                                        
   The fundamental  difference between  C* and  C lies  in this,  that in
 C*  the  Sun  is already  present from  the beginning  of Arda  (see the
 italicised  passages  in  $24 on  p. 40),  and the  origin of  the Moon,
 similarly  'de-mythologised' by  removal from  all association  with the
 Two Trees, is placed in the context of the tumults of Arda's  making. It
 seems strange  indeed that  my father  was prepared  to conceive  of the
 Moon  -  the  Moon,  that  cherishes  the  memory  of the  Elves (V.118,
 240) - as a dead and blasted survival of the  hatred of  Melkor, however
 beautiful its light. In  consequence, the  old legend  of the  Lamps was
 also  abandoned:  whence  the  different  placing  of the  passage about
 Melkor's perversion of living things, p. 41.                            
   There  is  no  indication  whatsoever  of  how  the  myth of-  the Two
 Trees  was to  be accommodated  to these  new ideas.  But for  that time
 the  'de-mythologising'  version  C*  was  set  aside;  and  the  D text
 followed  from  C  without  a  trace  of  them.  The  Annals   of  Aman,
 certainly later than the end of the Ainulindale  series, contains a full
 account of  the Making  of the  Sun and  Moon; and  in my  father's long
 letter  to Milton  Waldman, written  almost certainly  in 1951,  the old
 myth is fully present and its significance defined (Letters no.131):
                                                                        
   There  was  the  Light  of  Valinor  made  visible in  the Two  Trees of
   Silver  and  Gold.  These were  slain by  the Enemy  out of  malice, and
   Valinor  was  darkened,  though  from  them,  ere  they   died  utterly,
   were  derived  the lights  of Sun  and Moon.  (A marked  difference here
   between these legends and most others is that  the Sun  is not  a divine

                                                              
                                                                         
 symbol, but a second-best thing, and the  'light of  the Sun'  (the world
 under  the  sun)  become  terms  for  a  fallen  world, and  a dislocated
 imperfect vision).                                                       
                                                                         
 In  conclusion,  there  remains  the  perplexing  question  of  the  name
 Anar in C* and  C, to  which I  can find  no satisfactory  solution. Anar
 occurred first in $15, where the reference is to  the 'habitation  in the
 Halls of Anar which the Elves  call Arda,  the Earth';  and here  in both
 texts my father  later emended  'Anar' to  'Aman', while  in C*  he added
 a  footnote:  'Anar  =  the  Sun'.   In  $24   the  spirits   whom  Manwe
 summoned  to  his  aid  'went  down  into  the Halls  of Anar',  and here
 again 'Anar'  was later  changed to  'Aman' in  C; in  C* the  reading is
 somewhat different,  and in  this text  'Anar' was  left to  stand: Manwe
 said to the other spirits 'Let us go to the Halls of  Anar where  the Sun
 of the Little  World is  kindled'. The  retention of  'Anar' in  C* seems
 however  to  be  no more  than an  oversight. Finally,  in $25  are named
 'the  Seven  Great  Ones of  the Kingdom  of Anar',  changed subsequently
 in C* but in the act of writing in C to 'the Kingdom of Arda'.           
 The  name  Anar  (Anor)  =  'the  Sun'  goes  back  a long  way -  to The
 Lost  Road,  the  Quenta  Silmarillion,  and  the  Etymologies  (see  the
 Index  to  Vol.V),  and  had  been  repeated  in  The Notion  Club Papers
 (IX  302-3,  306), beside  Minas Anor,  Anarion, Anorien  in The  Lord of
 the Rings.  It seems  therefore at  first sight  very probable  that Anar
 means 'the Sun' in these texts  of the  Ainulindale'. On  this assumption
 the  footnote  to  $15  in  C*  was  no more  than an  explanatory gloss;
 while 'the  Kingdom of  Anar' in  $25 =  'the Kingdom  of the  Sun' ('the
 Sun of the Little World'): cf. the change in D $14 (p. 30) of  'the whole
 field of the Sun' to 'the whole field of Arda'.  The fact  that in  C, in
 which  the  myth  of  the  Making  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  is implicitly
 present,  my  father  wrote  'the  Kingdom of  Anar' would  be explicable
 on the basis that he had C*  before him,  and wrote  'Anar' inadvertently
 before immediately changing it to 'Arda'.                                
 There  is  however  a  radical  objection to  this explanation.  In $$15,
 24 'the Halls of Anar' is the name given to 'the vast halls of the World'
 with their  'wheeling fires',  in which  Iluvatar chose  a place  for the
 habitation  of  Elves  and  Men;  and  subsequently  Anar  >  Aman  >  Ea
 (p. 31,  $23).  Here  the  interpretation  of  Anar  as  'the  Sun' seems
 impossible. It may be therefore  that my  father's note  to C*  $15 'Anar
 = the Sun'  (made at  the same  time as  he changed  'Anar' to  'Aman' in
 the  body  of  the  text)  implies  that he  had been  using the  name in
 another  sense, but  was now  asserting that  this and  no other  was the
 meaning of Anar.                                                         
