  PART TWO.
          
    THE
   ANNALS
     OF
    AMAN.

                             THE ANNALS OF AMAN.                           
                                                                          
 The  second  version  (pre-Lord  of  the  Rings) of  the Annals  of Valinor
 (AV 2) has been given in V.109 ff. I  mentioned there  that the  first part
 of  AV  2 was  - years  later -  covered with  emendation and  new writing,
 and that this new  work was  the initial  drafting of  the Annals  of Aman.
 In this case I shall spend no time on the original  draft, apart  from some
 points  arising  in  it  which  are  mentioned  in the  notes. It  does not
 extend  very  far  -  not  even so  far as  the bringing  forth of  the Two
 Trees, and so far as it goes it is extremely close to  the Annals  of Aman;
 but  my  father  evidently  very  soon decided  to embark  on a  wholly new
 text.                                                                     
  Of  the  Annals  of  Aman,  which  I  shall  refer  to  throughout  by the
 abbreviation  'AAm',  there  is  a  good  clear  manuscript,  with  a  fair
 amount  of  correction  in  different  'layers'.  Emendations  belonging to
 the  time  of  composition,  or soon  after, were  carefully made;  and the
 manuscript gives  the impression  of being  a 'fair  copy', a  second text.
 But  while  passages  of drafting  may have  been lost,  I very  much doubt
 that a complete  'first text'  of the  Annals existed  (see further  p. 121
 note  17).  The  work  undoubtedly  belongs  with  the   large  development
 and  recasting  of  the   Matter  of   the  Elder   Days  that   my  father
 undertook  when  The Lord  of the  Rings was  finished (see  p. 3),  and it
 stands  in  close  relationship  to  the  revision  at  that  time  of  the
 corresponding  parts  of  the  Quenta  Silmarillion (V.204-43,  referred to
 throughout  as  QS),  the  text  that  had  been  abandoned  at the  end of
 1937. Equally clearly it followed the last text of the Ainulindale (D).
  There   is   an   amanuensis   typescript   of   AAm  bearing   some  late
 emendations  and  notes,  together  with  its  carbon  copy bearing  a very
 few,  but  different,  emendations;  I  am  inclined to  date this  text to
 1958,  although  the  evidence  for  this  is  a  matter  of  inference and
 suggestion (see pp. 141 - 2, 300). There is also an  interesting, divergent
 typescript of the early part of the work, made by  my father  (pp. 64  - 8,
 79-80).                                                                   
  I  give  the  whole  text  of  the  Annals  narrative,  incorporating  the
 emendations made to it;  where earlier  readings are  of interest  they are
 recorded   in   the  notes.   I  number   the  paragraphs   for  subsequent
 reference, and since the text  is long  I have  divided it  for convenience
 into  six sections.  The sections  are followed  by numbered  textual notes
 (not in the case  of section  2), and  then by  a commentary  referenced to
 the paragraph-numbers.                                                    
                                                                          
       The dates of the annals of the Years of the Trees were changed very

               
                                                                           
 frequently - in some cases there are as  many as  six substitution's  - and
 I  give only  the final  form. Since  the continual  changing of  the dates
 seems in no case to  be associated  with changes  in the  actual narrative,
 and  since  the  final  articulation  of  the  dates  seems  to  have  been
 achieved  before  the  completion  of  the  manuscript,   I  think   it  is
 sufficient  to notice  that my  father at  first allowed  a longer  span of
 years from the arising of  the Trees  to their  destruction. Thus  at first
 the  Silmarils  were  achieved by  Feanor in  the: Year  of the  Trees 1600
 (later 1450), and Tulkas was sent  to lay  hands on  Melkor in  1700 (later
 1490)  -  though  other  dates  were  proposed  and  rejected  as  well  as
 these. From this point the revised dating (1490  - 1500)  is the  only one,
 but here too the dates were much altered  in detail,  and the  final result
 is not at all points perfectly clear.                                      
                                                                           
                    First section of the Annals of Aman.                    
                                                                           
 The  first  page  of AAm  is extant  in two  forms, both  fine manuscripts,
 all but identical in text but differing in title and in the brief preamble.
 The  first  has  the title  The Annals  of Valinor,  and opens  thus: 'Here
 begin  the  Annals of  Valinor, and  speak of  the coming  of the  Valar to
 Arda';  beside  the  title  was  added:  'These were  written by  Quennar i
 Onotimo   who   learned  much,   and  borrowed   much  also,   from  Rumil;
 but they were  enlarged by  Pengolod.' This  last was  struck out,  and the
 title  and  preamble  emended to  the form  they have  on the  second copy,
 as  given  below,  with  Valinor  >  Aman  and  the  addition of  the words
 'which  Rumil  wrote  (made)'.  I  imagine  that  my  father  recopied  the
 page  because  he  wished  it to  look well,  and had  spoiled it  by these
 changes. The title Annals of  Aman came  in at  this point,  therefore, and
 very  possibly the  final meaning  of the  name Aman  also: it  occurs once
 in Ainulindale D, but as an addition to the text (p. 33, $32).             
                                                                           
                             THE ANNALS OF AMAN.                            
                                                                           
 Here begin the Annals of Aman, which Rumil made, and speak                 
 of the coming of the Valar to Arda:                                        
                                                                           
   $1   At   the   Beginning  Eru   Iluvatar  made   Ea,  the   World  that
 is,(1) and the  Valar  entered into  it, and  they are  the Powers  of Ea.
 These  are  the  nine  chieftains  of  the  Valar  that  dwelt   in  Arda:
 Manwe,    Ulmo,    Aule,    Orome,    Tulkas,   Osse,  Mandos, Lorien,(2)
 and Melkor.                                                                
   $2   Of   these   Manwe    and   Melkor    were   most    puissant   and
 were   brethren.   Manwe   is   lord   of   the   Valar,  and   holy;  but
 Melkor  turned  to  lust  of  power  and  pride,   and  became   evil  and
 violent,  and  his  name   is  accursed,   and  is   not  spoken;   he  is
 named    Morgoth.    Orome    and    Tulkas    were    younger    in   the

                        
                                                                        
 thought of  Eru  ere  the  devising  of  the  World,  and   Tulkas  came
 fast  to  the  kingdom  of  Arda.  The  queens of  the Valar  are seven:
 Varda,   Yavanna,   Nienna,   Vaire,   Vana,   Nessa,   and   Uinen.  No
 less  in  might  and  majesty  are  they than  the chieftains,  and they
 sit ever in the councils of the Valar.                                  
    $3   Varda   was   Manwe's   spouse    from   the    beginning,   but
 Aule  espoused  Yavanna,  her  sister,  in  Ea.(3) Vana the   fair,  her
 younger  sister,  is  the  wife  of  Orome;  and  Nessa,  the  sister of
 Orome,  is  Tulkas'  wife;  and  Uinen,  lady  of   the  seas,   is  the
 spouse   of   Osse.   Vaire   the   Weaver   dwells   with   Mandos.  No
 spouse   hath   Ulmo,   nor   Melkor.   No   lord   hath    Nienna   the
 sorrowful,   queen  of   shadow,  Manwe's   sister  and   Melkor's.  The
 wife of Lorien is Este the pale,  but she  goes not  to the  councils of
 the  Valar  and  is  not  accounted  among  the rulers  of Arda,  but is
 the chief of the Maiar.                                                 
    $4  With  these  great  powers  came  many  other  spirits   of  like
 kind  but  less  might  and   authority;  these   are  the   Maiar,  the
 Beautiful,(4) the  folk  of  the  Valar.  And   with  them   are  numbered
 also  the  Valarindi,  the  offspring  of  the  Valar,   their  children
 begotten  in  Arda,  yet  of  the  race  of  the  Ainur who  were before
 the World; they are many and fair.                                      
                                                                        
 At  this  point  my  father wrote  in: This  is drawn  from the  work of
 Quennar  Onotimo.  These words  refer not  to what  precedes but  to the
 following  passage,  headed  Of the  Beginning of  Time and  its Reckon-
 ing (although in the preamble - struck  through - of the  rejected first
 page  of  AAm  Quennar  i Onotimo  is said  to have  been the  author of
 the Annals as a whole, p. 48).                                          
  The entire section on the subject of  the Reckoning  of Time  was later
 marked in pencil: 'Transfer to the Tale of Years'. The Tale of  Years, a
 chronological list of the same sort as that  in Appendix  B to  The Lord
 of the Rings, exists in different forms, associated with the earlier and
 later  Annals;  the  later  form,  closely associated  with AAm  and its
 companion the Grey  Annals (Annals  of Beleriand),  is perhaps  the most
 complex and difficult text of all that my father  left behind  him. This
 need not  concern  us here;  but associated  with it  are two  very fine
 manuscripts  (one  of  them,  the  later  of  the  two,  among  the most
 beautiful that he made: see the frontispiece) giving in almost identical
 form the same text  Of the  Beginning of  Time and  its Reckoning  as is
 found here in AAm, but placing it as the  opening of  The Tale  of Years
 and the  prelude  to  the  chronological  list  of  events.   These  two
 manuscripts  are  of  course  later  than  the  text  in  AAm,  and some
 readings in which  they  differ  from  it  are given  in the  notes. AAm
 continues:                                                              

   
                                                                      
            This is drawn from the work of Quennar Onotimo.(5)         
                  Of the Beginning of Time and its Reckoning.          
                                                                      
      $5   Time  indeed began  with the  beginning of  Ea, and  in that
   beginning  the  Valar  came  into  the  World.  But  the measurement
   which  the Valar  made of  the ages  of their  labours is  not known
   to any of the  Children of  Iluvatar, until  the first  flowering of
   Telperion  in  Valinor.  Thereafter  the Valar  counted time  by the
   ages  of  Valinor,  whereof each  age contained  one hundred  of the
   Years of the  Valar; but  each such  year was  longer than  are nine
   years under the Sun.(6)                                             
      $6   Now  measured  by  the  flowering of  the Trees  there were
   twelve  hours  in  each  Day  of  the  Valar,  and  one  thousand of
   such  days  the  Valar  took  to  be a  year in  their realm.  It is
   supposed  indeed  by  the  Lore-masters  that the Valar  so devised
   the  hours  of  the  Trees  that  one  hundred  of  such   years  so
   measured  should  be  in  duration  as  one  age  of  the Valar (7) (as
   those ages  were in  the days  of their  labours before  the founda-
   tion of Valinor).(8) Nonetheless this is not certainly known.          
      $7   But  as  for the  Years of  the Trees  and those  that came
   after,(9) one such  Year  was  longer  than  nine  such years  as now
   are.  For  there  were  in  each  such  Year twelve  thousand hours.
   Yet the  hours of  the Trees  were each  seven times  as long  as is
   one  hour  of  a  full-day  upon   Middle-earth  from   sun-rise  to
   sun-rise,  when  light  and  dark  are equally divided.(10) Therefore
   each Day of  the Valar  endured for  four and  eighty of  our hours,
   and  each  Year  for  four  and  eighty thousand:  which is  as much
   as  three  thousand   and  five   hundred  of   our  days,   and  is
   somewhat  more  than  are  nine  and  one  half  of our  years (nine
   and one half and eight hundredths and yet a little).(11)            
      $8   It is recorded by the Lore-masters that this is  not rightly
   as  the  Valar  designed  at the  making and  ordering (12) of the Moon
   and Sun. For it was their intention that  ten years  of the  Sun, no
   more and  no less,  should be  in length  as one  Year of  the Trees
   had been; and it was their first device  that each  year of  the Sun
   should  contain  seven  hundred  times  of  sunlight  and moonlight,
   and  each  of  these  times  should  contain  twelve hours,  each in
   duration one  seventh of  an hour  of the  Trees. By  that reckoning
   each Sun-year would  contain three  hundred and  fifty full  days of
   divided  moonlight  and sunlight,  that is  eight thousand  and four
   hundred  hours,  equalling  twelve  hundred hours  of the  Trees, or
   one  tenth  of  a  Valian  Year. But  the Moon  and Sun  proved more

 wayward  and  slower  in  their  passage  than  the   Valar  had
 intended, as  is  hereafter  told,(13) and  a  year  of  the  Sun  is
 somewhat  longer  than  was  one  tenth of  a Year  in the  Days of
 the Trees.                                                         
    $9  The shorter  year of  the Sun  was so made (14) because of the
 greater speed  of  all  growth,  and  likewise  of  all  change and
 withering,  that  the  Valar  knew  should come  to pass  after the
 death of  the Trees.  And after  that evil  had befallen  the Valar
 reckoned time in Arda by the  years of  the Sun,  and do  so still,
 even  after  the  Change  of  the  World  and  the hiding  of Aman;
 but ten years of the Sun  they account  now as  but one  year,(15) and
 one  thousand  but   as  a   century.  This   is  drawn   from  the
 Yenonotie of Quennar: quoth Pengolod.(16)                         
    $10  It  is  computed by  the lore-masters  that the  Valar came
 to the  realm of  Arda, which  is the  Earth, five  thousand Valian
 Years ere the first rising of the Moon, which is as much as  to say
 forty-seven  thousands  and  nine  hundred  and  one of  our years.
 Of  these,  three  thousand  and  five  hundred   (or  thirty-three
 thousand  five  hundred  and  thirty of  our reckoning)  passed ere
 the  measurement  of  time  first  known  to  the Eldar  began with
 the  flowering  of  the  Trees.  Those were  the Days  before days.
 Thereafter  one  thousand  and  four  hundred  and five  and ninety
 Valian  Years  (or  fourteen  thousand  of  our  years   and  three
 hundred  and  twenty-two)  followed  during  which  the   Light  of
 the  Trees  shone  in  Valinor. Those  were the  Days of  Bliss. In
 those days, in the Year one thousand  and fifty  of the  Valar, the
 Elves  awoke  in Kuivienen  and the  First Age  of the  Children of
 Iluvatar began.(17)                                               
                                                                  
                1. The First Year of the Valar in Arda.              
                                                                  
   $11  After  ages  of  labour  beyond  knowledge  or  reckoning in
 the  great  halls  of  Ea  the  Valar  descended  into Arda  in the
 beginning  of  its  being,  and  they  began  there   their  labour
 fore-ordained for the  shaping of  its lands  and its  waters, even
 from the foundations to the highest towers of the Air.            
   $12  But  their  labours  were frustrated  and turned  aside from
 their  design,  for  Melkor coveted  the dominion  of Arda,  and he
 claimed  the   kingship  and   was  at   strife  with   Manwe.  And
 Melkor  wrought  great  ruin   with  fire   and  deadly   cold  and
 marred all that the other Valar made.                             

                                1500                               
                                                                  
   $13  It  came  to  pass  that  hearing  afar of  the war  in Arda
 Tulkas the  Strong came  thither out  of distant  regions of  Ea to
 the  aid  of  Manwe. Then  Arda was  filled with  the sound  of his
 laughter,  but  he  turned  a  face of'  anger towards  Melkor; and
 Melkor  fled  before  his wrath  and his  mirth, and  forsook Arda,
 and there was a long peace.                                       
   $14  Now  the  Valar  began  their  labours  anew;  and  when the
 lands and  the waters  were ordered  the Valar  had need  of light,
 that  the seeds  of Yavanna's  devising might  grow and  have life.
 Aule therefore wrought two great lamps,  as it  were of  silver and
 of  gold  and  yet  translucent,  and Varda  filled them  with hal-
 lowed fire, to give light to the Earth. Illuin and Ormal  they were
 named.   1900   And   they   were  set   upon  mighty   pillars  as
 mountains  in  the  midst  of  Arda,  to  the  northward   and  the
 southward.                                                        
   $15  Then  the  Valar  continued  their  labours  until  all  the
 kingdom  of  Arda  was  ordered  and  made  ready,  and  there  was
 great growth of trees and herbs,  and beasts  and birds  came forth
 and  dwelt  in  the  plains and  in the  waters, and  the mountains
 were  green  and  fair  to  look  upon.  And  the Valar  made their
 dwelling upon a green isle in the midst  of a  lake; and  that lake
 was  between  Illuin  and  Ormal  in  the  midmost  of   Arda;  and
 there  in  the  Isle  of Almaren,  because of  the blending  of the
 lights, all things were richest in growth and  fairest of  hue. But
 the  Valar were  seldom there  gathered in  company, for  ever they
 would fare abroad in Arda, each in his own business.              
   $16 And it  came to  pass that  at last  the Valar  were content,
 and they were  minded to  rest a  while from  labour and  watch the
 growth  and  unfolding  of  the  things that  they had  devised and
 begun.  Therefore  Manwe  ordained  a  great  feast,  and  summoned
 all the Valar and the queens  of the  Valar unto  Almaren, together
 with all their folk. And they came at his bidding; but Aule,  it is
 said,  and  Tulkas  were  weary;  for  the  craft  of Aule  and the
 strength of Tulkas had been at the service  of all  without ceasing
 in the days of their labour.                                      
   $17  Now  Melkor  knew  of  all  that  was  done;  for  even then
 he  had  secret  friends  and  spies  among the  Maiar whom  he had
 converted to his cause,  and of  these the  chief, as  after became
 known,  was Sauron,  a great  craftsman of  the household  of Aule.
 And afar  off in  the dark  places Melkor  was filled  with hatred,

 being jealous of the work of his  peers, whom  he desired  to make
 subject to himself. Therefore he gathered to himself  spirits out
 of the voids of Ea that he had perverted to his service,  and he
 deemed  himself  strong.  And  seeing  now his  time he  drew near
 again  unto  Arda,  and  looked down  upon it,  and the  beauty of
 the Earth in its Spring filled him the more with hate.             
                                                                  
                                3400                               
                                                                  
   $18  Now  therefore  the  Valar   were gathered upon Almaren
 and feasted and made merry, fearing  no evil,  and because  of the
 light of llluin they did not perceive the shadow in the North that
 was  cast  from  afar  by  Melkor; for  he was  grown dark  as the
 Night of the Void.(18) And it  is sung  that in  that feast  of the
 Spring  of Arda  Tulkas espoused  Nessa the  sister of  Orome, and
 Vana  robed  [her)  in  her  flowers,  and  she danced  before the
 Valar upon the green grass of Almaren.                            
   $19   Then   Tulkas   slept,  being   weary  and   content,  and
 Melkor   deemed   that  his   hour  had   come.  And   he  passed,
 therefore, over  the Walls of the Night (19) with his host,  and he
 came  to  Middle-earth  in  the  North;  and  the  Valar  were not
 aware of him.                                                     
   $20  Now  Melkor  began  the  delving  and  building  of  a vast
 fortress  deep  under  Earth,  beneath  dark  mountains  where the
 light  of  Illuin  was dim.(20) That  stronghold  was  named Utumno.
 And though the Valar  knew nought  of it  as yet,  nonetheless the
 evil of Melkor and  the blight  of his  hatred flowed  out thence,
 and  the  Spring  of  Arda  was marred,  and living  things became
 sick and rotted, or were corrupted to monstrous forms.            
                                                                  
                                3450                               
                                                                  
   $21  Then  the  Valar  knew  indeed  that  Melkor  was  at  work
 again,  and  they  sought  for   his  hiding-place.   But  Melkor,
 trusting in the strength of Utumno and the might of  his servants,
 came forth suddenly to  war, and  struck the  first blow,  ere the
 Valar  were prepared.  And he  assailed the  lights of  Illuin and
 Ormal,  and he  cast down  their pillars,  and broke  their lamps.
 Then  in the  overthrow of  the mighty  pillars lands  were broken
 and  seas  arose  in  tumult;  and  when  the  lamps  were spilled
 destroying  flame was  poured out  over the  Earth. And  the shape
 of Arda and the symmetry of its  waters and  its lands  was marred
 in that time, so that the first  designs of  the Valar  were never
 after restored.                                                   

      
                                                                  
   $22  In  the   confusion  and   the  darkness   Melkor  escaped,
 though fear fell upon him; for above  the roaring  of the  seas he
 heard  the  voice  of  Manwe  as  a  mighty  wind,  and  the earth
 trembled beneath the feet  of Tulkas.  But he  came to  Utumno ere
 Tulkas could overtake him;  and there  he lay  hid. And  the Valar
 could  not  at that  time overcome  him, for  the greater  part of
 their strength was needed to  restrain the  tumults of  the Earth,
 and to save from ruin  all that  could be  saved of  their labour;
 and  afterward they  feared to  rend the  Earth again,  until they
 knew  where  the  Children  of  Iluvatar  were dwelling,  who were
 yet to come in a time that was hidden from the Valar.             
                                                                  
   $23  Thus  ended the  Spring of  Arda. And  the dwelling  of the
 Valar  upon  Almaren  was  utterly  destroyed,  and  the  gods had
 no  abiding  place  upon  the  face of  the earth.  Therefore they
 removed  from  Middle-earth  and  went  to   the  Land   of  Aman,
 which  was  westernmost  of  all  lands  upon  the borders  of the
 world;  for  its  west  shores  looked  upon  the  Outer  Sea that
 encircled  the  kingdom  of  Arda,  and beyond  were the  Walls of
 the Night.(21) But the east-shores of Aman are the  uttermost end
 of the Great Sea of  the West;  and since  Melkor had  returned to
 Middle-earth,  and  they  could  not yet  overcome him,  the Valar
 fortified  their dwelling,  and upon  the shores  of the  Sea they
 raised  the  Pelori, the  Mountains of  Aman, highest  upon earth.
 And above all the mountains of  the Pelori  was that  height which
 was   called  Taniquetil,   upon  whose   summit  Manwe   set  his
 throne. But behind the walls of the  Pelori the  Valar established
 their mansions and  their domain  in that  region which  is called
 Valinor.  There  in the  Guarded Realm  they gathered  great store
 of light and all the fairest things that were saved from the ruin;
 and  many  others  yet   fairer  they   made  anew,   and  Valinor
 became  more  beautiful even  than Middle-earth  in the  Spring of
 Arda; and it was blessed and holy, for the  gods dwelt  there, and
 there  nought  faded  nor  withered, neither  was there  any stain
 upon flower or leaf in that land, nor  any corruption  or sickness
 in  anything  that  lived;  for  the very  stones and  waters were
 hallowed.                                                         
   $24 Therefore the Valar and  all their  folk were  joyful again,
 and for long they  were well  content, and  they came  seldom over
 the  mountains  to  the  Outer  Lands; and  Middle-earth lay  in a
 twilight  beneath the  stars that  Varda had  wrought in  the ages
 forgotten of her labours in Ea.                                   

                                 3500                                
                                                                    
   $25  And  it   came  to   pass  that,   after  Valinor   was  full-
 wrought  and  the  mansions  of  the   Valar  were   established  and
 their  gardens  and  woodlands  were arrayed,  the Valar  built their
 city in the  midst of  the plain  beyond the  Pelori. That  city they
 named  Valmar  the  Blessed.  And  before  its  western   gate  there
 was  a  green  mound,  and  it  was   bare  save   for  a   sward  of
 unfading grass.                                                     
   $26   Then   Yavanna  and   Nienna  came   to  that   Green  Mound;
 and  Yavanna  hallowed  it,  and  sat  there  long  upon   the  green
 grass  and  sang a  song of  great power,  in which  was set  all her
 thought  of  things that  grow in  the earth.  But Nienna  thought in
 silence,  and  watered  the  mould  with  tears.  Then all  the Valar
 were  gathered  together  to  hearken  to  the  song of  Yavanna; and
 the  mound  was  in  the  midst  of  the  Ring  of  Doom  before  the
 gates  of  Valmar,  and  the Valar  sat round  about in  silence upon
 their thrones of council, and their folk were set before  their feet.
 And  as  the  gods  watched,  behold!  upon  the  mound  there sprang
 two  green  saplings, and  they grew  and became  fair and  tall, and
 they came to blossom.                                               
   $27   Thus   there   awoke   in   the  world   the  Two   Trees  of
 Valinor,  of  all  growing  things  the  fairest  and  most renowned,
 whose fate is woven with the  fate of  Arda. The  elder of  the Trees
 was  named  Telperion,  and  its  blossoms  were  of  shining  white,
 and  a  dew  of  silver  light  was spilled  from them.  Laurelin the
 younger  Tree  was  called; its  green leaves  were edged  with gold,
 and its flowers were like  to clusters  of yellow  flame, and  a rain
 of  gold  dripped  from  them  to  the   ground.  From   those  Trees
 there came forth a great light, and all Valinor  was filled  with it.
 Then  the bliss  of the  Valar was  increased; for  the light  of the
 Trees was holy and  of great  power, so  that, if  aught was  good or
 lovely or of worth, in that light its loveliness  and its  worth were
 fully  revealed;  and  all  that walked  in that  light were  glad at
 heart.                                                              
   $28  But  the  light  that  was  spilled  from  the  Trees  endured
 long, ere it was taken up into the airs  or sank  into the  earth for
 their  enrichment.  Therefore  of  its   abundance  Varda   was  wont
 to gather great  store, and  it was  hoarded in  mighty vats  nigh to
 the  Green  Mound.  Thence  the  Maiar  would  draw  it and  bring it
 to  frith  and field,  even those  far removed  from Valmar,  so that
 all regions of Valinor were nourished and waxed ever fairer.        

            
                                                                    
  $29  Thus  began  the  Days  of  the  Bliss  of  Valinor,  and thus
 began also the  count of  Time. For  the Trees  waxed to  full bloom
 and  light,  and  waned  again,   unceasingly,  without   change  of
 speed or fullness. Telperion came first to flower, and a  little ere
 he ceased to shine  Laurelin began  to bud;  and again  ere Laurelin
 had   grown   dim   Telperion   awoke   once  more.   Therefore  the
 Valar took the time of the  flowering, first  of Telperion  and then
 of Laurelin, to be  for them  a Day  in Valinor;  and the  time when
 each Tree was  flowering alone  they divided  into five  hours, each
 equal to the time of  the mingling  of their  lights, twice  in each
 Day.  There  were  thus  twelve  such  hours  in  every  Day  of the
 Valar;  and  one  thousand  of  those Days  was held  to be  a Year,
 for  then  the  Trees  would  put  forth  a  new  branch  and  their
 stature would increase.                                             
                                                                    
  The opening section of the Annals of Aman ends here; it is followed
 by a heading Here begins a new Reckoning in the Light of  the Trees,
 with dates beginning at Y.T.1, the First Year of the Trees.         

                             NOTES.                                      
                                                                        
  1. The definition of Ea as 'the  World that  Is' is  found also  at the
     appearance of the name in an  addition to  the text  of Ainulindale'
     D, p. 31,  $20. I  give it  throughout in  the form  that it  has in
     the texts, Ea, Ea, Ea'.                                             
  2. The  original  form of  the name  was Lorien,  but this  was changed
     to Lorien on the QS manuscript.                                     
  3. AV  2  had  here  (V.110)  'Yavanna,  whom  Aule  espoused  after in
     the world, in Valinor'; in  the later  rewriting of  the AV  2 manu-
     script  that  led  directly  to  AAm (p.  47) this  became 'Yavanna,
     whom Aule espoused in Arda', where AAm has 'in Ea'.                 
  4. AV  2  had  here  (V.110)  'these are  the Vanimor,  the Beautiful',
     changed  in  the  later  rewriting (see  note 3)  to 'these  are the
     Mairi...', and then to 'these  are the  Maiar...' This  was probably
     where the word Maiar first arose.                                   
  5. In the earlier (only) of the two manuscripts of  the opening  of The
     Tale  of  Years  the  heading  Of  the  Beginning  of  Time  and its
     Reckoning  was  subsequently  extended  by  the  addition   of  From
     the work of Quennar Onotimo; see note 6.                            
  6. As  this  sentence  was first  written  in  the  draft text  for the
     beginning of AAm (the rewriting of A V 2) it  read: 'each  such year
     is in length even as are ten years of the Sun that is now'; i.e., my
     father still retained the  old much  simpler computation  going back
     through  AV 2  (V.110) to  AV 1  (IV.263). This  was changed  on the
     draft  text to  'each such  year is  longer than  are nine  years of

      the Sun that is now'. In the earlier of the Tale of Years versions the
      words  'as  it  now  is'  were  pencilled in  after 'nine  years under
      the  Sun',  while  the  second reads  'than are  now nine  years under
      the Sun'.                                                             
        The  second  Tale  of  Years  version,  which  does  not   refer  to
      Quennar  Onotimo  in  the  heading  Of  the  Beginning  of   Time  and
      its  Reckoning  (note  5),  has  here:  'Thus  spake  Quennar  Onotimo
      concerning  this  matter'.  What  follows  from this  point is  in all
      three  texts  in  markedly smaller  script, so  that the  reference to
      Quennar seems most appropriate here.                                  
  7.  The later (only) of the Tale of Years  versions has  'one fifth  of an
      age of the Valar' for 'one age of the Valar'.                         
  8.  The earlier of the  Tale of  Years versions  adds here:  'whereas each
      age of the Valar  is one  exact part  (how great  or small  they alone
      know)  of  the  whole  history  of  Ea.  But  these  things   are  not
      certainly known even to the  Eldar'; the  later begins  the additional
      passage in the same way, but  ends: '...  of the  whole history  of Ea
      from its beginning  to the  End that  shall be.  But these  things are
      not certainly known even to [the] Vanyar.'                            
  9.  The  Tale  of  Years  versions  have here:  'As for  the Years  of the
      Trees  in  comparison  with those  that came  after', which  makes the
      meaning clear.                                                        
 10.  In the earlier Tale of Years version 'from  sun-rise to  sun-rise' was
      changed  in  pencil  to  'from  sunset to  sunset', and  the following
      sentence 'at such times  as light  and dark  are equally  divided' was
      bracketed.  The  second  version  has   a  different   reading:  'from
      sunset unto sunset beside the Shores of the Great Sea'.               
 11.  In  the  Tale  of Years  versions the  words '(nine  and one  half and
      eight hundredths and yet a little)' are omitted.                      
 12.  In  the  Tale  of  Years  versions  the   words  'and   ordering'  are
      omitted.                                                              
 13.  For 'as is hereafter told'  (which refers  to the  account of  the Sun
      and  Moon  later  in  AAm)  the  Tale  of Years  versions have  'as is
      elsewhere told'.                                                      
 14.  For  'was  so made'  the Tale  of Years  versions have  'was appointed
      by the Valar'.                                                        
 15.  'but one year' becomes in  the Tale  of Years  versions 'but  one year
      unto themselves'.                                                     
 16.  The  Tale  of  Years  versions  have here  'Thus speaketh  the Yenono-
      tie  of  Quennar'.  With  Yenonotie'  cf.  Yenie Valinoren  'Annals of
      Valinor'  in  the  title-pages  of  QS (V.202),  and the  name Onotimo
      itself; see  the Etymologies,  stems NOT  'count', YEN  'year' (V.378,
      400).                                                                 
 17.  Paragraph $10 had this form  in the  draft text  for the  beginning of
      AAm:                                                                  
        It  hath  been  computed  by  the  Masters  of  Lore that  the Valar

      came  to  the  Kingdom  of Arda,  which is  this Earth,  five and
      forty thousand  years of  our time  ere the  first rising  of the
      Moon.  And  of  these  thirty  thousand  passed ere  the measure-
      ment  of  Time  began  with  the  flowering  of the  Trees. These
      were  the  Days  before  Days.  And  fifteen thousand  years fol-
      lowed after during which the Light  of the  Trees yet  lived, and
      nigh  on  six  hundred more  of the  New Sun  and Moon  after the
      slaying of the Trees. And these  are called  the Elder  Days, and
      with their ending ended  the First  Age of  Time, and  Melkor was
      thrust from the world.                                            
                                                                       
      Thus whereas in AV 1 and AV 2 the reckoning was thus (V.Y. =      
      Valian Year(s), S.Y. = Sun Year(s)):                              
        V.Y. 1000 = S.Y. 10000   First flowering of the Trees               
        V.Y. 3000 = S.Y. 30000   Rising of the Moon                         
      this first revision gives:                                        
                    S.Y. 30000   First flowering of the Trees              
                    S.Y. 45000   Rising of the Moon                        
      This reckoning was then replaced again:                           
        V.Y. 3500 = S.Y. 33530   First flowering of the Trees               
        V.Y. 5300 = S.Y. 50775   Rising of the Moon                         
      These figures show a ratio of 1 V.Y. = 9-58 S.Y. (see the com-
      mentary on ($5 - 10, pp. 59 - 60). This last reckoning was the
      form in AAm as first written, which was then changed many         
      times to give the text printed.                                   
  18. The text as written had 'dark as the night that was before Ea',
      changed later to 'dark as the Night of the Void'.                 
  19. The text as first written had 'over the borders of Ea'; this was
      changed later to 'over the Walls of the Night upon the borders of
      Arda', and then 'upon the borders of Arda' was struck out.        
  20. The text was first written 'far from the light of Illuin'.        
  21. The text as written had 'which is westernmost of all lands' and
      'look upon the Outer Sea that encircles the kingdom of Arda'; the
      changes to the past tense were perhaps made at the time of        
      writing, since the next phrase, 'and beyond were the Walls of the
      Night', had the past tense as written. On the other hand, the     
      following sentence has the present tense ('But the east shores of
      Aman are the uttermost end of the Great Sea of the West'), where
      are was allowed to stand.                                         
                                                                       
                Commentary on the first section of the                  
                            Annals of Aman.                             
                                                                       
      $$1-3  On the occurrence of the name Eru see p. 7. The account of
      the interrelations of the Valar and the queens of the Valar       
      remains closely based on  that in  AV 2  (V.110), and  retains old

       phrases (as 'Manwe and Melkor were most puissant and were                    
       brethren') going back to the original Annals (IV.263). There are             
       however some developments in this opening section. On the                    
       phrase in $2, 'Orome and Tulkas were younger in the thought of               
       Eru ere the devising of the World', see V.120. That Tulkas came              
       last to Arda derives from the rewritten Ainulindale' ($31).                  
           It is not said now, as it was in AV 2, that Orome was the son            
       of Yavanna. On the other hand, it is now said, as in the Quenta              
       (Q) and QS, that Vana was the sister of Yavanna (and Varda),                 
       whereas this was not said in AV 2. These differences are perhaps             
       connected; for if both accounts are combined Orome's wife is                 
       the sister of his mother. But this may be to take too conventional           
       a view of the divine relations.                                              
           The statements that Este 'goes not to the councils of the Valar          
       and is not accounted among the rulers of Arda', and that she is              
       the chief of the Maiar (see note 4 above), are entirely new.                 
  $4   The passage concerning the 'lesser spirits' shows no significant             
       development from that in AV 2 (V.110) except for the replace-                
       ment of Vanimor by Maiar (translated 'the Beautiful' as Vani-                
       mor had been); the Valarindi, Children of the Valar, 'begotten               
       in Arda' and numbered among the Maiar, remain. On the                        
       earlier history of these conceptions see V.120 - 1; and see                  
       further p. 69.                                                               
  $5   Telperion first appeared in QS $16 (V.209), but not as the                   
       primary name of the Elder Tree, which remained Silpion.                      
       Telperion, used in The Lord of the Rings, now became the                     
       primary name.                                                                
                                                                                   
 $$5-10  The account of the Reckoning of Time is at first sight                    
       somewhat baffling, but it can be clarified.                                  
           (i) According to the reckoning by the Trees                              
           12 hours (a full flowering of both Trees) = 1 day                        
           1000 days (12000 hours) = 1 year                                         
           100 years = 1 age of the Valar (as the Valar reckoned the ages           
           before the Trees, according to a supposition of the Lore-                
           masters of the Elves; see notes 7 and 8 to the text)                     
           (ii) Relation of the reckoning by the Trees to the reckoning by          
       the Sun                                                                      
           1 hour of the Trees = 7 hours of our time                                
           1 day of the Trees = (7 X 12) 84 hours of our time                       
           1 year of the Trees = (7 x 12000) 84000 hours of our time                
       There are (365-25 X 24) 8766 hours in a Sun Year, and thus:                  
           1 year of the Trees = (84000 -: 8766) 9 582 Sun Years *                  
                                                                                   
 (* Cf. the text ($7): 'nine and one half and eight hundredths and yet a little'.)

       (iii) Original intention of the Valar for the new reckoning by
     the Sun and Moon                                                
       12 hours of moonlight.  24 hours = 1 full day.                   
       12 hours of sunlight.                                           
       700 times of sunlight and moonlight = 350 full days = 1 Sun     
       Year.                                                           
       1 hour = 1/7 of 1 hour of the Trees                               
     Therefore:                                                      
       1 Sun Year would have (24 X 350) 8400 hours = (8400 - 7)       
       1200 hours of the Trees = 1/10 of a Valian Year (see (i) above);
       thus 1 Valian Year would = 10 Sun Years                         
     The matter can be expressed more concisely thus:                
       1 year of the Trees = (7 x 12000) 84000 hours of our time       
       84000 - (350 x 24) 8400 = 10                                   
     but                                                             
       84000 - (365 25 x 24) 8766 = 9 582                             
                                                                      
     (iv) The dates of the first flowering of the Trees and the first
       rising of the Moon ($10)                                        
         The Trees first flowered after 3500  Valian Years  had passed,
       which  is  said  to  be  equal  to  33530  Sun Years  (this pre-
       supposes an equivalence of 9-58; 9 582 gives 33537).            
         The  Moon  first  rose  after  5000  Valian Years  had passed,
       which  is  said  to  be  equal  to  47901  Sun Years  (this pre-
       supposes an equivalence of 9-5802; if  the equivalence  is 9-582
       the  number  of Sun  Years would  be 47910,  if 9-58  the number
       would be 47900).                                                
         The Trees shone for  1495 Valian  Years, which  is said  to be
       equal to  14322 Sun  Years (this  presupposes an  equivalence of
       almost exactly 9-58).                                           
                                                     

                                         
 $511-29  The great expansion of the pre-Lord  of the  Rings narrative
     (QS,  AV  2)  is  in part  derived from  the later  Ainulindale' (that
     AAm  followed  the  last  version,  D,  of  that  work  is   shown  by
     various  details, as  for instance  the names  Ea, Illuin,  and Ormal,
     the first of  these entering  D by  later addition,  and those  of the
     Lamps   replacing   Foronte    and   Hyarante   by   emendation).  But
     there  is  much  that  is  entirely new:  as that  Manwe held  a great
     feast  on  the  Isle  of  Almaren, where  Tulkas espoused  Nessa; that
     Sauron  was  'a  great  craftsman  of  the  household  of  Aule'; that
     the  Valar  were  unable  to  overcome  Melkor  at  that  time because
     of  the  need  to  subdue  the turmoil  of the  Earth and  to preserve
     what  they  might  of  what  they  had  achieved;  and  other features
     mentioned  below.  -  The  question  of  the  cosmology  is  discussed
     at the end of this commentary.                                       
 $15 The statement that under the light of the Lamps 'there  was great
     growth  of  trees and  herbs, and  beasts and  birds came  forth' (cf.

        also  $18,  where  Vana  robed Nessa  in flowers  at the  feast on
        Almaren)  belongs with  the Ainulindale'  ($31): 'flowers  of many
        hues,   and   trees  whose   blossom  was   like  snow   upon  the
        mountains...  beasts  and birds  came forth'  - where  however the
        text was corrected ('As  yet no  flower had  bloomed nor  any bird
        had sung'). See p. 22 note 17, and p. 38, $31.                    
  $20   A structural difference between AAm and  the Ainulindale'  is that
        in the latter Melkor  did not  begin the  delving of  Utumno until
        after the overthrow of  the Lamps  and his  escape from  the Valar
        ($32)  -  a  story that  goes back  through the  texts to  the old
        'Sketch  of  the  Mythology'. In  AAm, on  the other  hand, Melkor
        built Utumno, or was  at least  far advanced  in the  work, before
        the  Valar were  aware of  him, and  it was  from Utumno  that the
        blight  and  corruption  proceeded; the  Valar then  perceived his
        presence in Arda  and 'sought  for his  hiding-place', and  it was
        this  (as it  appears) that  led to  Melkor's sudden  emergence in
        open war and the casting down of the Lamps.                       
  $22   The  attack  on  Melkor  by  the Valar  returning out  of Valinor,
        described  in  the Ainulindale'  ($32), is  not mentioned  in AAm,
        which says only that they 'could not at  that time  overcome him',
        taking up the  words of  QS $12  (V.208). That  the idea  had been
        abandoned is seen subsequently, p. 78, $47.                       
  $23   That all life in Aman was free from any  fading or  withering, and
        free  of  blight  and  sickness,  had  not  actually been  said in
        previous texts.                                                   
  $24   Whereas in the texts of the 1930s the old idea  of the  Lost Tales
        that the stars were created in two separate acts (1.69, 113  - 14,
        133)  had  been  abandoned,  it   now  reappears:   Varda  wrought
        stars 'in the ages forgotten of her labours in  Ea', and  later in
        AAm  (p.  71,  $35)  it  is told  that 'she  made stars  newer and
        brighter' before the awakening  of the  Elves. This  is presumably
        to be  associated with  the conception  in the  later Ainulindale'
        ($$14,  28)  of the  establishment of  Arda 'in  the midst  of the
        innumerable stars'.                                               
                                                                         
  $$25 - 6 That the Trees grew on a green mound in the Ring of Doom       
                                                                         
       is a new detail, though the implication of QS  $14 (V.209)  is that
       the  Trees  were  in  the  Ring. The  Ring and  the Mound  are here
       said to have been before the western  gate of  Valmar; in  the Lost
       Tales the Trees were to the north  of the  city, and  were moreover
       'leagues asunder' from each other (1.71, 143).                     
  $28  This account of the light that spilled from  the Trees  being drawn
       by  Maiar  from  the wells  of Varda  to 'water'  all the  lands of
       Valinor has its roots in the old idea that the Trees 'must needs be
       watered with light to have sap and live' (1.73).                   
  $29  At  the  end of  this paragraph  is a  remarkable new  detail, that
       after a thousand  days the  Trees put  out a  new branch;  and that

  this  was  why  a  Valian  Year was  so constituted.  It is  apparent -
  and  is  stated  here  expressly  -  that  the  Valian  day  had twelve
  hours  because  the  period  of  mingled light  was exactly  five times
  shorter than  the period  of full  light-flowering of  either Telperion
  or  Laurelin;  if  it  had  been  three  times  shorter  the  day would
  have  had  eight  hours,  and  so  on.  The  Valian  day  was therefore
  of  the  Trees'  nature.  We  now learn  that the  Valian year  of 1000
  days was  'also due  to,the Trees'  nature, since  after that  time the
  Trees would put out a new branch.                                         
    There  is  no  suggestion here  that the  further calculation  that a
  hundred  years  constituted  a  Valian  Age  (which  goes  back  to the
  earliest  Annals, IV.263)  was related  to the  inner structure  of the
  Trees; but  it is  said in  the section  Of the  Beginning of  Time and
  its   Reckoning  ($6)   that  the   Lore-masters  supposed   'that  the
  Valar  so  devised  the hours  of the  Trees that  one hundred  of such
  years  so  measured  should  be  in duration  as one  age of  the Valar
  (as  those  ages  were  in  the  days  of  their  labours   before  the
  foundation  of  Valinor)'  -  i.e.,  before  the  Trees. Since  the two
  passages   are   only   separated   by   a  few   pages  in   the  same
  manuscript  the  presumption  is  that  they  are   not  contradictory;
  and  taken  together  the  meaning  can  only  be  that the  periods of
  the  Trees,  which  were  of  their  nature,  were  nonetheless related
  to  a  mode  of  measurement  of  time  before  the  Trees   came  into
  existence.  That  in  turn  seems  to  demand  that  the   Valar  knew,
  and  had  'devised',  before  ever  Yavanna  and  Nienna  came  to  the
  Green Mound, the periodic nature of the Trees' light.                     
                                                                           
  The cosmological problem is here provided with new evidences. The     
  relevant statements in this first section of AAm are these:     
    $1 Ea is 'the World that is'; the Valar are 'the Powers of Ea'.     
   $11 After ages of labour 'in the great halls of Ea the Valar     
       descended into Arda in the beginning of its being'.     
   $13 Tulkas came to Arda 'out of distant regions of Ea'.     
   $17 Melkor gathered spirits 'out of the voids of Ea'; and he 'drew     
       near again unto Arda, and looked down upon it'.     
   $18 The Valar did not perceive the dark shadow 'cast from afar by     
       Melkor'.     
   $19 Melkor 'passed over the borders of Ea' > 'passed over the     
       Walls of the Night upon the borders of Arda' > 'passed over     
       the Walls of the Night' (note 19).     
   $23 The Outer Sea 'encircled the kingdom of Arda, and beyond     
       were the Walls of the Night'.     
 The Walls of the Night have not been named elsewhere: but it is hard     
 to see, especially in view of the sentence cited from $23, how they can
 not be equated with the Walls of the World. I have said (p. 29) that the
 departure of Melkor from Arda in the Ainulindale' - the new story that    i

   
                                                                            
   came  in  after  The  Lord of  the Rings  - raises  the question  of the
   passage  of  the  Walls  of  the  World   and  of   the  form   which  that
   conception  now took.  The idea  of such  a passage  in fact  appeared, and
   most puzzlingly, in the earlier period, at the end of Q,  where it  is said
   that some believe that Melko at  times returns  to the  world, and  that he
   'creeps  back  surmounting  the  Walls'  (IV.164,  253).  The   passage  in
   AAm  $19  (as  emended)  is  unequivocal:  Melkor  passed  over  the  Walls
   of  the  Night.  We  have  returned  to  the  earliest  imagination  of the
   Walls: cf. my remark in 1.227, 'the implication  seems clear  that the
   Walls were originally conceived like the walls  of terrestrial  cities, or
   gardens  -  walls  with  a  top:  a "ring-fence".'  Thus, we  may suppose,
   Melkor  could  'look  down  upon  Arda'  ($17);   thus  his   vast  shadow
   could  be  cast  even  before  he passed  over the  Walls ($18);  and thus
   Tulkas  ($13)  and  the  spirits  summoned  by  Melkor  ($19)  could enter
   the 'fenced region' (as Arda is defined, p. 7).                           
      But  the  phrase  'he  passed  over  the  Walls  of  the Night'  was an
   emendation of  what my  father first  wrote: 'he  passed over  the borders
   of  Ea'.  Can  this  mean  anything  other  than  that  on  entering  Arda
   Melkor  left  Ea?  In  this  connection  one  may  turn  back  to  the two
   Ambarkanta  diagrams  of  'Ilu'  (IV.242  -  5),   on  which   much  later
   (perhaps  about  this  time)  my  father  made  pencilled  corrections  to
   Ilurambar  'the  Walls  of  the  World', changing  this to  Earambar ('the
   Walls of  Ea'). (Of  course, if  the Walls  are no  longer conceived  as a
   spherical shell - whence  the expression  'globed amid  the Void'  as used
   in the early Ainulindale' versions -  but as  a surmountable  rampart, the
   Earambar  cannot  be  taken  as  the  same  conception  as  the Ilurambar,
   but  only as  a new  name for  the Walls,  now differently  conceived; and
   the  substitution of  the new  name on  the old  diagrams is  therefore to
   that extent  misleading.) It  is likewise  hard to  see what  Earambar can
   mean  but  'the Walls  that fence  out the  dark wastes  of "the  voids of
   Ea" ' (an expression used  in $17),  in contrast  to Ilurambar  'the Walls
   that fence in Ilu.'                                                       
      The difficulty with this, of course, is that Ea is elsewhere defined as
   the 'Universe of that which Is' (p. 7), 'Creation  the Universe'  (p. 39),
   and  Ea  therefore  necessarily  comprehends  Arda;  it  is  in  any  case
   abundantly  clear from  all the  texts of  the later  period that  Arda is
   within  Ea.  But  it  may  be  that  Arda can  nonetheless be  regarded as
   separate from Ea when Ea is regarded as 'Space'.                          
      Amid  all  the ambiguities  (most especially,  in the  use of  the word
   'World'), the testimony seems  to be  that in  these texts  the Ambarkanta
   world-image  survived  at  least  in  the  conception  of  the  Outer  Sea
   extending to the Walls of the  World, now  called the  Walls of  the Night
   - though the  Walls have  come to  be differently  conceived (see  also p.
   135, $168). Now in the  revision of  'The Silmarillion'  made in  1951 the
   phrase  in  QS $12  (V.209) 'the  Walls of  the World  fence out  the Void
   and the Eldest Dark - a  phrase in  perfect agreement  of course  with the

  
                                                                            
  Ambarkanta  -  was  retained  (p. 154).  This is  a central  difficulty in
  relation  to  the  Ainulindale', where  it is  made as  plain as  could be
  wished  that  Ea  came  into being  in the  Void, it  was globed  amid the
  Void ($$11,  20, and  see pp.  37 -  8); how  then can  the Walls  of Arda
  'fence out the Void and the Eldest Darkness'?                              
     A  possible  explanation,  of a  sort, may  be hinted  at in  the words
  cited  above  from  AAm  $17:  Melkor  gathered spirits  out of  the voids
  of Ea. It may be that, although AAm is not  far distant  in time  from the
  last version (D) of the Ainulindale',  my father's  conception did  not in
  fact  now  accord  entirely with  what he  had written  there; that  (as I
  suggested, p. 39) he  was now  thinking of  Arda as  being 'set  within an
  indefinite  vastness  in  which  all  "Creation" is  comprehended', rather
  than  of  a  bounded  Ea  itself  set  'amid the  Void'. Then,  beyond the
  Walls  of  the  Night,  the  bounds of  Arda, stretch  'the voids  of Ea'.
  But  this  suggestion  does  not, of  course, clear  up all  the problems,
  ambiguities, and  apparent contradictions  in the  cosmology of  the later
  period, which have been discussed earlier.                                 
                                                                            
     I have mentioned (p. 47) that there  exists a  typescript of  the early
  part  of  AAm that  is quite  distinct from  the amanuensis  typescript of
  the  whole  work. I  was unaware  of its  existence when  the text  of The
  Silmarillion  was  prepared for  publication. It  was taken  directly from
  and  closely  based  upon  the  AAm  manuscript,  and  was  certainly made
  by  my  father,  who  introduced  changes  from   the  manuscript   as  he
  typed. It has in  fact a  great many  such changes,  mostly minor  or very
  minor,  but also  some important  alterations and  additions; and  it does
  not  include  the  section  Of the  Beginning of  Time and  its Reckoning.
  None   of  these   changes  appear   in  the   emendations  made   to  the
  amanuensis  typescript  or  its  carbon  copy, except  the removal  of the
  section on the Reckoning of Time (p. 68).                                  
     I will refer to this text  as 'AAm*'. There seems  no way  to determine
  with certainty when it was made,  and I  can only  record my  feeling that
  it belongs with  the writing  of the  AAm manuscript  rather than  to some
  later time. At any rate my father soon abandoned  it (see  p. 80).  It may
  be that having set it aside he forgot about it, or lost  it; and  when the
  opportunity  arose  to  have  the  work  typed  by a  secretary who  was a
  trained  typist (as  appears to  be the  case) he  simply handed  over the
  AAm  manuscript  as  it  stood  (including  therefore  the section  on the
  Reckoning of Time, although in AAm* he had cut this out).                  
     I  give  now  the  noteworthy changes  in AAm*  (which extends  a short
  way beyond the point reached in this first section;  for the  remainder of
  the text see pp. 79 - 80).                                                 
                                                                            
  The preamble                                                               
     Here begin the 'Annals of Aman'. Rumil made them in the Elder           

 Days,  and  they  were  held  in  memory by  the Exiles.  Those parts
 which  we  learned  and  remembered  were  thus  set down  in Numenor
 before the Shadow fell upon it.                                      
                                                                     
 This is especially  interesting since  it shows  a different  mode of
 transmission from the 'Pengolod - AElfwine' tradition: the Annals are
 conceived  as  a  written  work  made in  Numenor, deriving  from the
 'Exiles', the Noldor in Middle-earth, who themselves derived  it from
 the work of Rumil. The idea that Numenor was an essential  element in
 the transmission of the legends of the Elder Days will  reappear (see
 especially pp. 370, 373-4, 401-2).                                  

  $1   For 'chieftains of the  Valar' AAm*  has 'lords  of the  Valar', and
       subsequently.  Lorien  was changed  in pencil  on the  typescript to
       Lorion (but not in the passage cited under $3 below).               
  $2   In  AAm  the  old  phrase  'Manwe  and  Melkor  were  most  puissant
       and were brethren' was preserved, but AAm* has here:                
         Melkor  and  Manwe  were  brethren  in  the  thought  of  Eru, and
       the eldest  of their  kind, and  their power  was equal  and greater
       than  that  of  all  others  who  dwelt  in Arda.  Manwe is  King of
       the Valar...                                                        
       It is said in the later Ainulindale'  ($$5, 9)  that Melkor  was the
       mightiest of the Ainur, and this in fact goes  back to  the pre-Lord
       of the Rings text B of the Ainulindale'  (see V.164  note 4  for the
       different statements made  on this  subject). Later  in AAm  (p. 97,
       $102)  Feanor  'shut  the  doors  of his  house in  the face  of the
       mightiest of all the dwellers in Ea'.                               
         This  text  has  'Orome  and  Tulkas  were  the  youngest  in  the
       thought of Eru' where AAm has 'younger'.                            
  $3   There  is  a  strange  mixture of  present and  past tenses  in this
       passage:  thus  'Vana the  fair is  the wife  of Orome',  'Vaire the
       Weaver  dwells  with  Mandos',   but  'No   spouse  had   Ulmo,  nor
       Melkor', 'No  lord had  Nienna', 'the  wife of  Lorien was  Este the
       Pale'. On this question see pp. 204-5.                              
         It  is  not  now  said  that  Vana  (marked  Vana  at   the  first
       occurrence  but  not subsequently)  was the  sister of  Yavanna (see
       p. 59).                                                             
         As  typed,  the  passage  beginning  'No  lord had  Nienna' (spelt
       thus, not Nienna, at all occurrences in AAm*) ran thus:             
         No  lord  had  Nienna,  queen  of  Shadow,  Manwe's   sister.  The
       wife  of  Tulkas  was  Nessa  the  Young;  and  the  wife  of Lorien
       was Este the Pale. These do  not sit  in the  councils of  the Valar
       but are the highest among the Maiar.                                
       In AAm it is said of Este alone that 'she goes  not to  the councils
       of the  Valar', and  her name  does not  appear in  the list  of the
       queens of the Valar: she is 'the chief of the Maiar'. In the present
       text, despite the  exclusion of  Nessa also  from the  councils, and

                                                  
                                                                    
 the  statement  that  she  and  Este  'are  the  highest  among  the
 Maiar', her name still  stands in  the list  of the  queens. Contem-
 porary  emendations  to  the  typescript  produced  this  remarkable
 change:                                                             
     No  lord  had  Nienna,  Manwe's  sister;  nor Nessa  the Ever-
     maid.  The  wife  of  Tulkas  was  Lea  the Young;  and the  wife of
     Lorien was Este the Pale...                                         
    The text then continues as before, so that the two who do not sit
    in  the  councils  of  the  Valar  and  are  'the highest  among the
    Maiar'  become  Lea and  Este. There  is no  trace of  this develop-
    ment  in  any  other  text,  but Lea  appears again  in AAm*  as the
    text was typed (see under $18 below).                               
 $4 This paragraph was substantially extended:                       
        With   these   great  powers   came  many   other  spirits   of  the
        same  kind,  begotten  in  the  thought  of  Eru  before  the making
        of  Ea,  but  having  less  might  and  authority.  These   are  the
        Maiar,  the  people  of  the  Valar; they  are beautiful,  but their
        number   is  not   known  and   few  have   names  among   Elves  or
        Men.                                                                
            There  are  also  those  whom  we  call  the Valarindi,  who are
        the  Children  of  the  Valar,  begotten of  their love  after their
        entry  into  Ea.  They  are  the  elder children  of the  World; and
        though their being  began within  Ea, yet  they are  of the  race of
        the  Ainur,  who  were  before  the  world,  and  they   have  power
        and rank below that of the Valar only.                              
  $12   At  the  end  of  this paragraph  AAm* adds:  'So passed  many years
        of the Valar in strife.'                                            
  $14   The  date V.Y.1900  of the  setting up  of the  Lamps is  omitted in
        AAm*.                                                               
  $15   AAm*  retains  the  words  of  AAm,  'and  there  was  great  growth
        of  trees  and  herbs,  and  beasts  and birds  came forth  ...' See
        the  commentary  on  this  passage,  p.  60:  the  reference  to the
        appearance  of  birds  and  flowers  at this  time was  removed from
        Ainulindale' D by  what looks  to be  a fairly  early change  in the
        text, and there is in this a suggestion that the two versions of the
        opening  of  the  Annals  of  Aman  belong  fairly  closely together
        (see p. 64).                                                        
  $17   This paragraph underwent several modifications:                     
            Now  Melkor  knew  all  that  was  done;  for  even then  he had
        secret  friends  among  the   Maiar,  whom   he  had   converted  to
        his  cause,  whether  in  the  first playing  of the  Ainulindale or
        afterwards  in  Ea.  Of  these  the  chief,  as   afterwards  became
        known,  was  Sauron,  a   great  craftsman   of  the   household  of
        Aule.  Thus  far  off  in the  dark places  of Ea,  to which  he had
        retreated,  Melkor  was  filled  with new  hatred, being  jealous of
        the  work  of   his  peers,   whom  he   desired  to   make  subject

                                                       
                                                                         
           to himself. Therefore he had gathered to himself spirits  out of
           the voids of  Ea who  served him,  until he  deemed that  he was
           strong; and  seeing now  his time  he drew  near to  Arda again;
           and he looked down upon it, and the beauty of  the Earth  in its
           Spring filled him with wonder, but  because it  was not  his, he
           resolved to destroy it.                                        
                                                                         
 $18     Here Tulkas'  wife Lea  the Young  appears again,  in the  text as
         typed  and  not  by  emendation  (see under  $3 above),  named now
         Lea-vinya ('Lea the Young'):                                    
              It is told that in that feast  of the  Spring of  Arda Tulkas
         espoused  Lea-vinya,  fairest  of  the  maidens  of  Yavanna,  and
         Vana  robed  her  in  flowers  that  came  then  first   to  their
         opening; and she danced before the Valar...                      
         On the reference to the first flowers see under $15 above.       
 $19     AAm* has 'the Walls of Night' for  'the Walls  of the  Night', and
         again in $23.                                                    
 $20          Now  Melkor  began  the  delving  and  building  of   a  vast
         fortress  deep  under the  Earth, [struck  out: beneath  the roots
         of] far from the light of  Illuin; and  he raised  great mountains
         above  his  halls.  That  stronghold was  after called  Utumno the
         Deep-hidden;  and  though  the   Valar  for   a  long   time  knew
         nothing of it...                                                 
         In  AAm  Utumno  was  delved  'beneath  dark  mountains';  the new
         text, in  which Melkor  raised mountains  above it  (as Thangorod-
         rim above Angband), arose in the act of typing.                  
 $21     Where AAm has 'And  he assailed  the lights  of Illuin  and Ormal'
         AAm* has:                                                        
           He  came  down  like  a  black  storm  from  the  North,  and he
         assailed the lights of Illuin and Ormal.                         
 $22     The  conclusion  of  this  paragraph  in  AAm,  'who  were  yet to
         come in a  time that  was hidden  from the  Valar', is  omitted in
         AAm*.                                                            
 $23     The  word  'gods'  was  removed  in AAm*  at both  occurrences: at
         the beginning of  the paragraph  'the gods  had no  abiding place'
         becomes 'they had', and near the  end 'for  the gods  dwelt there'
         becomes 'for the Servants of Iluvatar dwelt there'.              
           The  Land  of  Aman  was  'upon  the  borders  of   the  ancient
         world' (i.e. the world  before the  Cataclysm); 'upon  the borders
         of  the  world'  AAm.  The   passage  concerning   Taniquetil  was
         changed to read thus:                                            
           But  above  all  the  mountains  of the  Pelori was  that height
         which  was  named  Taniquetil  Oiolosse,  the  gleaming   peak  of
         Everwhite,  upon  whose  summit  Manwe  set  his   throne,  before
         the doors of the domed halls of Varda.                           
 $25     In AAm it is said  that 'the  Valar built  their city';  AAm* has:
         ... in the midst  of the  plain west  of the  Pelori Aule  and his

        people built for them a fair city. That city they named Valimar
        the Blessed.                                                    
                                                                       
       This  reappears  from  the  Lost  Tales;  cf.  1.77: 'Now  have I
       recounted  the  manner  of the  dwellings of  all the  great Gods
       which Aule of his craftsmanship raised in Valinor.' - This is the
       first occurrence of the form Valimar (again in  $$26, 28  of this
       text).                                                           
  $26  After the words 'But Nienna sat silent in thought, and  her tears
       fell upon the mould' there is a footnote in the new version:     
        For it is said that even in the Music  Nienna took  little part,
       but listened intent to all that she heard. Therefore she was rich
       in  memory,  and  farsighted,  perceiving  how the  themes should
       unfold in the Tale of Arda. But she had little mirth, and all her
       love  was  mingled  with  pity,  grieving  for  the harms  of the
       world and for the things that failed of fulfilment. So  great was
       her ruth, it is said, that she could not endure to the end of the
       Music.  Therefore  she  has  not the  hope of  Manwe. He  is more
       farseeing; but Pity is the heart of Nienna.                      
       On this passage see p. 388 and  note 2.  The statement  here that
       Nienna  'could  not endure  to the  end of  the Music',  and that
       'therefore she has not the hope of Manwe', is very  striking; but
       it is not  said in  what Manwe's  hope lies.  It may  possibly be
       relevant to recall the pengolod footnote  to Ainulindale'  D, $19
       (p. 31):                                                         
        And some have  said that  the Vision  ceased ere  the fulfilment
       of  the  Dominion  of  Men  and  the  fading  of  the  Firstborn;
       wherefore,  though  the  Music is  over all,  the Valar  have not
       seen as with sight the Later Ages or the ending of the World.
  $28  For 'hoarded in mighty vats'  AAm* has  'hoarded in  deep pools'.
                                                                       
                                  *                                     

   It  remains  to  consider  the  very,  few  emendations  made  to the
 amanuensis  typescript  of  AAm  in  this  opening  section,  and those
 (almost  entirely  different) made  to the  carbon copy.  These changes
 were hasty, and casual, in no sense a real revision  of the  work. They
 were made at some  later time  which I  am unable  to define;  but they
 have the  effect of  bringing the  opening of  AAm into  agreement with
 the latest form of the other  tradition, proceeding  from QS  chapter 1
 'Of the Valar'  and ultimately  issuing in  the short  independent work
 Valaquenta.                                                           
   On the top copy of the  typescript not  only was  the section  on the
 Reckoning of Time struck through (see  p. 64)  but also  the compressed
 account of the Valar at the beginning: a note on  the covering  page of
 the text directs that the Annals are to start at the First Year  of the
 Valar in Arda ($11 in this book). But pencilled  changes had  been made
 to $$1-4 before this:                                                  

  $1  'nine  chieftains'  >  'seven  chieftains';  Osse and  Melkor were
      struck from the list. On the removal of Osse see p. 91, $70.      
  $2  The  word  'also'  added  in  'The  queens of  the Valar  are also
      seven'; Este added, and Uinen  removed, so  that the  list becomes
      'Varda, Yavanna, Nienna, Este, Vaire, Vana, and Nessa'.           
  $3  'Varda  was  Manwe's  spouse  from  the  beginning'  >  'Varda was
      Manwe's spouse from the beginning of Arda'                        
         'and Uinen, lady of the seas, is the spouse of Osse' was struck
  out  (a  consequence  simply  of  Osse's  being no  longer numbered
  among the 'chieftains').                                           
    'Manwe's sister and Melkor's' (of Nienna) was struck out.        
    'but  she  goes  not  to  the councils  of the  Valar and  is not
  accounted  among  the  rulers  of  Arda,  but is  the chief  of the
  Maiar'  (of  Este)  was  struck  out (a  consequence of  Este's now
  being included in the 'queens').                                   
  $4 'And with them are numbered also the Valarindi ...' to the end
      of the paragraph was struck out (see below).                 
 $28 'mighty vats' > 'shining wells' (cf. the change made in AAm*,
      p. 68).                                                      
   Quite distinct changes were  made on  the carbon  copy in  this section
 on  the  Valar.  In  $3  'the wife  of Orome'  and 'Tulkas'  wife' were
 changed  to  the  spouse  of  Orome  and Tulkas  spouse,. No  lord hath
 Nienna'  was  changed  to  'No  companion  hath  Nienna';  and  in  the
 margin against these changes my father wrote:                         
   Note  that 'spouse'  meant only  an 'association'.  The Valar  had no
   bodies, but could assume  shapes. After  the coming  of the  Eldar they
   most often used shapes of  'human' form,  though taller  (not gigantic)
   and more magnificent.                                                 
 At the same time the passage concerning the Valarindi, the  Children of
 the Valar, at the end of $4 was struck out (as it was  also on  the top
 copy), since this note  is a  most definitive  statement that  any such
 conception was out of the question.                                   
   A  few  other  pencillings  were  made  at  subsequent points  in the
 carbon copy:                                                          
 $20 Against  Utumno is  pencilled: 'Utupnu  V TUI? cover  over, hide';
     with this cf. AAm*  $20 (p.  67): 'that  stronghold was  after called
     Utumno   the   Deep-hidden',   and   see  the   Etymologies  (V.394),
     stem  TUB,  where  the  original  form  of  the  name  is   given  as
     * Utubnu.                                                           
 $23 Where the word 'gods' was replaced by 'the Servants  of Iluvatar'
     in  AAm*  (p.  67)  my  father  corrected  it on  the carbon  copy of
     the typescript to  'the Deathless'.  At the  occurrence of  'gods' at
     the  beginning  of  the  paragraph  he  made  the  same   change  (to
     'they') as in AAm*.                                                 
 $25 After 'a green mound' is added Ezellohar;  and in  $26 Ezellohar
     replaces 'that Green Mound'.                                        

                          
                                                                                     
               Second section of the Annals of Aman.                              
                                                                                     
         Here begins a new Reckoning in the Light of the Trees.                
                                         1*                                           
                                                                                     
   $30  For one thousand  years of  the Trees  the Valar  dwelt in                    
 bliss  in  Valinor  beyond  the  Mountains   of  Aman,   and  all                    
 Middle-earth lay in a twilight under the stars. Thither the Valar                    
 seldom   came,  save   only  Yavanna   and  Orome;   and  Yavanna                    
 often would walk there in the shadows,  grieving because  all the                    
 growth and promise of  the Spring  of Arda  was checked.  And she                    
 set a sleep upon many fair things that had arisen in  the Spring,                    
 both tree and herb and beast and  bird, so  that they  should not                    
 age but should wait for a time of awakening  that yet  should he.                    
 But  Melkor  dwelt  in  Utumno,  and he  slept not,  but watched,                    
 and laboured; and the evil  things that  he had  perverted walked                    
 abroad,  and  the  dark  and  slumbering  woods  were  haunted by                    
 monsters  and  shapes  of  dread.  And in  Utumno he  wrought the                    
 race  of  demons  whom  the  Elves after  named the  Balrogs. But                    
 these  came  not yet  from the  gates of  Utumno, because  of the                    
 watchfulness of Orome.                                                               
   $31  Now Orome  dearly   loved  all   the  works   of  Yavanna,                    
 and he was ever ready to her  bidding. And  for this  reason, and                    
 because he desired at whiles to ride in forests greater and wider                    
 than  the  friths  of  Valinor,  he  would  often  come  also  to                    
 Middle-earth, and there go  a-hunting under  the stars.  Then his                    
 white horse, Nahar,  shone like  silver in  the shadows;  and the                    
 sleeping earth trembled  at the  beat of  his golden  hooves. And                    
 Orome  would  blow  his  mighty   horn,  whereat   the  mountains                    
 shook,  and  things  of  evil  fled away;  but Melkor  quailed in                    
 Utumno and dared not venture forth. For it is  said that  even as                    
 his malice grew, and the strength of his hatred, so the  heart of                    
 Melkor failed; and with all his knowledge and  his might  and his                    
 many servants he became craven,  giving battle  only to  those of                    
 little strength, tormenting the  weak, and  trusting ever  to his                    
 slaves and creatures to do his evil work.  Yet ever  his dominion                    
 spread  southward  over  Middle-earth, for  even as  Orome passed                    
 the  servants of  Melkor would  gather again;  and the  Earth was                    
 full of shadows and deceit.                                                          
                                                                                     
 (* Pencilled beside '1' is  'YT'  (Year  of the  Trees), and  also 'YV  3501' (i.e.
 Year  of  the  Valar).  -  The  'YT'  dates  were  very  frequently  changed  on the
 manuscript, and it is in places very difficult to interpret the changes; I give only
 the final forms (see pp. 47 - 8).)                                                   

                                 1000.                                
                                                                     
   $32  It  came  to  pass  that  the  Valar  held  council,  for they
 became   troubled   by   the   tidings   that   Yavanna   and   Orome
 brought  from  the  Outer  Lands.  And   Yavanna  spoke   before  the
 Valar,  and  foretold  that the  coming of  the Children  of Iluvatar
 was  drawing  nigh,  albeit  the hour  and the  place of  that coming
 was  known  only  to   Iluvatar.  And   Yavanna  besought   Manwe  to
 give  light  to Middle-earth,  for the  stay of  the evils  of Melkor
 and  the  comfort  of  the  Children;  and  Orome  and  Tulkas  spoke
 likewise, being eager for war with Utumno.                           
   $33   But   Mandos   spoke   and  said   that  though   the  Coming
 was  prepared it  should not  yet be  for many  Years; and  the Elder
 Children  should  come  in  the  darkness  and  look  first  upon the
 Stars. For so it was ordained.                                       
   $34   Then   Varda   went   forth   from   the  council,   and  she
 looked  out   from  the   height  of   Taniquetil,  and   beheld  the
 darkness  of  the  Earth  beneath  the  innumerable stars,  faint and
 far. Then she began a  great labour,  the greatest  of all  the works
 of the Valar since their coming unto Arda.                           
                                                                     
                               1000-1050.                             
                                                                     
   $35  Now  Varda  took   the  light   that  issued   from  Telperion
 and   was  stored   in  Valinor   and  she   made  stars   newer  and
 brighter.  And  many  other  of  the   ancient  stars   she  gathered
 together and set as signs  in the  heavens of  Arda. The  greatest of
 these  was  Menelmakar,  the  Swordsman  of  the  Sky.  This,  it  is
 said,  was  a  sign  of  Turin  Turambar,  who  should come  into the
 world, and a  foreshowing of  the Last  Battle that  shall be  at the
 end of Days.                                                         
                                                                     
                                 1050.                                
                                                                     
   $36  Last  of  all  Varda  made the  sign of  bright stars  that is
 called  the  Valakirka, the  Sickle of  the Gods,  and this  she hung
 about  the  North  as  a  threat  unto  Utumno  and  a  token  of the
 doom of Melkor.                                                      
   $37  In  that  hour,  it is  said, the  Quendi, the  Elder Children
 of  Iluvatar,  awoke:  these  Men  have  named  the  Elves,  and many
 other  names.  By  the  Waters  of  Awakening,  Kuivienen,  they rose
 'from the sleep of Iluvatar and their eyes beheld first of all things
 the stars of heaven. Therefore  they have  ever loved  the starlight,
 and have revered Varda Elentarie above all the Valar.                

                                                         
                                                                  
  $38  In the  changes of  the world  the shapes  of lands  and of
 seas  have been  broken and  remade; rivers  have not  kept their
 courses,  neither  have  mountains  remained  steadfast;  and  to
 Kuivienen there is no returning. But it is said among  the Quendi
 that it lay far off in Middle-earth, eastward of Endon  (which is
 the  midmost  point)  and  northward;  and  it was  a bay  in the
 Inland  Sea of  Helkar. And  that sea  stood where  aforetime the
 roots of the  mountain of  Illuin had  been ere  Melkor overthrew
 it. Many waters  flowed down  thither from  heights in  the East,
 and the first sound that was heard by the ears  of the  Elves was
 the sound of water flowing, and the sound  of water  falling over
 stone.                                                            
  $39  Long  the Quendi  dwelt in  their first  home by  the water
 under  stars  and  they  walked  the  Earth  in wonder;  and they
 began to make speech and to give  names to  all things  that they
 perceived.  And  they  named  themselves  the  Quendi, signifying
 those that speak with voices; for as  yet they  had met  no other
 living things that spoke or sang.                                 
  $40 At this time also, it is said, Melian, fairest of the Maiar,
 desiring to look  upon the  stars, went  up upon  Taniquetil; and
 suddenly she desired to  see Middle-earth,  and she  left Valinor
 and walked in the twilight.                                       
                                                                  
                               1085.                               
                                                                  
  $41  And  when  the  Elves  had  dwelt  in  the  world  five and
 thirty Years of the Valar (which is like  unto three  hundred and
 thirty-five of our years) it chanced that Orome rode to  Endon in
 his hunting,  and he  turned north  by the  shores of  Helkar and
 passed  under  the  shadows  of  the  Orokarni, the  Mountains of
 the  East. And  on a  sudden Nahar  set up  a great  neighing and
 then  stood  still.  And Orome  wondered and  sat silent,  and it
 seemed to him that in the quiet of  the land  under the  stars he
 heard afar off many voices singing.                               
  $42  Thus it was that the  Valar found  at last,  as it  were by
 chance,  those  whom  they   had  so   long  awaited.   And  when
 Orome  looked  upon  them he  was filled  with wonder,  as though
 they  were  things unforeseen  and unimagined;  and he  loved the
 Quendi, and named them Eldar, the people of the stars.            
                                                                  
  The original manuscript page was interpolated at this point, a
 passage being written in the-margin as follows:                   
  Yet by after-knowledge the masters of lore say sadly that Orome

                                                         
                                                                        
     was not, mayhap, the first of the Great Ones to look upon  the Elves.
     for Melkor  was on  the watch,  and his  spies were  many. And  it is
     thought that lurking near  his servants  had led  astray some  of the
     Quendi  that  ventured  afield,  and  they took  them as  captives to
     Utumno, and there enslaved them. Of these slaves it is held  came the
     Orkor that were afterward chief foes of the Eldar. And  Melkor's lies
     were  soon  abroad,  so that  whispers were  heard among  the Quendi,
     warning  them  that  if  any of  their kindred  passed away  into the
     shadows  and  were  seen  no  more,  they  must  beware  of   a  fell
     huntsman on a great horse, for  he it  was that  carried them  off to
     devour  them. Hence  it was  that at  the approach  of Orome  many of
     the Quendi fled and hid themselves.                                 
                                                                        
  The  original  text  then  continues,  with  a  new date  1086, 'Swiftly
  Orome rode back to Valinor and brought  tidings to  the Valar'  (see $46
  below).  But  the  interpolated  passage  just  given  was  subsequently
  replaced  on  a new  page by  the following  long and  important passage
  $$43 - 5 (found in the typescript as typed):                           
                                                                        
       $43  Yet  many   of  the   Quendi  were   adread  at   his  coming.
  This   was   the   doing   of   Melkor.   For  by   after-knowledge  the
  masters  of  lore  say  that  Melkor,  ever  watchful,  was  first aware
  of   the  awakening   of  the   Quendi,  and   sent  shadows   and  evil
  spirits  to  watch  and  waylay  them. So  it came  to pass,  some years
  ere  the  coming  of  Orome,  that  if  any  of  the  Elves  strayed far
  abroad,   alone   or  few   together,  they   would  often   vanish  and
  never  return;  and  the  Quendi  said  that   the  Hunter   had  caught
  them,  and  they  were  afraid.  Even  so,  in  the  most  ancient songs
  of  our  people,  of  which  some  echoes  are  remembered still  in the
  West,  we  hear  of  the   shadow-shapes  that   walked  in   the  hills
  about  Kuivienen,  or  would  pass  suddenly  over  the  stars;  and  of
  the  dark  Rider   upon  his   wild  horse   that  pursued   those  that
  wandered   to   take   them   and  devour   them.  Now   Melkor  greatly
  hated  and  feared  the  riding  of  Orome,  and  either verily  he sent
  his  dark  servants  as  riders, or  he set  lying whispers  abroad, for
  the  purpose  that  the  Quendi  should  shun   Orome,  if   ever  haply
  they met.                                                              
       $44   Thus   it   was   that   when   Nahar   neighed   and   Orome
  indeed   came   among  them,   some  of   the  Quendi   hid  themselves,
  and  some  fled  and  were  lost.  But  those  that  had the  courage to
  stay  perceived  swiftly  that  the  Great  Rider  was  noble  and  fair
  and  no  shape  out  of  Darkness;  for  the  Light of  Aman was  in his
  face, and all the noblest of the Quendi were drawn towards it.         
       545  But  of  those  hapless  who  were  ensnared by  Melkor little

 
                                                                   
 is  known  of a  certainty. For  who of  the living  hath descended
 into  the  pits of  Utumno, or  hath explored  the darkness  of the
 counsels of Melkor? Yet this is held true by  the wise  of Eressea:
 that all those of the Quendi that  came into  the hands  of Melkor,
 ere  Utumno  was  broken,  were put  there in  prison, and  by slow
 arts  of  cruelty  and  wickedness  were  corrupted  and  enslaved.
 Thus did Melkor breed the  hideous race  of the  Orkor in  envy and
 mockery of the Eldar, of  whom they  were afterwards  the bitterest
 foes. For the Orkor  had life  and multiplied  after the  manner of
 the Children of Iluvatar; and naught that had life of its  own, nor
 the   semblance  thereof,   could  ever   Melkor  make   since  his
 rebellion in the Ainulindale before the Beginning: so say the wise.
 And  deep  in  their  dark  hearts  the  Orkor  loathed  the Master
 whom they  served in  fear, the  maker only  of their  misery. This
 maybe was the vilest deed of Melkor  and the  most hateful  to Eru.
                                                                   
                                1086.                               
                                                                   
   $46  Orome   tarried  a   while  among   the  Quendi,   and  then
 swiftly he  rode back  to Valinor  and brought  the tidings  to the
 Valar.  And  he  spoke  of  the  shadows  that  troubled Kuivienen.
 Then the Valar sat in council and  debated long  what it  were best
 to do for the guarding of the  Quendi; but  Orome returned  at once
 to Middle-earth and abode with the Elves.                          
                                                                   
                                1090.                               
                                                                   
   $47  Manwe  sat  long   in  thought   upon  Taniquetil,   and  he
 resolved  at  the  last  to  make  war  upon  Melkor,  though  Arda
 should receive yet more hurts in that strife.  For the  first time,
 therefore, the Valar assailed Melkor,  not he  the Valar,  and they
 came  forth  to  war  in  all  their might,  and they  defeated him
 utterly. This they did on behalf of the Elves,  and Melkor  knew it
 well, and forgot it not.                                           
                                                                   
                               1090-2                               
                                                                   
   $48  Melkor  met  the  onset of  the Valar  in the  North-west of
 Middle-earth, and all that region was much  broken. But  this first
 victory  of  the  hosts of  the West  was swift  and easy,  and the
 servants  of  Melkor  fled before  them to  Utumno. Then  the Valar
 marched over  Middle-earth, and  they set  a guard  over Kuivienen;
 and  thereafter  the Quendi  knew naught  of the  Great War  of the
 Gods,  save  that  the Earth  shook and  groaned beneath  them, and
 the waters were moved; and  in the  North there  were lights  as of

  
                                                                              
  mighty fires. But after two years the Valar passed into the far              
  North and began the long siege of Utumno.                                    
                                                                              
                                  1092-1100.                                   
                                                                              
      $49  That  siege  was  long  and  grievous,  and  many   battles  were
  fought  before  its  gates  of  which  naught  but  the  rumour  is  known
  to  the  Quendi.  Middle-earth  was  sorely  shaken  in  that   time,  and
  the  Great  Sea  that  sundered  it   from  Aman   grew  wide   and  deep.
  And  the  lands  of  the  far  North  were  all  made  desolate  in  those
  days,  and  so   have  ever   remained;  for   there  Utumno   was  delved
  exceeding  deep,  and  its  pits  and  caverns  reached  out  far  beneath
  the  earth,  and  they  were  filled with  fires and  with great  hosts of
  the servants of Melkor.                                                      
                                                                              
                                     1099.                                     
                                                                              
      $50  It  came  to  pass  that  at  last  the  gates  of   Utumno  were
  broken  and  its   halls  unroofed,   and  Melkor   took  refuge   in  the
  uttermost  pit.  Thence,  seeing  that all  was lost  (for that  time), he
  sent  forth  on  a  sudden a  host of  Balrogs, the  last of  his servants
  that  remained,  and  they  assailed   the  standard   of  Manwe,   as  it
  were  a  tide  of  flame.  But  they  were  withered  in  the wind  of his
  wrath   and  slain   with  the   lightning  of   his  sword;   and  Melkor
  stood  at  last  alone.  Then,  since  he  was   but  one   against  many,
  Tulkas  stood  forth  as  champion   of  the   Valar  and   wrestled  with
  him  and  cast  him  upon  his  face,  and  bound   him  with   the  chain
  Angainor.  Thus  ended  the  first  war  of  the  West  upon   the  North.
                                                                              
                   Commentary on the second section of the                     
                                Annals of Aman.                                
                                                                              
  (There are no textual notes to this section of the  text.) In  the portion
  given  above  the  Annals  of  Aman  correspond  to  the opening  of Chap-
  ter 3 Of the Coming of the Elves in the other or  'Silmarillion' tradition
  (QS  $$18  -  21,  V.211  - 13).  Contemporary (more  or less)  with the
  writing  of  the  Annals  of  Aman was  the major  revision of  the Quenta
  Silmarillion,  but  here comparison  must obviously  be restricted  to the
  pre-Lord  of  the  Rings  text,  together  with  AV  2, annals  V.Y.1000 -
  1990 (V.111 - 12).                                                           
                                                                              
  $30  In  AAm there  is now  recounted the  laying by  Yavanna of  a sleep
       on  living  things  that  had  awoken  in  the Spring  of Arda,  of which
       there is no trace in QS (or in the later rewritings).             
       The  making  of   the  Balrogs   is  then   mentioned;  and   while  in
       AAm  ($17)  the  account  of  Melkor's  'host',   spirits  'out   of  the

       voids of Ea' and 'secret friends  and spies  among the  Maiar', is
       fuller than in the other tradition at any  stage, the  Balrogs are
       still  firmly  stated  to  be  demons  of  his  own   making,  and
       moreover  to  have  been  made  in  Utumno  at  this time.  On the
       conception of Balrogs in AAm see further  under $$42  - 5,  50 in
       this commentary, and especially p. 79, $30.                       
  $31  That  Orome's  horse was  white and  shod with  gold is  stated in
       QS  ($24) and  Q ($2),  but this  is the  first appearance  of the
       horse's  name  Nahar.  Orome  is  here  represented as  a guardian
       presence  in  Middle-earth,  to  such  an  extent  even  that  the
       Balrogs did not issue  from Utumno  on account  of him  ($30); cf.
       AV 2 (V.111) 'Morgoth withdrew before his horn'.                  
                                                                        
  $$34 - 6 On the two star-makings see p. 61, $24. There is here the     
                                                                        
       remarkable  statement  that  Menelmakar  (Orion)  was  'a  sign of
       Turin  Turambar,   who  should   come  into   the  world,   and  a
       foreshowing  of  the  Last  Battle  that  shall be  at the  end of
       Days.' This is a reference to  the Second  Prophecy of  Mandos (in
       the Quenta, IV.165):                                              
         Then shall the last battle be gathered on the fields of Valinor.
       In  that  day Tulkas  shall strive  with Melko,  and on  his right
       shall  stand  Fionwe  and  on  his  left  Turin  Turambar,  son of
       Hurin,  Conqueror  of  Fate,  coming  from  the  halls  of Mandos;
       and it shall be the  black sword  of Turin  that deals  unto Melko
       his death and final end; and so  shall the  children of  Hurin and
       all Men be avenged.                                               
       The  Quenya  name  Menelmacar  is  mentioned  in  Appendix  E  (I)
       to The Lord of the Rings; in The  Fellowship of  the Ring  (p. 91)
       appears  the  Sindarin  form:  the  Swordsman  of the  Sky, Menel-
       vagor with his shining belt'.                                     
  $37  That the Elves awoke at  the first  shining of  the Sickle  of the
       Gods is told in AV 2 (V.111); 'at the opening of the  first stars'
       QS 520.                                                           
  $38  The reference to the site of Kuivienen is interesting. Of  this no
       more is said in the other tradition than that it lay 'in  the East
       of  the  Middle-earth'  (QS  $20,  preserved throughout  the later
       texts). In AAm  Kuivienen lay  N.E. of  Endon, the  midmost point.
       In  the  list  of  names  accompanying  the   Ambarkanta  (IV.241)
       appears   'ambar-endya  or   Middle  Earth   of  which   Endor  is
       the midmost point', and Endor is  written over  the centre  of the
       middle-land  in  the Ambarkanta  diagrams (IV.243,  245) -  on the
       map (IV.248 - 9) it is  marked as  a point:  'Endor Earth-middle',
       and  here  it  was  corrected to  Endon, the  form in  the present
       passage  of  AAm,  though later  changed back  again to  Endor (so
       also  on  the  typescript  of  AAm  my  father corrected  Endon to
       Endor here and in $41, p. 80). See IV.254 - 5.                    

          In  AAm Kuivienen  was 'a  bay in  the Inland  Sea of  Helkar'; in
        QS it is 'the starlit mere' (so also  in Q),  which was  retained in
        the  later texts.  On the  Ambarkanta map  it is  shown to  the N.E.
        of Endor (Endon), and is marked at the  eastern side  of the  Sea of
        Helkar; in the text it is 'beside the waters of Helkar' (IV.239). It
        is  not  clear  whether these  various statements  show one  and the
        same conception. Here in AAm is the  first reference  to the  Sea of
        Helkar  (formed  after  the  fall  of the  northern Lamp)  since the
        Ambarkanta  -  in  which  text  the Lamp  itself was  called Helkar;
        see IV.256.                                                         
  $39   Cf.  QS  $20:  'For  a  while  [Orome] abode  with them,  and taught
        them  the  language  of  the  Gods,  from  whence   afterwards  they
        made  the  fair  Elvish  speech',  and  the  Lhammas   (V.168):  'of
        [Orome]  they  learned  after  their  capacity  the  speech  of  the
        Valar; and  all the  tongues that  have been  derived thence  may be
        called  Oromian  or  Quendian'.  It  is  now  said  in AAm  that the
        Quendi  had  achieved  language, and  that they  gave names  'to all
        things  that  they  perceived',  before  ever  Orome came  upon them
        (which  was  335  Years  of  the  Sun  since  their  awakening). Cf.
        Gilfanon's  Tale  in  The  Book  of  Lost  Tales  (I.232):  'Now the
        Eldar or Qendi had the gift of speech direct from Iluvatar'.        
  $40   This  paragraph  was  interpolated into  the manuscript;  it appears
        in the typescript  as typed.  The placing  of Melian's  departure at
        this time derives  from the  Annals of  Valinor (IV.264,  V.111); in
        QS ($31) it is said  that she  'often strayed  from Valinor  on long
        journey  into  the  Hither  Lands'.  The  meaning  of  the  words of
        AAm,  that  Melian,  'desiring  to  look  upon  the  stars,  went up
        upon  Taniquetil', is  presumably that  she climbed  on Taniquetil's
        eastern slopes, where the light of the Trees was hidden.            
  $41   As  noted  in  IV.256,  the  statement  that  Orome turned  north by
        the  shores  of  Helkar  and  passed  under   the  shadows   of  the
        Orokarni,  the  Mountains  of  the East'  agrees perfectly  with the
        Ambarkanta  map  (IV.249;  on  the  map   the  Orokarni   are  named
        Red Mountains).                                                     
          'He  heard  afar  off  many  voices  singing':  cf.  QS  $20: 'But
        Orome  came  upon  them  ...  while  they  dwelt  yet  silent beside
        the starlit mere, Kuivienen'. See under $39 above.                  
  $42   QS  ($20)  has   here  the   extraordinary  statement   that  'Orome
        looking  upon  the  Elves  was  filled  with  love  and  wonder; for
        their  coming was  not in  the Music  of the  Ainur, and  was hidden
        in  the  secret  thought  of  Iluvatar'; see  my discussion  of this
        passage, V.216 - 17.                                                
          On  the  history  of  the  meaning  of  the  name  Eldar  see  the
        references  to  this given  under the  entry Eldar  in the  Index to
        Vol.V.                                                              

                 
                                                                         
 ($42 - 5 The origin of the Orcs. The first appearance of the idea that
                                                                         
       their origin was connected with the Elves is in  QS $18,  and later
       in  QS  ($62)  it  is said  that when  Morgoth returned  to Middle-
       earth      after     the      destruction     of      the     Trees
       he  brought into  being the  race of  the Orcs,  and they  grew and
       multiplied  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth.  These   Orcs  Morgoth
       made  in  envy  and  mockery  of  the  Elves,  and  they  were made
       of stone, but their hearts of hatred.                              
       (For  my  father's  changing  views  concerning  the  time  of  the
       origin  of  the  Orcs  in  the  chronology  of  the Elder  Days see
       IV.314,  V.238.)  In  the  interpolation  into  the  manuscript  of
       AAm  and  its  subsequent  rewriting  and  extension  (pp. 72  - 4)
       there  appears,  together  with  the  story  of  the Rider  who was
       rumoured to carry off the Quendi if they  strayed, the  theory that
       Melkor  bred  the  Orcs (here  called Orkor)  'in envy  and mockery
       of  the Eldar'  from Quendi  enslaved in  the east  of Middle-earth
       before  ever  Orome  came  upon  them.  It  is explicit  ($45) that
       Melkor  could  make  nothing  that had  life of  its own  since his
       rebellion; but this is in sharp contradiction to  $30, where  it is
       said  that  'in  Utumno  he  wrought  the race  of demons  whom the
       Elves after named the Balrogs'. I do not think that  the interpola-
       tion  in  which  the former  of these  statements appears  was made
       after any very  long interval:  my father's  views on  this subject
       seem  to have  been changing  swiftly, and  a different  account of
       the origin  of the  Balrogs is  found in  the soon  abandoned type-
       script which I have  called AAm*  (see p.  79, $30).  The retention
       of the statement in $30, despite its contradiction to that  in $45,
       was  no  doubt  due  to  oversight,  and  both  appear in  the main
       typescript of  AAm. -  See further  on the  question of  the origin
       of the Orcs p. 123, $127, and pp. 408 ff.                          
 $47   The  words  'For  the  first  time,  therefore, the  Valar assailed
       Melkor, not he the Valar' show  that the  story in  the Ainulindale
       that the Valar came against him out  of Valinor  after the  fall of
       the Lamps had been abandoned (p. 61, $22).                         
 $49   On the changes in the Earth at  the time  of the  Great War  of the
       Gods  as  described  in the  Ambarkanta see  IV.239. While  the two
       texts  are  not necessarily  contradictory, it  is curious  that it
       should  be  said  in  AAm  that at  this time  'the Great  Sea that
       sundered  [Middle-earth]  from  Aman  grew  wide  and   deep';  for
       in  the  Ambarkanta  (ibid.,  and  see  the  map, IV.249)  the much
       greater width  of the  Western Sea  than that  of the  Eastern came
       about at the time of the foundation of Valinor:                    
        For  their  further  protection  the  Valar  thrust  away  Middle-
       earth  at  the  centre  and  crowded  it eastward,  so that  it was
       bended,  and  the  great  sea  of  the  West  is  very wide  in the
       middle, the widest of all  waters of  the Farth.  The shape  of the

        Earth in the East was much like that  in the  West, save  for the
        narrowing  of  the  Eastern Sea,  and the  thrusting of  the land
        thither.                                                          
                                                                         
  $50   It is notable that the Balrogs were still at this time,  when The
        Lord  of  the  Rings  had  been  completed,  conceived   to  have
        existed  in  very  large numbers  (Melkor sent  forth 'a  host of
        Balrogs'); see p. 80, $50.                                        
                                     *                                   
  The typescript  text  (AAm*)  which  my  father  began but  soon aban-
  doned continues for a little way beyond the point reached in  the first
  section (p. 68). Significant differences from AAm are as follows:       
                                                                         
  $30   But  Melkor  dwelt  in  Utumno,  and  he   did  not   sleep,  but
        watched  and   laboured;  and   whatsoever  good   Yavanna  work-
        ed in the lands he undid if he could, and the evil things that he
        had  perverted  walked  far  abroad,  and  the dark  and slumber-
        ing  woods  were  haunted  by  monsters  and  shapes   of  dread.
        And in Utumno he  multiplied the  race of  the evil  spirits that
        followed  him,  the  Umaiar,  of  whom   the  chief   were  those
        demons  whom  the  Elves  afterwards  named  the  Balrogath.  But
        they did  not yet  come forth  from the  gates of  Utumno because
        of their fear of Orome.                                           
        The latter part of this passage is of much interest as  showing a
        marked  development  from  the  idea   that  Melkor   'made'  the
        Balrogs at this time (see p. 78). They  now become  'evil spirits
        (Umaiar) that followed him' - but he  could 'multiply'  them. The
        term  Umaiar,  not  met before,  stands to  Maiar as  Uvanimor to
        Vanimor (see IV.293, footnote).
  $31   ...  and  there  would  go  a-hunting  under  the  stars.  He had
        great love of horses and of hounds,  but all  beasts were  in his
        thought, and he hunted only  the monsters  and fell  creatures of
        Melkor.  If  he  descried  them  afar  or  his  great  hounds got
        wind of them, then his white horse, Nahar,  shone like  silver as
        it ran through the shadows,  and the  sleeping earth  trembled at
        the  beat  of  his  golden hooves.  And at  the mort  Orome would
        blow   his   great   horn,    until   the    mountains   shook...
        mort: the horn-call blown at the kill.                            
                                                                         
        ... and trusting ever to  his slaves  to do  his evil  work. [his
        slaves and creatures, AAm]                                        
  $32     It   came   to   pass   that  Manwe   summoned  the   Valar  to
        council,  for  they  were  troubled by  the tidings  that Yavanna
        and  Orome  brought  from  the  Outer   Lands,  saying   that  if
        Melkor  were  left  longer  to  work  his  will  unhindered,  all
        Middle-earth  would  fall  into  ruin  irretrievable;  and  Manwe
        knew  moreover  that  the  coming  of  the  Children  of Iluvatar

      was now drawing near, although the very  hour and  place of           
      their  coming  was  known  only  to  Iluvatar  himself. And           
      Manwe spoke of this to the Valar; and Yavanna  besought him           
      to give light to Middle-earth, for the stay of the evils of           
      Melkor and the comfort of the Children; and                           
 Here  the  typescript  AAm*  ends,  at  the  foot  of  a page.  Once again,
 what  began  as  a  copy  was  changing  with  gathering  speed into  a new
 version. But I see no reason to think that any more of it ever existed.
                                                                           
                                      *                                     
                                                                           
  1                                                                         

   It remains to record a very few late scribbled changes and notes
 made on one or other copy of the typescript of the whole text.
 $$38, 41 Endon > Endor (see p. 76, $38).
 $42 'and named them Eldar, the people of the stars' > 'and called
     them the people of the stars'. In the margin my father wrote (i.e.
     with reference to the original text): 'but he could not - [?as this]
     was later Quenya.'
 $43 Against the middle portion of this paragraph is a note in the
     margin: 'Alter this. Orcs are not Elvish.' See pp. 408 ff.
 $50 'a host of Balrogs, the last of his servants that remained' ) 'his
     Balrogs, the last of his servants that remained faithful to him'. In
     the margin my father wrote: 'There should not he supposed
     more than say 3 or at most 7 ever existed.' See p. ?9, $50.

                 Third section of the Annals of Aman.               
                                                                  
                                1100.                               
                       The Chaining of Melkor.                      
                                                                  
  $51  Then  the   Valar  returned   to  the   Land  of   Aman,  and
 Melkor  was  led  captive,  bound  hand  and  foot  and  blindfold;
 and he  was brought  to the  Ring of  Doom. There  he lay  upon his
 face  before  the  feet  of  Manwe,  and  he  sued  for  pardon and
 freedom,  recalling  his  kinship  with Manwe.  But his  prayer was
 denied, and it is said that in that hour the Valar would  fain have
 put him to death. But death none  can deal  to any  of the  race of
 the Valar, neither can  any, save  Eru only,  remove them  from Ea,
 the  World  that  is,  be  they  willing  or  unwilling.  Therefore
 Manwe cast  Melkor into  prison, and  he was  shut in  the fastness
 of Mandos, whence none can escape.                                
  $52  And  the  Valar  doomed  Melkor  there  to  abide  for  three
 ages of Valinor, ere he should come forth again to be tried  by his
 peers,  and  sue  once  more  for  terms  of  pardon. And  this was
 done,  and  peace returned  to the  kingdom of  Arda; and  this was

 the  Noontide  of  the Blessed  Realm. Yet  many evil  things yet
 lingered in Middle-earth  that had  fled away  from the  wrath of
 the Lords of the West, or lay hidden in the  deeps of  the earth.
 For  the  vaults  of Utumno  were many,  and hidden  with deceit,
 and not all were discovered by the Valar.                        
                                                                 
                               1101.                              
                                                                 
   $53  Now  the  Valar  sat  again  in  council and  debated what
 they should do for the comfort  and guidance  of the  Children of
 Iluvatar. And at length, because of the great love that the Valar
 had for the Quendi,  they sent  a summons  to them,  bidding them
 to remove and dwell  in bliss  in Aman  and in  the Light  of the
 Trees. And Orome bore the message of the Valar to Kuivienen.     
                                                                 
                               1102.                              
                                                                 
   $54  The   Quendi  were   dismayed  by   the  summons   of  the
 Valar,  and  they  were  unwilling  to depart  from Middle-earth.
 Therefore  Orome  was  sent  again  to  them,  and he  chose from
 among  them  ambassadors  who  should  go  to  Valinor  and speak
 for their people. And three only of the chieftains of  the Quendi
 were willing to adventure  the journey:  Ingwe, Finwe,  and Elwe,
 who afterward were kings.                                        
   $55  The three  Elf-lords were  brought, therefore,  to Valmar,
 and there spoke with Manwe and  the Valar;  and they  were filled
 with awe, but the  beauty and  splendour of  the land  of Valinor
 overcame their fear, and they desired the Light of the Trees.
                                                                 
                               1104.                              
                                                                 
   $56  And  after  they  had  dwelt  in  Valinor  a  while, Orome
 brought  them  back  to  Kuivienen, and  they spoke  before their
 people  and  counselled  them to  heed the  summons of  the Valar
 and remove into the West.                                        
                                                                 
                               1105.                              
                                                                 
   $57 Then befell the first sundering of  the Elvenfolk.  For the
 kindred of  Ingwe, and  the most  part of  the kindreds  of Finwe
 and  Olwe,  were swayed  by the  words of  their lords,  and were
 willing  to  depart  and  follow  Orome.  And  these  were  known
 ever after as the Eldar, by the name that Orome  gave to  them in
 their  own  tongue.  But  the  kindreds of  Morwe and  Nurwe were
 unwilling and refused the summons,  preferring the  starlight and
 the wide spaces  of the  Earth to  the rumour  of the  Trees. Now

 these  dwelt  furthest  from  the  waters  of  Kuivienen,  and wan-
 dered  in  the  hills, and  they had  not seen  Orome at  his first
 coming,  and  of  the  Valar  they  knew  no  more than  shapes and
 rumours  of  wrath  and  power   as  they   marched  to   war.  And
 mayhap  the  lies  of  Melkor  concerning  Orome  and  Nahar  (that
 above were recalled) lived still  among them,  so that  they feared
 him  as  a  demon  that would  devour them.(1) These are  the Avari,
 the  Unwilling,  and  they  were  sundered  in  that time  from the
 Eldar, and met never again until many ages were past.             
   $58  The  Eldar  now   prepared  for   their  Great   March,  and
 they went in three  hosts. First  came the  Vanyar, the  most eager
 for  the  road,  the  people  of  Ingwe.  Next  came the  Noldor, a
 greater  host  (though  some  remained   behind),  the   people  of
 Finwe. Last came the  Teleri, and  they were  the least  eager. Yet
 their host that began the March was greatest of  all, and  they had
 therefore  two  lords:  Elwe  Singollo, and  Olwe his  brother. And
 when  all  was  made  ready  Orome  rode  before  them  upon Nahar,
 white  in  the  starlight. And  they began  their long  journey and
 passed by the Sea of Helkar ere they bent somewhat westward.(2)   
 And it is said that before them  great clouds  hung still  black in
 the North above  the ruins  of war,  and the  stars in  that region
 were  hidden.  Then  not  a  few  grew  afraid  and   repented  and
 turned back and are forgotten.                                    
                                                                  
                                1115.                              
                                                                  
   $59  Long  and  slow  was  the  March  of  the  Eldar   into  the
 West,  for  the  leagues  of   Middle-earth  were   uncounted,  and
 weary and pathless. Nor did the  Eldar desire  to hasten,  for they
 were filled with wonder at  all that  they saw,  and by  many lands
 and  rivers  they  would  fain  abide;  and  though  all  were  yet
 willing  to wander,  not a  few rather  feared their  journey's end
 than  hoped  for  it.  Therefore,  whenever  Orome departed,  as at
 times  he  would,  having other  matters to  heed, they  halted and
 went forward no more until he returned to guide them.             
   $60  And  it  came  to pass  that after  ten Years  of journeying
 in this manner (which is to say  in such  a time  as we  now should
 reckon  well  nigh  a  century  of  our  years)  the  Eldar  passed
 through a  forest, and  came to  a great  river, wider  and broader
 than  any  that they  yet had  seen, and  beyond it  were mountains
 whose sharp horns seemed to pierce the realm of the stars.(3)     
   $61 This river, it is said, was  even that  river that  was after
 called Anduin the Great,  and was  ever the  frontier of  the West-

                                             
                                                                     
  lands  of  Middle-earth.  But  the  mountains  were  the Hithaeglir,
  the  Towers  of  Mist  upon the  borders of  Eriador; yet  they were
  taller and  more terrible  in those  days, and  they were  reared by
  Melkor  to  hinder  the  riding  of Orome.(4) Now  the  Teleri  abode
  long  on  the  east-bank of-the  River and  wished to  remain there,
  but  the Vanyar  and the  Noldor passed  the River  with the  aid of
  Orome,  and  he  led  them  to  the  passes of the mountains.(5) And
  when   Orome   was  gone   forward  the   Teleri  looked   upon  the
  shadowy heights and were afraid.                                    
          $62  Then  one arose  in the  host of  Olwe, which  was ever
  hindmost  on  the  march,  and  his  name  was Nano  (or Dan  in the
  tongue  of  his  own  people).  And he  forsook the  westward march,
  and  led  away  a  numerous  folk,  and  they  went  south  down the
  River,  and  passed out  of the  knowledge of  the Eldar  until long
  years were over. These were the Nandor.                             
                                                                     
                                  1125.                               
                                                                     
          $63  And when  again ten  years had  passed, the  Vanyar and
  Noldor  came  at  length  over  the  mountains  that  stood  between
  Eriador  and  the  westernmost  land   of  Middle-earth,   that  the
  Elves   after   named   Beleriand.   And   the   foremost  companies
  passed  over  the  Vale  of  Sirion and  came to  the shores  of the
  Great  Sea.  Then  great  fear  came  upon  them, and  many repented
  sorely   of   their  journey   and  withdrew   into  the   woods  of
  Beleriand.  And  Orome  returned  to  Valinor  to  seek  the counsel
  of Manwe.                                                           
                                                                     
                                  1128.                               
                                                                     
     $64   Now the host of the Teleri came at last to Beleriand and
  dwelt  in  the  eastward region  beyond the  River Gelion.  And they
  came  unwillingly,  being  urged  by  Elwe  their  king; for  he was
  eager  indeed  to  return  to  Valinor  and  the  light that  he had
  beheld  (though  his  doom  forbade  it);  and he  wished not  to be
  sundered  from  the  Noldor,  for  he  had  great   friendship  with
  Finwe their lord.                                                   
                                                                     
                                  1130.                               
                                                                     
       $65   At this time Elwe strayed in the woods of  Beleriand and
  was  lost,  and  his  people  sought  him  long in  vain. For  as he
  journeyed  homeward  from  a  meeting  with  Finwe,  he   passed  by
  the  borders  of  Nan  Elmoth.  There  he  heard   the  nightingales
  singing,  and  he  was  spell-bound,  for  they  were  the  birds of

             
                                                                     
 Melian  the  Maia,  who  came  from  the  gardens  of Lorien  in the
 Blessed  Realm.  And  Elwe   followed  the   birds  deep   into  Nan
 Elmoth,  and  there  he  saw  Melian  standing  in  a glade  open to
 heaven, and a starlit mist  was about  her. Thus  began the  love of
 Elwe  Greymantle  and  Melian  the  fair;  and  he  took  her  hand,
 and it is said that  thus they  stood while  the stars  measured out
 the  courses  of  many  Years,  and  the  trees  of Nan  Elmoth grew
 tall and dark about them.                                            
                                                                     
                                1132.                                 
                                                                     
  $66  Now  Ulmo,  by  the  counsel  of  the  Valar,  came   to  the
 shores  of  Middle-earth  and  spoke  with  the  Eldar;  and because
 of  his  words  and  the  music  which  he  made  for them  upon his
 conches  their  fear  of  the  Sea  was  turned  rather  to  desire.
 Therefore  Ulmo  and  his  servants  took an  island which  long had
 stood alone amidst the Sea, since the tumults of the fall of Illuin,
 and they moved it, and brought it to the  grey bay  of Balar,  as it
 were  a  mighty  ship.  And  the  Vanyar  and  the  Noldor  embarked
 upon  the  isle,  Eressea,  and were  drawn over  the Sea,  and came
 at  last  to  the land  of Aman.(6) But the Teleri remained still in
 Middle-earth;  for  many  dwelt  in  East  Beleriand  and  heard not
 the  summons  of  Ulmo  until too  late; and  many searched  yet for
 Elwe  Singollo,  their  king,  and  would  not  depart  without him.
 But  when  the  Teleri  learned  that  Ingwe  and  Finwe  and  their
 peoples were gone, they  pressed on  to the  shore, and  there dwelt
 in  longing  for  their  friends  that had  departed. And  they took
 Olwe,  Elwe's  brother,  to  be  their  king.  And  Osse  and  Uinen
 came  to  them  and  befriended  them  and  taught  them  all manner
 of  sea-lore  and sea-music.  Thus it  came to  be that  the Teleri,
 who  were  from  the  beginning  lovers  of  water, and  the fairest
 singers  of the  Elvenfolk, were  after enamoured  of the  seas, and
 their  songs  were  filled  with  the  sound of  the waves  upon the
 shore.                                                               
                                                                     
                                1133.                                 
                                                                     
  $67  In  this  Year  the  Vanyar  and  the  Noldor  came  to  Aman,
 and the cleft  of the  Kalakiryan (7) was made in the Pelori;  and the
 Elves  took  possession  of  Eldamar,  and  began  the  building  of
 the green  hill of  Tuna in  sight of  the Sea.  And upon  Tuna they
 raised the white walls of  the Watchful  City, Tirion  the Hallowed.
                                                                     
                                1140.                                 
  $68  In this year Tirion was full-wrought, and the Tower of          

                                              
                                                                    
  Ingwe  was  built,  Mindon  Eldalieva,  and  its  silver  lamp  was
  kindled.  But  Ingwe  and  many  of  the  Vanyar  yearned  for  the
  Light  of  the Trees,  and he  and many  of his  household departed
  and  went  to  Valinor,  and  dwell  forever  with  the  people  of
  Manwe. And though others  of the  Vanyar dwelt  still in  Tirion in
  fellowship with  the Noldor,  the sundering  of those  kindreds and
  of  their  tongue  was begun;  for ever  and anon  yet more  of the
  Vanyar would depart.                                               
                                                                    
                                 1142.                               
                                                                    
      $69      In  this  year Yavanna  gave to  the Noldor  the White
  Tree,  Galathilion,  image  of  the  Tree  Telperion,  and  it  was
  planted beneath the Mindon and grew and flourished.                
                                                                    
                                 1149.                               
                                                                    
      $70     In this  year Ulmo  hearkened to  the prayers  of Finwe
  and went  again to  Middle-earth to  bring Elwe  and his  people to
  Aman,  if  they   would  come.   And  most   of  them   proved  now
  willing indeed;  but Osse  was grieved.  For his  care was  for the
  seas of  Middle-earth and  the shores  of the  Outer Lands,  and he
  came  seldom  to  Aman,  unless  summoned  to  council; and  he was
  ill-pleased that the fair voices of the Teleri  should be  heard no
  more  in  Middle-earth.  Some  therefore  he  persuaded  to remain,
  and  those  were  the  Eldar  that  long  abode  on  the  coasts of
  Beleriand, the first mariners upon  earth and  the first  makers of
  ships. Their havens were at  Brithombar and  Eglarest. Cirdan  the
  Shipwright was their lord.                                         
                                                                    
                                 1150.                               
                                                                    
      $71     The kinsfolk and friends of Elwe also were unwilling to
  depart;  but Olwe  would be  gone, and  at last  Ulmo took  all who
  would  embark  upon  Eressea  and  drew  them  over  the  deeps  of
  the  Sea.  And  the  friends  of  Elwe were  left behind,  and they
  called themselves, therefore, in their own  tongue the  Eglath, the
  Forsaken People. And they sought still for Elwe  in sorrow.  But it
  was  not  his  doom  ever  to  return  to the  Light of  the Trees,
  greatly though he  had desired  it. Yet  the Light  of Aman  was in
  the face of Melian the fair, and in that light he was content.     
                                                                    
                                 1151.                               
                                                                    
      $72      Now Osse followed after the Teleri, and when they      
  were come nigh to the Bay of Eldamar he called to them, and        
  they knew his voice,  and they  begged Ulmo  to stay  their voyage.

                    
                                                                   
 And  Ulmo  granted this,  and at  his bidding  Osse made  fast the
 island and rooted it in the foundations of the Sea; and  there the
 Teleri abode as they wished still under the  stars of  heaven, and
 yet  within  sight  of  Aman  and  the  deathless shore;  and they
 could see from afar the Light of  the Trees  as it  passed through
 the Kalakiryan, and touched the dark waves to silver and gold.     
   $73  Ulmo  did  this the  more readily,  for that  he understood
 the hearts of the Teleri, and in the council of  the Valar  he had
 chiefly spoken against the  summons, deeming  that it  were better
 for  the  Quendi  to remain  in Middle-earth.  But the  Valar were
 little  pleased  to  learn  what  he had  done; and  Finwe grieved
 when  the  Teleri  came  not, and  yet more  when he  learned that
 Elwe was  forsaken, and  knew that  he should  not see  him again,
 unless it were in the halls of Mandos.                             
                                                                   
                               1152.                                
                                                                   
   $74  At  this time  Elwe Singollo,  it is  said, awoke  from his
 trance, and he dwelt with Melian  in the  woods of  Beleriand. But
 he  was a  great lord  and noble,  tallest in  stature of  all the
 Children of Iluvatar, and like  unto a  lord of  the Maiar;  and a
 high  doom  was  before  him.  For  he  became  a  king  renowned,
 and his folk were all the Eldar of Beleriand; the Sindar they were
 named,  the  Grey-elves,  the  Elves  of  the  Twilight,  and King
 Greymantle  was  he,  Elu  Thingol  in the  tongue of  the Sindar.
 And  Melian  was  his  Queen,  wiser  than  any  child  of Middle-
 earth; and of the love of Thingol and Melian  there came  into the
 world the fairest of all the Children of Iluvatar that was or ever
 shall be.                                                          
                                                                   
                               1161.                                
                                                                   
   $75  It came to pass  that after  the Teleri  had dwelt  for one
 hundred years of our reckoning upon the  Lonely Isle  their hearts
 were  changed,  and  they  were  drawn  towards  the   Light  that
 flowed  out  from  Aman.  Therefore Osse (8) taught them  the craft
 of  shipbuilding,  and  when  their  ships  were  made   ready  he
 brought  them,  as  his  parting  gift, many  strong-winged swans.
 And the swans drew the white ships  of the  Teleri over  the wind-
 less sea. Thus at last and latest they came to Aman and the shores
 of Eldamar; and there the Noldor welcomed them with joy.           
                                                                   
                               1162.                                
                                                                   
  $76  In this year Olwe lord of the Teleri, with the aid of         

                                                   
                                                                  
  Finwe and the Noldor, began the building of Alqualonde,          
  the Swanhaven, upon the coast of Eldamar, north  of the          
  Kalakiryan.                                                      
                                                                  
                                1165.                              
                                                                  
     $77  In this year the last of the Vanyar departed from Tirion,
  and  the  Noldor  dwelt  there  alone,  and  their  converse  and
  friendship thereafter was rather with the Teleri.                

                              NOTES.                                    
                                                                       
  1. This sentence is an interpolation in the  manuscript, and  is itself
     rewritten from an earlier interpolation:                           
       And this, maybe, was also one of the first-fruits  of the  lies of
     Melkor  for  the  deceit  of  the Quendi,  that despite  his sojourn
     among them many still feared him and Nahar his steed.              
     The typescript has the form given in the text.                     
  2. This  is  an  emendation from  'went north  until Helkar  was passed
     and then north-west'; the typescript has the emended sentence.     
  3. My  father  added  hastily  here,  using  a  ball-point  pen  and so
     apparently much later (see p. 102, $78):                           
       Here they dwelt  for a  year, and  here Indis  wife of  Finwe bore
     him a son,  eldest of  all the  second generation  of the  Eldar. He
     was    first   named    Minyon   First-begotten,    but   afterwards
     Curufinwe or Feanor.                                               
     This was struck out, perhaps as soon as written; see note 5.       
  4. 'and they were reared by Melkor to  hinder the  riding of  Orome' is
     a pencilled addition that appears in the typescript as typed.      
  5. Added  to  the  manuscript here  at the  same time  and in  the same
     way as the passage given in note 3 (and struck out at the  same time
     as that):                                                          
       Here Indis wife of Finwe was lost, and fell  from a  great height.
     And  her  body  was found  in a  deep gorge,  and there  buried. And
     when  Finwe  would  not  go  forward,  and  wished to  remain there,
     Orome  spoke  to  him  of  the  fate  of  the  Quendi, and  how they
     could return again, if they would, after a while. For  their spirits
     do  not  die,  and  yet do  not leave  Arda, and  by the  command of
     Eru  a  dwelling  place is  made for  them in  Aman. Then  Finwe was
     eager to go forward.                                               
  6. After  this  there  stood  in  the  manuscript:  'and Ingwe  and his
     household passed  into Valinor,  and dwell  forever with  the people
     of Manwe.' This was struck out and is not in the typescript,  but it
     reappears in the annal for 1140.                                   
  7. Kalakiryan  is  a  pencilled  emendation  from  Kalakirya,   and  at
     subsequent occurrences (but at the very end of  the Annals,  p. 133,
     $180, Kalakiryan is the form in the manuscript as written).        

               
                                                                        
 8. Ulmo in the manuscript as first written, changed early to Osse'.      
                                                                        
                  Commentary on the third section of the                
                               Annals of Aman.                           
                                                                        
 This  section  of  AAm  corresponds  to  QS  Chapter  3  Of the  Coming of
 the Elves  (including 3(b)  Of Thingol  and 3(c)  Of Kor  and Alqualonde)
 from $22  to $39  and elements  of $$43  - 5;  and to  AV 2,  Valian Years
 1980 - 2111. These texts are found in V.213 ff., 112 - 13.              
  A  cursory  comparison  shows  that  an   enormous  extension   at  large
 and  in  detail  has  taken  place; and  while concurrent  development had
 proceeded in the  'Silmarillion' tradition  also (with  which AAm  has not
 a  few  phrases  in  common),  AAm is  a very  distinct narrative,  with a
 large  number  of  features  absent  from  the  other  tradition  and some
 actual  divergences.  Here,  as  before,  I  observe  the  more  important
 developments  in  AAm   in  relation   to  the   pre-Lord  of   the  Rings
 narratives; and in many cases I restrict myself to  a simple  reference to
 the  new  elements  that  have entered  the legends,  it being  implied in
 such cases that the matter in question is wholly new.                   
  $51  Melkor  sued  for pardon  in the  Ring of  Doom; the  Valar wished
       to put him to death, but none can  slay any  of Valarin  race, nor
       remove them from Ea, save Eru only.                              
  $52  Melkor   was   condemned   to   Mandos   for  three   ages  (three
       hundred  Valian  Years);  in  AV  2,  and  in  QS  ($47),  he  was
       condemned for seven ages.                                        
  $54  Elwe,  the  third of  the 'ambassadors',  is now  Thingol himself,
       whereas in QS he  was Thingol's  brother; see  V.217 $23,  and cf.
       AV 2 (V.112): 'Thingol, brother of Elwe, lord of the  Teleri'. The
       brother of Elwe-Thingol now becomes Olwe ($58).                  
  $57  Only  'the  most  part'  of the  kindreds of  Finwe and  Olwe were
       willing  to  depart.  The  Avari  were the  kindreds of  Morwe and
       Nurwe  (and  presumably  those  of  the  other kindreds  who would
       not go);  and an  explanation is  given of  their not  going: they
       dwelt  furthest  from  Kuivienen  and  had not  seen Orome  at his
       first coming.                                                    
  $58  The  First  Host  now  bears  the name  Vanyar, not  as previously
       Lindar  (cf.  p. 34,  $36). The  Third Host,  the Teleri,  had two
       lords,  the  brothers  Elwe  and  Olwe;  and  Elwe  is  now called
       Singollo  ('Greymantle',  $65;  in  QS Sindo  'the Grey',  $30). -
       The  route  taken by  the Eldar  on the  Great March  is described
       (and  it  agrees  well  with  the  track  shown on  the Ambarkanta
       map, IV.249). Many turned back in fear at  the great  clouds still
       hanging in the North.                                            
  $59  The  slowness  of  the  journey  is described:  the wonder  of the
       Elves, the reluctance of many  to complete  the journey,  the long

       halts. The journey took twenty  Valian Years;  in AV  1 it  took ten
       (IV.272), and apparently also in AV 2.                              
  $$60-1  Important  names  enter  from  The  Lord  of  the Rings:
       Anduin,  Eriador,  Hithaeglir  ('the  Towers  of Mist');  the forest
       east  of the  river is  not named,  but is  of course  Mirkwood. The
       origin of  the Hithaeglir  is told:  they were  raised by  Melkor to
       hinder the riding of  Orome. I  noticed (IV.256  - 7)  in connection
       with  the  Ambarkanta  map  that  there  is  no  trace there  of the
       Misty  Mountains  or  of  Anduin  (which  first  appeared,   as  did
       Mirkwood,  in  The  Hobbit,  where  the  river  is called  the Great
       River of Wilderland).                                               
         The  Teleri  remained  on  the  eastern  bank  of Anduin  when the
       Vanyar  and  the  Noldor  crossed  the  river and  went up  into the
       passes of the Misty Mountains.                                      
                                                                          
  $62  It  was  at  this point  on the  Great March  that the  Nandor broke
       off,  and  they  went  south down  Anduin; they  were of  the Teleri
       (from  the  host  of  Olwe), and  their leader's  name was  Nano, or
       Dan  in  the  speech  of  his  own  people.  In  QS  ($28) and  AV 2
       these  people were  of the  Noldor, and  in QS  they were  called in
       their  own  tongue Danas,  after their  first leader  Dan; similarly
       in  the  Lhammas  (V.175  -  6).  The  name  Nandor does  not appear
       in  these  works,  but  see  the  Etymologies,  stems  DAN  and NDAN
       (V.353, 375), and also V.188.                                       
  $63  The  fear  of  the  Sea  among  the  Vanyar  and Noldor  caused many
       to  withdraw  from  the  shores  into  the  woods of  Beleriand; and
       Orome returned to Valinor to seek Manwe's counsel.                  
  $64  The  Teleri  came  reluctantly  into  Beleriand,  urged on  by Elwe,
       and dwelt at first in the east,  beyond the  River Gelion.  Elwe had
       great friendship with Finwe.                                        
  $65  Elwe  was  journeying  home  from  a  meeting  with  Finwe  when  he
       entered  Nan  Elmoth.  This  name  first  emerged  in  the post-Lord
       of the Rings rewriting of the Lay of Leithian (III.346 - 7, 349). In
       QS ($32) it  is not  said where  the meeting  of Thingol  and Melian
       took  place;  in  AV  2  'Melian  enchanted  him  in  the  woods  of
       Beleriand'.  The  trance  into  which  Elwe  fell  endured  for many
       Valian  Years  (annals  1130,  1152:  that  is  for  more  than  two
       centuries measured by the Sun).                                     
  $66  Ulmo  made music  for the  Elves and  turned their  fear of  the Sea
       into desire. The  Teleri came  to the  shores of  the Sea  when they
       heard  that  the  Vanyar  and  the  Noldor  had  departed,  and took
       Olwe to be their king.                                              
  $67  The  name  Kalakilya  'Pass  of  Light'  is  found  in  QS  and  the
       Lhammas; cf.  Quenya kilya  'cleft, pass  between hills,  gorge', in
       the  Etymologies,  stem  KIL  (V.365).  The   form  in   AAm,  Kala-
       kiryan, replaced earlier Kalakirya (note 7 above).                  

          'The   Elves   took   possession   of   Eldamar,   and   began  the
        building of the green hill of Tuna'; cf. also $$75  - 6  'the shores,
        coast,  of  Eldamar'.  This  contradicts  the  footnote  to   QS  $39
        (never  subsequently  changed,  p.  176),  where  Eldamar  is  a name
        of the Elvish city  itself and  Eldanor or  Elende  the  region where
        the   Elves  dwelt   (earlier,  on   the  Ambarkanta   map  (IV.249),
        Elvenhome  was  named  Eldaros).  The  usage  here  (found   also  in
        the rewritten Lay of Leithian) is in fact a reversion to the earliest
        meaning of Eldamar; see 1.251.                                       
          The  city  is  now  Tirion  upon  Tuna,  not  Tuna  upon  Kor;  see
        QS  $39  and  commentary,   and  also   1.258  (Kortirion).   But  my
        father  continued to  use Tuna  also as  the name  of the  city: e.g.
        p.  97,  $101,  where  Melkor  speaks  of  Feanor's words  'in Tuna'.
        Tirion  is  called here  Tirion the  Hallowed, as  it was  in Bilbo's
        song at Rivendell (VII.93, 98, 101).                                 
  $68   The   Tower   of   Ingwe   (Ingwemindon   in   QS)   is   now  Mindon
        Eldalieva.   -   In   AAm   Ingwe   and   'many  of   his  household'
        removed  from  Tirion  only  seven  Valian  Years  after  the  coming
        of  the  Vanyar  and  the  Noldor  to Aman,  and in  the year  of the
        completion  of  Tirion  and  the  kindling   of  Ingwe's   lamp;  and
        the departure of  the rest  of the  Vanyar is  represented as  a long
        drawn  out  movement  over  25   Valian  Years   (see  $77).   In  QS
        ($45) a different impression is given, for  it is  said that  'As the
        ages passed the Lindar  grew to  love the  land of  the Gods  and the
        full light of the Trees, and they forsook the city of Tuna'.         
  $69   In   QS   ($16)   Galathilion   is  the   Gnomish  name   of  Silpion
        (Telperion),  and  there is  no mention  of an  'image' of  the Elder
        Tree  being  given  by  Yavanna   to  the   Noldor  of   Tirion  (see
        IX.58).                                                              
  $70   Ulmo's  return  to  the  shores  of  Middle-earth  was on  account of
        the  prayers  of  Finwe.  The  statement  that  Osse 'came  seldom to
        Aman,  unless  summoned  to  council'  reflects  the  preservation in
        AAm  (p.  48,  $1)  of  his  old  status  as  one  of the  Valar. The
        southern  Haven  of  the  Falas  now  reverts  to the  form Eglarest,
        which  preceded  Eglorest  of  QS   and  AV   2.  Cirdan   the  Ship-
        wright,  lord  of the  Havens, appears  from The  Lord of  the Rings.
  $71   While it is not said in QS that any others of the Teleri,  beside the
        Elves   of   the   Falas,   remained   in   Middle-earth   when  Ulmo
        returned, but  only that  the people  of Thingol  'looked for  him in
        vain'  ($32),  it  is  told in  the Lhammas  $6 (V.174)  that Thingol
        was  'king  in  Beleriand  of  the  many Teleri  who ...  remained on
        the  Falasse,  and  of  others  that  went  not because  they tarried
        searching  for  Thingol  in  the  woods.'  In  AAm 'the  kinsfolk and
        friends of Elwe also were unwilling  to depart',  and they  were left
        behind, and called themselves Eglath, the Forsaken People.           
                                                                            
  $$72-3 Ulmo granted readily the request of the Teleri, for he had        

       opposed  the  summoning  of  the  Quendi  to  Valinor,   and  Osse
       rooted  Tol  Eressea  to  the  sea-bottom  at Ulmo's  command; but
       the  Valar were  displeased, and  Finwe was  grieved (most  of all
       for the knowledge that  Elwe Singollo  his friend  was not  in Tol
       Eressea). The final form of the  legend is  thus now  present: see
       QS $37 and commentary.                                           
  $74  Thingol's people were 'all the Eldar of Beleriand', and  they were
       named the Sindar, the Grey-elves. This is the  first time  that we
       meet the name in the texts (as here presented); it does  not occur
       in  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  apart  from  the   Appendices.  The
       Sindarin name of Elwe Singollo is Elu Thingol (see II.50).       
  $75  The Teleri dwelt for 100 years of the  Sun in  Tol Eressea;  in QS
       ($43)  and in  AV 2  they dwelt  there for  100 Valian  Years (see
       p. 183, $43).                                                    
           It was Osse,  not as  in QS  Ulmo, who  taught the  Teleri the
       craft of shipbuilding; but as the text was written (note  8 above)
       it was Ulmo who did  so, and  it was  Ulmo too  who gave  them the
       swans (Osse in QS).                                              
  $76  The Teleri had the aid  of Finwe  and the  Noldor in  the building
       of Alqualonde.                                                   
                                                                       
                                                     

                                                   
                                                                       
 The  two passages  concerning Indis  wife of  Finwe, roughly  written in
 against $$60  and 61  (notes 3  and 5  above) and  then struck  out, are
 notable as the first indications of  what would  become a  major further
 development  in  the  Valinorian  legend, though  the stories  told here
 bear no relation to the  later narrative.  These briefly  sketched ideas
 may  have  been merely  passing, rejected  as soon  as jotted  down; but
 they show my father's concern  with Feanor,  feeling that  the greatness
 of his powers and  formidable nature  were related  to a  singularity of
 origin - he was the first-born of the Eldar: that is to say, he  did not
 'waken'  by Kuivienen,  but had  a father  and mother,  and was  born in
 Middle-earth. The idea that Finwe  was bereaved  also appears;  and this
 is the first appearance of Feanor's name Curufinwe.                  
                                                                       
                                    *                                   

 Finally, I record a few very late notes on one or other of the
 typescript texts (top copy and carbon) of the Annals of Aman:
 $65  'the trees of Nan Elmoth' > 'the sapling trees of Nan Elmoth'
 $66  Against the word conches, pipes of shell horns, with a
      query.
 $70  Against the first sentence my father wrote 'Needs revising'; but I
      do not know in what respect he intended to do so. Against
      'summoned to council' he wrote an X and 'he [Osse] was not a
      Vala, but a chief of the Maiar, servant of Ulmo.' He had been
      removed from the Valar by emendation to the typescript in $1
      (p. 69).

                                          
                                                                       
      Fourth section of the Annals of Aman.                              
                                                                       
 [This section of the Annals has a good  many changes  made at  the time
 of writing, and also various alterations and additions -  some substan-
 tial - that seem certainly to belong to much the  same time.  These are
 incorporated  into  the  text  given  here,  with  details of  the more
 important alterations recorded in the notes that follow it. A few short
 additions that are decidedly later are placed in the notes.]           
                                                                       
                                  1179.                                 
                                                                       
  $78  Feanor,  eldest   son  of   Finwe,  was   born  in   Tirion  upon
 Tuna. His mother was Byrde Miriel.(1)                                    
  $79  Now  the  Noldor (2) took  delight  in  all  lore  and  all  crafts,
 and  Aule  and  his  folk  came  often  among  them.  Yet   such  skill
 had  Iluvatar  granted  to  them  that  in  many   matters,  especially
 such  as  needed  adroitness  and fineness  of  handiwork,   they  soon
 surpassed  their  teachers.  It  is  said  that  about  this  time  the
 masons  of  the  House  of  Finwe  quarrying   in  the   mountains  for
 stone  for  their  building  (for  they  delighted  in the  building of
 high  towers)  first  discovered  the  earth-gems,  in  which  the Land
 of   Aman   was   indeed   surpassingly   rich.  And   their  craftsmen
 devised  tools  for  the  cutting   and  shaping   of  the   gems,  and
 carved  them  in  many  forms  of  bright  beauty;  and   they  hoarded
 them  not  but  gave  them  freely  to  all who  desired them,  and all
 Valinor was enriched by their labour.(3)                               
  $80  In  this  year  Rumil,  most  renowned  of  the  masters  of  the
 lore  of  speech,  first  devised  letters   and  began   recording  in
 writing the tongues of the Eldar and their songs and wisdom.(4)        
                                                                       
                                  1190.                                 
                                                                       
  $81 In this year was born Fingolfin son of Finwe, who after           
 was King of the Exiles.                                                
                                                                       
                                  1230.                                 
                                                                       
 $82 Finrod Finwe's son was born.                                       
                                                                       
                                  1250.                                 
                                                                       
  $83  In  this  time  began  the  flowering  of  the  skill  of  Feanor
 son  of  Finwe,  who  was  of  all  the Noldor  the greatest  maker and
 craftsman.   And   he   took   thought   and   devised   new   letters,
 bettering  the  devices  of  Rumil,  and those  letters the  Eldar have
 used  ever  since  that  day.  This  was  but  the  beginning   of  the
 works  of  Feanor.  Greatly  he  loved  gems,  and  he  began  to study

                          
                                                                  
 how  by  the  skill of  his hand  and mind  he could  make others
 greater and brighter than those hidden in the earth.(5)        
   $84  [In  this  time  also, it  is said  among the  Sindar, the
 Naugrim (6) whom  we   also  name   the  Nornwaith   (the  Dwarves)
 came over the mountains into Beleriand and became known to
 the Elves. Now the Dwarves were great smiths and masons,      
 being indeed (it is believed) brought into being by Aule; yet of
 old small beauty was in their works. Therefore each people had
 great profit of the other, though their friendship was ever cool.
 But at that time no griefs lay between  them, and  King Thingol
 welcomed  them;  and  the  Longbeards  of  Belegost  aided  him in
 the delving and  building of  the great  halls of  Menegroth, where
 he after dwelt with Melian, his Queen. Thus saith Pengolod.](7)   
                                                                  
                               1280.                               
                                                                  
  $85  In this  year   Finrod  Finwe's   son  wedded   Earwen  King
 Olwe's  daughter of  Alqualonde, and  there was  a great  feast in
 the  land  of  the  Teleri.  Thus the  children of  Finrod, Inglor
 and  Galadriel,  were  the  kin  of  King  Thingol  Greymantle  in
 Beleriand.                                                        
                                                                  
                               1350.                               
                                                                  
  $86  [At this time  a part  of the  lost Elves  of the  people of
 Dan  after  long  wanderings  came  up  into  Beleriand  from  the
 South.  Their  leader  was  Denethor  son of  Dan, and  he brought
 them  to  Ossiriand  where  seven  rivers   flow  down   from  the
 Mountains  of  Lindon.  These  are the  Green-elves. They  had the
 friendship of Thingol. Quoth Pengolod.](8)                        
                                                                  
                               1400.                               
                                                                  
  $87  Now it  came  to  pass that  Melkor had  dwelt alone  in the
 duress  of  Mandos  for  the  three  ages  that  were   doomed  by
 the Valar,  and he  came before  their conclave  to be  tried. And
 Melkor  sued  for  pardon  at  the  feet  of  Manwe,  and  humbled
 himself, and swore to abide his rule, and to aid the Valar  in all
 ways that he could, for the good of Arda, and the profit  of Valar
 and of Eldar, if so he should be granted freedom,  and a  place as
 the least of all the folk of Valinor.                             
  $88  And Nienna  aided  his  prayer  (because  of  her  kinship),
 and Manwe granted it, for  being himself  free of  all evil  he saw
 not the depths of the heart of Melkor, and believed in  his oaths.
 But Mandos was silent, and Ulmo's heart misgave him.              

                                 1410.                              
                                                                   
    $89  Then  Melkor  dwelt  for  a  while  in  a  humble  house  in
 Valmar  under  vigilance,  and   was  not   yet  suffered   to  walk
 abroad  alone.  But  since  in  that  time all  his words  and works
 were  fair,  and  he  became  in  outward form  and seeming  even as
 the  Valar  his  brethren,  Manwe  gave   him  his   freedom  within
 Valinor.   Yet   Tulkas'   mirth   was   clouded  whenever   he  saw
 Melkor pass by, and the nails of his fingers bit  into the  palms of
 his hands, for the restraint that he put upon himself.             
    $90  And  indeed  Melkor  was  false  and  betrayed  the  clemen-
 cy  of  Manwe,  and  used  his  freedom  to  spread lies  abroad and
 poison  the  peace  of  Valinor.  Thus  a   shadow  fell   upon  the
 Blessed Land and its golden  Noon passed;  yet it  was long  ere the
 lies of Melkor bore fruit, and still the Valar dwelt long in bliss.
    $91  Now  in  his  heart  Melkor  most  hated  the   Eldar,  both
 because  they  were  fair  and  joyful  and because  in them  he saw
 the reason for the arising  of the  Valar and  his own  downfall and
 subjection.  Therefore  all  the more  did he  feign love  for them,
 and sought their  friendship, and  offered them  the service  of his
 lore  and labour  in any  great deed  that they  would do.  And many
 of  the  Noldor,  because   of  their   desire  of   all  knowledge,
 hearkened  to  him  and  took  delight  in  his  teaching.  But  the
 Vanyar would have no part with him.                                
                                                                   
                                 1449.                              
                                                                   
    $92  In  this  Year  Feanor  began  that labour  of his  which is
 renowned  above  all  the  works  of  the  Eldalie;  for  his  heart
 conceived  the  Silmarils,  and   he  made   much  study   and  many
 essays  ere  their fashioning  could begin.  And though  Melkor said
 after that Feanor had his instruction in that work,  he lied  in his
 lust and his envy;  for Feanor  was driven  by the  fire of  his own
 heart  only,  and  was  eager  and proud,  working ever  swiftly and
 alone, asking no aid and brooking no counsel.                      
                                                                   
                                 1450.                              
                                                                   
                  The Silmarilli of Feanor are made.               
                                                                   
    $93  In  this year  the Silmarils  were full-wrought,  the wonder
 of Arda. As  three great  jewels they  were in  form. But  not until
 the  End,  when  Feanor  shall  return  who  perished  when  the Sun
 was  young  and  sitteth  now  in  the Halls  of Awaiting  and comes
 no  more  amongst  his  kin;  not  until  Sun  passeth and  the Moon

                                                         
                                                                         
 falls  shall  it  be  known  of  what substance  they were  made. Like
 the  crystal  of  diamonds  it  appeared  and  yet  was  more  strong
 than adamant,  so  that  no  violence  within  the  walls  of  this world
 could mar it or  break it.  Yet that  crystal was  to the  Silmarils but
 as is the body  to the  Children of  Iluvatar: the  house of  its inner
 fire, that is within it and yet in all parts of it, and is its  life. And
 the inner  fire of  the Silmarils  Feanor made  of the  blended Light
 of  the  Trees  of Valinor  which lives  in them  yet, though  the Trees
 have  long  withered  and  shine   no  more.   Therefore  even   in  the
 uttermost   darkness  the   Silmarils  of   their  own   radiance  shone
 like  the  stars  of  Varda;  and  yet,  as  were  they   indeed  living
 things, they rejoiced in light and received  it, and  gave it  back in
 hues more lovely than before.                                           
       $94   And   all   the   folk   of  Valinor   were  amazed   at  the
  handiwork  of  Feanor,  and  were  filled   with  wonder   and  delight,
  and  Varda  hallowed  the  Silmarils,  so  that  thereafter   no  mortal
  flesh  nor  any  evil  or  unclean thing  might touch  them, but  it was
  scorched    and    burned    with    unendurable   pain.    And   Melkor
  lusted  for  the  Silmarils  and  the  very  memory  of  their  radiance
  was like a gnawing fire in his heart.(9)                                
                                                                         
                                 1450-1490.                               
                                                                         
  $95   Therefore,   though   he  still   dissembled  his   purposes  with
 great   cunning,   Melkor   sought   now   ever   more  eagerly   how  he
 should   destroy   Feanor,   and   end  the   friendship  of   Valar  and
 Eldar.  Long  was  he  at  work;  and slow  at first  and barren  was his
 labour.  But  he  that  sows  lies  in  the  end  shall  not  lack  of  a
 harvest,  and  soon  he  may   rest  from   toil  indeed,   while  others
 reap  and  sow  in  his  stead.   Ever  Melkor   found  some   ears  that
 would   heed   him,   and   some   tongues   that   would   enlarge  what
 they  had  heard.  For  the  lies  of  Melkor  take  root  by  the  truth
 that is in them.                                                         
  $96   Thus   it   was   that   whispers  arose   in  Eldamar   that  the
 Valar  had  brought  the  Eldar  to  Valinor   being  jealous   of  their
 beauty  and  skill,  and  fearing  that  they  should  grow   too  strong
 to  be  governed  in  the  free  lands  of  the  East.  And  then  Melkor
 foretold  the  coming  of   Men,  of   which  the   Valar  had   not  yet
 spoken  to  the  Elves,  and  again  it  was  whispered  abroad  that the
 gods  purposed  to  reserve   the  kingdoms   of  Middle-earth   for  the
 younger   and   weaker   race   whom   they   might  more   easily  sway,
 defrauding the Elves of the inheritance of Iluvatar.                     
  $97  Then  at  last  the  princes   of  the   Noldor  began   to  murmur

   
                                                                     
   against the Valar, and many became filled with pride, forgetting
   all that the Valar had taught to them and given to them. And in
   that time (having now awakened anger and pride) Melkor             
   spoke to the Eldar concerning weapons, which they had not          
   before possessed or known; for the armouries of the Valar after
   the chaining of Melkor were shut. But now the Noldor.,began        
   the smithying of swords and axes and spears; and shields they      
   made displaying the tokens of many houses and kindreds that        
   vied one with another.                                             
        $98 A great smith was Feanor in those days, and a proud       
   and masterful prince, jealous of all that he had; and Melkor       
   kept watch on him. For still he lusted after the Silmarils; but
   Feanor now brought them seldom to light, and kept them             
   locked rather in the darkness of the treasury of Tuna; and he .
   began to begrudge the sight of them to all save to his sire and to
   his seven sons. Therefore Melkor set new lies abroad that          
   Fingolfin was plotting to supplant Feanor and his father in the
   favour of the Valar, and was like to succeed, for the Valar were
   ill-pleased that the Silmarils were not committed to their         
   keeping. Of those lies quarrels arose among the proud children     
   of Finwe and Melkor was well-pleased; for all now went to his      
   design. And suddenly ere the Valar were aware the peace of         
   Valinor was broken and swords were drawn in Eldamar.               
                                                                     
                                   1490.                              
                                                                     
        $99   Then   the   Gods   were   wroth,   and   they  summoned
   Feanor before  them. And  they laid  bare all  the lies  of Melkor;
   but  because  it was  Feanor that  had first  broken the  peace and
   threatened   violence   in   Aman   he   was  by   their  judgement
   banished for twenty (10) years from  Tirion. And  he went  forth and
   dwelt  northward  in  Valinor  near  to  the  halls of  Mandos, and
   built  a  new  treasury  and  stronghold  at  Formenos;  and  great
   wealth  of  gems he  laid there  in hoard,  but the  Silmarils were
   shut  in  a chamber  of iron.  And thither  came Finwe,  because of
   the love that he  bore to  Feanor; and  Fingolfin ruled  the Noldor
   of  Tuna.  Thus  the  lies  of  Melkor were  made true  in seeming,
   and  the  bitterness  that  he  had  wrought  endured  long between
   the sons of Fingolfin and Feanor.                                  
        $100  Straight  from  the Ring  of Doom  Tulkas went  in haste
   to  lay  hands  upon Melkor,  but Melkor  knowing that  his devices
   were  bewrayed (11) had  hidden himself  from the  sight of  eyes, and
   a cloud was about him; and it seemed  to the  folk of  Valinor that

   the light of the Trees was become dimmer than its wont, and the      
   shadows were darker and longer.                                     
                                                                      
                                  1492.                                
                                                                      
    $101  And  it  is  said  that  Melkor  was  not  seen  again  for  a
   while;  but  suddenly  he  appeared  before  the  doors of  the house
   of  Finwe  and  Feanor  at  Formenos,  and   sought  to   speak  with
   them.  And  he said  to them:  Behold the  truth of  all that  I have
   spoken,  and  how  you  are  indeed  banished  unjustly.   And  think
   nof that the Silmarils lie safe in any treasury  within the  realm of
   the gods. But  if the  heart of  Feanor is  yet free  and bold  as his
   words were  in Tuna,  then I  will aid  you, and  bring you  far from
   this  narrow  land.  For  am I  not Vala  as are  they? Yea,  and more
   than  they,  and  have  ever  been  a  friend  to  the  Noldor,  most
   skilled and valiant of all the folk of Arda.'                       
    $102  Then  the  heart  of  Feanor   was  increased   in  bitterness
   and  filled  with  fear  for  the  Silmarils,  and  in  that  mood he
   endured.  But  Melkor's  words   touched  too   deep,  and   awoke  a
   fire  more  fierce  than  he  intended;  and  Feanor looked  upon him
   with  blazing  eyes,  and  lo!  he  saw  through  the   semblance  of
   Melkor  and  pierced  the cloaks  of his  mind, perceiving  there the
   lust for the Silmarils.  Then hate  overcame all  fear and  he cursed
   Melkor  and  bade  him  begone.   'Get  thee   from  my   gate,  thou
   gangrel,(12) jail-crow  of  Mandos,' said  he, and  he shut  the doors
   of his house in the face of the mightiest of all the dwellers in Ea.
    $103   And   at   that   time,  being   himself  in   peril,  Melkor
   departed,  consumed  with  wrath,  and  bitter  vengeance   he  plot-
   ted  for his  shame. But  Finwe was  filled with  great fear,  and in
   haste he sent messengers to Manwe in Valmar.                        
    $104  Then  Orome  and  Tulkas  set  out   in  pursuit   of  Melkor,
   but  ere  they  had   ridden  far   messengers  came   from  Eldamar,
   telling  that  Melkor  had  fled  through  the  Kalakiryan,(13) passing
   by  the  hill  of  Tuna in  wrath as  a thunder  cloud. And  with the
   flight of  Melkor  the  shadow  was  lifted from  Valinor, and  for a
   while all the land was fair again. But  the gods  sought in  vain for
   tidings  of  their  enemy,  and  doubt  lay  heavy  upon  their hearts
   what new evil he might attempt.                                     
    $105  It  is  told  that  Melkor   came  to   the  dark   region  of
   Arvalin.  Now  that  narrow  land  lay  south  of  the Bay  of Eldamar,
   but  east  of  the  mountains  of  the  Pelori,  and  its   long  and
   mournful  shores  stretched  away  into  the  South  of   the  world,
   lightless  and  unexplored.  There,  between the  sheer walls  of the

                                                                 
                                                                    
 mountains and the cold dark Sea, the shadows were deepest in        
 the world. And there secretly Ungoliante had made her abode.        
 Whence she came none of the Eldar know, but maybe she came          
 to the South out of the darkness of Ea, in that time when           
 Melkor destroyed the lights of Illuin and Ormal, and because of     
 his dwelling in the North the heed of the Valar was turned most     
 thither and the South was long forgotten. Thence she crept          
 towards the realm of the light of the Valar. For she hungered for .
 light and hated it. In a deep cleft of the mountains she dwelt,     
 and took shape as it were a spider of monstrous form, sucking       
 up all such light as she could find, or that strayed over the walls
 of Valinor, and she spun it forth again in black webs of            
 strangling gloom, until no light more could come to her abode,      
 and she was famished.                                               
   $106  It may well be that Melkor, if none other, knew of her,      
 being and her abode, and that she was in the beginning one of       
 those that he had corrupted to his service. And coming at length
 to Arvalin, he sought her out, and demanded her aid in his          
 revenge. But she was loath to dare the perils of Valinor and the
 great wrath of the gods, and would not stir from her hiding until
 Melkor had vowed to render her a reward that should heal the        
 gnawing of her hunger and hatred.                                   
                                                                    
                                 1495.                               
                                                                    
   $107   At   last  having   well  laid   their  plans   Melkor  and
 Ungoliante  set  forth.  A  great  darkness  was  about   them  that
 Ungoliante  wove,  and  black  ropes  also  she  span and  made fast
 among  the  rocks,  and  so  after  long  labour,  from web  to web,
 she  climbed  at  last  to  the  summit of  Hyarantar, which  is the
 highest  pinnacle  of  the  mountains  south  of  Taniquetil.  There
 indeed  (save for  that watch-tower  of the  South) the  Pelori were
 less lofty, and less was the vigilance  of the  Valar, for  they had
 ever been on guard rather against the North.                        
   $108  Now  Ungoliante  wrought  a  ladder  of  ropes  and  cast it
 down,  and  Melkor  climbed  upon  it,  and  so  came  to  that high
 place,  whence  he  could   look  down   upon  the   Guarded  Realm.
 And  below  lay  the  wild  green-wood   of  Orome,   and  west-away
 shimmered   the   fields   and  pastures   of  Yavanna,   pale  gold
 beneath  the  tall  wheat  of  the  gods.  But Melkor  looked north,
 and  saw  afar the  shining plain,  and the  silver domes  of Valmar
 gleaming in the mingling of  the lights  of Telperion  and Laurelin.
 Then  Melkor  laughed  aloud,  and  leapt  swiftly  down   the  long

 western slopes; and Ungoliante was at his side and her darkness
 covered them.                                                     
    $109  Now  it  was  a  time  of  festival,  as  Melkor  well knew.
 For though all  tides and  seasons were  at the  will of  the Valar,
 and  there was  in Valinor  no winter  of death,  nonetheless the
 gods  dwelt  then  in  the  kingdom  of  Arda,  and  that   was  but
 a small realm in the halls of Ea,  whose life  is Time,  which flows
 ever from the first note to the last chord of Eru.  And it  was then
 the pleasure of the Valar (as is told in  the Ainulindale)  to clothe
 themselves in the forms  of the  Children of  Iluvatar; and  they ate
 and  they  drank  and  gathered  the  fruits  of  Yavanna,  and drew
 strength from the Earth which under Eru they ha J made.             
    $110  Therefore  Yavanna  set  times  for  the flowering  and the
 ripening  of   all  growing   things:  upspringing,   blooming,  and
 seed-time.  And  at  each  first  gathering of  fruits Manwe  made a
 high-tide  for  the praising  of Eru,  and all  the folk  of Valinor
 poured  forth  their  joy  in  music  and  song.  Such  now  was the
 hour;  but  Manwe,  hoping   that  indeed   the  shadow   of  Melkor
 was  removed  from  the  land,  and  fearing no  worse than  maybe a
 new  war  with  Utumno and  a new  victory to  end all,  had decreed
 that  this  feast should  be more  glorious than  any that  had been
 held  since  the  coming  of  the  Eldar.  He  designed  moreover to
 heal  the  evil  that  had  arisen  among the  Noldor, and  they all
 were  bidden,  therefore,  to  come  to  him  and  mingle  with  the
 Maiar in  his halls  upon Taniquetil,  and there  put aside  all the
 griefs that lay between their princes and forget utterly the lies of
 their Enemy.                                                        
    $111  There  came  the  Vanyar,  and   there  came   the  Noldor,
 and  the  Maiar  were   gathered  together,   and  the   Valar  were
 arrayed  in  their  beauty  and  majesty;   and  they   sang  before
 Manwe  in  his  lofty  halls,  or  played upon  the green  slopes of
 Taniquetil that looked west to the  Trees. In  that day  the streets
 of  Valmar  were  empty  and the  stairs of  Tuna were  silent; only
 the  Teleri  beyond  the  mountains  still sang  upon the  shores of
 the Sea, for they recked  little of  seasons or  times, and  gave no
 thought to the cares of the  Rulers of  Arda or  to the  shadow that
 had fallen upon Valinor, for it had not touched them, as yet.       
    $112  One  thing  only  marred  the   design  of   Manwe.  Feanor
 indeed  came,   for  him   alone  Manwe   had  commanded   to  come;
 but  Finwe  came  not  nor  any  others of  the Noldor  of Formenos.
 For  said  Finwe,  While  the  ban  lasts upon  Feanor my  son, that
 he  may  not  go  to  Tuna,  I  hold myself  unkinged, and  will not

 meet my people, nor those that rule in my stead.' And Feanor        
 came not in raiment of festival, and he wore no ornament,           
 neither silver nor gold nor any gem; and he denied the sight of     
 the Silmarils to Eldar and Valar, and left them locked in:          
 darkness in their chamber of iron. Nonetheless, he met Fingolfin
 before the throne of Manwe, and was reconciled in words, and        
 Fingolfin set at nought the unsheathing of the sword.               
   $113 It is said that even as Feanor and Fingolfin stood           
 before Manwe, and it was the Mingling of the Lights and both,       
 Trees were shining and the silent city of Valmar was filled with
 radiance as of silver and gold, in that hour Melkor and             
 Ungoliante came over the plain and stood before the Green           
 Mound. Then Melkor sprang up, and with his black spear he           
 smote each Tree to its core, a little above the roots, and their sap
 poured forth, as it were their blood, and was spilled upon the      
 ground. But Ungoliante sucked it up, and going then from Tree       
 to Tree she plied her foul lips to their wounds, till they were     
 drained; and the poison that was in her passed into their tissues
 and withered them; and they died. And still Ungoliante thirsted,
 and going to the Vats of Varda she drank them dry; but              
 Ungoliante belched forth black vapours as she drank, and            
 swelled to a shape so vast and hideous that even Melkor was         
 adread.                                                             
   $114 Then Darkness fell upon Valinor. Of the deeds of that        
 day much is said in the Aldudenie  (the Lament for the Trees)       
 that Elemire of the Vanyar made and is known to all the Eldar.      
 Yet no song or tale could hold all the grief and terror that then
 befell. The Light failed; and that was woe enough, but the          
 Darkness that followed was more than loss of light. In that hour
 was made the Dark which seems not lack but a thing with being       
 of its own: for it was indeed made by malice out of Light, and it
 had the power to pierce the eye, and to enter heart and mind,       
 and strangle the very will.                                         
   $115  Varda looked down from the Holy Mountain, and                
 beheld the Shadow soaring up in sudden towers of gloom;             
 Valmar had foundered in a deep sea of night. Soon Taniquetil        
 stood alone, as a last island of light in a world that was          
 drowned. All song ceased. There was silence in Valinor, and no      
 sound could be heard, save only from afar there came on the         
 wind through the pass of the mountains the wailing of the Teleri
 like the cold cry of gulls. For it blew chill from the East in that

                                                  
                                                               
 hour, and the vast shadows of the Sea were rolled against the
 walls of the shore.
   $116  But Manwe from his high seat looked out, and his
 eyes alone pierced through the gloom, and he saw afar off how a
 Darkness beyond dark moved north over the land, and he knew
 that Melkor was  there. Then  the pursuit  was begun,  and the
 earth shook beneath the horses of the host  of Orome,  and the
 fire that was stricken from the  hooves of  Nahar was  the first
 light that returned to Valinor. But so soon as any came  up with
 the Cloud of Ungoliante, the  riders of  the Valar  were blinded
 and dismayed, and  they were  scattered, and  went they  knew not
 whither;  and  the sound  of the  Valaroma faltered  and failed.
 And Tulkas was as  a man  caught in  a black  net at  night, and
 he  stood  powerless  and  beat the  air in  vain. And  when the
 Darkness had passed, it was  too late:  Melkor had  gone whither
 he would, and his vengeance was full-wrought.                  

                             NOTES.                                      
                                                                        
 1. This annal  is an  early replacement;  the original  annal, concerning
    the  marriage  of  Finrod  and   Earwen  Olwe's   daughter,  reappears
    in very similar  form in  the manuscript  as originally  written under
    the  year  1280.  Later,  in  ball-point  pen,  my father  changed the
    date  of  this  annal  to  1169,  and  added  new  annals   for  1170,
    'Miriel  falls   asleep  and   passes  to   Mandar'  (on   Mandar  see
    p.  205),  and  1172  'Doom  of  Manwe  concerning  the  espousals  of
    the Eldar.' On these matters see pp. 205 ff., and  see note  4 below.
    The new annals appear in the typescript as typed.                    
 2. The  name  Noldor  is here  written with  a tilde,  Noldor (represent-
    ing the back  nasal, the  ng of  king; see  IV.174). This  becomes the
    normal  form  in  all  my  father's   later  writings,   though  often
    casually omitted (none of his typewriters possessed this sign);  it is
    not represented in the spelling of the name Noldor in this book.     
 3. The latter part of this passage, concerning gems,  is very  largely an
    addition. As first written, all that was said on the subject was:
      It  is  said  that about  this time  the craftsmen  of the  House of
    Finwe  (of  whom  Feanor  his  eldest  son   was  the   most  skilful)
    first  devised   gems;  and   all  Valinor   was  enriched   by  their
    labour.                                                              
    See note 5.                                                          
 4. A  new  annal  was  added  here  at the  same time  as those  given in
    note 1: '1185 Finwe weds Indis of the Vanyar.'                       
 5. This  sentence  ('Greatly  he loved  gems ...')  is an  addition going

                                                                        
                                                                        
     with the change and expansion referred to in note 3.                
  6. Naugrim  was  written in  pencil above  the original  reading Naug-
     lath (which however was not struck  out), and  the word  'also' (in
     'whom we also name') added at the same time.                        
  7. This  Beleriandic  interpolation  by  Pengolod,  bracketed  in  the
     original, was an addition to the manuscript; cf. note 8. Against it
     my father later pencilled: 'Transfer to A[nnals of] B[eleriand]'.
  8. This bracketed  interpolation by  Pengolod was  an addition  to the
     manuscript; and like that referred to in note 7 it was marked later
     for transfer to the Annals of Beleriand. The name of the  leader of
     the  Nandor  was  first  written  Enadar,  changed  immediately  to
     Denethor (the name in AV 2, QS, and the Lhammas).                   
         Later my father added  here in  pencil a  new annal,  for 1362:
     'Here was born Isfin Fingolfin's  daughter, the  White Lady  of the
     Noldor' (see note 9).                                               
  9. A hasty addition in ink,  subsequently struck  out, gives  an annal
     for  1469:  'Here  was born  the first  daughter of  Fingolfin, the
     White Lady of the Noldor' (see note  8). It  is not  said elsewhere
     that Fingolfin had any daughter but Isfin.                          
 10. The  manuscript  has  'three'  o 'ten'  > 'twenty'  (Valian Years).
 11. bewrayed: 'revealed', 'betrayed'.                                   
 12. gangrel ('vagabond') replaced beggarman (see p. 191).               
 13. My father first wrote Kalakilya, the  old form,  but changed  it at
     once to Kalakirya; -n was added later (see p. 89, $67).             

                 Commentary on the fourth section of the                
                              Annals of Aman.                           
                                                                       
 This section of the Annals  corresponds in  content to  QS Chapter  4 Of
 the Silmarils and the Darkening of  Valinor (V.227  - 31),  and to  AV 2
 annals  2500  to  the beginning  of 2990  (V.113 -  14). The  account in
 AAm  bears  no  comparison  with  the  cursory  AV  2, and  represents a
 wholly different impulse; indeed, in this section we see the  annal form
 disappearing  as  a fully-fledged  narrative emerges.  As was  often the
 case in  my father's  work, the  story took  over and  expanded whatever
 restrictions of form he had set for it. The new narrative is  double the
 length of that in QS, to which it  is closely  related in  structure. In
 expression it is almost entirely  new; and  yet comparison  between them
 will  show  that  AAm  tends  rather  to  a  greater  definition  of the
 narrative  than to  significant change  in the  structure or  marked new
 additions  -  though  both are  present. The  following comments  are in
 no  way  intended as  an analysis  of all  the differences  of emphasis,
 suggestion, and detail between AAm and QS.                             
                                                                       
 $78 Earlier in AAm, under the year 1115, appear rejected insertions
     (see p. 87, notes 3 and 5) in which are recorded the birth of        
     Feanor  to  Finwe's wife  Indis in  Middle-earth in  the course of the

          Great Journey,  and her  subsequent death  in a  fall in  the Misty
          Mountains.  Written  in  ball-point  pen  these   insertions  would
          appear  to  be relatively  late; here  on the  other hand,  in what
          seems to be an early addition  (written carefully  in ink,  and see
          note  1  above),  Feanor  was born  in Tirion,  and his  mother was
          Miriel,  called  Byrde  Miriel  (Old  English  byrde, 'broideress';
          see pp. 185, 192). In late insertions (notes 1 and  4 above)  it is
          recorded that in 1170 Miriel  'fell asleep'  and passed  to Mandos,
          and in 1185 Finwe married Indis of the Vanyar.                     
   $79    At  an  earlier  point  in  QS  ($40)  it is  said that  the Noldor
          'contrived  the  fashioning  of  gems'; similarly  in AV  2 (V.113)
          they 'invented  gems', and  again in  Ainulindale' B  (V.162). This
          idea is found in all the earlier texts, going back to the elaborate
          account  in the  old tale  of The  Coming of  the Elves  (see I.58,
          127). In the later period it survived in the final version D of the
          Ainulindale' ($35, see pp.  19 and  34), and  was still  present at
          first in  AAm (see  note 3  above). The  rewriting of  this passage
          rejects  the  idea  of  'invention':  the gems  of the  Noldor were
          mined in Aman.                                                     
  $80     The  association  of the  Noldor with  alphabetic script  goes back
          to the Lost Tales,  where this  art is  ascribed primarily  to Aule
          (1.58);  'in  those  days  Aule  aided  by  the   Gnomes  contrived
          alphabets  and  scripts'  (I.141).  In  Ainulindale' B  {V.162) the
          Noldor  'added  much  to  [Aule's] teaching  and delighted  much in
          tongues and alphabets', and  this survived  in the  later versions.
          Now  Rumil  and  (in  $83)  Feanor emerge  as the  great inventors.
          Cf. The Lord of the Rings, Appendix E (II):                        
            The  Tengwar  ...  had  been  developed  by  the   Noldor,  the
          kindred  of the  Eldar most  skilled in  such matters,  long before
          their  exile.  The oldest  Eldarin letters,  the Tengwar  of Rumil,
          were  not  used  in  Middle-earth. The  later letters,  the Tengwar
          of  Feanor,  were  largely  a  new  invention,  though   they  owed
          something to the letters of Rumil.                                 
          If Rumil were the author of the Annals of Aman, as  is said  in the
          preamble  (p.  48),  he  is  here describing  himself in  the words
          'most renowned of the masters of the lore of speech'.              
   $82    Finrod: earlier name of Finarfin (Finarphin).                      
   $84    The form Nauglath (see note 6, p. 102)  is, curiously,  a reversion
          to  the  original Gnomish  name of  the Dwarves  in the  Lost Tales
          (see  I.261), although  Naugrim occurs  as an  original form  in QS
          at a later point in the  narrative ($122).  [The entry  Naugrim was
          inadvertently  dropped  from the  index to  Vol. V.  The references
          are 273, 277, 405.] - On the name Sindar see p. 91, $74.           
            On earlier  references to  the Dwarves  in Beleriand  see IV.336;
          as  I  noted  there,  the statement  in the  second version  of the
          earliest  Annals  of Beleriand  (IV.332) that  the Dwarves  had 'of

                                     
                                                                            
       old' a road into Beleriand is the first sign of the later idea that
       the Dwarves had been active in Beleriand long before the Return       
       of the Noldor. But the present passage is the first reference to the
       Dwarves' aiding of Thingol in the delving and building of             
       Menegroth. - The legend of Aule s making of the Dwarves is            
       referred to in the texts of the earlier period: AB 2 (V.129), the     
       Lhammas (V.178 and commentary), and QS ($123 and com-              
       mentary).                                                             
  $85  Here appears the important development whereby the princes of         
       the Third House of the Noldor became close kin to Thingol of          
       Doriath (Elwe Singollo, brother of Olwe of Alqualonde, $ 58);         
       and Galadriel enters from The Lord of the Rings. Cf. Appendix         
       F (I, Of the Elves): 'The Lady Galadriel of the royal house of        
       Finrod, father of Felagund, Lord of Nargothrond' (a statement         
       that was changed in the Second Edition of The Lord of the,            
       Rings, when Finrod had become Finarphin and Inglor had                
       become Finrod (Felagund)).                                            
  $86  In AV 2 (V.112, also in an interpolation by Pengolod) and in QS       
       ($115) the Elves under Denethor did not come into Beleriand           
       'from the South', but came over the Blue Mountains; the               
       meaning here is probably that they crossed the mountains in a         
       region to the south of Ossiriand. There were nor seven rivers         
       flowing down from the mountains, but six: the seventh river of        
       Ossiriand was the great river Gelion, into which the six flowed.      
  $88  because of her kinship: in AAm $3 (as in AV 2 and in QS $9)           
       Nienna was 'Manwe's sister and Melko(r)'s'. In AAm* (p. 65)           
       she is named only Manwe's sister.                                     
  $92  In AV 2 two ages passed (V.Y.2500 - 2700) between the making          
       of the Silmarils and the release of Melkor; similarly in QS           
       ($$46 - 7). In AAm the relation of the two is reversed, with the      
       release of Melkor placed under Year of the Trees 1400 and the         
       final achievement of the Silmarils under 1450.                        
  $93  With what is said here concerning the fate of Feanor cf. QS $88:      
       'so fiery was his spirit that his body fell to ash as his spirit sped;
       and it has never again appeared upon earth nor left the realm of      
       Mandos.'                                                              
  $97  On the Elves' ignorance of weapons see p. 106, $97.                   
  $98  No mention is made in QS ($52) of the dissensions reaching the        
       point of drawn swords. In AAm $112 'Fingolfin set at nought           
       the unsheathing of the sword'; and in the margin of the               
       typescript text at this point my father wrote: 'refers to what?' A
       later expansion of the chapter in QS, close in time to the writing
       of AAm, tells that Feanor menaced Fingolfin with drawn sword          
       (p. 189, $52); and in view of $112 it seems probable that this        
       was inadvertently omitted here.                                       

                          
                                                                               
                                                          
                                                                               
   $99        The term of  Feanor's banishment  (see note  10 above)  is not
              stated in  the older  texts. -  The name  Formenos now  enters, in
              an addition to the text.                                          
   $102       the mightiest of all the dwellers in Ea: see p. 65, $2.      
   $105       The  time  of  Ungoliante's  coming to  Arda is  placed (as  a surmise)
              with the  entry of  Melkor and  his host  before the  overthrow of
              the Lamps (see  p. 53,  $19). With  'maybe she  came to  the South
              out  of the  darkness of  Ea' cf.  QS $55:  'from the  Outer Dark-
              ness, maybe, that lies beyond the Walls of the World'.            
   $106       Though  again  put  as a surmise, Ungoliante's origin is now found
              in her ancient corruption by Melkor, and it  is suggested  that he
              went to Arvalin of set purpose to find her.                       
   $107       The  high  mountain   in  the   southern range of the  Pelori  now
              receives  a  name,  Hyarantar (later  replaced by  Hyarmentir, see
              p. 285).                                                          
   $109 - 10  In  the  Lost  Tales  the  occasion  of  the great  festival was
              commemoration  of  the  coming  of the  Eldar to  Valinor (I.143),
              but in later texts its occasion is  not specified.  Now a  new and
              remarkable account of it is given, with a reference to the passage
              in the Ainulindale' ($25) where  the visible  shapes taken  by the
              Valar in Arda are described; and here the  idea of  these 'shapes'
              is extended (as it appears) to the point  where the  great spirits
              might  eat,  and  drink,  and  'draw  strength  from  the  Earth'.
              Wholly  new  also  in  this  passage  is  the  element  of Manwe's
              purpose to achieve concord among the Noldor.                      
   $112       In QS ($60) Feanor  was  present  at  the  festival on Taniquetil;
              now  enters  the  story that  he came  alone from  Formenos, being
              commanded  so   to  do   by  Manwe,   in  sombre   garments,  that
              Finwe  refused  to  come while  his son  lived in  banishment, and
              that  Feanor  was  reconciled  'in  words'  with  Fingolfin before
              Manwe's throne.  At this  stage, of  course, Feanor  and Fingolfin
              were still full brothers.                                         
   $114 There is no trace of  the work  Aldudenie among  my father's
              papers.  With  the  passage  concerning  the  Darkness  that  came
              with the extinction of the Light of the Trees cf. the Ainulindale'
              $19:  'and  it  seemed  to [the  Ainur] that  in that  moment they
              perceived  a  new  thing,  Darkness,  which  they  had  not  known
              before, except in thought.'                                       
   $116       On Orome's   horn  Valaroma   see  Ainulindale'   D,  $34 (pp.  35
              and 39).                                                          
                                                                               
                                        *                                       
                                                                               
   There  are  a  good  many  notes   and  changes   made  on   the  typescript,
   some added  by the  typist under  my father's  direction; but  only a  few of
   them need be recorded.                                                       

                          
                                                                                 
 $78 The two new annal entries given in note 1 above, and that in              
     note 4, are present in the typescript as typed.                              
 $81 After the entry for 1190 a new entry was added for the year                  
     1200: 'Luthien born' (with a query).                                         
 $84 A blank is left in the typescript where the manuscript has,                  
     Naugrim written above Nauglath, possibly because the typist                  
     did not know which form to put (see note 6). The blank was not               
     filled in, but the name Nornwaith that follows was struck                    
     through.                                                                     
 $85 After the annal for 1280 the following Beleriandic entries were          
     added:                                                                       
     1300 Daeron, loremaster of Thingol, contrives the Runes.                     
          Turgon, son of Fingolfin, and Inglor, son of Finrod, born.              
     1320 The Orcs first appear in Beleriand.                                     
 $86 After the annal for 1350 two entries were added:                             
     1362 Galadriel, daughter of Finrod, born in Eldamar.                         
          Isfin, White Lady of the Noldor, born in Tirion.                        
     The second of these appears also as a pencilled addition to the              
     manuscript (note 8).                                                         
 $97 Against the words 'Melkor spoke to the Eldar concerning                  
     weapons, which they had not before possessed or known' my                    
     father wrote on the typescript: 'No! They must have had                      
     weapons on the Great Journey.' Cf. the passage in QS on this                 
     subject (footnote to $49): 'The Elves had before possessed only              
     weapons of the chase, spears and bows and arrows.'                           
 $99 The term of Feanor's banishment was changed yet again (see                   
     note 10), from 'twenty' to 'twelve'.                                         
$113 After 'the Green Mound' was added: 'of Ezellohar'. This name            
     was added to the typescript at earlier occurrences: p. 69, $25. -            
     'The Vats of Varda' become 'The Wells of Varda'; see p. 69,                  
     $28.                                                                         
$114 The typist misread Elemire, and my father corrected the error to       
     the form Elemmire.                                                           
                                                                                 
 I do not know what intention lay behind the introduction of the                  
 Beleriandic entries given under $$81, 85 above.                                  
                                                                                 
                       Fifth section of the Annals of Aman.                       
                                                                                 
  $117   Thus   it   came   to   pass   that   after   a   while   a  great       
 concourse   of   folk   was  gathered   about  the   Ring  of   Doom;  and       
 the  gods  sat  in shadow,  for it  was night.  But now  night only  as it       
 may  be  in  some  land  of  the  world,  when  the  stars  peer  fitfully       
 through  the  wrack  of  great  clouds,  and  cold  fogs  drift in  from a       
 sullen   shore   of   the  sea.   Then  Yavanna   stood  upon   the  Green       

                                
                                                                       
 Mound,  and  it  was  bare  now  and  black;  and  she  gazed  upon the
 Trees  and  they   were  both   dead  and   dark.  Then   many  voices
 were  lifted  in  lamentation;  for  it  seemed  to those  that mourned
 that  they  had  drained  to  the  dregs  the  cup  of woe  that Melkor
 had filled for them. But it was not so.                            
    $118   For   Yavanna   spoke   before   the   Valar,   saying:  'The
 Light  of  the  Trees  hath  gone  hence,  and liveth  now only  in the
 jewels  of  Feanor.  Foresighted was  he. Lo!  for those  even who
 are  mightiest  there  is  some  deed that  they may  accomplish once,
 and  once  only.  The Light  of the  Trees I  brought into  being, and
 can  do so  never again  within Ea.  Yet had  I but  a little  of that
 Light, I could recall life to the Trees, ere their roots die; and then
 our  hurt  should   be  healed,   and  the   malice  of   Melkor  be
 confounded.'                                                           
    $119   And   Manwe   spoke,   and   said,   Hearest   thou,  Feanor,
 the words of Yavanna? Wilt thou grant what she would ask?'             
    And there was a long silence, but Feanor answered no word.          
    Then  Tulkas  cried:   Speak,  O   Noldo,  yea   or  nay!   But  who
 shall deny  Yavanna? And  did not  the light  of the  Silmarils come
 from her work in the beginning?'                                       
    But  Aule  the  Maker (1) said,  Be  not  hasty!   We  ask   a  greater
 thing than thou knowest. Let him have peace yet a while.'              
    $120  But  Feanor  spoke  then,  and  cried  bitterly:  'Verily  for
 the  less  even  as  for the  greater there  is some  deed that  he may
 accomplish  but  once  only.  And in  that deed  his heart  shall rest.
 Mayhap  I  can  unlock  my  jewels,  but  never  again  shall   I  make
 their  like;  and  if they  be broken,  then broken  will be  my heart,
 and I shall die: first of all the Children of Eru.'                    
    $121   'Not   the   first,'  quoth   Mandos,  but   they  understood
 not   his   word;   and   again   there   was  silence,   while  Feanor
 brooded  in the  dark. And  it seemed  to him  that he  was beset  in a
 ring  of  enemies,   and  the   words  of   Melkor  returned   to  him,
 saying  that  the  Silmarils  were  not  safe,   if  the   Valar  would
 possess  them. 'And  is he  not Vala  as are  they,' said  his thought,
 'and   understandeth   their   hearts?  Yea,   a  thief   shall  reveal
 thieves.'  Then  he  cried aloud:  'Nay, this  thing I  will not  do of
 free will. But  if the  Valar will  constrain me,  then verily  shall I
 know that Melkor is of their kindred.'                                 
    $122   'Thou   hast  spoken,'   quoth  Mandos;   then  all   sat  in
 silence,  while  Nienna  wept  upon  Korlaire   and  mourned   for  the
 bitterness  of  the  world.  And  even   as  she   mourned,  messengers
 came   from   Formenos,   and   they   were   Noldor,   and   bore  new

             
                                                                  
 tidings  of  evil. For  they told  now how  a blind  Darkness came
 northward,  and  in  the  midst  walked   some  power   for  which
 there was no name,  and the  Darkness issued  from it.  But Melkor
 also was there, and he came to the house of  Feanor, and  there he
 slew Finwe, king of the Noldor, before the doors, and  spilled the
 first blood of the Children of Iluvatar. For  Finwe alone  had not
 fled  from  the  horror  of  the  Dark.  But  the   stronghold  of
 Formenos  Melkor  had  broken,  and  had  utterly  destroyed,  and
 all  the  wealth  of  gems he  had taken;  and the  Silmarils were
 gone.                                                             
  $123  Then  Feanor  rose  up  and   cursed  Melkor,   naming  him
 Morgoth;(2) and  he  cursed  also  the  summons of Manwe,  and the
 hour in which he came to  Taniquetil, thinking  in his  folly that
 had  he been  at Formenos,  his strength  would have  availed more
 than  to  be  slain also, as Melkor had hoped.(3)  But  now Feanor
 ran from the concourse and fled into  the night,  as one  mad both
 with wrath and with grief: for his father was  dearer to  him than
 the  Light  of Valinor  or the  peerless works  of his  hands; and
 who among sons, of Elves  or of  Men, have  held their  fathers of
 greater worth?                                                    
  $124  And  those   who  beheld   Feanor  depart   grieved  sorely
 for  him; but  Yavanna was  dismayed, fearing  now that  the Great
 Darkness  would  swallow  the  last  rays of  Light for  ever. For
 though  the  Valar  did   not  yet   understand  fully   what  had
 befallen,  they  perceived that  Melkor had  called upon  some aid
 that came from  Without. The  Silmarils had  passed away,  and all
 one  it  may  seem,  therefore, whether Feanor would have said (4)
 yea or nay at the last; yet had he said  yea at  the first  and so
 cleansed his heart  ere the  dread tidings  came, his  after deeds
 maybe  had been  other than  they were.  But now  the doom  of the
 Noldor drew nigh.                                                 
  $125   Meanwhile,  it   is  told,   Morgoth  escaping   from  the
 pursuit  of  the  Valar  came  to the  waste-land of  Araman, that
 northward, as Arvalin to the south, lay between  the walls  of the
 Mountains  and  the  Great Sea.  Thus he  passed to  the Helkaraxe
 where  the  Strait  between  Araman  and  Middle-earth  is  filled
 with  grinding  ice;  and  he crossed  over and  came back  to the
 North  of  the  world. Then  so soon  as they  set foot  there and
 were  escaped  from  the  land of  the Valar,  Ungoliante summoned
 Morgoth to deliver  to her  her reward.  The half  of her  fee was
 the sap of the Trees; the other half was to be a full share in all
 the  jewels they  should take.  Morgoth yielded  these grudgingly,

 
                                                                    
 one by one, until  she had  devoured all  and their  beauty perished
 from the  earth,  and  then  huger and  darker grew  Ungoliante, and
 yet she hungered for more.                                         
    $126  But  Morgoth  would  give  her  no  part in  the Silmarils:
 these he named unto himself for ever. Thus there befell the first
 thieves' quarrel, and the  fear of  Yavanna came  not to  pass: that
 the  Darkness  should  swallow  the  last  rays  of  the  Light. But
 Ungoliante   was   wroth,  and   so  great   had  she   become  that
 Morgoth  could  not  master  her;  and  she  enmeshed  him   in  her
 strangling webs,  and  his  dreadful cry  echoed through  the world.
 Then  there  came  to  his  aid  the Balrogs,  who endured  still in
 deep  places  in  the  North  where  the  Valar  had  not discovered
 them.  With  their  whips  of  flame  they  smote her  webs asunder,
 and   they   drove  Ungoliante   away,  and   she  went   down  into
 Beleriand   and  dwelt   awhile  beneath   Ered  Orgoroth   in  that
 valley  which  after  was  named  Nan  Dungorthin,  because  of  the
 fear and horror that she  bred there.  But when  she had  healed her
 hurts  and  spawned  there  a  foul  brood  she  passed away  out of
 the  Northlands, and  returned into  the South  of the  world, where
 she abides yet for all that the Eldar have heard.                   
    $127   Then   Morgoth   being  freed   gathered  again   all  his
 servants that  he could  find, and  he delved  anew his  vast vaults
 and  his  dungeons  in  that  place  which  the Noldor  after called
 Angband,  and   above  them   he  reared   the  reeking   towers  of
 Thangorodrim.  There  countless  became  the  hosts  of  his  beasts
 and  his  demons;  and  thence  there  now   came  forth   in  hosts
 beyond  count  the  fell  race  of  the  Orkor,  that had  grown and
 multiplied  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth  like  a  plague.  These
 creatures  Morgoth  bred  in  envy  and  mockery  of  the  Eldar. In
 form (5) they  were like unto the Children of  Iluvatar, yet foul to
 look  upon;  for they  were bred (6) in hatred, and with hatred they
 were filled;  and he  loathed the  things that  he had  wrought, and
 with loathing they  served him.  Their voices  were as  the clashing
 of  stones,  and they  laughed not  save only  at torment  and cruel
 deeds.  The  Glamhoth,  host  of  tumult,  the Noldor  called them.
 (Orcs  we  may  name  them;  for  in  days of  old they  were strong
 and  fell  as  demons.  Yet  they  were  not  of  demon   kind,  but
 children (7) of earth corrupted  by  Morgoth,   and  they  could  be
 slain  or  destroyed  by  the  valiant  with  weapons  of  war. [But
 indeed  a  darker tale  some yet  tell in  Eressea, saying  that the
 Orcs  were verily  in their  beginning of  the Quendi  themselves, a
 kindred   of   the   Avari   unhappy   whom  Morgoth   cozened,  and

   
                                                                               
 then   made   captive,   and  so   enslaved  them,   and  so   brought  them
 utterly  to   ruin.*  For,   saith  Pengolod,   Melkor  could   never  since
 the   Ainulindale'   make  of   his  own   aught  that   had  life   or  the
 semblance  of  life,  and  still  less might  he do  so after  his treachery
 in   Valinor   and   the   fullness   of   his   own   corruption.](8) Quoth
 AElfwine.)                                                                     
      $128   Dark   now   fell   the  shadow   on  Beleriand,   as  elsewhere
 is   told;   but   in   Angband   Morgoth   forged   for  himself   a  great
 crown   of   iron;   and   he  called   himself  King of  the   World.(9) In
 token  of  which  he  set  the  Silmarils  in  his  crown.  His  evil  hands
 were   burned   black   by  the   touch  of   those  hallowed   jewels,  and
 black  they   have  been   ever  since;   and  he   was  never   again  free
 from  the  pain  of  the  burning.  The  crown  he   never  took   from  his
 head,   though   its   weight   became   a   weariness   unto.torment;   and
 never  but  once  only,  while  his  realm  lasted,  did  he  depart  for  a
 while   secretly   from   his   domain   in  the   North.(10) And   once  only
 also  did  he  himself  wield  weapon,  until  the  Last  Battle.  For  now,
 more  than  in  the  days  of  Utumno  ere  his   pride  was   humbled,  his
 hatred  devoured  him,   and  in   the  domination   of  his   servants  and
 the  inspiring  of  them   with  lust   of  evil,   he  spent   his  spirit.
 Nonetheless   his   majesty   as   one   of   the   Valar   long   remained,
 though   turned   to   terror,   and   before   his   face   all   save  the
 mightiest sank into a dark pit of fear.                                        
                                                                               
                      Of the Speech of Feanor upon Tuna.                       
                                                                               
      $129   When   it   was   known   that   Morgoth   had    escaped   from
 Valinor   and   pursuit   was   unavailing,   the   Valar    remained   long
 seated  in  darkness  in  the  Ring  of   Doom,  and   the  Maiar   and  the
 Vanyar   stood   by   them   and  wept;   but  the   Noldor  for   the  most
 part   returned   sadly   to   Tuna.  Dark   now  was   the  fair   city  of
 Tirion,  and  fogs   drifted  in   from  the   Shadowy  Seas,   and  mantled
 its towers. The lamp of the Mindon burned pale in the gloom.                   
      $130   Then   suddenly  Feanor   appeared  in   the  city   and  called
 on  all  to  come  to  the  high  Court  of  the  King  upon  the  summit of
 Tuna.   The   doom   of   banishment   that   had   been   laid   upon   him
 was  not  yet  lifted,  and  he   rebelled  against   the  Valar.   A  great
 multitude   gathered   swiftly,   therefore,   to   hear   what   he   would
 say,  and  the hill  and all  the streets,  and the  stairs that  climbed to
                                                                               
   (* [footnote to the text] In the Annals of Beleriand it is said that this
 he did in the Dark ere ever the Quendi were found by Orome.)                    

                                    
                                                                    
   the Court were thronged with the many torches that all bore in
   hand as they came.                                              
            $131 Feanor was a master  of words,  and his  tongue had
   great power over  hearts when  he would  use it.  Now he  was on
   fire, and that night he made a speech before the Noldor which
   they have ever remembered. Fierce and fell  were his  words, and
   filled  with  anger  and  pride;  and  they  moved  the  people to
   madness like the fumes of hot wine.  His wrath  and his  hate were
   most given to Morgoth, and  yet well  nigh all  that he  said came
   from  the  very  lies  of  Morgoth  himself.  He  claimed  now the
   kingship  of  all  the  Noldor,  since  Finwe  was  dead,  and  he
   scorned the decrees of the Valar.                                 
             $132 'Why, O my people,' he cried, 'why should we longer
   serve  these  jealous  gods,  who  cannot keep  us, nor  their own
   realm  even,  secure  from  their  Enemy?  And  though  he  be now
   their foe, are  not they  and he  of one  kin? Vengeance  calls me
   hence, but even were  it otherwise,  I would  not dwell  longer in
   the same land with the kin of my father's slayer and the  thief of
   my treasure. Yet I am not the only valiant in this valiant people.
   And have ye not  all lost  your king?  And what  else have  ye not
   lost,  cooped  here  in a  narrow land  between the  jealous moun-
   tains  and  the  harvestless Sea?  Here once  was light,  that the
   Valar begrudged to Middle-earth,  but now  dark levels  all. Shall
   we  mourn here  deedless for  ever, a  shadow-folk, mist-haunting,
   dropping vain  tears in  the salt  thankless Sea?  Or shall  we go
   home?  In  Kuivienen   sweet  ran   the  waters   under  unclouded
   stars, and  wide lands  lay about  where a  free folk  might walk.
   There they lie still and await us who in  our folly  forsook them.
   Come away! Let the cowards  keep this  city. But  by the  blood of
   Finwe! unless I dote, if the cowards only remain, then  grass will
   grow in the streets. Nay, rot, mildew, and toadstool.'            
             $133  Long he  spoke, and  ever he  urged the  Noldor to
   follow  him  and by  their own  prowess to  win freedom  and great
   realms in the lands of the East ere it was too late; for he echoed
   the  lies  of Melkor  that the  Valar had  cozened them  and would
   hold  them  captive  so  that  Men  might  rule  Middle-earth; and
   many of the  Eldar heard  then for  the first  time of  the After-
   comers. 'Fair shall the end be,' he cried,  'though long  and hard
   shall be the road! Say farewell to bondage! But say  farewell also
   to ease! Say farewell to the weak! Say farewell to  your treasures
   - more  still shall  we make!  Journey light.  But bring  with you
   vour swords! For we will  go further  than Tauros,  endure longer

             
                                                                
 than  Tulkas:  we  will  never  turn  back  from  pursuit. After
 Morgoth to the ends of the Earth! War shall  he have  and hatred
 undying.  But  when  we  have  conquered  and have  regained the
 Silmarils that he stole, then behold! We, we alone, shall be the
 lords of the unsullied Light, and masters of  the bliss  and the
 beauty of Arda! No other race shall oust us!'(11)                   
  $134  Then  Feanor  swore  a  terrible  oath.  Straightway  his
 seven sons leaped to his side and each  took the  selfsame oath;
 and red as blood shone their drawn  swords in  the glare  of the
 torches.                                                        
                        

      
                                         
    'Be he foe or friend, be he foul or clean,            
    brood of Morgoth or bright Vala,                      
    Elda or Maia or Aftercomer,                           
    Man yet unborn upon Middle-earth,                     
    neither law, nor love, nor league of swords,          
    dread nor danger, not Doom itself,                    
    shall defend him from Feanor, and Feanor's kin,       
    whoso hideth or hoardeth, or in hand taketh,          
    finding keepeth or afar casteth                       
    a Silmaril. This swear we all:                        
    death we will deal him ere Day's ending,              
    woe unto world's end! Our word hear thou,             
    Eru Allfather! To the everlasting                     
    Darkness doom us if our deed faileth.                 
    On the holy mountain hear in witness                  
    and our vow remember, Manwe and Varda!'               

                   
                    
 Thus  spoke  Maidros  and  Maglor,  and  Celegorn,  Curufin  and
 Cranthir, Damrod and Diriel, princes of the Noldor. But  by that
 name none should swear an oath, good or evil, nor in  anger call
 upon such witness, and many quailed to hear the fell  words. For
 so sworn, good or evil, an oath may not be broken, and  it shall
 pursue oathkeeper or oathbreaker to the world's end.           
   $135  Fingolfin, and his son  Turgon, therefore  spoke against
 Feanor, and fierce words awoke,  so that  once again  wrath came
 near to the edge of swords. But Finrod, who was skilled  also in
 words, spoke softly, as  his wont  was, and  sought to  calm the
 Noldor,  persuading  them  to  pause and  ponder ere  deeds were
 done that  could not  be undone.  But of  his own  sons Orodreth
 alone  spoke  in  like manner;  for Inglor  was with  Turgon his
 friend,(12) whereas  Galadriel, the only woman of the  Noldor to
 stand that day tall  and valiant  among the  contending princes,
 was  eager to  be gone.  No oaths  she swore,  but the  words of

                                    
                                                                    
 Feanor  concerning Middle-earth  had kindled  her heart,  and she
 yearned  to  see  the  wide  untrodden  lands  and  to rule  there a
 realm  maybe  at  her  own  will.  For  youngest  of  the  House of
 Finwe  she  came  into  the  world  west  of the  Sea, and  knew yet
 nought  of  the  unguarded  lands.  Of  like  mind  was  Fingon
 Fingolfin's son,  being moved  also by  Feanor's words,  though he
 loved  him  little;(13) and with Fingon as  ever stood  Angrod and
 Egnor, sons of Finrod. But these  held their  peace and  spoke not
 against their fathers.                                            
     $136 In the end after long debate Feanor prevailed, and the
 greater part of the Noldor there assembled  he set  aflame with
 the desire  of new  things and  strange countries.  Therefore when
 Finrod spoke  yet again  for heed  and delay,  a great  shout went
 up:  'Nay,  let  us be  gone! Let  us be  gone! '  And straightway
 Feanor and his sons began to prepare for the marching forth.      
     $137 Little foresight could there  be for  those who  dared to
 take so dark a road. Yet all  was done  in over-haste;  for Feanor
 drove them on, tearing  lest in  the cooling  of hearts  his words
 should  wane  and  other  counsels  yet prevail.  And for  all his
 proud words he did not  forget the  power of  the Valar.  But from
 Valmar  no  message  came,  and  Manwe  was  silent. He  would not
 yet either forbid or hinder Feanor's purpose;  for the  Valar were
 aggrieved that they were charged with evil intent to the Eldar, or
 that any were held captive by  them against  their will.  Now they
 watched  and  waited,  for they  did not  yet believe  that Feanor
 could hold the host of the Noldor to his will.                    
     $138  And  indeed  when  Feanor began  the marshalling  of the
 Noldor for their setting out, then at  once dissension  arose. For
 though he had  brought the  assembly in  a mind  to depart,  by no
 means all were  of a  mind to  take Feanor  as king.  Greater love
 was given to Fingolfin  and his  sons, and  his household  and the
 most part of the dwellers in  Tirion refused  to renounce  him, if
 he  would go  with them.  Thus at  the last  the Noldor  set forth
 divided in two hosts. Feanor and  his following  were in  the van;
 but  the  greater  host  came  behind  under  Fingolfin.   And  he
 marched  against  his  wisdom,  because  Fingon  his son  so urged
 him, and because he  would not  be sundered  from his  people that
 were eager to go, nor leave them to the  rash counsels  of Feanor.
 With Fingolfin went  Finrod also  and for  like reason;  but most
 loath was he to depart.                                           
    $139 It  is recorded  that of  all the  Noldor in  Valinor, who
 were grown now  to a  great people,  but one  tithe refused  to take

             
                                                                   
 the road: some for the love  that they  bore to  the Valar  (and to
 Aule not least), some for the love  of Tirion  and the  many things
 that they had made; none for  fear of  peril by  the way.  For they
 were indeed a valiant people.                                      
  $140  But  even  as  the  trumpet  sang  and  Feanor  issued  from
 the  gates  of  Tirion  a  messenger  came  at  last   from  Manwe,
 saying: 'Against the folly of Feanor shall be set my  counsel only.
 Go  not  forth!  For  the  hour  is  evil, and  your road  leads to
 sorrows that ye do not foresee. No aid will the  Valar lend  you in
 this emprise; but lo! they will not hinder you;  for this  ye shall
 know: as ye came hither freely,  freely shall  ye depart.  But thou
 Feanor Finwe's son by  thine oath  art exiled.  The lies  of Melkor
 thou  shalt unlearn  in bitterness.  Vala he  is, thou  saist. Then
 thou  hast  sworn  in  vain,  for  none  of  the  Valar  canst thou
 overcome  now  or  ever  within the halls of Ea,(14) not though Eru
 whom  thou  namest  had   made  thee   thrice  greater   than  thou
 arr.'(15)                                                          
  $141  But  Feanor  laughed,  and  spoke  not  to  the  herald, but
 to  the  Noldor,  saying: So!  Then will  this valiant  people send
 forth the heir of their King  alone into  banishment with  his sons
 only, and return to their bondage? But  if any  will come  with me,
 to  them I  say: Is  sorrow foreboded  to you.'  Verily in  Aman we
 have  seen  it.  In Aman  we have  come through  bliss to  woe. The
 other  now  we  will try:  through sorrow  to find  joy. Or  at the
 least: freedom!'                                                   
  $142  Then  turning  to  the  herald  he   cried:  'Say   this  to
 Manwe  Sulimo,  High-king  of  Arda:  If  Feanor  cannot  overthrow
 Morgoth, at least he delays not to assail him, and sits not idle in
 grief. And Eru,  mayhap, has  set in  me a  fire greater  than thou
 knowest. Such hurt, at the least, will I  do the  Foe of  the Valar
 that  even the  mighty in  the Ring  of Doom  shall wonder  to hear
 it. Yea, in the end they shall follow me. Farewell! '              
  $143  In  that  hour  the  voice of  Feanor grew  so great  and so
 potent  that  even  the  herald of  the Valar  bowed before  him as
 one  full-answered,  and  departed;  and  the  Noldor   were  over-
 ruled.  Therefore  they  continued  their march;  and the  House of
 Feanor  hastened  before  them  along  the  coasts  of  Elende: and
 not  once  did  they  turn  their  eyes  backward  to  Tirion  upon
 Tuna.  Slower and  less eagerly  came the  host of  Fingolfin after
 them.  Of  these  Fingon  was the  foremost; but  at the  rear went
 Finrod  and  Inglor,  and  many of  the fairest  and wisest  of the
 Noldor; and often they looked behind them to  see their  fair city,

       
                                                                            
        until  the  lamp  of  the  Mindon  Eldalieva was  lost in  the night.
        More  than  any  others of  the exiles  they carried  thence memories
        of  the  bliss  that they  had forsaken,  and some  even of  the fair
        things  that  they  had  made  there  they took  with them:  a solace
        and a burden on the road.                                            
                                                                            
                 Of the First Kin-slaying and the Doom of the Noldor.        
                                                                            
           $144   Now   Feanor   led  the   Noldor  northward,   because  his
       first  purpose  was   to  follow   Morgoth.  Moreover,   Tuna  beneath
       Taniquetil  was  set  nigh  to  the  girdle  of  Arda,  and  there the
       Great  Sea  was   immeasurably  wide,   whereas  ever   northward  the
       sundering  seas  grew  narrower,  as  the  waste-land  of  Araman  and
       the  coasts  of  Middle-earth  drew  together. But  the hosts  had not
       gone far,  ere it  came to  the mind  of Feanor,  over late,  that all
       these  great  companies,  both  of  the  full-grown  and  war-high and
       many  others,   and  great   store  of   goods  withal,   would  never
       overcome the long  leagues to  the North,  nor cross  the seas  at the
       last, save with the aid of ships.                                     
           $145  Therefore  Feanor  now  resolved  to  persuade  the  Teleri,
       ever  friends  of  the  Noldor,  to  join  with  them;  for   thus  he
       thought  to  diminish  the  wealth  of  Valinor  yet  further  and  to
       increase  his  own  power  of  war.  Thus  also  he  would  get  ships
       swiftly.  For  it  would need  great time  and toil  to build  a great
       fleet, even if  the Noldor  had skill  and timber  in plenty  for such
       craft,  as  indeed  they  had  not.  He  hastened then  to Alqualonde,
       and spoke to the Teleri as he had spoken in Tirion.                   
           $146  But  the  Teleri  were  unmoved  by  aught  that   he  could
       say.  They  were grieved  indeed at  the going  of their  kinsfolk and
       long  friends,  but  would  rather  dissuade   them  than   aid  them;
       and  no  ship  would  they  lend,  nor help  in the  building, against
       the  will  of  the  Valar.  As  for  themselves  they  desired  now no
       other  home  but  the  strands  of  Eldamar,  and  no other  lord than
       Olwe,  prince  of   Alqualonde.  And   he  had   never  lent   ear  to
       Morgoth,  nor  welcomed him  to his  land, and  he trusted  still that
       Ulmo  and  the  other  great  among  the   Valar  would   redress  the
       hurts  of  Morgoth,  and  that  the  night  would  pass  yet   to  new
       dawn.                                                                 
           $147  Then  Feanor  grew  wroth,  for he  still feared  delay; and
       he  spoke  hotly  to  Olwe.  'Thou  renouncest  thy  friendship,  even
       in  the hour  of our  need,' said  he. 'Yet  fain were  ye of  our aid
       when  ye came  at last  to these  shores, fainthearted  loiterers, and
       wellnigh  emptyhanded.  In  huts  on  the   beaches  would   ye  dwell

 still,  had  not  the  Noldor carved  out your  haven and  toiled on
 your walls.'                                                       
   $148  But  Olwe  answered:  'Nay,   we  renounce   no  friendship.
 But it may be the hard part of a friend to rebuke a  friend's folly.
 And  when  your  folk  welcomed  us  and  gave  us   aid,  otherwise
 then ye spoke: in the land of  Aman we  were to  dwell for  ever, as
 brothers  whose  houses stand  side by  side. But  as for  our white
 ships: those ye  gave us  not. That  craft we  learned not  from the
 Noldor, but from  the Lords  of the  Sea; and  the white  timbers we
 wrought  with  our  own  hands  and  the white  sails were  woven by
 our  fair wives  and maidens.  Therefore we  will neither  give them
 nor  sell them  for any  league or  friendship. For  I say  to thee,
 Feanor, these are to  us as  are the  gems of  the Noldor:  the work
 of our hearts, whose like we shall not make again.'                
   $149  Thereupon  Feanor  left  him,  and  sat  beyond   the  walls
 brooding  darkly,  until  his  host  was  assembled. When  he deemed
 that his strength was  enough he  v ent  to the  Haven of  the Swans
 and  began  to  man  the  ships  that  were  anchored  there  and to
 take  them  away  by force.  But the  Teleri withstood  him stoutly,
 and  they  cast  many  of  the  Noldor  into  the  sea.  Then swords
 were  drawn,  and  a  bitter fight  was fought  upon the  ships, and
 about  the  lamplit  quays  and piers  of the  Haven, and  even upon
 the great arch of its gate. Thrice  the folk  of Feanor  were driven
 back, and  many were  slain upon  either side;  but the  vanguard of
 the  Noldor  were  succoured  by  Fingon  with  the  foremost people
 of  Fingolfin.  These  coming  up  found a  battle joined  and their
 own  kin  falling,  and  they rushed  in ere  they knew  rightly the
 cause  of  the  quarrel:  some  deemed  indeed  that the  Teleri had
 sought to waylay  the march  of the  Noldor, at  the bidding  of the
 Valar.                                                             
   $150  Thus  at  last  the  Teleri  were  overcome,  and   a  great
 part  of  their  mariners  that  dwelt  in Alqualonde  were wickedly
 slain.  For the  Noldor were  become fierce  and desperate,  and the
 Teleri  had less  strength, and  were armed  mostly with  light bows
 only.   Then   the  Noldor   drew  away   their  white   ships,  and
 manned  their  oars  as  best  they  might,  and  rowed  them  north
 along  the  coast.  And  Olwe  called  upon Osse,  but he  came not;
 for  he had  been summoned  to Valmar  to the  vigil and  council of
 the gods; and it was no'. permitted by the Valar that the  Flight of
 the  Noldor  should be  hindered by  force. But  Uinen wept  for the
 mariners  of  the  Teleri;  and the  sea rose  in wrath  against the
 slayers,  so  that  many  of  the  ships were  wrecked and  those in

                   
                                                                   
  them  drowned. Of the Kin-slaying  at Alqualonde  more is  told in
  that  lament  which  is  named  Noldolante,(16) The  Fall  of  the
  Noldor, which Maglor made ere he was lost.                        
                                                                   
                                 1496                               
                                                                   
      $151  Nonetheless  the  greater  part  of the  Noldor escaped,
  and when the storm was  over they  held on  their course,  some by
  ship, some by land; but the  way was  long and  ever more  evil as
  they  went  forward.  After  they  had marched  for a  great while
  in  the  unmeasured  night  they came  at length  to the  north of
  the  Guarded  Realm  upon  the  borders  of  the  empty  waste  of
  Araman,  which  were  mountainous  and  cold.  There  they  beheld
  suddenly  a  dark  figure standing  upon a  high rock  that looked
  down  upon  the shore.  Some say  that it  was Mandos  himself and
  no lesser herald of  Manwe. And  they heard  a loud  voice, solemn
  and terrible, that bade them stand and give ear.(17)              
     $152  All halted and stood still, and  from end  to end  of the
  hosts  of the  Noldor the  voice was  heard speaking  the Prophecy
  of  the  North  and  the  Doom  of  the  Noldor. 'Turn  back! Turn
  back! Seek  the pardon  of the  Valar lest  their curse  fall upon
  you!'  So  the  voice  began, and  many woes  it foretold  in dark
  words,  which  the  Noldor  understood not  until the  woes indeed
  after befell them. 'Tears unnumbered ye shall shed;  but if  ye go
  further, be assured that the Valar will fence Valinor against you,
  and shut you out, so that not  even the  echo of  your lamentation
  shall pass over the mountains.                                    
      $153  'Lo!  on  the  House of  Feanor the  wrath of  the gods
  lieth from  the West  into the uttermost East,  and upon  all that
  will follow them it  shall be  laid also.  Their Oath  shall drive
  them,  and  yet  betray  them,  and  ever  snatch  away  the  very
  treasures that they have sworn to  pursue. To  evil end  shall all
  things turn that they begin well; and by the  treason of  kin unto
  kin,  and  the  fear  of  treason,  shall this  come to  pass. The
  Dispossessed shall they be for ever.                              
      $154  'Behold!  Ye  have  spilled  the  blood of  your kindred
  unrighteously  and have  stained the  land of  Aman. For  blood ye
  shall  render blood,  and beyond  Aman ye  shall dwell  in Death's
  shadow.  For  know  now  that  though  Eru  appointed unto  you to
  die not in Ea, and no sickness may  assail you,  yet slain  may ye
  be,  and  slain  ye  shall  be: by  weapon and  by torment  and by
  grief;  and  your  houseless  spirits shall  come then  to Mandos.
  There  long  shall ye  abide and  yearn for  your bodies  and find

              
                                                                     
 little pity though all  whom ye  have slain  should entreat  for you.
 And   those   that   endure   in   Middle-earth   and  come   not  to
 Mandos,  they  shall  grow  weary  of  the  world  as  with  a  great
 burden,   and   shall  wane,   and  become   as  shadows   of  regret
 before  the  younger  race   that  cometh   after.  The   Valar  have
 spoken.'                                                             
  $155   Then   many   quailed.   But   Feanor   hardened   his  heart
 and  said:  'We  have  sworn,  and  not  lightly.  This Oath  we will
 keep.  And  lo!  we  are  threatened  with  many  evils,  and treason
 not  least; but  one thing  is not  said: that  we shall  suffer from
 cravens;  from  cowardice  or  the  fear   of  cowardice   among  us.
 Therefore  I  say  we  will go  on, and  this doom  I add:  the deeds
 that  we  do  shall  be the  matter of  song until  the last  days of
 Arda.' And the doom of Feanor was true-spoken also.                  
  $156   But   in   that   hour   Finrod   forsook   the   march,  and
 turned hack,  being filled  with grief,  and with  hitterness against
 the  house  of  Feanor,  because  of  his   kinship  with   Olwe  of
 Alqualonde;  and  many  of  his  people  went  with   him,  retracing
 their  steps  in sorrow,  until they  beheld once  more the  far beam
 of  the Mindon  upon Tuna  still shining  in the  night, and  so came
 at last  to Valinor.  There they  received the  pardon of  the Valar,
 and  Finrod  was  set  to  rule  the  remnant  of  the Noldor  in the
 Blessed  Realm.  But  his  sons  were  not with  him, for  they would
 not  forsake the  sons of  Fingolfin; and  all Fingolfin's  folk went
 forward still, feeling the constraint of their  kinship and  the will
 of Feanor, and fearing to face the doom  of the  gods, since  not all
 of  them  had  been  guiltless  of  the  kinslaying   at  Alqualonde.
 Moreover  Fingon  and  Turgon  were  bold  and  fiery  of  heart  and
 loath  to  abandon  any  task  to  which  they  had  put  their hands
 until the bitter end, if bitter it must he. So the main host held on,
 and swiftly the evil that was forespoken began its work.             
                                                                     
                                 1497                                 
                                                                     
  $157  The  Noldor  came  at  last  far  into  the  North   of  Arda,
 and they saw the first teeth of the ice that floated in the  sea, and
 knew   that   they   were   drawing  nigh   to  the   Helkaraxe.  For
 between   the   West-land   of   Aman  that   in  the   north  curved
 eastward  and  the  east-shores  of  Endar  (which  is  Middle-earth)
 that  bore  westward  there  was  a  narrow  strait,   through  which
 the chill waters of the  Encircling Sea  and the  waves of  the Great
 Sea  flowed  together,  and  there  were  vast  fogs  and   mists  of
 deathly cold,  and the  sea-streams were  filled with  clashing hills

                                             
                                                                   
  of  ice  and  the  grinding  of  ice  deep-sunken.  Such   was  the
  Helkaraxe, and there none  yet had  dared to  tread save  the Valar
  only and Ungoliante.                                              
      $158   Therefore   Feanor   halted   and  the   Noldor  debated
  what  course  they  should  now  take.  But  soon  they   began  to
  suffer  anguish  from  the  cold,  and  the clinging  mists through
  which no  gleam of  star could  pierce; and  many of  them repented
  of the road  and began  to murmur,  especially those  that followed
  Fingolfin, cursing Feanor, and naming him as the  cause of  all the
  woes of  the Eldar.  But Feanor,  knowing all  that was  said, took
  counsel  with  his  sons.  Two  courses  only  they  saw  to escape
  from  Araman  and  come  unto  Endar:  by the  straits or  by ship.
  But  the  Helkaraxe  they  deemed  impassable,  whereas  the  ships
  were  too  few.  Many  had been  lost upon  their long  journey and
  there remained now not  enough to  bear across  all the  great host
  together;  yet  none  were  willing  to  abide upon  the west-coast
  while others were ferried first: already the fear of  treachery was
  awake among the Noldor.                                           
      $159  Therefore  it  came  into  the hearts  of Feanor  and his
  sons  to  seize all  the ships  and depart  suddenly; for  they had
  retained the mastery of the fleet  since the  battle of  the Haven,
  and  it  was  manned  only  by  those  who  had  fought  there  and
  were  bound unto  Feanor. And  lo! as  though it  came at  his call
  there  sprang up  a wind  from the  north-west, and  Feanor slipped
  away (18) secretly  with  all  whom he  deemed true  to him,  and went
  aboard,  and  put out  to sea,  and left  Fingolfin in  Araman. And
  since  the  sea  was  there  narrow,  steering  east  and  somewhat
  south he passed over without loss, and first of all the  Noldor set
  foot  once  more  upon   the  shores   of  Middle-earth.   And  the
  landing  of  Feanor  was  at  the  mouth  of  that firth  which was
  called Drengist, and ran into Dor-lomin.(19)                     
      $160  But  when  they were  landed, Maidros  the eldest  of his
  sons (and on  a time  a friend  of Fingon  ere Morgoth's  lies came
  between)  spoke  to  Feanor,  saying:  'Now  what  ships   and  men
  wilt thou spare to return, and whom shall  they bear  hither first?
  Fingon the valiant?'                                              
      $161  Then  Feanor  laughed  as  one  fey,  and  his  wrath was
  unleashed: 'None and none!'  he cried. 'What I  have left  behind I
  count now  no loss:  needless baggage  on the  road it  has proved.
  Let those  that cursed  my name,  curse me  still! And  whine their
  way back to the cages of the Valar, if they can find no  other! Let
  the ships burn!'                                                  

                                                         
                                                                   
  $162  Then  Maidros  alone  stood  aside,   but  Feanor   and  his
 sons set fire in the white ships of  the Teleri.  So in  that place
 which was called Losgar at the outlet of the Firth of Drengist (20)
 ended in a great burning  bright and  terrible the  fairest vessels
 that ever sailed the sea. ' And  Fingolfin and  his people  saw the
 light afar off red beneath the clouds. This was the first-fruits of
 the Kinslaying and the Doom of the Noldor.                         
  $163  Then  Fingolfin  knew  that  he  was  betrayed, and  left to
 perish in misery or go  back in  shame. And  his heart  was bitter,
 but  desired  now  as  never  before  to  come  by  some  way  into
 Middle-earth,  and  meet  Feanor  again.  And   he  and   his  host
 wandered  long  and  wretchedly;  but  their  valour  and endurance
 grew greater with hardship; for they  were yet  a mighty  folk, the
 elder  children  undying  of  Eru Iluvatar,  but new-come  from the
 Blessed  Realm,  and  not yet  weary with  the weariness  of Earth;
 and the fire of their hearts was young. Therefore led  by Fingolfin
 and his sons, and  by Inglor  and Galadriel  the valiant  and fair,
 they  dared  to  pass  into  the  untrodden  North, and  finding no
 other way  they endured  at last  the terror  of the  Helkaraxe and
 the cruel hills of ice. Few of the deeds  of the  Noldor thereafter
 surpassed  that  desperate crossing  in hardihood  or in  woe. Many
 there perished, and it was with a lessened host that  Fingolfin set
 foot at last upon the Northlands of Endar.  Little love  for Feanor
 or  his  sons  had  those that  then marched  behind him,  and blew
 their trumpets in Middle-earth at the first rising of the Moon.
           Here the Noldor passed out of Aman and                   
           the Annals of Aman tell of them no more.            

                            NOTES.                                   
                                                                    
 1. 'Aule the Maker' replaced 'Ulmo'.
 2. Struck out here, probably at once: '(the Dark Enemy)'.
 3. Struck out here (later): 'not a second time would the Black Foe of
    Arda be dismissed with proud words of scorn.'
 4. This passage is a replacement of the original text:
    but Yavanna was dismayed, for now the Light of the Trees had
    passed utterly into a great Darkness, which though the Valar
    did rot yet understand they perceived that it must come from
    some aid that Morgoth had called from Without, and they
    feared that it was lost beyond the End. Therefore all was one,
    whether Feanor said...
 5. This passage was emended from the original text, which read
    thus:

     There  countless  became  the  hosts  of his  beasts and  his demons;
     and  he  brought  now  into  being the  fell race  of the  Orkor, and
     they  grew  and  multiplied  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth  like  a
     plague.  These  creatures  Morgoth  made  in  envy  and   mockery  of
     the Eldar. Therefore in form...                                      
                                                                         
  6. 'bred' is an emendation of 'made'.                                   
  7. 'children' is an emendation of 'a spawn'.                            
  8. This passage, from 'But indeed  a darker  tale...' and  including the
     footnote, was struck out at a later  time than  the changes  given in
     notes 5 - 7 and perhaps in revision of the text before the  making of
     the typescript, in which it does  not appear.  The whole  addition by
     AElfwine is enclosed within brackets as originally written.          
  9. The  original  text  was  'Aran  Endor,  King of  Middle-earth.' Aran
     Endor  was  then  corrected  to Tarumbar;  finally the  reading 'King
     of the World' was substituted.                                       
 10. The text as originally written read  here: 'and  never but  once only
     did he come forth from the  deeps that  he had  dug, while  his realm
     lasted.'  When  my  father  corrected  this  to  the text  printed he
     added all that follows to the end of the paragraph.                  
 11. In this paragraph the passage from 'ere it  was too  late' as  far as
     'many  of  the  Eldar heard  then for  the first  time of  the After-
     comers', and the final sentence 'No other race  shall oust  us', were
     later additions.                                                     
 12. The  associations  of  the  Noldorin princes  were different  as this
     passage  was  first  written:  'Fingolfin  and  his  sons  Fingon and
     Turgon  spoke  against Feanor',  and 'of  [Finrod's] own  sons Inglor
     alone  spoke  in  like  manner,  for  Angrod  and  Egnor   were  with
     Fingon,  and  Orodreth  stood  aside;  whereas Galadriel...'  But the
     changes  that  give  the  text  printed  appear  to  have  been  made
     immediately,  since  the  passage  at  the   end  of   the  paragraph
     belongs to the original writing of the text.                         
 13. Struck out here: and his  sons less  (cf. the  passage in  $160 where
     Fingon's friendship with Maidros is referred to).                    
 14. Ea   is  so  spelt  here,  and  again in  $154, but  in the  last two
     occurrences in the text it is spelt Ea.                              
 15. Struck out  here: 'and  Melkor least  of all,  who is  mightiest save
     one.'                                                                
 16. The  name  Noldolante   was  added  in  the   margin.  It   does  not
     appear in the typescript.                                            
 17. The  page  beginning  here  and  carrying  $$152  -  4  is  much more
     roughly  written  than  the  rest  of the  manuscript, and  my father
     struck it through and replaced it. It might be thought at first sight
     that this is the only place where a first draft of AAm  survives, but
     this  is not  the case.  The rough  'draft' page  was written  on the
     reverse of that carrying $$149 -  51, and  that is  in the  same good

                                                             
                                                                         
      clear script  as elsewhere  (with a  number of  changes made  in the
      act of composition). It is plain then that the rejected page did not
      begin as 'rough  draft' (and  the handwriting  bears this  out), but
      degenerated  into  it;  and  this instance  is, if  anything, rather
      evidence against the idea of  a lost  first draft  of the  Annals of
      Aman (see p. 47).                                                   
        The first  text originally  began, following  QS $71,  'Once again
      he  warned  the  Noldor to  return and  seek pardon,  or in  the end
      they  should  return  at  last  only  after  bitter sorrow  and woes
      unspeakable.'  The  Doom  of  the Noldor  in the  final form  was in
      fact only changed from  the draft  by a  rearrangement of  its parts
      and in  many details  of phrasing.  Two points  may be  noted. After
      '... over the mountains' at the end of $152 stood 'Ye shall  be free
      of  them  and  they  of  you';  and the  sentence in  $154 beginning
      'There long shall ye abide...' read 'There long shall ye  ahide, and
      be not set free until those ye have slain entreat for you.'         
  18. This sentence replaced the following: 'Waiting then but a little for
      a  north wind  that brought  a deep  mist upon  the host  he slipped
      away...'                                                            
  19. The last sentence of $159 was a later addition.                     
  20. The passage 'in that place ... the  Firth of  Drengist' was  a later
      addition.                                                           
  21. Changed from 'the fairest vessels of the Elder Days'.               

                 Commentary on the fifth section of the               
                             Annals of Aman.                           
                                                                      
 This section of the Annals corresponds in  content to  QS Chapter  5 Of
 the Flight of the Noldor (V.232 - 8), and to  AV 2  annals 2990  - 2994
 (V.114 - 17). After the opening paragraphs the narrative of  the Annals
 is again closely related in structure to  the chapter  in QS,  and from
 $125  onwards  many phrases  are retained  from it  (more in  fact than
 appears from the text printed, since  in some  cases my  father adopted
 phrases without change from  QS and  then altered  them). On  the other
 hand, the narrative is greatly expanded in scope.                     
                                                                      
 $$117-24   There now  enters a  new and  subtle articulation  in the
   story,  with  the  assertion  of  Yavanna that  with the  holy light
   regained  from  the Silmarils  she could  rekindle the  Trees before
   their   roots   died,  the   demand  made   upon  Feanor,   and  his
   refusal - before the news came from Formenos.                       
 $121   Mandos  said 'Not  the first'  because he  knew that  Finwe had
   been murdered. See further p. 127, $ 120.                           
 $122   Korlaire: the first occurrence of this name (see p.127, $122).-
   A new element  in the  narrative is  that 'Finwe  alone had not fled
   from  the  horror  of  the  Dark.'  In  QS  ($60)  and AV  2 Morgoth

                
                                                                              
             slew  many  others  beside.  Where  Feanor's  sons  were,  or where
             they went (for Feanor  came to  the festival  alone, $112),  is not
             cold (see pp. 293 - 4).                                           
      $123   It  is  now first  said  that  it  was  Feanor  who   named  Melkor
             Morgoth  ('the  Dark  Enemy',  note  2   above).  In   AAm  (unlike
             QS) Melkor  is always  so named  until this  point, but  after this
             almost invariably Morgoth.                                        
      $125   Araman:  QS  Eruman.   The  change   had  appeared   previously  on
             the  Ambarkanta  map  V  (IV.250  - 1),  where it  was put  in many
             years after the making of the map.                                
      $126   In QS ($62)  no more  is said  of Ungoliante's  fate than  that the
             Balrogs  drove  her  away  'into  the  uttermost  South,  where she
             long  remained';  now  appears the  story that  she dwelt  first in
             Nan  Dungorthin,  and  only  afterwards,  after  spawning  there,
             did she retreat into the  South of  the world.  But the  spiders of
             Nan Dungorthin 'of  the fell  race of  Ungoliante' are  referred to
             later in QS, in the story  of Beren's  flight from  Dorthonion (see
             V.299, and the published Silmarillion p. 164).                    
      $127   The  origin  of  the  Orcs.  In  QS  ($62)  the  idea  had  already
             arisen that the Orcs originated in  mockery of  the Elves,  but not
             yet  that  the Orcs  were in  any other  way associated  with them:
             they  were  a  'creation' of  Morgoth's own,  'made of  stone', and
             he  brought  them  into  being  when  he returned  to Middle-earth.
             As AAm was first written (see notes 5  - 7  above) this  view still
             held;  the  word  'made'  was  still  used -  though not  the words
             'made of stone'.  But in  AElfwine's note  that follows  (and which
             was  written  continuously  with  what  precedes)  they  are called
             'a  spawn of  earth corrupted  by Morgoth';  and the  'darker tale'
             told  in  Eressea  -  that  the  Orcs   were  in   their  beginning
             enslaved  and  corrupted  Elves  (Avari) -  is certainly  the first
             appearance   of   this  idea,   contradicting  what   precedes,  or
             perhaps rather at this stage presenting  an alternative  theory. It
             is  ascribed  to  Pengolod;  and Pengolod  argues to  AElfwine that
             Melkor  could  actually  make  nothing  that  had  life,  but could
             only  corrupt  what  was  already living.  The implication  of this
             second  theory  would  probably,  though  not necessarily,  be that
             the  Orcs came  into being  much earlier,  before the  Captivity of
             Melkor; and that this implication  is present  is suggested  by the
             footnote  reference  to  the  Annals  of  Beleriand  -  meaning the
             last  version  of  these  Annals,  the  Grey  Annals,  companion to
             the Annals of Aman: 'it is said that this  he did  in the  Dark ere
             ever the Quendi were found by Orome.'                             
                At this point  my father  went back  to an  earlier part  of AAm
             (p.  72,  $42)  and  interpolated  the   passage  'Yet   by  after-
             knowledge  ...',  where  the  idea  of  the  capture  of  wandering

                                                                  
                                                                            
        Quendi  in  their  earliest  days  is filled  out, though  it remains
        only a  supposition of  the 'masters  of lore'.  Perhaps at  the same
        time   he  emended   the  present   passage,  changing   'he  brought
        now  into  being'  to  'thence   there  now   came  forth   in  hosts
        beyond  count',  'made'  to  'bred',  and  'a  spawn  of   earth'  to
        'children  of  earth'.  He  then  (as  I  conjecture)  developed  the
        interpolation  at  the  earlier  point  much more  fully ($$43  - 5),
        where  the  idea  becomes  less  a  supposition  than a  certainty of
        history:  the  powerlessness  of Melkor  to make  living things  is a
        known fact ('so say the wise'). Finally,  at a  later time  (see note
        8),  he  cut  out  the  whole passage  at the  end of  $127 beginning
        'But indeed a  darker tale  some yet  tell in  Eressea ...'  - either
        because  he  only  then  observed  that  it  had  been  superseded by
        $$43  -  5  and  was in  any case  not in  the appropriate  place, or
        because  he  rejected  this  theory of  the origin  of the  Orcs. See
        further p. 127, $127.                                                
          The  word  for  in  'Orcs  we  may name  them; for  in days  of old
        they  were  strong  and  fell  as  demons.  Yet  they  were   not  of
        demon  kind'  (an  observation  of  AElfwine's)  suggests  that  Orcs
        is  Old  English  (cf.  orc-neas in  Beowulf line  112), conveniently
        similar  to  the  Elvish  word.  This  would  explain   why  AElfwine
        said,  in  effect,  'We  may  call  them  Orcs,  because   they  were
        strong  and  fell  as  demons,  even  though  they  were not  in fact
        demons.'  In  a  letter  of  my  father's  written  on 25  April 1954
        (Letters  no.144)  he  said  that the  word Orc  'is as  far as  I am
        concerned  actually  derived  from  Old  English  orc   "demon",  but
        only because  of its  phonetic suitability'  (and also:  'Orcs... are
        nowhere  clearly stated  to be  of any  particular origin.  But since
        they  are  servants  of  the  Dark  Power,   and  later   of  Sauron,
        neither  of  whom  could,  or  would,  produce  living  things,  they
        must be "corruptions"').                                             
  $128  The final reading here 'King of the World' (see note  9) returns
        to  that  of  QS  ($63),  which  goes  hack  to Q  (IV.93). -  On the
        subject  of  Morgoth's  departures  from  Angband  QS  has:  'it  was
        never  his  wont  to  leave  the  deep places  of his  fortress', and
        there is no mention of his one absence.                              
  $$132-3  The report of Feanor's speech is greatly extended from that
        in QS ($$66 - 7).                                                    
  $133  Tauros:  Orome;  cf.  QS  $8:  'He  is  a  hunter,  and  he  loves all
        trees;  for  which  reason  he   is  called   Aldaron,  and   by  the
        Gnomes  Tauros,  the   lord  of   forests';  also   the  Etymologies,
        stem    TAWAR    (V.391):    'N[oldorin]    Tauros    "Forest-Dread",
        usual   N  by-name   of  Orome   (N  Araw)'.   It  is   notable  that
        Feanor should  use this  name (see  p. 146,  $8). In  the typescript,
        for no very  clear reason,  the typist  left a  blank here,  in which
        my father later pencilled Orome'.                                    

 $135   As AAm was first written (see note 12 above) the  alignments of
        the  Noldorin  princes  were  already   changed  from   the  account
        in  QS  ($68),  since  Angrod   and  Egnor   were  now   opposed  to
        Feanor  -  and  Galadriel  now  has  a part  in the  matter, being
        eager  to  leave  Aman.  As  rewritten, a  more subtle  alignment is
        portrayed:  for  Fingon  now  independently  urges   departure,  and
        Angrod  and  Egnor  move  with  him.  Of  Fingolfin's   sons  Turgon
        alone  now  supports  his father,  but inglor  stands with  him; and
        Orodreth  moves  into inglor's  place as  the only  one of  his sons
        to support Finrod.                                                  
           The  close  friendship  of  Turgon  with  Felagund  (Inglor)  had
        appeared  already  in  the  earliest  Annals of  Beleriand (IV.296);
        in  a  late  addition  to  the  AAm  typescript  (p. 106,  $85) they
        were born in the same Year of the Trees.                            
          The  statement  that   Galadriel,  'youngest   of  the   House  of
        Finwe',  'came  into  the  world  west  of  the  Sea,  and  knew yet
        nought  of  the  unguarded  lands',  is  strange,  because  all  the
        progeny of Finwe were born in Aman (AAm $$78, 81 - 2).              
 $136   The   Noldor  were   moved  by   'the  desire   of  new   things  and
        strange  countries'; in  QS they  were 'filled  with desire  for the
        Silmarils'.                                                         
 $137   The  march  from  Tirion  was  undertaken  with  too  little prepara-
        tion  and in  too great  haste; cf.  AV 2  (annal 2992):  'The great
        march of the Gnomes was long preparing.'                            
 $139   Only one tenth of the Noldor remained behind in Tirion.               
 $$140-2  The   words  of   Manwe's  messenger   are  given,   and  the
        episode  is  much  expanded.  The  herald  does  not  say"as  in  QS
        ($68), that the Valar forbade  the march,  but it  is now  said that
        Feanor  had  exiled  himself  through  the  very  fact of  his oath;
        and  Feanor  in  his  reply accuses  the Valar  of sitting  idle and
        making no move against Morgoth.                                     
 $143   Elende  (Elvenhome, Elfland): see p. 90, $67.                         
 $$145-8  Feanor  himself  (not  as  in  QS  $70  messengers)   went  to
        Olwe   at   Alqualonde,   and   their   words  together   are  fully
        recounted.  In  $147  Feanor  speaks  of the  building of  the Haven
        by the Noldor, which is mentioned earlier in AAm ($76).             
 $$149-50  The  account  in  AAm  of  the battle  at Alqualonde  and its
        aftermath  follows  QS  $70   closely  and   retains  much   of  its
        phrasing;  but  in  $149 it  is now  told that  those of  the second
        host who joined in the battle mistook its cause.                    
        $150 On the weapons of the Teleri see p. 106, $97. - The song of the
        Flight  of  the  Gnomes  (QS  $70)  is  now  called  Noldolante, the
        Fall of the Noldor, 'which Maglor made ere he was lost.'            
 $$152-4  The  Prophecy  of  the  North,  now  called  'the  Prophecy  of
        the  North   and  the   Doom  of   the  Noldor',   is  significantly
        developed:  by  the  warning  that  such  of  the  Noldor as  may be

        slain  afterwards  shall  remain  long  in  Mandos  'yearning for
        their bodies', and that  those who  endure in  Middle-earth shall
        grow  weary  of  the  world  and  shall wane.  In this  AAm looks
        back  to  AV  2  (annal  2993, V.116;  almost the  same in  AV 1,
        IV.267):                                                         
          A  measure  of  mortality  should  visit  the Noldor,  and they
        should  be  slain  with  weapons,  and  with  torments,  and with
        sorrow,  and  in  the  long  end  they  should fade  upon Middle-
        earth and wane before the younger race.                          
        I  have  discussed  these  passages  in IV.278  - 9.  See further
        pp. 265 ff.                                                      
 $156   As  in AV  (both texts),  many of  Finrod's people  returned with
        him  to  Valinor;  in  QS  ($72)  only 'a  few of  his household'
        turned back. A new element in Finrod's motive  for return  is his
        kinship  with  Olwe  of  Alqualonde,  for  his  wife  was  Earwen
        Olwe's daughter ($85).                                           
 $157   Endar  'Middle-earth'.  The  form  Endon  was  used   earlier  in
        AAm  of  'the  midmost  point'  of  Middle-earth ($38),  where it
        was  changed  on  the typescript  to Endor  (p. 80).  These forms
        Endon  and  Endor  had  appeared  in  the  Ambarkanta   and  maps
        (see  p.  76,  $38).  In The  Lord of  the Rings  Quenya Endore,
        Sindarin  Ennor,  means  not  the   midmost  point   but  Middle-
        earth itself, and in a letter of 1967 (Letters no.297, p. 384) my
        father referred to Q. Endor,  S. Ennor  = Middle-earth,  with the
        etymology  en(ed)  'middle'  and (n)dor  'land (mass)';  cf. also
        Aran  Endor  'King  of Middle-earth',  note 9  above. But  in the
        present passage the form Endar is perfectly clear, as  also again
        in  $$158,  163.  The  typist  however  in  each  case,  for some
        reason,  typed  Endor, and  my father  did not  alter it.  On the
        other hand, in the title of the next section in AAm (p.  129) the
        typist put Endar as in the  manuscript, and  again my  father let
        this  stand.  In the  published Silmarillion  (p. 89)  I printed,
        hesitantly, the form Endor.                                      
          This  passage  concerning  the  Helkaraxe  derives not  from QS
        but from AV 2 (annal 2994, almost the same  in AV  1), and  it is
        very  notable  that it  remains in  complete congruence  with the
        cosmography of the Ambarkanta (see IV.238, 254).                 
 $159   The  story  that  Angrod and  Egnor came  to Middle-earth  in the
        ships  with the  Feanorians is  now abandoned,  with the  loss of
        the story that they were close friends of the sons of Feanor, and
        especially of Celegorn and Curufin (QS $$42, 72 - 3).            
                                                                        
 $160-2  Maidros takes no part in the burning  of the  ships, and
        remembers  Fingon,  his  former friend.  Feanor's motive  in this
        act is sufficiently explained in the older texts, but in  AAm the
        insane  pride  and  fury  that  drove  him  is far  more strongly
        conveyed; he was indeed 'fey'.                                   

   $162   The  addition  (note  20  above)  of  the  name  Losgar  of  the place
          of the burning of the  ships is  derived from  its sole  occurrence in
          the  earlier  texts,  at  the  beginning  of   the  later   Annals  of
          Beleriand (AB 2, V.125 and commentary).                               
   $163   On  the  difference  between  the  final  sentence  from  that  in  QS
          ('and  came  unto  Beleriand  at the  rising of  the sun')  see V.239,
          commentary on $73.                                                    
                                                                               
  Among   the   notes   and   corrections   written  by   my   father   on  the
  typescript  in  this  section  of  AAm, not  all of  which need  be recorded,
  there are several indicating proposed extensions of the narrative.            
                                                                               
  $120    'I shall die' > 'I shall be slain'; 'first of all the Children of Eru'
          underlined;  and  a  note  in  the  margin  against  the   words  'Not
          the  first  (at  the  beginning  of  $121): 'X  This  no  longer  fits
          even  the  Eldar of  Valinor. Finwe  Feanor's father  was first  to be
          slain of the  High-elves, Miriel  Feanor's mother  the first  to die.'
          It  is  to  be  remembered  that  when  AAm  was  written  the history
          of  Miriel  had  not  yet been  devised; the  entries that  state that
          Miriel   'fell   asleep  and   passed  to   Mandos'  and   that  Finwe
          afterwards  wedded  Indis  (p.  101,  notes  1   and  4)   were  later
          additions   (found   in   the  typescript   as  typed).   See  further
          pp. 268-9.                                                            
  $122    The typist  left a  blank for  Korlaire, which  my father  filled with
          the  form  Korolaire.  Later  he  underlined   this  in   pencil  and
          wrote Ezellohar against it (see p. 106, $113).                        
  $126    Ered   Orgoroth   >   Ered   Gorgorath;    Nan   Dungorthin    >   Nan
          Dungortheb. See V.298 - 9.                                            
  $127    Against  the  opening  of  this  paragraph   my  father   wrote:  'The
          making  of  this  fortress  as  a  guard  against  a landing  from the
          West should come earlier. See p. 156, $12.                            
            In  the  typescript  the  passage  concerning  the  Orcs  ran  as it
          stands  in  the  text  printed  from  the  manuscript  on p.  109 only
          as  far  as  'they could  be slain  or destroyed  by the  valiant with
          weapons   of   war';  the   remainder  of   the  paragraph   had  been
          struck  out  in  the  manuscript  (note  8,  p.  121), apart  from the
          words  'Quoth  AElfwine'  at  the  end  (which  the  typist   did  not
          notice  and  omitted,  ending  the  paragraph  at  'weapons   of  war'
          without  closing  the  brackets).  Against  the  first  part   of  the
          passage  my  father  wrote  an  X  on  the  typescript  and   a  brief
          illegible direction of which  the first  word might  be 'cut',  with a
          reference  to  the  passage on  the subject  in $45.  It is  not clear
          what  precisely was  to be  cut (if  I read  the word  correctly), but
          seeing  that  he  noted   on  the   typescript  against   the  earlier
          passage (p.  80, $43):  'Alter this.  Orcs are  not Elvish',  it seems
          likely   that   the   same   objection   applied  here   (see  further

                                      
                                                                         
       pp. 408 ff.). -  He rectified  the typist's  error in  omitting the
       words  'Quoth  AElfwine'  by  cutting  out  the  words   '(Orcs  we
       may  name  them;  for',  so  that the  text reads:  'The Glamhoth,
       host  of  tumult,  the  Noldor  called  them. In  days of  old they
       were  strong  and  fell  as  demons  ...'  This  was  perhaps  done
       without consulting the manuscript.                                 
 $132  In 'the salt thankless Sea' the word salt was struck out.          
 $134  Marginal  note   against  the   names  of   the  Sons   of  Feanor:
       'X  Names  will  be  revised.'  In the  text Cranthir  > Caranthir,
       Damrod  and  Diriel  struck  out  (but   no  other   names  substi-
       tuted), and the n of Celegorn underlined.                          
 $135  Marginal  note  against  the  opening  of  this  paragraph:  'Names
       and relations now  altered.' In  the text  Finrod >  Finarphin (and
       subsequently),  and  Inglor  o  Finrod  (and   subsequently);  also
       Orodreth underlined and marked with an X.                          
 $137  Against  the  sentence  'He  [Manwe]  would  not yet  either forbid
       or  hinder  Feanor's  purpose'  is  the  marginal note:  'Manwe and
       the  Valar  could  not  -  sc.  were  not  permitted to  hinder the
       Noldor except by counsel - not by force.'                          
 $149  Marginal  note  against  the  passage  describing  the  involvement
       of  the  second  host  in  the  fighting:  'Finrod  and  Galadriel
       (whose  husband  was  of  the  Teleri)  fought  against  Feanor  in
       defence of Alqualonde.' On this see  the very  late note  (1973) of
       my  father's  concerning  Galadriel's  conduct at  the time  of the
       rebellion  of  the Noldor  in Unfinished 'Tales, pp.  231 -  2: 'In
       Feanor's  revolt  that  followed the  Darkening of  Valinor Galad-
       riel had no  part: indeed  she with  Celeborn fought  heroically in
       defence of Alqualonde against the assault of the Noldor...'        
 $162  'Feanor and his sons  set fire  in' was  changed to  'Feanor caused
       fire to be set to'. A  marginal note  at the  end of  the paragraph
       reads:  'Tragedy  of  the  burning  of  one  of Feanor's  [added: 2
       younger]  sons, who  had returned  to sleep  in his  ship.' Another
       note  at  the  same  place  reads:  'Feanor's  youngest  sons  were
       twins';  this  is  followed by  a bracketed  word which  was struck
       out,  probably  '(unlike)'.  It was  said in  QS ($41)  that Damrod
       and Diriel were 'twin brethren alike in mood and face'.            
 $163  Marginal  note  against   'Many  there   perished'  (i.e.   in  the
       crossing  of the  Helkaraxe): 'Turgon's  wife was  lost and  he had
       then  only  one  daughter  and  no  other  heir. Turgon  was nearly
       lost himself in attempts to rescue his wife - and he had  less love
       for the Sons of Feanor than any other.'                            

            Sixth and last section of the Annals of Aman.          
                                                                   
                              1495-1500.                            
           Of the Moon and the Sun. The Lighting of Endar,          
                      and the Hiding of Valinor.                    
                                                                   
  $164  It is  told  that  the  Valar  sat  long  unmoved  upon their
 thrones  in  the  Ring of  Doom, but  they were  not idle  as Feanor
 said in the folly of his heart. For  the gods  may work  many things
 with  thought  rather  than  with  hands,  and  without   voices  in
 silence  they  may  hold council  one with  another. Thus  they held
 vigil  in  the  night  of  Valinor,  and  their thought  passed back
 beyond  Ea  and  forth  to  the  End; yet  neither power  nor wisdom
 assuaged their grief, and the  knowing of  evil in  the hour  of its
 being.  Neither  did  they  mourn more  for the  death of  the Trees
 than  for  the marring  of Feanor:  of all  Melkor's works  the most
 wicked.                                                            
  $165  For Feanor   was  made   the  mightiest   in  all   parts  of
 body  and  mind:  in  valour,  in  endurance,  in beauty,  in under-
 standing,  in  skill,  in strength  and subtlety  alike: of  all the
 Children  of  Eru,  and  a  bright flame  was in  him. The  works of
 wonder  for  the  glory  of  Arda  that  he  might   otherwise  have
 wrought  only  Manwe  might  in  some  measure  conceive.   And  the
 Vanyar  who  held  vigil  with  the  Valar  have recorded  that when
 the  messengers  reported  to  Manwe  the answers  of Feanor  to his
 heralds  Manwe  wept  and  bowed  his  head. But  at that  last word
 of Feanor: that at the least the Noldor should do  deeds to  live in
 song for ever: he raised his head, as  one that  hears a  voice afar
 off, and he said: 'So shall it be! Dear-bought those songs  shall be
 accounted,  and  yet  shall  be  well-bought.  For  the  price could
 be  no  other.  Thus,  even  as Eru  spoke to  us, shall  beauty not
 before  conceived  be  brought  into  Ea,  and evil  yet be  good to
 have been.'                                                        
 'And  yet  remain  evil,'   quoth  Mandos.   'To  me   shall  Feanor
 come soon.'                                                        
  $166  But when   at  last   the  Valar   learned that   the  Noldor
 had   indeed  passed   out  of   Aman  and   were  come   back  into
 Middle-earth,  they  arose  and began  to set  forth in  deeds those
 counsels they had taken in thought for the redress  of the  evils of
 Melkor.                                                            
  $167  Then   Manwe   bade   Yavanna   and   Nienna  to   put  forth
 all  their  powers of  growth and  healing; and  they put  forth all
 their powers upon the  Trees. But  the tears  of Nienna  availed not

   
                                                                                    
 to  heal  their  mortal  wounds;  and  for a  long while  Yavanna sang              
 alone  in  the  shadows.  Yet  even  as  hope  failed  and   her  song              
 faltered,  behold!  Telperion  bore  at  last  upon  a  leafless bough              
 one great flower of silver, and Laurelin a single fruit of gold.                    
     $168  These   Yavanna  took,   and  then   the  Trees   died,  and              
 their  lifeless stems  stand yet  in Valinor,  a memorial  of vanished              
 joy.  But  the  flower  and  fruit  Yavanna  gave  to Aule,  and Manwe              
 hallowed  them;  and  Aule  and  his  folk made  vessels to  hold them              
 and preserve their radiance,  as is  said in  the Narsilion,  the Song              
 of  the  Sun  and Moon.  These vessels  the gods  gave to  Varda, that              
 they   might   become   lamps  of   heaven,  outshining   the  ancient              
 stars,  being  nearer to  Arda; and  she gave  them power  to traverse              
 the   lower  regions   of  Ilmen,   and  set   them  to   voyage  upon              
 appointed  courses  above  the  girdle  of  the  Earth  from  the West              
 unto the East, and to return.                                                       
     $169  These  things  the  Valar did,  recalling in  their twilight              
 the  darkness  of  the  lands  of  Arda;  and  they  resolved  now  to              
 illumine  Middle-earth  and  with  light  to   hinder  the   deeds  of              
 Morgoth.  For  they  remembered  the  Quendi,   the  Avari   that  had              
 remained  by  the  waters  of  their  awakening,  and did  not utterly              
 forsake  the  Noldor  in  exile;   and  Manwe   knew  also   that  the              
 hour of the coming of Men was drawn nigh.                                           
     $170  Indeed  it  is  said  that,  even  as  the  Valar  made  war              
 upon  Melkor  on  behalf  of  the Quendi,  so now  for that  time they              
 forbore   on   behalf   of   the   Hildi,  the   Aftercomers,  younger              
 children  of  Eru.  For grievous  had been  the hurts  of Middle-earth              
 in  the  war  upon  Utumno,  and  the  Valar  feared  lest  even worse              
 should  now  befall;  whereas   the  Hildi   should  be   mortal,  and              
 weaker  than  the  Quendi   to  withstand   fear  and   tumult.  More-              
 over  it  was  not  revealed  to  Manwe  where  the  beginning  of Men              
 should  be,  north,  south, or  east. Therefore  the Valar  sent forth              
 light, but made strong the land of their dwelling.                                  
     $171  Isil  the  Sheen  the   Vanyar  of   old  named   the  Moon,              
 flower  of  Telperion  in  Valinor;  and  Anar the  Fire-golden, fruit              
 of  Laurelin,  they  named  the  Sun.  But   the  Noldor   named  them              
 Rana  the  wayward,  and  Vasa  the  consumer;  for  the  Sun  was set              
 as  a  sign for  the awakening  of Men  and the  waning of  the Elves,              
 but the Moon cherishes their memory.                                                
     $172   The   maiden   whom   the  Valar   chose  from   among  the              
 Maiar  to  guide  the  vessel  of  the  Sun  was  named Arien,  and he              
 that  steered  the  island of  the Moon  was Tilion.*  In the  days of              
                                                                                    
 (* Marginal notes against A rien and Tilion: 'daegred AE' and 'hyrned AE'.)         

  
                                                                  
  the Trees Arien had tended the golden flowers in the  gardens of
  Vana  and  refreshed them  with the  bright dews  of Laurelin.
  Tilion  was  a  young  hunter  of  the company  of Orome,  and he
  had a silver bow. He was  a lover  of silver,  and when  he would
  rest  he  forsook the  woods of  Orome and  went unto  Lorien and
  lay  adream  by  the  pools of  Este in  the flickering  beams of
  Telperion; and he begged to be given the task of tending ever the
  last Flower of  Silver. Arien  the maiden  was mightier  than he,
  and  she  was  chosen  because she  had not  feared the  heats of
  Laurelin,  and was  unhurt by  them, being  from the  beginning a
  spirit  of  fire, whom  nonetheless Melkor  had not  deceived nor
  drawn to his service. Fair indeed  was Arien  to behold,  but too
  bright were her eyes for even the Eldar to  look on,  and leaving
  Valinor she forsook the form and raiment  which, like  the Valar,
  she had there worn, and she was as a naked flame, terrible in the
  fullness of her splendour.                                       
                                1500                               
                                                                  
    $173   Isil was first wrought  and made  ready, and  first rose
  into the realm of the stars, and was the elder of the new lights,
  as was Telperion of the  Trees. Then  for a  while the  world had
  moonlight,  and  many  things  stirred and  woke that  had waited
  long  in  the  sleep  of  Yavanna. The  servants of  Morgoth were
  amazed, but the dark-elves looked up in delight;  and it  is told
  that Fingolfin set foot upon  the Northern  Lands with  the first
  moon-rise,  and  the  shadows of  his host  were long  and black.
  Tilion had traversed  the heavens  seven times,  and was  thus in
  the furthest East when the vessel of Arien  was made  ready. Then
  Anar  arose  in  glory, and  the snow  upon the  mountains glowed
  as with fire, and there was heard the  sound of  many waterfalls;
  but  the  servants  of  Morgoth  fled to  Angband and  cowered in
  fear, and Fingolfin unfurled his banners.                        
      $174  Now  Varda  purposed  that   the  two   vessels  should
  journey in Ilmen and ever be aloft, but not together: each should
  pass from Valinor into the East and return, the one  issuing from
  the West as the other turned from the East. Thus the first of the
  new days were reckoned  after the  manner of  the Trees  from the
  mingling  of the  lights when  Arien and  Tilion passed  in their
  courses, above the middle of  the Earth.  But Tilion  was wayward
  and uncertain in speed, and held not to  his appointed  path; and
  he sought to come  near to  Arien, being  drawn by  the splendour
  of her beauty, though  the flame  of Anar  scorched him,  and the
  island of the Moon was darkened.                                 

           
                                                                  
  $175  Because  of  the  waywardness  of  Tilion,  therefore,  and
 yet  more  because of  the prayers  of Lorien  and Este,  who said
 that sleep  and rest  had been  banished from  the Earth,  and the
 stars  were  hidden,  Varda  changed  her  counsel, and  allowed a
 time wherein the world  should still  have shadow  and half-light.
 Anar rested, therefore, a while  in Valinor,  lying upon  the cool
 bosom of the Outer Sea;  and Evening,  which was  the time  of the
 descent and resting of the Sun, was the hour of greatest light and
 joy  in Aman.  But soon  the Sun  was drawn  down by  the servants
 of  Ulmo, and  went then  in haste  under the  Earth, and  came so
 unseen  to  the  East  and  there mounted  the heaven  again, lest
 night should be over-long  and evil  walk under  the Moon.  But by
 Anar  the  waters  of  the  Outer  Sea  were  made hot  and glowed
 with coloured fire, and Valinor had  light for  a while  after the
 passing of Arien. Yet as she  journeyed under  the Earth  and drew
 towards  the  East the  glow faded  and Valinor  was dim,  and the
 Valar mourned then most  for the  death of  Laurelin. At  dawn the
 shadows of their Mountains  of Defence  lay heavy  on the  land of
 the Valar.                                                        
  $176   Varda   commanded   the   Moon   to   journey    in   like
 manner, and passing under  Earth to  arise in  the East,  but only
 after  the Sun  had descended  from heaven.  But Tilion  went with
 uncertain  pace,  as  yet  he  goes, and  was still  drawn towards
 Arien, as he shall ever be; so that oft both may be seen above the
 Earth together, or at times it will chance that  he comes  so nigh
 that his shadow cuts off her brightness, and  there is  a darkness
 amid the day.                                                     
  $177  Therefore  by  the  coming  and  going  of  Anar  the Valar
 reckoned the days thereafter until  the Change  of the  World. For
 Tilion  tarried  seldom  in  Valinor,  but  more  oft  would  pass
 swiftly over the  westland of  Aman, over  Arvalin, or  Araman, or
 Valinor,  and  plunge  in   the  chasm   beyond  the   Outer  Sea,
 pursuing his way alone  amid the  grots and  caverns at  the roots
 of  Arda.  There  he  would  oft  wander  long,  and   late  would
 return.                                                           
  $ 178   Still  therefore,  after  the  Long  Night, the  light of
 Valinor was  greater and  fairer than  upon Middle-earth;  for the
 Sun rested there, and the lights  of heaven  drew nearer  to Earth
 in that region. But neither the Sun  nor the  Moon can  recall the
 light that was  of old,  that came  from the  Trees ere  they were
 touched by the poison of Ungoliante. That light  lives now  in the
 Silmarils alone, and they are lost.                               

                                         
                                                                       
          $179  But  Morgoth hated  the new  lights and  was for  a while
      confounded  by  this  unlooked-for  stroke  of  the Valar.  Then he
      assailed Tilion, sending spirits of shadow  against him,  and there
      was strife in Ilmen beneath the paths of the stars, and  Tilion was
      the victor: as he  ever yet  hath been,  though still  the pursuing
      darkness  overtakes  him  at  whiles.  But  Arien   Morgoth  feared
      with a great fear, and dared not  to come  nigh her,  having indeed
      no  longer the  power. For  as he  grew in  malice, and  sent forth
      from himself the evil that he  conceived in  lies and  creatures of
      wickedness,  his  power  passed  into them  and was  dispersed, and
      he  himself  became  ever  more  earth-bound,  unwilling  to  issue
      from   his  dark   strongholds.  With   shadow  therefore   he  hid
      himself  and  his  servants from  Arien, the  glance of  whose eyes
      they could not long endure, and  the lands  nigh his  dwelling were
      shrouded in fumes and great clouds.(1)                            
          $180  But  seeing  the assault  upon Tilion  the Valar  were in
      doubt,  fearing what  the malice  and cunning  of Melkor  might yet
      contrive  against  them. Being  unwilling, as  hath been  said, yet
      to   make   war   upon   him   in  Middle-earth,   they  remembered
      nonetheless  the  ruin  of  Almaren  and  resolved  that  the  like
      should not befall Valinor.  Therefore at  this time  they fortified
      Valinor  anew;  and  they  raised  up  the  mountain-walls  of  the
      Pelori  to  sheer  and  dreadful heights,  east, north,  and south.
      Their  outer  sides  were  dark  and  smooth,  without  foothold or
      ledge,(2) and they fell in great precipices with faces hard  as glass,
      and they rose up to towers with  crowns of  white ice.  A sleepless
      watch  was set  upon them.  No pass  led through  them -  save only
      at the Kalakiryan (3) wherein still stood forsaken the green hill of
      Tuna. This pass the Valar did not close because  of the  Eldar that
      were faithful: for  all those  of elven-race,  even the  Vanyar and
      Ingwe their  lord, must  breathe at  whiles the  outer air  and the
      wind that comes over the  Sea from  the lands  of their  birth; and
      the  gods  would  not  sunder  the  Teleri  wholly from  their kin.
      Therefore  in  the  Kalakiryan  they  set  strong  towers  and many
      sentinels; and at its issue upon the  plains of  Valmar a  host was
      encamped;  for  the  armouries of  the Valar  were opened,  and the
      Maiar  and  the  Sons  of  the  Valar  were  arrayed  as  for  war.
      Neither bird  nor beast  nor Elf  nor Man,  nor any  other creature
      beside that dwelt in Middle-earth, could pass that leaguer.       
          $181  And  in  that  time  also,  which  songs   call  Nurtale 
      Valinoreva, the Hiding of  Valinor, the  Enchanted Isles  were set,
      and  all  the  seas  about  them  were  filled  with   shadows  and
                                                                       
 I'                                                                     

 bewilderment;  and  these  isles  were   strung  as   a  net   in  the
 Shadowy Seas (4) from  north  unto  south,   before  Tol   Eressea,  the
 Lonely  Isle, is  reached  by  one  sailing  west.  Hardly  might any
 vessel  pass   between  them:   for  in   the  dangerous   sounds  the
 waves  sighed  for  ever  upon  dark  rocks shrouded  in mist.  And in
 the   twilight   a   great   weariness  came   upon  mariners   and  a
 loathing  of the  Sea; but  all that  ever set  foot upon  the islands
 were  there  entrapped,  and  slept  until  the  Change of  the World.
 Thus  it  was  that,  as  Mandos  foretold  to  them  in  Araman,  the
 Blessed  Realm  was  shut  against  the  Noldor,   and  of   the  many
 messengers  that  in  after-days  they  sent into  the West  none came
 ever to Valinor - save one only: the mightiest mariner of song.      
                                                                     
                                         

                                                                
                                                                    
                Here with the Hiding of Valinor                      
                              end                                    
                      The Annals of Aman.                            
                                                                    
                             NOTES.                                  
                                                                    
 1. This paragraph, from 'Then he assailed Tilion ...', was first
    written thus:
      Tilion indeed he assailed, sending dark spirits of shadow against
      him, which still pursue him, though ever yet Tilion has overcome
      them. But Arien he feared with a great fear and dared not to
      trouble, and neither he nor any of his creatures could look upon
      her, nor long endure the glance of her eyes. In shadows he hid
      their wickedness from her, and sent forth fumes and dark
      clouds, so that the lands near his dwelling were drear and
      shrouded in glooms, though far above bright Anar might sail in
      blue heaven. For as he grew in malice and let issue forth from
      him the evil that he conceived in lies and creatures of ill-
    At this point my father stopped, struck out what he had written,
    and replaced it with the text printed.
 2. As first written this phrase read: 'without ledge or foothold even
    for birds', corrected immediately to the text given (QS has 'without
    ledge or foothold for aught save birds').
 3. Kalakiryan was here so written (and again below); see p. 87,
    note 7.
 4. 'the Shadowy Seas' (as in QS) emended from 'the Great Sea'.
                                                                    
            Commentary on the sixth and last section of the          
                            Annals of Aman.                          
  This account of the Making of the Sun and Moon was the last that my
  father wrote. He was following QS Chapter 8 Of the Sun and Moon
  and the Hiding of Valinor (V.239 - 43) very closely, but with many

 changes and notably many omissions. I indicate here most of the         
 developments, some much more significant than others.                    
                                                                        
 $164   With  the  silent  communion  of  the  Valar   among  themselves,
        not  in  QS, cf.  what is  said in  The Return  of the  King VI.6
        'Many  Partings'  of  the  speech  of  Celeborn   and  Galadriel,
        Gandalf and Elrond in Eregion:                                   
          If  any  wanderer  had chanced  to pass,  little would  he have
        seen  or heard,  and it  would have  seemed to  him only  that he
        saw  grey  figures,  carved  in  stone,  memorials  of  forgotten
        things  now  lost  in  unpeopled  lands.  For  they did  not move
        or  speak  with  mouth,  looking  from  mind  to  mind;  and only
        their shining  eyes stirred  and kindled  as their  thoughts went
        to and fro.                                                      
        Perhaps  to  be  compared  also  are  Michael Ramer's  remarks in
        The Notion Club Papers, IX.202.                                  
 $165   The  praise  of  Feanor,  and  Manwe's  thought   concerning  his
        words,  are  not  in  QS,  nor  the  foretelling  of  Mandos that
        Feanor will soon come to him.                                    
 $167   In  QS  Nienna  is  not  named  with  Yavanna  in the  attempt to
        heal the Trees.                                                  
 $168   The  QS  text  'lamps  of heaven,  outshining the  ancient stars;
        and she gave them power to traverse the region  of the  stars' is
        changed  to  'lamps  of  heaven,  outshining  the  ancient stars,
        being nearer to Arda;  and she  gave them  power to  traverse the
        lower regions of Ilmen'.  AAm here  moves in  fact closer  to the
        Ambarkanta,  where  it  was  told  (IV.237)  that the  Sun 'sails
        from East to West through the lou er Ilmen'. I have  said earlier
        (p.  63)  that 'the  testimony seems  to be  that in  these texts
        [i.e.  AAm  and  the  Ainulindale']  the  Ambarkanta  world-image
        survived at least in the  conception of  the Outer  Sea extending
        to the Walls of the World';  now it  is seen  that the  region of
        Ilmen, in which  the Sun  and Moon  have their  courses, survived
        also. Is it to be understood that Ilmen was also still the region
        of  the  stars?  This  is  not a  necessary presumption  from the
        wording of the new text  at this  point; however,  in $173  it is
        said that 'Isil ... rose  into the  realm of  the stars'.  In the
        Ainulindale'  the problem  has been  encountered that  'the three
        regions  of  the  firmament'  are  retained  together   with  the
        irreconcilable conception of  Arda as  set 'in  the midst  of the
        innumerable stars' of Ea: see p. 29.                             
          With  'the  girdle  of  the Earth'  (not in  QS) cf.  AAm $144:
        'Tuna  beneath Taniquetil  was set  nigh to  the girdle  of Arda,
        and there the Great Sea was immeasurably wide'.                  
 $170   It is not said  in QS  that the  Valar forbore  to make  war upon
        Morgoth  on  account  of  the  coming  of Men  that was  at hand,

           fearing great destruction and  being ignorant  of the  place where
           Mankind should arise.                                             
  $171     In  QS  Isil and  Urin are  names given  by the  Gods to  Moon and
           Sun,  and  Rana  and  Anar  the  Eldarin   names  ($75   and  com-
           mentary).  In  AAm  Isil  and  Anar  become  Vanyarin  names,  and
           Rana  and  Vasa  Noldorin;  so also  in The  Lost Road  (V.41) and
           The  Notion  Club  Papers  (IX.306)   the  'Eressean'   or  'Aval-
           lonian' (i.e. Quenya) names are Isil and Anar.                    
  $172     One of the  Old English  glosses by  AElfwine, hyrned  'horned' of
           Tilion, is found already in QS (marginal note  to $75);  the other
           word, daegred, of Arien, meant 'daybreak, dawn'.                   
             It is not now said that Tilion loved Arien (and for  this reason
           forsook  the  woods  of  Orome  and  dwelt   in  the   gardens  of
           Lorien),  though in  $174 Tilion  'sought to  come near  to Arien,
           being  drawn  by  the  splendour of  her beauty'.  The description
           of the fire-spirit Arien, who ceased to clothe herself in any form
           but became 'as a naked flame', is  not in  QS; the  original story
           of Urwendi in the Lost Tales may be compared (I.187).             
  $173     'Isil... rose into the realm of the stars': see under  $168 above.
           The  idea  of  the  stars  fleeing  'affrighted' from  Tilion, who
           wandered  from  his  path  pursuing  them,  is  abandoned  (as  is
           also  subsequently the  mythical explanation  of shooting  stars -
           stars that had fled to the roots of the Earth  and now  flee again
           from Tilion into the upper air, QS $78).                          
                                                                            
  $$175-8   The account of the motions of the Sun and Moon is put            
                                                                            
           entirely into the past tense, where QS uses the present.          
  $175     Este takes the place of Nienna as complaining against the new     
           lights. - The name Vaiya is not used of the Outer Sea in AAm.     
  $177     'Therefore by the coming and going of Anar the Valar              
           reckoned the days thereafter until the Change of the World':      
           there is nothing corresponding to this in QS ($78). - The         
           passage in QS (and very similarly in the Ambarkanta, IV.237)      
           concerning the coming at times of both Arien and Tilion           
           together above Valinor is abandoned.                              
             In QS Tilion 'plunges into the chasm between the shores of      
           the earth and the Outer Sea', and similarly in the Ambarkanta     
           he plunges into the chasm of Ilmen. In AAm, on the other          
           hand, he would 'plunge in the chasm beyond the Outer Sea'.        
           As I have said previously (IV.254, second footnote) I am at a     
           loss to explain this, though I retained it in the published       
           Silmarillion which here derives from AAm. But in view of the      
           fact that in AAm it is said expressly ($23) that the Outer Sea
           encircled the Kingdom of Arda, and beyond the Outer Sea           
           were the Walls of the Night, I am now inclined to think that      
           the sentence in AAm was a slip, that whatever my father           
           intended it was not what he wrote. For even if we suppose that

                                                                       
                                                                             
         the  relations  of Ilmen,  the Chasm,  the Outer  Sea, and  the Walls
         were  now  in  some  way  differently  conceived,  it   remains  that
         Tilion  after  plunging  in  the  chasm  came to  the roots  of Arda:
         he  must  therefore  still  be  within  the  Outer Sea,  which encom-
         passes Arda.                                                         
  $178   The idea of the storing by the Valar of the radiance of the Sun
         in vessels, vats, and pools (QS $79) is omitted in AAm.              
             The last words of this paragraph, 'and they  are lost',  are not
         in QS, but are in fact derived from  the Ainulindale:   'the fairest
         of all  gems were  the Silmarils,  and they  are lost',  which first
         appeared  in the  original Music  of the  Ainur (I.58)  and survived
         through the later texts (V.162, and in this book p. 19, $35).        
  $$179-80  The  prophecy  of  the  rekindling  of  the Trees  is omitted
         (and this ancient feature finally lost, see IV.20, 49  - 50),  as is
         the   foretelling   by   Ulmo   concerning   Men;   but   there  now
         appears  the  assault  on  Tilion  by  Morgoth,  his  great  fear of
         Arien,  and  the  account of  his loss  of power  through dispersion
         among  his slaves.  The phrase  in $179  'though still  the pursuing
         darkness overtakes him at  whiles' evidently  refers to  eclipses of
         the Moon.                                                            
             The further fortification of Valinor still of course arises from
         the  fear  of  the  Valar  of  'the  might  and cunning  of Morgoth'
         (QS),  but  Morgoth's  attack  on   the  Moon   is  now   the  main-
         spring  of  their  fear:  'But  seeing the  assault upon  Tilion the
         Valar  were  in  doubt,  fearing  what  the  malice  and  cunning of
         Melkor might yet contrive against them.'                             
  $180   The hill of Tuna is said to be forsaken; it is not said  in the
         account  of  Finrod's  return  ($156)  that  he ruled  thereafter in
         Tirion,  but  only (as  in QS,  $72) that  he 'was  set to  rule the
         remnant  of  the  Noldor  in   the  Blessed   Realm.'  In   QS  $79,
         however,  'the  remnant  of  the  Gnomes  dwelt  ever  in  the  deep
         cleft of the mountains.'                                             
           'the Maiar and the Sons of the Valar': see p. 59, $4.            
  $181   The Hiding of Valinor is  called Nurtale   Valinoreva. -  In QS
         mariners  who  set  foot  upon  the   Enchanted  Isles   'are  there
         entrapped  and  wound  in  everlasting  sleep';  in  AAm  they 'were
         there  entrapped,  and  slept  until  the  Change  of   the  World.'
         With  the  reference  to  the  Change  of the  World cf.  under $177
         above;  and  with  the  change  from  present  to  past   tense  cf.
         under $$175 - 8.                                                     
                                                                             
                                       *                                      
                                                                             
  My father scribbled  a few  hasty notes  on the  typescript, but  those that
  arose from  his later  rejection of  the essentials  of the  cosmogonic myth
  are not given here. The following may however be recorded:                  
  $169  The  words  'utterly  forsake'  were   underlined,  with   a  marginal

  
                                                                           
       note:  'They  forbade  return  and  made  it  impossible  for   Elves  or
       Men   to   reach   Aman    -   since    that   experiment    had   proved
       disastrous.  But  they  would  not  give  the  Noldor  aid   in  fighting
       Melkor.   Manwe   however   sent   Maia   spirits   in   Eagle   form  to
       dwell   near   Thangorodrim   and   keep   watch   on  all   that  Melkor
       did   and   assist   the   Noldor   in  extreme   cases.  Ulmo   went  to
       Beleriand  and  took  a  secret  but active  part in  Elvish resistance.'
       On the Eagles as Maiar see pp. 409 - 11.                             
 $170  Beside this paragraph (and evidently arising from the words 'it
       was   not   revealed   to   Manwe   where   the  beginning   of  Men
       should  be')  my  father  noted  on the  typescript that  Manwe told
       the  other  Valar  that  he  had been  visited by  the mind  of Eru,
       and  warned  that  Men  might  not  be  taken  living  from  Middle-
       earth.                                                               
 $176  Against  the  last  sentence  of  this  paragraph my  father wrote:
       'What  then  causes  eclipses  of  the  Moon?'  See  the  commentary
       on $$179 - 80 above.                                                 
