      PART THREE.
                   
      THE LATER     
 QUENTA SILMARILLION.

                           THE LATER QUENTA SILMARILLION.                       
                                                                               
                               (I) THE FIRST PHASE.                             
                                                                               
  In   this   book,  as   explained  in   the  Foreword,   my  account   of  the
  development  of  The  Silmarillion  in  the  years  following  the  completion
  of  The  Lord  of  the Rings  is restricted  to the  'Valinorian' part  of the
  narrative  -  that  is  to say,  to the  part corresponding  to the  Annals of
  Aman.                                                                         
   As  with  the  Annals  of  Valinor  (Aman)  (p.  47),   my  father   did  not
  begin  revision  of  the  Quenta  Silmarillion  as  a  new  venture  on  blank
  sheets,   but   took   up   again   the   original   QS  manuscript   and  the
  typescript  (entitled  'Eldanyare')  derived  from  it (see  V.199 -  201) and
  covered  them  with  corrections  and  expansions.  As  already  seen  (p. 3),
  he  noted that  the revision  had reached  the end  of the  tale of  Beren and
  Luthien  on  10  May  1951.  The  chapters  were  very   differently  treated,
  some  being  much  more  developed   than  others   and  running   to  several
  further texts.                                                                
   An   amanuensis   typescript   was   then   made,   providing   a  reasonably
  clear   and   uniform   text   from   the   now   complicated   and  difficult
  materials.  This  was  made  by  the  same  person as  made the  typescript of
  Ainulindale'  D  (p.  39)  and  seems  to  have  been  paginated  continuously
  on from it. I shall call this typescript 'LQ  1' (for  'Later Quenta  1', i.e.
  'the  first  continuous  text  of  the later  Quenta Silmarillion').  It seems
  virtually certain that it was made in 1951( - 2).                             
   LQ  1  was  corrected,  at  different  times and  to greatly  varying extent.
  A  new  typescript,  in  top   copy  and   carbon,  was   professionally  made
  later,  incorporating all  the alterations  made to  LQ 1.  This text  I shall
  call  'LQ  2'.  In  a  letter  to  Rayner  Unwin of  7 December  1957 (Letters
  no.204) my father said:                                                       
      I  now  see  quite  clearly  that I  must, as  a necessary  preliminary to
  'remoulding',*  get  copies  made  of  all  copyable  material.  And  I  shall
  put  that  in  hand  as  soon  as  possible.  But  I  think  the  best  way of
  dealing  with  this  (at  this  stage,  in  which  much  of  the  stuff  is in
  irreplaceable  sole copies)  is to  install a  typist in  my room  in college,
  and not let any material out of my keeping, until it is multiplied.           
                                                                               
  (* This word refers to a letter from Lord Halsbury, who had said: 'I can quite
  see that there is a struggle ahead m re-mould it into  the requisite  form for
  publication' (cited earlier in my father's letter to Rayner Unwin).)          

                                      
                                                                         
 It seems likely that it was  soon after  this that  LQ 2  was made.  It is
 noteworthy that  it was  typed on  the same  machine as  was used  for the
 typescript of the Annals of  Aman (also  extant in  top copy  and carbon),
 and  both  texts  may  well  belong  to  the same  time -  say 1958.  LQ 2
 (like LQ 1)  has naturally  no textual  value in  itself, but  it received
 careful  emendation  in  Chapter  1  Of  the  Valar  (thereafter, however,
 only scattered jottings).                                                
  Finally,  my  father turned  to new  narrative writing  in the  Matter of
 the First Age  before the  Hiding of  Valinor. The  first chapter,  Of the
 Valar,  much  altered  at  this  time,  became  separated  off   from  the
 Quenta Silmarillion  proper under  the title  Valaquenta; while  the sixth
 chapter, Of  the Silmarils  and the  Darkening of  Valinor (numbered  4 in
 QS,  V.227),  and  a  part of  the seventh,  Of the  Flight of  the Noldor
 (numbered  5  in  QS), were  very greatly  enlarged and  gave rise  to new
 chapters with these titles:                                              
  Of Finwe and Miriel                                                    
  Of Feanor and the Unchaining of Melkor                                 
  Of the Silmarils and the Unrest of the Noldor                           
  Of the Darkening of Valinor                                             
  Of the Rape of the Silmarils                                            
  Of the Thieves' Quarrel                                                 
 This  new   work  exemplifies   the  'remoulding'   to  which   my  father
 looked  forward  in  the  letter to  Rayner Unwin  cited above.  It repre-
 sents  (together  with  much  other  writing  of a  predominantly specula-
 tive nature) a second phase  in his  later work  on The  Silmarillion. The
 first phase included the new  version of  the Lay  of Leithian,  the later
 Ainulindale,  the  Annals  of  Aman and  the Grey  Annals, the  later Tale
 of  Tuor,  and  the  first wave  of revision  of the  Quenta Silmarillion,
 much  of  this  work  left  unfinished.  The  years  1953  -  5   saw  the
 preparation and  publication of  The Lord  of the  Rings; and  there seems
 reason to think that it was a  good while  yet before  he turned  again to
 The Silmarillion, or at least to its earlier chapters.                   
  In  these  substantially  rewritten  chapters  of  the 'second  phase' he
 was  moving  strongly  into  a  new  conception  of  the  work, a  new and
 much fuller mode of  narrative -  envisaging, as  it appears,  a thorough-
 going  're-expansion'  from  the  still fairly  condensed form  (despite a
 good deal  of enlargement  in the  1951 revision)  that went  back through
 QS  and Q  to the  'Sketch of  the Mythology'  of 1926,  which had  made a
 brief  summary  from  the amplitude  of The  Book of  Lost Tales  (on this
 evolution see IV.76).                                                    
  It has been difficult to find a satisfactory  method of  presentation for
 the later evolution of The Silmarillion. In the first place,  the chapters
 must  obviously  be  treated  separately,  since the  extent of  the later
 development, and the textual history, varies  so widely.  Equally clearly,
 a complete documentation of every  alteration from  start to  finish (that

                                    
                                                                           
 is detailing the precise sequence of change through successive  texts) is
 out  of  the  question.  After   much  experimentation   the  plan   I  have
 followed is based on this consideration: seeing that a  great deal  of the
 development  can  be  ascribed  to  a  relatively  short  time   (the  '1951
 revision'), it seems best to take LQ 1, marking  the end  of that  stage, as
 the 'common text'. But while I print LQ 1  in full  as it  was typed  (as far
 as Chapter 5: Chapters 6 - 8 are differently treated),  I also  include in
 the text   the  corrections   and  expansions   made  to   it  subsequently,
 indicated as such. This gives at once a  view of  the state  of the  work in
 both LQ 1, at the end of the 'first phase', and  in LQ  2, at  the beginning
 of  the  'second   phase'  some   seven  years   later.  Beyond   this,  the
 treatment  of  each  chapter varies  according to  the peculiarities  of its
 history.  The  late  expanded  versions  of  certain  chapters  belonging to
 the 'second phase' are treated separately (pp. 199 ff.).                   
    Particular  difficulties  are  encountered  in  the  later  work  on  The
 Silmarillion,  in  that  so  much of  the typescript  material was  not made
 by  my father,  and he  seems often  to have  corrected these  texts without
 going  back  to  the earlier  ones from  which they  were taken;  while when
 there  were  both  top  copy  and  carbon  copy  he   often  kept   them  in
 different  places  (for  fear  of  loss),  and  one  copy  is  often emended
 differently  from  the  other,  or  one is  not emended  when the  other is.
 Moreover  he  was  liable  to  emend  a  text  after  later  texts  had been
 derived from it.                                                           
                                                                           
                                1 OF THE VALAR.                             
                                                                           
 In my edition of 'QS' in  Volume V  of this  history the  text of  the first
 chapters (1, 2,  3(a), 3(b),  3(c)) is  taken from  the typescript  which my
 father  made  from  the  QS  manuscript  in  (as   I  have   argued,  V.200)
 December  1937  -  January  1938,  and  which  incorporated   certain  revi-
 sions  made to  the opening  chapters on  the manuscript.  This text  I will
 refer  to  as  'the  QS  typescript'.  Both  manuscript and  typescript were
 used  for  the '1951  revision', but  it was  the latter  that was  the copy
 from  which  LQ  1  was  made,  there  being  some  fourteen  years  between
 them.  As  already  explained,  the  changes  made  subsequently  to   LQ  1
 are shown as such in the text.                                             
  There  is  now  no  title-page  to  LQ 1  (see p.  200), which  begins with
 AElfwine's  note  (with  the Old  English verses)  and the  Translator's note
 in an almost  exact copy  of the  old QS  typescript (V.203  - 4),  the only
 difference   being  Pengoloth   for  Pengolod   (at  the   first  occurrence
 changed  to Pengolodh,  representing voiced  'th'). The  page, like  that of
 the QS typescript, is headed Eldanyare (History of the Elves).            
  The  paragraph  numbers  are  those  of  QS  (V.204  -  7), with  '10a' and
 '10b'  used  to  indicate the  passages additional  to the  text of  QS, and
 belonging to different times, at the end of the chapter.                   

                                                       
                                                                    
       Here begins the Silmarillion or History of the Silmarils.     
                                                                    
                           1. Of the Valar.                          
                                                                    
   $1 In the  beginning  Eru,  [added:  the   One,]  who   in  Elvish
 tongue  is  named  Iluvatar,  made  the  Ainur  of his  thought; and
 they  made  a  great  music  before  him.  Of  this Music  the World
 was  made;  for Iluvatar  made visible  the song  of the  Ainur, and
 they  beheld  it  as  a  light  in  the  darkness.  And many  of the
 mightiest  among  them  became  enamoured  of  its  beauty   and  of
 its  history  which  they  saw  beginning  and  unfolding  as  in  a
 Vision. Therefore Iluvatar gave to  their vision  Being, and  set it
 amid the Void, and the Secret  Fire was  sent to  burn at  the heart
 of the World.                                                       
 Then  those  of  the  Ainur  who  would  entered  into the  World at
 the beginning of Time, and behold! it was their  task to  achieve it
 and  by  their labour  to fulfill  the Vision  which they  had seen.
 Long  they  laboured in  the regions  of Ea,  which are  vast beyond
 the  thought  of  Elves  and Men,  until in  the time  appointed was
 made   Arda,  the   Kingdom  of   Earth.  Then   they  put   on  the
 raiment  of  Earth  and  descended  into it  and dwelt  therein; and
 they are therein.                                                   
   $2  These spirits the  Elves   name  the   Valar,  which   is  the
 Powers,  and  Men  have   often  called   them  gods.   Many  lesser
 spirits of their own kind they  brought in  their train,  both great
 and  small;  and some  of these  Men have  confused with  the Elves,
 but  wrongfully  [read  wrongly],  for  they  were  made  before the
 World,  whereas  Elves  and  Men  awoke  first  on Earth,  after the
 coming  of  the  Valar.  Yet  in  the  making of  Elves and  of Men,
 and in the giving to each of their especial gifts, none of the Valar
 had  any  part.  Iluvatar  alone  was  their author;  wherefore they
 are called the Children of Iluvatar [> Eru].                        
   $3  The chieftains of  the  Valar  were   nine.  These   were  the
 names of  the Nine  Gods [>  gods] in  the Elvish  tongue as  it was
 spoken  in  Valinor;  though  they  have other  or altered  names in
 the  speech  of  the  Gnomes  [>  Sindar],  and  their  names  among
 Men   are   manifold:   Manwe  and   Melkor,  Ulmo,   Aule,  Mandos,
 Lorien [> Lorion], Tulkas, Osse, and Orome.                         
   $4  Manwe  and   Melkor   were   brethren   in   the   thought  of
 Iluvatar  /  and  mightiest  of  those  Ainur  who  came   into  the
 World. But Manwe is the lord  of the  gods, and  prince of  the airs
 and  winds, and  ruler of  the sky.  With him  dwells as  wife Varda

                    
                                                                     
 the  maker  of  the  stars  [>  The mightiest  of those  Ainur who
 came  into  the  World  was  Melkor;  but  Manwe  was  dearest to
 the heart  of  Iluvatar  and  understood  most clearly  his purposes.
 He was appointed to be, in the fullness of time,  the first  of all
 kings:  lord  of  the  realm  of  Arda  and  ruler  of all  that dwell
 therein. And there his delight is in the  winds of  the world  and in
 all  the  regions  of  the  air. With  him in  Arda dwells  as spouse
 Varda  kindler of  the stars],  immortal lady  of the  heights, whose
 name  is  holy.  Fionwe  and  Ilmare  are  their  son   and  daughter
 [this  sentence   struck  out].   Next  in   might  and   closest  in
 friendship  to  Manwe is  Ulmo, lord  of waters.  He dwells  alone in
 the  Outer  Seas, but  has the  government of  all waters,  seas, and
 rivers,  fountains  and  springs,  throughout  the earth.  Subject to
 him is  Osse, the  master of  the seas  about the  lands of  Men; and
 his wife is Uinen the lady of the sea. Her  hair lies  spread through
 all the waters under skies.                                          
    $5  Aule has might but little less [> little  less] than  Ulmo. He
 is a smith and a master  of crafts;  and his  spouse is  Yavanna, the
 giver of fruits and lover of all things that grow. In majesty she i."
 next to Varda,  her sister,  among the  queens of  the Valar.  She is
 fair and tall, and often  the Elves  name her  Palurien, the  Lady of
 the Wide Earth.                                                      
    $6  The  Fanturi  [>  Feanturi]  were  brethren,  and   are  named
 Mandos  and  Lorien  [>  Lorion].  Yet  these  are  not  their  right
 names,  and  are the  names rather  of the  places of  their abiding.
 For  their  right  names  are  seldom  spoken  save in  secret: which
 are  Namo   and  Irmo.   Quoth  Rumil.   Nurufantur  the   elder  was
 also  called,  [>  which  are  Namo  and Irmo.  Namo, the  elder, is]
 the  master  of  the  houses  of the  dead, and  the gatherer  of the
 spirits of the slain. He forgets  nothing, and  knows all  that shall
 be, save only what Iluvatar  has hidden;  but he  speaks only  at the
 command  of  Manwe.  He  is   the  doomsman   of  the   Valar.  Vaire
 the  weaver is  his wife,  who weaves  all things  that have  been in
 time  in  her  storied  webs,  and  the  halls  of  Mandos  that ever
 widen  as  the  ages  pass  are  clothed  therewith.   Olofantur  the
 younger   of   these   brethren   was  also   named,  [>   Irmo,  the
 younger  of  these  brethren,  is]  the  master  of  visions  and  of
 dreams. His gardens in the land of the  gods are  the fairest  of all
 places in the world, and filled with many spirits.  Este the  pale is
 his  wife,  who walks  not by  day, but  sleeps on  an island  in the
 dark  lake  of  Lorien  [>  Lorion].   Thence  her   fountains  bring
 refreshment  to  the  folk  of  Valinor;  yet  she  comes not  to the

              
                                                                     
 councils of the Valar, and is not reckoned among their queens.       
  $7  Strongest  of  limb,  and  greatest  in  deeds  of  prowess,  is
 Tulkas,  who  is  surnamed  Poldorea  the  Valiant.  He  is unclothed
 in his disport, which is much in  wrestling; and  he rides  no steed,
 for he can outrun all things that go on feet, and he is tireless. His
 hair  and  beard are  golden, and  his flesh  ruddy; his  weapons are
 his hands. He recks little of either past or future, and is  of small
 avail as a  counsellor, but  a hardy  friend. He  has great  love for
 Fionwe,  son  [>  Eonwe,  herald]  of  Manwe.  His  wife   is  Nessa,
 sister  of  Orome;  she  is  lissom of  limb and  fleet of  foot, and
 dances in Valinor upon lawns of never-fading green.                  
  $8  Orome  is  a  mighty  lord,  and  little  less  than  Tulkas  in
 strength,  or  in  wrath, if  he be  aroused. He  loved the  lands of
 Earth,  while  they  were still  dark, and  he left  them unwillingly
 and  came  last  to  Valinor;  and he  comes even  yet at  times east
 over  the mountains.  Of old  he was  often seen  upon the  hills and
 plains. He is  a hunter,  and he  loves all  trees; for  which reason
 he  is  called  Aldaron,  and  by  the   Gnomes  [>   Sindar]  Tauros
 [>  Tauron],  the  lord  of  forests.  He delights  in horses  and in
 hounds,  and  his  horns  are  loud  in  the  friths  and  woods that
 Yavanna  planted  in  Valinor;  but  he  blows  them  not   upon  the
 Middle-earth  since  the  fading  of  the   Elves,  whom   he  loved.
 Vana  is  his wife,  the ever-young,  the queen  of flowers,  who has
 the beauty  both of  heaven and  of earth  upon her  face and  in all
 her works; she is the younger sister of Varda and Palurien.          
  $9   But   mightier  than   she  is   Nienna,  Manwe's   sister  and
 Melkor's.  She  dwells  alone.  Pity  is in  her heart,  and mourning
 and  weeping  come  to  her;  shadow  is  her  realm  and  her throne
 hidden. For her halls are west of West,  nigh to  the borders  of the
 World   and   Darkness   [read   the   Darkness];   and   she   comes
 seldom  to  Valmar,  the city  of the  gods, where  all is  glad. She
 goes  rather  to  the  halls  of  Mandos,  which  are nearer  and yet
 more  northward;  and  all  those  who  go  to  Mandos  cry  to  her.
 For  she  is  a  healer  of  hurts,  and turns  pain to  medicine and
 sorrow   to   wisdom.  The   windows  of   her  house   look  outward
 from the walls of the World.                                         
  $10  Last  do  all  name   Melkor.  But   the  Gnomes   [>  Noldor],
 who  suffered  most from  his evil  deeds, will  not speak  his name,
 and  they  call  him  Morgoth,  the  black  god  [>  the  Black Foe],
 and  Bauglir,  the  Constrainer.  Great  might  was  given to  him by
 Iluvatar,  and  he  was coeval  with Manwe,  and part  he had  of all
 the  powers of  the other  Valar; but  he turned  them to  evil uses.

  
                                                                          
  He coveted the world and all that was in it, and desired the             
  lordship  of  Manwe  and the  realms of  all the  gods; and  pride and
  jealousy  and lust  grew ever  in his  heart, till  he became  unlike his
  brethren.   Wrath   consumed   him,   and    he   begot    violence   and
  destruction  and  excess.  In  ice   and  fire   was  his   delight.  But
  darkness  he  used most  in all  his evil  works, and  turned it  to fear
  and a name of dread among Elves and Men.                                 
    $10a  Thus   it  may   be  seen   that  there   are  nine   Valar,  and
  Seven  queens  of  the  Valar  of  no  less  might;  for  whereas  Melkor
  and  Ulmo  dwell  alone,  so  also  doth  Nienna,   while  Este   is  not
  numbered   among  the   Rulers.  But   the  Seven   Great  Ones   of  the
  Realm   of   Arda   are   Manwe   and   Melkor,  Varda,   Ulmo,  Yavanna,
  Aule,  and  Nienna;  for  though  Manwe  is  their  chief  [>  king],  in
  majesty   they   are   peers,  surpassing   beyond  compare   all  others
  whether  of  the  Valar  and  their  kin,  or  of  any  other  order that
  Iluvatar has conceived [> caused to be].                                 
    $10b  [All  the  following  was  added  to   the  typescript   in  ink:
  With  the  Valar  were  other  spirits  whose  being  also  began  before
  the  world:  these  are  the  maiar,  of  the  same  order  as  the Great
  but  of  less  might  and  majesty.  Among  them  Eonwe  the   herald  of
  Manwe,   and   Ilmare   handmaid   of   Varda   were   the   chief.  Many
  others  there  are  who   have  no   names  among   Elves  or   Men,  for
  they  appear  seldom   in  forms   visible.  But   great  and   fair  was
  Melian   of   the   people   of   Yavanna,  who   [struck  out:   on  her
  behalf]   tended   once   the   gardens   of  Este,   ere  she   came  to
  Middle-earth.   And  wise   was  Olorin,   counsellor  of   Irmo:  secret
  enemy  of  the  secret  evils  of  Melkor, for  his bright  visions drove
  away the imaginations of darkness.                                       
    Of  Melian  much  is  later  told;  but  of Olorin  this tale  does not
  speak.  In  later  days  he  dearly  loved  the  Children  of   Eru,  and
  took  pity  on  their  sorrows.   Those  who   hearkened  to   him  arose
  from  despair;  and  in  their  hearts the  desire to  heal and  to renew
  awoke,  and  thoughts  of  fair  things  that  had   not  yet   been  but
  might  yet  be  made  for  the  enrichment  of  Arda.  Nothing   he  made
  himself   and   nothing  he   possessed,  but   kindled  the   hearts  of
  others, and in their delight he was glad.                                
    But  not  all  of  the  maiar  were  faithful  to  the Valar;  for some
  were   from   the   beginning  drawn   to  the   power  of   Melkor,  and
  others  he  corrupted  later  to  his  service.  Sauron  was the  name by
  which  the  chief  of  these  was  afterwards  called,  but  he  was  not
  alone.]                                                                  
                                      *                                    

                                                             
                                                                         
 All the changes  shown in  the text  of LQ  1 given  above were  taken up
 into  the  second  complete  and  continuous typescript  LQ 2,  made some
 seven years later (pp. 141 - 2), which introduced a few errors. It cannot
 be said  when the  alterations were  made to  LQ 1,  though most  of them
 look as if they were made at the same time.                              
   The  typescript  LQ  2  was much  more fully  and carefully  emended in
 this chapter than in any  subsequent one,  though in  many cases  only on
 one of the two copies. I give here a list of these alterations:*         
   $1     After 'the Secret Fire was sent  to burn  at the  heart of  the World'
          was added: 'and it was called Ea', with 'Let  it be!  ' in  a footnote
          (struck out on the top copy).                                        
   $2     'and  some  of   these  Men   have  confused   with  the   Elves,  but
          wrongfully'   >   'these   are   the  Maiar,   whom  Men   have  often
          confounded  with  the  Elves,  but   wrongly'  ('wrongfully'   was  an
          error on the part of the typist of LQ 1).                            
   $3     On the  form Lorien  with short  vowel see  p. 56  note 2.  The typist
          did  not   understand  my   father's  corrections   of  the   name  on
          LQ  1,  which  were  unclear,  and  typed  at  the  three  occurrences
          ($$3,  6)  Lorien,  Lorin,  Lorion.  At  the   first  two   my  father
          corrected  the  name  to  Lorinen,  but struck  this out,  probably at
          once; his final form on LQ 2 was Lorien (so marked).                
   $4     'in all the regions of the air.' > '... air; therefore he  is surnamed
          Sulimo.'                                                             
            The  typist  of  LQ  2  omitted  the  word 'kindler'  after 'Varda',
          so  producing  'Varda  of  the  stars'; my  father changed  'stars' to
          'Stars', showing that he had not observed the error.                 
   $5     In  'she  [Yavanna]  is  next to  Varda, her  sister,' the  words 'her
          sister' were struck out (cf. under $8 below).                        
   $6     The  opening  of  the  paragraph  was again  rewritten, to  read: 'The
          Feanturi  were  brethren,  and  are  called  most  often   Mandos  and
          Lorien.  Yet  these  are  rightly  the  names of  the places  of their
          abiding;  for  their  true  names  are  Namo   and  Irmo.   Namo,  the
          elder,  dwells  in  Mandos,  and  is  the  keeper  of  the  Houses  of
          the Dead'                                                            
            '(Vaire the weaver is his) wife' ) 'spouse'                        
            'His  gardens  in  the  land  of  the  gods are  the fairest'  > 'In
          Lorien are  his gardens  in the  land of  the gods,  and they  are the
          fairest'                                                             
            '(Este the pale is his) wife' > 'spouse' (top copy only)           
            'an  island  in  the  dark  lake  of  Lorion'  )  'an island  in the
          tree-shadowed lake of Lorellin'                                      

  (*  No  doubt  many  of  the  corrections  to  LQ 1  as a  whole belong  to the
  'second phase' of revision (p. 142), while LQ 2 and the corrections made  to it
  are constituent elements in that phase; but it is obviously far more convenient
  and clear to set them all out together in relation to the primary text LQ 1.)

 
                                                                       
  $7   'Poldorea' > 'Astaldo'                                           
       'His wife is Nessa' > 'His spouse is Nessa'                      
  $8   The earlier part of this paragraph was substantially altered, but
       almost all of the new text appears on the carbon copy only:      
         He loved the  lands of  Middle-earth, and  he left  them unwil-
       lingly and came last to Valinor; and  oft of  old he  passed back
       east  over  the  mountains,  and  returned with  his host  to the
       hills and plains. He is a hunter of monsters and fell beasts, and
       delights  in  horses  and  hounds,  and all  trees he  loves; and
       Tauron  the  Sindar  called  him,  the lord  of the  forests. The
       Valaroma  was  the name  of his  great horn,  the sound  of which
       was  like  the  upgoing  of  the  Sun in  scarlet, and  the sheer
       lightning cleaving the clouds. Above all the horns of his host it
       was  heard   in  the   woods  that   Yavanna  brought   forth  in
       Valinor; for there he  would train  his folk  and his  beasts for
       the pursuit of  the evil  creatures of  Melkor. But  the Valaroma
       is  blown  no  more  upon  the Middle-earth  since the  change of
       the world and the fading of the Elves, whom he loved.            
         'she [Vana] is the younger sister of Varda and Palurien' > 'she
                                                                       
      is the younger sister of Yavanna' (top copy only)                
  $9  'Nienna, Manwe's sister and Melkor's' o 'sister of Namo' (top      
       copy only)                                                       
 $10  'Bauglir' > 'Baugron' (top copy only)                              
       the lordship of Manwe > the kingship of Manwe (top copy          
       only)                                                            
 $10b 'With the Valar were other spirits' > 'With the Valar, as has     
       been said, were other spirits' (top copy only)                   
         'these are the maiar' o 'the Maiar' (top copy only); maiar >
       Maiar again at end.                                              
   I have shown all these changes in unnecessary detail since they serve
 to indicate the nature of much of the material constituting 'the later
 Silmarillion'.                                                         
                                                                       
               Commentary on Chapter 1, 'Of the Valar'.                 
                                                                       
  $1   The new opening of The Silmarillion came in with the  first phase
       of  the  revision, and  it is  obvious that  it followed  and was
       dependent on the new version  of the  Ainulindale', with  its new
       conception of the Creation of the World:                         
         Iluvatar made visible the song of the  Ainur... [The  Ainur saw
       the history of  the World]  unfolding as  in a  Vision. Therefore
       Iluvatar gave to their  vision Being  ... it  was their  task to
       achieve it and by their labour to fulfill  the Vision  which they
       had seen.                                                        
       The  first  form  of  the new  opening, written  on the  QS manu-
       script, had 'Long they laboured  in the  regions of  Aman', using

       that name in the sense that it bore in the later Ainulindale' texts
       ('the  Halls  of  Aman',  the  World);  on  the QS  typescript (see
       p.  143)  Aman  was  emended  to  Ea'  (which therefore  appears in
       LQ 1).                                                             
  $2   The  name  Maiar, introduced  in the  addition made  at the  end of
       LQ  1 ($10b)  and appearing  in this  paragraph in  LQ 2,  is first
       found in the preliminary drafting  for the  Annals of  Aman (Mairi
       > Maiar, p. 49 and note 4). See further under $10b below.          
  $3   The  passing  change  of  Lorien to  Lorion is  found also  in AAm*
       (the  second,  abandoned  version  of  the  opening  of   AAm),  p.
       65, $1.                                                            
  $4   On  the  change  to  LQ  1  whereby  Melkor becomes  'the mightiest
       of  those  Ainur  who  came  into  the  World' (and  not possessing
       only powers equal to those of Manwe) see p. 65, $2.                
          On  the loss  of the  original sentence  'Fionwe and  Ilmare are
       their  son  and daughter',  heavily inked  out on  LQ 1,  see under
       $10b below. So  also in  the final  text D  of the  Ainulindale the
       reference  to  Fionwe  and  Ilmare  as  the  son  and  daughter  of
       Manwe and Varda was strongly blacked out (p. 34, $36).             
       On  the striking  out on  LQ 2  of the  statement that  Yavanna was
       the sister of Varda see under $8 below.                            
  $6   In the earliest phase  of the  revision a  marginal note  was added
       against  the  names  Mandos  and  Lorien, which  as entered  on the
       QS typescript read:                                                
          Yet these are not their right  names, and  are the  names rather
       of the places of their abiding.  For their  right names  are seldom
       spoken save in secret: which are Nur and Lis. Quoth Rumil.         
       (In the Lost Tales  Mandos is  the name  of the  God, and  also the
       name of his halls; it is  also said  (1.76) that  Vefantur (Mandos)
       called  his halls  by his  own name,  Ve.) Nur  and Lis  were then
       corrected  to  Namo  and  Irmo.  The typist  of LQ  1 took  this up
       into the  body of  the text,  which was  obviously not  my father's
       intention. This typist did the same elsewhere,  and my  father then
       restored the passage to its original status as a marginal note; but
       in this case he left it to stand, getting rid  of the  words 'Quoth
       Rumil'  (and  of the  old name  Nurufantur; similarly  with Olofan-
       tur subsequently).                                                 
          At the  foot of  the page  carrying this  passage in  the carbon
       copy of LQ 2  he pencilled  the following  (referring to  the names
       Namo  and   Irmo),  Judgement   (of  what   is)  Desire   (of  what
       might be or should be)'.                                           
          What is said at the end of the paragraph about Este is  found in
       AAm (p. 49, $3), where it is also told that she  was 'the  chief of
       the Maiar'.  This was  repeated in  AAm* (p.  65, $3),  where Nessa
       is added to Este as 'the highest among the Maiar'.                 
          The  change  of  'wife'  to  'spouse' was  made on  LQ 2  in the

                                                      
                                                                                           
           accounts of Vaire, Este, and Nessa ($$6 - 7); in that of Vana ($8)               
           it was merely overlooked, while Varda had become Manwe's                         
           'spouse' in a change made to LQ 1 ($4), and Yavanna was                          
           already Aule's 'spouse' in QS ($5). The same change was made                     
           on the typescript of AAm (p. 69), and its significance is seen                   
           from the accompanying marginal comment: 'Note that                               
           "spouse" meant only an "association". The Valar had no                           
           bodies, but could assume shapes.' At this time the passage in                    
           AAm concerning the Children of the Valar was removed (see                        
           under $10b below).                                                               
     $8    In AAm ($133, pp. 111, 124) the form was still Tauros (in                        
           Feanor's speech on the summit of Tuna), and was not corrected.                   
             The name Valaroma (appearing in the expanded passage on                        
           LQ 2) occurs in AAm (p. 101, $116) and by emendation of                          
           Rombaras in Ainulindale' D (p. 35, $34).                                         
             The statement in $5 that Yavanna is the sister of Varda does                   
           not appear in QS, but it was merely derived from that in QS $8,                  
           that Vana is 'the younger sister of Varda and Palurien'. This                    
           goes back to Q (IV.79, 167), but no further. Varda and                           
           Yavanna were still sisters in AAm (p. 49, $3), but the idea was                  
           abandoned in corrections to LQ 2.                                                
     $9    That Nienna was the sister of Manwe and Melkor ('brethren in                     
           the thought of Iluvatar') goes back to the earliest Annals of                    
           Valinor (IV.263), and remained in AAm (p. 49, $3; cf. p. 93,                     
           $88, where Nienna aided the prayer of Melkor for pardon                          
           'because of her kinship'). With the change in LQ 2 whereby she                   
           becomes 'sister of Namo', omitting Irmo his brother, cf. AAm*                    
           (p. 65, $3), where she is named only 'Manwe's sister', omitting                  
           Melkor.                                                                          
     $10   The name Baugron (changed from Bauglir in LQ 2) is found                         
           nowhere else. It was not adopted in the published Silmarillion.                  
    $10a   The meaning of the passage is more evident from a table; the                     
           names italicised are 'the Seven Great Ones of the Realm of                       
           Arda'.                                                                           
                         Manu e'...................Varda                  
                         Melkor                                                             
                         Ulmo                                                               
                         Aule'.....................Yavanna              
                                                   Nienna                               
                         Mandos....................Vaire                               
                         Lorien ...................................(Este)
                         Tulkas ...................Nessa                                
                         Osse......................Uinen                                
                         Orome.....................Vana                                      
                                                                                           
    $10b   Fionwe and Ilmare were removed from $4 as the children of                        
           Manwe and Varda, and in $7 Fionwe becomes Eonwe, 'herald                         

  of   Manwe';   here  Ilmare   becomes  'handmaid   of  Varda'.   This  is
  an  aspect  of  an  important  development  in  the  conception   of  the
  Powers   of   Arda,   the   abandonment  of   the  old   and  long-rooted
  idea  of  'the Children  of the  Valar, the  Sons of  the Valar'.  It was
  still  present  in   AAm  (p.   49,  $4),   where  the   Valarindi,  'the
  offspring  of  the  Valar',  were  'numbered  with'  the  Maiar  (but  in
  AAm*  they  are  distinguished  from  the  Maiar,  p.  66,  $4).  On  the
  typescript  text  of  AAm  the   conception  of   the  Children   of  the
  Valar was struck out (see under $6 above).                              
     Melian  is  a  Maia (as  in AAm  $40), and  she is  'of the  people of
  Yavanna'  (in  QS  $31  'she  was  akin,  before  the  World   was  made,
  unto   Yavanna').   And   here  Olorin   (Gandalf),  as   'counsellor  of
  Irmo', enters The Silmarillion.                                         
     In   AAm   (p.   52,   $17)   Sauron  ('a   great  craftsman   of  the
  household  of  Aule')  is likewise  said to  have been  the chief  of the
  Maiar who turned to Melkor.                                             
                                                                         
 It may be that the (relatively) heavy correction carried out on the  LQ 2
 text of  this chapter  was the  preliminary to  its final,  enlarged form
 called the Valaquenta (pp. 199 ff.).                                     
                                                                         
                      2 OF VALINOR AND THE TWO TREES.                     
                                                                         
 The textual situation in this chapter differs from that in Chapter  1, in
 that here, after the  alterations made  to the  original pre-Lord  of the
 Rings  texts  (the  QS  manuscript  and  derived  QS   typescript)  there
 followed  two  typescripts  made  by  my  father  before  LQ 1  was made,
 and in the first of these the opening of the chapter was  greatly changed
 from its form in QS. I shall not however distinguish the 'layers'  in the
 textual  history  before  the  amanuensis  typescript  LQ 1  was reached,
 although some particular points are recorded in the commentary.          
 The  further  development  of  this  chapter  from  QS   was  effectively
 confined  to  the  1951  revision,  since  late  rewriting  and expansion
 corresponding  to  the  development of  the Valaquenta  out of  Chapter 1
 Of the Valar was not undertaken in this case. It is conceivable, I think,
 that (while there  is no  evidence one  way or  the other)  having remade
 Chapter  1  as  the  Valaquenta  my  father  postponed  the  rewriting of
 Chapter 2  because his  views on  the treatment  of the  myth of  the Two
 Trees in the light of the later cosmology were too uncertain.            
 There  follows  now  the text  of LQ  1, with  the (very  few) subsequent
 changes  made  to  it  shown  as  such.  The  paragraph  numbers  corres-
 pond to those in QS (V.208 - 10).                                        
                                                                         
                     2. Of Valinor and the Two Trees.                     
                                                                         
   $11 Now in the beginning of the Kingdom of Arda Melkor                   
 contested with his brother Manwe and the Valar for the                   

 overlordship,  and  all  that  they  wrought   he  hindered   or  marred,
 if  he  might. But  he fled  before the  onset of  Tulkas, and  there was
 peace.   But   since  Melkor   had  perverted   light  to   a  destroying
 flame,  when  he  was  gone  and  his  fires   were  subdued   the  Valar
 perceived   that  the   Earth  was   dark,  save   for  the   glimmer  of
 the   innumerable  stars   which  Varda   had  made   in  the   ages  un-
 recorded  of  the  labours  of  Ea.  Aule,   therefore,  at   the  prayer
 of   Yavanna,   wrought   two   mighty    Lamps   [added:    illuin   and
 Ormal]  for  the  lighting  of  Arda;  and  the   Valar  set   them  upon
 lofty   pillars  northward   and  southward   in  Middle-earth,   and  in
 the  light  of  the  Lamps  they  ordered  all   their  realm,   and  the
 desire  of  Yavanna  had  fruit,  and  living   things  came   forth  and
 grew abundantly.                                                         
   In  those  days  the  dwelling  of  the  Valar  was upon  an isle  in a
 great  lake  in  the  midst  of  the  Middle-earth  that Aule  had built.
 There  the  light  of  the   Lamps  mingled   and  growth   was  swiftest
 and  fairest;  and  behold!  in   the  blending   of  Illuin   and  Ormal
 there  came   forth  Greenness,   and  it   was  new;   and  Middle-earth
 rejoiced,   and   the   Valar   praised   the   name   of   Yavanna.  But
 Melkor  hearing  of  these  works,  and  being  filled  with   wrath  and
 envy,  returned  secretly  to  Arda  out  of   the  Darkness   and  gath-
 ered  his  strength  in  the  North,  and  he   marred  the   labours  of
 Yavanna,  so  that   the  growth   of  Earth   was  corrupted   and  many
 monstrous  things   were  born.   Then  coming   with  war   against  the
 Valar   suddenly,   he  cast   down  the   Lamps,  and   night  returned,
 and  in  the  fall  of the  pillars of  Illuin and  Ormal the  seas arose
 and many lands were drowned.                                             
   $12  In  the  darkness  and  the  confusion  of  the  seas   the  Valar
 could  not  at  that  time   overcome  Melkor;   for  his   strength  had
 increased   with   his   malice,  and   he  had   now  gathered   to  his
 service  many  other  spirits,  and  many  evil  things  also of  his own
 making.  Thus  he  escaped  from  the  wrath  of  the  Valar, and  far in
 the  North  he  built  himself  a  fortress,  and  delved  great  caverns
 underground,   and   deemed  that   he  was   secure  from   assault  for
 ever.  But  the  gods  removed   into  the   uttermost  West   and  there
 made  their  home  and  fortified  it;  and  they  built   many  mansions
 in  that  land  upon  the  borders   of  the   World,  which   is  called
 Valinor.  And  Valinor  was  bounded   upon  the   hither  side   by  the
                                                                         
  (*  [footnote  to  the  text  - see  page 154]  Which is  Garsecg: quoth
 AElfwine. [This note was mistakenly placed in the text by the typist, and
 subsequently reinstated as a footnote.])                                 

                                                            
                                                                        
 Great  Sea  of  the  West,*  and  eastward  upon  its  shores  the Valar
 built  the  Pelori,  the  Mountains  of  Aman,  that  are  highest  upon
 Earth.  But  on  the  further side  lay the  Outer Sea,  which encircles
 the  Kingdom  of  Arda,  and  is   called  by   the  Elves   Vaiya.  How
 wide  is  that  sea  none  know  but  the  gods, and  beyond it  are the
 Walls   of   the  World   to  fence   out  the   Void  and   the  Eldest
 Darkness.                                                               
  $13  Now  in   that  guarded   land  the   Valar  gathered   all  light
 and all  fair things;  and there  are their  houses, their  gardens, and
 their  towers.  In  the  midst  of  the   plain  beyond   the  Mountains
 was  the  City  of  the  Gods [>  their city],  Valmar the  beautiful of
 many  bells.  But  Manwe  and   Varda  had   halls  upon   the  loftiest
 of  the  Mountains  of  Aman,   whence  they   could  look   out  across
 the  Earth  even  into  the  furthest  East.  Taniquetil the  Elves name
 that   holy   mountain,   and   Oiolosse   Everlasting   Whiteness,  and
 Elerina   [>   Elerrina]   Crowned   with   Stars,   and    many   names
 beside.  But  the  Gnomes  [>  Sindar]  spoke  of  it  in   their  later
 tongue as Amon Uilos.**                                                 
  $14   In   Valinor   Yavanna   hallowed    the   mould    with   mighty
 song,  and  Nienna  watered  it  with  tears.  In  that  time  the  gods
 [)  Valar]  were  gathered  together,  and  they  sat silent  upon their
 thrones  of  council  in  the  Ring  of  Doom   nigh  unto   the  golden
 gates  of  Valmar  the  Blessed;  and   Yavanna  Palurien   sang  before
 them and they watched.                                                  
  $15   From   the   earth   there   came   forth  two   slender  shoots;
 and  silence  was  over  all  the  world  in  that  hour, nor  was there
 any  other  sound  save  the  slow  chanting  of  Palurien.   Under  her
 song  two  fair  trees  uprose  and  grew.  Of  all  things   which  the
 gods  [>  she]  made  they  have  most  renown,  and  about  their  fate
 all  the  tales of  the Elder  World are  woven. The  one had  leaves of
 dark  green  that  beneath  were   as  shining   silver;  and   he  bore
 white  blossoms  like  unto  a  cherry-tree,  were  it  surpassing great
 and  fair;  and  from  each  of his  countless flowers  a dew  of silver
 light  was  ever  falling,  but  the  earth  beneath  was  dappled  with
                                                                        
 (* [footnote to the text - see page 153])                               
 (** [footnote  to  the  text]  In the  language of  this island  of Men
 Heofonsy'I was its name among those few that ever descried it  afar off.
 Yet in error [> So I wrote in error], as the Eldar teach me; for that is
 rightly  the  name  only  of  the mountain  of Numenor,  the Meneltarma,
 which  has  foundered  for  ever:  quoth AElfwine.  [This note  was also
 mistakenly  placed  in the  text by  the typist.  See the  commentary on
 $13.])                                                                  

 the  dancing  shadows  of  his  fluttering   leaves.  The   other  bore
 leaves  of  a  young  green  like  the  new-opened  beech;  their edges
 were  of  glittering  gold.  Flowers  swung  upon  her   branches  like
 clusters  of  yellow  flame,  formed  each  to  a  glowing   horn  that
 spilled  a  golden  rain  upon  the  ground;  and  from the  blossom of
 that tree there came forth warmth and a great light.                   
   $16  Telperion  the  one   was  called   in  Valinor,   and  Silpion,
 and   Ninquelote,   and   many   names   in   song   beside;   but  the
 Gnomes  name  him  [>  but  in  the  Sindarin  tongue  he  was  called]
 Galathilion.  Laurelin  was  the  other  [>  the  other   was]  called,
 and  Malinalda,   and  Kulurien,   and  many   other  names;   but  the
 Gnomes name her [> but the Sindar named her] Galadloriel.              
   $17  In  seven  hours  the  glory  of  each  tree  waxed to  full and
 waned  again  to  naught;  and  each  awoke  once   more  to   life  an
 hour  before  the  other  ceased  to  shine.  Thus  in   Valinor  twice
 every  day  there  came  a  gentle  hour  of  softer  light  when  both
 Trees  were  faint  and  their  gold  and  silver  beams  were mingled.
 Telperion was the elder of  the Trees  and came  first to  full stature
 and  to  bloom;  and  that  first  hour  in which  he shone  alone, the
 white  glimmer  of  a  silver  dawn,  the  gods  reckoned not  into the
 tale  of  hours,   but  named   it  the   Opening  Hour,   and  counted
 therefrom  the  ages  of  their  reign  in  Valinor.  Therefore  at the
 sixth hour of  the First  Day, and  of all  the joyous  days thereafter
 until  the  Darkening,  Telperion  ceased  his time  of flower;  and at
 the  twelfth  hour  Laurelin  her  blossoming.  And  each  day  of  the
 gods  in   Valinor  [>   Aman]  contained   twelve  hours,   and  ended
 with  the  second  mingling  of  the  lights,  in  which  Laurelin  was
 waning  but  Telperion  was   waxing.'  And   the  dews   of  Telperion
 and  the  spilth  of  Laurelin  Varda  let  hoard  in great  vats, like
                                                                       
  (* [footnote to the  text] Other  names of  Laurelin among  the Noldor
 [> in the Sindarin tongue] are [>  were] Glewellin  (which is  the same
 as Laurelin, song of gold), Lasgalen green of leaf, and Melthinorn tree
 of gold;  and her  image in  Gondolin was  named Glingal.  [Struck out:
 Of  old  among  the  Noldor]  The  Elder Tree  was named  also Silivros
 glimmering [>  sparkling] rain,  Celeborn tree  of silver,  and Nimloth
 pale blossom. But in after days Galathilion  the Less  was the  name of
 the  White  Tree  of  Tuna,  and  his  seedling  was named  Celeborn in
 Eressea, and Nimloth in Numenor, the gift  of the  Eldar. The  image of
 Telperion  that  Turgon  made  in  Gondolin  was Belthil.  Quoth Pengo-
 lod. [Like the previous ones this footnote was put into the body of the
 text by the typist of  LQ 1,  but afterwards  reinstated in  its proper
 place.])                                                               

                                                              
                                                                     
 [struck out: unto] shining lakes, that were to all the land of the
 Valar as wells of water and of light.                                
                                                                     
        Commentary on Chapter 2, 'Of Valinor and the Two Trees'.      
                                                                     
 The final typescript (LQ 2) of this chapter received very few correc-
 tions, and those only on the top copy (such as were made are recorded
 in the commentary that follows). Thus the LQ 1 text given above, with
 the corrections shown, is virtually the final text of the chapter.

                
                                                                      
 $511 - 12 This chapter underwent little change from  the text  of QS
      (V.208 -  10) apart  from the  greatly expanded  opening -  in which
      most  of  the  new  material  derives  from the  later Ainulindale'.
      That  the  much  fuller  story  in  AAm  (see  p. 60,  commentary on
      $$11  -  29)  was  written  after the  revision of  the Silmarillion
      chapter can be seen  from various  points. Thus  the old  story that
      Melkor  only  began  the  delving of  Utumno after  the fall  of the
      Lamps  is  still  present (see  p. 61,  $20). The  phrase in  LQ $11
      concerning the first star-making of Varda was  first written  in the
      form  '...  the  ages  unrecorded  of  the labours  of the  Great in
      Aman'  (for  Aman  >  Ea  see  p. 149,  $1), which  shows it  to be
      earlier  than  the  closely  similar phrase  in AAm  ($24): 'Middle-
      earth lay in a  twilight beneath  the stars  that Varda  had wrought
      in the ages forgotten of her labours in Ea' - where it is used  in a
      distinct context, of the darkness after the fall of the Lamps.        
 $12  The  footnote  to  QS  $12  giving the  name Utumno  of Melko's
      original fortress survived at first in the revised version,  but was
      lost from one of the typescripts and not reinstated.                  
        On the final text  LQ 2  my father  pencilled a  hasty footnote
      after 'deemed that he was secure from assault for ever':              
        The  chief  of his  fortresses was  at Utumno  in the  North of
      Middle-earth;  but  he  made  also  a   fortress  and   armoury  not
      far  from  the  northwestern  shores  of  the  Sea,  to  resist  any
      assault   from   Aman.   This   was    called   Angband    and   was
      commanded by Sauron, lieutenant of Melkor.                            
     In  QS  ($$62,  105)  the  story  was  that  Morgoth,  when he
 returned  from  Valinor,  built  Angband  on  the  ruins  of Utumno;
 in AAm ($127, p. 109)  this may  well have  been still  present, but  j
 the  statement  of QS  $62 that  'Morgoth came  back to  his ancient
 habitation'  is  lacking.  Now  there enters  the story  that Melkor
 built both strongholds in the ancient  days -  and also  that Sauron
 was  the  commander of  Angband; cf.  the late  note written  on the
 typescript  of  AAm  (p. 127,  $127): 'The  making of  this fortress
 [Angband]  as  a  guard  against  a  landing  from  the  West should
 come earlier.'                                                        
      The original  passage in  QS concerning  Vaiya, the  Outer Sea,

        beyond  which  'the  Walls  of  the  World  fence  out the  Void and
        the   Eldest   Dark',   reflecting   the   contemporary  Ambarkanta,
        survived in the  revision almost  unchanged, except  that it  is now
        said that none but  the Valar  know how  wide is  the Outer  Sea (in
        contrast  to  the  Ambarkanta  and  its  diagrams).  On   the  great
        difficulty of interpreting this passage  in the  light of  the later
        world-image see pp. 62-4.                                           
           On  LQ  2  my  father  emended  Vaiya   to  Ekkaia   (whence  its
        occurrence in the published  Silmarillion). The  Outer Sea  is given
        no Elvish name in AAm.                                              
  $13   In the first texts of  the 1951  revision the  sentence 'and  in the
        language  of  this  island  of  Men  Heofonsyl  was  its  name among
        those  few that  ever descried  it afar  off' was  part of  the text
        (as  it  was  in  QS,  with  Tindbrenting  for  Heofonsyl),  and the
        footnote began  at 'Yet  in error,  as the  Eldar teach  me...' This
        seems  the  natural  arrangement.  The  typist  of  LQ  1,  as often
        elsewhere,  put  the  footnote  into the  body of  the text;  but my
        father  when  correcting  LQ  1  put  the   whole  passage   into  a
        footnote - in contrast to what he did in a similar case in the first
        chapter (p. 150, $6), where  he left  the footnote  in the  text. It
        certainly seems clear in these cases that he did  not refer  back to
        the  texts  preceding  LQ 1  (see p.  143). -  The Old  English name
        Heofonsyl  'Pillar  of  Heaven'  occurs in  The Notion  Club Papers
        of the Meneltarma (IX.314).                                         
  $14   Palurien  >  Kementari  by  a  pencilled  change   on  LQ   2.  This
        was  as  it  were  a casual  change, not  made in  $15 (nor  in $5).
        Kementari occurs in the Valaquenta (p. 202).                        
  $16   Telperion  (not  Silpion)  is  the  primary   name  in   AAm  (first
        appearing  in  $5,  pp. 50,  59); in  the Silmarillion  tradition it
        became  the  primary  name  by  emendation  to the  first typescript
        text of the 1951 revision.                                          
  $17   With  the  reference  (in  the  footnote  on  the  names of  the Two
        Trees) to  Galathilion the  Less, the  White Tree  of Tuna,  cf. AAm
        $69  (annal  1142,   p.  85):   'In  this   year  Yavanna   gave  to
        the  Noldor  the  White  Tree,  Galathilion,   image  of   the  Tree
        Telperion'.                                                         
           In the last sentence the word  'vats' was  changed to  'wells' on
        LQ  2  (cf.  'mighty  vats' in  AAm $28,  changed on  the typescript
        to 'shining wells' (p. 69); in AAm* 'deep pools' (p. 68)).         
           On  the  carbon  copy  of  LQ  2,  which  otherwise  received  no
        emendations,  my  father  added  the  following  note  to  the  word
        spilth in the last sentence:
        meant  to  indicate  that  Laurelin  is  'founded' on  the laburnum.
        'jocund  spilth  of  yellow   fire'  Francis   Thompson  -   who  no
        doubt  got   the  word   from  Timon   of  Athens   (his  vocabulary
        was largely derived from Elizabethan English)                       

  The   reference   is   to   Francis   Thompsons's   Sister   Songs,   The
  Proem:                                                                  
         Mark yonder, how the long laburnum drips                         
         Its jocund spilth of fire, its honey of wild flame!              
  Cf.  the  original  description  of  Laurelin in  the Lost  Tales (1.72):
  'all  its  boughs  were  hidden   by  long   swaying  clusters   of  gold
  flowers  like  a  myriad  hanging  lamps  of  flame,  and  light  spilled
  from  the  tips  of   these  and   splashed  upon   the  ground   with  a
  sweet  noise.'  In  the  earlier versions  (from Q  through to  the first
  typescript  of  the  1951  revision)   Laurelin  was   expressly  likened
  to  'those  trees  Men  now  call  Golden-rain'  - that  being a  name of
  the  laburnum,  and  the  words  'a golden  rain' are  used in  the final
  form  of  the  passage  ($15).  -  The  reference to  Timon of  Athens is
  to  Act  II, Scene  2, 'our  vaults have  wept /  With drunken  spilth of
  wine'.                                                                  
                                                                         
                       3   OF THE COMING OF THE ELVES.                      
                                                                         
 The textual situation here is similar to that in the previous chapter but
 more  complicated.  After very  substantial revision  carried out  on the
 old  pre-Lord  of the  Rings texts  there followed  a typescript  made by
 my  father;  but  after  LQ  1  had been  taken from  it he  made further
 changes to it (mostly very minor, but a major  alteration in  $20), which
 were  'lost', since  LQ 2  was a  straight copy  of LQ  1 and  he clearly
 never compared the texts in detail. This typescript I shall refer  to for
 the purposes of this section as 'Text A'. For some reason it ceases to be
 a typescript at the words 'counselled the Elves to remove' (near  the end
 of $23), which stand  at the  foot of  a page,  and becomes  a manuscript
 on the  following page  with the  words 'into  the West'.  The manuscript
 portion  is  in  two  forms, the  first heavily  emended, and  the second
 written out fair.                                                        
 There  follows  now  the text  of LQ  1 (the  'lost' alterations  made to
 Text  A  are  given  in  the  commentary).   The  system   of  paragraph-
 numbering  in  this  chapter,  and  elsewhere, needs  a word  of explana-
 tion.  As  generally,  I  have  retained the  numbers of  QS, introducing
 'sub-paragraph  numbers'  (as  $18a)  where  QS  has  nothing correspond-
 ing.  Where  the  revised  text  expands  a QS  paragraph into  more than
 one, or several (as in $$20, 23) only the first is numbered.            
                                                                         
                       3. Of the Coming of the Elves.                     
                                                                         
   $18  In all this time, since Melkor overthrew the Lamps, the              
 Middle-earth east of the Mountains was without light. While              
 the  Lamps  had  shone,  growth began  there which  now was              
 checked, because all was again dark. But already the oldest              

                                         
                                                                  
 living  things  had  arisen:  in the  sea the  great weeds,  and on
 the earth the  shadow of  great trees;  and in  the valleys  of the
 night-clad  hills  there  were  dark creatures  old and  strong. In
 those  lands  and  forests Orome  would often  hunt; and  there too
 at times  Yavanna came,  singing sorrowfully;  for she  was grieved
 at  the  darkness  of  Middle-earth  and  ill  content that  it was
 forsaken.  But  the  other Valar  came seldom  thither; and  in the
 North  Melkor  built his  strength, and  gathered his  demons about
 him. These were the first made of his creatures: their  hearts were
 of  fire,  but  they  were  cloaked  in  darkness, and  terror went
 before  them;  they  had whips  of flame.  Balrogs they  were named
 by the Noldor  in later  days. And  in that  dark time  Melkor made
 many  other  monsters  of  divers  shapes   and  kinds   that  long
 troubled  the  world;  yet  the  Orcs  were not  made until  he had
 looked  upon  the  Elves,  and  he  made  them  in  mockery  of the
 Children  of  Iluvatar. His  realm spread  now ever  southward over
 the Middle-earth.                                                 
    $18a  It  came  to  pass  that  the  Valar  held   council,  and
 Yavanna  spoke  before   them,  saying:   'Behold,  ye   mighty  of
 Arda, the Vision  of Eru  was brief  and soon  taken away,  so that
 maybe  we  cannot  guess  within a  narrow count  of days  the hour
 appointed. Yet be  sure of  this: the  hour approaches,  and within
 this  age  our  hope  shall  be  revealed,  and the  Children shall
 awake.  But it  is not  in Aman  that they  shall awaken.  Shall we
 then leave the lands of their dwelling desolate  and full  of evil?
 Shall they walk in darkness while  we have  light? Shall  they call
 Melkor lord while Manwe sits upon the Holy Hill?'                 
    And  Tulkas cried  aloud: 'Nay!  Let us  make war  swiftly! Have
 we not rested from strife over-long,  and is  not our  strength now
 renewed? Shall one alone contest with us for ever?'               
    But  at  the  bidding  of Manwe  Mandos spoke  and he  said: 'In
 this age the Children  shall come  indeed, but  they come  not yet.
 Moreover it  is doom  that the  First Children  should come  in the
 darkness and should look first  upon the  Stars. Great  light shall
 be for their waning. To Varda ever shall they call at need.'      
    $19  And  Varda  said  naught,  but  departing from  the council
 she  went  to  the  mountain  of Taniquetil  and looked  forth; and
 she beheld the darkness and was moved.                            
    Then  Varda took  the silver  dews from  the vats  of Telperion,
 and  therewith  she  made  new  stars  and  brighter   against  the
 coming  of  the  First-born. Wherefore  she whose  name out  of the
 deeps of  time and  the labours  of Ea  was Tintalle,  the Kindler,

                                                      
                                                                 
 was called after by the Elves  Elentari, the  Queen of  the Stars.
 Karnil  and  Luinil,  Nenar  and  Lumbar,  Alkarinque   and  Elem-
 mire she wrought in that time, and other of her  works of  old she
 gathered together and set  as signs  in Heaven  that the  gods may
 read:   Wilwarin,   Telumendil,   Soronume,   and   Anarrima;  and
 Menelmakar with his shining  belt that  forebodes the  Last Battle
 that shall be. And high in the  North as  a challenge  unto Melkor
 she set the crown of seven mighty stars  to swing,  the Valakirka,
 the  Sickle  of  the  Gods  and  sign  of  doom.  Many  names have
 these stars been given; but  in the  North in  the Elder  Days Men
 called  them  the   Burning  Briar:   quoth  Pengolod   [>  (quoth
 Pengolod)].                                                      
  $20 It is told that  even as  Varda ended  her labours,  and they
 were  long,  when  first  Menelmakar  strode  up  the sky  and the
 blue fire of Helluin flickered in the mists  above the  borders of
 the  world,  in that  hour the  Children of  the Earth  awoke, the
 First-born  of  Iluvatar.  Themselves   they  named   the  Quendi,
 whom  we  call  Elves  (quoth  AElfwine);  but  Orome  named  them
 in their  own tongue  Eldar, people  of the  stars, and  that name
 has  since  been  borne  by  all  that   followed  him   upon  the
 westward road.  In the  beginning they  were stronger  and greater
 than they have since  become; but  not more  fair, for  though the
 beauty of the Quendi in  the days  of their  youth was  beyond all
 other beauty that Iluvatar has caused to be, it has  not perished,
 but lives in the West, and sorrow and wisdom have enriched it.
  And  Orome  looking  upon  the  Elves  was  filled with  love and
 wonder,  as  though  they  were beings  sudden and  marvellous and
 unforetold. For [so] it shall ever  be even  with the  Valar. From
 without  the  world,  though  all  things  may  be  forethought in
 music  or  foreshown  in  vision  from  afar,  to those  who enter
 verily  into  Ea  each in  its time  shall be  met at  unawares as
 something new and strange.                                       
  Thus  it  was  that  Orome  came  upon  the  Quendi by  chance in
 his wandering, while they dwelt yet silent upon [read  beside] the
 star-lit  mere,  Kuivienen,  Water  of Awakening,  in the  East of
 Middle-earth.  For  a  while  he  abode with  them and  aided them
 in the making of language; for that was their first work  of craft
 upon  Earth,  and ever  most dear  to their  hearts, and  the fair
 Elvish speech was sweet  in the  ears of  the Valar.  Then swiftly
 Orome rode  back over  land and  sea to  Valinor, filled  with the
 thought of the beauty of the Elves, and he brought the  tidings to
 Valmar. And  the gods  rejoiced, and  yet were  amazed at  what he

 told;  but Manwe  sat long  upon Taniquetil  deep in  thought, and
 he  sought  the  counsel  of  Iluvatar.  And  coming then  down to
 Valmar he called a conclave of  the Great,  and thither  came even
 Ulmo from the Outer Sea.                                         
   And Manwe said to the Valar:  'This is  the counsel  of Iluvatar
 in my heart: that we  should take  up again  the mastery  of Arda,
 at whatsoever cost,  and deliver  the Quendi  from the  shadows of
 Melkor.' Then Tulkas was  glad; but  Aule was  grieved, and  it is
 said that he (and others of the Valar)  had before  been unwilling
 to  strive with  Melkor, foreboding  the hurts  of the  world that
 must come of that strife.                                        
   $21  But  now  the  Valar  made  ready   and  came   forth  from
 Aman in the strength of war, resolving to assault the  fortress of
 Melkor  in  the North  and make  an end.  Never did  Melkor forget
 that this war was made on behalf of the Elves  and that  they were
 the cause of his downfall. Yet they  had no  part in  those deeds;
 and little do they know of  the riding  of the  power of  the West
 against the North in the beginning of their days, and of  the fire
 and tumult of  the Battle  of the  Gods. In  those days  the shape
 of  Middle-earth  was  changed  and  broken  and  the   seas  were
 moved. Tulkas  it was  who at  the last  wrestled with  Melkor and
 overthrew  him,  and  he was  bound with  the chain  Angainor that
 Aule had wrought, and  led captive;  and the  world had  peace for
 a  great age.  Nonetheless the  fortress of  Melkor at  Utumno had
 many  mighty  vaults  and  caverns  hidden  with deceit  far under
 earth,  and  these  the  Valar  did not  all discover  nor utterly
 destroy, and  many evil  things still  lingered there;  and others
 were dispersed  and fled  into the  dark and  roamed in  the waste
 places of the world, awaiting a more evil hour.                  
   $22  But when  the Battle  was ended  and from  the ruin  of the
 North  great  clouds  arose  and  hid  the  stars, the  Valar drew
 Melkor  back  to  Valinor  bound  hand  and  foot  and  blindfold,
 and he was cast into prison in  the halls  of Mandos,  from whence
 none  have  ever escaped  save by  the will  of Mandos  and Manwe,
 neither Vala, nor Elf, nor mortal  Man. Vast  are those  halls and
 strong, and they  were built  in the  north of  the land  of Aman.
 There  was  Melkor  doomed  to  abide  for  seven  [>  three] ages
 long, ere his cause should be tried  again, or  he should  sue for
 pardon.                                                          
   $23  Then  again  the  gods  were gathered  in council  and were
 divided in  debate. For  some (and  of these  Ulmo was  the chief)
 held that the Quendi should be left free to walk as they  would in

  
                                                                     
  Middle-earth, and with their gifts of skill to  order all  the lands
  and heal their hurts. But  the most  part feared  for the  Quendi in
  the  dangerous  world  amid  the  deceits of  the starlit  dusk; and
  they  were  filled  moreover  with  the  love of  the beauty  of the
  Elves  and  desired their  fellowship. At  the last,  therefore, the
  Valar  summoned  the  Quendi  to  Valinor, there  to be  gathered at
  the knees of the gods in the light  of the  blessed Trees  for ever.
  And  Mandos  who  had  spoken  not  at  all  in  the   debate  broke
  silence  and  said:  'So  it is  doomed.' For  of this  summons came
  many  woes  that after  befell; yet  those who  hold that  the Valar
  erred, thinking rather of the bliss  of Valinor  than of  the Earth,
  and seeking to wrest  the will  of Iluvatar  to their  own pleasure,
  speak with the tongues [read tongue] of Melkor.                     
     Nonetheless the Elves were at first unwilling  to hearken  to the
  summons, for they  had as  yet seen  the Valar  only in  their wrath
  as  they  went  to  war,  save  Orome  alone,  and they  were filled
  with  dread.  Therefore  Orome  was  sent  again  to  them,  and  he
  chose   from   among   them  three   ambassadors;  and   he  brought
  them  to  Valmar.  These  were  Ingwe  and   Finwe  and   Elwe,  who
  after were  kings of  the Three  Kindreds of  the Eldar;  and coming
  they were filled  with awe  by the  glory and  majesty of  the Valar
  and  desired  greatly  the  light  and   splendour  of   the  Trees.
  Therefore  they  returned and  counselled the  Elves to  remove into
  the West,  and the  greater part  of the  people hearkened  to their
  counsel. This they did of their free  will, and  yet were  swayed by
  the  majesty  of  the  gods, ere  their own  wisdom was  full grown.
  The  Elves  that  obeyed   the  summons   and  followed   the  three
  kings  are  called  the  Eldar, by  the name  that Orome  gave them;
  for he was their guide and led them  at the  last unto  Valinor. Yet
  there  were many  who preferred  the starlight  and the  wide spaces
  of the  Earth to  the rumour  of the  glory of  the Trees,  and they
  remained behind. These are called the Avari, the Unwilling.         
     $24  The  Eldar  prepared  now  a  great  march from  their first
  homes  in  the  East.  When  all  was  made  ready,  Orome  rode  at
  their  head  upon  Nahar,  his  white  horse  shod  with  gold;  and
  behind him the Eldalie were arrayed in three hosts.                 
     $25  The smallest  host and  the first  to set  forth was  led by
  Ingwe, the most high lord of all  the Elvish  race. He  entered into
  Valinor and sits at the feet of the Powers, and all Elves revere his
  name;   but   he   has   never  returned   nor  looked   again  upon
  Middle-earth.  The  Lindar  [>  Vanyar]  were  his folk,  fairest of

                                            
                                                                         
  the  Quendi;  they  are  the  High  Elves,  and  the  beloved   of  Manwe
  and Varda, and few Men have spoken with them.                           
       $26   Next  came   the  Noldor,   a  name   of  wisdom.*   They  are
  the  Deep  Elves,  and  the  friends  of  Aule.  Their  lord  was  Finwe,
  wisest   of   all   the   children   of  the   world.  His   kindred  are
  renowned   in   song,   for   they   fought   and   laboured   long   and
  grievously in the northern lands of old.                                
       $27  The  greatest  host  came   last,  and   they  are   named  the
  Teleri,  for  they  tarried  on  the  road,  and  were  not  wholly  of a
  mind  to  pass  from  the dusk  to the  light of  Valinor. In  water they
  had  great  delight,  and  those  that came  at last  to the  west shores
  were  enamoured  of  the  Sea.  The   Sea-elves  therefore   they  became
  in   Valinor,   the   Soloneldi   [>  Falmari],   for  they   made  music
  beside   the   breaking   waves.   Two   lords   they   had,   for  their
  numbers    were    very   great:    Elwe   Singollo,    which   signifies
  Greymantle,  and  Olwe   his  brother.   The  hair   of  Olwe   was  long
  and  white,  and  his  eyes  were  blue; but  the hair  of Elwe  was grey
  as silver, and his eyes  were as  stars; he  was the  tallest of  all the
  Elven-folk.                                                             
                                                                         
         [$28  The  paragraph concerning  the people  of Dan  who left
         the Great March and turned south was displaced to follow $29;
         see the Commentary.]                                             
                                                                         
       $29  These  are  the  chief  peoples  of  the  Eldalie,  who passing
  at  length  into  the  uttermost  West  in  the  days  of  the  Two Trees
  are  called  the  Kalaquendi,  the  Elves  of  the  Light. But  others of
  the   Eldar   there   were  who   set  out   indeed  upon   the  Westward
  March,  but  became  lost  upon  the  long  road,  or  turned  aside,  or
  lingered  on  the  shores  of  Middle-earth.  They  dwelt  by   the  sea,
  or   wandered   in   the   woods   and  mountains   of  the   world,  yet
  their  hearts  were  ever  turned  towards  the  West.  These  the  Kala-
  quendi   call   the    Alamanyar   [>    Umanyar],   since    they   came
  never   to   the  Land   of  Aman   and  the   Blessed  Realm.   But  the
  Alamanyar    [>    Umanyar]    and    the    Avari   alike    they   name
  the  Moriquendi,   Elves  of   the  Darkness,   for  they   never  beheld
  the light before the Sun and Moon.                                      
       The  Alamanyar  [>  Umanyar]  were   for  the   most  part   of  the
                                                                         
     (*  [footnote  to  the  text]  The Gnomes  they may  be called  in our
  tongue, quoth AElfwine. (The word  that he  uses is  Witan. More  is said
  of  this  matter  in  the  Tenth  Chapter  where the  tale speaks  of the
  Edain.) [See the commentary on $26.])                                   

                                                   
                                                                 
 race of the Teleri. For the hindmost of that people,  repenting of
 the  journey,  forsook  the  host  of  Olwe,  and  Dan  was  their
 leader;  and  they  turned  southward and  wandered long  and far;
 and they became a  folk apart,  unlike their  kin, save  that they
 loved  water,  and dwelt  most beside  falls and  running streams.
 They had greater lore of living  things, tree  and herb,  bird and
 beast, than all other Elves. The  Nandor they  are called.  It was
 Denethor son of  Dan who  turning again  west at  last led  a part
 of that people over the  mountains into  Beleriand ere  the rising
 of the Moon.                                                     
  $30  Others  there  were  also  of  the  Teleri that  remained in
 Middle-earth. These were  the Elves  of Beleriand  in the  west of
 the Northern  lands. They  came from  the host  of Elwe  the Grey.
 He was lost in  the woods  and many  of his  folk sought  him long
 in  vain;  and  thus  when  their kindred  departed over  Sea they
 were left behind and went not  into the  West. Therefore  they are
 called  the  Sindar,  the  Grey Elves,  but themselves  they named
 Eglath, the Forsaken. Elwe after became  their king,  mightiest of
 all  the  Alamanyar  [correction  to  Umanyar  missed]. He  it was
 who was called Thingol in the language of Doriath.               
                                                                 
  [Other names in song  and tale  are given  to these  peoples. The
  Vanyar  are  the Blessed  Elves, and  the Spear-elves,  the Elves
  of  the Air,  the friends  of the  Gods, the  Holy Elves  and the
  Immortal,  and  the  Children of  Ingwe; they  are the  Fair Folk
  and the White.                                                  
     The  Noldor are  the Wise,  and the  Golden, the  Valiant, the
  Sword-elves,  the Elves  of the  Earth, the  Foes of  Melkor, the
  Skilled  of  Hand,  the  Jewel-wrights,  the  Companions  of Men,
  the Followers of Finwe.                                         
     The Teleri are the Foam-riders, the Singers of the  Shore, the
  Free,  and the  Swift, and  the Arrow-elves;  they are  the Elves
  of the  Sea, the  Ship-wrights, the  Swanherds, the  Gatherers of
  Pearl, the Blue Elves,  the people  of Olwe.  The Nandor  are the
  Host  of  Dan,  the  Wood-elves,  the  Wanderers,  the Axe-elves,
  the  Green  Elves  and the  Brown, the  Hidden People;  and those
  that  came  at  last  to  Ossiriand  are the  Elves of  the Seven
  Rivers,  the Singers  Unseen, the  Kingless, the  Weaponless, and
  the  Lost Folk,  for they  are now  no more.  The Sindar  are the
  Lemberi, the Lingerers; they are the Friends  of Osse,  the Elves
  of  the  Twilight,  the  Silvern,  the  Enchanters, the  Wards of

 Melian, the Kindred of Luthien, the people of Elwe. Quoth                
 Pengolod.]                                                               
                                                                         
           Commentary on Chapter 3, 'Of the Coming of the Elves'.         
                                                                         
 LQ 1 is here again, as in the previous chapter, virtually the  final text,
 for  the later  typescript LQ  2 was  scarcely touched,  and there  was no
 further enlargement or expansion.                                        
                                                                        

                                                 
                                                                      
 $18  In AAm $30 (p. 70) it is said that Melkor 'wrought' the Balrogs
      in Utumno during the long darkness after the fall of the Lamps;
      but in an interpolation to AAm there enters the view that
      Melkor, after his rebellion, could make nothing that had life of
      its own ($45, see pp. 74, 78), and in AAm*, the second version
      of the opening of AAm (p. 79, $30), the Balrogs become the
      chief of 'the evil spirits that followed him, the Umaiar', whom at
      that time he multiplied. The statement in QS $18 that the
      Balrogs were 'the first made of his creatures' survived through
      all the texts of the later revision of the Quenta, but in the margin
      of one of the copies of LQ 2 my father wrote: 'See Valaquenta
      for true account.' This is a reference to the passage which
      appears in the published Silmarillion on p. 31:
        For of the Maiar many were drawn to his splendour in the
        days of his greatness, and remained in that allegiance down
        into his darkness; and others he corrupted afterwards to his
        service with lies and treacherous gifts. Dreadful among these
        spirits were the Valaraukar, the scourges of fire that in
        Middle-earth were called the Balrogs, demons of terror.
      The actual text of LQ 2 my father emended at this time very
      hastily to read:
        These were the (ealar) spirits who first adhered to him in the
        days of his splendour, and became most like him in his
        corruption: their hearts were of fire, but they were cloaked in
        darkness, and terror went before them; they had whips of
        flame. Balrogs they were named by the Noldor in later days.
        And in that dark time Melkor bred many other monsters of
        divers shapes and kinds that long troubled the world; and his
        realm spread now ever southward over the Middle-earth. But
        the Orks, mockeries and perversions of the Children of Eru,
        did not appear until after the Awakening of the Elves.
      There is a footnote to the word ealar in this passage:
        'spirit' (not incarnate, which was fea, S[indarin] fae). eala
        'being'.
      On the origin of the Orcs in AAm (and especially with respect to
      the word 'perversions' in the passage just given) see pp. 78,
      123 - 4. Orks was my father's late spelling.

                                                         
                                                                    
$18a   Of Yavanna's words before the Valar, and  the words  of Tulkas
  and  Mandos,  there  has  been  no   previous  suggestion   in  the
  Quenta  tradition;  but  cf.  AV  2  (V.111, annal  1900): 'Yavanna
  often  reproached  the  Valar  for  their  neglected  stewardship'.
  This  was  extended in  AAm $$32  - 3  (p. 71),  where most  of the
  elements  of  the  present  passage  appear,  though  more  briefly
  expressed.                                                         
$19   Here the two star-makings are expressly contrasted, and Varda's
  names Tintalle  'the Kindler'  and Elentari  'Queen of  the Stars'
  differentiated  in  their  bearing. The  second star-making  is de-
  scribed also in AAm $$35 -  6 (p.  71), but  far more  briefly, and
  though the 'gathering together of the ancient stars' to  form signs
  in the  heavens is  mentioned there  also, only  the constellations
  Menelmakar   (Orion)   and   Valakirka   are  named.   That  Menel-
  makar forebodes the Last Battle is said  in both  sources, but  l Q
  does not name it as a sign of Turin Turambar.                      
    The name 'Burning  Briar' for  the Great  Bear still  survives in
  the  Quenta  tradition.  This  observation  was  made into  a foot-
  note in Text  A (on  which see  p. 158),  with the  addition 'quoth
  Pengolod', but the typist of LQ 1 put it as usual into the  body of
  the text, where my father left it.                                  
    In  Text  A,  in  which  the  names  of the  great stars  and the
  constellations  first  entered,  Wilwarin,  Karnil,  and Alkarinque
  were typed  Vilvarin, Carnil,  and Alcarinque  and then  altered to
  the  forms  in  LQ  1.  By  a  later  change to  Text A  Elentari >
  Elentarie,  not  found  in  LQ  1 and  LQ 2.  - The  name Elemmire
  has  appeared  in  AAm  $114  (pp.  100,  106)   as  that   of  the
  Vanyarin Elf who made the Aldudenie.                              
$20   Although in Text  A my  father added  the words  quoth AElfwine
  to 'whom  we call  Elves' (deriving  from QS)  he retained  this in
  the body of the text, and only on the final  typescript LQ  2 wrote
  a direction that it should be a footnote.                          
    The aberrant idea  in QS  that the  coming of  the Elves  was not
  in  the  Music  of  the  Ainur (see  V.217) is  now displaced  by a
  much  more   subtle  explanation   of  Orome's   astonishment.  The
  detailed statement of the  place of  Kuivienen in  AAm $38  (p. 72)
  is absent here.                                                    
    The  history  of  the  passage  concerning  Orome and  the Quendi
  (from  'For  a  while  he  abode  with  them  ...') is  curious and
  complex. In text A as  he typed  it my  father followed  QS exactly
  in  saying  that  Orome  'taught  them  the  language of  the gods,
  from  whence  afterwards  they  made the  fair Elvish  speech', and
  that  afterwards  he  returned  to Valinor  and brought  tidings of
  the Awakening  of the  Quendi to  Valmar. He  then altered  this to
  the text  found in  LQ 1  above (he  'aided them  in the  making of
  language; for that was their first work  of craft  upon Earth...'),

 and  at  the  same  time  added  at  the  beginning  of  $20  the  words
 'in   their  own   tongue'  ('but   Orome  named   them  in   their  own
 tongue  Eldar,  people  of  the  stars').  In  this  form   the  passage
 survived into LQ 2 without further change.                              
         On  Text  A,  however,   my  father   struck  out   the  passage
 beginning  'For  a  while  he  abode  with  them...'  and   replaced  it
 with the following on a slip pinned to the typescript:                  
         Then swiftly he rode back over land and  sea to  Valinor, filled
 with  the  thought   of  the   beauty  of   the  long-awaited,   and  he
 brought  the  tidings  to  Valmar.  And  the  gods  rejoiced,   and  yet
 were   in   doubt   amid   their   mirth,   and   they    debated   what
 counsel  it  were  best  now  to  take  to  guard  the  Elves  from  the
 shadow   of   Melkor.   At   once    Orome   returned    to   Kuivienen,
 and  he  abode  there  long  among   the  Elves,   and  aided   them  in
 the  making  of  language;  for  that  was  their  first  work  of craft
 upon  Earth,  and  ever  the   dearest  to   their  hearts,   and  sweet
 was  the  Elven-tongue  on  the  ears  of  the  Valar.  But   Manwe  sat
 alone upon Taniquetil...                                                
      This  further  revision  makes  Orome  return  at once  to Valinor,
 and  then  come  back  to  Kuivienen,  where  he  aided  the   Elves  in
 the  making  of  language.  It  does  not  appear  in  LQ  1  and  LQ  2
 because,  as  I  have  said,  this  and other  alterations were  made to
 Text A after LQ 1 had been taken from it.                               
         In AAm  $39 (p.  72) the  story is  different: there  the Quendi
 'began  to  make  speech  and  to  give  names to  all things  that they
 perceived'   long   before  Orome   came  upon   them  (335   Sun  Years
 after  the  Awakening);  and  nothing is  said of  his playing  any part
 in the evolution of Elvish speech.                                      
         In the sentence 'while they dwelt yet  silent upon  the star-lit
 mere'  Text  A  has  beside;  upon  in  LQ  1  (and  LQ  2)  was clearly
 an   error   introduced   by   the  typist   (and  similarly   with  the
 omission  of  so  earlier  in  this  paragraph  and  tongues  for tongue
 in $23).                                                                
$21   On LQ 2 my father  changed 'the  fortress of  Melkor' in  the first
 sentence  to  'the  fortresses  of  Melkor',  and  at  the  end  of  the
 paragraph  'the  fortress  of  Melkor  at  Utumno'  to  'the  fortresses
 of  Melkor'.  In  this case  he made  the changes  on LQ  1 also,  but I
 have  not  included  them  in  the  text printed,  since they  were very
 late,  and  belonged   with  the   changed  story   of  the   origin  of
 Angband: see the commentary on Chapter 2, $12 (p. 156).                 
         On Text A 'little do they  know of  the riding  of the  power of
 the  West'  was  changed  to  'they  know  little',  but this,  like the
 major   change   made   to   $20,  was   made  after   LQ  1   had  been
 taken from Text A.                                                      
         There reappears here for the first time since the Lost Tales the
 story  that  Aule  made  the   chain  Angainor   (elaborately  recounted

                                                                
                                                                             
       in  The  Chaining  of  Melko,  I.100  -  1,   where  the   form  was
       Angaino; in The Tale  of Tinuviel,  II.19, there  is a  reference to
       'the chain Angainu that Aule and Tulkas made').                        
  $22  Changes  were  also  made  in  this  paragraph after  LQ 1  had been
       made:  'from  whence'  >  'whence',  and 'Vast  are those  halls and
       strong' > 'Vast and strong are those halls'.                           
         In   AAm   $52   Melkor   was  condemned   to  Mandos   for  three
       ages (pp. 80, 88).                                                     
  $23  That  there  were  differing counsels  of the  Valar on  the Summon-
       ing  of  the  Quendi  was not  even hinted  in the  Quenta tradition
       till now. In AAm $53 (p. 81) there is  mention of  a debate,  and in
       $73 (p. 86) it is told that in the  council of  the Valar  Ulmo 'had
       chiefly  spoken  against the  summons, deeming  that it  were better
       for  the  Quendi  to remain  in Middle-earth.'  The belief  that the
       Valar  erred is  not here  imputed to  them as  an error  'with good
       intent' (QS, V.214), and to this extent is harshly repudiated.         
         The  passage  concerning  the   three  ambassadors   remains  vir-
       tually unchanged from QS,  but in  the course  of the  revision (see
       under  $27  below)  there  came   to  be   an  internal   change  of
       reference  -  when  Elwe  became  Thingol,  whereas   previously  he
       had  been  Thingol's   brother  (see   V.217,  $23).   Probably  the
       sentences  'These  were  Ingwe  and  Finwe   and  Elwe,   who  after
       were  kings  of  the  Three Kindreds  of the  Eldar' and  'The Elves
       that  obeyed  the  summons  and  followed  the  three  kings' should
       have  been  modified  when  that  transformation  took   place,  and
       when the Third Host came to have two lords.                            
         There  is  no  mention  in  LQ  of  the  kindreds  of   Morwe  and
       Nurwe, who refused the summons (AAm $57, p. 81).                       
         Another  very  minor  change  was  made  to  Text  A  after  LQ  1
       was  made:  'And  Mandos  who  had  spoken  not   at  all'   >  'And
       Mandos who had not spoken'.                                            
  $25  The  name  Lindar  was  altered  to  Vanyar  by  a late  change made
       to  the final  text of  the Ainulindale'  (p. 34,  $36); in  AAm $58
       (p. 82) Vanyar  appears in  the text  as written.  - By  a pencilled
       change  to  LQ  2  'High  Elves'  was changed  to 'Fair  Elves' (see
       V.218, $25).                                                           
  $26  In  Text  A  the  opening  sentence  of  this paragraph  read: 'Next
       came  the  Noldor,  a  name  of  wisdom,  and  the  Gnomes  they may
       be  called  in  our tongue',  with 'Quoth  AElfwine. (The  word that
       he uses ...' placed in a  footnote. The  typist of  LQ 1  placed all
       this in the body of the text; but my father directed that  it should
       all go into a footnote, as is done in the text  printed. In  the Old
       English  versions of  the 1930s  Witan was  not used,  but Noldelfe,
       Noldielfe  (see  also  IV.212).  On  one  copy  of  LQ  2  my father
       struck  out  'Gnomes'  and  wrote  above  'Enquirers';  this  occurs
       nowhere else.                                                          
                                                                             
                                                                          

        At the  end of  the paragraph  he added  to Text  A: 'Dark  is their
        hue  and  grey  are their  eyes'; this  did not  get into  the later
        typescripts. See 1.44.                                              
  $27   By  the  end  of  the  revision,  represented  by  LQ  1,  the final
        position  had  been  reached,  as  in  AAm  $$58, 74:  Elwe Singollo
        (Greymantle)  -  who  is  Elu  Thingol  King  of  Doriath -  and his
        brother  Olwe,  the  two  lords  of the  host of  the Teleri  on the
        Great  March  until  Elwe  was  lost. The  stages passed  through to
        reach this can  be observed  in the  earlier version  of the  end of
        Text  A  (see  p.  158).  First came  the idea  that there  were two
        lords,  because  the  numbers   were  very   great:  Elwe   and  his
        brother Sindo ('the locks of Sindo were  as grey  as silver  ... but
        the hair of Elwe was long and white, and he was  the tallest  of all
        the Elven-race'). Then  Elwe' was  changed to  Solwe, and  Sindo to
        Elwe'; at this stage, probably, Elwe  (the Grey)  became one  of the
        three  original  ambassadors,  displacing  his  brother  (now Solwe)
        in this at the same  time as  he took  his name  (and became  in his
        stead 'the tallest of all the Elven-folk').                         
  $28   In the first stage of the 1951 revision, carried out on the original
        QS  typescript,  the  people  of  Dan,  still from  the host  of the
        Noldor, were thus described:                                        
           They  are  not  counted  among  the  Eldar,  nor  yet  among  the
        Avari.   The   [Nandar   >]   Nandor   who   turn  back   they  were
        called,  and  akin  was  the name  of their  first leader  Nano, who
        in  their  tongue  was  called  Dan.  His  son  was   Denethor,  who
        led  them  into  Beleriand  ere   the  rising   of  the   Moon.  The
        Danathrim, Danians, they were named in that land.                   
        The  term  Pereldar  'Half-eldar'  used in  QS had  now disappeared,
        and in this passage  is clearly  the first  occurrence of  the name
        Nandor  (which  appears  subsequently  in  AAm  $62:  see   pp.  83,
        89).                                                                
           In the next stage  (Text A)  the paragraph  was removed  from its
        former place and set at the end of  $29. At  this stage  the Nandor,
        also  called  the  Laiquendi  or  Green-elves, became  Telerin Elves
        from the host  of Sindo  the Grey,  and were  placed with  the other
        Teleri  (followers  of  Sindo)  who  remained  behind  in  Beleriand
        under the name Ekelli  (first written  Ecelli), 'the  Forsaken'. See
        further under $$29 - 30.                                            
                                                                           
    $$29 - 30 In the first stage of the revision the form Lembi Lingerers
        -  the  Elves  of  the  Great Journey  who 'were  lost upon  the long
        road'  -  became Lemberi,  classed  with  the  Avari  as  Moriquendi,
        Dark  Elves.  The  term  Kalaquendi,  Light  Elves, also  appeared in
        the  account  (though  found  much   earlier,  together   with  Mori-
        quendi,  in  the  table  associated  with  the  Lhammas,  V.197,  and
        also  in  the  Etymologies).  At  this  stage  the   old  subdivision
        Ilkorindi  (comprising  Lembi   and  Pereldar   or  Danas,   see  the

                                                         
                                                                     
 table given in V.219) is  not present,  and the  place of  the Nandor
 is not defined.                                                      
  In  the  next  stage (Text  A) the  term Lemberi  was not  used, and
 there emerged  the short-lived  term Ekelli  (Ecelli) used  (like the
 old Ilkorindi) of  all the  'lost Eldar',  including the  Nandor (see
 under  $28);  Ekelli  was  the  name given  to them  by the  Elves of
 Valinor,  and  meant  'the  Forsaken,  their   kin  that   were  left
 behind'. Thus:                                                       
                                                                     
    Followers of                                                      
                                    Nandor                 Avari      
        Elwe                                                          
                                                                     
                     Ekelli                                           
                 (the Forsaken)                                       
                                                                     
                                    Moriquendi                        
                                    (Dark Elves)                      
                                                                     
  Ekelli   was   then   replaced  by   Alamanyar  ('since   they  came
 never  to  the  Land  of   Aman'),  and   the  Nandor   became  Elves
 from  the  host  of Olwe;  while those  who sought  in vain  for Elwe
 Singollo  (Thingol) are  'therefore' called  Sindar, the  Grey Elves,
 'but themselves they named Eglath, the Forsaken.' Thus:              
                                                                     
          Sindar                        Nandor                        
 (= Eglath, the Forsaken)                                   Avari     
                                                                     
                      Alamanyar                                       
                                                                     
                                        Moriquendi                    
                                                                     
 It  was  here,  undoubtedly,  that  the  name  Sindar  arose:  occur-
 rences  earlier  in LQ  were inserted  later, and  that in  AAm ($74,
 see  p.  91)  was  later  also.  With  the  change  of  Alamanyar  to
 Umanyar  on  LQ  1  the  final  form (as  shown in  the table  in the
 published Silmarillion, p. 309) was reached.                         
  Thus   some   important  developments   in  the   narrative  emerged
 in the course of the 1951 revision of  the end  of this  chapter. The
 original  Elwe,  who  in  QS  ($30)  was  Thingol's  brother,  became
 Olwe,  while  the  name  Elwe  was  transferred  to  Thingol   -  who
 became  one  of  the  three  Elvish  'ambassadors'  taken   by  Orome
 to  Valinor, in  the place  of his  brother; and  both Olwe  and Elwe
 were  leaders  of  the  Telerin   host  on   the  Great   March  from
 Kuivienen. The story  that the  Eldar of  Beleriand (the  Sindar) did
 not  pass  over the  Sea because  they were  left behind  seeking for
 Elwe  Singollo  takes  up  a  passage  in  the Lhammas  (V.174, cited
 on p.  90, $71);  in QS  there was  no suggestion  that the  Elves of

 Doriath   were   specifically   those   of  Thingol's   following  who
 would not abandon the search for him.                                 
    In  AAm  the  whole  matter is  treated from  a different  point of
 view:  there,  the events  and geography  of the  Great Journey  are a
 central  element,  but  the  complexities  of  naming  and classifica-
 tion  are not.  It is  clear however  that AAm  was not  written until
 the  revision  of  the  Quenta tradition  concerning the  Sundering of
 the  Elves  was  virtually  complete:  for  in  AAm  the   Nandor  are
 from  the  host  of  Olwe  ($62),  and  the  followers  of   Elwe  who
 were  left  behind  called  themselves  Eglath,  the  Forsaken  People
                                                                      
 ($71).                                                                 
                                                                      
 The  passage  recounting  the  names  used  in  poetry for  the Elvish
 peoples, which goes back to QS, and  which forms  an integral  part of
 Text A, was for  some reason  omitted from  LQ 1;  my father  wrote it
 onto the typescript subsequently (with Vanyar for Lindar of Text A).
 Later changes made to Text A altered  'Axe-elves' to  'Staff-elves' as
 a name of  the Nandor,  and introduced  'Axe-elves' as  a name  of the
 Sindar (following 'the Friends of Osse'); but these were 'lost' and do
 not appear  in LQ  1 and  LQ Z.  - The  name Lemberi  'Lingerers' (see
 under $$29 - 30 above) reappears as one of the by-names of the Sindar;
 and 'the Green Elves and  the Brown'  re-emerge from  the old  Tale of
 the Nauglafring (11.237, etc.).                                       
 It remains to notice lastly that on LQ 2 my  father changed  the title
 of the chapter to  Of the  Coming of  the Elves  and the  Captivity of
 Melkor, which  was followed  in the  published Silmarillion;  and also
 that on one copy of this typescript, against  the first  occurrence of
 Umanyar  ($29),  he  wrote  Alamanyar  in  the margin,  as if  he were
 considering a return to the earlier name.                             
                                                                      
                        4  OF THINGOL AND MELIAN.                   
                                                                      
 Of  Thingol  and  Melian  was  not  a  separate  chapter  in   the  QS
 manuscript and the derived QS typescript, although  in both  there was
 a sub-heading (and in The Lost Road, V.220, I treated it  as separate,
 numbering  it  3(b)).  The  first  text  of  the  1951 revision  was a
 manuscript that continued on from  the manuscript  ending of  'Text A'
 of The Coming of the Elves (see p. 158), and here  my father  may have
 intended it as a separate chapter, although there  is no  number. From
 'Text A', as in the preceding chapter, LQ 1 was  taken, and  the final
 text was LQ 2 (in which the chapter is numbered '4').                 
 The first  paragraph  remained  almost  unchanged  from  QS,  but  the
 remainder was much expanded.                                          

                                                                
                                                                              
                             Of Thingol and Melian.                            
                                                                              
  $31  Thus  it  came to  pass that  Elu-thingol [>  Elwe Singollo]            
 and  many  of  his  folk  abode  in  Beleriand  and  went  not  to            
 Valinor.                                                                      
  Melian was a maia, of the  race of  the Valar.  She dwelt  in the            
 gardens of Olofantur, and among all his fair  folk there  was none            
 more  beautiful  than  she,  nor  more wise,  nor more  skilled in            
 songs of enchantment. It is told that the  gods would  leave their            
 business, and the birds of Valinor their mirth, that the  bells of            
 Valmar  were  silent  and the  fountains ceased  to flow,  when at            
 the mingling  of the  lights Melian  sang in  Lorien. Nightingales            
 went always with her, and she  taught them  their song.  She loved            
 the  deep  shadow of  great trees;  but she  was akin,  before the            
 world  was  made,  unto  Yavanna  herself,  and  on  a   time  she            
 departed from Valinor  on a  long journey  into the  Hither Lands,            
 and there she filled the silence of Arda before the dawn  with her            
 voice and with the voices of her birds.                                       
   $32  Now  it  came  to   pass  that   when  their   journey  was            
 near its end the folk of Elwe rested long  and dwelt  in Beleriand            
 beyond  Gelion;  and  King  Elwe  went  often  through  the  great            
 woods,  for  he  had  friendship with  the Noldor  who lay  to the            
 westward, and  with Finwe  their lord.  And it  chanced on  a time            
 that he came alone to the starlit  wood of  Nan Elmoth,  and there            
 on  a  sudden  he  heard  the  song   of  nightingales.   Then  an            
 enchantment  fell  upon  him,  and  he stood  still; and  afar off            
 beyond  the  voices  of  the  lomelindi * he  heard  the  voice of            
 Melian, and it filled  all his  heart with  wonder and  desire. He            
 forgot then utterly all his folk and all the purposes of his mind,            
 and following the birds under the shadows of  the trees  he passed            
 deep  into  Nan Elmoth  and was  lost. But  he came  at last  to a            
 glade open to the stars, and there  Melian stood;  and out  of the            
 darkness he beheld her with hands outstretched,  and the  light of            
 Aman was in her face.                                                         
  No  word  she  spoke;  but being  filled with  love Elwe  came to            
 her and took her hand; and straightway  a spell  was laid  on him,            
 so  that  they stood  thus, hand  in hand,  while long  years were            
 measured  by  the  wheeling  stars  above them;  and the  trees of            
 Nan  Elmoth grew  tall and  dark ere  they spoke  any word  one to            
 another.                                                                      
                                                                              
 (* [footnote to the text] lomelindi: 'dusk-singers' = nightingales.)          

    $33   Thus  Elwe's   folk  who   sought  him   found  him   not,  and
 Olwe  took  the  kingship  of   the  Teleri   and  departed;   but  Elwe
 Singollo  came  never  again  across  the  sea  to  Valinor;  and Melian
 returned  not  thither  while their  realm together  lasted; and  of her
 a  strain  of  the  [read:  of  the  race  of  the]  immortal  gods came
 among  both  Elves  and  Men,  as  hereafter  shall  be  told.  In after
 days   Melian  and   Elwe  became   Queen  and   King  of   Grey  Elves,
 and  their  hidden  halls  were  in   Menegroth,  the   Thousand  Caves,
 in   Doriath;  and   as  Thingol   Greymantle  he   was  known   in  the
 [read:  to all  in the]  tongue of  that land.  Great power  Melian lent
 to   Thingol  her   spouse,  who   was  in   himself  great   among  the
 Eldar;  for  he  alone  of  all  the  Forsaken  had  seen  with  his own
 eyes  the  Trees  in  the  day of  their flowering,  and king  though he
 were    [>    was]   of    Alamanyar   [>    Umanyar],   he    was   not
 accounted   among   the   Moriquendi,   but  with   the  Elves   of  the
 Light, mighty upon Middle-earth.                                        
                                                                        
            Commentary on Chapter 4, 'Of Thingol and Melian'             
                                                                        
 $31  The  form 'Elu-thingol'  here first  appeared. -  Olofantur was
      corrected to Lorien on one copy of LQ 2 (see p. 150, $6).          
 $32  With the mention  of the  long sojourn  of the  Teleri in  the lands
      beyond Gelion  cf. AAm  $64 (p.  83). The  story of  Elwe's journey
      to visit Finwe his friend is told also in AAm ($$64  - 5);  and the
      phrase 'the trees of Nan  Elmoth grew  tall and  dark' is  found in
      both  sources.  In  AAm  Elwe's  trance  lasted  for more  than two
      centuries measured by the Sun (p. 89, $65).                        
      $33 It now becomes explicit, and not  merely implied,  that Thingol
      had  been  to  Valinor,  as  one  of  the  three  ambassadors  (see
      pp. 168 - 9, $$23, 27). - The  readings in  LQ 1  'a strain  of the
      immortal  gods'  and  'he  was known  in the  tongue of  that land'
      were clearly mere errors  of omission  on the  part of  the typist;
      the  readings  proposed are  found in  my father's  manuscript Text
      A  (see  p.  158). A  late change  to Text  A made  after LQ  1 was
      copied from it was 'Grey Elves' to 'the Grey Elves'.               
                                                                        
                     5  OF ELDANOR AND THE PRINCES OF                  
                               THE ELDALIE.                              
                                                                        
 My father did less revision and rewriting of this chapter than  on those
 preceding,  and in  fact did  not himself  make a  wholly new  text: the
 revision of 1951 was very largely  restricted to  emendation of  the old
 QS typescript, and  it was  from this  that LQ  1 was  taken. In  the QS
 typescript this was not a separate chapter, but a 'sub-chapter' entitled

            
                                                                      
 Of Kor and Alqualonde' (in The Lost  Road numbered  3(c); V.221  - 5);
 after which that typescript was  abandoned, and  for the  remainder of
 the work there  is only  the QS  manuscript from  the pre-Lord  of the
 Rings period.                                                         
  Emendation to the QS typescript was carried  out at  different times,
 and  three  important  passages  of rewriting  (see the  commentary on
 $$40, 43) were 'lost' and not taken up into the later texts.         
                                                                      
               Of Eldanor and the Princes of the Eldalie.              
                                                                      
  $34  In  time  the  hosts  of the  Eldalie came  to the  last western
 shores  of  the  Hither  Lands.  In  the  North  these shores,  in the
 ancient  days  after  the battle  of the  gods, sloped  ever westward,
 until  in  the  northernmost  parts  of  the earth  only a  narrow sea
 divided   the   Outer   Land   of   Aman,   upon  which   Valinor  was
 built, from  the Hither  Lands; but  this narrow  sea was  filled with
 grinding  ice,  because  of  the  violence  of  the frosts  of Melkor.
 Therefore  Orome  did  not  lead  the  Eldar into  the far  North, but
 brought  them  to  the  fair  lands  about   the  River   Sirion  that
 afterwards   were   named   Beleriand;    and   from    those   shores
 whence  first the  hosts of  the Eldar  looked in  fear and  wonder on
 the  sea  there  stretched  an   ocean,  wide   and  dark   and  deep,
 between them and the Mountains of Aman.                               
  $35  There  they  waited  and   gazed  upon   the  dark   waves.  But
 Ulmo   came   from   the   Valar;  and   he  uprooted   a  half-sunken
 island,  which  now  long  had  stood  alone  amid  the sea,  far from
 either shore; and with  the aid  of his  servants he  moved it,  as it
 were  a mighty  ship, and  anchored it  in the  bay into  which Sirion
 pours  his  water.*  Thereon  he  embarked   the  Lindar   [>  Vanyar]
 and  the  Noldor,  for  they  had  already  assembled. But  the Teleri
 were  behind,  being  slower  and  less  eager  upon  the  march,  and
 they were  delayed also  by the  loss of  Thingol and  their fruitless
 search; and they did not come until Ulmo had departed.                
  $36   Therefore   Ulmo   drew   the   Lindar   [>  Vanyar]   and  the
 Noldor  over  the  sea  to  the  long  shores  beneath  the  Mountains
 of  Valinor,  and  they  entered  the  land  of  the  gods   and  were
 welcomed to its  bliss. But  the Teleri  dwelt long  by the  coasts of
                                                                      
 (* [footnote to the text] And some have  told that  the great  isle of
 Balar, that lay of old in that bay, was the eastern horn of the Lonely
 Isle,  that  broke  asunder  and  remained  behind, when  Ulmo removed
 that land again into the West. Quoth Rumil. [Placed in the body of the
 text by the typist of LQ 1 but subsequently reinstated as a footnote.])

 the  western  sea,  awaiting  Ulmo's  return;  and  they  grew  to  love
 the  sound  of  the  waves,  and  they  made   songs  filled   with  the
 music   of  water.   Osse  heard   them,  and   came  thither;   and  he
 loved  them,  delighting  in  the  music of  their voices.  Sitting upon
 a  rock  nigh  to  the  margin  of  the  sea  he   spoke  to   them  and
 instructed   them.   Great   therefore   was   his   grief   when   Ulmo
 returned   at   length   to  bear   them  away   to  Valinor.   Some  he
 persuaded  to   remain  on   the  beaches   of  the   Middle-earth,  and
 these  were the  Elves of  the Falas  that in  after days  had dwellings
 at  the  havens  of  Brithombar  and  Eglorest  in  Beleriand;  but most
 of the Teleri embarked upon the isle and were drawn far away.           
   $37   Osse  followed   them,  and   when  they   were  come   near  to
 their  journey's  end,  he  called  to  them;  and  they begged  Ulmo to
 halt for a while,  so that  they might  take leave  of their  friend and
 look  their  last upon  the sky  of stars.  For the  light of  the Trees
 that filtered  through the  passes of  the hills  filled them  with awe.
 And   Ulmo   understood   well   their   hearts,   and   granted   their
 request;  and  at  his  bidding  Osse  made fast  the island  and rooted
 it  in  the  foundations  of  the  sea.  Then  Ulmo returned  to Valinor
 and  made   known  what   had  been   done,  and   the  Valar   for  the
 most  part  were  ill-pleased;  but  the  island  could  not   again  be
 moved  without  great  hurt,  or  without  peril   to  the   Teleri  who
 dwelt  thereon;  and  it  was  not  moved,  but  stood  there  alone for
 many  an  age.  No  other  land  lay  near  it,  and  it was  called Tol
 Eressea,  the  Lonely  Isle.*  There  the  Teleri  long had  their home,
 and   Osse   was   often   among   them,   and   they  learned   of  him
 strange  musics  and  sea-lore;  and  he  brought  to   them  sea-birds,
 the gift of  Yavanna, for  their delight.  By this  long sojourn  of the
 Teleri  apart  in  the  Lonely Isle  was caused  the sundering  of their
 speech   from  the   language  of   the  Lindar   [>  Vanyar]   and  the
 Noldor.                                                                 
   $38   To   these   the   Valar   had  given   a  land   and  dwelling-
 places.  Even  among  the  radiant  flowers  of  the   Tree-lit  gardens
 of the gods they longed still  to see  the stars  at times.  Therefore a
 gap  was  made  in  the  great  walls  of  the  Pelori,  and there  in a
 deep  valley  that  ran  down  to  the  sea  the  Eldar  raised  a  high
 green  hill:  Tuna  it  was  called.  From  the  West  the light  of the
                                                                        
  (* [footnote to the text] Avallone also it was after called, signifying
 the isle that lies nighest unto  the Valar  in Valinor.  Quoth AElfwine.
 [Placed in the body of the text by the typist of  LQ 1  but subsequently
 reinstated as a footnote.])                                             

 
                                                                         
 Trees  fell  upon  it,  and  its  shadow  lay ever  eastward; and  to the
 East  it  looked   towards  the   Bay  of   Elvenhome,  and   the  Lonely
 Isle,  and   the  Shadowy   Seas.  Then   through  the   Kalakiryan,  the
 Pass  of  Light,  the  radiance  of  the  Blessed  Realm  streamed forth,
 kindling   the   waves   with  gleams   of  gold   and  silver,   and  it
 touched  the  Lonely  Isle,  and  its  western   shore  grew   green  and
 fair.  There  bloomed  the  first  flowers  that  ever  were east  of the
 mountains of the gods.                                                   
      $39  Upon  the  crown  of  Tuna,  the  green hill,  the city  of the
 Elves  was  built,  the  white   walls  and   terraces  of   Tirion;  and
 the  highest  of the  towers of  that city  was the  Tower of  Ingwe, the
 Mindon,   Mindon   Eldalieva,   whose   silver   lamp   shone   far   out
 into  the  mists  of  the  sea.  Few  are  the ships  of mortal  Men that
 have  seen  its  slender  beam.   In  Tirion'   the  Lindar   [>  Vanyar]
 and  the  Noldor  dwelt  long  time  in  fellowship.  And  since  of  all
 things   in   Valinor   they   loved   most   the  White   Tree,  Yavanna
 made  for  them  a  tree   in  all   things  like   a  lesser   image  of
 Telperion,  save  that  it  did  not  give  light   of  its   own  being;
 and  this  tree  was  planted  in  the  courts  beneath  the   Tower  and
 there  flourished,   and  its   seedlings  were   many  in   Eldanor.  Of
 which  one  was  after   planted  in   Eressea,  and   prospered.  Thence
 came  in  the  fullness  of time,  as is  later told,  the White  Tree of
 Numenor.                                                                 
      $40   Manwe   and   Varda   loved  most   the  Lindar   [>  Vanyar],
 the  High  Elves,  and  holy  and  immortal  were  all  their  deeds  and
 songs.   The   Noldor   were  beloved   of  Aule,   and  of   Mandos  the
 wise;  and  great  became  their  knowledge  and  their  skill.  Yet ever
 greater  was  their  thirst  for  more  knowledge,  and  their  desire to
 make    things   wonderful    and   new.    They   were    changeful   in
 speech,  for  they  had  great  love of  words, and  sought ever  to find
 names  more  fit  for  all  things  that  they   knew  or   imagined.  In
 Valinor  they  first  contrived   the  fashioning   of  gems,   and  they
 made   them  in   countless  myriads   of  many   kinds  and   hues;  and
 they  filled  all  Elende  with  them,  and  the  halls  of  the  gods in
 Valinor were enriched.                                                   
                                                                         
   (*   [footnote to the text] That is the Watchful City. Eldamar (that is
 Elvenhome) it was also  called; but  the regions  where the  Elves dwelt,
 and  whence  the stars  could be  seen, were  called Elende,  or Eldanor
 (that is Elvenland): quoth AElfwine. [Placed in the body  of the  text by
 the typist of LQ 1 but subsequently reinstated as a footnote.])          

   $41   The   Noldor   afterwards   came   back    to   Middle-earth,
 and this tale tells mostly of  their deeds;  therefore the  names and
 kinship  of  their  princes  may  here  be  told  in that  form which
 these  names  after  had  in  the  tongue  of the  Gnomes as  it was
 [>  the  Elves]  in  Beleriand  upon  the  Middle-earth.   Finwe  was
 king  of  the  Noldor. His  sons were  Feanor, Fingolfin,  and Finrod
 [> Finarphin]. Of these  Feanor was  the mightiest  in skill  of word
 and hand, more learned in lore than  his brethren;  in his  heart his
 spirit  burned  as  flame.  Fingolfin  was  the  strongest,  the most
 steadfast,  and  the  most  valiant.  Finrod  [>  Finarphin]  was the
 fairest,  and  the  most  wise  of  heart;  and  afterwards he  was a
 friend of  the sons  of Olwe,  lord of  the Teleri,  and had  to wife
 Earwen,  the   swan-maiden  of   Alqualonde,  Olwe's   daughter.  The
 seven  sons   of  Feanor   were  Maidros   [>  Maedhros]   the  tall;
 Maglor  a  musician  and  a  mighty  singer,  whose  voice  was heard
 far  over  land  and  sea;  Celegorn  [>  Celegorm]  the   fair,  and
 Cranthir  [>  Caranthir]  the  dark;  and  Curufin  the  crafty,  who
 inherited  most  of  his  father's  skill of  hand; and  the youngest
 Damrod   and   Diriel   [>   Amrod   and   Amras],   who   were  twin
 brothers  alike  in  mood  and  face.  They  afterwards   were  great
 hunters   in   the  woods   of  Middle-earth.   A  hunter   also  was
 Celegorn  [>  Celegorm],  who  in  Valinor  was  a  friend  of  Orome
 and followed oft the great god's horn.                              
   $42  The  sons  of  Fingolfin  were  Fingon,  who  was  after  king
 of  the  Gnomes  [>  Noldor]  in   the  North   of  the   World;  and
 Turgon  of  Gondolin;  and  their  sister  was  Isfin  [>  Irith] the
 White.  [Added:  She  was  younger   in  the   years  of   the  Eldar
 than  her  brethren;  and  when  she  was grown  to full  stature and
 beauty   she   was   greater   and   stronger   than   woman's  wont,
 and she  loved much  to ride  on horse  and to  hunt in  the forests,
 and  there  was  often in  the company  of her  kinsmen, the  sons of
 Feanor;  but  to  none  was her  heart's love  given. She  was called
 the  White Lady  of the  Noldor; for  though her  hair was  dark, she
 was  pale  and  clear  of  hue, and  she was  ever arrayed  in silver
 and  white.]   The  sons   of  Finrod   [>  Finarphin]   were  Inglor
 [>  Finrod]  the  faithful  (who   afterwards  was   named  Felagund,
 Lord  of  Caves),  [struck  out:  and  Orodreth,]  and   Angrod,  and
 Egnor  [>  Aegnor].  And  these  four  [>  three]  were  as  close in
 friendship  with  the  sons  of  Fingolfin  as  though they  were all
 brethren together. A sister they had, Galadriel, the fairest  lady of
 the  house of  Finwe, and  the most  valiant. Her  hair was  lit with
 gold as though  it had  caught in  a mesh  the radiance  of Laurelin.

                                                        
                                                                  
   $43  Here  must  be  told  how  the  Teleri   came  at   last  to
 Valinor. For nigh on  one hundred  of the  years of  Valinor, which
 were each as ten  of the  years of  the Sun  that were  after made,
 they  dwelt in  Tol Eressea.  But slowly  their hearts  were moved,
 and  were  drawn towards  the light  that flowed  out over  the sea
 unto their isle; and they were torn between the  love of  the music
 of  the  waves upon  their shores,  and desire  to see  again their
 kindred and to  look upon  the splendour  of the  gods. Yet  in the
 end desire of  the light  was the  stronger. Therefore  Ulmo taught
 them  the  craft of  ship-building; and  Osse, submitting  to Ulmo,
 brought  them  as  his  farewell  gift  the   strong-winged  swans.
 These they harnessed to their fleet of white  ships, and  thus they
 were drawn without the help of the winds to Valinor.              
   $44  There  they  dwelt  upon  the   long  shores   of  Elvenhome
 [> Elvenland], and if they wished they could see  the light  of the
 Trees,  and  could  visit  the  golden  streets  of Valmar  and the
 crystal  stairs  of Tirion  upon the  Green Hill.  But most  it was
 their wont to sail in their swift ships upon the waters of  the Bay
 of Elvenhome, or to walk  in the  waves upon  the shore  with their
 long hair gleaming like  foam in  the light  beyond the  hill. Many
 jewels  the  Noldor  gave  them,  opals   and  diamonds   and  pale
 crystals,  which  they  strewed  upon the  shores and  scattered in
 the pools. Marvellous  were the  beaches of  Elende in  those days.
 And  many  pearls  they  won  for  themselves  from  the  sea,  and
 their halls were of pearl, and of pearl were  the mansions  of Elwe
 [>  Olwe]  at  the Haven  of the  Swans, lit  with many  lamps. For
 Alqualonde,  the  Haven  of the  Swans, was  their chief  town, and
 the  harbour  of  their  ships;  and  these  were fashioned  in the
 likeness of swans, white, and their  beaks were  of gold  with eyes
 of gold and jet. The gate  of that  harbour was  an arch  of living
 rock sea-carven, and  it lay  upon the  confines of  the Elvenland,
 north of Kalakiryan, where the light  of the  stars was  bright and
 clear.                                                            
   $45  As  the  ages  passed  the  Lindar [>  Vanyar] grew  to love
 the land of the  gods and  the full  light of  the Trees,  and they
 forsook  the  city  upon  Tuna,  and  dwelt  upon  the  mountain of
 Manwe,  or  about  the  plains  and  woods  of Valinor,  and became
 sundered  from  the  Noldor.  But  remembrance  of the  Earth under
 the Stars  remained in  the hearts  of the  Gnomes [>  Noldor], and
 they abode in the Kalakiryan, and in the  hills and  valleys within
 sound  of  the  western  sea;  and  though  many  of them  went oft
 about  the  land  of  the gods  [> Valar],  making far  journeys in

 search of the secrets of land  and water  and all  living things,            
 [struck out: yet their intercourse was more with the  Teleri than            
 with  the  Lindar  (> Vanyar);  and] the  tongues [>  peoples] of            
 Tuna  and  of  Alqualonde  drew  together  in  those  days. Finwe            
 was  king  of Tuna  and Elwe  [> Olwe]  of Alqualonde;  but Ingwe            
 was ever held the high-king of all the Elves. He dwelt thereafter            
 at  the  feet  of  Manwe  upon  Taniquetil.  Feanor and  his sons            
 abode seldom in one place for long. They  travelled far  and wide            
 upon [read: within] the confines  of Valinor,  going even  to the            
 borders  of  the  Dark  and  the  cold shores  of the  Outer Sea,            
 seeking  the  unknown.  Often they  were guests  in the  halls of            
 Aule;  but  Celegorn  [> Celegorm]  went rather  to the  house of            
 Orome,  and  there  he  got  great  knowledge  of  all  birds and            
 beasts, and all their tongues he knew. For all living things that            
 are or have been in the Kingdom of Arda, save  only the  fell and            
 evil creatures of Melkor, lived then in  Valinor; and  there also            
 were many  other creatures  beautiful and  strange that  have not            
 yet  been  seen upon  the Middle-earth,  and perchance  never now            
 shall be, since the fashion of the World was changed.                        
                                                                             
             Commentary on Chapter 5, 'Of Eldanor and the Princes             
                               of the Eldalie'.                               
                                                                             
 $35   The identification of the isle of the Gods' first dwelling with the
       isle  of   the  Elves'   ferrying  (see   IV.45)  was   abandoned  when
       the  isle  of  the  Gods  amid  the  seas  became  an   isle  (Almaren)
       in  a  great  lake  in  the  midst  of  Middle-earth.  Tol  Eressea has
       now  no  significant  origin.  Cf.   AAm  $66   (p.  84):   'an  island
       which  long  had  stood  alone  amidst  the Sea,  since the  tumults of
       the fall of Illuin'. The old story was still present in a  draft narra-
       tive   associated   with   The   Drowning   of   Anadune   (IX.402  and
       note 11).                                                              
 $36   The  form  Eglorest  was  retained  from  QS   presumably  through
       oversight and not changed to Eglarest as in AAm ($70).                 
 $37   The  changed  story  of  the  rooting of  Tol Eressea  to the  bottom of
       the  sea  appears  also  in  AAm  ($$72  -  3  and   commentary);  with
       'Ulmo  understood  well  their  hearts'  cf.  LQ  $23  (p.  161: Ulmo's
       belief that the Quendi should be left in Middle-earth).                
         In  AElfwine's  note  Avallone'  appears  as a  name of  Tol Eressea,
       not, as in the published Silmarillion, of a haven in the isle;  cf. the
       Akallabeth  (p. 260):  'there is  in that  land a  haven that  is named
       Avallone, for it is of all cities the nearest to Valinor.' In the third
       version  of  The  Fall  of  Numenor  (IX.332),  as  here,  Tol  Eressea
       'was  named  anew  Avallon:  for  it  is  hard  by  Valinor  and within

        sight  of  the  Blessed  Realm'; while  on the  other hand  in the
        narrative  sketches  associated  with  The  Drowning   of  Anadune
        the  name  'Avallon(de)'  already  appears  as  the  name  of  the
        eastern haven (IX.399, 403 and note 12).                          
  $38   'The  Bay  of  Elvenhome':  in  the  footnote  to  $39, as  in its
        forerunner in QS, 'Elvenhome' is the name  of the  city, translat-
        ing Eldamar, while 'Elvenland' is  the name  of the  regions where
        the Elves dwelt, translating Eldanor;  in $44  of this  chapter QS
        'shores of Elvenhome' was changed  in the  revision to  'shores of
        Elvenland',  but  'the  Bay  of  Elvenhome'  was allowed  to stand
        in  $$38,  44.  In  AAm  Eldamar is  the name  of the  region: see
        p. 90, $67.                                                       
          The  form  Kalakiryan,  for  earlier  Kalakirya,  arose  in  the
        course of the composition of AAm (p. 87 note 7).                  
          On 'the first flowers that ever  were east  of the  mountains of
        the gods' see p. 60, $15, and the references given there.         
  $39   Tirion   upon   Tuna,   replacing  Tuna   upon  Kor,   and  Mindon
        Eldalieva   replacing   Ingwemindon,   are   found  also   in  AAm
        $$67  -  8  (pp. 84  - 5,  90). -  On LQ  2 'the  Mindon, Mindon
        Eldalieva'  (the original  emendation to the QS typescript, not an
        error) the repetition of 'Mindon' was bracketed for exclusion.
          'In  Tirion  the  Vanyar  and  the  Noldor  dwelt  long  time in
        fellowship': this is scarcely in accord with AAm (see p. 90, $68).
        LQ retained also the old phrase in  $45: 'As  the ages  passed the
        Vanyar grew to  love the  land of  the gods  ... and  they forsook
        the city upon Tuna'.                                              
          The gift of Yavanna to  the people  of Tirion  of an  'image' of
        Telperion  is  recorded  also  in  AAm  $69 (p.  85), where  it is
        named  Galathilion  and  is  a  gift  to  the  Noldor.  In  LQ $16
        Galathilion  is  the  Sindarin  name  of  Telperion,  and  in  the
        footnote  to  LQ  $17 on  the names  of the  Trees the  White Tree
        of  Tuna  is  Galathilion  the  Less.  The  Trees  of  Eressea and
        Numenor are referred to  in that  note also,  and given  the names
        Celeborn  and  Nimloth (both  of which  were names  of Telperion).
  $40   'High  Elves'  > 'Fair  Elves' by  a late  change to  LQ 2,  as in
        Chapter 3 (p. 168, $25).                                          
          On one copy of LQ 2 my father revised the paragraph thus:       
          Manwe  and  Varda  loved  most  the  Vanyar,  the   High  Elves,
        and  all  their  deeds  and  songs  were  holy  and  immortal. The
        Noldor   were   beloved  of   Aule,  and   of  Mandos   the  wise;
        and  their  knowledge  and  skill became  great. Yet  ever greater
        grew their thirst  for more  knowledge, and  their desire  to make
        things  new  and  wonderful.  They were  changeful in  speech, for
        they  had  great  love  of   words,  and   were  never   weary  of
        devising  names more  fitting for  all the  things that  they knew
        or imagined.                                                      

 This is strange, and  I cannot  really explain  it; it  seems as  if he
 were  experimenting  (but  casually,  and  only in  this and  one other
 passage) with  a stylistic  'reduction', especially  in respect  of the
 characteristic  'inversions'.  Comparison  with  the  text as  it stood
 (which  is  that  of  QS)  shows  how  flat  the opening  sentences had
 become.                                                                
         After LQ 1 had  been made  my father  returned to  the original
 QS  typescript,  and  wrote  in  a  substantial  new  passage   on  the
 subject of  the jewels  of the  Noldor; this  was not  entered on  LQ 1
 and  so  was  'lost',  since he  never rediscovered  it, and  the final
 typescript  LQ  2  still  retained  the  old text  in which  the Noldor
 'contrived   the   fashioning   of   gems'.   The   new   passage  read
 (following the words 'all things that they knew or imagined.'):        
         And in all crafts of hand they delighted also; and their masons
 built  many  towers  tall  and  slender,  and  many  halls  and  houses
 of  marble.  Thus  it  came  to  pass  that,  quarrying  in  the  hills
 after  stone,  the  Noldor   first  discovered   gems,  in   which  the
 Land   of   Aman  was   indeed  surpassing   rich,  and   they  brought
 them  forth  in  countless  myriads  of  many   kinds  and   hues;  and
 they  carved   and  fashioned   them  in   shapes  of   bright  beauty,
 and  they  filled  all  Elende  with them,  and the  halls of  the gods
 in Valinor were enriched.                                              
       In fact, a closely similar change  (including the  phrase 'carved
 them  in  many  forms  of  bright   beauty')  was   made  to   AAm  $79
 (p. 92 with note 3 and p. 103).                                        
$$41-2    In Appendix F to The Lord of the Rings is  found in  the First
 Edition  (published  in  October  1955):  'the  Lady  Galadriel  of the
 royal  house  of  Finrod, father  of Felagund';  in the  Second Edition
 (1966)  this  became  'the  Lady  Galadriel  of  the  royal   house  of
 Finarphin  and   sister  of   Finrod  Felagund'.   Since  as   late  as
 September  1954  (Letters   no.150)  my   father  was   apologising  to
 Allen  and  Unwin  for  not  having  as yet  'any copy  to send  in for
 the  Appendices',  it is  clear that  Finrod >  Finarphin and  Inglor >
 Finrod  cannot  have  been  entered  on  LQ  1  until after  this time.
 On  the  typescript  text  of  AAm  (p.  128, $134)  he noted  that the
 names of  the Sons  of Feanor  'will be  revised', and  on the  text he
 changed  Cranthir  to   Caranthir,  underlined   the  n   of  Celegorn,
 and   struck   out   Damrod   and   Diriel   without   replacing  them.
 LQ  2  has the  altered names.  I have  suggested that  the typescripts
 of  AAm  and  LQ  2  belong  to  much  the  same  time  (perhaps  about
 1958): see pp. 141 - 2.                                                
         It is characteristic of the textual puzzles  that abound  in my
 father's  later  work  on  The  Silmarillion  that  the  regular change
 of  Lindar   >  Vanyar   was  undoubtedly   made  on   LQ  1   in  this
 chapter  at  the  same  time  as  these  other  changes  of  name;  yet
 AAm  has  Vanyar  as  first  written.  It may  be that  a good  deal of

                                                        
                                                                   
      the correction to LQ 1 was actually carried out  a long  time after
      that text was typed.                                              
 $41  The  marriage  of  Finrod  (=  Finarphin)  to   Earwen  Olwe's
      daughter  is  recorded  under  the  Valian  Year  1280  in  AAm $85
      (p.  93).  -  By  a late  change to  LQ 2  Maglor >  Maelor; Maelor
      occurs in the later Lay of Leithian, III.353.                      
 $42  The passage describing the White Lady of  the Noldor  was added
      on a slip to the original QS typescript,  and this  slip is  a page
      from  a  used  engagement  calendar  dated  October  1951.  At that
      stage her name was still Isfin. A rejected draft for this  rider on
      the same slip began thus:                                          
    She was younger in  the years  of the  Eldar than  her brethren,
    for  she  awoke  in  Valinor  [not upon  Middle-earth )]  after the
    making of the Silmarils,  and even  as the  first shadow  fell upon
    the  Blessed  Realm;  and  when  she was  grown to  full stature...
 The  words 'She  was younger  in the  years of  the Eldar  than her
 brethren,  for  she  awoke  in Valinor  not upon  Middle-earth' are
 not  in  accord  with  AAm,  where   Fingolfin  their   father  was
 himself born in Aman ($81).                                       
    The rider was not taken up into LQ 1 as  typed, which  still had
 the name Isfin, as in  AAm (see  p. 102  notes 8  and 9:  the first
 birth-date  for Isfin  (1469) makes  her born  after the  making of
 the Silmarils in  1450, but  the second  (1362) before).  But later
 Isfin  was  changed  to  frith on  LQ 1  (at the  same time  as the
 corrections of Finrod to Finarphin, etc.), and  the same  rider was
 attached on a slip, identical in  wording to  that attached  to the
 old QS typescript, but with the  name frith.  This is  presumably a
 case where a 'lost' change was recovered.                          
    In  QS  Angrod and  Egnor were  friends of  the sons  of Feanor,
 while Inglor and Orodreth were  friends of  the sons  of Fingolfin,
 Fingon  and  Turgon.  Now  the  association  of  Angrod  and  Egnor
 with the Feanorians (which led  to their  being allowed  passage in
 the ships  at the  time of  the crossing  to Middle-earth,  QS $73)
 was  abandoned  (as  it  was  also  in  AAm,  $135, pp.  113, 125),
 and  all  four  of  Finarphin's  sons become  the bosom  friends of
 Fingon  and  Turgon.  'And these  four' was  changed to  'And these
 three'  on LQ  1 when  Orodreth was  finally ejected  entirely from
 the third generation of the Noldorin princes (see III.91,  246, and
 Unfinished Tales p. 255 note 20).                                  
    Here  Galadriel enters  the Quenta  tradition; for  Galadriel in
 AAm  see  $$85,  135  and  commentary.  On  one  copy  of  LQ  2 my
 father  noted:  'In  High-elvish  her  name  was  Altarielle  "Lady
 with garland of sunlight", galata-rig-elle = S[indarin] Galadriel.
 It was thus  mere accident  that her  name resembled  galad (Silvan
 galad  tree  ).  Cf.  the  Appendix  to  The  Silmarillion  p. 360,
 entry kal-.                                                        

  $43   In  this  paragraph  my  father  made  two  narrative  changes that
        (like the passage concerning the jewels of  the Noldor  referred to
        under  $40  above)  were  'lost', since  they were  made to  the QS
        typescript after LQ 1 had been copied from  it. The  first concerns
        the sentence  'For nigh  on one  hundred of  the years  of Valinor,
        which were each as  ten of  the years  of the  Sun that  were after
        made'  (the  text  of  QS,  preserved  in  LQ  1  and 2);  here the
        following was substituted:                                         
           For  well-nigh  one  hundred of  the years  of our  time (though
        that  be  but ten  of the  Years of  the Valar)  they dwelt  in Tol
        Eressea.                                                           
        The reduction of the time during  which the  Teleri dwelt  apart in
        Tol Eressea from  1000 to  100 years  of the  Sun was  clearly made
        for  linguistic  reasons.  A  thousand  years would  introduce such
        changes  as to  make the  tongues of  the Noldor  (a people  in any
        case  'changeful  in speech',  $40) and  the Teleri  into different
        languages,  which  could  not  conceivably  'draw  together'  again
        ($45). In AAm ($$72,  75) the  'lost' reckoning  of only  100 years
        of the Sun is present.                                             
           On  one  copy of  LQ 2  my father  emended the  original passage
        anew,  and  produced:  'They dwelt  in Tol  Eressea for  nearly one
        hundred of the  years of  Valinor (which  were each  as ten  of the
        later years of the Sun in Middle-earth).' Since this does not alter
        the  sense  in  any  way  it  must  have  been  made to  reduce the
        archaic  element  (cf.  the  passage given  under $40  above). Thus
        the revision made to the  QS typescript  for reasons  of likelihood
        in  linguistic  history  was  forgotten;  on  the  other  hand, the
        change on LQ 1 of 'tongues' to  'peoples' in  'the tongues  of Tuna
        and  of  Alqualonde  drew   together  in   those  days'   was  very
        probably   made  for   the  same   reason,  though   resolving  the
        difficulty in a different way.                                    
           The  second  of  the  'lost'   emendations  in   this  paragraph
        changed  the  story  that  it was  Ulmo who  taught the  Teleri the
        craft of ship-building:                                            
           Therefore Ulmo, submitting to the will of  the Valar,  sent unto
        them Osse their friend, and he,  albeit in  grief, taught  them the
        craft  of  ship-building;  and  when  their  ships  were  built  he
        brought to them as his farewell gift the strong-winged swans.      
        In  AAm  $75  Ulmo  as  teacher  was  likewise  corrected  to  Osse
        (p. 86 and note 8). This shift is an aspect of the changed story of
        the rooting  of Tol  Eressea to  the sea-bottom;  where in  QS Osse
        submitted to Ulmo, Ulmo now submits to the will of the Valar.      
  $44   Kalakiryan  was  corrected  on  one  copy  of  LQ  2  to  the Cala-
        ciryan, and the same change of spelling in  $45. -  It is  at first
        sight puzzling that LQ 1 has Olwe' in $41  but Elwe   in $$44  - 5,

  but the reason is simply that the correction in the latter two            
  places was missed on the QS typescript.                                   
                                                                           
                     6  OF THE SILMARILS AND THE DARKENING                   
                                  OF VALINOR.                                
                                                                           
 The textual history of this chapter is entirely different from that  of any
 of the preceding ones. In the first stage of revision, only few  and slight
 changes  were  made  to  the  QS  manuscript  (the  old QS  typescript text
 having  stopped  at  the  end  of  the  previous  chapter), and  these were
 taken  up into  LQ 1.  But after  LQ 1  had been  made, my  father returned
 to  the  old  manuscript,  and on  the verso  pages began  a new  version -
 rather  oddly, paginating  it on  from the  end of  the QS  typescript, and
 retaining  the  chapter  number  4.  This  was  clearly  an element  in the
 revision of 1951. At first this version is virtually continuous (as  far as
 part  way  through $50),  and if  retaining the  old text  he wrote  it out
 anew;  but  after  this  point  he  made  use of  the actual  QS manuscript
 text, though emending it and interpolating  it very  heavily. At  '... came
 into that region that  is called  Arvalin' ($55)  the new  work effectively
 ceases.  My  father  scarcely touched  LQ 1:  he made  a couple  of changes
 on  the  first  page  of  the  typescript, including  Lindar >  Vanyar, but
 then  stopped:  a  later  occurrence  of  Lindar  was  left to  stand. Here
 therefore LQ 1 ceases to be of use, and the  text printed  is the  new text
 of  the chapter  written on  the QS  manuscript: it  will be  convenient to
 refer to this simply as 'LQ'.                                              
 The  new  writing  was  itself   emended  and   interpolated  subsequently,
 in red ink; I give the text in its final form, but in a few cases where the
 distinction between earlier and later readings is of interest I  record the
 earlier in notes following the  text. The  title given  to the  new version
 was  Of  the  Silmarilli  and  the  Darkening  of  Valinor,  but  this  was
 changed  to  (apparently  -  the  intention  is  not  perfectly  clear)  Of
 Feanor  and  the  Silmarilli,  and the  Darkening of  Valinor. For  the QS
 version (in which it is numbered Chapter  4) see  V.227 -  31, There  is no
 text of the chapter extant in the LQ 2 series.                             
                                                                           
   $46  From  this   time,   when   the   Three   Kindreds   of   the  Eldar
 were   gathered   at   last   in   Valinor,   and   Melkor   was   chained,
 began   the   Noontide   of  the   Blessed  Realm   and  its   fullness  of
 glory  and  bliss,  long  in tale  of years,  but in  memory too  brief. In
 those  days  the   Eldar  became   full-grown  in   stature  of   body  and
 of  mind,  and   the  Noldor   advanced  ever   in  skill   and  knowledge;
 and  the  long  years  were  filled  with  their  joyful labours,  in which
 many new things fair and wonderful were devised.                           
   $46a  Then  it   was   that   the   Noldor   first   bethought   them  of
 letters,   and   Rumil   of  Tuna   was  the   name  of   that  lore-master

 who  first  made  fitting  signs  for  the  recording  of   speech  and
 song,  some  for   graving  upon   metal  or   in  stone,   others  for
 drawing with brush or with pen.                                        
   $46b  In  that  time  was  born  in  Eldamar  in  the  house  of  the
 king,  in  Tirion  upon the  crown of  Tuna, Feanor  the eldest  of the
 sons  of  Finwe,  and  the  most  beloved.  Miriel  was  the   name  of
 his  mother.  Silver  was  her  hair and  dark were  her eyes,  but her
 hands  were  more  skilled  to  fineness  than  any  hands even  of the
 Noldor.  By  her  was  the  craft  of  needles  devised;  and  were but
 one  fragment  of  the  broideries  of  Miriel  to  be seen  in Middle-
 earth  it  would  be  held  dearer  than  a   king's  realm,   for  the
 richness  of  her  devices  and  the  fire  of  their  colours  were as
 manifold  and  as  bright  as  the glory  of leaf  and flower  and wing
 in   the   fields   of   Yavanna.  Therefore   she  was   named  Miriel
 Serende.*                                                              
   $46c  And  Feanor  grew  swiftly  as  if a  secret fire  were kindled
 within  him.  and  he  was  tall and  fair of  face and  masterful, and
 he  became  of  all  the  Noldor  the  most  subtle  of  heart  and  of
 mind,  and  the most  skilled of  hand. He  it was  that in  his youth,
 bettering  the  work  of  Rumil,  made  those  letters  which  bear his
 name,  and  which  ever since  the Eldar  have used;  yet this  was the
 least  of  his  works.  For  he  it  was  that  first  of   the  Noldor
 discovered  how   gems  greater   and  brighter   than  those   of  the
 Earth  might  be  made  with  skill.  And  the  first gems  that Feanor
 devised  were  white  and  colourless,  but  being set  under starlight
 they   would   blaze   with   blue  and   white  fires   brighter  than
 Helluin.  And  other  crystals  he  made,   wherein  things   far  away
 could  be  seen small  but clear,  as with  the eyes  of the  Eagles of
 Manwe. Seldom were the hand and mind of Feanor at rest.(1)               
   $47   Now   at   length  the   Noontide  of   Valinor  drew   to  its
 close.  For it  came to  pass that  Melkor, as  the Valar  decreed, had
 dwelt  for  three  ages  in  the  duress  of  Mandos,  alone.  And when
 he  had  suffered  that  bondage,  as  the   Valar  had   promised,  he
 was   brought   again  before   them  in   conclave.  He   looked  then
 upon  the  bliss  and  glory  of  the  Valar,  and  malice  was  in his
 heart;  he  looked  upon  the  fair  Children of  Iluvatar that  sat at
 the  feet  of  the  gods,  and hatred  filled him;  he looked  upon the
 wealth  of  bright  gems  and  lusted   for  them;   but  he   hid  his
 thoughts and postponed his vengeance.                                  
                                                                       
  (* [footnote to the text] That is Byrde Miriel (the Broideress): quoth
 AElfwine.)                                                             

   $48  Before  the  gates  of  Valmar   Melkor  abased   himself  at
 the  feet  of  Manwe  and  sued  for pardon,  promising that,  if he
 might be made but the least of the  free folk  of Valinor,  he would
 aid the Valar in all their deeds, and most of all in the  healing of
 the  many  hurts  that  he  had  wrought  and  now  would   work  no
 more.  And  Nienna  aided  his  prayer,   but  Mandos   was  silent.
 Then  Manwe  granted  him  pardon;  but  the  Valar  would  not  yet
 suffer  him  to  depart  from  their  sight  and  vigilance.  He was
 given, therefore, a humble dwelling  within the  gates of  the city,
 and put  on trial;  and he  was not  permitted to  go more  than one
 league  from  Valmar,  save  by  the  leave  of  Manwe  and  with  a
 guardian  at  his  side.  But  fair-seeming were  all the  words and
 deeds  of  Melkor  in  that  time,  and  both  Valar  and  Eldar had
 much  profit  from  his  aid. Wherefore  in a  while he  was allowed
 to go freely about the land, and it  seemed to  Manwe that  his evil
 was  cured. For  he himself  was free  from the  evil and  could not
 comprehend  it.  and  he  knew  that  in   the  beginning.   in  the
 thought of Eru, Melkor  had been  even as  he. Yet  it is  said that
 Ulmo's   heart   misgave   him,  and   Tulkas  clenched   his  hands
 whenever he saw Melkor, his foe,  go by.  For if  Tulkas is  slow to
 wrath, slow is he also to forget.                                  
   $49  Most  fair  of  all  was Melkor  to the  Eldar, and  he aided
 them  in  many works,  if they  would let  him. The  Vanyar, indeed,
 the  people  of  Ingwe,  held  him  in   suspicion;  for   Ulmo  had
 warned  them,  and  they  heeded  his  words.  But  the  Noldor took
 delight  in  the  many  things  of  hidden  knowledge that  he could
 reveal  to  them, and  some hearkened  to words  that it  would have
 been better that they should never have heard.                     
   $49a  It  has  been  said  indeed  that  Feanor  learned  much  of
 Melkor in secret, but that  doubtless is  but one  of the  many lies
 of  Melkor  himself,  envying the  skill of  Feanor and  desiring to
 claim part in his deeds. For certain  it is  that, snared  though he
 might be (as others) by the lies of Melkor, none of all  the Eldalie
 ever  hated  Melkor  more  than  Feanor  son  of  Finwe,  who  first
 named him Morgoth.                                                 
   $49b   And   in   that  time   there  was   done  the   deed  most
 renowned  of  all  the  works  of the  Elvenfolk. For  Feanor, being
 now  come  to  his full  might, was  filled with  a new  thought, or
 maybe   some   shadow   of   foreknowledge  came   to  him   of  the
 doom  that  should  be;  and  he  pondered  how  the  Light  of  the
 Trees,  the  glory  of  the  Blessed   Realm,  might   be  preserved
 imperishable.  Then  he  began  a  long  and marvellous  labour; and

                                                                       
                                                                          
 he  summoned  all  his  lore,  and his  power, and  his subtle  craft, for
 he  purposed  now  to  make  things  more  fair  than  any  of  the  Eldar
 had yet made, whose beauty should last beyond the End.                    
   Three  jewels  he  made,  and  named  them  Silmarils.  A   living  fire
 burned  within  them  that   was  blended   of  the   Light  of   the  Two
 Trees.  Of  their  own  radiance  they  shone,  even  in  the dark  of the
 deepest  treasury;   yet  all   lights  that   fell  upon   them,  however
 faint,  they   received  and   returned  again   in  marvellous   hues  to
 which   their   own   inner   fire  gave   a  surpassing   loveliness.  No
 mortal  flesh,  nor  flesh  unclean,  nor  any  thing  of evil  will could
 touch   them,   but   it   was  scorched   and  withered;   neither  could
 they  be  hurt  or  broken  by  any  strength  in   all  the   kingdom  of
 Arda.  These  jewels  the  Elves  prized  beyond  all  their   works,  and
 Varda   hallowed   them,   and   Mandos   foretold   that  the   fates  of
 Arda,  earth,  sea,  and  air,  lay  locked  within  them.  And  the heart
 of  Feanor  was  fast  bound  to   these  things   that  he   himself  had
 made.                                                                     
   $50*  But  the   heart  of   Melkor  also   desired  these   fairest  of
 jewels;   and  from   that  time   with  desire   the  malice   of  Melkor
 grew  ever  greater,  though   nought  of   it  could   be  seen   in  the
 semblance  that  he  wore,   or  in   the  fair   form  that   he  assumed
 after  the  manner  of  the  Valar  his  brethren.  And  when  he  saw his
 chances  he  sowed  a  seed  of  lies  and  hints  of  evil among  all who
 were  open  to  his  converse.  Bitterly  did  the  people  of  the Noldor
 atone  for  their  folly  in  the  days  to   come.  Coming   often  among
 them  he  would   speak  ever   words  of   greatest  praise,   sweet  but
 poisoned  honey;  for   amid  all   the  fair   words  others   were  ever
 subtly  woven.  Visions  he  would   conjure  in   their  hearts   of  the
 mighty  realms  they  might  have  ruled  at  their  own  will,  in  power
 and  freedom   in  the   East.  And   then  he   would  whisper,   to  any
 that  leaned  towards  him,  that  the  gods  had  brought  the  Eldar  to
 Valinor  because  of  their  jealousy,  fearing  that  the  beauty  of the
 Quendi,  and   the  makers'   power  that   Iluvatar  had   bequeathed  to
 them,  would  grow  too  great  for  the  Valar  to  govern, as  the Elves
 waxed and spread over the wide lands of the world.                        
   In  those  days,  moreover,  though  the  Valar   knew  indeed   of  the
 coming  of  Men  that  were  to  be,(2) the Elves   knew  yet   nought  of
 it;  for  the  gods  had  not  revealed  it,  and  the  time  was  not yet
 near.  But  Melkor  spake  to  the   Elves  in   secret  of   Mortal  Men,
                                                                          
 (* The beginning of this paragraph corresponds in content to the end of QS
 $49.)                                                                     

  
                                                                     
  though  he  knew  little  of  the  truth.  Manwe  alone  knew  aught
  clearly of  the mind  of Iluvatar  concerning Men,  and he  has ever
  been  their  friend.  Yet Melkor  whispered that  the gods  kept the
  Eldar  captive,  so  that  Men  coming  should  defraud them  of the
  kingdoms  of  Middle-earth;  for  the  weaker  and  short-lived race
  the  Valar  saw  would  be  more  easily   swayed  by   them.  Small
  truth was there in this, and little have the Valar ever prevailed to
  sway  the  wills or  fates of  Men, and  least of  all to  good. But
  many of the Noldor believed, or half-believed,  the evil  words. [It
  is told, also, that at  this time  Melkor would  speak to  the Eldar
  of  weapons  and  armour, and  of the  power that  they give  to him
  that  is  armed  to  defend  his  own  (as he  said). The  Eldar had
  before  possessed  no  weapons,  and  since  the chaining  of Melkor
  the  armouries  of  the  gods  had  been  shut.  But the  Noldor now
  learned  the  fashioning  of  swords  of  tempered  steel,  and  the
  making  of  bows  and  of  arrows  and  of  spears;  and  they  made
  shields in those  days and  emblazoned them  with devices  of silver
  and  gold  and  gems.  Thus  it was  that the  Noldor were  armed in
  the days of their Flight. Thus  too, as  oft was  seen, the  evil of
  Melkor  was  turned  against  him;  for  the  swords  of  the Gnomes
  did  him  more  hurt  than  anything  under   the  gods   upon  this
  earth. Yet they had  little joy  of Melkor's  teaching; for  all the
  sorrows  of  the  Gnomes  they  wrought  with  their own  swords, as
  later shall be seen. Quoth Pengolod.]                               
       $51  Thus,  ere  the  gods  were  aware,  the peace  of Valinor
  was  poisoned.  The  Noldor  began  to  murmur  against   the  Valar
  and  their  kindred;  and  many became  filled with  vanity, forget-
  ting  all  that  the  gods  had  given  them  and  taught  to  them.
  Fiercest  burned  the  flame  in  the  eager  heart  of  Feanor, and
  Melkor  laughed  in  his  secrecy; for  to that  mark above  all had
  his lies been addressed, and Feanor he most  hated, lusting  all the
  while for  the Silmarils.  Yet never  could he  come nigh  them; for
  though  at  great  feasts  Feanor  would  wear  them,  blazing  upon
  his brow,  at other  times they  were guarded  close, locked  in the
  deep  hoards  of Tuna.  There were  no thieves  in Valinor,  as yet;
  but Feanor  loved the  Silmarils with  a greedy  love, and  he began
  to grudge the sight of them to all save to his sire and to his sons.
       $52  High  princes were  Feanor and  Fingolfin, the  elder sons
  of  Finwe;  but  they  grew  proud  and jealous  each of  his right,
  and  his  possessions.  And  lo!  Melkor  set  new lies  abroad, and
  whispers  came to  Feanor that  Fingolfin and  his sons,  Fingon and
  Turgon,  were  plotting  to  usurp  the leadership  of Finwe  and of

    
                                                                   
  the elder house of Feanor,  and to  supplant them  by leave  of the
  Valar - for the Valar were  ill-pleased that  the Silmarils  lay in
  Tuna, and were not given to their keeping.  Of these  lies quarrels
  were  born  among  the  proud  children  of  Finwe,  and  of  these
  quarrels  came  the  end  of  the  high  days  of  Valinor  and the
  evening of its ancient glory; for Feanor  spake words  of rebellion
  against  the  Valar,  crying  aloud  that  he  would   depart  from
  Valinor back to the  world without,  and deliver,  as he  said, the
  Gnomes  from  thraldom,  if  they  would   follow  him.   And  when
  Fingolfin  sought  to  restrain  him  Feanor  drew  his  sword upon
  him.(3) For  the lies  of Melkor,  though he  knew not  clearly their
  source, had taken root in the pride of his heart.                 
     $53  Then  the  Valar  were  wroth  and  dismayed, and (4) Feanor
  was  summoned  to  answer  in  the  Ring  of  Doom;  and  there the
  lies of Melkor were  laid bare  for all  those to  see who  had the
  will.  By  the  judgement  of  the  gods  Feanor  was  banished for
  twenty years (5) from  Tuna, since  he had  disturbed its  peace. But
  with  him  went  Finwe  his  father,  who loved  him more  than his
  other   sons,   and   many   other   Gnomes   also.   Northward  in
  Valinor, in the hills near  to the  halls of  Mandos, they  built a
  strong  place  and  a  treasury  at  Formenos;(6) and they gathered
  there  a  multitude  of  gems.  But Fingolfin  ruled the  Noldor in
  Tuna;  and  thus  Melkor's  words  seemed justified  (though Feanor
  had  wrought  their  fulfilment   by  his   own  deeds),   and  the
  bitterness  that  Melkor  had  sown endured,  even though  the lies
  were revealed, and long afterwards it lived still between  the sons
  of Feanor and Fingolfin.                                          
     $54  Straight from  the midst  of their  council the  Valar sent
  Tulkas  to  lay  hands  on  Melkor  and bring  him again  to judge-
  ment,  but  Melkor  hid  himself, and  none could  discover whither
  he  had  gone;  and  the  shadows  of  all  standing  things seemed
  to grow longer and darker in  that time.  It is  said that  for two
  years (7) none  saw  Melkor,  until  he  appeared privily  to Feanor,
  feigning  friendship  with  cunning  argument,  and  urging  him to
  his  former  thought  of  flight. But  his cunning  overreached his
  aim;  for  knowing  that  the jewels  held the  heart of  Feanor in
  thrall,  he said  at the  last: 'Here  is a  strong place  and well
  guarded, but  think not  that the  Silmarils will  lie safe  in any
  treasury within reach of the Valar!'                              
     Then the  fires of  the heart  of Feanor  were kindled,  and his
  eyes blazed, and his  sight burned  through all  the fair-semblance
  of  Melkor  to the  dark depths  of his  mind, and  perceived there

 
                                                                   
 his  fierce  lust for  the Silmarils.  Then hate  overcame Feanor's
 fear,  and  he  spoke  shamefully  to  Melkor,  saying:  'Get  thee
 gone,  gangrel!  Thou  jail-crow  of  Mandos!'  And  he   shut  the
 doors of his house upon the mightiest  of all  the dwellers  in Ea,
 as though he were a beggar.                                        
   And  Melkor  departed  in  shame,  for he  was himself  in peril,
 and  saw not  his time  yet for  revenge; but  his heart  was black
 with  anger.  And  Finwe was  filled with  dread, and  sent messen-
 gers in haste to the Valar.                                        
   $55  Now the  gods were  sitting in  council before  their gates,
 fearing  the  lengthening  of  the  shadows,  when   the  messenger
 came  from  Finwe,  but  ere  Tulkas  could  set forth  others came
 that  brought  tidings from  Eldanor. For  Melkor had  fled through
 the Kalakirya, and from the  hill of  Tuna the  Elves saw  him pass
 in  wrath  as  a  thunder-cloud.  Thus Melkor  departed, and  for a
 while  the  Trees  shone  again unshadowed,  and still  Valinor was
 fair; yet as a cloud  far off  that looms  ever higher,  borne upon
 a  slow  cold  wind,  a  doubt  now  marred  the  mirth of  all the
 dwellers  in  Aman,  dreading  they  knew not  what evil  might yet
 come.  And  the  Valar  sought ever  for news  of Melkor,  in vain.
 But he  passed from  Eldanor and (8) came into  that region that is
 called Arvalin, which lies south  of the  Bay of  Elende, and  is a
 narrow  land  beneath  the  eastern  feet   of  the   Mountains  of
 Aman.  There  the  shadows  were  deepest   and  thickest   in  the
 World. In that  land, secret  and unknown,  dwelt in  spider's form
 Ungoliante,  weaver  of  dark  webs.  It  is  not  told  whence she
 came;  from  the  Outer  Darkness,  maybe, that  lies in  Ea beyond
 the walls of the World. In a ravine  she lived,  and spun  her webs
 in a cleft of the mountains; for  she sucked  up light  and shining
 things to  spin them  forth again  in black  nets of  choking gloom
 and clinging fog. She hungered ever for more food.                 
   $56  Melkor  met  Ungoliante   in  Arvalin,   and  with   her  he
 plotted  his  revenge;  but  she  demanded  a  great  and  terrible
 reward, ere  she would  dare the  perils of  Valinor and  the power
 of  the gods.  Then, when  Melkor had  vowed to  give all  that she
 lusted  for,  she  wove  a  great  darkness  about  her  for  their
 protection,  and black  ropes she  span, and  cast from  rocky peak
 to peak; and in this way she scaled at last the highest pinnacle of
 the  mountains,  far  south  of  Taniquetil.  In  that  region  the
 vigilance  of  the  Valar  was  less,  because  the  wild  woods of
 Orome  lay  in  the  south  of  Valinor,  and  the  walls   of  the
 mountains  looked  there  eastward  upon  the  untrodden  land  and

                                                            I            
                                                                        
 empty seas; and the gods held guard rather against the North            
 where of old Melkor had delved his fortress and deep throne.            
                                                                        
   For $$57 - 9 see the end of the commentary on this chapter, p. 193.
                                                                        
                                   NOTES.                                
                                                                        
 1. This  passage  concerning  the gems  devised by  Feanor (following
    'yet this was the least of his works') was a secondary  addition (see
    p. 184). See the commentary on $46c.                                 
    2  From  this  point  the  virtually  continuous  newly  written text
    changes to a  heavily emended  and interpolated  treatment of  the QS
    manuscript (p. 184).                                                 
 3. 'drew  his  sword  upon  him'  was  changed  from  'menaced  him with
    his sword'.                                                          
 4. 'Then  the Valar  were wroth  and dismayed,  and' was  a secondary
    addition.                                                            
 5. 'twenty years' was changed from 'ten years'.                          
 6. 'at Formenos' was a secondary addition.                               
 7. 'two years' was changed from 'a great while'.                         
 8. From  this  point  the new  work on  the chapter  effectively ceases,
    and  the  few  differences  from QS  belong to  the earlier  layer of
    emendation that was taken up into LQ 1; but  I give  the text  to the
    end of $56 in order to take in the majority of these earlier changes.
                                                                        
                Commentary on Chapter 6, 'Of the Silmarils               
                       and the Darkening of Valinor'.                    
                                                                        
 A  comparison  will  show  that  the new  writing in  LQ stands  in close
 relation  to  the  corresponding  part  of  AAm.   New  elements   in  LQ
 appear also in  AAm, such  as Feanor's  mother Miriel  ($78, p.  92), the
 devising of letters by Rumil  and Feanor  ($$80, 83),  or the  placing of
 the making of the Silmarils after the  release of  Melkor (p.  104, $92).
 There are  constant similarities  of wording  and many  actual identities
 of  phrase  (notably  in  the   encounter  of   Feanor  with   Melkor  at
 Formenos, LQ $54, AAm $102).                                            
  Can  precedence  be  established  between  the   two?  It   is  scarcely
 possible to demonstrate it one way or the  other, for  individual details
 tell in  both ways.  Thus Feanor's  word to  Melkor, 'gangrel',  was that
 first written in LQ,  whereas in  AAm it  replaced 'beggarman';  but 'the
 Valar  were  wroth  and  dismayed'  is  an  addition  to  LQ   (note  4),
 whereas  'the  Gods  were  wroth'  in AAm  ($99) was  not. The  change in
 LQ of 'ten years' to 'twenty years'  as the  term of  Feanor's banishment
 from Tirion (note  5) is  a change  also in  AAm ($99  and note  10), and
 the name Formenos is an addition in both. I  think in  fact that  the two
 texts were closely contemporary. It will be seen that after  the revision
 in  LQ  has  come to  an end  AAm continues  on (from  $105) in  the same

  larger  and  more  expansive  fashion obviously  based structurally  on the
  Quenta tradition: and  it may  be therefore  that the  LQ text  petered out
  because  the  'Annals'  (scarcely   'Annals'  any   more)  had   become  my
  father's preference.                                                       
    How  he  conceived  the  relation  between  the  two  at this  time seems
  impossible  to  say.  As  I  have  said (p.  102), 'we  see the  annal form
  disappearing   as  a   fully-fledged  narrative   emerges';  and   the  AAm
  narrative,  while  differing  in  every  sentence  from   the  Silmarillion
  version, is nonetheless very  obviously 'the  same'. Certainly  too similar
  to  it to  be regarded  as the  representation of  a separate  tradition of
  learning  and  memory, or  even of  the work  of a  different 'loremaster'.
  There  are  only  the  most  minor  variations in  the two  narratives (for
  example,  in  LQ  the  messengers  came  to  Valinor  telling  that  Melkor
  had  fled  through  the  Kalakirya  before  Tulkas had  set out  in pursuit
  ($55),  whereas  in  AAm  the  messengers  came   'ere  Orome   and  Tulkas
  had  ridden  far'  ($104));  and  there is  constant echoing  of vocabulary
  and phrasing. See further on this topic pp. 289 - 91.                      
                                                                            
  $46b  Byrde Miriel (in the footnote to the text): cf. AAm $7S (p. 92),
        where  Feanor's  mother  (in  a replacement  entry) is  given, rather
        oddly,  the Old  English 'surname'  Byrde, not  Serende, in  the text
        itself and without reference to AElfwine.                            
  $46c  The  passage  in  AAm  $83  (p.  92 and  note 5)  concerning Feanor's
        study  of  the  making  of  gems  by  skill was  an addition,  as was
        that  in  the present  text (note  1 above);  the idea  is associated
        with the change  from the  devising of  gems by  the Noldor  to their
        obtaining   them  from   the  ground   of  Aman   (see  LQ   $40  and
        commentary).                                                         
          With  the  mention  of the  'crystals ...  wherein things  far away
        could  be  seen  small  but  clear'  (not  referred  to  in  AAm) cf.
        Gandalf's  words  in  The  Two   Towers  (III.11):   'The   palantiri
        came   from   beyond   Westernesse,   from   Eldamar.    The   Noldor
        made  them.  Feanor  himself,  maybe,  wrought   them,  in   days  so
        long ago that the time cannot be measured in years.'                 
  $49a  Cf.   AAm  $123   (p.  108):   'Then  Feanor   rose  up   and  cursed
        Melkor,   naming   him    Morgoth'.   In    AAm   Melkor    is   used
        throughout   until   the   time   when   Feanor  named   him  Morgoth
        (p. 123, $123); so  also in  the revision  of QS  the use  of Morgoth
        before this point in the narrative was changed to Melkor.            
  $49b  The passage concerning the Silmarils  corresponds in  content to
        the  latter  part  of  QS  $46;  for, as  in AAm,  the making  of the
        Silmarils now comes after the release of Melkor.                     
   $50  The  passage  on  the  arming of  the Elves  is no  longer given  as a
        footnote,  and  is  moved  to  a  different  place  from  that  in QS
        ($49);  but  it  is  enclosed  within  brackets  and   attributed  to
        Pengolod.  The  text  is  at  this  point   in  any   case  extremely

      disordered,  since  it  consists partly  of new  writing and  partly of
      passages  retained  from  the  original  QS  text.  The  old  note  was
      largely  written  out  afresh,  though  it  was  not   greatly  changed
      from  the  earlier  form: the  chief difference  being that  whereas it
      was  said  in  QS  that  the  Elves  had previously  possessed 'weapons
      of  the  chase,  spears  and bows  and arrows'  it is  now told  (as in
      AAm,  p.  96,  $97)  that  they had  no weapons  before this  time. See
      further p. 281.                                                       
 $52  On Feanor's drawing his sword on Fingolfin see p. 104, $98. - It
      is curious that (despite $46b 'in Tirion upon the crown of
      Tuna') here 'the Silmarils lay in Tuna', and again in $53
      Fingolfin ruled the Noldor ir Tuna'. The same is found in AAm
      (p. 90, $67), and much later (see p. 282).
 $55  The words 'in Ea', not found in LQ 1, belong with the later
      work on the QS manuscript as presented in the text given above
      (see note 8). On the words 'the Outer Darkness... that lies in Ea
      beyond the walls of the World' see pp. 62 - 4.
 $$51-9  In the last paragraphs of the chapter, not given in the text
      (p. 191), changes made to QS were:
        $57:  Morgoth > Melkor, and at all subsequent occur-
              rences.
        $58:  Tun > Tuna; the shores of Elvenhome > the shores of
              Eldamar; Silpion > Telperion; protected by fate
              omitted; With his black spear > Suddenly with his
              black spear; leaf and branch and root > root and leaf
              and bough; and at the end of the paragraph (after she
              swelled to monstrous form) was added: but still she
              was athirst. She drank therefore also of the vats of
              Varda, and drained them utterly.
        559:  their feet > the feet of the hunters; escaped the hunt >
              escaped them.
                                                                       
   I have noticed earlier (p.142) that much later (after the publication
 of The Lord of the  Rings) my  father turned  to new  narrative writing
 wit hin the body of the Quenta Silmarillion:  beginning with  Chapter 1,
 which  became  the  Valaquenta,  and  then   jumping  to   the  present
 chapter, 6. A new story of ramifying implications, that of the death of
 Feanor's  mother Miriel  and Finwe's  second marriage  to Indis  of the
 Vanyar,  had now  entered; but  this further  and final  development is
 here postponed (see pp. 205 ff.).                                      
                                                                       
                     7  OF THE FLIGHT OF THE NOLDOR.                    
                                                                       
 The textual history of this chapter is relatively  simple (for  the late
 rewriting just referred to, which extends some little way into  it, see

                                                                 f       
                                                                        
 pp.  292  ff.).  The  original chapter  in QS  (V.232 -  8, where  it is
 numbered 5)  was corrected,  not very  extensively, at  the time  of the
 1951  revision,  and  as  corrected  was  typed  in the  amanuensis text
 LQ 1. This received no corrections at all, but  on the  later amanuensis
 typescript  LQ  2  my  father  made  a few  changes, mostly  the regular
 alteration of names. In this case I do  not give  the revised  text, but
 record individually the significant  changes made  to QS.  Various small
 changes  of  wording  are  not mentioned,  nor are  regular name-changes
 as  Melko  >  Melkor,  Tun  > Tuna  or Tirion,  Kor > Tuna, the  pass of
 Kor  >  the  pass  of  Kalakiryan,  Elwe  > Olwe'.  In $69  western land
 >  Westland  and  Helkarakse   > Helkaraxe'  (so spelt  in AAm),  in $70
 strands  of  Elvenhome  >  strands  of  Eldanor,   and  in   $71  Eruman
 > Araman (cf. AAm $125, pp. 108, 123).                                  
                                                                        
 $60  At the first three occurrences  'Morgoth' >  'Melkor', and  at the
      end  of  the  paragraph,   after  'the   violence  of   Morgoth',  was
      added:  'for  such  was  his  name  from  that  day  forth  among  the
      Gnomes';  thereafter  'Morgoth'  was  retained.  At  the  foot  of the
      page  my  father  noted:  'In  more   ancient  form   Moringotto'.  It
      was  here  that  the  story  entered  that  Melkor  received  the name
      Morgoth  at  this time,  though there  was no  suggestion yet  that it
      was  Feanor  who  gave  it  to  him.  That   entered  in   AAm  ($123)
      and  in  the  contemporary  rewriting  of  Chapter  6 (p.  186, $49a);
      no  doubt  at  the  same  time  my  father  struck   out  on   the  QS
      manuscript  the  addition  just  given  and  substituted:  'So  Feanor
      called  him  in  that  hour:  the  Black  Foe, and  that name  he bore
      among   the   Noldor   ever  after.'   Morgoth  was   translated  'the
      Dark  Enemy'  in  the  AAm  passage,  but  for  some  reason  this was
      rejected (p. 120, note 2).                                        
         The  sentence  in  $60  'a   thing  before   unseen  that   in  the
      gathering  night  had  seemed  to  be  a  spider  of  monstrous  form'
      was  changed  to  'a  thing  before  unseen  for  which  no  word  was
      known,  a  vast  shape  of  darkness  black  in the  gathering night';
      cf.  AAm  $122.  The  Valar  are   to  be   wholly  ignorant   of  the
      nature  of  the  aid  that  Melkor  had   summoned  (cf.   AAm  $124),
      and  the  Darkness  (or  'Unlight')  of  Ungoliante becomes  a central
      idea of the legend.                                                
                                                                        
 $62  The passage concerning the Orcs, from 'he brought into being
      the race of the Orcs' to the end of the paragraph, was rewritten
      as follows:
        he brought into being the race of the Orkor,* and they grew
        and multiplied in the bowels of the earth. These creatures
        Morgoth made in envy and mockery of the Elves. Therefore in
        form they were like unto the Children of Iluvatar, yet foul to
        look upon; for they were made in hatred, and with hatred

            they were filled. Their voices were as the clashing of stones,
            and they laughed not, save only at torment and cruel deeds.
            Clamhoth, the hosts of tumult, the Noldor called them.
              *[footnote to the text) In Cnomish speech this name is orch
               of one, yrch of many. Orcs we may name them, for in the
               ancient days they were strong and fell as demons; yet they
               were of other kind, a spawn of earth corrupted by the
               power of Morgoth, and they could be slain or destroyed
               by the valiant: quoth AElfwine.
         This is closely related to AAm $127, as that was first written (see
         pp. 120 - 1, notes 5 - 7, and commentary p. 123), and contains
         the same conjunction of two apparently different theories, that
         the Orcs were 'made' by Morgoth and that they were 'a spawn
         of earth' corrupted by him.
           My father then altered the passage by cutting out AElfwine's
         footnote to the word Orkor but adding a closely similar passage
         in the body of the text, thus:
           Glamhoth, the hosts of tumult, the Noldor called them. Orcs
           we may name them,* for in ancient days they were strong and
           fell as demons. Yet they were not of demon-kind, but a spawn
           of earth corrupted by Morgoth, and they could be slain or
           destroyed by the valiant with weapons of war.
             *[footnote to the text] Quoth AElfwine.
         This rearrangement is puzzling, for AElfwine's contribution can
         hardly be limited to the words 'Orcs we may name them' (see p.
         124); but perhaps by placing the asterisk at this point my father
         meant to indicate that all that follows it was added by AElfwine.
         On the LQ typescript he changed it again, putting the whole
         passage from 'Orcs we may name them' into a footnote.
           On the QS manuscript he scribbled later, against the first part
         of the passage, concerning the making of the Orcs: 'Alter this.
         See Annals.' This refers to the change introduced into AAm
         whereby the Orcs had been bred from captured Quendi many
         ages before: see the commentary on AAm $127 (p. 123).
                                                                          
  $67    'masters  of  the enchanted  light' >  'masters of  the unsullied
         Light'; cf. AAm $133 'lords of the unsullied Light'.              
                                                                          
  $68    'But  of  his  own  sons  Inglor alone  spake with  him [Finrod];
         Angrod  and Egnor  took the  part of  Feanor, and  Orodreth stood
         aside' >  'But of  his own  children Inglor  alone spoke  in like
         manner;  for  Angrod and  Egnor and  Galadriel were  with Fingon,
         whereas Orodreth stood  aside and  spoke not.'  As AAm  was first
         written  the  same account  of the  associations of  the Noldorin
         princes  was  given,  but  it  was  changed immediately:  see AAm
         $135 (pp. 112, 125), and p. 121, note 12.                         

        'and with Fingolfin were Finrod and Inglor' > 'and with
      Fingolfin were Finrod and his house'
 $72  The whole of this paragraph was rewritten as follows:
        Then Finrod turned back, being filled with grief, and with
        bitterness against the house of Feanor because of his kinship
        with Olwe of Alqualonde; and many of his people went with
        him, retracing their steps in sorrow, until they beheld once
        more the far beam of the Mindon upon Tuna, still shining in
        the night, and so came at last to Valinor again. And they
        received the pardon of the Valar, and Finrod was set to rule
        the remnant of the Noldor in the Blessed Realm. But his sons
        were not with him, for they would not forsake the sons of
        Fingolfin; and all Fingolfin's folk went forward still, fearing to
        face the doom of the gods, since not all of them had been
        guiltless of the kinslaying at Alqualonde. Moreover Fingon
        and Turgon, though they had no part in that deed, were bold
        and fiery of heart and loath to abandon any task to which
        they had put their hands until the bitter end, if bitter it must
        be. So the main host held on, and all too swiftly the evil that
        was foretold began its work.
      This is almost word for word the same as AAm $156, the only
      real difference being the mention here that Fingon and Turgon
      had no part in the kinslaying. That the rewriting of QS preceded
      the passage in AAm, however, is shown by the fact that Olwe' is
      here a later change from Elwe'.
 $73  'and they took with them only such as were faithful to their
      house, among whom were Angrod and Egnor' was left un-
      changed, through oversight, and survived into the typescript
      LQ 2. The association of Angrod and Egnor with the Feanorians
      (so that they were given passage to Middle-earth in the ships) had
      been abandoned in the rewritings of QS $$68, 72 given above.
        'a great burning, terrible and bright' > 'a great burning,
      terrible and bright, at the place that was after called Losgar, at
      the outlet of the Firth of Drengist'. The same addition was made
      to AAm ($162, pp. 120, 127, and p. 122 note 20).
        'Therefore led by Fingolfin, and Fingon, Turgon, and Inglor'
      > 'Therefore led by Fingolfin and his sons, and by Inglor and
      Galadriel the fair and valiant'; this is virtually the text of AAm
      ($163, p. 120).
        'and came unto Beleriand at the rising of the sun' > 'and came
      unto Middle-earth at the rising of the Moon'; cf. AAm $163
      (pp. 120, 127).
                                                                         
 Emendations made to one or other  of the  copies of  the typescript  LQ 2
 give the later names or name-forms  of certain  of the  Noldorin princes,

 
                                                                         
 as  in  Chapter  5  (pp.  177,  181, $$41  - 2):  Finrod >  Finarphin and
 Finarfin,  Inglor  >  Finrod,  Egnor  > AEgnor (as  emended in  Chapter 5
 spelt Aegnor). - In  'his ancient  fortress, Utumno  in the  North' ($62)
 Utumno  >  Angband; this  reflects the  late story  that both  Utumno and
 Angband were built in the ancient days  (see p.  156, $12)  - and  it was
 of  course to  the western  fortress, Angband,  that Melkor  returned and
 which he rebuilt from its ruins.                                         
   Against  the  passage  in   $68  'The   greater  part   marched  behind
 Fingolfin, who with his sons yielded to the  general voice  against their
 wisdom,  because  they  would not  desert their  people' my  father noted
 on  a  copy  of  LQ 2:  'also because  of the  promise made  by Fingolfin
 (above)'. This refers to a passage in the final rewriting of the previous
 chapter  (p. 287,  $58c), where  Fingolfin said  to Feanor  before Manwe:
 'Thou shalt lead  and I  will follow.'  The word  'above' means  that the
 final  text  was  in  being  and  had  been  incorporated  into the  LQ 2
 typescript.                                                              
                                                                         
                   8  OF THE SUN AND MOON AND THE HIDING                   
                                OF VALINOR.                               
                                                                         
 The textual situation here is the simplest so far: we have the chapter in
 QS  (V.239  - 43),  and emendations  made to  QS in  1951, taken  up into
 the  typescript  LQ  1,  which  was  not  emended  subsequently.  (A  few
 lightly  pencilled  alterations  were  not incorporated  in LQ  1, either
 because  the  typist  could  not  interpret  them  or  because  they were
 entered  on  the  manuscript subsequently.)  As with  Chapter 6  (p. 184)
 the later typescript LQ 2 is not extant. The history  of this  chapter in
 The  Silmarillion  therefore  ends  with the  few changes  made to  QS in
 1951;  there  is  also  the  account  in AAm  $$164-81, which  was itself
 closely  derived  from  QS,  with  changes  and  omissions. In  this case
 again I give the significant changes made to QS and  not the  whole text.
 Regular  changes  of  name   are  ($79)   Kalakilya  >   Kalakiryan,  the
 mound of Kor > the mound of Tuna.                                        

 574  The passage beginning 'And Manwe bade Yavanna ...' was
      changed to a form almost identical with AAm $167 (p. 129):
      And Manwe bade Yavanna and Nienna to put forth all their
      powers of growth and healing; and they put forth all their
      powers upon the Trees, but the tears of Nienna availed not to
      heal their mortal wounds; and for a long while Yavanna sang
      on alone in the shadows. Yet even as hope failed and her song
      faltered in the dark, lo! Telperion bore at last upon a leafless
      bough one great flower of silver, and Laurelin a single golden
      fruit.

  $75   The   passage   giving   the  names   of  the   Sun  and   Moon  was
        changed to a form intermediate between QS and AAm $171:             
          Isil the Sheen  the gods  of old  named the  Moon in  Valinor, and
        Anar  Fire-golden  they  named   the  Sun;   but  the   Eldar  named
        them  also  Rana the  wayward, the  giver of  visions, and  [Urin >]
        Naira, the heart of flame, that awakens and consumes.               
        Thus  Urin  >  Anar  (with  changed  meaning, 'Fire-golden'),  as in
        AAm,  but  this  and Isil  remain names  given by  the Gods,  not by
        the  Vanyar;  Urin  was  at  first  changed  about  with   Anar  and
        made  the  Eldarin  name  of  the  Sun,  but  was  then  replaced by
        Naira  (Vasa  in  AAm).  Rana  (replacing  Rana)  and  Naira  remain
        Eldarin names, whereas in AAm Rana and Vasa are Noldorin.           
          'The  maiden  chosen  from  among  their  own  folk by  the Valar'
        >  'The  maiden  whom  the  Valar  chose   from  among   the  Maiar'
        (agreeing with AAm $172).                                           
          Pencilled  in  the  margin  against  Arien  (above   the  original
        marginal  gloss  by  AElfwine  hyrned 'horned'  to the  name Tilion,
        V.240,  footnote)  is  the  unrecorded  Old  English   word Daegbore
        ('Day-bearer',  feminine,.  In  AAm   ($172,  marginal   notes)  the
        Old  English  words  supplied  by  AElfwine  are hyrned  and daegred
        (daybreak, dawn).                                                   
          'the pools lit by the flickering light of Silpion' > 'the pools of
        Este  in  Telperion's  flickering beams'  (agreeing with  AAm $172).
        Silpion > Telperion subsequently (see p. 59, $5).                   
  $76   'Rana  was  first  wrought'  >  'Isil  was  first  wrought'  (as AAm
        $173).                                                              
          'Melko'  >  'Morgoth',  because  he  is  to  be  known  as Morgoth
        from  the  point  in  the  narrative  where  he  is given  that name
        (p. 194, $60).                                                      
  $77   'the prayers  of Lorien  and Nienna'  > 'the  prayers of  Lorien and
        Este' (as AAm $175).                                                
          'Varda  changed  her  design'  > 'Varda  changed her  counsel' (as
        AAm $175).                                                          
          The entire passage beginning at  'is the  hour of  greatest light'
        and continuing to $79 'the Valar store  the radiance  of the  Sun in
        many vessels' was put into the past tense (cf. AAm $$ 175 - 8).
  $78   Eruman   >   Aruman   (not   Araman).   Since  Eruman   was  changed
        to  Araman in  the revision  made at  this time  to an  earlier page
        in  QS  ($71)  Aruman  here  is  no   doubt  merely   an  incomplete
        alteration.                                                         
  $79   Rewriting  of  the  passage in  QS beginning  'That light  lives now
        only  in  the Silmarils'  removed at  last the  ancient idea  of the
        'rekindling'  of  'the  Elder  Sun  and Moon,  which are  the Trees'
        (for the history of this see II.285 - 6, IV.20, 49, 98), or at least
        restricted it to a foretelling of the recovery of the Silmarils; but

     the strange prophecy of Ulmo that this would only come to pass
     through the aid of Men was retained. To none of this is there
     anything corresponding in AAm. The changed passage reads:
       That light lives now only in the Silmarils; though there shall
       yet come a time, maybe, when they are found again and their
       fire released, and the ancient joy and glory return. Ulmo
       foretold to the Valar...'
       The sentence (not in AAm, $180) 'the fleet of the Teleri kept
     the shore' was changed to 'rebuilt with Osse's aid, the fleet of
     the Teleri kept the shore'.
                                                                    
 $80 'the Bay of Elvenhome' > 'The Bay of Eldanor'.                  
                                                                    
 It seems to me very probable that my father made these changes to QS
 before he wrote the section on  the Sun  and Moon  in the  Annals of
 Aman; in any case they were doubtless closely contemporary.         

             (II)     THE SECOND PHASE.                                     
                                                                          
 An  acute  problem  of  presentation  arose  in the  treatment of  the late
 expanded  version  of  Chapter  6  Of  the Silmarils  and the  Darkening of
 Valinor (see pp. 142, 184 ff.), in that the first part of the new  text was
 based  on  and  developed  in  stages  from  a major  independent disquisi-
 tion  concerning the  nature of  the Eldar.  Arising out  of an  account of
 their marriage laws  and customs,  this discussion  extends into  a lengthy
 analysis of the meaning  of death,  immortality and  rebirth in  respect of
 the  Elves.  I found  that to  give the  late narrative  text of  Chapter 6
 immediately following  the text  of the  'first phase'  version, postponing
 the  long  and  remarkable  essay  from  which  it  derives,  was extremely
 confusing; while to introduce the essay  into the  series of  'first phase'
 chapters  made  matters worse.  For this  reason I  have divided  this part
 of  the  book  into  two  sections,  and  give  here  separately  the  late
 narrative versions of Chapters  1, 6,  and a  part of  7 together  with the
 essay  on  the  Eldar.  To  date these  writings (and  those given  in Part
 Four)  with  any real  precision seems  impossible on  the evidence  that I
 know of, but such as  there is  points clearly  in most  cases to  the late
 1950s and not much later (for detailed discussion see p. 300).            
                                                                          
                                     *                                     
                                                                          
                               THE VALAQUENTA.                              
                                                                          
 Of  the  final,  enlarged  form  of  the  old  Chapter  1,  the  Valaquenta
 (abbreviated  Vq),  there  are  two  texts, both  of them  typescripts made
 by my father (Vq 1 and Vq  2). Vq  1 begins  as a  copy of  LQ 2,  but very
 soon  diverges,  and  with  the  introduction  of  much new  matter becomes
 in several parts entirely distinct. Though  typewritten it  is very  much a
 draft text, confused  and (at  any rate  as it  exists now)  incomplete. It

                                                                           
                                                                            
  was followed, I would think immediately, by the finished text Vq 2.        
    Vq  1  is  headed   like  the   preceding  versions,   'QUENTA  SILMARIL-
  LION.  Here  begins  the  Silmarillion,  or the  History of  the Silmarils.
  I.  Of  the  Valar.'  Vq  2,  on  the  other  hand, is  headed 'VALAQUENTA.
  Here  is  the  Account  of the  Valar and  Maiar according  to the  Lore of
  the  Eldar.'  That  the  original  first  chapter  of The  Silmarillion had
  become a separate entity  like the  Ainulindale' is  shown, apart  from the
  new title, by the fact that to the final text (LQ 2)  of the  next chapter,
  Of  Valinor  and  the  Two  Trees,  a  title-page  (together  with  a  page
  carrying  the  preamble, AEaelfwine's  note, and  the Translator's  note) was
  attached, and the chapter numbered  '1'. This  title-page is  virtually the
  same  as  that  in  the  old QS  typescript (see  V.202), with  the heading
  'Eldanyare'  and  beneath  'Quenta Silmarillion',  the division  into three
  parts,  and  the  forms  Pennas Silevril,  Yenie Valinoren,  Inias Valannor
  (where  however  the  old   typescript  was   changed  to   Balannor),  and
  Inias  Beleriand.  The fact  that it  was taken  from the  original 'Eldan-
  yare' text suggests that it really belonged  to LQ  1 (whose  title-page is
  missing, p. 143). It is true that it was typed at the same time as the rest
  of  LQ  2,  but  I  imagine  that  (having  decided  to  separate  off  the
  Valaquenta) my  father at  this time  gave the  title-page of  LQ 1  to the
  typist of LQ  2 to  copy, after  which it  was mislaid  and lost.  It seems
  odd  that  he  should  have  done this;  at least  one might  have expected
  him  to  change  the  second  element  from  The Annals  of Valinor  to The
  Annals  of  Aman.  He  did  indeed  make  some  pencilled   emendations  to
  it:  Yenie  Valinoren  to  Yenie  Valinoreo  (and  beneath   this  Valinore
  Yenie), and Inias Valannor to Inias Dor-Rodyn.                             
    Essentially,  Vq  1  was  the  innovating  version,  and  Vq   2  refined
  stylistically  on  the  new  material,  although  in any  given case  it is
  possible that Vq 1  was as  LQ 2  and that  Vq 2  introduced the  new text;
  however,  I  treat this  detail as  largely immaterial.  In what  follows I
  comment  on  notable  features  arising  from  a  comparison   between  the
  Valaquenta  and  LQ  (that  is,  the  corrected  text  of  LQ  1  given  on
  pp.  144-7,  referred  to  by  the numbered  paragraphs, together  with the
  emendations made  to its  copy LQ  2 given  on pp.  148 -  9). The  text of
  the  Valaquenta  is  found  in the  published Silmarillion  (references are
  to  the  original  hardback  edition,  1977). Since  a number  of editorial
  changes  were  made  to  the  text  of  the  Valaquenta  I  notice  certain
  points of substance in which they differ.                                  
                                                                            
  $1   The  words  'Let  it  be!'  were  not  included  in  the Vq  texts (see
       p. 148, $1).                                                         
  $2   Nearly  all   of  this   paragraph  concerning   the  Maiar   and  the
       confusion  with  Elves  (as  emended  in  LQ  2)  still  survived in  Vq 1,
       but  was  eliminated  in  Vq  2   (the  first   part  of   it  reappearing,
       rewritten,  at  the  beginning  of  the  section 'Of  the Maiar').  The end

          of  the  paragraph,  concerning  the  making  of  the Children  of Eru,
          was eliminated in Vq 2 and does not reappear.                          
     $3   Vq 1 as typed followed LQ  exactly in  the list  of the  'chieftains of
          the Valar' (with Lorien as in LQ 2 for earlier Lorien), but a  list of
          the   seven   queens   (Valier)   was   also  given:   Varda,  Yavanna,
          Nienna,  Vana,  Vaire,  Nessa,  Uinen  (agreeing  with the  table given
          on  p.  151).  In  Vq  1  the  nine  'chieftains' became  by emendation
          seven:   Melkor   and   Osse   were   removed   (and   Orome   s  place
          changed,  so  that  he  stands  after  Aule);  this  is the  number and
          order  of  'the  Lords  of  the  Valar' in  Vq 2  and in  the published
          work  (p.  25).  Also  by  emendation  to  Vq 1  the queens  lose Uinen
          but  gain  Este,  who is  placed after  Nienna, and  Vana is  set after
          Vaire; this  again was  the final  form. These  changes, both  to Valar
          and  Valier,  were  made  also  to  the  typescript  of  AAm   (p.  69,
          $$1 - 2). The names Vana and Nienna are given thus in Vq 2.          
             The  sentence  in LQ  'though they  have other  or altered  names in
          the  speech  of  the Sindar'  was retained  in Vq  1 with  the addition
          of  'in  Middle-earth',  but  changed  in  Vq  Z  to 'though  they have
          other names in the speech of the Elves in Middle-earth.'               
     $4   (Varda)  The  history  of   the  phrase   'With  Manwe   dwells  Varda'
          (The Silmarillion p.  26) is  curious. QS  $4 has  'With him  dwells as
          wife  Varda...  -,  by  emendation  to  LQ  1  it  became  With  him in
          Arda  dwells  as  spouse  Varda  ...';  and  in  Vq  it is  'With Manwe
          now  dwells  as  spouse  Varda...'  In  1975,  when  the  main  work on
          the  text  of  the  published  Silmarillion was  done, being  then much
          less  clear  than  I  have  since  become   about  certain   dates  and
          textual  relations (and  ignorant of  the existence  of some  texts), I
          did not  see that  this 'now'  could have  any significance,  and more-
          over  it  contributed  to  the  problem  of  tense  in  the Valaquenta,
          which  is  discussed  below;  I  therefore  omitted  it. It  is however
          undoubtedly significant.  In AAm  it is  said (p.  49, $3):  'Varda was
          Manwe  s  spouse  from  the  beginning,  in   contrast  to   the  later
 C        'union'  of  Yavanna  and  Aule  'in  Ea'  (on   which  see   under  $5
          below).  But  the  typescript  text  of  AAm  was  emended (p.  69, $3)
          to   'Varda   was  Manwe's   spouse  from   the  beginning   of  Arda',
          which  shows  that   some  complex   conception  was   present  (though
          never definitively  expressed) concerning  the time  of the  'union' of
          the great spirits.                                                     
             In  the  new,  much   extended  passage   concerning  Varda,   Vq  1
          has  'She  speaks  seldom  in  words,  save  to  Manwe',  where   Vq  2
          followed  by  the  published  text  (p.  26) has  'Manwe and  Varda are
          seldom parted, and they remain in Valinor.'                            
             (Ulmo)   The   long   new  passage   concerning  Ulmo   entered  in
          Vq  1,  which  has some  interesting differences  from the  final form:
          it is said that Ulmo 'had less need of the light of the Trees or of any

       resting-place',  and  that  'his  counsels grew  ever away  from the
       mind  of  Manwe  (whom  nonetheless  he  obeyed)': cf.  the Ainulin-
       dale  (p.  13,  $18),  'Manwe  and  Ulmo  have  from  the  beginning
       been  allied,  and  in all  things have  served most  faithfully the
       purpose  of  Iluvatar'.  In  both  Vq  texts  his  horns  are called
       Falarombar,  changed  on  the Vq  2 typescript  to Ulumuri;  cf. the
       original  name  of the  horn of  Orome, Rombaras  (p. 35,  $34), and
       the Etymologies, V.384, stem ROM.                                   
          (Osse  and  Uinen)  The  passage   concerning  Osse   and  Uinen,
       much  enlarged, now  appears in  the section  'Of the  Maiar', since
       they  have  ceased  to  be numbered  among the  Valar (see  under $3
       above).                                                             
  $5   (Aule') In the  words (referring  to Melkor  and Aule)  'Both, also,
       desired  to  make  things  of  their  own  that  should  be  new and
       unthought  of  by  others' (The  Silmarillion p.  27) there  is very
       probably  a  reflection  of  the  legend  of  Aule's  making  of the
       Dwarves.                                                            
          (Yavanna)  Here  again,  as  with  Varda  ($4  above),  I wrongly
       changed the text  concerning Yavanna  S union  with Aule.  Both Vq
       texts  have  'The  spouse  of  Aule  in  Arda  is Yavanna',  and the
       words 'in Arda' are certainly significant (see V.120).              
          'Some there  are who  have seen  her standing  like a  tree under
       heaven' recalls the later versions of the Ainulindale', where  it is
       Pengolod himself who declares to AElfwine  that he  has so  seen her
       'long years agone, in the land of the Valar' (p. 15, $25).          
          The  name  Kementari  is  found  as a  correction of  Palurien in
       LQ 2, Chapter 2 (p. 157, $14).                                      
  $6   (Mandos)  The   editorial  change   of  'northward'   to  'westward'
       in  'Namo  the  elder  dwells  in  Mandos,  which  is  northward  in
       Valinor' in the published text (p. 28) is a regrettable error, which
       I  have  explained  in  I.82. -  It may  be noted  here that  in the
       passage  in  $9  concerning  Nienna  the  change  of  'the  halls of
       Mandos,  which  are  nearer  and  yet  more  northward'  (found from
       QS to LQ 2) to  'the halls  of Mandos,  which are  near to  her own'
       is not editorial, but is found in the Vq texts.                     
  $7   (Tulkas) The sentence 'He came  last to  Arda, to  aid the  Valar in
       the first battles with Melkor' only entered with  Vq 2,  but derives
       from the later Ainulindale ($31).                                   
  $8   (Orome')  In  emendation  to  one  copy  only  of  LQ  2   the  name
       Aldaron  of  Orome  was  lost  (see  p.  149, $8),  and it  does not
       appear in either text of Vq.  It should  not have  been reintroduced
       into the published text (p. 29). The sentence (ibid.) 'by the Sindar
       Tauron' derives  from LQ  2 and  Vq 1,  but was  in fact  changed in
       Vq 2 to 'Tauron he is called in Middle-earth';  cf. under  $3 above,
       where  'Sindar'  was  also  removed  in  Vq  2.  The  translation of
       Tauron should be 'the Lord of the Forests'.                         

               The name Nahar of Orome s horse first appears in AAm $31
     (p. 70). - After the words 'for the pursuit of the evil  creatures of
     Melkor'  (The  Silmarillion  p.  29)  the  Vq  texts  have  'But  the
     Valaroma   is  not   blown,  and   Nahar  runs   no  more   upon  the
     Middle-earth  since  the  change  of  the  world  and  the  waning of
     the  Elves,  whom  he  loved.'  This sentence  goes back  through the
     versions  to  QS  (though  the Valaroma  does not  appear in  it till
     LQ 2 and Nahar  not till  Vq), and  I regret  its exclusion  from The
     Silmarillion.                                                       
 $9  (Nienna) The account  of Nienna  appears at  an earlier  point in
     Vq  (following  the  Feanturi,  to whom  she is  now 'akin')  than it
     had in previous  versions. The  words 'sister  of the  Feanturi' were
     changed editorially from Vq 'sister of Namo' (see p. 151, $9).      
                                                                        
 At the  end of  the account  of the  Valar and  Valier appears  the name
 and  conception of  the Aratar,  the High  Ones of  Arda, of  whom there
 are  eight  after  the  removal  of  Melkor.  This  contrasts  with  the
 conception  of 'the  Seven Great  Ones of  the Realm  of Arda'  (p. 147,
 $10a),   among   whom   Melkor   is   numbered,   but  not   Orome,  nor
 Mandos.                                                                 
 $$10a,b  Of  the  Maiar.  The  words  in  the  published  text  (p.  30)
     concerning  Eonwe,  'whose  might  in  arms  is  surpassed  by  none  in
     Arda',  were  an  editorial  addition,  made  in  order  to  prepare for
     his  leadership  of  the  hosts  of the  West at  the Great  Battle (The
     Silmarillion  pp.  251 -  2). For  the end  of the  Elder Days  there is
     scarcely  any  material  from  the  period  following  The  Lord  of the
     Rings.                                                                  
       (Melian)  In  LQ  2  Melian  was  said  to  be  'of the  people of
     Yavanna'; see p. 147, $10b.                                             
       (Olorin)  At  the end  of the  account of  Olorin is  scribbled on
     the  typescript  Vq  1:  'He  was  humble  in the  Land of  the Blessed;
     and  in  Middle-earth  he  sought   no  renown.   His  triumph   was  in
     the uprising of the fallen,  and his  joy was  in the renewal  of hope.'
     This  appears  in  Vq  2,  but  my  father subsequently  placed inverted
     commas  round  it.  It  was  wrongly   omitted  from   The  Silmarillion
     (p. 31).                                                                
                                                                        
       Of the Enemies. In this almost entirely new section appears
     the conception that the Balrogs (Valaraukar) were powerful
     spirits from before the World; so also in AAm* (p. 79, $30) the
     Balrogs are described as the chief of 'the evil spirits that followed
     [Melkor], the Umaiar'. See further p. 165, $18.
  The Valaquenta texts end thus, and speak of the Marring of Arda, the
  underlying concern of many of the writings given subsequently in this
  book:
   Here ends The Valaquenta. If it has passed from the high and
   beautiful to darkness and ruin, that was of old the fate of Arda

                                                                  
                                                                         
 Marred;  and  if  any  change shall  come and  the Marring  be amended,
 Manwe  and  Varda  may  know;  but they  have not  revealed it,  and it
 is not declared in the dooms of Mandos.                                  
                                                                         
 The   Second   Prophecy  of   Mandos  (V.333)   had  now   therefore  de-
 finitively disappeared. This  passage was  used to  form a  conclusion to
 the published Silmarillion (p. 255).                                     
                                                                         
 In  my  foreword  to  The  Silmarillion  I wrote  that in  the Valaquenta
 'we have  to assume  that while  it contains  much that  must go  back to
 the earliest days of the  Eldar in  Valinor, it  was remodelled  in later
 times; and thus explain its  continual shifting  of tense  and viewpoint,
 so  that the  divine powers  seem now  present and  active in  the world,
 now remote, a vanished order known only to memory.'                      
 The problem of tense in this  work is  certainly very  difficult. Already
 in Q (IV.78 - 9) the shifting from past to  present tense  appears, where
 Osse and Uinen and Nienna are described  in the  present, in  contrast to
 all  the  others,  while  Ulmo  'was'  next  in  might  to Manwe,  but he
 'dwells' alone in the Outer Seas. In QS (see V.208) the present  tense is
 used, almost  though not  exclusively -  but 'Tulkas  had great  love for
 Fionwe'  early  became  'has',  and  'Orome  was  a  mighty  lord' became
 'Orome is' in the 1951 revision.                                         
 With  the  additions  and  alterations  made  in   the  course   of  that
 revision the variations continue. In  LQ $10a,  for instance,  'there are
 nine Valar', contrasting with the original passage in $3, 'The chieftains
 of the Valar  were nine',  which goes  back through  QS to  Q; or  in the
 passage  about  the  Maiar  in  $10b  'Among  them  Eonwe...  and  Ilmare
 ... were the chief', but 'Many others there are' (altered from  'were').
 The same mixture of present and past is found in AAm* (p. 65, $3).       
 The situation remains  the same  in the  Vq texts,  and in  preparing the
 Valaquenta  for  publication I  altered (with  misgiving and  doubt) some
 of the  tenses. The  readings of  the published  work which  were altered
 from  those  in  Vq  are:
 p. 25: 'The Lords of the  Valar are  seven; and  the Valier...  are seven
 also'; 'The  names of  the Lords  in due  order are';  'the names  of the
 Queens are'
 p. 26: 'Manwe  is  dearest  to  Iluvatar  and understands  most clearly
 his purposes'; 'he hated her,  and  feared  her'
 p. 27: 'Ulmo loves both  Elves  and  Men'
 p. 28: 'The  Feanturi...  are  brethren'
 p.  30:  'it  is  otherwise  in  Aman';  'Chief among  the Maiar  ... are
 Ilmare... and Eonwe'                                                     
 In all these cases, except 'he hated her, and feared her'  on p.  26, the
 tense was changed from  past to  present. The  change on  p. 28  seems in
 any  case  mistaken  (cf.  p.  26,  'Manwe  and  Melkor were  brethren in
 the  thought  of  Iluvatar');  and  to make  any of  them was  probably a
 misjudgement.  But  the  problem  is  real.  A  leading  consideration in

                                           
                                                                           
 the  preparation  of  the  text  was  the  achievement  of   coherence  and
 consistency;  and  a  fundamental  problem  was   uncertainty  as   to  the
 mode by which in  my father's  later thought  the 'Lore  of the  Eldar' had
 been  transmitted.  But  I  now  think  that  I  attached too  much import-
 ance  to  the  aim  of  consistency,   which  may   be  present   when  not
 evident,  and  was  too  ready  to  deal   with  'difficulties'   simply  by
 eliminating them.                                                          
                                                                           
                                      *                                     
                                                                           
                    THE EARLIEST VERSION OF THE STORY OF                    
                              FINWE AND MIRIEL.                             
                                                                           
 The  story  of  Finwe  and  Miriel,  which  would  assume  an extraordinary
 importance  in  my  father's  later work  on The  Silmarillion, began  as a
 rider in manuscript  to the  'first phase'  revision of  Chapter 6,  Of the
 Silmarils  and  the  Darkening  of  Valinor;  it  was  inserted  after  the
 account  of   the  marvellous   skill  of   Miriel,  called   Serende  'the
 Broideress', mother of Feanor,  at the  end of  LQ $46b  (p. 185).  I shall
 refer to this rider as 'FM 1' (i.e. the first text treating of the story of
 Finwe and Miriel in the Quenta Silmarillion).                              
   A curious feature of this  text is  the presence  of marginal  dates; and
 three late insertions to the Annals of  Aman (p.  101, notes  1 and  4) are
 closely  associated with  it. The  entry in  AAm for  the Valian  Year 1179
 (p.  92)  gave  the  birth  of  Feanor  in  Tirion  and  his  mother's name
 Byrde  Miriel.  Afterwards  my  father changed  this date  to 1169,  and at
 the same time added these new annals:                                      
   1170 Miriel falls asleep and passes to Mandar.                           
   1172 Doom of Manwe concerning the espousals of the Eldar.                
   1185 Finwe weds Indis of the Vanyar.                                     
 In the  present rider  to LQ  the dates,  which were  a good  deal changed,
 are the same, or the same to within a year or two. It  is obvious  that the
 insertions  to  AAm  and  the  rider  to  LQ  are  contemporary;  and while
 my father probably only put in the dates in the  latter as  a guide  to his
 thought  (they  are  absent  from  the  subsequent  texts  of   Finwe'  and
 Miriel), the fact that he did so seems  a testimony  to the  closeness that
 the two 'modes' now had for him.                                           
   The  text  FM  1  was  subsequently  emended   in  ball-point   pen;  the
 changed  readings  are  shown  in  the  text  that now  follows. It  may be
 noted  here  that  at the  first three  occurrences of  the name  my father
 wrote  Mandar,  changing  it  before  the  text  was  completed  to Mandos.
 The  inserted  entry  in  AAm  for  the  year 1170,  cited above,  also has
 Mandar.  Thus  even  this  very  long-established name,  going back  to the
 earliest form of the legends, was still susceptible of  change; but  it was
 a passing movement and does not appear again.                              
                                                                           
                  Now it is told that in the bearing of her son Miriel was

                                     
                                                                     
 consumed  in  spirit  and  body;  and  that   after  his   birth  she
 yearned  for  rest  from  the  labour  of  living.  And  she  said to
 Finwe: 'Never again shall  I bear  a child;  for strength  that would
 have  nourished  the  life  of  many  has  gone forth  into Feanaro.'*
 Then  Manwe  granted  the  prayer   of  Miriel.   And  she   went  to
 Lorien,  and  laid  her  down  to  sleep  upon   a  bed   of  flowers
 [)  beneath  a  silver  tree];  and  there  her  fair  body  remained
 unwithered in  the keeping  of the  maidens of  Este. But  her spirit
 passed to rest in the halls of Mandos.                               
  Finwe's grief was great, and he gave to  his son  all the  love that
 he  had for  Miriel; for  Feanaro was  like his  mother in  voice and
 countenance.  Yet  Finwe  was  not  content, and  he desired  to have
 more   children.   He   spoke,  therefore,   [>  After   some  years,
 therefore,  he  spoke]  to  Manwe,  saying:   'Lord,  behold!   I  am
 bereaved;  and  alone  among  the  Eldar  I  am  without a  wife, and
 must  hope  for  no  sons   save  one,   and  no   daughter.  Whereas
 Ingwe  and  Olwe  beget  many  children  in the  bliss of  Aman. Must
 I  remain  ever  so? For  I deem  that Miriel  will not  return again
 ever from the house of Vaire.'                                       
  Then  Manwe  considered  the  words  of  Finwe;  and  after  a  time
 he  summoned  all  the  counsellors  of  the  Eldar,  and   in  their
 hearing  Mandos  spoke  this  doom:  'This  is  the  law  of Iluvatar
 for you [> This is the way of  life that  Iluvatar hath  ordained for
 you],  his  children,  as you  know well:  the First-born  shall take
 one  spouse  only  and  have  no  other  in  this  life,  while  Arda
 endureth.  But  this  law  takes   no  account   [)  But   herein  no
 account  is  taken]  of  Death.  This  doom  is  therefore  now made,
 by  the  right  of  lawgiving  that  Iluvatar  committed   to  Manwe:
 that  if  the  spirit  of a  spouse, husband  or wife,  forsaking the
 body,  shall  for any  cause pass  into the  keeping of  Mandos, then
 the living shall be permitted to  take another  spouse. But  this can
 only be, if the  former union  be dissolved  for ever.  Therefore the
 one that is  in the  keeping of  Mandos must  there remain  until the
 end  of Arda,  and shall  not awake  again or  take bodily  form. For
 none  among  the  Quendi  shall have  two spouses  at one  time alive
 and awake. But since it is not to be thought  that the  living shall,
 by  his  or  her  will  alone,  confine  the spirit  of the  other to
 Mandos,  this  disunion shall  come to  pass only  by the  consent of
                                                                     
 (* [footnote to the text] Thus she named her son: Spirit-of-Fire: and
 by that name  he was  known among  the Eldar.  [Feanaro is  so spelt
 here, but Feanaro subsequently.]                                     

 
                                                                         
 both.  And  after  the  giving  of  the  consent ten  years of  the Valar
 shall  pass  ere  Mandos  confirms  it.  Within  that  time  either party
 may   revoke   this   consent;   but  when   Mandos  has   confirmed  it,
 and  the  living  spouse  has  wedded  another,  it shall  be irrevocable
 until the end of Arda. This is the doom of Namo in this matter.'         
  It  is  said  that  Miriel  answered  Mandos  saying:  'I   came  hither
 to escape from  the body,  and I  do not  desire ever  to return  to it';
 and  after  ten  years  the   doom  of   disunion  was   spoken.  [Added:
 And  Miriel  has  dwelt  ever  since  in the  house of  Vaire, and  it is
 her  part  to record  there the  histories of  the kin  of Finwe  and all
 the  deeds  of  the  Noldor.]  And   in  the   years  following   [>  But
 when  three  years  more  had  passed]  Finwe   took  as   second  spouse
 Indis  of  the  Vanyar,  of the  kin [>  sister] of  Ingwe; and  she bore
 five  fair  children  of  whom  her  two  sons   are  most   renowned  in
 the  histories  of  the  Noldor.  But  her eldest  child was  a daughter,
 Findis,  and  she  bore  also  two  other  daughters:  Irime  and  Faniel
 [> Faniel and Irime].                                                    
  The  wedding  of   the  father   was  not   pleasing  to   Feanaro;  and
 though  the  love  between  them  was  not   lessened,  Feanaro   had  no
 great  love  for  Indis  or  her  children, and  as soon  as he  might he
 lived   apart   from  them,   being  busy   from  early   childhood  upon
 the  lore  and  craft  in  which  he  delighted,   and  he   laboured  at
 many tasks, being in all pursuits eager and swift.                       
                                                                         
  There is a direction here to  return to  LQ (at  the beginning  of $46c,
 p. 185) with the words 'For he grew swiftly...'                          
                                                                         
                    LAWS AND CUSTOMS AMONG THE ELDAR.                     
                                                                         
 As  I  have explained  (p. 199),  I have  found that  the best  method of
 presenting  the  material  is  to  give  at  this  point  the  long essay
 concerning the nature and  customs of  the Eldar,  although of  course it
 cannot be said to be a part of the Quenta Silmarillion.                  
  This  work  is  extant  in  two versions,  a completed  manuscript ('A')
 and a revision of this in a typescript ('B') made by  my father  that was
 abandoned  when  somewhat  less  than  halfway  through.  The  two  texts
 bear different titles, and since both are long I shall use an abbreviated
 form,  Laws  and  Customs among  the Eldar  (in references  later, simply
 Laws  and  Customs).  From  the existence  of the  two versions  arises a
 difficulty of presentation  frequently encountered  in my  father's work.
 The typescript B,  so far  as it  goes, follows  the manuscript  A pretty
 closely for the most part - too closely to justify printing them  both in
 full, even if space allowed. On the other hand there  are many  points in

  
                                                                          
  which B differs significantly from A. The options  are therefore  to give
  A in full with important divergences in B in textual notes, or to  give B
  as far as it goes with A's divergences in notes,  and then  the remainder
  from A. Since B is  a clearer  and improved  text I  have decided  on the
  latter course.                                                           
                                                                          
     It  is  not  easy  to  say  from what  fictional perspective  Laws and
  Customs  among  the  Eldar  was  composed.  There is  a reference  to the
  Elves who linger in Middle-earth 'in these after-days'  (p. 223);  on the
  other  hand  the  writer  speaks  as if  the customs  of the  Noldor were
  present  and  observable  ('Among  the  Noldor  it may  be seen  that the
  making  of  bread  is  done  mostly  by  women',  p.  214) -  though this
  cannot be pressed. It is clear in any case  that it  is presented  as the
  work, not of one of the Eldar, but of  a Man:  the observation  about the
  variety  of  the names  borne by  the Eldar,  'which ...  may to  us seem
  bewildering'  (p.  216;  found  in  both  texts,  in different  words) is
  decisive.  AElfwine  is  indeed  associated  with  the  work,  but  in an
  extremely  puzzling  way. He  does not  appear at  all in  A as  that was
  originally  written;  but  among  various  corrections   and  alterations
  made in  red ball-point  pen (doubtless  as a  preliminary to  the making
  of the typescript) my father  wrote 'AElfwine's  Preamble' in  the margin
  against the  opening of  the text  - without  however marking  where this
  'preamble' ended. In B the  first two  paragraphs are  marked 'AElfwine's
  Preamble'  and  placed  within  ornate  brackets,  and this  very clearly
  belongs with the making of  the typescript,  although it  is by  no means
  obvious  why  the  opening should  be thus  set apart;  while later  in B
  (p. 224) there is a long observation, set  within similar  brackets, that
  ends with the words 'So spoke AElfwine' - but this  passage is  absent in
  any form from A.                                                         
     There are  no initial  drafts or  rough writings  extant, and  if none
  existed  the  manuscript text  is remarkably  clear and  orderly, without
  much  correction  at  the  time  of  composition,  though  a   good  deal
  changed  subsequently.  It  may  be  that   it  had   been  substantially
  composed,  the  product  of  long  thought, before  it was  first written
  down; at the same time, my  impression is  that my  father had  not fully
  planned its structure when  he began.  This is  suggested by  the curious
  way  in  which  the  judgement  of  Mandos  in  the  case  of  Finwe  and
  Miriel  precedes  the  actual  story of  what led  to the  judgement (pp.
  225 - 6, 236-9); while  after the  account of  Finwe's marriage  to Indis
  there follows  the Debate  of the  Valar, although  that was  held before
  'the Statute of Finwe and Miriel' was promulgated. It is hard  to believe
  that my father can have intended this rather confusing structure, and the
  view that the work evolved as he wrote seems borne out by the title in A:
                                                                          
                  Of the marriage laws and customs of the                  
                      Eldar, their children, and other                     
                          matters touching thereon                         

  At  the  same  time  as  the  words   'AElfwine's  Preamble'   and  other
  corrections  in  red  ball-point  pen  were made  to the  manuscript (see
  above) he wrote in bold letters beneath the title: 'The Statute  of Finwe
  and Miriel' - almost as if this was to be the new title of the work  as a
  whole, although the original one was not struck out.                     
    The typescript B has the long title given at the beginning of  the text
  below;  the  text  in this  version ends  before the  story of  Finwe and
  Miriel  and  the  Debate  of  the  Valar  is   reached.  Why   my  father
  abandoned it  I cannot  say; perhaps  he was  merely interrupted  by some
  external cause, perhaps he was dissatisfied by its form.                 
                                                                          
    But all these questions are very secondary  to the  import of  the work
  itself: a  comprehensive (if  sometimes obscure,  and tantalising  in its
  obscurity)  declaration  of  his  thought  at  that  time  on fundamental
  aspects  of  the  nature  of  the Quendi,  distinguishing them  from Men:
  the power of the incarnate  fea (spirit)  in relation  to the  body; the
  'consuming'  of  the body  by the  fea; the  destiny of  Elvish spirits,
  ordained by Eru, 'to dwell in Arda for all the life of Arda'; the meaning
  of death for such beings,  and of  existence after  death; the  nature of
  Elvish  re-birth;  and  the  consequences  of  the  Marring  of  Arda  by
  Melkor.                                                                  
                                                                          
    There follows now the typescript version B so  far as  it goes.  At the
  end of the text (pp. 228 ff.) are  notes largely  limited to  the textual
  relations of the two versions; these are necessarily very  selective, and
  do  not  record the  very many  changes of  wording in  B that  modify or
  improve the expression without altering  the sense  of the  original text
  in any important way. B  itself was  scarcely changed  after it  had been
  typed; but a  pencilled note  on the  first page  reads 'For  hrondo read
  hroa', and this change was carried out in the greater  part of  the text.
  The  word  used  in  A  for  the body  was hron,  which became  hrondo in
  the course of the writing of the manuscript.                             
                                                                          
                   OF THE LAWS AND CUSTOMS AMONG THE ELDAR                 
    PERTAINING TO MARRIAGE AND OTHER MATTERS                               
    RELATED THERETO: TOGETHER WITH THE                                     
    STATUTE OF FINWE AND MIRIEL AND THE DEBATE                             
                         OF THE VALAR AT ITS MAKING.                       
                                                                          
  AElfwine's Preamble.                                                     
                                                                          
    [The  Eldar  grew  in  bodily  form  slower  than  Men,  but   in  mind
  more  swiftly.  They  learned  to  speak  before   they  were   one  year
  old;  and  in  the  same  time  they learned  to walk  and to  dance, for
  their  wills  came  soon  to  the  mastery  of their  bodies. Nonetheless
  there  was  less  difference   between  the   two  Kindreds,   Elves  and
  Men,   in  early   youth;  and   a  man   who  watched   elf-children  at

 play  might  well  have  believed  that  they  were the  children of
 Men,  of  some  fair  and  happy  people.  For  in their  early days
 elf-children delighted still in the world about  them, and  the fire
 of  their  spirit  had  not  consumed  them,   and  the   burden  of
 memory was still light upon them.(1)                                 
   This  same  watcher  might  indeed  have  wondered  at  the  small
 limbs  and stature  of these  children, judging  their age  by their
 skill in words and  grace in  motion. For  at the  end of  the third
 year mortal children began to  outstrip the  Elves, hastening  on to
 a  full  stature while  the Elves  lingered in  the first  spring of
 childhood.  Children  of  Men  might reach  their full  height while
 Eldar of  the same  age were  still in  body like  to mortals  of no
 more than seven years.(2) Not until the fiftieth year did  the Eldar
 attain  the  stature  and shape  in which  their lives  would after-
 wards  endure,  and  for  some  a  hundred  years would  pass before
 they were full-grown.]                                              
                                                                    
   The  Eldar  wedded  for  the  most  part in  their youth  and soon
 after their fiftieth  year. They  had few  children, but  these were
 very dear to  them. Their  families, or  houses, were  held together
 by love and a deep feeling  for kinship  in mind  and body;  and the
 children  needed  little  governing  or teaching.(3) There were sel-
 dom  more  than  four  children  in  any   house,  and   the  number
 grew less as ages passed; but even in days of  old, while  the Eldar
 were  still  few  and  eager  to  increase  their  kind,  Feanor was
 renowned  as  the  father of  seven sons,  and the  histories record
 none that surpassed him.(4)                                         
   The Eldar wedded once only in life, and for love  or at  the least
 by  free will  upon either  part. Even  when in  after days,  as the
 histories  reveal,  many  of  the   Eldar  in   Middle-earth  became
 corrupted,  and  their  hearts  darkened  by  the  shadow  that lies
 upon  Arda,  seldom  is  any  tale  told  of  deeds  of  lust  among
 them.(5)                                                            
   Marriage,  save for  rare ill  chances or  strange fates,  was the
 natural course of life for all the Eldar. It took place in this way.
 Those   who   would   afterwards   become   wedded    might   choose
 one  another  early  in  youth,  even as  children (and  indeed this
 happened  often  in  days of  peace); but  unless they  desired soon
 to be married and  were of  fitting age,  the betrothal  awaited the
 judgement of the parents of either party.                           
   In  due  time  the  betrothal was  announced at  a meeting  of the
 two  houses  concerned,(6) and the betrothed  gave silver  rings one

 to another. According to the laws of the  Eldar this  betrothal was
 bound then to stand for one year at least, and  it often  stood for
 longer. During this time  it could  be revoked  by a  public return
 of the rings, the rings then being molten and not again used  for a
 betrothal.  Such  was  the  law;  but  the  right  of  revoking was
 seldom  used,  for the  Eldar do  not err  lightly in  such choice.
 They are not easily deceived by their own  kind; and  their spirits
 being  masters  of  their  bodies,  they are  seldom swayed  by the
 desires  of  the  body  only,  but  are  by  nature  continent  and
 steadfast.                                                        
   Nonetheless  among  the  Eldar,  even  in  Aman,  the  desire for
 marriage  was  not  always  fulfilled.  Love  was  not  always  re-
 turned;  and  more  than  one  might desire  one other  for spouse.
 Concerning  this,  the  only  cause  by  which  sorrow  entered the
 bliss of Aman,  the Valar  were in  doubt. Some  held that  it came
 from  the  marring  of  Arda,  and  from  the  Shadow  under  which
 the  Eldar  awoke;  for  thence  only  (they  said) comes  grief or
 disorder.  Some  held  that  it  came  of love  itself, and  of the
 freedom  of  each  fea, and  was a  mystery of  the nature  of the
 Children of Eru.                                                  
   After the betrothal it was the part of  the betrothed  to appoint
 the  time  of their  wedding, when  at least  one year  had passed.
 Then  at  a feast, again (7) shared by the two houses, the marriage
 was celebrated. At the end of the feast the betrothed  stood forth,
 and  the  mother  of  the bride  and the  father of  the bridegroom
 joined the hands of the pair  and blessed  them. For  this blessing
 there was a solemn form,  but no  mortal has  heard it;  though the
 Eldar  say  that  Varda  was  named  in witness  by the  mother and
 Manwe  by  the  father;  and  moreover  that  the  name of  Eru was
 spoken  (as  was  seldom  done  at any  other time).  The betrothed
 then  received  back  one from  the other  their silver  rings (and
 treasured  them);  but  they  gave  in  exchange  slender  rings of
 gold, which were worn upon the index of the right hand.           
   Among  the  Noldor  also  it  was  a  custom  that   the  bride's
 mother  should  give  to  the bridegroom  a jewel  upon a  chain or
 collar; and the bridegroom's father should give a like gift  to the
 bride. These  gifts were  sometimes given  before the  feast. (Thus
 the  gift  of  Galadriel  to  Aragorn,  since she  was in  place of
 Arwen's  mother,  was  in  part a  bridal gift  and earnest  of the
 wedding that was later accomplished.)                             
   But  these  ceremonies  were  not  rites  necessary  to marriage;
 they were only a gracious  mode by  which the  love of  the parents

 was  manifested,(8) and   the   union   was   recognized   which  would
 join  not  only the  betrothed but  their two  houses together.  It was
 the  act  of  bodily  union  that  achieved  marriage, and  after which
 the  indissoluble  bond  was  complete.  In  happy  days  and  times of
 peace  it  was  held  ungracious  and  contemptuous  of  kin  to  forgo
 the  ceremonies,  but  it  was  at  all  times  lawful  for any  of the
 Eldar,  both  being  unwed,  to  marry  thus  of  free  consent  one to
 another  without   ceremony  or   witness  (save   blessings  exchanged
 and  the  naming  of  the  Name);  and  the union  so joined  was alike
 indissoluble.  In  days  of  old, in  times of  trouble, in  flight and
 exile and wandering, such marriages were often made.(9)                
   As  for  the  begetting  and  bearing  of  children:  a  year  passes
 between  the  begetting  and  the birth  of an  elf-child, so  that the
 days  of  both  are  the  same  or  nearly  so,  and it  is the  day of
 begetting  that  is  remembered  year  by  year.  For  the   most  part
 these days come  in the  Spring. It  might be  thought that,  since the
 Eldar  do  not  (as  Men  deem)  grow  old  in  body,  they  may  bring
 forth children at any time in the ages of their lives. But this  is not
 so.  For the  Eldar do  indeed grow  older, even  if slowly:  the limit
 of  their  lives  is the  life of  Arda, which  though long  beyond the
 reckoning  of  Men  is  not  endless,  and  ages  also.  Moreover their
 body  and  spirit  are  not separated  but coherent.  As the  weight of
 the  years,  with  all  their  changes of  desire and  thought, gathers
 upon  the  spirit  of  the  Eldar,  so  do  the  impulses and  moods of
 their  bodies  change.  This  the  Eldar  mean   when  they   speak  of
 their  spirits  consuming them;  and they  say that  ere Arda  ends all
 the  Eldalie  on  earth  will  have  become  as  spirits  invisible  to
 mortal  eyes,  unless  they  will  to  be  seen   by  some   among  Men
 into whose minds they may enter directly.(10)                          
   Also  the Eldar  say that  in the  begetting, and  still more  in the
 bearing  of children,  greater share  and strength  of their  being, in
 mind  and  in  body,  goes  forth   than  in   the  making   of  mortal
 children.  For  these  reasons  it   came  to   pass  that   the  Eldar
 brought  forth  few  children;  and  also  that  their time  of genera-
 tion  was  in  their  youth or  earlier life,  unless strange  and hard
 fates  befell   them.  But   at  whatever   age  they   married,  their
 children  were  born  within  a  short  space  of  years   after  their
 wedding.'  For  with  regard  to  generation  the  power  and  the will
                                                                       
   ' Short as the Eldar reckoned time. In mortal  count there  was often
 a long interval between the wedding and the first child-birth, and even
 longer between child and child.                                        

 are  not  among  the  Eldar  distinguishable.  Doubtless  they would
 retain  for  many  ages  the power  of generation,  if the  will and
 desire  were  not  satisfied;  but  with the  exercise of  the power
 the desire  soon ceases, and the mind turns to other things.(11) The
 union  of love  is indeed  to them  great delight  and joy,  and the
 'days of the children', as they  call them,  remain in  their memory
 as  the  most  merry in  life; but  they have  many other  powers of
 body and of mind which their nature urges them to fulfil.           
   Thus,  although  the  wedded  remain  so  for  ever,  they  do not
 necessarily  dwell  or  house  together  at  all times;  for without
 considering  the  chances  and  separations of  evil days,  wife and
 husband,  albeit  united,  remain  persons  individual  having  each
 gifts of mind and  body that  differ. Yet  it would  seem to  any of
 the  Eldar  a  grievous  thing  if  a  wedded  pair   were  sundered
 during  the bearing  of a  child, or  while the  first years  of its
 childhood   lasted.  For   which  reason   the  Eldar   would  beget
 children only in days of happiness and peace if they could.         
                                                                    
   In  all  such  things, not  concerned with  the bringing  forth of
 children, the neri and nissi (12) (that is, the men and women) of the
 Eldar are equal - unless it be in this (as they themselves say) that
 for the nissi the making of things new  is for  the most  part shown
 in the forming of their children,  so that  invention and  change is
 otherwise  mostly  brought  about  by  the  neri.  There  are,  how-
 ever,  no matters  which among  the Eldar  only a  ner can  think or
 do,  or  others  with  which  only  a  nis  is concerned.  There are
 indeed  some differences  between the  natural inclinations  of neri
 and  nissi,  and  other  differences that  have been  established by
 custom (varying in place and in time,  and in  the several  races of
 the Eldar). For instance, the arts of healing, and all  that touches
 on the care  of the  body, are  among all  the Eldar  most practised
 by  the  nissi;  whereas  it  was  the  elven-men  who bore  arms at
 need.  And  the  Eldar  deemed  that  the  dealing  of  death,  even
 when   lawful   or   under  necessity,   diminished  the   power  of
 healing, and that the virtue  of the  nissi in  this matter  was due
 rather  to  their  abstaining  from  hunting  or  war  than  to  any
 special  power  that  went  with  their  womanhood.  Indeed  in dire
 straits or desperate defence, the nissi fought valiantly,  and there
 was  less  difference in  strength and  speed between  elven-men and
 elven-women  that   had  not   borne  child   than  is   seen  among
 mortals.  On  the  other  hand  many  elven-men  were  great healers
 and  skilled  in  the  lore  of  living  bodies,  though   such  men

           
                                                                         
 abstained from hunting, and went not to war until the last need.         
   As  for  other  matters,   we  may   speak  of   the  customs   of  the
 Noldor   (of   whom   most   is   known   in  Middle-earth).   Among  the
 Noldor  it  may  be  seen  that  the  making  of  bread  is  done  mostly
 by   women;   and  the   making  of   the  lembas   is  by   ancient  law
 reserved  to  them.  Yet  the  cooking  and  preparing  of other  food is
 generally  a  task  and  pleasure  of  men.  The  nissi  are  more  often
 skilled  in  the  tending  of  fields  and   gardens,  in   playing  upon
 instruments  of  music,  and  in   the  spinning,   weaving,  fashioning,
 and  adornment  of  all  threads  and  cloths;  and  in  matters  of lore
 they  love  most the  histories of  the Eldar  and of  the houses  of the
 Noldor;  and  all  matters  of  kinship  and  descent  are  held  by them
 in  memory.  But  the  neri  are  more  skilled  as  smiths  and wrights,
 as  carvers  of wood  and stone,  and as  jewellers. It  is they  for the
 most   part   who    compose   musics    and   make    the   instruments,
 or  devise  new  ones;  they  are  the  chief   poets  and   students  of
 languages   and   inventors   of   words.   Many   of  them   delight  in
 forestry  and in  the lore  of the  wild, seeking  the friendship  of all
 things  that  grow  or  live  there  in  freedom.  But all  these things,
 and  other  matters  of  labour   and  play,   or  of   deeper  knowledge
 concerning  being  and  the  life   of  the   World,  may   at  different
 times  be   pursued  by   any  among   the  Noldor,   be  they   neri  or
 nissi.                                                                   
                                                                         
                                OF NAMING.                                
                                                                         
 This   is   the   manner   in   which   the   naming   of   children  was
 achieved   among   the   Noldor.   Soon   after   birth  the   child  was
 named.  It  was  the  right  of the  father to  devise this  first name,(13)
 and  he  it  was  that  announced   it  to   the  child's   kindred  upon
 either  side.  It  was  called,  therefore,   the  father-name,   and  it
 stood  first,  if  other  names  were   afterwards  added.   It  remained
 unaltered,* for it lay not in the choice of the child.                   
   But   every   child   among   the  Noldor   (in  which   point,  maybe,
 they  differed  from  the  other  Eldar)  had  also  the  right  to  name
 himself   or   herself.   Now  the   first  ceremony,   the  announcement
 of   the   father-name,   was   called    the   Essecarme     or   'Name-
 making'.  Later  there  was  another   ceremony  called   the  Essecilme 
 or  'Name-choosing'.  This  took  place  at  no  fixed  date   after  the
                                                                         
 (* Save  for  such  changes  as  might  befall  its  spoken  form  in the
 passing of the long years; for (as is elsewhere told) even the tongues of
 the Eldar were subject to change.)                                       

                           
                                                                         
  Essecarme,  but  could  not  take  place  before  the  child  was deemed
  ready  and  capable  of  lamatyave,  as  the Noldor  called it:  that is,
  of  individual  pleasure  in  the   sounds  and   forms  of   words.  The
  Noldor  were  of  all  the   Eldar  the   swiftest  in   acquiring  word-
  mastery;  but  even  among  them   few  before   at  least   the  seventh
  year  had  become  fully  aware  of  their  own   individual  lamatyave,
  or  had  gained  a  complete  mastery  of  the  inherited   language  and
  its structure, so as to express this tyave skilfully within  its limits.
  The  Essecilme,  therefore,  the  object  of  which  was  the expression
  of  this  personal  characteristic,'  usually  took  place  at  or  about
  the end of the tenth year.                                              
      In   elder   times   the   'Chosen   Name',   or  second   name,  was
  usually   freshly   devised,   and   though   framed  according   to  the
  structure  of  the  language  of  the  day,  it  often  had  no  previous
  significance.  In  later  ages,  when  there  was  a  great  abundance of
  names   already   in  existence,   it  was   more  often   selected  from
  names  that  were   known.  But   even  so   some  modification   of  the
  old name might be made.(14)                                            
      Now   both   these   names,   the   father-name   and    the   chosen
  name,   were   'true   names',   not   nicknames;  but   the  father-name
  was  public,   and  the   chosen  name   was  private,   especially  when
  used  alone.  Private,  not  secret.  The  chosen  names   were  regarded
  by  the  Noldor  as  part of  their personal  property, like  (say) their
  rings,  cups,  or  knives,   or  other   possessions  which   they  could
  lend,  or  share  with  kindred  and  friends,  but  which  could  not be
  taken   without  leave.   The  use   of  the   chosen  name,   except  by
  members  of  the  same  house  (parents,  sisters,  and   brothers),  was
  a   token   of   closest   intimacy   and   love,   when   permitted.  It
  was,   therefore,   presumptuous   or   insulting   to  use   it  without
  permission.**(15)                                                       
      Since,   however,   the   Eldar  were   by  nature   immortal  within
  Arda,  but  were  by  no  means  changeless,  after  a  time   one  might
  wish  for  a  new  name.+(16) He  might  then  devise  for  himself  a  new
  chosen  name.  But  this  did  not  abrogate   the  former   name,  which
                                                                         
      (* This  lamatyave   was  held  a  mark  of  individuality,  and more
  important indeed than others, such  as stature,  colour, and  features of
  face.                                                                   
                                                                         
  (**  This sentiment had thus nothing to do with 'magic' or with         
  taboos, such as are found among Men.)                                   
                                                                         
    (+ The Eldar hold that, apart from ill chances and the destruction of
    their bodies, they may in the course of their years each exercise and)

 remained  part  of  the   'full  title'   of  any   Noldo:  that   is  the
 sequence  of  all  the  names  that  had  been  acquired  in   the  course
 of life.(17)                                                              
   These   deliberate   changes   of   chosen   name  were   not  frequent.
 'There  was  another  source  of  the  variety  of  names  borne   by  any
 one  of  the  Eldar,  which  in  the  reading  of  their histories  may to
 us  seem  bewildering.  This  was  found  in  the  Anessi:  the  given (or
 added)   names.   Of  these   the  most   important  were   the  so-called
 'mother-names'.(18) Mothers  often   gave   to   their   children  special
 names   of  their   own  choosing.   The  most   notable  of   these  were
 the  'names  of  insight',  essi tercenye,  or of  'foresight', apacenye.
 In  the   hour  of   birth,  or   on  some   other  occasion   of  moment,
 the   mother   might   give  a   name  to   her  child,   indicating  some
 dominant   feature  of   its  nature   as  perceived   by  her,   or  some
 foresight  of  its  special   fate.'  These   names  had   authority,  and
 were   regarded   as   true   names   when   solemnly   given,   and  were
 public   not   private  if   placed  (as   was  sometimes   done)  immedi-
 ately after the father-name.                                              
   All   other   'given   names'   were   not   true   names,   and  indeed
 might   not   be   recognized   by   the   person   to   whom   they  were
 applied,  unless  they  were  actually   adopted  or   self-given.  Names,
 or   nicknames,   of   this   kind   might   be   given  by   anyone,  not
 necessarily  by  members  of  the  same  house  or   kin,  in   memory  of
 some  deed,   or  event,   or  in   token  of   some  marked   feature  of
 body  or  mind.  They  were  seldom  included  in  the  'full  title', but
 when  they  were,  because  of  their  wide  use   and  fame,   they  were
 set  at  the   end  in   some  form   such  as   this:  'by   some  called
 Telcontar'   (that  is   Strider);  or   'sometimes  known   as  Mormacil'
 (that is Blacksword).                                                     
                                                                          
 enjoy all the varied talents of their kind, whether of  skill or  of lore,
 though  in different  order and  in different  degrees. With  such changes
 of  'mind-mood'  or  inwisti  their  lamatyaver  might  also  change.  But
 such  changes  or  progressions  were in  fact seen  most among  the neri,
 for  the  nissi,  even  as  they  came sooner  to maturity,  remained then
 more  steadfast  and  were  less  desirous  of  change. [According  to the
 Eldar,  the  only  'character'  of  any  person  that  was not  subject to
 change was the difference of sex. For this  they held  to belong  not only
 to the body (hrondo) [> (hroa)]  but also  to the  mind (inno)  [> (indo)]
 equally: that is,  to the  person as  a whole.  This person  or individual
 they often called esse' (that is 'name'), but it was also called erde, or
 'singularity'.  Those  who  returned  from  Mandos,  therefore,  after the
 death of their first body, returned  always to  the same  name and  to the
 same sex as formerly.]                                                    

     The  amilessi  tercenye,  or  mother-names  of  insight,  had  a high
  position,  and  in  general  use  sometimes  replaced,  both  within the
  family   and   without,   the  father-name   and  chosen   name,  though
  the  father-name  (and  the  chosen  among  those  of  the   Eldar  that
  had  the  custom   of  the   essecilme)  remained   ever  the   true  or
  primary  name,  and  a  necessary   part  of   any  'full   title'.  The
  'names  of  insight'  were more  often given  in the  early days  of the
  Eldar,  and  in  that  time  they  came  more  readily into  public use,
  because  it  was  then still  the custom  for the  father-name of  a son
  to  be a  modification of  the father's  name (as  Finwe' I  Curufinwe)
  or  a  patronymic  (as   Finwion  'son   of  Finwe').   The  father-name
  of  a  daughter  would  likewise  often  be  derived  from  the  name of
  the mother.                                                             
     Renowned  examples   of  these   things  are   found  in   the  early
  histories.  Thus  Finwe,  first  lord  of  the  Noldor, first  named his
  eldest  son  Finwion;(20) but later when  his  talent  was revealed this
  was  modified  to  Curufinwe.(21) But  the  name  of  insight  which his
  mother  Miriel  gave  to  him  in  the  hour   of  birth   was  Feanaro
  'Spirit  of  Fire';*  and  by  this  name  he became  known to  all, and
  he is so called in all the histories. (It is said that he also took this
  name  as  his  chosen   name,  in   honour  of   his  mother,   whom  he
  never  saw.)(22) Elwe, lord of  the  Teleri,   became  widely   known by
  the   anesse   or   given   name   Sindicollo  'Greycloak',   and  hence
  later,  in  the  changed  form  of  the Sindarin  tongue, he  was called
  Elu  Thingol.  Thingol  indeed  was  the  name  most  used  for  him  by
  others,  though  Elu  or  Elu-thingol  remained his  right title  in his
  own realm.                                                              
                                                                         
                     OF DEATH AND THE SEVERANCE OF FEA                    
                           AND HRONDO [> HROA].(23)                       
                                                                         
  It  must  be  understood  that  what  has   yet  been   said  concerning
  Eldarin  marriage  refers  to  its right  course and  nature in  a world
  unmarred,   or   to   the   manners   of   those   uncorrupted   by  the
  Shadow  and  to  days  of  peace   and  order.   But  nothing,   as  has
  been  said,  utterly  avoids  the   Shadow  upon   Arda  or   is  wholly
  unmarred,  so  as  to  proceed  unhindered   upon  its   right  courses.
  In  the  Elder  Days,  and  in  the  ages  before  the Dominion  of Men,
  there  were  times   of  great   trouble  and   many  griefs   and  evil
                                                                         
   (* Though  the  form  Feanor  which  it  took later  in the  speech of
  Beleriand  is  more  often  used.  [>  (later)  Though the  form Feanor,
  which  is  more  often  used,  was  a  blend  of  Q[uenya]  Feanaro and
  S[indarin] Faenor.])                                                    

                                                                  
                                                                     
 chances; and Death (24) afflicted all the  Eldar, as it did all other
 living things in Arda save the Valar  only: for  the visible  form of
 the  Valar  proceeds from  their own  will and  with regard  to their
 true being is to be  likened rather  to the  chosen raiment  of Elves
 and Men than to their bodies.                                        
   Now  the  Eldar  are  immortal  within  Arda  according   to  their
 right nature. But if a fea (or spirit) indwells in and  coheres with
 a hrondo [> hroa]  (or bodily  form) that  is not  of its  own choice
 but  ordained,  and  is  made  of  the  flesh  or  substance  of Arda
 itself,(25) then the fortune of this  union must be vulnerable by the
 evils that  do hurt  to Arda,  even if  that union  be by  nature and
 purpose permanent. For in spite  of this  union, which  is of  such a
 kind   that   according   to   unmarred   nature  no   living  person
 incarnate  may  be  without  a fea,  nor without  a hrondo  [> hroa],
 yet  fea  and  hrondo  [>  hroa]  are  not  the  same   things;  and
 though  the   fea  cannot   be  broken   or  disintegrated   by  any
 violence  from  without,  the  hrondo  [>  hroa]  can  be   hurt  and
 may be utterly destroyed.                                            
   If  then  the  hrondo  [>  hroa]  be  destroyed,  or  so  hurt that
 it ceases to  have health,  sooner or  later it  'dies'. That  is: it
 becomes painful for the fea to dwell in it, being neither a  help to
 life and will nor a delight to use, so that the fea departs from it,
 and its function being at an end  its coherence  is unloosed,  and it
 returns  again  to  the  general  hron  [>  orma] of Arda.(26) Then the
 fea is, as it  were, houseless,  and it  becomes invisible  to bodily
 eyes  (though  clearly  perceptible  by  direct  awareness  to  other
 fear).                                                              
   This  destruction  of  the hrondo  [> hroa],  causing death  or the
 unhousing  of  the  fea,  was  soon  experienced  by   the  immortal
 Eldar,  when  they  awoke  in  the  marred  and   overshadowed  realm
 of  Arda.  Indeed  in  their  earlier days  death came  more readily;
 for  their  bodies  were  then less different (27) from the bodies of
 Men,  and  the  command  of  their  spirits  over  their  bodies less
 complete.                                                            
   This  command  was,  nonetheless,  at  all  times  greater  than it
 has  ever   been  among   Men.  From   their  beginnings   the  chief
 difference  between  Elves  and  Men lay  in the  fate and  nature of
 their spirits. The fear of the Elves were destined to dwell  in Arda
 for  all  the  life  of  Arda,  and the  death of  the flesh  did not
 abrogate that destiny. Their  fear were  tenacious therefore  of life
 'in the raiment  of Arda',  and far  excelled the  spirits of  Men in
 power over  that  'raiment', even from the first days (28) protecting

  
                                                                     
  their  bodies  from  many ills  and assaults  (such as  disease), and
  healing  them  swiftly  of  injuries,  so  that  they  recovered from
  wounds that would have proved fatal to Men.                         
    As  ages  passed  the  dominance  of  their  fear  ever  increased,
  'consuming'  their  bodies  (as  has  been noted). The end of this
  process  is  their  'fading',  as Men  have called  it; for  the body
  becomes at last, as  it were,  a mere  memory held  by the  fea; and
  that  end  has  already  been  achieved  in  many regions  of Middle-
  earth,  so  that  the  Elves  are  indeed  deathless  and may  not be
  destroyed or changed.(30) Thus it  is that  the further  we go  back in
  the histories, the more often do we read  of the  death of  the Elves
  of  old;  and  in  the  days  when  the  minds  of  the  Eldalie were
  young  and  not  yet  fully   awake  death   among  them   seemed  to
  differ little from the death of Men.                                
    What  then  happened  to  the  houseless fea?  The answer  to this
  question  the  Elves  did  not  know  by  nature. In  their beginning
  (so they report) they believed, or guessed,  that they  'entered into
  Nothing',  and  ended  like  other  living  things  that  they  knew,
  even  as  a  tree  that was  felled and  burned. Others  guessed more
  darkly  that  they  passed  into 'the  Realm of  Night' and  into the
  power  of  the  'Lord  of  Night'.(31) These  opinions  were  plainly
  derived  from  the  Shadow  under  which  they  awoke;  and   it  was
  to  deliver  them  from  this  shadow  upon  their  minds,  more even
  than  from  the dangers  of Arda  marred, that  the Valar  desired to
  bring them to the light of Aman.                                    
    It  was  in  Aman that  they learned  of Manwe  that each  fea was
  imperishable  within  the  life  of Arda,  and that  its fate  was to
  inhabit  Arda  to  its  end.  Those  fear,  therefore,  that  in the
  marring   of  Arda   suffered  unnaturally   a  divorce   from  their
  hrondor  [>  hroar]  remained  still  in  Arda  and  in Time.  But in
  this  state  they  were open  to the  direct instruction  and command
  of   the  Valar.   As  soon   as  they   were  disbodied   they  were
  summoned  to  leave  the places  of their  life and  death and  go to
  the 'Halls of Waiting': Mandos, in the realm of the Valar.          
    If   they   obeyed   this   summons  different   opportunities  lay
  before  them.(32) The  length  of  time  that  they  dwelt   in  Waiting
  was  partly  at  the  will  of  Namo  the  Judge,  lord   of  Mandos,
  partly  at their  own will.  The happiest  fortune, they  deemed, was
  after the Waiting to be re-born, for so the evil and grief  that they
  had  suffered in  the curtailment  of their  natural course  might be
  redressed.                                                          

                                                         
                                                                     
          OF RE-BIRTH AND OTHER DOOMS OF THOSE                        
                   THAT GO TO MANDOS.(33)                             
                                                                     
 Now the Eldar hold that to each elf-child  a new  fea is  given, not
 akin  to the  fear of  the parents  (save in  belonging to  the same
 order and nature); and this fea either did  not exist  before birth,
 or is the fea of one that is re-born.                               
  The  new  fea,  and  therefore  in  their  beginning all  fear, they
 believe  to  come  direct  from  Eru  and  from beyond  Ea. Therefore
 many of them hold that it  cannot be  asserted that  the fate  of the
 Elves is to be confined within Arda for  ever and  with it  to cease.
 This  last  opinion  they  draw  from  their  own  thought,  for  the
 Valar, having had no part  in the  devising of  the Children  of Eru,
 do  not  know  fully  the purposes  of Eru  concerning them,  nor the
 final ends that he prepares for them.                                
  But  they  did  not  reach  these  opinions   at  once   or  without
 dissent.  In  their  youth,  while  their  knowledge  and  experience
 were  small  and they  had not  yet received  the instruction  of the
 Valar (or had not yet fully understood it), many  still held  that in
 the  creation  of  their  kind  Eru  had  committed  this   power  to
 them: to  beget children  in all  ways like  to themselves,  body and
 indwelling spirit; and that therefore the fea of  a child  came from
 its parents as did its hrondo.(34)                                   
  Yet  always  some  dissented,  saying:   'Indeed  a   living  person
 may  resemble  the  parents  and  be  perceived  as  a  blending,  in
 various  degrees,  of  these  two;  but  this  resemblance   is  most
 reasonably related to  the hrondo.  It is  strongest and  clearest in
 early  youth,  while  the  body  is  dominant   and  most   like  the
 bodies of its parents.' (This is true of all elf-children.)(35) 'Where-
 as  in  all  children,  though  in  some  it may  be more  marked and
 sooner  apparent,  there  is  a part  of character  not to  be under-
 stood  from  parentage,  to which  it may  indeed be  quite contrary.
 This difference is most reasonably  attributed to  the fea,  new and
 not  akin  to the  parents; for  it becomes  clearer and  stronger as
 life proceeds and the fea increases in mastery.'                    
  Later  when  the  Elves  became  aware  of  re-birth  this  argument
 was  added:  'If  the fear  of children  were normally  derived from
 the  parents  and  akin  to  them, then  re-birth would  be unnatural
 and  unjust.  For  it  would  deprive  the  second  parents,  without
 consent, of one half of their parentage, intruding  into their  kin a
 child half alien.'                                                   
  Nonetheless,  the  older  opinion  was  not  wholly  void.  For  all

                                          
                                                                             
  the  Eldar,  being  aware  of  it  in  themselves,  spoke  of   the  passing
  of  much  strength,  both  of  mind  and  of  body,  into   their  children,
  in   bearing   and   begetting.   Therefore   they   hold  that   the  fea,
  though   unbegotten,   draws   nourishment    from   the    parents   before
  the  birth  of  the  child:  directly  from  the  fea  of the  mother while
  she   bears   and   nourishes   the  hrondo,   and  mediately   but  equally
  from  the  father,  whose  fea  is  bound  in   union  with   the  mother's
  and supports it.                                                            
       It  was  for this  reason that  all parents  desired to  dwell together
  during  the  year  of  bearing,  and  regarded   separation  at   that  time
  as  a  grief  and  injury,  depriving  the  child  of   some  part   of  its
  fathering.  'For,'  said  they,  'though  the  union  of  the  fear  of the
  wedded  is  not  broken  by  distance  of  place,  yet  in   creatures  that
  live  as  spirits  embodied  fea  communes  with  fea  in  full  only when
  the bodies dwell together.'                                                 
                                                                             
       A  houseless  fea  that  chose  or  was permitted  to return  to life
  re-entered   the   incarnate   world   through   child-birth.   Only   thus
  could  it  return.(*) For  it  is  plain  that  the  provision  of  a bodily
  house   for   a   fea,   and   the   union   of   fea  with   hrondo,  was
  committed  by  Eru  to  the  Children,  to  be  achieved  in  the   act  of
  begetting.                                                                  
                                                                             
       As  for  this  re-birth,  it  was  not  an   opinion,  but   known  and
  certain.   For   the   fea   re-born  became   a  child   indeed,  enjoying
  once   more    all   the    wonder   and    newness   of    childhood;   but
  slowly,  and  only  after  it  had  acquired  a   knowledge  of   the  world
  and  mastery  of   itself,  its   memory  would   awake;  until,   when  the
  re-born  elf  was  full-grown,  it recalled  all its  former life,  and then
  the  old   life,  and   the  'waiting',   and  the   new  life   became  one
  ordered   history   and   identity.   This   memory   would   thus   hold  a
  double   joy   of   childhood,   and  also   an  experience   and  knowledge
  greater  than  the  years  of  its  body.  In  this  way  the   violence  or
  grief  that  the  re-born  had   suffered  was   redressed  and   its  being
                                                                             
      (* Save in rare and strange cases: that is, where the body that the fea
  had  forsaken  was  whole,  and  remained  still  coherent   and  incorrupt.
  But  this  could  seldom  happen;  for  death  unwilling  could  occur  only
  when  great  violence  was  done to  the body;  and in  death by  will, such
  as  at times  befell because  of utter  weariness or  great grief,  the fea
  would not desire  to return,  until the  body, deserted  by the  spirit, was
  dissolved.  This  happened  swiftly  in  Middle-earth.  In  Aman   only  was
  there  no  decay. Thus  Miriel was  there rehoused  in her  own body,  as is
  hereafter told.)                                                            

                     
                                                                                 
 was  enriched.   For  the   Re-born  are   twice  nourished,   and  twice        
 parented,*   and  have   two  memories   of  the   joy  of   awaking  and      
 discovering  the  world  of  living  and  the  splendour  of  Arda. Their        
 life  is,  therefore,  as  if  a  year  had  two  springs  and  though an        
 untimely  frost  followed  after  the  first, the  second spring  and all        
 the summer after were fairer and more blessed.                                   
  The  Eldar  say  that  more  than  one  re-birth  is   seldom  recorded.        
 But  the  reasons  for  this  they  do not  fully know.  Maybe, it  is so        
 ordered  by  the  will  of  Eru;  while  the   Re-born  (they   say)  are        
 stronger,  having  greater  mastery  of  their  bodies  and   being  more        
 patient  of  griefs.  But  many,  doubtless,  that  have  twice  died  do        
 not wish to return.(36)                                                          
                                                                                 
  Re-birth  is  not  the  only  fate  of  the  houseless fear.  The Shadow        
 upon  Arda  caused  not  only  misfortune  and  injury  to  the  body. It        
 could   corrupt  the   mind;  and   those  among   the  Eldar   who  were        
 darkened   in   spirit  did   unnatural  deeds,   and  were   capable  of        
 hatred   and   malice.   Not   all   who   died    suffered   innocently.        
 Moreover,  some  fear   in  grief   or  weariness   gave  up   hope,  and        
 turning   away  from   life  relinquished   their  bodies,   even  though        
 these  might  have  been  healed  or  were  indeed   unhurt.+(37) Few  of        
 these latter desired  to be  re-born, not  at least  until they  had been        
 long   in   'waiting';   some   never  returned.   Of  the   others,  the        
 wrong-doers,  many   were  held   long  in   'waiting',  and   some  were        
 not permitted to take up their lives again.                                      
  For  there  was,  for  all  the  fear of  the Dead,  a time  of Waiting,        
 in   which,   howsoever   they   had    died,   they    were   corrected,        
 instructed,  strengthened,  or  comforted,   according  to   their  needs        
 or  deserts.  If  they  would  consent  to  this.  But  the  fea  in its        
 nakedness   is   obdurate,   and   remains   long   in  the   bondage  of        
 its memory and old purposes (especially if these were evil).                     
  Those  who  were  healed  could   be  re-born,   if  they   desired  it:        
                                                                                 
 (* In some cases a fea re-born might  have the  same parents  again. For        
 instance, if its first body had died in early youth. But this did not often      
 happen; neither did a fea necessarily  re-enter its  own former  kin, for        
 often a great length of  time passed  before it  wished or  was permitted        
 to return.)                                                                      
                                                                                 
 (+ Though the  griefs  might  be  great and  wholly unmerited,  and death        
 (or  rather  the abandonment  of life)  might be,  therefore, understand-        
 able and innocent, it was held that the refusal to return to  life, after        
 repose in Mandos,  was a  fault, showing  a weakness  or lack  of courage        
 in the fea.)                                                                    

 none  are  re-born  or  sent  back  into  life  unwilling.   The  others
 remained,  by  desire  or  command,  fear   unbodied,  and   they  could
 only  observe  the  unfolding  of  the  Tale of  Arda from  afar, having
 no  effect  therein.  For  it  was  a  doom  of  Mandos that  only those
 who  took  up  life  again  might  operate  in  Arda,  or  commune  with
 the  fear  of  the  Living,  even with  those that  had once  been dear
 to them.(38)                                                            
   Concerning  the  fate  of  other  elves,   especially  of   the  Dark-
 elves  who  refused  the  summons  to  Aman,  the  Eldar   know  little.
 The  Re-born  report  that  in   Mandos  there   are  many   elves,  and
 among  them  many of the Alamanyar,(39) but that   there  is   in  the
 Halls   of   Waiting  little   mingling  or   communing  of   kind  with
 kind,  or  indeed  of  any  one  fea  with  another. For  the houseless
 fea  is  solitary  by  nature,  and  turns  only  towards   those  with
 whom, maybe, it formed strong bonds of love in life.                    
                                                                        
   The  fea  is  single,  and  in  the  last  impregnable.  It  cannot be
 brought   to   Mandos.   It   is   summoned;   and   the   summons  pro-
 ceeds  from  just  authority,  and   is  imperative;   yet  it   may  be
 refused.   Among   those   who   refused   the   summons    (or   rather
 invitation)  of  the  Valar to  Aman in  the first  years of  the Elves,
 refusal  of  the  summons  to  Mandos  and  the  Halls  of  Waiting  is,
 the  Eldar  say,  frequent. It  was less  frequent, however,  in ancient
 days,  while  Morgoth  was  in  Arda,  or   his  servant   Sauron  after
 him;  for  then  the  fea  unbodied  would  flee   in  terror   of  the
 Shadow  to  any  refuge  -  unless  it  were  already  committed  to the
 Darkness   and   passed  then   into  its   dominion.  In   like  manner
 even  of  the  Eldar  some   who  had   become  corrupted   refused  the
 summons,   and   then   had   little  power   to  resist   the  counter-
 summons of Morgoth.                                                     
   But  it  would  seem  that  in  these  after-days  more  and  more  of
 the  Elves,  be  they  of  the  Eldalie in  origin or  be they  of other
 kinds,  who   linger  in   Middle-earth  now   refuse  the   summons  of
 Mandos,   and   wander   houseless   in   the   world,*   unwilling   to
 leave it (40) and unable  to  inhabit  it,  haunting  trees or  springs or
 hidden  places  that  once they  knew. Not  all of  these are  kindly or
                                                                        
 (* For  only  those  who  willingly  go  to   Mandos  may   be  re-born.
 Re-birth is a grace, and comes of the  power that  Eru committed  to the
 Valar for the ruling of Arda and the redress of its marring. It does not
 lie in the power of any  fea in  itself. Only  those return  whom, after
 Mandos has spoken the doom of release, Manwe and Varda bless.)          

 unstained  by  the  Shadow.  Indeed  the  refusal  of the  summons is
 in itself a sign of taint.                                          
   It  is  therefore  a foolish  and perilous  thing, besides  being a
 wrong  deed  forbidden  justly by  the appointed  Rulers of  Arda, if
 the  Living   seek  to   commune  with   the  Unbodied,   though  the
 houseless  may  desire  it,  especially   the  most   unworthy  among
 them.  For  the  Unbodied,  wandering  in  the  world, are  those who
 at the least have refused the door of life and  remain in  regret and
 self-pity.  Some  are  filled with  bitterness, grievance,  and envy.
 Some  were  enslaved  by  the  Dark  Lord  and  do  his  work  still,
 though  he  himself is  gone. They  will not  speak truth  or wisdom.
 To call  on them  is folly.  To attempt  to master  them and  to make
 them  servants  of  one  own's  will  is  wickedness.  Such practices
 are  of  Morgoth;  and  the necromancers  are of  the host  of Sauron
 his servant.                                                        
   Some  say  that  the  Houseless  desire  bodies,  though  they  are
 not  willing  to  seek  them  lawfully  by  submission to  the judge-
 ment  of  Mandos.  The  wicked  among  them  will  take   bodies,  if
 they  can,  unlawfully.  The  peril  of   communing  with   them  is,
 therefore, not only the peril of being deluded by fantasies  or lies:
 there  is  peril  also  of  destruction.  For   one  of   the  hungry
 Houseless, if it is  admitted to  the friendship  of the  Living, may
 seek to eject the fea from its body; and in the contest  for mastery
 the  body may  be gravely  injured, even  if it  he not  wrested from
 its  rightful  habitant.  Or  the  Houseless  may plead  for shelter,
 and if it is admitted, then it will seek to enslave its host  and use
 both his will and  his body  for its  own purposes.  It is  said that
 Sauron  did these  things, and  taught his  followers how  to achieve
 them.                                                               
                                                                    
   [Thus  it  may  be seen  that those  who in  latter days  hold that
 the Elves are dangerous to  Men and  that it  is folly  or wickedness
 to  seek  converse  with  them  do  not  speak  without  reason.  For
 how,  it  may  be  asked, shall  a mortal  distinguish the  kinds? On
 the  one hand,  the Houseless,  rebels at  least against  the Rulers,
 and  maybe  even  deeper  under  the  Shadow;   on  the   other,  the
 Lingerers,  whose  bodily  forms  may  no  longer   be  seen   by  us
 mortals, or seen only dimly and fitfully.  Yet the  answer is  not in
 truth  difficult.  Evil  is  not  one thing  among Elves  and another
 among  Men.  Those  who  give  evil  counsel,  or  speak  against the
 Rulers (or if they dare, against the  One), are  evil, and  should be
 shunned  whether   bodied  or   unbodied.  Moreover,   the  Lingerers

 are  not  houseless,  though  they  may  seem  to  be.  They  do  not
 desire bodies, neither do they seek shelter,  nor strive  for mastery
 over  body  or  mind.  Indeed  they  do  not  seek converse  with Men
 at all, save  maybe rarely,  either for  the doing  of some  good, or
 because  they  perceive  in  a  Man's  spirit  some  love  of  things
 ancient  and  fair.  Then  they  may  reveal   to  him   their  forms
 (through   his   mind   working  outwardly,   maybe),  and   he  will
 behold  them  in  their  beauty.  Of  such  he  may  have   no  fear,
 though  he  may  feel  awe  of  them.  For  the  Houseless   have  no
 forms to reveal,  and even  if it  were within  their power  (as some
 Men  say)  to  counterfeit elvish  forms, deluding  the minds  of Men
 with fantasies, such visions  would be  marred by  the evil  of their
 intent.  For  the  hearts of  true Men  uprise in  joy to  behold the
 true likenesses of the First-born, their elder kindred; and  this joy
 nothing evil can counterfeit. So spoke AElfwine.](41)               
                                                                    
                     OF THE SEVERANCE OF MARRIAGE.                   
                                                                    
 Much  has  now  been  said  concerning   death  and   re-birth  among
 the Elves. It  may be  asked: of  what effect  were these  upon their
 marriage?                                                           
   Since  death  and  the  sundering  of  spirit and  body was  one of
 the griefs  of Arda  Marred, it  came inevitably  to pass  that death
 at  times  came  between  two  that  were  wedded.  Then   the  Eldar
 were  in  doubt,  since  this  was   an  evil   unnatural.  Permanent
 marriage  was  in  accordance  with  elvish  nature,  and  they never
 had  need  of  any  law  to teach  this or  to enforce  it; hut  if a
 'permanent'  marriage  was  in  fact  broken,  as  when  one  of  the
 partners  was  slain,  then  they did  not know  what should  he done
 or thought.                                                         
   In  this  matter  they  turned  to  Manwe for  counsel, and,  as is
 recorded  in  the  case  of  Finwe,  Lord   of  the   Noldor,  Manwe
 delivered  his  ruling  through  the  mouth   of  Namo   Mandos,  the
 Judge.                                                              
   'Marriage of the Eldar,' he said, 'is  by and  for the  Living, and
 for the duration of  life. Since  the Elves  are by  nature permanent
 in  life  within Arda,  so also  is their  unmarred marriage.  But if
 their  life  is  interrupted or  ended, then  their marriage  must be
 likewise. Now marriage is  chiefly of  the body,  hut it  is nonethe-
 less not of the body only but of  the spirit  and body  together, for
 it begins and  endures in  the will  of the  fea. Therefore  when one
 of the partners of a  marriage dies  the marriage  is not  yet ended,

                
                                                                    
 but is in abeyance.  For those  that were  joined are  now sundered;
 but their union remains still a union of will.                      
  'How   then   can   a   marriage   be  ended   and  the   union  be
 dissolved?  For  unless  this  be  done,  there  can  be  no  second
 marriage. By the law of the nature of  the Elves,  the neri  and the
 nissi being equal, there can be union only of one with one.(42)     
 Plainly an  end can  be made  only by  the ending  of the  will; and
 this  must  proceed  from the  Dead, or  be by  doom. By  the ending
 of the will, when the Dead are not willing ever to return to life in
 the body; by  doom, when  they are  not permitted  to return.  For a
 union that is for the life of Arda is ended, if it cannot be resumed
 within the life of Arda.                                            
  'We  say  that  the  ending  of  will must  proceed from  the Dead,
 for  the  Living  may  not for  their own  purposes compel  the Dead
 to remain thus, nor deny to them  re-birth, if  they desire  it. And
 it must be  clearly understood  that this  will of  the Dead  not to
 return,  when  it  has  been  solemnly  declared  and   is  ratified
 by  Mandos,  shall  then  become  a  doom:  the  Dead  will  not  be
 permitted ever to return to the life of the body.'                  
  The   Eldar  then   asked:  'How   shall  the   will  or   doom  be
 known?'  It   was  answered:   'Only  by   recourse  to   Manwe  and
 by  the  pronouncement  of  Namo.  In  this matter  it shall  not be
 lawful  for  any  of  the  Eldar  to  judge  his  own case.  For who
 among  the  Living  can  discern  the  thoughts  of  the   Dead,  or
 presume the dooms of Mandos?'                                       
                                                                    
  Upon   this   pronouncement   of  Mandos,   which  is   called  the
 'Doom  of Finwe  and Miriel'(43) for reasons to  be told,  there are
 many   commentaries   that   record   the   explanation   of  points
 arising  from  its  consideration,  some  given  by the  Valar, some
 later  reasoned  by  the  Eldar.  Of these  the more  important are
 here added.                                                         
  1.  It  was  asked:  'What  is  meant by  the saying  that marriage
 is chiefly of the body, and yet is both of spirit and body?'        
  It  was  answered:  'Marriage  is chiefly  of the  body, for  it is
 achieved by bodily union, and its first  operation is  the begetting
 of  the  bodies  of  children,  even though  it endures  beyond this
 and has other operations.  And the  union of  bodies in  marriage is
 unique,  and  no  other  union  resembles it.  Whereas the  union of
 fear in marriage differs from other unions  of love  and friendship
 not  so  much  in  kind as  in its  closeness and  permanence, which
 are  derived  partly from  the bodies  in their  union and  in their
 dwelling together.                                                  

   'Nonetheless  marriage  concerns  also  the  fear.  For  the   fear  of
 the  Elves  are  of  their  nature   male  and   female,  and   not  their
 hrondor (44) only. And the beginning  of  marriage   is  in  the  affinity
 of  the  fear,  and  in  the  love  arising  therefrom.  And   this  love
 includes  in  it,  from  its  first  awakening,  the desire  for marriage,
 and  is  therefore  like  to  but  not  in  all  ways  the  same  as other
 motions   of   love   and   friendship,  even   those  between   Elves  of
 male  and  female  nature  who  do  not  have  this  inclination.   It  is
 therefore  true  to  say  that,  though  achieved  by  and  in  the  body,
 marriage  proceeds  from  the  fea  and resides  ultimately in  its will.
 For   which   reason   it  cannot   be  ended,   as  has   been  declared,
 while that will remains.'                                                 
   2.   It   was  asked:   'If  the   Dead  return   to  the   Living,  are
 the   sundered   spouses   still  wedded?   And  how   may  that   be,  if
 marriage  is  chiefly  of  the  body,  whereas  the  body  of one  part of
 the   union   is   destroyed?   Must  the   sundered  be   again  married,
 if they wish? Or whether they wish it or no?'                             
   It   was   answered:   'It   has   been   said  that   marriage  resides
 ultimately  in  the  will  of  the  fear.  Also  the  identity  of person
 resides  wholly  in the  fea,(45) and the  re-born is  the same  person as
 the  one  who  died.  It  is  the purpose  of the  grace of  re-birth that
 the  unnatural  breach   in  the   continuity  of   life  should   be  re-
 dressed;  and  none  of  the  Dead  will  be   permitted  to   be  re-born
 until  and  unless  they  desire  to  take  up   their  former   life  and
 continue  it.  Indeed  they  cannot  escape  it,  for  the   re-born  soon
 recover full memory of all their past.                                    
   'If  then  marriage  is  not  ended  while  the  Dead  are in  the Halls
 of   Waiting,   in   hope   or  purpose   to  return,   but  is   only  in
 aheyance,  how  then  shall  it  be  ended,  when  the  fea  is  again in
 the land of the living?                                                   
   'But  herein  there  is  indeed a  difficulty, that  reveals to  us that
 death  is  a  thing  unnatural.  It  may  be   amended,  but   it  cannot,
 while  Arda  lasts,  be  wholly  undone  or   made  as   if  it   had  not
 been.  What  shall  come  to  pass  as  the  Eldar  grow  older  cannot be
 wholly  foreseen.  But  perceiving  their  nature,  as   we  now   do,  we
 hold that the love of the                                                 
                                                                          
   Here  the  typescript version  B breaks  off, with  much of  the content
 of the essay as declared in the title unfulfilled (see  p. 209).  The text
 ends at the foot of a page, but I think it virtually certain that this was
 where my father abandoned it.                                             

                                NOTES                                      
 l. In A the opening paragraph ended: 'the  fire of  their spirit  had not
   consumed   them,   nor   their   minds  turned   inwards',  subsequently
   changed to the text of B.                                               
 2. Added  here  later  in  A:  'Yet  the  Elf-child  would  have  more
   knowledge and skill.' This was not taken up in B.                       
 3. A: 'They  had few  children, but  these were  dear to  them beyond  any number more than seven', with 'seldom' written later above
   all  else  that  they  possessed.   (Though  no   Elf  would   speak  of  3
   possessing   children;  he   would  say:   "three  children   have  been
   added  unto  me",  or  "are  with  me",  or  "are  in  my   house";  for
   their  families  were held  together...' (the  brackets being  closed at
   the words 'or teaching').                                               
 4. A: '... while the Eldar were still few, and eager to increase their
   kind, before the weight  of years  lay on  them, there  is no  record of
   'no'.                                                              
 5. For this paragraph A has:                                          
          The Eldar wedded once for all. Many,  as the  histories reveal,
        could  become  estranged   from  good,   for  nothing   can  wholly
        escape from the evil  shadow that  lies upon  Arda. Some  fell into
        pride,  and  self-will,  and could  be guilty  of deeds  of malice,
        enmity, greed and jealousy. But among all these  evils there  is no
        record  of  any  among  the  Elves  that  took another's  spouse by
        force;  for  this  was  wholly  against  their  nature, and  one so
        forced  would  have  rejected  bodily  life  and passed  to Mandos.
        Guile or trickery in this matter was scarcely possible (even  if it
        could be thought that any  Elf would  purpose to  use it);  for the
        Eldar can read at once  in the  eyes and  voice of  another whether
        they be wed or unwed.                                              
   6. The original reading in A was 'at a [feast >] repast shared  by the
      two "houses" concerned', changed later to 'at a  meeting' as  in B.
      See note 7.                                                        
   7. The word 'again' in  'again shared  by the  two houses'  depends on
      the original reading in A given in note 6.                         
   8. A: 'and were only a gracious recognition of the change of state'.
   9. Added  here  in  A,  probably  very  much  later: '[Thus  Beren and
      Tinuviel  could  lawfully  have  wedded,  but  for Beren's  oath to
      Thingol.]'                                                         
  10. This paragraph  ends in  A: 'This  the Eldar  mean when  they speak
      of their spirits consuming them; and  they say  that ere  Arda ends
      all the Elf-folk will  have become  spirits no  less than  those in
      Mandos, invisible to mortal eyes, unless they will to be seen.' The
      words  'no less  than those  in Mandos'  stood in  B as  typed, but
      were heavily struck out.                                           
  11. For  the  passage  in  B  'For  with  regard  to  generation ...'  A has:
      'For,  whether  the  Eldar  retain  their  power  of  generation  (as  is
      likely  if  we speak  of days  of old  when all  the Eldalie  were young)
      or  in  time  lose  it  (as  some  say  those that  remain on  Earth have
      now  lost  it),  at  all times  they lose  the desire  and will  with the
      exercise of that power.'                                                
  12. For neri and nissi  in B  (see the  Etymologies in  Vol. V,  entries NER,
      NIS)  A  has  quendor  and   quender,  changed   later  to   quendur  and
      quendir.  For  the  singulars  ner  and  nis  occurring   subsequently  A
      has   quendo   and   quende,   changed   to   quendu   and   quendi.  The
      substance  of  this  passage  concerning  the difference  in characteris-
      tic  activity  among  men  and  women  of  the  Eldar is  essentially the
      same in A, but no reference is made to the Noldor.                      
  13. It is said in A that it was the right of the father, not to  'devise' the
      first  name,  but  to  'announce'  it, and  this is  followed by  a note:
      'Though  the  name  was  often  the  mother's  choice.  But  it  was held
      to be the right of the father to  devise the  name of  [the first  son >]
      his sons, if  he would,  and of  the mother  to devise  the name  of [the
      first  daughter  >]   her  daughters.   But  in   any  case   the  father
      proclaimed  the  name.'  To  the  words  'This   name  was   thus  called
      the  "father-name"  or  first  name'  was  added later  in A:  'It always
      had a meaning and was made of known words.'                             
  14. At  this  point  there  is  a  footnote  in B  (deriving closely  from A)
      which was later struck through:                                         
         It  will  be  observed  in  the  histories  how  seldom the  same name
      recurs  for  different  persons.  This  is  because,  both  in Essecarme 
      and   in   Essecilme,   there   was   usually   an   attempt   to   mark
      individuality;   and   names   were   regarded   as   the   property   of
      those who first bore them.                                              
  15. The footnote here reads thus in A:                                      
         This  feeling  had  nothing  to do  with 'magic'  or taboo.  The Eldar
      did  indeed  believe  in  a  special  relation  between   a  name   of  a
      person  and  his  life  and  individuality;   but  this   concerned  both
      first   and   second  name   (alone  or   together),  which   they  might
      conceal from enemies.                                                   
  16. The  latter  part  of  the  footnote  here,  which  I  have  enclosed  in
      square  brackets,  is  found  typed  on  a  separate page  belonging with
      the  B  typescript, but  with no  direction for  its insertion  (see note
      37).  It  is  found however  in closely  similar words  in the  A version
      of  the  footnote,  following  'their  lamatyave  might  also  change' (A
      does  not  have  the  conclusion  of  the  note in  B, 'But  such changes
      or progressions...').                                                   
         In   the   A  version   of  the   note  the   Elvish  word   of  which
      'mind-mood'  is  a  translation  was  first  written  ingil-[?weidi, very
      uncertain],  changed to  inwaldi, and  later to  inwisti, as  in E.  In A
      the  Elvish  word  for the  body is  rhon (changed  later to  hrondo, the

       word  used in  B), and  for the  mind m,  indo (the  latter changed
       later to inno, whereas B has inno > indo).                         
  17.  A  has  a different  account here:  'They might  then devise  a new
       "Chosen  Name",  but  this  replaced  the  former,  and  became the
       Second  Name.  Identity  was  preserved by  the permanence  for all
       formal and legal purposes of the First Name or father's name.'     
  18.  A  has: 'this  was the  Anessi, the  given names,  or "nick-names"'
       (with  reference  to  the  original  meaning of  nick-name, changed
       from (an) eke-name, meaning an additional or added name).          
  19.  The passage following this in A reads thus:                        
          Later, when the character and gifts of the child  were revealed,
       as it grew, she might also  give a  similar name  to it  (or modify
       its  father-name).  But  this   latter  branch   of  'mother-names'
       differed  in  authority  only  rather  than  in  kind  from general
       given  or  nick-names.  These  were  given  to  persons  by  anyone
       (not  necessarily  even  members  of  their  'house'  or  kin),  in
       memory  of  some  deed,  or  event,  or some  striking peculiarity.
       Though  these   names  had   no  authority   and  were   not  'true
       names',  they  often  became  widely  known  and  used,   and  were
       sometimes   recognized   by  the   persons  themselves   and  their
       families.                                                          
            The 'mother-names  of insight'  had an  intermediate position.
       They  had  parental  authority  and   the  authority   of  maternal
       terken  [added:  insight], and  were often  used instead  of either
       father-name  or  chosen  name,  or  might   replace  them   both  -
       replaced  them, that  is, in  actual usage.  The 'true'  or primary
       Esse  of  any  person  remained  the  father-name.  The  'names  of
       insight', though at  no time  frequent, were  more frequent  in the
       early days of the Eldar...                                         
  20.  In A it is said that 'Finwe originally named his eldest son Finwe'.
  21.  Curufinwe:  the  name  has been  met in  the rejected  addition to
       AAm  where  appear  my  father's  first  thoughts  on the  story of
       Feanor's  birth  (when  his  mother  was  named  Indis): see  p. 87
       note 3.                                                            
  22.  A has here a passage that was omitted in B:                        
          Finwe  then  named  his  second son  (by another  mother, Indis)
       also  Finwe',  modifying it  later to  Nolofinwe. But  the mother-
       name  which  Indis  gave  to  him was  Ingoldo, signifying  that he
       was  partly  of  both  the Ingar  (people of  Ingwe), her  own kin,
       and  of  the  Noldor.  By  this  name  he  also   became  generally
       known;  though  after  the  rule  of  the  Noldor was  committed to
       him by Manwe (in the  place of  his elder  brother and  his father)
       he  took  the  name  of  Finwe,  and was  in fact  usually called
       Ingoldo-finwe.  Similarly the  third son  was Arafinwe  and also
       Ingalaure (because he had the golden hair of his mother's kin).
       As in the  name Noldor  throughout the  later texts,  Nolofinwe is

       written  with  a  tilde  over  the N.  - On  this passage  see further
       p. 265 note 10.                                                       
  23.  In  A  there  is  no  subtitle  here,  but before  'It must  be under-
       stood...' there stands the following:                                 
          In  what  has  been  said concerning  names it  will be  noted that
       for  Finwe,  first  lord  of   the  Noldor,   two  wives   are  named:
       Miriel  and  Indis;  though  it  was  said  that  the marriage  of the
       Eldar is permanent and indissoluble.                                  
  24.  After 'and Death' there followed in  B 'in  its Elvish  mode', derived
       from A; but this was rejected as soon as typed.                       
  25.  A:  'and  is  made  also  as  it  were  of  the  hron  (or  flesh  and
       substance)  of  Arda'; cf.  rhon 'body',  note 16.  The word  hron was
       left  unchanged  in A  here (see  note 26);  subsequently where  B has
       hrondo  (>  hroa)  A  has  hron,  hron,  and  hron  (>  hrondo), until
       later in the text hrondo appears in A as first written (note 34).     
  26.  The words 'and  it returns  again to  the general  hron of  Arda' were
       added to the  A-text at  the same  time as  other occurrences  of hron
       were  changed  to  hrondo  (note  25);  thus  hron  here in  B (subse-
       quently  >  orma)  represents  a  distinction  between  hron  (of  the
       'body'  of Arda)  and hrondo.  At a  later point  in the  A manuscript
       there  is  the  following  hastily  pencilled  note, which  was struck
       through:                                                              
          V's-ron 'flesh, substance,  matter'. Q.  hron, hrom-  'matter', the
       substance of Arda, hence hrondo 'physical body, "the flesh"'.         
  27.  B as typed had 'little different', as does A, but 'little' was at once
       changed to 'less'.                                                    
  28.  Where 8 has 'even from the first days' A has 'even at first'.         
  29.  'as has been noted' (not said in  A): the  previous references  are on
       pp. 210 ('AElfwine's Preamble') and 212.                               
  30.  In A the first part of this paragraph reads:                          
            As  ages  passed   their  spirits   became  more   dominant,  and
       'consumed'   their   bodies   -   the   end   of  this   process  (now
       achieved),  they  said,  was  that  the  body  should  become   as  it
       were  a  mere  memory  of  the  spirit  -   though  it   never  became
       changeable like raiment.                                              
  31.  A:  'Others  guessed  that  they  passed  into the  realm of  Dark and
       the power of the Dark Lord (as they called him).'                     
  32.  A: '(The  fear of  the Eldar,  with rare  exceptions, at  once obeyed
       that  summons.)   After  that   different  opportunities   lay  before
       them.'                                                                
  33.  There is no subtitle here in A.                                       
  34.  Here  and  subsequently  hrondo  (not  hron)  appears  in  the  A-text
       as  written  (see  notes  25  and  44).  Purely coincidentally,  as it
       seems,  here  and  subsequently  hrondo  was   not  changed   to  hroa
       in B.                                                                 
  35.  This  bracketed  statement  derives  from  an  addition  made   to  A:

       'This  is  true of  all Elf-children,  whatever may  be the  case with
       Men, in whom the body is ever more dominant.'                         
  36.  This paragraph is absent from A.                                      
  37.  This footnote is not in the B-text, but is  found typed  separately on
       the same page as the passage  referred to  in note  16, and  like that
       passage without direction for its insertion. It derives fairly closely
       from  a  footnote  found  at  this  point  in  A;  this  however ends:
       '...  was  held a  fault or  weakness, needing  correction or  cure if
       that could be achieved.'                                              
  38.  From  'The  others  remained'  to  the  end   of  the   paragraph  the
       A-text as first written read thus:                                    
          Others,  freed  from  desire  of life  and of  doing, yet  not from
       operations  of  the  mind  in  observing  or  reflexion,  might remain
       as spirits,  fear unbodied,  and yet  be permitted  to go  forth from
       Mandos,  and  to  return  thither  or  not,  as  they  would.  As ages
       passed,  the  numbers  of  these  increased, the  Eldar say.  With the
       minds  of  the  Living  they  can  commune,  if  the  Living  remember
       them  or  open  their  minds  to  receive  them.  This the  Eldar call
       'communing  with  the  fear  (or  the Unliving)',  and in  the latter
       days  it  has  become  easier  and  more  frequent.  But   they  could
       only  observe  what  passed  or  was   done  as   the  Tale   of  Arda
       unfolded. They could                                                  
       The  passage  was  struck  out  when  this   point  was   reached  and
       replaced  by  the  text  that stands  here in  B. Cf.  the subsequent
       passage  (p.  224),  found  both in  A and  in B:  'It is  therefore a
       foolish  and  perilous  thing,  besides being  a wrong  deed forbidden
       justly  by  the  appointed  Rulers  of  Arda,  if  the Living  seek to
       commune with the Unbodied...'                                         
  39.  On Alamanyar see pp. 170 - 1.                                         
  40.  A sets the opening of this paragraph in the past tense: 'But  in after
       days  more  and  more  of  the  Elves  that  lingered  in Middle-earth
       refused  the  summons  of  Mandos,  and  wandered  houseless   in  the
       world, unwilling to leave it...'                                      
  41.  This  paragraph,  attributed  to  AElfwine and  bracketed in  the same
       way  as  is  the  opening   'Preamble',  is   absent  from   A,  which
       continues  on  from  'These  things it  is said  that Sauron  did, and
       taught his chief followers how to achieve them' as follows:           
            In this  account the  lives and  customs of  the Eldar  have been
       considered  mainly  in  their  natural  courses  in  days  untroubled,
       and  in  accordance  with  their  true  nature  unmarred. But,  as has
       been  said,  the  Eldar  did  not  escape the  Shadow upon  Arda, that
       caused both misfortunes and misdeeds to afflict them.                 
       This  was  replaced  by  the  sentence  beginning  'Now much  has been
       said  concerning  death  and  rebirth among  the Eldar  ...' as  in B,
       but without the subtitle 'Of the Severance of Marriage'.              
  42.  This  sentence  is  absent  from  A,  and  so  there  appear  here  no

     equivalents of the words neri and nissi in B (see note 12).          
 43. A has 'the "Statute of Finwe and Miriel"', as in the title  of the
     B-text.                                                              
 44. A had here hroni, changed to hrondor: see note 34.                     
 45. From  here  to the  point where  it breaks  off B  diverges altogether
     from A, and I take up  the presentation  of the  A-text in  full from
     the beginning of this second response.                               
                                                                          
 I  give now  the remainder  of the  work from  the original  manuscript A,
 taking it up shortly before the point  where the  typescript B  breaks off
 (see  note  45  above).  Alterations  and  additions  are mostly  noted as
 such.                                                                     
   In  A  the   actual  tale   of  Finwe,   Miriel,  and   Indis  reappears
 (pp. 236 - 9); it is easily  shown that  this version  followed FM  1 (the
 rider to LQ  chapter 6,  Of the  Silmarils and  the Darkening  of Valinor,
 pp. 205 - 7), but I think at no long interval: the manuscript style of the
 two texts is notably similar.                                             
                                                                          
   It   was   answered:   It   has   been   said   that   marriage  resides
 ultimately  in  the  will  of  the  fea.  Also  the  identity  of  person
 resides  in  the  fea; and  the Dead  that return  [struck out:  will] in
 time  recover  full  memory  of  the  past;  what  is  more,   though  the
 body  is  more  than  raiment  and  the  change  of  body  [will   not  be
 of  no  effect  >]  will  certainly  have  effect  upon  the  reborn,  the
 fea  is  the  master,  and  the  reborn  will  come  to   resemble  their
 former  self  so  closely  that  all  who  knew  them  before  Death  will
 recognize   them,   soonest   and   most   readily   the   former  spouse.
 Nonetheless,  since  marriage   is  also   of  the   body  and   one  body
 has  perished,  they  must  be  married  again,  if  they  will.  For they
 will  have  returned,  as  it  were, to  that state  in their  former life
 when  by  the  motions  of  their  fear  they   desired  to   be  married.
 There  will  be  no  question  of desiring  this or  not desiring  it. For
 by  the  steadfastness  of  the  fear  of  the  Eldar   uncorrupted  they
 will   desire   it;  and   none  of   the  Dead   will  be   permitted  by
 Mandos  to  be  reborn,  until  and  unless  they desire  to take  up life
 again  in  continuity  with  their  past.  For  it is  the purpose  of the
 time   in   Waiting   in  Mandos   that  the   unnatural  breach   in  the
 continuity  of  the  life  of  the  Eldar  should  be  healed,  though  it
 cannot  be   undone  or   made  of   no  effect   in  Arda.   It  follows,
 therefore,  also  that  the  Dead  will  be  reborn  in  such   place  and
 time   that   the   meeting   and  recognition   of  the   sundered  shall
 surely  come  to  pass,  and  there  shall  be   no  hindrance   to  their
 marriage.                                                                 

  Upon  this  the  Eldar  comment:  'By  this  is   meant  that   the  Reborn
  Spouse   will  not   appear  among   the  close   kindred  of   the  Living
  Spouse,  and  in  fact  the  Reborn  appear  as  a  rule amongst  their own
  former  kin,  unless  in  the  chances  of  Arda  things  have  so  changed
  that  the  meeting  of  the sundered  would thus  be unlikely.  [Added: For
  the first purpose of the fea that seeks rebirth is to find its spouse, and
  children,  if  it  had  these  in  life.]  The  Reborn  that  were unwedded
  always  return  to  their  own  kin.'  For  the marriages  of the  Eldar do
  not  take  place  between  'close  kin'. This  again is  a matter  in which
  they  needed  no  law  or  instruction,  but acted  by nature,  though they
  gave reasons  for it  later, declaring  that it  was due  to the  nature of
  bodies  and  the  processes  of  generation;  but  also  to  the  nature of
  fear.  'For,'  they  said, 'fear  are also  akin, and  the motions  of love
  between  them,  as  say  between  a  brother  and  sister,  are not  of the
  same  kind  as  those  that  make  the  beginning  of marriage.'  By 'close
  kin'  for  this  purpose  was  meant  members  of  one  'house', especially
  sisters  and  brothers.  None  of the  Eldar married  those in  direct line
  of  descent,  nor  children  of  the  same  parents,  nor  the   sister  or
  brother of  either of  their parents;  nor did  they wed  'half-sisters' or
  'half-brothers'. Since  as has  been shown  only in  the rarest  events did
  the  Eldar  have  second  spouses,  half-sister  or  half-brother  had  for
  them  a  special  meaning:  they  used  these  terms   when  both   of  the
  parents  of  one  child were  related to  both of  the parents  of another,
  as  when  two  brothers  married  two  sisters  of  another  family,  or  a
  sister  and  a  brother  of  one  house  married  a  brother and  sister of
  another:  things  which  often  occurred.  Otherwise  'first  cousins',  as
  we  should  say,  might  marry, but  seldom did  so, or  desired to  do so,
  unless one of the parents of each were far-sundered in kin.                
                                                                            
  Hardly   otherwise   shall   it  be   when  both   spouses  are   slain  or
 die:  they  will  marry  again  in  due  time  after  rebirth,  unless  they
 desire to remain together in Mandos.                                        
  It   was   asked:  Why   must  the   Dead  remain   in  Mandos   for  ever,
 if  the  fea  consents  to the  ending of  its marriage?  And what  is this
 Doom of which Mandos speaks?                                                
  It   was   answered:   The   reasons   are   to  be   found  in   what  has
 been  said  already.  Marriage  is  for  life,  and  cannot,  therefore,  be
 ended,   save   by  the   interruption  of   death  without   return.  While
 there  is  hope  or  purpose  of  return  it  is not  ended, and  the Living
 cannot   therefore   marry   again.   If   the   Living   is   permitted  to
 marry  again,   then  by   doom  Mandos   will  not   permit  the   Dead  to
 return.  For,  as  has  been  declared,  one  reborn  is  the   same  person
 as  before  death  and  returns  to  take  up  and   continue  his   or  her
 former  life.  But  if  the  former  spouse  were  re-married,   this  would
 not  be  possible,  and  great  grief  and  doubt  would  afflict  all three

                                           
                                                                           
 parties.  To  speak  of  the  dooms   of  Mandos:   these  are   of  three
 kinds.  He  utters  the   decisions  of   Manwe,  or   of  the   Valar  in
 conclave,  which   become  binding   upon  all,   even  the   Valar,  when
 they  are  so  declared:  for  which  reason  a  time  passes  between the
 decision  and  the  doom.  In  similar  manner  he  utters  the  decisions
 and  purposes  of  others  who  are  under   his  jurisdiction,   who  are
 the  Dead,  in  grave  matters  that  affect justice  and the  right order
 of   Arda;   and   when   so   spoken   these   decisions   become  'laws'
 also,  though  pertaining  only  to  particular  persons  or   cases,  and
 Mandos   will   not   permit   them   to   be   revoked  or   broken:  for
 which   reason   again   a   time   must   pass   between   decision   and
 doom.*  And  lastly   there  are   the  dooms   of  Mandos   that  proceed
 from   Mandos  himself,   as  judge   in  matters   that  belong   to  his
 office  as  ordained  from  the  beginning.  He  is  the  judge  of  right
 and  of  wrong,  and  of  innocence  or  guilt  (and  all the  degrees and
 mingling  of  these)  in  the  mischances  and   misdeeds  that   come  to
 pass  in   Arda.  All   those  who   come  to   Mandos  are   judged  with
 regard  to  innocence  or  guilt,  in  the  matter of  their death  and in
 all  other  deeds  and  purposes  of   their  lives   in  the   body;  and
 Mandos   appoints   to   each  the   manner  and   the  length   of  their
 time  of  Waiting  according  to   this  judgement.   But  his   dooms  in
 such  matters  are  not  uttered  in  haste;  and  even  the  most  guilty
 are  long  tested,  whether  they  may  be  healed  or  corrected,  before
 any  final  doom  is  given  (such  as  never  to  return again  among the
 Living).   Therefore   it   was   said:   'Who   among   the   Living  can
 presume the dooms of Mandos?'                                              
                                                                           
  Upon  this  the  Eldar  comment:  'Innocence  or  guilt  in  the  matter of
  death  is  spoken  of,  because  to  be  in any  way culpable  in incurring
  this  evil  (whether  by  forcing  others  to  slay  one  in  their defence
  against  unjust  violence,  or  by  foolhardiness  or  the  making  good of
  rash  vaunts,  or  by  slaying  oneself  or  wilfully withdrawing  the fea
  from  the  body) is  held a  fault. Or  at the  least, the  withdrawal from
  life is held a good reason, unless  the will  of the  fea be  changed, for
  the  fea to  remain among  the Dead  and not  to return.  As for  guilt in
  other  matters  little  is  known  of  the  dealings  of  Mandos  with  the
  Dead.  For  several  reasons:  Because  those  who  have  done  great  evil
  (who  are  few)  do  not  return.  Because  those who  have been  under the
  correction  of  Mandos  will  not speak  of it,  and indeed,  being healed,
  remember little of it;  for they  have returned  to their  natural courses,
                                                                           
 (* In the case of a decision never to return to life by a fea of the Dead,
 the  least  time  of  interval appointed  by Mandos  was ten  Valian years.
 During this period the decision could be revoked.)                         

  and the  unnatural and  perverted is  no longer  in the  continuity of
  their lives. Because also, as has been said, though  all that  die are
  summoned to Mandos, it is within the power  of the  fear of  the Elves
  to refuse  the summons,  and doubtless  many of  the most  unhappy, or
  most corrupted spirits (especially those of the Dark-elves) do refuse,
  and  so  come  to  worse  evil,  or  at   best  wander   unhoused  and
  unhealed,  without hope  of return.  Not so  do they  escape judgement
  for ever; for Eru abideth and is over all.                               
                                                                          
  This  judgement  is  known  as  the  'Statute  of  Finwe  and Miriel',
 for theirs  was the  first case,  and it  was on  behalf of  Finwe that
 Manwe's  counsel  was  sought   in  this   matter.  Now   Finwe,  first
 Lord  of  the  Noldor,  had  to   wife  Miriel   who  was   called  the
 Serinde,  because  of  her  surpassing  skill  in weaving  and sewing,
 and  their  love  was  great  for one  another. But  in the  bearing of
 her  first  son  Miriel  was  consumed  in  spirit  and  body,  so that
 wellnigh  all  strength  seemed  to  have  passed  from  her.  This son
 was  Curufinwe,  most  renowned  of  all  the  Noldor  as  Feanaro  (or
 Feanor),(1) Spirit-of-fire,  the  name  which  Miriel  gave  to  him  at
 birth;  he  was  mighty  in body  and in  all the  skills of  the body,
 and   supreme   among  the   Eldar  in   eagerness  and   strength  and
 subtlety  of  mind.  But  Miriel said  to Finwe:  'Never again  shall I
 bear  child;  for  strength  that  would  have  nourished  the  life of
 many has gone forth into Feanaro.'                                        
  Then  Finwe  was  greatly  grieved,  for  the   Noldor  were   in  the
 youth  of  their  days  and  dwelt  in  the  bliss  of the  Noontide of
 Aman,  but  were  still  few  in  number,  and  he  desired   to  bring
 forth  many  children  into  that  bliss.  He said,  therefore: 'Surely
 there is healing in Aman? Here all weariness can find rest.'              
  Therefore   Finwe   sought   the   counsel   of   Manwe,   and   Manwe
 delivered Miriel to the care of Irmo in Lorien.(2) At  their parting
 (for  a  little while  as he  deemed) Finwe  was sad,  for it  seemed a
 thing   unhappy   that   the   mother  should   depart  and   miss  the
 beginning  at  least  of  the childhood  days of  her son.  'Unhappy it
 is indeed,' said Miriel,  'and I  would weep  if I  were not  so weary.
 But  hold  me  blameless in  this, and  in aught  that may  come after.
 Rest  now  I  must.  Farewell,  dear  lord.' No  clearer than  this did
 she  speak,  but  in  her  heart  she  yearned not  only for  sleep and
 rest,  but for  release from  the labour  of living.  She went  then to
 Lorien  and  laid  her  down  to  sleep  beneath  a  silver  tree,  but
 though  she  seemed  to  sleep  indeed  her  spirit  departed  from her
 body  and  passed  in  silence  to  the  halls   of  Mandos;   and  the
                                                                          
                                                                          i
                                                                          I

 maidens  of  Este  tended  her   fair  body   so  that   it  remained
 unwithered, yet she did not return.                                 
   Finwe's  grief  was  great,  and he  went often  to the  gardens of
 Lorien  and sitting  beneath the  silver willows  beside the  body of
 his wife he called her  by her  names. But  it was  of no  avail, and
 he  alone  in  all  the  Blessed  Realm  was bereaved  and sorrowful.
 After a while he  went to  Lorien no  more, for  it did  but increase
 his grief. All his love he gave to his son; for Feanaro was  like his
 mother  in  voice  and  countenance,  and  Finwe  was  to   him  both
 father  and  mother,  and  there  was  a  double  bond  of  love upon
 their  hearts.  Yet  Finwe was  not content,  being young  and eager,
 and  desiring  to  have  more  children  to  bring  mirth   into  his
 house.  [He  spoke,  therefore,  to  Manwe  >]  When,  therefore, ten
 years  had  passed,  he  spoke  to  Manwe,  saying: 'Lord,  behold! I
 am  bereaved  and  solitary.  Alone  among  the   Eldar  I   have  no
 wife,  and  must  hope  for  no  sons  save  one,  and  no  daughter.
 Must  I  remain  ever  thus?  [For  I  believe  not that  Miriel will
 return  again  >]  For  my  heart  warns  me  that  Miriel  will  not
 return  again  from the  house of  Vaire while  Arda lasts.  Is there
 not healing of grief in Aman?'                                      
   Then  Manwe   took  pity   upon  Finwe,   and  he   considered  his
 plea,   and   when   Mandos  had   spoken  his   doom  as   has  been
 recorded,(3) Manwe  called  Finwe  to  him,   and  said:  'Thou  hast
 heard the  doom that  has been  declared. If  Miriel, thy  wife, will
 not  return  and releases thee, your union (4) is dissolved, and thou
 hast leave to take another wife.'                                   
   It  is said  that Miriel  answered Mandos,  saying: 'I  came hither
 to escape from the body, and I do not  desire ever  to return  to it.
 My life is gone  out into  Feanaro, my  son. This  gift I  have given
 to  him  whom  I  loved, and  I can  give no  more. Beyond  Arda this
 may be healed, but not within it.'                                  
   Then   Mandos  adjudged   her  innocent,   deeming  that   she  had
 died  under a  necessity too  great for  her to  withstand. Therefore
 her  choice  was  permitted,  and she  was left  in peace;  and after
 ten  years  the   doom  of   disunion  was   spoken.  [In   the  year
 following  >)  And  after  three  years  more  Finwe  took  as second
 spouse Indis the fair; and  she was  in all  ways unlike  Miriel. She
 was not of the Noldor, but of the Vanyar,  [of the  kin >)  sister of
 Ingwe;  and  she  was  golden-haired,   and  tall,   and  exceedingly
 swift  of  foot.  She  laboured  not  with  her  hands, but  sang and
 made  music,  and  there  was ever  light and  mirth about  her while

 the  bliss  of  Aman  endured.  She  loved Finwe  dearly, for  her heart
 had  turned  to  him  long  before,  while  the  people  of  Ingwe dwelt
 still  with  the  Noldor in Tuna.(5)  In those   days  she   had  looked
 upon   the   Lord   of   the   Noldor,  dark-haired   and  white-browed,
 eager  of  face  and  thoughtful-eyed,  and  he  seemed  to  her fairest
 and   noblest  among   the  Eldar,   and  his   voice  and   mastery  of
 words   delighted   her.   Therefore   she   remained   unwedded,   when
 her  people  departed  to  Valinor,  and  she  walked  often   alone  in
 the  fields  and friths  of the  Valar, [turning  her thought  to things
 that  grow  untended  >]  filling  them  with  music.  But  it  came  to
 pass  that  Ingwe,  hearing  of   the  strange   grief  of   Finwe,  and
 desiring   to   lift   up  his   heart  and   withdraw  him   from  vain
 mourning  in   Lorien,  sent   messages  bidding   him  to   leave  Tuna
 for  a  while  and  the reminders  of his  loss, and  to come  and dwell
 in  the  light  of  the  Trees.  This  message  Finwe  did  not  answer,
 until  after  the  doom  of   Mandos  was   spoken;  but   then  deeming
 that  he  must  seek  to build  his life  anew and  that the  bidding of
 Ingwe  was  wise,  he  arose  and  went  to  the  house  of  Ingwe  upon
 the  west  of  Mount  Oiolosse.  His  coming   was  unlooked   for,  but
 welcome;  and  when  Indis  saw   Finwe  climbing   the  paths   of  the
 mountain  (and  the  light  of  Laurelin  was  behind  him  as  a glory)
 without  forethought   she  sang   suddenly  in   great  joy,   and  her
 voice  went  up  as  the  song  of  a  lirulin  in the sky.(6) And  when
 Finwe  heard  that  song  falling  from  above  he  looked  up  and  saw
 Indis  in  the  golden  light,  and  he  knew  in  that moment  that she
 loved  him  and  had  long done  so. Then  his heart  turned at  last to
 her,  and  he  believed  that  this  chance,  as  it  seemed,  had  been
 granted  for  the  comfort  of  them  both.  'Behold!'  he  said. 'There
 is indeed healing of grief in Aman!'                                    
   In  this  way  came  to  pass  ere  long  the  wedding  of  Finwe  and
 Indis,  sister  of Ingwe.  In Indis  was proved  true indeed  the saying
 that  'the  loss  of  one may  be the  gain of  another.' But  this also
 she  found  true:  'the  house  remembers  the  builder,  though  others
 may  dwell  in  it  after.'  For  Finwe  loved her  well, and  was glad,
 and   she   bore   him   children   in  whom   he  rejoiced,*(7) yet the
 shadow  of  Miriel  did  not   depart  from   his  heart,   and  Feanaro
 had  the  chief  share  of  his  thought.  The  wedding  of  his  father
 was  not  pleasing  to  Feanaro,  and  though  it  did  not  lessen  his
                                                                        
  (* Five children she bore, three daughters and two sons, in this order:
 Findis,  Nolofinwe,   Faniel,  Arafinwe,   and  Irime.   Concerning  the
 naming of the sons we have spoken above.)                               

 love for his father, he had little love for Indis or  her children,
 least of all for his  half-brethren. As  soon as  he might  (and he
 was  wellnigh  fullgrown  ere  Nolofinwe  was  born)  he  left  his
 father's  house and  lived apart  from them,  giving all  his heart
 and thought to the pursuit of lore and the  practice of  crafts. In
 those  unhappy  things  which  afterward  came   to  pass   and  in
 which Feanaro was a  leader, many  saw the  effects of  this breach
 in the house of Finwe, judging that if Finwe  had endured  his loss
 and  been  content  with  the  fathering  of  his  mighty  son, the
 courses   of   Feanaro   would  have   been  otherwise,   and  much
 sorrow and evil would never have been.                             
   Thus it is that the cases in  which remarriage  of the  Eldar can
 take place are rare, but rarer still  are those  who do  this, even
 when it is permissible. For the sorrow and strife  in the  house of
 Finwe is graven in the memory of the Eldar.                        
                                                                   
   [It is recorded by the Eldar that the Valar found this  matter of
 Finwe  strange,  and  debated  much concerning  it. For  Finwe they
 could  not  accuse  of  any guilt,  and the  Statute that  had been
 made  for  Finwe and  Miriel was  just and  reasonable. Yet  it was
 clear that many evils would  have been  avoided, [if  either Miriel
 had been less faint, or Finwe more patient  >] if  it had  not been
 made,  or  at  least  had  not  been used.  This passage  was later
 replaced as follows:] It is recorded  by the  Eldar that  the Valar
 debated long the case of Finwe  and Miriel,  after the  Statute was
 made, but  not yet  declared. For  they perceived  that this  was a
 grave  matter,  and  a  portent, in  that Miriel  had died  even in
 Aman,  and  had  brought  sorrow  to  the  Blessed   Realm,  things
 which  they  before  had  believed  could not  come to  pass. Also,
 though  the  Statute  seemed just,  some feared  that it  would not
 heal the  death of  grief, but  perpetuate it.  And Manwe  spoke to
 the Valar,  saying: 'In  this matter  ye must  not forget  that you
 deal  with  Arda  Marred  -  out  of  which  ye brought  the Eldar.
 Neither  must  ye  forget  that  in  Arda  Marred  Justice  is  not
 Healing.  Healing  cometh  only  by  suffering  and  patience,  and
 maketh  no  demand,  not  even  for  Justice. Justice  worketh only
 within the bonds of things as  they are,  accepting the  marring of
 Arda, and therefore though Justice is itself  good and  desireth no
 further evil, it can but perpetuate the evil that was, and doth not
 prevent it from the bearing of  fruit in  sorrow. Thus  the Statute
 was just,  but it  accepted Death  and the  severance of  Finwe and
 Miriel,  a  thing unnatural  in Arda  Unmarred, and  therefore with

 reference  to  Arda  Unmarred  it  was  unnatural  and   fraught  with
 Death. The liberty that it gave was a lower road that,  if it  led not
 still   downwards,   could   not  again   ascend.  But   Healing  must
 retain  ever  the  thought  of  Arda  Unmarred,   and  if   it  cannot
 ascend,  must  abide  in  patience.  This  is Hope  which, I  deem, is
 before all else  the virtue  most fair  in the  Children of  Eru, [but
 cannot   be   commanded   to   come   when   needed:   patience   must
 often long await it.]'(8)                                               
   Then  Aule,  friend  of  the  Noldor [added:  and lover  of Feanor],
 spake.  'But  did this  matter indeed  arise out  of Arda  Marred?' he
 asked.  'For  it  seemeth  to  me that  it arose  from the  bearing of
 Feanaro.  Now  Finwe  and  all  the  Noldor  that  followed  him  were
 never  in  heart  or  thought  swayed  by  [Morgoth  >]   Melkor,  the
 Marrer;  how  then  did  this  strange  thing  come  to pass,  even in
 Aman  the  Unshadowed?  That  the  bearing  of  a  child   should  lay
 such  a  weariness  upon  the   mother  that   she  desired   life  no
 longer. This child is the greatest in gifts that hath arisen  or shall
 arise  among  the  Eldar.  But  the  Eldar are  the first  Children of
 Eru,  and  belong  to  him  directly. Therefore  the greatness  of the
 child  must  proceed  from  his  will  directly,  and be  intended for
 the  good of  the Eldar  and of  all Arda.  What then  of the  cost of
 the birth? Must  it not  be thought  that the  greatness and  the cost
 come   not   from   Arda,   Marred  or   Unmarred,  but   from  beyond
 Arda? For this  we know  to be  true, and  as the  ages pass  it shall
 often be manifest (in small matters and  in great)  that all  the Tale
 of  Arda  was  not  in  the Great  Theme, and  that things  shall come
 to  pass  in  that Tale  which cannot  be foreseen,  for they  are new
 and  are  not  begotten  by  the  past that preceded them.'(9) [Added:
 Thus  Aule  spake being  unwilling to  believe that  any taint  of the
 Shadow  lay  upon  Feanor,  or  upon  any  of   the  Noldor.   He  had
 been the most eager to summon them to Valinor.](10)                  
   But   Ulmo  answered:   'Nonetheless  Miriel   died.  [And   is  not
 death  for  the  Eldar  an  evil, that  is a  thing unnatural  in Arda
 Unmarred,  which  must   proceed  therefore   from  the   marring?  Or
 if  the  death  of  Miriel  doth  not  so,  but  cometh   from  beyond
 Arda,  how  shall  death  that  is  unnatural and  evil be  known from
 that which  is a  new thing  and hath  no reason  in the  past, unless
 the  latter  cause  neither  sorrow  nor  doubt?  But  the   death  of
 Miriel  has   brought  both   into  Aman.   This  passage   was  later
 replaced as follows:] And death is for the  Eldar an  evil, that  is a
 thing  unnatural  in   Arda  Unmarred,   which  must   proceed  there-
 fore  from  the marring.  For if  the death  of Miriel  was otherwise,

 and  came  from  beyond Arda  (as a  new thing  having no  cause in
 the past) it would not bring  grief or  doubt. For  Eru is  Lord of
 All, and moveth all the devices of his  creatures, even  the malice
 of the Marrer, in his final purposes, but he doth not of  his prime
 motion  impose  grief  upon  them.  But  the  death  of  Miriel has
 brought   sorrow   to   Aman.   /  The   coming  of   Feanaro  must
 proceed  certainly  from  the  will  of  Eru; but  I hold  that the
 marring  of his  birth comes  of the  Shadow, and  is a  portent of
 evils to come. For the greatest are the most potent also  for evil.
 Have a  care, my  brethren, thinking  not that  the Shadow  is gone
 for ever, though  it is  beaten down.  Doth it  not dwell  even now
 in  Aman,  though  you  deem  the  bonds  to be  unbreakable?' [For
 Ulmo  had  dissented  >]  Thus  Ulmo   spake,  who   had  dissented
 from  the  counsels  of  the  Valar, when  they brought  Melkor the
 Marrer to Mandos after his defeat.(11) [Added: Also he loved the
 Elves  (and  Men  afterwards), but  otherwise than  Aule, believing
 that they should be left  free, however  perilous that  might seem.
 Thus  afterwards  it  was  seen,  that though  he loved  Feanor and
 all the  Noldor more  coolly, he  had more  mercy for  their errors
 and misdeeds.]                                                    
   Then  Yavanna  spoke,  and  though  she  was  the spouse  of Aule
 she leaned rather to Ulmo. 'My lord Aule errs,' she said,  'in that
 he speaks of Finwe and Miriel as  being free  in heart  and thought
 from the Shadow, as  if that  proved that  naught that  befell them
 could  come  from  the  Shadow  or  from the  marring of  Arda. But
 even  as  the  Children  are  not  as  we  (who  came  from  beyond
 Arda wholly and in all  our being)  but are  both spirit  and body,
 and  that  body  is  of  Arda  and  by Arda  was nourished:  so the
 Shadow  worketh  not  only upon  spirits, but  has marred  the very
 hron of  Arda, and  all Middle-earth  is perverted  by the  evil of
 Melkor,  who has  wrought in  it as  mightily as  any one  among us
 here.  Therefore  none  of  those  who  awoke in  Middle-earth, and
 there  dwelt  before  they  came  hither,  have  come  here  wholly
 free. The failing of the strength of  the body  of Miriel  may then
 be ascribed,  with some  reason, to  the evil  of Arda  Marred, and
 her death  be a  thing unnatural.  And that  this should  appear in
 Aman seemeth to me as to Ulmo a sign to be heeded.'(12)           
   Then  Nienna  spoke,  who   came  to   Valmar  seldom,   but  sat
 now  upon the  left hand  of Manwe.  'In the  use of  Justice there
 must be Pity, which is the consideration of the singleness  of each
 that  cometh under  Justice. Which  of you  Valar, in  your wisdom,
 will  blame  these  Children,  Finwe and  Miriel? For  the Children

 are  both  strong  and  without  might.  Mandos you  hold to  be the
 strongest  of  all  that  are in  Arda, being  the least  moved, and
 therefore  you  have  dared  to  commit even  the Marrer  himself to
 his keeping. Yet I say to you that each fea of  the Children  is as
 strong as he; for  it hath  the strength  of its  singleness impreg-
 nable (which cometh to it from Eru as  to us):  in its  nakedness it
 is obdurate beyond all  power that  ye have  to move  it if  it will
 not. Yet the Children are not mighty: in life  they are  little, and
 can effect  little; and  they are  young, and  they know  Time only.
 Their minds are as the hands of  their babes,  little in  grasp, and
 even  that  grasp  is  yet  unfilled.  How  shall they  perceive the
 [?end] of deeds, or forgo the  desires which  arise from  their very
 nature, the indwelling of the spirit  in [the]  body which  is their
 right  condition? Have  ye known  the weariness  of Miriel,  or felt
 the bereavement of Finwe?                                          
   'Miriel, I deem,  died by  necessity of  body, in  suffering [for]
 which  she  was  blameless  or  indeed  to be  praised, and  yet was
 not given power to resist it: the cost of so great  a child-bearing.
 And herein I think that  Aule perceiveth  a part  of the  truth. The
 severance  of  the  fea  was in  Miriel a  thing special.  Death is
 indeed  death   and  within   the  Great   Theme  cometh   from  the
 Marrer  and is  grievous; but  Eru in  this death  had a  purpose of
 immediate  good,  and  it  need  not  have  borne any  bitter fruit;
 whereas  Death  that  comes  from  the Marrer  only is  intended for
 evil,  and  its  healing  must await  in Hope  only, even  until the
 End.  But  Finwe  not  understanding  death  (as  how   should  he?)
 called Miriel,  and she  did not  return, and  he was  bereaved, and
 his  natural  life and  expectation was  impaired. Justly  he cried:
 "Is   there  not   healing  in   Aman?"  That   cry  could   not  be
 unheeded,  and  what  could   be  done   we  have   done.  Wherefore
 should this be grudged?'                                           
   But   Ulmo   answered   her   saying:  'Nay!   Though  I   do  not
 condemn, yet  still I  will judge.  Herein I  perceive not  only the
 direct will of Eru, but  fault in  his creatures.  Not guilt,  yet a
 failing  from  the  highest  which  is  the Hope  of which  the King
 hath spoken. And I doubt  not that  the taking  of the  higher road,
 an ascent  that though  hard was  not impossible,  was part  of that
 purpose  of  immediate   good  of   which  Nienna   speaketh.(13) For
 the fea of Miriel may have  departed by  necessity, but  it departed
 in the will not to return. Therein was her fault, for this  will was
 not under compulsion irresistible; it was a failure  in hope  by the
 fea, acceptance of the  weariness and  weakness of  the body,  as a

                                
                                                                       
 thing  beyond  healing,  and  which  therefore  was  not  healed.  But
 this  resolve  entailed  not only  abandoning her  own life,  but also
 the  desertion  of   her  spouse,   and  the   marring  of   his.  The
 justification which she urged is insufficient;  for by  the gift  of a
 child however  great, nor  indeed by  the gift  of many  children, the
 union  of  marriage  is  not  ended, having  further purpose.  For one
 thing,  Feanaro  will  be  deprived  of  the  mother's  part   in  his
 nurture.  Moreover,  if  she  would  return  she  need  bear  no more,
 unless by the renewal of rebirth her weariness were healed.            
  'Thus  Finwe  was  aggrieved  and  claimed   justice.  But   when  he
 called her and she did not return, in only  a few  years he  fell into
 despair.  Herein  lay  his  fault, and  failing in  Hope. But  also he
 founded  his  claim  mainly  upon his  desire for  children, consider-
 ing  his  own  self  and  his  loss  more  than  the  griefs  that had
 befallen his wife: that was a failing in full love.                    
  'The  fear  of  the  Eldar,  as  Nienna hath  said, cannot  be broken
 or  forced,*  and  the  motion  of  their  will  cannot  therefore  be
 predicted  with  certainty.  Yet  it  seemeth  to  me  that  there was
 hope  still  that after  repose in  Mandos the  fea of  Miriel should
 return of itself to its nature, which is to desire to inhabit  a body.
 This  strange  event  should  issue, rather  than in  dissolving their
 union, in  the use  by Finwe  of the  patience of  full love,  and the
 learning  of  Hope;  and  in  the  return  of  Miriel, wider  in mind,
 and  renewed  in  body.   Thus  together   they  might   foster  their
 great son  with joined  love, and  his right  nurture be  assured. But
 the fea of Miriel hath  not been  lett in  peace, and  by importuning
 its  will  hath  been  hardened; and  in that  resolve it  must remain
 without  change  while  Arda  lasteth,  if  the  Statute  is declared.
 Thus the impatience  of Finwe  will close  the door  of life  upon the
 fea  of  his  spouse.  This  is  the  greater fault.  For it  is more
 unnatural  that  one  of  the  Eldar  should  remain  for ever  as fea
 without  body   than  that   one  should   remain  alive   wedded  but
 bereaved.  A  trial  was  imposed  upon  Finwe  (not by  Miriel only),
 and he hath asked for justice, and relief.'                            
                                                                       
 (* By this is meant primarily  the fear  naked and  unhoused. Living,
 the fear can be deluded; and they can be dominated by fear (of one of
 great power  such as  Melkor) and  so enslaved.  But these  things are
 wicked  and  tyrannous  and  are  done  by  Melkor  alone   among  the
 Valar. They beget only hatred and loathing in  the enslaved  (which is
 the sign of inmost and ultimate dissent). To no good purpose can such
 means be used, for they render all purposes evil.)                     

   'Nay!'  said  Vaire suddenly.  'The fea  of Miriel  is with  me. I
 know  it  well,  for  it  is  small.  But  it  is  strong;  proud and
 obdurate. It is of that sort who having  said: this  I will  do, make
 their  words  a  doom  irrevocable  unto  themselves.  She  will  not
 return to life, or to Finwe, even if he waiteth  until the  ageing of
 the world. Of this he is aware,  I deem,  as his  words show.  For he
 did  not found  his claim  on his  desire for  children only,  but he
 said  to the  King: my  heart warns  me that  Miriel will  not return
 while  Arda  lasts.  Of  what  sort  the knowledge  or belief  may be
 that  he  would  thus  express,  and whence  it came  to him,  1 know
 not.  But  fea  perceiveth fea  and knoweth  the disposition  of the
 other,  in  marriage  especially,  in  ways  that  we   cannot  fully
 understand.  We  cannot  probe  all  the  mystery  of  the  nature of
 the  Children.  But  if  we  are  to speak  of Justice,  then Finwe's
 belief  must  be  taken  into  account;  and  if, as  I judge,  it is
 well-founded,  not  a  fantasy  of his  own inconstancy,  but against
 his will and desire,  we must  otherwise assess  the faults  of these
 two.  When  one  of  the  Queens  of  the  Valar,  Varda  or Yavanna,
 or even  I, departeth  for ever  from Arda,  and leaveth  her spouse,
 will he or nill he,(14) then let that  spouse judge  Finwe, if  he will,
 remembering   that   Finwe   cannot   follow  Miriel   without  doing
 wrong  to  his  nature,  nor  without  forsaking  the  duty  and bond
 of his fatherhood.'                                                  
   When Vaire  had spoken,  the Valar  sat long  in silence,  until at
 length  Manwe  spoke  again.  'There  is  reason  and  wisdom  in all
 that  has  been  said.  Truly,  in  the  matter  of  the  Children we
 approach  mysteries,  and  the  key to  their full  understanding was
 not  given  to  us. In  part the  Children are  indeed one,  or maybe
 the  chief,  of  those  "new  things"  of  which  Aule  hath spoken.*
 Yet  they  came  into  Arda  Marred,  and  were  destined to  do so,
 and  to  endure  the  Marring,  even  though   they  came   in  their
 beginning  from  beyond  Ea.  For  these  "new  things",  manifesting
 the finger of Iluvatar,  as we  say: they  may have  no past  in Arda
 and  be  unpredictable  before  they  appear,  yet  they  have there-
 after  future  operations  which  may  be  predicted,  according  to
 wisdom  and  knowledge,  since  they  become  at  once  part  of  Ea,
 and part of the past of all  thar followeth.  We may  say, therefore,
 that the  Elves are  destined to  know "death"  in their  mode, being
                                                                     
   (*  Meaning that though they appeared in the Great Theme, they were
 introduced by Eru himself, not mediated by any of the Ainur; and even
 so they were not fully revealed to the Ainur.)                       

                                                      
                                                                     
 sent  into  a  world  which  contains  "death",  and  having   a  form
 for  which  "death"  is possible.  For though  by their  prime nature,
 unmarred,  they  rightly  dwell  as  spirit  and  body  coherent,  yet
 these are  two things,  not the  same, and  their severance  (which is
 "death") is a possibility inherent in their union.                   
   'Aule  and  Nienna err,  I deem;  for what  each saith  in different
 words  meaneth   this  much:   that  Death   which  cometh   from  the
 Marrer  may  be  one  thing,  and  Death  as an  instrument of  Eru be
 another  thing  and  discernible:  the  one   being  of   malice,  and
 therefore  only  evil  and  inevitably grievous;  the other,  being of
 benevolence,   intending   particular   and   immediate    good,   and
 therefore  not evil,  and either  not grievous  or easily  and swiftly
 to be healed. For the  evil and  the grief  of death  are in  the mere
 severance  and  breach of  nature, which  is alike  in both  (or death
 is  not  their  name);  and  both  occur  only  in  Arda  Marred,  and
 accord with its processes.                                           
   'Therefore  I  deem  that  Ulmo  is to  be followed  rather, holding
 that  Eru  need  not  and  would  not desire  as a  special instrument
 of his benevolence  a thing  that is  evil. Wherefore,  indeed, should
 he  intrude  death  as  a  "new  thing"  into  a world  that suffereth
 it already? Nonetheless, Eru is Lord of All, and  will use  as instru-
 ments  of  his  final  purposes,  which  are  good, whatsoever  any of
 his creatures, great or small, do or devise, in his despite or  in his
 service. But we must hold that it is his will that those of  the Eldar
 who  serve  him  should  not  be  cast  down by  griefs or  evils that
 they  encounter  in  Arda  Marred;  but  should  ascend to  a strength
 and  wisdom  that  they  would  not  otherwise  have   achieved:  that
 the Children of Eru should grow to be daughters and sons.            
   'For  Arda  Unmarred  hath  two  aspects  or  senses.  The  first is
 the  Unmarred  that  they  discern in  the Marred,  if their  eyes are
 not dimmed,  and yearn  for, as  we yearn  for the  Will of  Eru: this
 is  the  ground  upon  which  Hope  is  built.   The  second   is  the
 Unmarred  that  shall  be:  that  is,  to speak  according to  Time in
 which  they  have  their  being,  the  Arda  Healed,  which  shall  be
 greater and more fair  than the  first, because  of the  Marring: this
 is  the  Hope   that  sustaineth.   It  cometh   not  only   from  the
 yearning  for  the  Will  of  Iluvatar the  Begetter (which  by itself
 may  lead  those  within  Time  to  no  more  than  regret),  but also
 from trust in  Eru the  Lord everlasting,  that he  is good,  and that
 his  works  shall  all  end  in  good.  This  the Marrer  hath denied,
 and in this denial is the root of evil, and its end is in despair.
   'Therefore,  notwithstanding  the  words  of   Vaire,  I   abide  by

 that  which  I  said  first.  For  though  she speaketh  not without
 knowledge,  she  uttereth  opinion  and  not  certainty.  The  Valar
 have  not  and  must  not  presume  certainty  with  regard  to  the
 wills  of  the Children.  Nor, even  were they  certain in  this one
 case  concerning  the  fea of  Miriel, would  that unmake  the union
 of  love  that  once  was  between  her  and  her spouse,  or render
 void  the  judgement  that  constancy  to  it  would  in Finwe  be a
 better  and  fairer  course,  more  in  accord  with  Arda Unmarred,
 or with the will of Eru in permitting this thing to befall  him. The
 Statute openeth the liberty of  a lower  road, and  accepting death,
 countenanceth death, and cannot heal  it. If  that liberty  is used,
 the evil of the death  of Miriel  will continue  to have  power, and
 will bear fruit in sorrow.                                         
   'But  this  matter  I  now  commit  to  Namo  the  Judge.  Let him
 speak last! '                                                      
                                                                   
   Then  Namo  Mandos  spoke,  saying:  'All  that  I  have  heard  I
 have  considered  again;  though   naught  pertinent   to  judgement
 hath  been  brought  forward  that  was  not  already  considered in
 the making of the Statute. Let the Statute stand, for it is just.
   'It is our part to rule Arda, and to counsel  the Children,  or to
 command  them  in  things  committed  to  our  authority.  Therefore
 it is our task  to deal  with Arda  Marred, and  to declare  what is
 just  within  it.  We  may  indeed  in counsel  point to  the higher
 road,  but  we  cannot  compel any  free creature  to walk  upon it.
 That  leadeth  to  tyranny,  which  disfigureth  good and  maketh it
 seem hateful.                                                      
   'Healing  by final  Hope, as  Manwe hath  spoken of  it, is  a law
 which one can give to oneself only; of others  justice alone  can be
 demanded.  A  ruler  who  discerning  justice  refuseth  to  it  the
 sanction  of  law,   demanding  abnegation   of  rights   and  self-
 sacrifice, will not drive  his subjects  to these  virtues, virtuous
 only  if  free,  but  by unnaturally  making justice  unlawful, will
 drive  them  rather  to  rebellion  against  all  law.  Not  by such
 means will Arda be healed.                                         
   'It is right,  therefore, that  this just  Statute should  be pro-
 claimed,  and  those  that  use  it  shall be  blameless, whatsoever
 followeth after. Thus shall the Tale of the  Eldar, within  the Tale
 of Arda, be fashioned.                                             
   'Hearken  now,  O  Valar! To  me foretelling * is granted  no less
                                                                   
  (* By  which  was  meant prophecy  concerning things  which neither
 reason upon evidence,  nor (for  the Valar)  knowledge of the Great.)

 than  doom,  and  I  will  proclaim  now  to you  things both  near and
 far.  Behold!  Indis  the  fair shall  be made  glad and  fruitful, who
 might  else  have  been  solitary.  For  not  in  death  only  hath the
 Shadow   entered   into   Aman   with  the   coming  of   the  Children
 destined to  suffer; there  are other  sorrows, even  if they  be less.
 Long  she  hath  loved  Finwe,  in  patience  and  without  bitterness.
 Aule  nameth  Feanor  the  greatest  of  the  Eldar,  and   in  potency
 that is  true. But  I say  unto you  that the  children of  Indis shall
 also  be  great,  and  the  Tale  of  Arda  more  glorious  because  of
 their  coming.  And  from  them  shall  spring things  so fair  that no
 tears  shall  dim  their  beauty;  in  whose being  the Valar,  and the
 Kindreds  both  of  Elves  and  of  Men  that  are  to  come  shall all
 have  part,  and  in  whose  deeds  they shall  rejoice. So  that, long
 hence  when  all  that  here  is,  and  seemeth  yet  fair  and impreg-
 nable,  shall  nonetheless  have  faded  and  passed  away,  the  Light
 of  Aman  shall  not  wholly  cease  among  the  free  peoples  of Arda
 until the End.                                                         
    'When  he  that  shall  be  called  Earendil  setteth foot  upon the
 shores  of  Aman,  ye  shall  remember  my  words.  In  that   hour  ye
 will  not say  that the  Statute of  Justice hath  borne fruit  only in
 death;  and  the  griefs  that  shall  come  ye  shall  weigh   in  the
 balance,  and  they  shall  not  seem  too  heavy  compared   with  the
 rising of the light when Valinor groweth dim.'                         
    'So be it!' said Manwe.(15)                                         
                                                                       
    Therefore   the  Statute   was  proclaimed,   and  the   meeting  of
 Indis and Finwe took place, as has been told.                          
    But  after  a  while  Nienna  came  to  Manwe,  and she  said: 'Lord
 of  Aman,  it  is  now  made  clear  that  the death  of Miriel  was an
 evil  of  Arda  Marred, for  with the  coming hither  of the  Eldar the
 Shadow   hath   found   an   entrance   even  into   Aman.  Nonetheless
 Aman  remaineth  the  Realm  of   the  Valar,   wherein  thy   will  is
 paramount.   Though   the  death   of  severance   may  find   out  the
 Eldar  in  thy  realm,  yet  one  thing  cometh  not  to it,  and shall
 not:*  and  that  is  deforming  and  decay.  Behold  then!   The  body
 of  Miriel  lieth  unmarred,  even as  a fair  house that  awaiteth its
 mistress,  who  hath   gone  upon   a  journey.   In  this   at  least,
                                                                       
 Theme, could discover  or swiftly  perceive. Only  rarely and  in great
 matters was Mandos moved to prophecy.                                  
                                                                       
   (* Yet after the slaying of the Trees it did so while Melkor remained
 there;  and  the  body  of  Finwe,  slain by  Melkor, was  withered and
 passed into dust, even as the Trees themselves had withered.)          

 therefore,  her  death  differeth  from  death  in  Middle-earth: that
 for the houseless fea a fair body is still ready, and rebirth  is not
 the only  gate by  which it  may return  to life,  if thou  wilt grant
 her  leave  and  give  her thy  blessing. Moreover  the body  has lain
 long  now  in  repose  in  the  peace  of  Lorien;  and  must  not the
 rulers  of  Arda  have  respect  even  to bodies  and all  fair forms?
 Why  should  it  lie  idle  and  untenanted,  when doubtless  it would
 not now afflict the fea with weariness, but rejoice  it with  hope of
 doing? '                                                             
   But  this  Mandos  forbade.   'Nay,'  said   he,  'if   Miriel  were
 rehoused,   she   would  be   again  among   the  Living,   and  Finwe
 would  have  two  spouses  alive  in  Aman.  Thus  would  the  Statute
 be  contravened,  and  my  Doom  set  at  naught.  And   injury  would
 be  done  also  to Indis,  who used  the liberty  of the  Statute, but
 would  now  by  its  breach  be  deprived, for  Finwe would  desire to
 return to his former spouse.'                                        
   But  Nienna  said  to  Mandos:  'Nay!  Let  Miriel  have the  joy of
 her body and of  the use  of its  skills in  which she  delighted, and
 dwell not for ever  remembering only  her brief  life before,  and its
 ending  in  weariness!  Can  she  not  be  removed  from the  Halls of
 Waiting,  and  taken  into  the  service  of  Vaire?  If   she  cometh
 never   thence,   nor   seeketh   to  walk   among  the   Living,  why
 shouldst  thou  hold  the  Doom  set  at  naught,  or fear  for griefs
 that might arise? Pity must have a part in Justice.'                 
   But  Mandos  was  unmoved.  And  the  body of  Miriel lay  at rest
 in  Lorien,  until   the  escape   of  Melkor   the  Marrer   and  the
 Darkening  of  Valinor.  In  that  evil  time Finwe  was slain  by the
 Marrer  himself,  and  his  body  was  burned  as by  lightning stroke
 and   was   destroyed.   Then   Miriel   and   Finwe   met   again  in
 Mandos,   and  lo!   Miriel  was   glad  of   the  meeting,   and  her
 sadness  was  lightened;  and  the  will  in  which  she had  been set
 was released.                                                        
   And  when  she  learned  of Finwe  all that  had befallen  since her
 departure  (for  she  had  given  no  heed to  it, nor  asked tidings,
 until  then)  she  was greatly  moved; and  she said  to Finwe  in her
 thought: 'I erred in  leaving thee  and our  son, or  at the  least in
 not soon returning  after brief  repose; for  had I  done so  he might
 have  grown  wiser.  But  the  children  of  Indis  shall  redress his
 errors  and  therefore  I  am glad  that they  should have  being, and
 Indis  hath  my  love.  How  should  I  bear  grudge  against  one who
 received   what   I   rejected   and   cherished  what   I  abandoned.
 Would that I might set  all the  Tale of  our people  and of  thee and

 thy  children  in  a  tapestry  of  many  colours,  as   a  memorial
 brighter  than  memory!  For  though  I  am  cut  off  now  from the
 world,  and I  accept that  Doom as  just, I  would still  watch and
 record all that befalls those dear to me, and their  offspring also.
 [Added: I feel again the call of my body and its skills.]'         
   And  Finwe  said  to  Vaire:  'Dost  thou  hear  the   prayer  and
 desire  of  Miriel?  Why  will  Mandos  refuse  this redress  of her
 griefs,  that  her  being  may  not  be  void  and   without  avail?
 Behold!  I  instead will  abide with  Mandos for  ever, and  so make
 amends. For surely, if I remain  unhoused, and  forgo life  in Arda,
 then his Doom will be inviolate.'                                  
   'So  thou  may  deem,'  answered  Vaire;  'yet  Mandos  is  stern,
 and he will not readily permit  a vow  to be  revoked. Also  he will
 consider  not  only  Miriel and  thee, but  Indis and  thy children,
 whom thou seemest to forget, pitying now Miriel only.'             
   'Thou  art  unjust  to  me  in  thy thought,'  said Finwe.  'It is
 unlawful  to  have  two  wives,  but  one may  love two  women, each
 differently,  and  without  diminishing  one  love by  another. Love
 of Indis did not drive out love of  Miriel; so  now pity  for Miriel
 doth not lessen my  heart's care  for Indis.  But Indis  parted from
 me  without  death.  I had  not seen  her for  many years,  and when
 the  Marrer  smote  me  I  was  alone.  She  hath  dear  children to
 comfort  her,  and  her  love, I  deem, is  now most  for Ingoldo.(16)
 His  father  she  may  miss;  but  not  the  father of  Feanaro! But
 above  all  her  heart now  yearns for  the halls  of Ingwe  and the
 peace  of  the Vanyar,  far from  the strife  of the  Noldor. Little
 comfort should I bring her, if I returned; and  the lordship  of the
 Noldor hath passed to my sons.'(17)                                
   But  when  Mandos  was  approached  he  said  to  Finwe:   'It  is
 well  that  thou  desirest  not to  return, for  this I  should have
 forbidden,  until  the  present griefs  are long  passed. But  it is
 better still that  thou hast  made this  offer, to  deprive thyself,
 of thy free will, and out of pity for another. This is a  counsel of
 healing, out of which good may grow.'                              
   Therefore  when  Nienna  came  to  him  and  renewed   her  prayer
 for Miriel,  he consented,  accepting the  abnegation of  Finwe as
 her  ransom.  Then  the  fe'a  of  Miriel  was  released   and  came
 before  Manwe  and  received  his  blessing;  and  she went  then to
 Lorien  and  re-entered  her  body,  and  awoke  again, as  one that
 cometh  out  of  a  deep  sleep;  and  she  arose  and her  body was
 refreshed.  But  after she  had stood  in the  twilight of  Lorien a
 long  while in  thought, remembering  her former  life, and  all the

 tidings  that  she  had  learned,  her  heart  was still  sad, and  she had
 no  desire  to  return  to  her  own  people.  Therefore  she  went  to the
 doors  of  the  House  of  Vaire  and  prayed  to  be  admitted;  and  this
 prayer  was  granted,   although  in   that  House   none  of   the  Living
 dwelt  nor  have  others  ever  entered  it  in  the  body.(18) But  Miriel
 was   accepted  by   Vaire  and   became  her   chief  handmaid;   and  all
 tidings  of  the  Noldor  down   the  years   from  their   beginning  were
 brought  to  her,  and  she  wove  them  in  webs  historial,  so  fair and
 skilled  that   they  seemed   to  live,   imperishable,  shining   with  a
 light  of  many  hues  fairer   than  are   known  in   Middle-earth.  This
 labour  Finwe  is  at  times  permitted  to  look   upon.  And   still  she
 is  at  work,  though  her  name  has   been  changed.   For  now   she  is
 named  Firiel,*  which  to  the  Eldar  signifies  'She  that died',(19) and
 also  'She  that sighed'.  As fair  as the  webs of  Firiel is  praise that
 is given seldom even to works of the Eldar.                                
                                                                           
 * For  before  the  passing of  Miriel the  Eldar of  Valinor had  no word
   for  'dying'  in   this  manner,   though  they   had  words   for  being
   destroyed (in body) or being slain. But  fire' meant  to 'expire',  as of
   one sighing or  releasing a  deep breath;  and at  the passing  of Miriel
   she had sighed a  great sigh,  and then  lay still;  and those  who stood
   by  said  firie,  'she  hath  breathed  forth'.  This  word   the  Eldar
   afterwards  used of  the death  of Men.  But though  this sigh  they take
   to  be  a symbol  of release,  and the  ceasing of  the body's  life, the
   Eldar  do  not  confound the  breath of  the body  with the  spirit. This
   they  call,  as  hath been  seen, fea  or faire',  of which  the ancient
   significance  seems  to  be  rather  'radiance'. For  though the  fea in
   itself is not visible to bodily eyes, it is in light that the  Eldar find
   the most fitting symbol in bodily  terms of  the indwelling  spirit, 'the
   light of  the house'  or coacalina  as they  also name  it. And  those in
   whom  the  fea  is  strong  and  untainted,  they  say,  appear  even to
   mortal eyes to shine at times translucent (albeit  faintly), as  though a
   lamp burned within.                                                      
                                                                           
 At  the  end  of  the  manuscript of  Laws and  Customs among  the Eldar
 are  several  pages  of  roughly written  'Notes', and  I append  here a
 portion of this material.                                                  
                                                                           
                                     (i)                                    
 This  debate  of  the  Valar  not  wholly  feigned.  For  the   Eldar  were
 permitted  to   attend  all   conclaves,  and   many  did   so  (especially
 those  that  so  deeply  concerned  them,  their  fate,  and   their  place
 in  Arda,  as  did  this  matter).  Reference  is made  to things  that had
 not  at  that  time  happened  (is  it  .....   prophecy?),  but   that  is

                                                                         
                                                                         
 partly due to later commentators. For the 'Statute of Finwe and          
 Miriel' was  among the  documents of  lore most  deeply studied          
 and  pondered.  And  as  has  been  seen  many   questions  and          
 answers arising were appended.                                           
   [?Thus]  questions were  also asked  concerning the  fate and          
 death of Men. All [?read Also] concerning other 'speaking', and          
 therefore 'reasonable',  kinds: Ents,  Dwarves, Trolls,  Orcs -          
 and the speaking of beasts such as Huan, or the Great Eagles.            
                                                                         
 Later my father commented  against the  beginning of  this note  that the
 Eldar would not be present at this debate  ('certainly not  Finwe!'), and
 that  the  Yalar  would  have  informed  the  loremasters  of  the  Eldar
 concerning it.                                                           
                                                                         
                                   (ii)                                   
                                                                         
 [The]  'Fate  of  Men'  was  also  later  discussed  by  the  Eldar, when
 they  had  met  Men  and  knew  them.  But  they  had   little  evidence,
 and   therefore   did   not   know   or   assert,   but   'supposed'   or
 'guessed'.   One   such  supposition   was  that   Elves  and   Men  will
 become  one  people.  Another  is  that  some  Men,  if  they  desire it,
 will  be  permitted  to  join the  Elves in  New Arda,  or to  visit them
 there  -  though  it  will  not  be  the  home  of  Men. The  most widely
 held  supposition  is  that  the  fate  of Men  is wholly  different, and
 that they will not be concerned with Arda at all.                        
                                                                         
 At  the end  of this  note my  father wrote  subsequently: 'But  see full
 treatment  of  this  later  in  Athrabeth Finrod  ah Andreth.'  This work
 constitutes Part Four in this book.                                      
                                                                         
                                   (iii)                                  
                                                                         
 Fate   of   'Immortal'   Elves:   ?   to  inhabit   New  Arda   (or  Arda
 Healed).  Probably  not,  in  a  physical  sense.  Since  what  is  meant
 by  'The  Tale  of  Arda'  seems  to  be  this.  The  World and  its Time
 appears  to  begin  and  end  simply  because  it  is   bounded,  neither
 infinite nor eternal. Its finite 'story'  when complete  will be,  like a
 work  of  art,  beautiful  and  good  (as  a  whole),  and  from outside,
 sc.  not  in  Time  or  its  Time,  it  can  be contemplated  with wonder
 and  delight  -  especially  by  those  who  have   taken  part   in  its
 'Tale'.  Only  in   that  sense   will  Elves   (or  Men)   inhabit  Arda
 Complete.   But   New   Arda'   or    Arda   Unmarred    (Healed)   would
 imply  a   continuance,  beyond   the  End   (or  Completion).   Of  that
 nothing  can  be  surmised.  Unless  it  be  this.  Since the  Elves (and
 Men)  were  made  for  Arda,  the  satisfaction  of  their   nature  will

 require   Arda  (without   the  malice   of  the   Marrer):  therefore
 before  the  Ending  the  Marring  will  be  wholly  undone  or healed
 (or  absorbed  into good,  beauty, and  joy). In  that region  of Time
 and Place the  Elves will  dwell as  their home,  but not  be confined
 to it. But no blessed spirits from what is still to us the  future can
 intrude  into  our  own  periods  of  Time.  For  to  contemplate  the
 Tale of Arda the Blessed  must (in  spirit or  whole being)  leave the
 Time  of  Arda.  But  others  use another  analogy, saying  that there
 will  indeed  be  a  New  Arda,  rebuilt  from  the  beginning without
 Malice,  and  that  the  Elves  will  take  part  in  this   from  the
 beginning.  It  will  be  in Ea,  say they  - for  they hold  that all
 Creation  of  any  sort  must  be in  Ea, proceeding  from Eru  in the
 same  way,  and  therefore  being  of  the  same  Order.  They  do not
 believe   in   contemporaneous   non-contiguous   worlds   except   as
 an  amusing  fantasy  of  the  mind.  They   are  (say   they)  either
 altogether  unknowable,  even  as  to  whether  they  are or  are not,
 or else if there are any  intersections (however  rare) they  are only
 provinces of one Ea.                                                 
                                                                     
 At the head of the page  on which  this note  stands my  father wrote:
 'But see Athrabeth': see (ii) above.                                 

                                 NOTES.                                
                                                                      
 [These notes refer to the part of the text of Laws and Customs among
 the Eldar given from the manuscript A, pp. 233 ff.]                   
                                                                      
  1. The spelling Feanaro is found also in the first text of  the tale,
     FM  1  (see  p.  206,  footnote).  The  name is  variously written
     subsequently in A (Feanaro, Feanaro, Feanaro).                   
  2. For the form Lorien with short vowel see p. 56 note 2 and  p. 148,
     $3.                                                               
  3. For the  doom of  Mandos (the  'Statute of  Finwe and  Miriel') in
     this work see  pp. 225  - 6.  In FM  1 the  doom, in  its earliest
     expression, is given at this  point in  the story  (pp. 206  - 7).
  4. your union: your is plural, and not  inconsistent with  thy, thee,
     thou           in           the           same           sentence.
  5. in Tuna: see p. 193, $52, and p. 282.                             
  6. My father first  wrote 'an  aimenel' (>  aimenal), but  changed it
     immediately to 'a lirulin', writing 'lark' in the margin.         
  7. The reference in the footnote here is to the passage in A (omitted
     in B) which is given in note 22 on p. 230. As in that  passage the
     name Nolofinwe' is written with a tilde over the  N. The  order of
     the  names  of  the daughters  of Finwe  and Indis  are as  in the

      emended text of FM 1, p. 207. See further p. 262 and note 10.       
  8.  The brackets are in the original.                                   
  9.  Cf. the  Ainulindale $13  (p. 11):  Yet some  things there  are that
      [the Ainur] cannot see  ...; for  to none  but himself  has Iluvatar
      revealed all that he has in store, and in every age there come forth
      things that are new and have no foretelling, for they do  not spring
      from the past.'                                                     
 10.  It is not  told elsewhere  that Aule  was the  most eager  among the
      Valar that  the Elves  should be  summoned to  Valinor. Cf.  what is
      said  earlier  in Laws  and Customs  (p. 219,  found in  both texts,
      but not elsewhere) concerning the  motive of  the Valar  in bringing
      the Elves to Aman.                                                  
 11.  As with the reference to Aule mentioned in note 10,  it is  not told
      elsewhere  that Ulmo  dissented from  the decision  of the  Valar to
      bring Melkor to Mandos. Cf.  the passage  in the  first text  of the
      Valaquenta, lost  in the  final form:  '[Ulmo's] counsels  grew ever
      away from the mind of Manwe' (p. 202).                              
 12.  At  this  point  there  originally followed:  'Then when  others had
      spoken  Manwe  answered:  'There  is  reason in  all that  hath been
      said...'  Manwe's  speech  was  apparently  abandoned  after  a  few
      lines,  and  the  speeches  of Nienna,  Ulmo, and  Vaire introduced;
      after which Manwe's speech reappears (p. 244).                      
 13.  This  sentence  ('And I  doubt not...')  was subsequently  placed in
      brackets.                                                           
 14.  nill is the old negative verb 'will not': thus 'will he or  nill he'
      means 'whether he wills  it or  wills it  not' (surviving  as willy-
      nilly).                                                             
 15.  The text stops here, not at the foot of a page. It takes up again on
      a new sheet, in a rougher script that  continues to  the end  of the
      work; but my father  paginated this  further text  continuously with
      the preceding.                                                      
 16.  Ingoldo: the mother-name of Fingolfin (p. 230 note 22).             
 17.  In the account of the  marriage of  Finwe and  Indis in  the present
      work (p. 238) there is no mention of this estrangement, or  at least
      separation.  In  the  final  work  on  Chapter   6  of   the  Quenta
      Silmarillion, however, it is implied that Indis did not  depart with
      Finwe to Formenos, because it  is told  that Feanor's  wife Nerdanel
      would not  go with  him into  banishment and  'asked leave  to abide
      with Indis' (p. 279, $53d).                                         
 18.  On Miriel's entry into the House of Vaire see p. 263 note 9.        
 19.  Firiel: see the Etymologies in Vol.V, p. 381, stem PHIR.            
                                                                         
                                    *                                     

                         LATER VERSIONS OF THE STORY OF                       
                                FINWE AND MIRIEL                              
                           IN THE QUENTA SILMARILLION.                       
                                                                             
 The  next version  of the  story was  a short  typescript derived  closely for
 the   most   part   from   that   in   Laws  and   Customs  among   the  Eldar
 (pp. 236 - 9)., it is entitled Of Finwe and Miriel, and begins:  Finwe, first
 lord  of  the  Noldor, had  to wife  Miriel, who  was called  the Serinde...'
 (cf. p. 236). There is  no indication  that it  was intended  to stand  in the
 text  of  the  Quenta  Silmarillion, but  there can  scarcely be  any question
 that my father did so intend it; I will refer to it therefore as 'FM 2'.     
  The  most  important  divergence  in  FM  2  from  the  text  in  Laws  and
 Customs  is  at  the  words  (p.  237):  'Then  Manwe  took  pity  upon Finwe,
 and  he  considered  his  plea,  and  when  Mandos  had  spoken  his  doom  as
 has  been  recorded,  Manwe  called  Finwe  to  him...'  For  the  purpose  of
 the  inclusion  of  the  story  in  the narrative  of the  Quenta Silmarillion
 the  judgement  of  Mandos  had obviously  to be  given at  this point  (as it
 had  been  in  the  original  version,  FM  1,  p.  206);  and  in  FM  2  the
 judgement  was  preceded  by  a  reference  to  the  Debate  of the  Valar and
 some  indication  of  the  nature  of  their  concern.  The word  'Statute' is
 used  here  in  a  wider  and  a  narrower  sense:  as a  name for  the record
 made  by  the  Eldar  of  all  matters  relevant to  the judgement  of Mandos,
 as well as the title of the actual judgement.                                
                                                                             
  Then   Manwe   was   moved   with  pity   for  Finwe,   and  he             
 considered  his plea.  But because  this seemed  to him  a great             
 matter and not lightly to be  judged, he  summoned the  Valar in             
 Council. Of the long  debate that  they held  the Elves  wrote a             
 record, for their chieftains were permitted to be present.(1) This             
 was called 'The Statute of Finwe and  Miriel' and  was preserved             
 among the chief of their books of law; for in the debate, before             
 the  Statute  was  at  last  established  by  the  doom  of Namo             
 Mandos, many matters concerning the Eldar,  their fate  in Arda,             
 their death and re-birth and the nature of their  marriage, were             
 examined and  judged. And  the Valar  were greatly  concerned to             
 see that all their labour for the guarding of Valinor was  of no             
 avail, to keep out evil and the shadow of Melkor, if  any thing,             
 living or unliving, was brought thither out of  Middle-earth and             
 left free or unguarded; and they perceived at last how great was             
 the power of Melkor in Arda, in the making of  which as  it was *            
                                                                             
  (* Arda  Hastaina,  or  'Arda  Marred',  as  they  named  it.  For  Arda,  or
 in  full  Arda  Alahasta,  the  'Unmarred',  they  named  the   thought  which
 they  had,  each  severally,  or as  a Council  under Manwe,  of that  Arda in)
 which Melkor had no part.                                                    

        
                                                                           
 his  part  was  such  that  all  things,  save  in  Aman  alone,  had  an
 inclination  to  evil  and  to  perversion  from  their  right  forms and
 courses.   Wherefore   those  whose   being  began   in  Arda,   and  who
 moreover  were  by   nature  a   union  of   spirit  and   body,  drawing
 the  sustenance  of  the  latter  from  Arda  Marred,  must  ever  be, in
 some  degree,  liable  to  grief, to  do or  to suffer  things unnatural;
 and  though  dwelling  in  Aman  might  be  a  guard  against  this evil,
 it  was  not a  full cure,  unless in  long ages.  And with  this thought
 a  shadow   passed  over   the  hearts   of  the   Valar,  even   in  the
 noon-tide  of   the  Blessed   Realm,  presage   of  the   sorrows  which
 the Children should bring into the world.                                  
 Now  this  was  the  doom  of  Namo  in  this  case,  and  in  all  cases
 where  a  marriage  of  the  Eldar  might  be  sundered  by the  death of
 one  only  of  the  partners.  'Marriage  among  the  Eldar  is   by  and
 for the Living...'                                                         
                                                                           
 The  doom  of  Mandos  in  FM  2  differs  from  the   form  in   Laws  and
 Customs  (pp. 225  - 6)  only in  detail of  expression and  not at  all in
 substance, except for some expansion at the very end.                      
                                                                           
 '...  For  it  must  be  clearly  understood  that, when  this will  not to
 return  has   been  solemnly   declared  and   ratified  by   Mandos,  then
 the  living  partner  may  take   another  spouse   lawfully.  For   it  is
 contrary  to  the  nature  of  the   Eldar  to   live  unwedded,   and  the
 Dead  may  not  compel  the  Living  to   remain  solitary   against  their
 will.  If  therefore  the  Living  take  another partner,  the will  of the
 Dead  shall  not  be  revoked,  but  shall  be  a   doom  of   Mandos.  For
 he  will  permit  none  of  the  Eldar  to  walk  alive  in  the  body  who
 has two spouses living also.'                                              
 This  in   brief  was   the  Doom   of  Mandos,   that  was   after  called
 the   Statute   of   Finwe  and   Miriel.  And   when  Mandos   had  spoken
 as  the   Mouth  of   Manwe,  the   Eldar  that   heard  him   asked:  'How
 shall  the  will  or  doom  be   known?';  and   it  was   answered:  'Only
 by   recourse   to   Manwe   and   the   pronouncement   of    Mandos.   In
 this  matter it  shall not  be lawful  for any  of the  Eldar to  judge his
 own   case.  For   who  among   the  Living   can  discover   the  thoughts
 of the Dead or presume the judgements of Mandos?'                          
 Then Manwe called Finwe to him...                                          
                                                                           
 Other  divergences  from  the  text  of  Laws  and  Customs  in  FM  2 were
 taken up into the final text (FM 4), which is given in full on pp. 256 ff.,
 and need not be set out here, or if lost from the final  text are  given in
 the notes to it.                                                           
 FM  2  was  followed  by  a  further   typescript,  'FM   3',  made   on  a

                                                            
                                                                        
 different  machine  (see  p.  300). This  is expressly  a chapter  of the
 Quenta  Silmarillion,  with  the  title  as  typed  Of  Feanor   and  the
 Darkening  of  Valinor,  changed  later  to  Of  Finwe  and  Miriel. This
 version was a good  deal reduced  by omissions,  and my  father evidently
 found  it  unsatisfactory,  for he  went on  to make  a further  and much
 more substantial version, 'FM 4', with which the  textual history  of the
 story of Finwe and Miriel comes to an end.                              
     It is clear  that when  making FM  3 and  FM 4  he had  the preceding
 texts in front of him, and  that he  selected variously  from them  as he
 sought to achieve a satisfactory form. To set out all the detail  of this
 development  would  take  much  space  but  serve  little  purpose, since
 very little was in fact omitted from the final, 're-expanded' text  FM 4;
 and I give this text here in full.                                      
     FM 4 has  a general  heading Of  the Silmarils  and the  Darkening of
 Valinor,  with  a  subtitle  Of  Finwe  and  Miriel (the  typescript then
 continues  with  further  'sub-chapters',  to  which  however  my  father
 subsequently  gave  numbers  as   chapters  in   their  own   right:  see
 p.  299).  The  paragraph numbers  provided for  reference do  not relate
 to  any  numbers previously  used, since  after the  opening the  text is
 entirely different; for the  'LQ' (1951)  version of  the opening  of the
 chapter see pp. 184 - 5, $$46, 46a - b.                                 
                                                                        
                    OF THE SILMARILS AND THE DARKENING                   
                                OF VALINOR.                              
                                                                        
                            OF FINWE AND MIRIEL.                         
                                                                        
     $1  Now  the   three  kindreds   of  the   Eldar  were   gathered  at
 last  in  Valinor,  and  Melkor  was  chained.  This  was   the  Noontide
 of  the  Blessed  Realm, the  fullness of  its glory  and bliss,  long in
 tale  of  years,  but  in  memory  too  brief.  In  those days  the Eldar
 became   full-grown   in   stature  of   body  and   of  mind,   and  the
 Noldor   advanced   ever   in   skill   and   knowledge;  and   the  long
 years  were  filled  with  their  joyful  labours,  in  which   many  new
 things  fair  and  wonderful  were  devised.  It  was  in this  time that
 the  Noldor  first  made  letters,  and  Rumil  of  Tuna  was   the  name
 of   the   lore-master  who   first  achieved   fitting  signs   for  the
 recording  of  speech  and  song,  some  for  graving  upon  metal  or in
 stone, others for drawing with brush or with pen.                       
     $2  It  came  to  pass  that  in Eldamar,  in the  house of  the King
 in  Tirion,  there was  born the  eldest of  the sons  of Finwe,  and the
 most   beloved,  Kurufinwe   was  his   name,  but   by  his   mother  he

 was  called  Feanor,*  Spirit  of  Fire,  by  which  title  he  is remem-
 bered in all the tales of the Noldor.                                   
    $3  Miriel  was  the   name  of   his  mother.   Her  hair   was  like
 silver;  and  she  was  slender  as  a  white flower  in the  grass. Soft
 and  sweet   was  her   voice,  and   she  sang   as  she   worked,  like
 rippling   water,   in   music   without  words.   For  her   hands  were
 more  skilled  to  make  things   fine  and   delicate  than   any  other
 hands  even  among  the  Noldor.  By  her  the   craft  of   needles  was
 devised;  and  if  but  one   fragment  of   the  broideries   of  Miriel
 were  seen  in  Middle-earth  it  would  be  held  dearer  than  a king's
 realm; for the  richness of  her devices  and the  fire of  their colours
 were  as  manifold  and  as  bright  as  the  wealth  of leaf  and flower
 and  wing  in   the  fields   of  Yavanna.   Therefore  she   was  called
 Serinde.+                                                               
    $4  The  love  of  Finwe  and  Miriel  was  great  and  full  of  joy,
 for  it began  in the  Blessed Realm  and in  days of  mirth. But  in the
 bearing  of  her  son  she  was  consumed  in  spirit  and body,  so that
 almost  all  strength  seemed  to   have  passed   from  her;   and  when
 she  had  named him (2) she said to  Finwe:  'Never  again  shall  I bear
 a  child,  for  strength  that  would  have  nourished  the life  of many
 has gone forth into Feanor.'                                            
    $5  Finwe  was   greatly  grieved,   for  the   Noldor  were   in  the
 youth  of  their  days,  but  were still  few in  number, and  he desired
 to  bring  forth  many  children  into  the  bliss   of  Aman.   He  said
 therefore:  'Surely  there  is  healing  in  Aman?  Here   all  weariness
 can find rest.'                                                         
    $6   But   when   Miriel   still   languished,   Finwe    sought   the
 counsel  of  Manwe,  and  Manwe  delivered  her  to  the  care   of  Irmo
 in Lorien.(3) At their  parting  (for  a  little  while  as  he  thought)
 Finwe   was   sad,   for   it   seemed   an   unhappy  chance   that  the
 mother  should  depart   and  miss   the  beginning   at  least   of  the
 childhood days of her son.                                              
    $7  'Unhappy  it  is  indeed,'  said  Miriel,  'and  I would  weep, if
 I  were  not  so  weary.  But  hold  me  blameless  in  this, and  in all
 that may come after. Rest now I must. Farewell, dear lord!'            
    $8  She  spoke  no  clearer  than  this  at  that  time,  but  in  her
 heart  she  yearned  not  only  for  sleep  and  rest  but  release  from
                                                                        
   (* [footnote to the text] Feanaro in the form of the speech of those
 days.)                                                                
                                                                        
   (+ [footnote to the text] Miriel Serinde: that is Byrde Miriel (Miriel
 the Broideress): quoth AElfwine.)                                       

 the labour of living. She  went then  to Lorien  and laid  her down
 to sleep beneath a  silver tree;  but though  she seemed  to sleep,
 her  spirit indeed  departed from  her body  and passed  in silence
 to the keeping of Mandos, and abode in the house of Vaire.(4)     
 The  maidens  of  Este  tended her  fair body  so that  it remained
 unwithered, but she did not return.                               
   $9  Finwe  lived  in  sorrow; and  he went  often to  the gardens
 of Lorien, and sitting beneath the silver  willows beside  the body
 of his wife he called her by  her names.  But it  was of  no avail,
 and  Finwe  alone in  all the  Blessed Realm  was bereaved  of joy.
 After  a while  he went  to Lorien  no more,  for it  increased his
 grief to see the fair form of Miriel that would not hear  his call.
 All his love he gave now to his  son; for  Feanor in  childhood was
 like his  mother in  voice and  countenance, and  Finwe was  to him
 both  father  and  mother  and  there  was  a  double bond  of love
 upon them.                                                        
   $10  Yet  Finwe  was  not  content,  being  young and  eager; and
 he still  desired to  have more  children to  bring mirth  into his
 house.  When,  therefore,  twelve  years had  passed he  went again
 to  Manwe.  'My  Lord,'  he  said,  'behold!  I am  bereaved. Alone
 among the Eldar I  have no  wife, and  must hope  for no  sons save
 one,  and  for  no  daughter.  Whereas  Ingwe  and Olwe  beget many
 children  in  the  bliss of  Aman. Must  I remain  ever so?  For my
 heart warns  me that  Miriel will  not return  again ever  from the
 house of Vaire.'                                                  
   $11   Then   Manwe   was   moved   with   pity  for   Finwe;  but
 because  this  seemed  to  him a  great matter,  and the  coming of
 death (albeit of free will) into the Blessed Realm a  grave portent
 not lightly to be  judged, he  summoned the  Valar in  Council, and
 bade  the  chieftains  and  loremasters  of  the  Eldar also  to be
 present.  Of  the  long  debate  of  the  Valar  the Eldar  wrote a
 record.  This  they  called  Namna Finwe  Miriello, the  Statute of
 Finwe and Miriel,(5) and  it  was  preserved  among  the  books  of
 their Law; for  in the  debate many  matters concerning  the Eldar,
 their fate in  Arda, and  their death  and re-birth,  were examined
 and  judged.  For  the  Valar  were greatly  concerned to  see that
 their labour for  the guarding  of Valinor  was unavailing,  if any
 thing,  living  or  unliving,  was brought  thither out  of Middle-
 earth,  and  they  perceived  now  more clearly  how great  was the
 hurt  that Melkor  of old  had done  to the  substance of  Arda, so
 that  all  those  who  were  incarnate and  drew the  sustenance of
 their bodies from Arda  Marred, must  ever be  liable to  grief, to

                                                  
                                                                  
 do  or  to  suffer  things  unnatural  in  Arda Unmarred.  And this
 marring  could  not  now  be  wholly  undone,  not  even  by Melkor
 repentant;  for  power had  gone forth  from him  and could  not be
 recalled, but would  continue to  work according  to the  will that
 had  set  it  in  motion.  And  with this  thought a  shadow passed
 over the  hearts of  the Valar,  presage of  the sorrows  which the
 Children should bring into the world.                             
   $12  But   when  all   was  said,   Manwe  commanded   Mandos  to
 speak  and  announce   his  judgement.   Then  Mandos   stood  upon
 the Doom-hill and said:                                           
   'It is the way of Life that Iluvatar hath  ordained for  you, his
 children, as ye know well, that the  life of  the Quendi  shall not
 end  until  the  end of  Arda; and  that they  shall take  each one
 spouse only and have no other in their  life, while  Arda endureth.
 But herein  no account  is taken  of Death,  which cometh  from the
 marring  of  Arda.  This  doom  is,  therefore,  now  made  by  the
 right of lawgiving that Iluvatar committed to Manwe.              
   When  the  spirit of  a spouse,  husband or  wife, shall  for any
 cause  pass  into the  keeping of  Mandos, then  the living  may be
 permitted  lawfully  to take  another spouse,  if the  former union
 be dissolved for ever.                                            
   $13  'How shall  a marriage  be ended  for ever?  By the  will of
 the Dead, or by the doom of  Mandos. By  the will  of the  Dead, if
 they refuse ever to return to the life of the body; by the  doom of
 Mandos, if he  will not  permit them  to return.  For a  union that
 was for the life of Arda is ended, if it  cannot be  resumed within
 the life of Arda.                                                 
   $14  'We  say  "by  the  will  of  the  Dead",  for  it  would be
 unjust that the Living should  for their  own purposes  confine the
 Dead in Mandos,  denying to  them all  hope of  return. It  is also
 unjust that the Dead by refusal  of life  should compel  the Living
 to remain solitary until the  End; and  therefore we  have declared
 that  in  such  case  the  Living  may  take  another  spouse.  But
 understand well that if this be done, then the  refusal of  life by
 the Dead shall be irrevocable,  and they  shall never  again return
 to  life in  the body.  For none  among the  Quendi shall  have two
 spouses at one time awake and alive.                              
   'This is the doom of Namo Mandos in this matter.'               
                                                                  
   $15   When   Mandos  had   spoken  thus,   the  Eldar   who  were
 present asked'. 'How then  shall the  will or  the doom  be known?'

 It  was  answered:  'Only  by  recourse  to   Manwe,  and   by  the
 pronouncement   of   Mandos.   For   who   among  the   Living  can
 discover  the  will  of  the  Dead,  or  presume the  judgements of
 Mandos?'                                                         
   $16  Then  Manwe  called  Finwe  to  him,  and  said:  'Thou hast
 heard the doom that has been  declared. If  Miriel, thy  wife, will
 not return, your (6) marriage is ended, and thou hast leave to take
 another  wife.  But  this  is  permission,  not  counsel.  For  the
 severance  cometh  from  the  marring  of   Arda;  and   those  who
 accept  this permission  accept the  marring, whereas  the bereaved
 who  remain  steadfast  belong in  spirit and  will to  Arda Unmar-
 red.  This  is  a  grave  matter upon  which the  fate of  many may
 depend. Be not in haste!'                                         
   $17  Finwe  answered:  'I  am  in  no  haste,  My  Lord,  and  my
 heart has no  desire, save  the hope  that when  this doom  is made
 clear  to  Miriel,  she  may  yet  relent  and  set  a  term  to my
 bereavement.'                                                     
   $18  Vaire  with  whom  Miriel  dwelt  made  known  to   her  the
 doom,(7) and spoke also  of  the  sorrow   of  Finwe.   But  Miriel
 answered: 'I came  hither to  escape from  the body,  and I  do not
 desire ever to return to it, My life has gone  out into  Feanor, my
 son. That gift I have  given to  him whom  I loved.  I can  give no
 more. Beyond Arda this may be healed, but not within it.'         
   $19  Then  Vaire  said  to  Mandos:  'The  spirit of  Miriel hath
 dwelt with me, and I know it.  It is  small, but  it is  strong and
 obdurate: one of those who having said  this will  I do  make their
 words  a  law  irrevocable  unto  themselves.  Unless  constrained,
 she will not return to life or to Finwe, not though he  should wait
 until the ageing of the world.'(8)                                
   $20  But  Mandos  said:  It  is  not  lawful  for  the  Valar  to
 constrain  the  Dead  to  return';  and he  summoned the  spirit of
 Miriel to appear before him. 'Thy  will must  rule in  this matter,
 spirit of Miriel, once  wife of  Finwe,' he  said. 'In  Mandos thou
 shalt abide. But take heed!  Thou art  of the  Quendi, and  even if
 thou  refuse  the body,  thou must  remain in  Arda and  within the
 time of its history. The Eldar are not as the Valar.  Their spirits
 are  less  strong  to  stand  than  thou  deemest.  Do  not wonder,
 then,  if  thy  will  should change  in time,  and this  doom which
 thou  takest  upon  thyself become  grievous to  thee. Yea,  and to
 many others!'                                                    
   $21  But  the  spirit  of Miriel  remained silent.  Mandos there-
 fore  accepted  her  choice,  and  she  went then  to the  Halls of

                                                 
                                                                        
 Waiting appointed to the Eldar and was left in peace.*(9)               
 Nonetheless   Mandos   declared   that   a   space   of   twelve   years
 should  pass  between  the  declaration  of  the  will  of the  Dead and
 the pronouncement of the doom of disunion.                              
  $22  During  that  time  Feanor  dwelt  in  the  care  of  his  father.
 Soon  he  began  to  show  forth  the skills  in hand  and mind  of both
 Finwe  and  Miriel.   As  he   grew  from   childhood  he   became  ever
 more  like  Finwe   in  stature   and  countenance,   but  in   mood  he
 resembled   Miriel  rather.   His  will   was  strong   and  determined,
 and  he  pursued  all  his  purposes   both  eagerly   and  steadfastly.
 Few ever changed his courses by counsel, none by force.                 
  $23  It  came  to  pass  that  after  three   years  more   Finwe  took
 as  second  wife  Indis the  fair. She  was in  all ways  unlike Miriel.
 She  was  not  of  the Noldor  but of  the Vanyar,  being the  sister of
 Ingwe;  and  she  was  golden-haired  and  tall  and  exceedingly  swift
 of  foot.  She  did  not  labour  with  her  hands,  but made  music and
 wove  words  into  song;  and  there  was  ever  light  and  mirth about
 her while the bliss of Aman lasted.                                     
  $24  She  loved  Finwe  dearly;  for  her  heart  had  turned   to  him
 long  before,  while  the  Vanyar  still  dwelt   with  the   Noldor  in
 Tuna.   In   those  days   she  had   looked  upon   the  Lord   of  the
 Noldor,  and  he  seemed  to  her  fairest  and  noblest  of  the Eldar,
 dark-haired  and  white  of  brow,  eager  of  face  but with  eyes full
 of  thought;  and  his  voice  and  mastery  of  words   delighted  her.
 Therefore   she   remained   unwedded   when   her  people   removed  to
 Valinor,  and  she  walked  often  alone  in  the  friths and  fields of
 the Valar, filling them with music.                                     
  $25   Now   Ingwe,   hearing   of   the   strange   grief   of   Finwe,
 and  desiring  to  lift  up  his  heart  and  withdraw  him   from  vain
 mourning   in   Lorien,  had   sent  messages   bidding  him   to  leave
 Tuna  for  a  while, and  to come  and dwell  for a  season in  the full
 light  of  the  Trees.  Finwe  thanked  him  but   did  not   go,  while
 there   was  yet   hope  that   Miriel  would   return.  But   when  the
 doom  of  Mandos  was   spoken,  it   came  into   his  heart   that  he
 must  seek  to  build his  life anew.  'Maybe, there  is healing  in the
 light  of  Laurelin  and  hope in  the blossom  of Telperion,'  he said.
 'I will take the counsel of Ingwe.'                                     
                                                                        
 (* [footnote to  the text]  But it  is said  that after  a time  she was
 permitted to return to the house of Vaire, and there it was her  part to
 record in web and broidery all the histories of the Kin of Finwe and the
 deeds of the Noldor.)                                                   

    $26   Therefore   one  day,   when  Feanor   was  far   abroad  walk-
 ing  in  the  mountains  in  the  strength  of  his  youth,  Finwe arose
 and   went  forth   from  Tuna   alone,  and   he  passed   through  the
 Kalakiryan,   and   went   towards   the   house   of  Ingwe   upon  the
 west   slopes   of  Oiolosse.   His  coming   was  unheralded   and  un-
 foreseen;  and  when  Indis  saw  Finwe  climbing   the  paths   of  the
 Mountain,  and  the  light  of  Laurelin  was  behind  him  as  a glory,
 without  forethought   she  sang   suddenly  in   great  joy,   and  her
 voice  went  up  as  a  song  of  the  lirulin * in the sky.  Then Finwe
 heard  that  song  falling  from  above,  and  he  looked  up   and  saw
 Indis  in  the  golden  light,  and  he  knew  in  that moment  that she
 loved  him  and  had  long done  so. Then  his heart  turned at  last to
 her;  and  he  believed  that  this  chance,  as  it  seemed,  had  been
 granted  for  the  comfort  of  them  both.  'Behold!'  he  said. 'There
 is indeed healing of grief in Aman!'                                    
    $27   In   one   year   from   their   meeting   upon   the  Mountain
 Finwe,  King  of  the  Noldor,  wedded  Indis,  sister  of   Ingwe;  and
 the  Vanyar  and  Noldor  for  the  most  part  rejoiced.  In  Indis was
 first  proved  true  the  saying: The  loss of  one may  be the  gain of
 another;   but   this   saying   also   she   found   true:   The  house
 remembers  the  builder,  though  others  may  dwell  in  it  after. For
 Finwe  loved  her  dearly,  and  was  glad  again;  and  she   bore  him
 five  children  whom  he  loved;+(10) yet  the   shadow  of   Miriel  did
 not  depart  from  the  house  of  Finwe,  nor  from  his heart;  and of
 all  whom   he  loved   Feanor  had   ever  the   chief  share   of  his
 thought.                                                                
    $28  The  wedding  of  the  father  was   not  pleasing   to  Feanor;
 and  though  it  did  not  lessen  the  love  between  them,  Feanor had
 no  great  love  for  Indis  or  her children.  As soon  as he  might he
 lived  apart  from  them,  exploring  the  land  of  Aman,   or  busying
 himself  with  the  lore  and  the  crafts  in  which  he  delighted. In
 those  unhappy  things  which  later   came  to   pass,  and   in  which
 Feanor  was  the  leader,  many  saw the  effect of  this breach  in the
 house  of  Finwe,  judging  that  if  Finwe  had  endured  his  loss and
 had  been  content   with  the   fathering  of   his  mighty   son,  the
 courses  of  Feanor  would  have  been   otherwise,  and   great  sorrow
 and  evil  might  have  been  prevented.  Yet  the  children   of  Indis
                                                                        
   (* [footnote to the text] The lark.)                                  
   (+ [footnote to the text] Findis, Fingolfin, Finvain, [Finarphin >]
 Finarfin and Faniel: three daughters, and two sons (Fingolfin and
 Finarfin).)                                                             

 were  great  and  glorious,  and their  children also;  and if  they had
 not  lived,  the  history  of  the  Eldar would  have been  the poorer."
                                                                        
                                  NOTES.                                 
                                                                        
  1. See  Note   (i)  following   Laws  and   Customs  and   my  father's
     comment on it, pp. 250 - 1.                                         
  2. In  FM  2  it  is  said,  following  Laws  and  Customs p.  236, that
     Miriel  gave the  name Feanaro  to her  son 'at  birth', and  at this
     point a long footnote is added on the subject of name-giving:       
         According to the custom of the Eldar. In addition to  their 'true
     names',  which  were  their  father-name   and  their   chosen  name,
     they  often  received  other  or  'added  names'.  Of these  the most
     important  were  the  mother-names.  Mothers  often  gave   to  their
     children  special  names  of  their  own  choosing, the  most notable
     of  which  were  'names  of  insight'. In  the hour  of birth,  or on
     some  other  occasion  of  moment,  a  mother   might  give   to  her
     child a  name that  referred to  dominant features  of its  nature as
     she  perceived  it, or  that came  of foresight  and referred  to its
     special  fate.  Names  of   this  kind   might  become   more  widely
     used  than  the  father-name  (which  was  often  only  the  name  of
     the  father  repeated  or  modified);  and  if  the  child  adopted a
     mother-name  as  a  'chosen  name',  then  it  became  also  a  'true
     name'.  Curufinwe  took  Feanaro  as  his  chosen  name.   Feanor  is
     the  form  that  this name  took in  the later  speech of  the Exiled
     Noldor.                                                             
     This   represents   an   extreme  compression   of  the   section  on
     Naming in Laws and Customs, pp. 214 ff.                            
  3. Lorien  was  still  the form  in Laws  and Customs  and in  the texts
     FM 2 and  FM 3;  in the  present text  FM 4  my father  typed Lorien,
     but       then       altered       it      back       to      Lorien.
  4. and abode in the house  of Vaire':  these words  first appear  in the
     present text; see note 9.                                           
  5. On the application of the term 'Statute' here see p. 254.           
  6. See p. 252, note 4.                                                 
  7. FM  2  as  typed  had  here,  expanding  the  passage  in   Laws  and
     Customs,   p.   237:   'But   Mandos   summoned   Miriel,   and  made
     known  to  her  the  Doom  ...'  This  was  later  emended  to  read:
     'Vaire,   with   whom   Miriel   dwelt,   made   known  to   her  the
     Doom...'                                                            
  8. These  words  of  Vaire's are  derived from  her intervention  in the
     Debate of the Valar in Laws and Customs, p. 244.                    
  9. The  footnote  at  this  point  is  derived  from  Laws  and  Customs
     (pp.  249  - 50),  although Miriel's  entry into  the house  of Vaire
     stands there at the end  of a  long account  recording the  coming of
     Finwe to the halls of Mandos, his renunciation  of re-birth,  and the

  re-entry of the fea of Miriel into her body that still lay in Lorien.
  In  FM  2 there  is no  mention of  Miriel after  the words  'she went
  then  to the  Halls of  Waiting appointed  to the  Eldar and  was left
  in peace.' In FM  3 the  text at  this point  is very  compressed, and
  reads (in place of FM 4 $$18 - 23,  all of  which is  present in  FM 2
  apart from the present footnote):
  ...  'I  came  hither  to  escape  from  the  body,  and  I  will  not
  return  to  it';  and  after  ten  years  had   passed  the   doom  of
  disunion  was  spoken.  And  Miriel  has  dwelt  ever  since   in  the
  house of Vaire, and it is her part  to record  there the  histories of
  the Kin of Finwe and all the deeds of the Noldor.                     
      It  came  to  pass  that  after  three  more  years Finwe  took as
  second wife Indis the Fair...                                         
  These texts are  thus altogether  inconsistent on  the subject  of the
  ultimate fate of  Miriel. In  particular the  references to  the House
  of Vaire are confusing. It was  told in  AAm (p.  49, $3)  that 'Vaire
  the  Weaver  dwells  with  Mandos',  and  the  same  is implied  in QS
  $6   (V.205,   retained   almost   unchanged   in   the   Valaquenta):
  'Vaire  the  weaver  is  his  wife,  who weaves  all things  that have
  been  in time  in her  storied webs,  and the  halls of  Mandos... are
  clothed  therewith.'  In  Laws  and  Customs (p.  236) the  spirit of
  Miriel departed  from her  body in  Lorien 'and  passed in  silence to
  the  halls  of  Mandos',  and  Finwe  said  to  Manwe 'my  heart warns
  me that Miriel  will not  return again  from the  house of  Vaire'; in
  the  debate  of  the Valar  before the  proclamation of  the 'Statute'
  Vaire  said  that  'the  fea  of  Miriel  is with  me' (p.  244). But
  afterwards   Nienna   asked   of   Mandos   that   Miriel   should  be
  'removed from  the Halls  of Waiting,  and taken  into the  service of
  Vaire' (p.  248); this  was refused,  and when  Finwe was  slain their
  fear  encountered  each  other  'in  Mandos'.  Thereafter the  fea of
  Miriel  was  'released',  and  re-united  with her  body 'she  went to
  the  doors  of  the  House  of Vaire  and prayed  to be  admitted; and
  this  prayer  was  granted,  although  in  that  House  none   of  the
  Living  dwelt  nor  have  others ever  entered it  in the  body.' Thus
  within the same text 'the house of  Vaire' is  both equated  with 'the
  halls of Mandos' and distinguished from them.                         
    In  FM  4  ($8)  the  spirit  of  Miriel 'passed  in silence  to the
  keeping  of  Mandos,  and abode  in the  house of  Vaire' (see  note 4
  above);  and  in  $18  'Vaire  with  whom  Miriel  dwelt   made  known
  to her the doom.' After Miriel's refusal of return  'she went  then to
  the Halls of Waiting appointed  to the  Eldar and  was left  in peace'
  ($21),  but (according  to the  footnote to  this paragraph)  'after a
  time  she was  permitted to  return to  the house  of Vaire.'  Thus in
  this  final  text  it  seems certain  that Vaire  in some  sense dwelt
  apart.                                                                

       Very  curiously,  my  father  subsequently  bracketed   the  footnote
       and  wrote  against  it  'Omit', commenting  beside it:  'Alter this.
       What   happened   when   Finwe   came   to   Mandos?'   Yet   he  had
       already  answered  this  question  very  fully  in Laws  and Customs,
       where indeed  it was  the very  fact of  the coming  of Finwe  to the
       halls  of  Mandos  that  led  to  the  release  of  Miriel   and  her
       admission to the house of Vaire.                                    
  10.  In FM  2 the  footnote on  the names  of the  children of  Indis read
       thus:                                                               
          Three   daughters   and   two   sons,   in  this   order:  Findis,
       Nolofinwe,   Faniel,   Arafinwe,  and   frime.  The   mother-name  of
       Nolofinwe  was  Ingoldo,  signifying  that  he came  of both  the kin
       of  the  Ingar  and  of  the  Noldor.  The  mother-name  of  Arafinwe
       was  Ingalaure,  for  he  had  the  golden   hair  of   his  mother's
       people, and that endured in his line afterwards.                    
       This  was  derived  from  a  passage  in  the  A-text  of   Laws  and
       Customs  (p.  230  note  22)  which  was  omitted   in  B;   in  that
       however  the  daughters  were  not  mentioned.  The name  Irime  (for
       later Finvain) goes back to the original text FM 1  (p. 207).  In the
       note in FM 3 the names are  as in  FM 4,  but those  of the  sons are
       spelt  Fingolphin  and   Finarphin,  and   this  comment   is  added:
       'These  names  are  given  in  the  forms  of  the  later  tongue  in
       Middle-earth (save  Findis and  Faniel who  did not  leave Valinor).'
       In  a  very  late  essay  (1968  or  later;  referred  to  in IV.174)
       my  father  said  that  the  mother-name   of  Finrod   Felagund  was
       Ingoldo,  but  he  gave to  it a  wholly different  significance. The
       term  Ingar  ('people  of  Ingwe')  occurring  in  Laws  and  Customs
       text A (p. 230 note 22) and here, has not been found before.        
  11.  FM 2 ends differently after 'might have been prevented':            
          Thus it is that the cases in which  the Eldar  can marry  again or
       desire to  do so  are rare;  and rarer  still are  those who  do this
       even when it is lawful; for  the sorrow  and strife  in the  house of
       Finwe are graven in the memory of the Noldor Elves.                 
       This  derives  from  Laws  and  Customs,   p.  239.   In  FM   3  the
       conclusion  is  as  in FM  4, but  after 'and  great sorrow  and evil
       might  have  been  prevented  it  continues:  But this  judgement was
       but a guess.  Certain it  is that  the children  of Indis  were great
       and  glorious  ...'  The  later  ending derives  in its  thought from
       the  prophecy  of  Mandos  in  Laws  and  Customs  (p.  247)  at  the
       final proclamation of the 'Statute of Finwe and Miriel'.            
                                                                          
       A note on certain conceptions in the story of Finwe and Miriel     
                                                                          
  The nature of Elvish 'immortality' and 'death' had been stated very      
  long before in The Book of Lost Tales (1.76):                            

  Thither [i.e.  to Mandos]  in after  days fared  the Elves  of all  the clans
  who  were  by  illhap  slain  with  weapons  or  did die  of grief  for those
  that  were  slain  -  and  only  so  might  the  Eldar die,  and then  it was
  only  for  a  while.  There  Mandos   spake  their   doom,  and   there  they
  waited  in  the  darkness,  dreaming  of  their past  deeds, until  such time
  as  he  appointed  when  they  might  again  be  born  into  their  children,
  and go forth to laugh and sing again.                                       
 And in the original Music of the Ainur (1.59) it  is said  of the  Elves that
 'dying  they  are reborn  in their  children, so  that their  number minishes
 not, nor grows.'                                                             
  In  the  Quenta  (IV.100,  deriving  from  the  'Sketch  of  the Mythology',
 IV.21) the idea of rebirth is qualified:                                     
  Immortal   were  the   Elves,  and   their  wisdom   waxed  and   grew  from
 age  to  age,  and  no  sickness  or  pestilence  brought  them   death.  But
 they  could  be  slain   with  weapons   in  those   days,  even   by  mortal
 Men,  and  some  waned  and  wasted   with  sorrow   till  they   faded  from
 the  earth.  Slain  or  fading  their  spirits  went  back  to  the  halls of
 Mandos   to   wait   a   thousand   years,   or   the   pleasure   of  Mandos
 according  to  their  deserts,  before  they  were recalled  to free  life in
 Valinor, or were reborn, it is said, into their own children.                
 In QS the corresponding passage ($85, V.246) was much enlarged:              
  Immortal  were  the  Elves,  and  their  wisdom  waxed  from  age   to  age,
 and  no  sickness   nor  pestilence   brought  death   to  them.   Yet  their
 bodies  were  of  the  stuff  of  earth  and  could  be  destroyed,   and  in
 those  days  they  were  more  like  to  the  bodies  of  Men,  and   to  the
 earth,  since  they  had  not  so  long  been  inhabited by  the fire  of the
 spirit,  which  consumeth  them  from   within  in   the  courses   of  time.
 Therefore  they  could  perish  in  the  tumults  of  the  world,  and  stone
 and   water   had   power   over  them,   and  they   could  be   slain  with
 weapons   in  those   days,  even   by  mortal   Men.  And   outside  Valinor
 they  tasted  bitter  grief,  and   some  wasted   and  waned   with  sorrow,
 until  they  faded  from   the  earth.   Such  was   the  measure   of  their
 mortality  foretold  in  the  Doom  of  Mandos  spoken  in  Eruman.   But  if
 they  were  slain  or  wasted  with  grief,  they  died  not from  the earth,
 and  their  spirits  went  back  to the  halls of  Mandos, and  there waited,
 days  or  years,  even  a  thousand,  according  to  the  will of  Mandos and
 their  deserts.  Thence they  are recalled  at length  to freedom,  either as
 spirits,  taking  form  according  to  their  own  thought,  as   the  lesser
 folk of the  divine race;  or else,  it is  said, they  are at  times re-born
 into  their  own  children,  and  the  ancient  wisdom  of  their  race  does
 not perish or grow less.                                                     
 At the end of the Ainulindale it is said (I cite the final text D, p. 37, but
 the  passage  goes  back  almost  unchanged  to  the  pre-Lord  of  the Rings
 version, V.163):                                                             
  For  the  Eldar  die  not  till  the world  dies, unless  they are  slain or
 waste  in  grief  (and  to  both  these  seeming  deaths  they  are subject);

 neither  does  age subdue  their strength,  unless one  grow weary  of ten
 thousand  centuries;  and  dying  they  are  gathered  in  the   halls  of
 Mandos  in  Valinor,  whence  often  they  return  and  are  reborn  among
 their children.                                                           
 And in the Doom  of the  Noldor as  it appears  in AAm  ($154, p.  117) it
 was declared:                                                             
 For  know  now  that  though  Eru  appointed unto  you to  die not  in Ea,
 and  no  sickness  may  assail  you,  yet slain  may ye  be, and  slain ye
 shall   be:   by  weapon   and  by   torment  and   by  grief;   and  your
 houseless  spirits  shall  come  then  to  Mandos.  There  long  shall  ye
 abide  and yearn  for your  bodies and  find little  pity though  all whom
 ye have slain should entreat for you.                                     
 The meaning of this, I feel sure, is: It is contrary indeed to  the 'right
 nature'  of  the Elves  that they  should die,  but nonetheless  death may
 come to them.                                                             
 The testimony  of all  these passages  (and others  not cited),  early and
 late, is that  Elvish 'death'  (or 'seeming  death', in  the words  of the
 Ainulindale') was always a possible  fate, deriving  from their  nature as
 incarnate  beings. But  there is  a constant  threat of  ambiguity imposed
 by the words that must be used. The Elves cannot 'die'  in the  sense that
 Men 'die', since Men (by  the Gift  of Iluvatar)  depart from  the 'world'
 never to return, whereas the Elves  cannot depart  from it  so long  as it
 lasts. In the legend of  Beren and  Luthien Mandos  offered her  a choice:
 and  the  doom  that  she  chose  was  that  the  destiny  decreed  by her
 nature should be changed. 'So it was that  alone of  the Eldalie   she has
 died indeed, and left the world long ago' (The  Silmarillion p.  187). But
 the  Elves  can  nonetheless  suffer  the severance  of spirit  from body,
 which  is  'death'. Thus  it may  be said  that the  essential distinction
 between the (possible) death of Elves  and the  (inevitable) death  of Men
 is  a  difference  of destiny  after death.  See V.304;  and cf.  Laws and
 Customs,  p.  218:  'From  their beginnings  the chief  difference between
 Elves and Men lay in the fate and nature of their spirits. The fear of the
 Elves were destined to dwell in Arda  for all  the life  of Arda,  and the
 death of the flesh did not abrogate that destiny.'                        
                                                                          
   In a draft for a letter written in October 1958 (see p. 300) my father
 discussed  the  meaning  of the  'immortality' of  the Elves  (Letters no.
 212):                                                                     
   In  this  mythical  'prehistory'  immortality,  strictly  longevity  co-
 extensive with  the life  of Arda,  was part  of the  given nature  of the
 Elves;  beyond  the  End  nothing  was  revealed.  Mortality,  that  is  a
 short life-span having no relation to the life  of Arda,  is spoken  of as
 the given nature of Men...                                                
   In  the  Elvish legends  there is  record of  a strange  case of  an Elf
 (Miriel  mother  of  Feanor)  that  tried  to  die,  which  had disastrous
 results,  leading  to the  'Fall' of  the High-elves.  The Elves  were not

  subject  to disease,  but they  could be  'slain': that  is their  bodies could
  be  destroyed,  or  mutilated  so  as  to be  unfit to  sustain life.  But this
  did  not  lead  naturally  to  'death':  they  were  rehabilitated  and  reborn
  and   eventually   recovered   memory   of  all   their  past:   they  remained
  'identical'.  But  Miriel  wished  to  abandon  being,  and   refused  rebirth.
 'But  Miriel  wished  to  abandon  being':  this  is  a  dark saying.  There is
 nothing  in  any  of  the accounts  to suggest  that she  desired annihilation,
 the  ending  of  her  existence  in  any  form.  In Laws  and Customs  (p. 222)
 my  father  wrote  that  'some  fear  in  grief  or  weariness  gave  up hope,
 and   turning   away  from   life  relinquished   their  bodies,   even  though
 these  might  have  been  healed  or  were  indeed  unhurt.  Few   of  these...
 desired  to  be  re-born,  not   at  least   until  they   had  been   long  in
 "waiting";  some  never  returned.'  This  surely  accords  with  what  is told
 of the death of Miriel.                                                        
  It  seems,  at any  rate, that  when my  father said  here that  Miriel 'tried
 to  die'  he  meant  that she  sought a  'true death':  not a  'seeming death',
 but a departure for  ever out  of Arda.  Yet this  could not  be: for  death in
 this  sense  was  contrary to  'the given  nature of  the Elves',  appointed by
 Iluvatar;  and  indeed,  in  Of  Finwe'  and  Miriel  ($20)  Mandos   spoke  to
 the  fea  of  Miriel,  saying:  'In Mandos  thou shalt  abide. But  take heed!
 Thou  art  of  the  Quendi,  and  even  if  thou  refuse  the  body,  thou must
 remain in Arda and within the time of its history.'                           
  But  the  'seeming  death'  to  which  the  Elves  are  subject had  never yet
 appeared  in  Aman  in  all   the  long   years  since   the  Vanyar   and  the
 Noldor   came   to   Eldamar.   In   the  Annals   of  Aman,   written  before
 the  story  of  Miriel  had  arisen, Feanor  spoke before  the Valar  after the
 Death of the Trees ($$120 - 1, p. 107):                                        
  '...  Mayhap  I  can  unlock  my  jewels,  but  never   again  shall   I  make
 their  like;  and  if  they  be broken,  then broken  will be  my heart,  and I
 shall die: first of all the Children of Eru.'                                  
    'Not   the   first,'   quoth   Mandos,   but   they   understood   not   his
 word...                                                                        
 Mandos   knew   that   Morgoth   had   murdered   Finwe   at   Formenos,   'and
 spilled the first blood of the Children of Iluvatar' ($122).                   
  Against   the   words   of   Mandos   my  father   afterwards  noted   on  the
 AAm  typescript  (p.  127,  $120):  'This  no  longer  fits  even the  Eldar of
 Valinor.  Finwe  Feanor's  father  was  first  to be  slain of  the High-elves,
 Miriel  Feanor's  mother  the  first  to  die',  and  on  the  text  itself  he
 changed Feanor's 'I shall die' to 'I shall be slain'. It might seem that a dis-
 tinction  is  made  here  between  'dying'  and  'being  slain',  but I  do not
 think  that this  is the  case. What  is meant  is simply  that Miriel  was the
 first to die, and Finwe was the  second to  die -  but the  first to  be slain.
 After  the  story  of  Miriel  had  entered  Feanor  could  no  longer  say  'I
 shall die: first  of all  the Children  of Eru';  my father  therefore, wishing
 to   retain   the   pregnant  words   of  Mandos   'Not  the   first',  altered
 Feanor's to 'I shall be slain'.                                                

  Much  later,  this  passage  in AAm  was used  again in  the new  work on
  the Quenta Silmarillion (see p. 293), taking this form:                  
    '... and I shall be slain, first of all the Children of Eru.'          
       'Not  the  first,'  quoth Mandos,  but they  did not  understand his
  words, thinking that he spoke of Miriel.                                 
  The  meaning  here  seems  to  be  that  those  who  heard  the  words of
  Mandos  (speaking  of  the  murder  of  Finwe  as  yet  unknown  to them)
  thought that he spoke  of Miriel,  because she  was the  only one  of the
  Eldar  whom  they  knew  to  have  died;  but since  Miriel had  not been
  slain  'they  did  not  understand  his  words'.  Even  so, it  cannot be
  supposed that Finwe was the first to be slain of the Children of Eru; cf.
  my father's note  on the  AAm typescript  'This no  longer fits  even the
  Eldar of Valinor,  and the  passage in  Laws and  Customs, p.  218: This
  destruction of the hroa, causing death or the unhousing of the  fea, was
  soon  experienced  by  the  immortal  Eldar,  when  they  awoke   in  the
  marred and overshadowed realm of Arda.'                                  
                                                                          
  It  is  made  plain in  Laws and  Customs and  in the  new 'sub-chapter'
  of the Quenta Silmarillion that the primary significance of the  death of
  Miriel is that it  was the  first appearance  of Death  in Aman;  and the
  debate  was  concerned  with  this unlooked-for  event, and  its implica-
  tions for the  laws that  governed the  life of  deathless Aman.  In Laws
  and  Customs  (p.  241)  Yavanna  declared  that  'the  Shadow   ...  has
  marred  the  very  hron  of Arda,  and all  Middle-earth is  perverted by
  the  evil  of  Melkor  ...  Therefore   none  of   those  who   awoke  in
  Middle-earth,  and  there  dwelt  before  they  came  hither,  have  come
  here  wholly free.  The failing  of the  strength of  the body  of Miriel
  may  then be  ascribed, with  some reason,  to the  evil of  Arda Marred,
  and her  death be  a thing  unnatural.' In  FM 2  (p. 254)  this thought,
  represented as a  new perception  on the  part of  the Valar,  takes this
  form:                                                                    
    And the Valar were greatly concerned to see that  all their  labour for
  the  guarding  of  Valinor  was of  no avail,  to keep  out evil  and the
  shadow  of  Melkor,  if  any  thing,  living  or  unliving,  was  brought
  thither  out  of  Middle-earth  and  left  free  or  unguarded;  and they
  perceived at  last how  great was  the power  of Melkor  in Arda,  in the
  making of which as it  was his  part was  such that  all things,  save in
  Aman  alone,  had an  inclination to  evil and  to perversion  from their
  right  forms  and  courses.   Wherefore  those   whose  being   began  in
  Arda,  and  who  moreover  were  by nature  a union  of spirit  and body,
  drawing   the   sustenance  of   the  latter   from  Arda   Marred,  must
  ever be,  in some  degree, liable  to grief,  to do  or to  suffer things
  unnatural;  and  though  dwelling  in  Aman  might  be  a  guard  against
  this evil, it was not a full cure, unless in long ages.                  
  This was largely retained in the final text  FM 4  (p. 258,  $11), though
  without  the  references  to  Aman;  and  Mandos expressly  declared that

 Death (i.e. of the Firstborn) is a consequence of the Marring of Arda         
 ($12).                                                                        
   In the draft letter of 1958  cited above  in reference  to the  death of
   Miriel my father continued:                                                 
    I   suppose  a   difference  between   this  Myth   and  what   may  be
   perhaps called Christian mythology is this.  In the  latter the  Fall of
   Man  is  subsequent  to  and  a  consequence  (though  not  a  necessary   l
   consequence)  of  the  'Fall  of  the  Angels':  a rebellion  of created
   free-will at a higher level than Man; but it is not clearly held (and in
   many versions is not held at all) that this affected the 'World'  in its
   nature: evil was brought in  from outside,  by Satan.  In this  Myth the
   rebellion  of  created free-will  precedes creation  of the  World (Ea);
   Ea  has in  it, subcreatively  introduced, evil,  rebellious, discordant
   elements  of  its  own nature  already when  the Let  it Be  was spoken.
   The  Fall  or  corruption,  therefore,  of  all  things  in  it  and all
   inhabitants of it, was a possibility if not inevitable.                     
   In Of Finwe' and Miriel all this is  presented as  a new  perception, or
 at least as a greatly sharpened perception, by the  Valar; and  'with this
 thought  a shadow  passed over  the hearts  of the  Valar, presage  of the
 sorrows  which  the  Children  should  bring  into  the world.'  One might
 wonder that it needed  the death  of Miriel  to bring  the Powers  of Arda
 to  this perception.  One might  wonder also  how it  should be  that even
 in  Aman  none  of  the  Eldar  were drowned  in the  sea or  missed their
 footing  in  the  mountains  and  fell  from a  great height.  This latter
 consideration is indeed countered to some degree  by what  is told  of the
 corporeal  nature  of  the Elves.  Their bodies  are described  as closely
 analogous  to  those of  mortal Men,  but against  this is  to be  set the
 following passage from Laws and Customs (p. 218):                             
   The fear of the Elves were destined to dwell in Arda for all the life of
 Arda, and the  death of  the flesh  did not  abrogate that  destiny. Their
 fear were tenacious therefore of life 'in the raiment  of Arda',  and far
 excelled  the  spirits  of  Men in  power over  that 'raiment',  even from
 the  first  days  protecting  their  bodies  from  many ills  and assaults
 (such as  disease), and  healing them  swiftly of  injuries, so  that they
 recovered from wounds that would have proved fatal to Men.                    
 This,  however,  while  diminishing  the  physical  vulnerability  of  the
 Elves  as  compared  with Men,  does not  alter the  fact that  the actual
 destruction of such bodies by violence is an  inherent possibility  in the
 nature of  Arda: 'though  the fea  cannot be  broken or  disintegrated by
 any  violence  from  without,  the  hroa can  be hurt  and may  be utterly
 destroyed' (ibid.).  Very explicit  are the  words of  Manwe in  his final
 address to the Valar before the proclamation of the Statute (p. 244):         
   [The  Elves] came  into Arda  Marred, and  were destined  to do  so, and
 to  endure  the  Marring,  even  though  they  came  in   their  beginning
 from  beyond  Ea....   We  may   say,  therefore,   that  the   Elves  are
 destined  to  know  'death'  in  their  mode,  being  sent  into  a  world

  which  contains  'death',  and  having  a  form  for  which   'death'  is
  possible.  For  though  by  their  prime  nature, unmarred,  they rightly
  dwell as spirit  and body  coherent, yet  these are  two things,  not the
  same, and their severance (which  is 'death')  is a  possibility inherent
  in their union.                                                         
 But it is made plain that  while, on  the one  hand, this  possibility of
 'death'  for  the  Elves  was  a consequence  of the  Marring of  Arda by
 Melkor,  on  the other  hand the  death of  Miriel so  gravely disquieted
 the Valar because it was the first that had taken place in Aman. Is it to
 be  supposed,  then, that  until this  time the  Valar had  been deluded,
 believing falsely that the incarnate Elves, by the fact of their dwelling
 in Aman, were protected from all possibility of  the severance  of spirit
 and body, in any  of the  ways that  such severance  might come  about in
 Middle-earth  -  believing  indeed  that  the  Marring  of  Arda  and the
 possibility of death for the incarnate had effect only east of  the Great
 Sea, and  only now  discovering the  falsity of  this belief  when Miriel
 died? (See the passage from 'text VII' on p. 400.)                       
                                                                         
  The 'immortality' of the Elves (co-extensive with  the 'life'  of Arda),
 their deaths  and rebirths,  were deep-laid  and fundamental  elements in
 my father's conception. At this time he was subjecting these ideas  to an
 elaborate analysis, and extending that analysis to  the ideas  of 'death-
 less  Aman'  and  the  significance  of  Melkor  in  the   perversion  of
 Creation  as  it  had  been  expounded to  the Ainur  by Iluvatar  in the
 Beginning. This analysis is,  in part,  presented as  a debate  among the
 Valar  themselves,  in  which  they  reach  new   perceptions  concerning
 the nature of Arda; but the theoretical discussion  of moral  and natural
 laws  is  given  an  immediate  dimension  from  its  arising out  of the
 strange story of the griefs of Finwe and Miriel. That story  was retained
 in the published Silmarillion, but with no intimation of its implications
 for the Rulers of Arda and the loremasters of the Elves.                 
  In  these  writings  is  seen  my  father's  preoccupation in  the years
 following  the  publication  of  The Lord  of the  Rings with  the philo-
 sophical  aspects  of  the  mythology  and  its  systemisation.   Of  the
 deliberations  of  the Gods  the sages  of the  Eldar preserved  a record
 among  the books  of their  law. How  far away  from these  grave Doctors
 seems the 'horned moon'  that rode  over AElfwine's  ship off  the coasts
 of  the Lonely  Isle (11.321),  as 'the  long night  of Faerie  held on'!
 AElfwine  is  still present  as communicator  and commentator;  but there
 have been great changes in Elfinesse.                                    
                                                                         
                                     *                                    
                                                                         
                  OF FEANOR AND THE UNCHAINING OF MELKOR.                 
                                                                         
 The  previous 'sub-chapter'  Of Finwe'  and Miriel  has reached  only, in
 terms of the earlier Chapter  6, to  the end  of $46b  (p. 185).  For the

  next section there are only two late  texts, continuing  straight on  in the
  typescripts that  I have  called FM  3 and  FM 4  (pp. 255  - 6):  from this
  point it is convenient to call them 'A' and 'B'. A, though a  finished text,
  is in effect a draft for the second typescript (B) that clearly  followed it
  immediately,  and  need  not  be  further  considered  beyond   noting  that
  it  does  not  contain the  new passage  about Feanor's  wife, and  that the
  title is Of Feanor and  the Silmarils  and the  Darkening of  Valinor: this
  text makes no further subdivisions.                                         
    In this section my father did not  greatly alter  (except by  the addition
  concerning  Feanor's  wife)  the text  of LQ,  $$46c -  48, and  the changes
  can  be  recorded  without  giving   the  whole   text  again.   Very  minor
  differences are not mentioned.                                              
                                                                             
  $46c  The only difference  here from  LQ is  that Feanor's  hair is  said to
        have  been  'raven-dark'.  But  at   the  end   of  the   paragraph,  after
        'Seldom   were   the   hand   and   mind   of   Feanor   at    rest',   the
        following passage was added:                                          
                                                                             
          While  still  in  early  youth  Feanor  wedded  Nerdanel, a         
        maiden  of  the  Noldor;  at  which  many  wondered,  for she         
        was  not  among  the  fairest  of  her  people.  But  she was         
        strong,  and  free  of mind,  and filled  with the  desire of         
        knowledge.  In her  youth she  loved to  wander far  from the         
        dwellings of  the Noldor,  either beside  the long  shores of         
        the Sea or  in the  hills; and  thus she  and Feanor  had met         
        and   were   companions   in   many  journeys.   Her  father,         
        Mahtan,  was  a  great   smith,  and   among  those   of  the         
        Noldor  most   dear  to   the  heart   of  Aule.   Of  Mahtan         
        Nerdanel   learned  much   of  crafts   that  women   of  the         
        Noldor  seldom  used:  the  making  of  things  of  metal and         
        stone.  She made  images, some  of the  Valar in  their forms         
        visible,  and  many  others of  men and  women of  the Eldar,         
        and these were so like that their friends,  if they  knew not         
        her  art,  would  speak   to  them;   but  many   things  she         
        wrought  also  of  her  own  thought  in  shapes  strong  and         
        strange but beautiful.                                                
          She also  was firm  of will,  but she  was slower  and more         
        patient  than  Feanor,  desiring  to understand  minds rather         
        than  to  master  them.  When  in  company  with  others  she         
        would often sit still listening to their words, and  watching         
        their gestures  and the  movements of  their faces.  Her mood         
        she bequeathed in part to some of her sons,  but not  to all.         
        Seven sons she bore to Feanor, and it is not recorded  in the         
        histories of old that  any others  of the  Eldar had  so many         

      children.  With  her  wisdom  at  first  she   restrained  Feanor
      when  the  fire  of  his  heart  burned  too  hot; but  his later
      deeds grieved her and they became estranged.                      
        Now   even   while   Feanor   and   the   craftsmen    of   the
      Noldor  wrought  with  delight,  foreseeing   no  end   to  their
      labours,  and  while  the  sons  of  Indis  grew to  manhood, the
      Noontide of Valinor was drawing to its close.                     
                                                                       
      The  text  then  continues  as  in LQ  $47 (p.  185). -  The name
      Nerdanel  of  Feanor's  wife  was  an  emendation:  the  original
      name as typed was Istarnie.                                       
 $47  LQ 'at the feet of the gods' becomes 'at the feet of the Mighty'.
 $48  'and most of all in the  healing of  the many  hurts that  he had
      done to the world. His prayer Nienna aided,  but the  others were
      silent.'                                                          
        From  LQ  'Wherefore in  a while  he was  allowed to  go freely
      about the land' the text was changed:                             
                                                                       
      Therefore  after  a  time  Manwe  gave  him  leave  to  go freely
      about  the  land.  The  evil  that  Melkor  had  wrought  of  old
      in  wrath  and  malice  was  beyond  full  healing  [cf.  p. 259,
      $11],  but his  aid, if  he would  truly give  it, would  do more
      than  aught  else  to  amend  the  world. For  Melkor was  in his
      beginning  the  greatest  of  the  Powers,  and   Manwe  believed
      that  if  he were  repentant he  would regain  in great  part his
      first   might   and  wisdom.   On  this   path  he   judged  that
      Melkor   was   now   set,   and  would   persevere  if   he  were
      treated  without   grudge.  Jealousy   and  rancour   Manwe   was
      slow  to  perceive,  for  he  knew  them not  in himself;  and he
      did  not  understand  that  all  love   had  departed   from  the
      mind of Melkor for ever.                                          
        Ulmo,  it  is  said,  was  not  deceived;  and  Tulkas clenched
      his  hands  whenever  he  saw  Melkor  his  foe  go  by,  for  if
      Tulkas is slow  to wrath,  he is  slow also  to forget.  But they
      obeyed  the  ruling  of   Manwe;  for   those  who   will  defend
      authority against rebellion must not themselves rebel.            
                                                                       
                                   *                                    
                                                                       
                    OF THE SILMARILS AND THE UNREST                     
                             OF THE NOLDOR.                             
                                                                       
 This chapter-heading  is present  only in  the second  of the  two late
 typescripts (B), and it was there written in subsequently. The first of

 
                                                                     
 the texts (A) was still fairly close to LQ  $$49  - 54;  though many
 changes were introduced they are for  the most part of slight  if any
 narrative significance. Here again it was effectively a draft for the
 second  text and  need not  be further  considered. The  second text,
 however, was  much altered  and expanded  in the  latter part  of the
 'sub-chapter'.                                                       
                                                                     
   $49  Most  fair  of  all  was  Melkor's  countenance to  the Eldar,
 and  he  aided  them  in  many  works,  if  they  would let  him. The
 Vanyar indeed  held him  in suspicion,  for they  dwelt in  the light
 of  the Trees  and were  content; and  to the  Teleri he  gave little
 heed,  deeming  them  of  little  worth,  tools  too  weak   for  his
 designs.  But  the  Noldor  took  delight  in  the  hidden  knowledge
 that  he  could  reveal  to them;  and some  hearkened to  words that
 it would have been better for them never to have heard.              
   $49a  In  after  days  Melkor  indeed  declared  that   Feanor  had
 learned  much  art  from  him  in secret;  but that  was only  one of
 the many lies of  Melkor, envying  the skill  of Feanor  and desiring
 to  claim  part  in his  works. For  none of  the Eldalie  ever hated
 Melkor  more  than   Feanor  son   of  Finwe,   and  though   he  was
 snared in  the webs  of Melkor's  malice against  the Valar,  he held
 no  converse  with  him  in  person,  and  he  took  no  counsel from
 him.  Indeed  he  sought  the  counsel  of none  that dwelt  in Aman,
 great or small,  save only  and for  a little  while of  Nerdanel the
 wise, his wife.                                                      
   $49b  In  that  time,  but  before  Melkor  was  given  his freedom
 within   the   land  of   Aman,  those   things  were   wrought  that
 afterwards  were  the  most  renowned  of  all   the  works   of  the
 Elvenfolk.  For  Feanor,  being  now  come  to  his  full  might, was
 filled  with  a  new  thought,  or  maybe  some shadow  of foreboding
 came  to  him  of  the  doom  that  drew  near;  and he  pondered how
 the Light of  the Trees,  the glory  of the  Blessed Realm,  might be
 preserved  imperishable.  Then  he  began a  long and  secret labour,
 and  he  summoned  all  his  lore,  and  his  power,  and  his subtle
 craft,  for  the  making  of  jewels  more  marvellous than  any that
 had yet been devised, whose beauty should last beyond the End.       
   Three  jewels  he  made,  and  named them  the Silmarils.  A living
 fire  burned  within  them  that  was  blended  of  the Light  of the
 Two  Trees.  Of  their  own  radiance  they shone,  even in  the dark
 of  the  deepest  treasury;  yet  all  lights  that  fell  upon them,
 however  faint,  they  received  and  returned  again  in  marvellous
 hues  to which  their own  inner fire  gave a  surpassing loveliness.
 No  mortal  flesh,  nor  hands  unclean,  nor  anything of  evil will

 could  touch  them,  but  it was  scorched and  withered; neither
 could  they  be  broken  by  any strength  within the  Kingdom of
 Arda. The Silmarils the Eldar prized  beyond all  other treasures
 in   Aman   or  upon   Earth;  and   Varda  hallowed   them,  and
 Mandos foretold that the fates of Arda, earth, sea, and  air, lay
 locked  within  them.  The  heart  of  Feanor  was fast  bound to
 these things that he himself had made.                          
   $50  Then  Melkor  lusted  also  for  the  Silmarils;  and from
 that time inflamed by this desire  the malice  of his  heart grew
 greater, though naught of it could yet be  seen in  the semblance
 that he wore,  or in  the fair  form that  he assumed,  after the
 manner of the Valar, his brethren.                              
   Therefore,  whenever  he  saw his  chances, he  began to  sow a
 seed of falsehood and hints of evil  among all  who were  open to
 his  converse.  But he  did this  with cunning,  so that  few who
 heard these lies ever took them  from his  own lips:  they passed
 from friend to friend, as secrets the  knowledge of  which proves
 the teller wise; and in the  telling they  grew and  spread, like
 weeds running up  rank in  shady places.  Bitterly the  people of
 the Noldor atoned for the  folly of  their open  ears in  days to
 come.                                                           
   When  he  saw  that  many  leaned  towards  him,  Melkor  would
 often walk among them,  speaking ever  words of  greatest praise,
 sweet  but poisoned  honey; for  amid all  the fair  words others
 were  woven,  so  subtly  that  many who  heard them  believed in
 recollection that they arose from their  own thought.  Visions he
 would conjure up in their hearts of the  mighty realms  that they
 could have ruled at their own will  in power  and freedom  in the
 East;  and  then  whispers  went  abroad   that  the   Valar  had
 brought  the  Eldar to  Aman because  of their  jealousy, fearing
 that  the  beauty  of  the  Quendi  and  the  makers'  power that
 Iluvatar  had bequeathed  to them  would grow  too great  for the
 Valar  to  govern,  as the  Elvenfolk waxed  and spread  over the
 wide lands of the world.                                        
   In those days, moreover, though  the Valar  knew indeed  of the
 coming of Men that were to be, the  Elves as  yet knew  naught of
 it; for Manwe had not revealed it to them, and  the time  was not
 yet  near.  But Melkor  spoke to  them in  secret of  Mortal Men,
 seeing how the silence  of the  Valar might  be twisted  to evil.
 Little he knew  yet concerning  Men, for  engrossed with  his own
 thought  in  the  Music  he  had  paid small  heed to  the Second
 Theme  of  Iluvatar;  but now  the whisper  went among  the Elves

 that  Manwe  held  them  captive,  so  that  Men  might   come  and
 supplant  them  in  the  dominions  of  the  Middle-earth.  For the
 Valar  saw  that  this weaker  and short-lived  race would  be more
 easily swayed by them. Alas! little have  the Valar  ever prevailed
 to  sway the  wills of  Men; but  many of  the Noldor  believed, or
 half believed, these evil words.                                  
   $51  Thus  ere  the  Valar  were  aware,  the  peace  of  Valinor
 was  poisoned.  The  Noldor  began  to  murmur  against   them  and
 all their kindred; and many became  filled with  vanity, forgetting
 how  much  of what  they had  and knew  came to  them in  gift from
 the  Valar. Fiercest  burned the  new flame  of desire  for freedom
 and  wider  realms  in  the  eager  heart  of  Feanor;  and  Melkor
 laughed  in  his  secrecy,  for  to  that  mark  his lies  had been
 addressed,  hating  Feanor  above  all,  and  lusting ever  for the
 Silmarils. But these he was  not suffered  to approach.  For though
 at  great  feasts  Feanor would  wear them  blazing upon  his brow,
 at  other  times  they  were  guarded  close,  locked  in  the deep
 chambers  of  his  hoard  in  Tuna.  There   were  no   thieves  in
 Valinor  as  yet; but  Feanor began  to love  the Silmarils  with a
 greedy love, and  grudged the  sight of  them to  all, save  to his
 father or  to his  sons. Seldom  he remembered  now that  the light
 with which they were lit was not his own.                         
   $52  High  princes  were  Feanor  and  Fingolfin, the  elder sons
 of  Finwe,  honoured  by  all  in  Aman;  but  now they  grew proud
 and  jealous  each  of  his  rights  and  his possessions.  And lo!
 Melkor  then  set  new  lies  abroad, and  whispers came  to Feanor
 that Fingolfin and his sons were plotting  to usurp  the leadership
 of Finwe and  of the  elder line  of Feanor,  and to  supplant them
 by the leave of the Valar: for the Valar were ill pleased  that the
 Silmarils lay in Tuna and were not given to  their keeping.  But to
 Fingolfin and Finarfin  it was  said: 'Beware!  Small love  has the
 proud son of  Miriel ever  had for  the children  of Indis.  Now he
 has become great, and he has his father  in his  hand. It  will not
 be long before he drives you forth from Tuna!'                    
   $52a  It  is  told  also  that  when Melkor  saw that  these lies
 were smouldering he began to speak,  first to  the sons  of Feanor,
 and at other times  to the  sons of  Indis, concerning  weapons and
 armour, and of the power that  they give  to him  that has  them to
 defend  his  own  (as  he  said).  Now  the  Quendi  had  possessed
 weapons  in  Middle-earth,  but  not  of  their own  devising. They
 had been  made by  Aule and  sent as  gifts by  the hand  of Orome,
 when  it  became  known  to the  Valar that  the Quendi  were beset

                                                         
                                                                    
 by  prowling  evils  that   had  discovered   the  places   of  their
 dwelling  beside  Cuivienen;  and  more  were  sent  later   for  the
 defence  of  the  Eldar  upon  the  Great  March  to  the  shores  of
 the  Sea.  But  all  these  were  long  unused, and  lay in  hoard as
 memorials  of  old  days  half-forgotten; and  since the  chaining of
 Melkor the armouries of the Valar also had been shut.               
   $52b  But  now  the  lords  of  the  Noldor  took out  their swords
 and  spears  and  sharpened  them,  re-strung  their bows  and filled
 their  quivers  with  arrows.  And  they made  shields in  those days
 and  emblazoned  them  with  devices  of  silver  and gold  and gems.
 These  only  they  wore  abroad,  and  of  other  weapons   they  did
 not  speak,  for  each  believed  that  he  alone  had  received  the
 warning.  But  when  Feanor  got  wind  of  what  was being  done, he
 made  for  himself  a  secret  forge,  of which  not even  Melkor was
 aware;  and  there  he  wrought  fell  swords  of tempered  steel for
 himself  and  for  his  seven  sons,  and tall  helms with  plumes of
 red.  Bitterly  Mahtan  rued  the  day  when  he  had  taught  to the
 husband  of  Nerdanel,  his  daughter,  all  the  lore of  metal work
 that he learned of Aule.                                            
   $52c  Thus  with  lies  and  evil  whisperings  and  false  counsel
 Melkor  kindled  the hearts  of the  Noldor to  strife; and  of their
 quarrels  came at  length the  end of  the high  days of  Valinor and
 the evening  of its  ancient glory.  For Feanor  now began  openly to
 speak  words of  rebellion against  the Valar,  crying aloud  that he
 would  depart   from  Valinor   back  to   the  world   without,  and
 would  deliver  the  Noldor  from  thraldom  (as  he  said),  if they
 would follow him.                                                   
   $52d  Then  there  was  great  unrest  in   Tuna,  and   Finwe  was
 troubled,   and   he  summoned   all  his   lords  to   council.  But
 Fingolfin  hastened  to  his  halls  and  stood  before  him, saying:
 'King and father, wilt thou not  restrain the  pride of  our brother,
 Curufinwe,  who  is  called  the Spirit  of Fire,  all too  truly? By
 what  right  does  he  speak  for all  our people,  as were  he king?
 Thou  it  was  who  long  ago  spoke   before  the   Quendi,  bidding
 them  accept  the  guesting  of  the  Mighty  in  Aman.  Thou  it was
 that  led  the  Noldor  upon  the  long  road  through  the  perilous
 Earth to the  light of  Eldanor. If  this does  not now  repent thee,
 two sons at least thou hast to honour thy words!'                   
   $52e  But  even  as  he  spoke,   suddenly  Feanor   appeared,  and
 he strode  into the  chamber tall  and threatening.  A fire  of anger
 was in  his eyes,  and he  was fully  armed: his  high helm  upon his
 head, and at his side a mighty sword. 'So it is, even as  I guessed,'

 he said:  'my half-brother  would be  before me  with my  father, in
 this as in all other  matters. He  would not  wait for  the council,
 where  all  words  would  be heard  by all,  and answered.  He would
 speak  against  me  in  secret. This  I will  not brook!'  he cried,
 turning upon Fingolfin.  'Get thee  gone, and  take thy  due place!'
 Then as  a flash  of flame  he drew  his sword.  'Get thee  gone and
 dare my wrath no longer!'                                          
   $52f   Then   Fingolfin   bowed   before   Finwe,    and   without
 word  or  glance  at  Feanor he  went from  the chamber.  But Feanor
 followed him, and at the  door of  the king's  house he  stayed him.
 The point of  his bright  sword he  set against  Fingolfin's breast.
 'See, half-brother!' he said. 'This is sharper than thy  tongue. Try
 but once  more to  usurp my  place and  the love  of my  father, and
 maybe it will rid the Noldor of a would-be master of thralls.'     
   $52g  These  words  were  heard   by  many,   for  the   house  of
 Finwe  was  in  the  great  square  beneath  the  Mindon,  and  many
 people   were   gathered   there.  But   Fingolfin  again   made  no
 answer,  and  passing  through  the  throng  in  silence he  went to
 seek Finarfin his brother.                                         
   $52h  The  unrest  of  the  Noldor  was  not  indeed  hidden  from
 the Valar; but its seed had been  sown in  the dark;  and therefore,
 since  Feanor  first  spoke  openly against  the Valar,  they deemed
 that  he was  the mover  of discontent,  being eminent  in self-will
 and  arrogance,  though  all  the  Noldor   had  become   proud.  It
 was,  maybe,  the  nature  of the  Children that  as they  grew they
 should  become  wilful,  and  should  desire  to escape  from tutel-
 age,  remembering  it  with  little  gratitude. Therefore  Manwe was
 grieved,  but  he  watched  and   said  no   word.  The   Valar  had
 brought the Eldar to their land freely, to dwell  or to  depart; and
 though  they  might judge  departure to  be folly,  it would  not be
 lawful to restrain them from it, if wise counsel did not suffice.
   $53  But  now  the  deeds  of  Feanor  could  not be  passed over,
 and  the  Valar  were  wroth;  and  dismayed  also,  perceiving that
 more  was  at  work   than  the   wilfulness  of   youth.  Therefore
 Manwe  summoned  Feanor  to  appear  before  the  Valar   to  answer
 for all his words  and deeds,  and he  was brought  to the  gates of
 Valmar.  Thither  also  were  summoned  all   others  who   had  any
 part  in  the  matter, or  any knowledge  thereof, or  any grievance
 of their own to declare.                                           
   $53a  Then  Mandos  set  Feanor   before  him   in  the   Ring  of
 Doom  and  bade  him  answer  to all  that was  asked of  him. Great
 must  be  the power  and will  of any  who would  lie to  Mandos, or

 even refuse his questioning. But Feanor  had no  thought of  it. He
 was so besotted  with the  lies of  Melkor that  had taken  root in
 his  proud  heart  (though he  did not  yet clearly  perceive their
 source) that he judged himself justified in  all points,  and other
 judgement he scorned.                                             
   $53b  But  when  all  was  said,  and  all  the  testimonies were
 spoken,  and  words and  deeds were  brought out  of the  dark into
 the  light, then  at last  the root  was laid  bare: the  malice of
 Melkor was revealed, and his lies and half-lies made plain  for all
 to  recognize  who  had  the  will to  see. Straightway  Tulkas was
 sent  from  the  council  to  lay  hands  on  Melkor and  bring him
 again to judgement.  But Feanor  was not  held wholly  guiltless in
 himself.  For  he  had  forged  secret  swords,  and had  drawn one
 in anger unjustified, threatening the life of his kinsman.        
   $53c   Therefore   Mandos   said  to   him:  'Thou   speakest  of
 thraldom.  If  thraldom  it  be,  thou  canst  not  escape  it. For
 Manwe  is  King  of  Arda,  and  not  of Aman  only. And  this deed
 was  unlawful,  whether  in  Aman  or  not  in  Aman.  Though  more
 insolent in Aman, for it is  a hallowed  land. Therefore  this doom
 is now  made: for  twelve years  thou shalt  leave Tuna  where this
 threat was uttered.  In that  time take  counsel with  thyself, and
 remember  who  and  what  thou  art.  But  after  that   time  this
 matter shall be set  in peace  and held  redressed, if  others will
 release thee.'                                                    
   $53d  Then  Fingolfin  rose   and  said:   'I  will   release  my
 brother.'  But  Feanor  spoke  no  word  in  answer;  and  when  he
 had stood silent before the Valar for a while,  he turned  and left
 the  council  and  departed  from  Valmar. At  once he  returned to
 Tuna,  and  before  the  term  of  seven  days  that  was  set,  he
 gathered his goods and  his treasures  and left  the city  and went
 far  away.  With  him  went  his  sons, and  Finwe his  father, who
 would  not  be parted  from him,  in fault  or guiltless,  and some
 others also  of the  Noldor. But  Nerdanel would  not go  with him,
 and  she  asked  leave  to  abide  with  Indis,  whom she  had ever
 esteemed,  though this  had been  little to  the liking  of Feanor.
 Northward in Valinor, in  the hills  near to  the halls  of Mandos,
 Feanor  and  his  sons  made  a  strong  place  and  a  treasury at
 Formenos,  and  they  laid  in  hoard  a  multitude  of  gems,  and
 weapons also: they did  not put  aside the  swords that  Feanor had
 made. But  Fingolfin now  ruled the  Noldor in  Tuna; and  thus the
 very  words  of  Melkor  seemed  to  be  fulfilled  (though  it was
 Feanor  who  had  by  his own  deeds brought  this thing  to pass);

 and  the  bitterness  that  Melkor  had   sown  endured,   even  though
 his  lies  had  been  made  manifest.  Long  afterward  it  lived still
 between Feanor and the sons of Indis.                                 
   $54   Worse   now  befell.   In  vain   Tulkas  sought   for  Melkor.
 For  Melkor,  knowing  that  his  devices  were  revealed,  hid himself
 and  passed  from  place  to  place  as  a  cloud  in  the  hills.  And
 though  none  could  discover  whither  he  had  gone,  it  seemed that
 the   light   of   Valinor  was   dimmed,  and   the  shadows   of  all
 standing  things  grew  longer  and  darker  in that  time. It  is said
 that  for  two  years  no  one  in  Valinor   saw  Melkor   again,  nor
 heard  any  rumour  of  him,  until  suddenly  he  sought  out  Feanor.
 Secretly  he  came  to  Formenos, in  guise as  a traveller  that seeks
 for   lodging;   and   he   spoke   with   Feanor   before   his  door.
 Friendship  he  feigned  with  cunning  argument,  urging  him  to  his
 former thought of flight from the trammels of the Valar.              
   'Behold  the  truth  of  all  that I  have spoken,  and how  thou art
 banished  unjustly,'  he said.  'But if  the heart  of Feanor  is still
 undaunted,  as  it  was  in Tuna,  then I  will aid  him and  bring him
 far  from  this  narrow  land.  For  am  I  not  Vala  also?  Yea,  and
 more  than  those who  sit here  in pride.  I have  ever been  a friend
 of  the  Noldor,  knowing  their  worth:  the  most  skilled   and  the
 most valiant of all the folk of Arda.'                                
   Now  Feanor's  heart  was  still  bitter  at  his  humiliation before
 Mandos,  and  for  a  moment  he  paused  and   looked  at   Melkor  in
 silence, wondering if  indeed he  might trust  him so  far at  least as
 to  aid  his  escape.  But  Melkor's   cunning  overreached   his  aim,
 and  seeing  Feanor  hesitate,  and  knowing  that  the  Silmarils held
 his heart in thrall, he said at the last: 'Here is a strong  place well
 guarded,  but  think  not  that  the  Silmarils  will  lie safe  in any
 treasury within the realm of the Valar!'                              
   Then  the  fires  of'  the  heart  of  Feanor  were kindled,  and his
 eyes  blazed;  and  his  sight  burned  through all  the fair-semblance
 of  Melkor  to  the  dark  depths  of  his  mind, perceiving  there his
 fierce  lust  for  the  Silmarils.  Then  hate overcame  Feanor's fear,
 and  he  spoke  shamefully  to  Melkor,  saying:  'Get  thee   from  my
 gate,  gangrel!  Thou  jail-crow  of  Mandos!'  And  he  shut  the door
 of his house in the face of the mightiest of all the dwellers in Ea.
   Then  Melkor  departed  in  shame,  for  he  was  himself  in  peril,
 and  he  saw not  his time  yet for  revenge; but  his heart  was black
 with  anger.  And  Finwe  was  filled  with great  dread, and  in haste
 he sent messengers to Manwe in Valmar.                                

                                    Commentary.                                  
                                                                                
 In the  first part  of this  'sub-chapter' Of  the Silmarils  and the  Unrest of
 the  Noldor  the  story  as  it  was  told  in  LQ  (pp.  184 ff.)  was scarcely
 changed  even  in   detail,  despite   the  many   changes  of   wording  intro-
 duced  in  this  last  version  - except  in the  matter of  the weapons  of the
 Eldar  ($$52a,b).  In  QS,  where  the  matter  first  entered  (V.228,  note by
 pengolod  to  $49),  it  was  said  that  'the Elves  had before  possessed only
 weapons  of   the  chase,   spears  and   bows  and   arrows',  but   that  now,
 under  the  influence  of  Melkor,  the  Noldor   'learned  the   fashioning  of
 swords  of  tempered  steel,  and  the  making  of   mail'  and   shields.  This
 was  rewritten  in  LQ  $50  (p.  188),   still  as   an  observation   made  by
 Pengolod,  to  read  that  the  Elves  had  originally  possessed   no  weapons,
 and  that  now  they  learned  the  making  of  all   kinds  of   arms,  swords,
 spears,   bows   and   arrows.   Similarly   in   AAm   $97  (p.   96):  'Melkor
 spoke   to   the   Eldar  concerning   weapons,  which   they  had   not  before
 possessed  or  known';  but  my  father  afterwards  noted  on   the  typescript
 of  AAm  (p.  106,  $97):  'No!  They  must  have  had  weapons  on   the  Great
 Journey.'  Feeling  a  need  to  explain  how  the  Quendi  survived  'amid  the
 deceits  of  the  starlit  dusk',  and  concluding  that  they  must  have  been
 armed   in   Middle-earth,   he    adopted   the    (to   my    mind)   somewhat
 mechanical narrative device introduced here ($52a).                             
   Explanations  in   such  a   world  may   prompt  unneeded   reflections.  The
 passage  of   Orome  on   his  horse   Nahar  from   Aman  to   Middle-earth  is
 never  described,  nor  (I  would  say)  need  it  be,  nor  should  it  be; the
 movements  of  the  great   Valar  (and   indeed  of   the  lesser   divine,  as
 Melian)  are  a  mystery  that  we  do  not  seek  to  penetrate. They  are from
 beyond  Arda  and  do  not  derive  from  it.  In  the (very  old) story  of the
 transportation    of    the   three    original   Elvish    'ambassadors'   from
 Kuivienen  to  Valinor   we  might   wonder  with   more  right,   perhaps,  how
 they  journeyed,  for  the  Elves,  whatever  their  powers,  are   Children  of
 Earth,  and  must   live  and   move  in   the  physical   world  of   Arda.  My
 father  never  said  any  more  about  that;  and  we may  suppose, if  we will,
 that  they  passed  over  the  Grinding  Ice,  borne   upon  Nahar.*   But  that
 he perceived  a need  to respond,  at a  certain level,  to speculation  of this
 kind  is  apparent  from  this  story  of  Orome's  bringing  to  the   Eldar  a
 great  store  of  weapons  made  in  Valinor  -  for  the  store must  have been
 great to be useful in the protection of such a host.                            
                                                                                
   In the latter part of the new version the story is greatly developed,         
 and yet not in such a way as to contradict the earlier versions - which         
 can  be  read as  a synopsis  of the  latest. It  may indeed  be that  the story
                                                                                
 (* Cf. the story referred to in the old 'Sketch of the Mythology', that 'Luthien
 went  even  over the  Grinding Ice,  aided by  the power  of her  divine mother,
 Melian, to Mandos' halls' (IV.25, 55).                                          

  of Feanor's  fierce encounter  with Fingolfin  in the  house of  Finwe was
  present  to  my  father's  mind  already when  he wrote  LQ (end  of $52),
  though he did not actually recount it till much later.                    
    It is worth remarking that in  writing the  new version  he also  had an
  eye to  AAm; thus  in $54  he took  up the  words of  Melkor to  Feanor at
  Formenos  in  AAm  $101  (p.  97)  -  though  removing  the  sentence 'And
  think not that the Silmarils lie safe in any treasury within the  realm of
  the gods' from its place in AAm and using  it as  it was  used in  LQ, the
  sudden clue for Feanor of Melkor's true intention.                        
    There remain a few isolated points. In  both texts  of the  last version
  occurs the  phrase in  $49b: 'The  Silmarils the  Eldar prized  beyond all
  other  treasures  in  Aman or  upon Earth'.  This usage  goes back  a long
  way (see  the Index  to Vol.IV,  entries Earth  and World),  unsuitable as
  it  may  seem  to  the  world  in which  Aman was  physically approachable
  across the Sea. But the Earth is Middle-earth: it is not the equivalent of
  Arda;  cf.  also $52d:  'Thou it  was that  led the  Noldor upon  the long
  road through the perilous Earth to the light of Eldanor.'                 
    It  is  also  curious that  Tuna is  now used  at every  occurrence, not
  Tirion; see p. 90, $67, and p. 193, $52.                                  
    In $50 it is said of  Melkor that  'Little he  knew yet  concerning Men,
  for  engrossed  with  his  own  thought  in  the Music  he had  paid small
  heed  to the  Second Theme  of Iluvatar'.  Compare the  Ainulindale' (both
  the C and D  texts) $13:  the Children  of Iluvatar  'came with  the Third
  Theme',  and  $24:  Manwe  'was  the  chief   instrument  of   the  second
  Theme that  Iluvatar had  raised up  against the  discord of  Melkor.' See
  further p. 358 note 10.                                                   
    The  names  Fingolfin  and  Finarfin  are  thus  spelt  in  B, but  in A
  Fingolphin  and  Finarphin (see  p. 265  note 10).  In the  Second Edition
  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  (1966)  Finarphin  was  spelt  thus,  later
  changed on my suggestion to Finarfin (Appendix F, Of the Elves).          
                                                                           
                         OF THE DARKENING OF VALINOR.                       
                                                                           
  The first of the two  late typescripts  (A) comes  to an  end after  a few
  lines  of  this  next  'sub-chapter',  in  which   LQ  $55   was  followed
  virtually word for word; and it  ends at  exactly the  same point  as does
  the LQ rewriting of QS (see p. 190 and note 8). For the  next part  of the
  narrative, therefore, we have on the one hand the text of  QS ($$55  - 9),
  with the very few revisions that had been made  to it  in the  revision of
  1951,  and  on  the  other  the  much  later  and  very  greatly  expanded
  version that follows here, extant  throughout almost  all its  length only
  in  the  one  typescript  B.  There  is  also  a  single  typescript page,
  intermediate   between   A   and   B,   which   extends   a    short   way
  further  than  does  A;  and   much  extremely   rough  working   for  the

  chapter in its late form which is for the most part scarcely legible.      
    Much  of  this  final  version  of  the  story  of Melkor  and Ungoliante
  and  the  destruction of  the Trees  stands in  such close  relationship to
  AAm  that  it  would  be possible,  for some  sections of  the text,  to be
  content  with  reference  to  AAm  and notes  of the  differences; nonethe-
  less I give the text in full, for these reasons. First, because despite the
  closeness  to  AAm  there  is also  a major  transformation of  the legend;
  and  second,  because  the  relation  between   the  two   traditions,  The
  Silmarillion  and  the  Annals,  here  takes  a  new  turn,  and   this  is
  important  for   the  understanding   of  the   nature  of   the  published
  Silmarillion, and its justification. It would be less easy to  follow these
  interesting  developments  if  part  of  the  text  appeared only  in notes
  referring to another text.                                                 
                                                                            
    $55   Now  the   Valar  were   sitting  in   council  before   the  gates
  of   Valmar,   fearing   the   lengthening   of   the  shadows,   when  the
  messengers    came    from    Finwe.    At    once    Orome    and   Tulkas
  sprang  up,  but  even  as  they  set  out  in  pursuit   other  messengers
  brought   tidings   from   Eldanor.   Melkor    had   fled    through   the
  Kalakiryan,  and  from  the   hill  of   Tuna  the   Elves  had   seen  him
  pass  in  wrath  as  a  thunder-cloud.  'Then,'   said  they,   'he  turned
  northward,   and   our   kinsfolk   in    Alqualonde   report    that   his
  Shadow went by their haven towards Araman.'                                
    Thus   Melkor  departed   from  Valinor,   and  for   a  while   the  Two
  Trees   shone   again   unshadowed   and   the   land   was   filled   with
  light;  yet  as  a  cloud  far  off that  looms ever  higher, borne  upon a
  slow  cold  wind,  a  doubt  now  marred  the  joy  of  all   the  dwellers
  in Aman, dreading they knew not what evil that yet might come.             
    $55a    When    Manwe    heard    of   the    ways   that    Melkor   had
  taken,  it  seemed  plain  to  him  that  Melkor  purposed  to   escape  to
  his  old  strongholds  in  the  North  of   Middle-earth,  as   was  indeed
  his  most  likely   course.  Though   there  was   little  hope   in  this,
  Orome  and  Tulkas  with   many  of   their  folk   went  with   all  speed
  northward,   seeking   to   overtake   him   if   they   might;   but  they
  found   no   trace   or   rumour   of   him  beyond   the  shores   of  the
  Teleri,  and  in  the  unpeopled  wastes   that  draw   near  to   the  Ice
  they   could  hear   no  tidings   even  from   the  birds.   Therefore  at
  length  they  returned,  but  the  watch  was   redoubled  along   all  the
  northern fences of Aman.                                                   
    $55b   This   indeed   Melkor   had   expected;   but   he    had   other
  things  to  do  before  he  would  return  to  Middle-earth,  and  ere  the
  pursuit  set  out,   indeed  ere   the  messengers   came  to   Valmar,  he
  had  turned   back  and   in  great   secrecy  passed   away  far   to  the

 South.  For  Melkor was  yet as  one of  the Valar,  and he  could still
 (though  with  pain)  change  his  form,  or   walk  unclad,   as  could
 his brethren; though that power he was soon to lose for ever.          
   $55c  Thus  unseen  he  came  at   last  to   the  region   that  once
 was  called  Avathar,*  beneath  the  eastern  feet  of  the  Pelori;  a
 narrow  land  it  had   become,  eaten   away  by   the  Sea,   and  was
 long  forsaken.  There  the  shadows  were   deepest  and   thickest  in
 the   world.   In   Avathar,   secret  and   unknown  save   to  Melkor,
 dwelt  Ungoliante,  and  she  had  taken  spider's   form,  and   was  a
 weaver  of  dark  webs.  It  is  not  known  whence  she   came,  though
 among  the  Eldar  it  was  said  that  in  ages  long  before  she  had
 descended  from  the  darkness  that  lies   about  Arda,   when  Melkor
 first  looked  down  in  envy  upon   the  light   in  the   kingdom  of
 Manwe.   But   she   had   disowned   her   Master,   desiring   to   be
 mistress  of her  own lust,  taking all  things to  herself to  feed her
 emptiness.  To  the  South  she  had  fled,  and  so  had   escaped  the
 assaults   of  the   Valar  and   the  hunters   of  Orome,   for  their
 vigilance  had  ever  been  to  the  North,  and  the  South   was  long
 unheeded.  Thence  she  had  crept  towards  the  light  of  the Blessed
 Realm; for she hungered for light and hated it.                        
   $55d  In  a  ravine  she  lived  and   wove  her   black  webs   in  a
 cleft  of  the  mountains. All  light she  sucked up  and spun  it forth
 in  dark  nets  of  gloom.  But  now  she  was  famished,  and  in great
 torment;  for  all  living  things  had  fled  far  away,  and  her  own
 webs  shut  out  from her  all light  that could  come to  her dwelling,
 whether   through   passes   in  the   walls  of   Aman,  or   from  the
 heavens  above.  Yet  she  had  no  longer  the  strength  or   will  to
 depart.                                                                
   $56  Now   Melkor  sought   for  her,   and  he   put  on   again  the
 form  that  he  had  worn  as  the  tyrant  of  Utumno:  a   dark  Lord,
 tall  and  terrible.  In  that  form  he remained  ever after.  And when
 Ungoliante  saw  him  coming   she  was   afraid,  knowing   his  hatred
 for  all  who  tried   to  escape   from  him.   She  shrank   into  her
 deepest  lair,  and  tried  to  shroud  herself   in  new   shadow;  but
 such  darkness  as  in  her  famine  she  could  weave  was  no  defence
 against the eyes of Melkor, Lord of Utumno and Angband.                
   $56a  'Come  forth!'  he  said. 'Thrice  fool: to  leave me  first, to
 dwell  here  languishing  within  reach  of  feasts  untold, and  now to
 shun  me,  Giver  of  Gifts,  thy  only  hope!  Come  forth  and  see! I
 have  brought  thee  an  earnest  of  greater  bounty  to  follow.'  But
                                                                       
  (* [footnote to the text] The Shadows (in ancient Quenya).)           

 Ungoliante   made   no   answer,   and   retreated  deeper   into  the
 cloven  rock.  Then  Melkor  was  angered,  for   he  was   in  haste,
 having  reckoned  his  times  to a  nicety. 'Come  out!' he  cried. 'I
 have  need of  thee and  will not  be denied.  Either thou  wilt serve
 me,  or  I  will  bury  thee  here  and under  black stone  thou shalt
 wither  into  naught.'  Then  suddenly  he  held up  in his  hands two
 shining  gems.  They  were  green,  and in  that lightless  place they
 reflected the dreadful light of his  eyes, as  if some  ravening beast
 had come hunting  there. Thus  the great  Thief set  his lure  for the
 lesser.                                                              
   $56b  Slowly   Ungoliante  came   forth;  but   as  she   drew  near
 Melkor  withheld  the  lure.  'Nay,  nay,'  he said.  'I do  not bring
 thee these Elvish sweets in love or  in pity;  they are  to strengthen
 thee,  when  thou  hast  agreed  to  do  my  bidding.'  'What  is your
 bidding, Master?' she said, and her eyes gloated upon the gems.      
   $56c  There  in  the  black  shadows,  beyond  the  sight   even  of
 Manwe  in  his  highest  halls,  Melkor  with  Ungoliante  plotted his
 revenge.  But  when  Ungoliante  understood   his  purpose,   she  was
 torn between  great  lust  and  great  fear.  She  would not  dare the
 perils  of  Aman,  or  the  power  of  the  dreadful Lords,  without a
 great  reward;  for  she  feared  the  eyes  of  Manwe and  Varda more
 even  than  the  wrath  of  Melkor.  Therefore  Melkor  said  to  her:
 'Do  as  I  bid,  and if  thou art  still hungry  when we  meet again,
 then,  I vow,  I will  give to  thee whatsoever  thy lust  may demand.
 Yea,  with  both  hands!'  Lightly  he  made  this  vow  (as  he  ever
 did), thinking little of its fulfilment, and he laughed in  his heart;
 for  if  she  achieved  his  design,  he  would   have  no   need,  he
 thought, to appease her, or any one else in Arda, great or small.
   $56d  'Come  then!'  he  said.  'Here  is   the  earnest!'   And  he
 delivered the gems  to her,  not only  the first  two but  many others
 that  he  had  stolen  in  Valinor. Then  swiftly Ungoliante  began to
 grow  again  and  to  find  new  strength.  A  cloak  of  darkness she
 wove  about  herself:  an  unlight, in  which things  seemed to  be no
 more,  and  which  eyes  could  not  pierce,  for  it  was  void. Then
 slowly  she  wrought  her  webs:  rope  by rope  from cleft  to cleft,
 from  jutting  rock  to  pinnacle  of  stone,  ever  climbing upwards,
 crawling  and clinging,  until at  last she  achieved the  very summit
 of  Mount  Hyarmentir,  the  highest  mountain   in  that   region  of
 the  world,  far  south  of  great  Taniquetil.  There the  Valar were
 not  vigilant;  for  west  of  the  Pelori  was   an  empty   land  in
 twilight,  until  northward  one  came  to  the  tall  fences  of  the
 woods  of  Orome;  and  eastward  the   mountains  looked   out,  save

 for  forgotten  Avathar,  only upon  the dim  waters of  the pathless
 Sea.                                                                   
   $57   But   now   upon  the   mountain-top  dark   Ungoliante  lay.
 For  a while  she rested,  and with  eyes faint  from labour  she saw
 the  glimmer  of  the stars  in the  dome of  Varda and  the radiance
 of  Valmar  far  away.  Slowly her  eyes wakened  and took  fire, and
 her lust increased until it overcame her fear.  She began  in stealth
 to creep down into the Blessed Realm.                                  
   $57a  Still  in  the   dark  depths   Melkor  stood,   gnawing  his
 mind,  between  evil  hope  and  doubt;  but   when  he   had  stood,
 revolving  his chances,  as long  as his  urgency allowed,  he turned
 away  and  went  down  to  the  shore.  There  he  cursed   the  Sea,
 saying: 'Slime of Ulmo! I will conquer  thee yet,  shrivel thee  to a
 stinking  ooze.  Yea,  ere  long  Ulmo  and  Osse  shall  wither, and
 Uinen  crawl  as  a  mud-worm  at  my  feet!'  With that  suddenly he
 passed from Avathar and went to do his will.                           
   $58  [see  AAm  $$109  -  10]  Now it  was a  time of  festival, as
 Melkor  knew  well.  In  Aman  all  tides  and  seasons  were  at the
 will of the Valar,  and there  was no  winter of  death; but  even as
 it was the delight of  the Valar  to clothe  themselves in  the forms
 of  the  Children  of  Iluvatar,* so  also they  would eat  and drink
 and  gather  the  fruits  of  Yavanna,  and share  the bounty  of the
 Earth  which  under  Eru  they  had   made.  Therefore   Yavanna  set
 times for the flowering  and the  ripening of  all growing  things in
 Valinor:  upspringing,  blooming,  and   seed-time.  And   after  the  l
 coming of the  First-born Children,  the Eldar,  at these  times they
 made  feasts,  at  which  all  the  dwellers  in Aman  would assemble
 in mirth. The greatest of the feasts  was at  the first  gathering of
 fruits,  and  this  was  held  upon  Taniquetil;  for  Manwe  decreed
 that at this time all should join in the praise of Eru  Iluvatar, and
 the  peoples  of  Valinor,  Valar,  Maiar,  and  Eldar,  poured forth
 their joy in music and song.                                           
   $58a   This   day   had   now   come    once   more,    and   Manwe
 prepared  a  feast  greater  than any  that had  been held  since the
 entry  of  the  Eldar  into  Aman.  For though  the escape  of Melkor
 portended  toils  and  sorrows to  come, and  indeed none  could tell
 what  further  hurts  would  be  done  to  Arda,  ere  he   could  be
 subdued  again,  at  this  time  Manwe  desired  to  unite   all  his
 people  once  more  in  joy,   healing  all   that  was   amiss,  and
                                                                       
  (* [footnote to the text] As is told in the Ainulindale'.  [The same
 reference to the Ainulindale ($25) is made in AAm $109.])              

 strengthening them with the blessing of  Eru to  hold ever  in heart
 the hope  of  Arda  Unmarred.  He  bade  all  come  who  would,  but
 the Noldor  above  all;  for  he  hoped  that  there they  would put
 aside the griefs that lay  between their  lords, and  forget utterly
 the  lies  of  their  Enemy.  Therefore  he  sent  a   messenger  to
 Formenos,  saying:  'Feanor  son  of  Finwe,  come  and do  not deny
 my  bidding!  In  my  love thou  remainest and  wilt be  honoured in
 my hall.'                                                          
   $58b   [see   AAm  $111]   There  came   the  Vanyar,   and  there
 came   the   Noldor   of   Tuna,   and   the  Maiar   were  gathered
 together,  and  the  Valar   were  arrayed   in  their   beauty  and
 majesty;  and  they  sang  before Manwe  and Varda  in the  halls of
 Taniquetil,  or  played  and  danced  upon the  green slopes  of the
 Mountain that  looked west  to the  Trees. In  that day  the streets
 of  Valmar  were  empty,  and the  stairs of  Tuna were  silent, and
 all  the  land lay  sleeping in  peace. Only  the Teleri  beyond the
 mountains still sang upon  the shores  of the  Sea; for  they recked
 little of seasons or times, and gave no thought to the cares  of the
 King  of  Arda,  or  to  the  shadow that  had fallen  upon Valinor;
 for it had not touched them, as yet.                               
   $58c  [see  AAm  $112]  One   thing  only   marred  the   hope  of
 Manwe.  Feanor  came  indeed,  for  he  read  the  message  of Manwe
 as  a  command;   but  Finwe   would  not   come  and   remained  in
 Formenos,  and  with  him  were  the  sons   of  Feanor.   For  said
 Finwe:  'While  the  ban  lasts  upon  Feanor, my  son, that  he may
 not go  to Tuna,  I hold  myself unkinged,  and I  will not  meet my
 people.' And  Feanor did  not come  in raiment  of festival,  and he
 wore  no  ornament,  neither  silver nor  gold nor  any gem;  and he
 denied the sight of the Silmarils to  the Valar  and the  Eldar, and
 left them in Formenos, locked in a chamber of iron.                
   Nonetheless  he  met  Fingolfin  before   the  throne   of  Manwe,
 and  was  reconciled  in word.  For Fingolfin  held forth  his hand,
 saying:  'As  I promised,  I do  now. I  release thee,  and remember
 no grievance.'                                                     
   Then  Feanor  took  his  hand  in  silence;  but  Fingolfin  said:
 'Half-brother in blood, full brother in heart I will be.  Thou shalt
 lead and I will follow. May no new grief divide us!'              
   'I hear thee,'  said Feanor.  'So be  it!' But  they did  not know
 then the full meaning that their words would bear.                 
   $58d  [see  AAm  $113]  It  is  told  that  even  as   Feanor  and
 Fingolfin  stood  before  Manwe,  there  came  the  Mingling  of the
 Lights,  and  both  Trees  were  shining,  and  the  silent  city of

 Valmar  was filled  with a  radiance of  silver and  gold. And  in that
 very  hour  Ungoliante  came  hastening  over  the  fields  of Valinor.
 Hunger  and  thirst  now  drove  her.  No  longer  she  crept  but ran,
 as the  shadow of  a black  cloud upon  the wind  fleets over  the sun-
 lit  earth.  Now  she  came  to  the  Green  Mound  of  the  Corolaire,
 and  her  Unlight  rose  up  even  to  the  roots  of  the  Trees. Then
 with  her  black  beak  she  pierced  their  rind,  wounded  them deep;
 and  their  juices  gushed  forth  and  she  drank  them  up.  But when
 no  more  flowed  she  set  her  mouth  to   the  wounds,   and  sucked
 them  dry,  and  the  poison  of  Death  that  was  in  her  went  into
 their  tissues  and  withered  them,  root,   branch,  and   leaf,  and
 they  died.  And  still  Ungoliante  thirsted;  and  she  went  to  the
 great  Wells  of  Varda  and  drained  them  dry.  And  as  she  drank,
 she  belched  forth  vast  vapours,  and  in  their  midst  she swelled
 to  a  shape  more  huge  and  hideous  than  even  her   most  lustful
 dream  had  hoped  ever  to   achieve.  At   last,  knowing   that  the
 time  was  short,  she  hastened  away,  north,   to  the   tryst  that
 Melkor had made with her, and did not mean to keep.                   
   $58e  Outside  he  had  lurked,  until  the  failing  of   the  Light
 announced   that   Ungoliante   had   done   her  work.   Then  through
 the  Kalakiryan,  now  only  a  dim  ravine  in  walls  of  shadow,  he
 came  striding  back,  Lord  of   Utumno,  a   black  shape   of  hate,
 visiting  the  places  of his  humiliation with  revenge. All  the land
 fell  swiftly  through  grey  twilight  into  night  as   Melkor  stood
 within  the  Ring  of  Doom  and   cursed  it;   and  he   defiled  the
 judgement  seat  of   Manwe  and   threw  down   the  thrones   of  the
 Valar.                                                                
   $58f  Then   he  went   on  to   his  second   mark,  which   he  had
 kept  secret  in  his  mind;  but  Ungoliante  was  aware  of  him, and
 turning  swiftly  she  overtook   him  on   his  road.   Aghast  indeed
 was  Melkor  to  see  her,  monstrous,  grown  to  a  lust   and  power
 that  he  could  not  master   without  aid.   He  could   not  contend
 with  her,  even  if  time  allowed;  and  he  could  not  escape.  She
 took  him  into  her  Unlight,  and they  went on  together to  the one
 place  in  the  land  of  the  Valar  that  he  would have  hidden from
 her.                                                                  
   $59   [see   AAm   $114]   So   the   great   Darkness    came   upon
 Valinor.  Of  the  deeds  of  that  time  much is  told in  the Aldude-
 nie * that  Elemmire  of  the  Vanyar  made  and  is  known to  all the
 Eldar.  Yet no  song or  tale could  contain all  the grief  and terror
                                                                      
  (* [footnote to the text] The Lament for the Two Trees.)             

 that  then  came  upon  the  Blessed  Realm.  The  Light  went  out;  but
 the  Darkness  that  followed  was  more  than  loss.  In  that  hour the
 dwellers  in  Aman  knew  the  Unlight,  and  it  seemed  not  lack,  but
 a  thing  with  being  of  its  own,  that  made by  malice out  of Light
 had  the  power  to  pierce  the  eye,  to  enter  heart  and   mind  and
 strangle the very will.                                                  
   $59a   [see   AAm   $115]   Varda   looked    down   from    the   Holy
 Mountain,   and   she   beheld   the   Shadow   soaring   up   in  sudden
 towers   of   gloom.   Valmar  was   blotted  out,   and  all   the  land
 foundered  in  a  deep  sea  of  night.  Soon  Taniquetil stood  alone, a
 last   island  in   a  drowned   world.  All   song  ceased.   There  was
 silence  in  Valinor,  and  no  sound  could  be  heard,  save  only from
 afar  there  came  on  the  wind  through  the  pass  of   the  mountains
 the  wailing  of  the  Teleri like  the cold  cry of  gulls. For  it blew
 chill  from  the  East  in that  hour, and  the vast  shadows of  the Sea
 were rolled against the walls of the shore.                              
   $59b  [see  AAm   $116]   Then  Manwe   went  up   to  his   high  seat
 upon  the  mountain-top,  and  he  looked  out,  and  his   eyes  pierced
 through  the  night,  until  they   saw  within   the  dark   a  Darkness
 which  they  could  not  penetrate,  huge  but   far  away,   moving  now
 northward   with   great   speed;   and   he   knew   that   Melkor   had
 come  and  gone.   Then  the   Valar  began   their  pursuit;   and  soon
 the  earth  shook  beneath  the  horses  of  the   host  of   Orome,  and
 the  fire  that  was  stricken  from the  hooves of  Nahar was  the first
 light  that  returned  to  Valinor.  But  when  the  riding of  the wrath
 of  the  Valar  came   up  with   the  Cloud   of  Ungoliante   all  were
 blinded   and   dismayed,   and   the  host   was  scattered,   and  they
 went  this  way  and  that,  they  knew  not   whither.  In   vain  Orome
 wound   his   horn,   for   the   Valaroma   was   choked  and   gave  no
 sound.  Tulkas  was  as  a  man  caught  in  a  black  net at  night, and
 he  stood   powerless  and   beat  the   air  in   vain.  And   when  the
 Cloud  had  passed,  it  was  too  late.  Melkor  had  gone   whither  he
 would, and his vengeance was achieved.                                   
                                                                         
                                Commentary.                               
                                                                         
 Leaving  for  a  moment  the  remarkable  narrative  shift in  this 'sub-
 chapter'  Of  the  Darkening  of  Valinor,  the  new  version  introduces
 many  elements  lacking  in  the  old  story:  among  the  most important
 being the origin of Ungoliante; the account of  the festival  in Valinor,
 with the 'investing' of the Valar in the form of the Children of Iluvatar
 and  their  partaking  of  the  physical  celebration  of   the  harvest;
 Manwe's   purpose   to   achieve  concord   among  the   Noldor;  Finwe's

  refusal  to  leave  Formenos  while  Feanor  was  banished  from Tirion;           
  and the reconciliation of Feanor with  Fingolfin before  Manwe's throne.           
  But all these are  present in  the Annals  of Aman,  and largely  in the           
  same  words. My  father, very  obviously, had  AAm in  front of  him; as           
  has been seen (pp. 191 - 2), LQ and AAm were very  close in  the earlier           
  part of the now replaced Chapter  6, and  while LQ  ceases at  the point           
  where  Melkor  goes  to  Arvalin   AAm  does   not,  but   continues  on           
  ($$105 - 16) in the same larger fashion, expanding  the old  story while           
  retaining the structure of the Quenta tradition.                                   
    Now,  however,  in  this  final  version  of  the  Quenta,  my  father           
  returned to the Annals and used them  for the  further expansion  of the           
  other - increasingly hard to differentiate - 'tradition'. Schematically:           
                                                                                    
                             QS (pre-The Lord of the Rings)                          
                Chapter 6 Of the Silmarils and the Darkening of Valinor              
                                                                                    
                         (Slight preliminary revision in 1951)                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
    Major  rewriting  of  QS       Annals of Aman                                    
    on  the  old  manuscript           $$78-104          continuing to $$105-16         
            in 1951                                                                  
     (as far  as Melkor's          (as far as Melkor's         (to Melkor's escape
     coming  to  Arvalin)          coming to Arvalin)            from the hunt)      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                        Final version in the Quenta Silmarillion                     
                                                                                    
    That in the  pre-The Lord  of the  Rings period  the Annals  of Valinor          
  and the Annals of Beleriand constituted  distinct entities,  forming with          
  the Quenta Silmarillion a tripartite  work, is  very clear  (see IV.284);          
  and  a  list  of  the  constituent  parts of  the Matter  of Middle-earth          
  associated  with  the  long  letter to  Milton Waldman  (see p.  3) shows          
  that this was still the case, in theory at least, in 1951.                         
    Yet we  have seen  how close  the versions  did in  fact become  in the          
  course of the 1951 revision; and now, in the  last phase  of his  work on          
  the actual narratives, when (as I have suggested, p.  142) my  father was          
  envisaging  a  're-expansion'  of  the  whole,  a  new conception  of The          
  Silmarillion,  a  new  and  much  fuller  mode  of narrative,  he derived          
  entire passages from the Annals with scarcely  any significant  change. I          
  have said (p. 192) that AAm and the rewriting (LQ) of  the first  part of          
  Chapter 6,  as I  think clearly  contemporary, are  too similar  in every          
  aspect, if continually different in actual wording, to be regarded as the          
  product of a separate tradition of learning  and memory,  or even  as the          
  product of two  different 'loremasters';  but the  relation of  this last          
  version of  the Silmarillion  tradition to  AAm on  which it  draws seems          
  to  show  that  my  father  had now  ceased to  regard them  as different          

  works. It may be, though I have no other evidence for it, that if  he had
  continued  this  last  version  he would  have 'cannibalised'  the Annals
  wherever  he  chose  to,  regarding  the  latter  now  as  no  more  than
  a  constituent  draft  text for  the sole  work that  was to  emerge: The
  Silmarillion.                                                            
     To  turn  now  to  the  major departure  from the  old legend  - which
  goes  back  to  the  original  tale  of  The  Theft  of  Melko   and  the
  Darkening of Valinor (I.152 - 3): Melkor was not present at the
  destruction of the Trees. When Ungoliante climbs Mount Hyarmentir
  he stays for a while beside her lair; goes down then to the shores of
  Avathar and curses the Sea; lurks outside the Pelori until the great
  darkness falls; then hastens through the pass to Valmar to desecrate
  the Ring of Doom. Why was this done? Not, surely, to bring in the
  casting down by Melkor of the thrones of the Valar - for this could
  have been achieved without altering the story, or at any rate without
  altering it so radically. The reason for the change, I think, was that my
  father found it unacceptable that Melkor should have risked allowing
  Ungoliante to come anywhere near the Silmarils. In the new story,
  Melkor's plan was to wait until she had destroyed the Trees and then
  go alone in the darkness to Formenos. The tryst 'that Melkor had     
  made with her, and did not mean to keep' ($58d) was not at Formenos
  - that being 'his  second mark,  which he  had kept  secret in  his mind'
  ($58f);  that  is why  it is  said that  Ungoliante 'turned  swiftly' and
  overtook him. Then 'they went on together to  the one  place in  the land
  of the Valar that he would have hidden from her.'                        
     Other  features  of  this  text are  discussed under  individual para-
  graphs.                                                                  
                                                                          
  $$55,  55b  There  now  appears  the  story  that  after Melkor  was seen
        from  the  hill  of  Tuna  passing  through  the  Kalakiryan   he  turned
        northwards  up  the  coast  into  Araman;  but  this  was  a  feint,  and
        he  turned  back  southwards  in   secret  and   came  into   Avathar  to
        find  Ungoliante.  (I  suggested  (I.157),  perhaps too  positively, that
        the  germ  of  this  northward  movement  on  the   part  of   Melkor  is
        to  be  found   in  the   old  Tale   (I.145),  where   Melko  originally
        'purposed  to  get  to  northward  over  the  passes  nigh   to  Mandos',
        but  thought  better  of  it. There  is indeed  no trace  of the  idea in
        any   intervening  version;   but  features   apparently  long   lost  do
        undoubtedly emerge again.)                                         
  $55a  'Melkor  purposed to  escape to  his old  strongholds in  the North
        of Middle-earth': i.e. Utumno and Angband. See p. 156, $12.        
  $55c  Here  first  appears  the  name  Avathar,  and  the   ancient  name
        Arvalin  at  last  disappears.  In  the  short   intermediate  typescript
        referred  to  on  p.   282  the   name  is   not  Avathar   but  Vastuman
        (typed over Arvalin). Vastuman is not translated.                  
  $56d  Hyarmentir replaces Hyarantar of AAm $107.                    

 $57 'The glimmer of the stars in the dome of Varda': on the Dome of     
      Varda see pp. 385 - 8.                                             
 $58d Corolaire: see AAm $122 (pp. 107, 127). - The Wells of            
      Varda: see p. 157, $17.                                            
 $59  The Aldudenie  of Elemmire  is named also in AAm $114               
      (Elemire; later Elemmire, p. 106).                               
                                                                        
   Entirely  new  are  the  statements that  Melkor 'could  still (though
 with pain) change his form, or walk unclad', but that at the time of his
 meeting  with  Ungoliante  he  appeared  as  the  Dark  Lord  of Utumno,
 and  never  again  changed  from  that  appearance   afterwards  ($$55b,
 56). He is now explicitly the Master of Ungoliante ($$56a, b);  cf. AAm
 $106: 'It may well  be that...  she was  in the  beginning one  of those
 that he had corrupted to his service.' The narrative is greatly expanded
 by the account of his persuasion of Ungoliante and his luring of  her by
 gems stolen in Valinor - giving her strength also to dare the  deed: for
 the great spider was weak through famine of light ($55d).               
                                                                        
                    THE LATER DEVELOPMENT OF CHAPTER 7.                  
                                                                        
 The  late  typescript  B  follows  straight  on  from  'Melkor  had gone
 whither he would,  and his  vengeance was  achieved' at  the end  of the
 'sub-chapter'  Of  the  Darkening  of  Valinor  (p.  289), with  no more
 than  a space,  but my  father afterwards  wrote in  a heading  [Of] The
 Rape  of  the  Silmarils; further  on there  is a  typed heading  Of the
 Thieves' Quarrel.                                                       
   As in the  preceding 'sub-chapter',  the end  of which  corresponds to
 the end of the former Chapter 6 (QS Chapter 4), he  again turned  to the
 Annals of Aman, and in  this case  he adopted  substantial parts  of the
 older text so closely that the new is almost an exact copy, with  only a
 word or two  changed here  and there  (on the  implications of  his thus
 amalgamating  the  two  'traditions'  see  pp.  289 -  91). But  he also
 introduced a new element  into the  narrative: the  attack by  Melkor on
 Formenos  reported by  Maedros (as  his name  is here  spelt: in  a late
 emendation  to  LQ  Chapter  5  Maedhros,  p.  177,  $41).  Only  now do
 the sons of Feanor play a part in this story: see p. 123, $122.         
   I  do not  give the  text in  the sections  where it  becomes scarcely
 distinct  from  that  of  AAm. The  paragraph numbers  here begin  a new
 series, since they cannot be usefully related to those of QS.           
                                                                        
                       OF THE RAPE OF THE SILMARILS.                     
                                                                        
   $1 When the Trees should have flowered for yet one more               
 day, but time was blind and unmeasured, the Valar returned to           
 the Ring of Doom. They sat upon the ground, for their thrones           

 were  defiled,  and  they  were  in  dark raiment  of grief.  About them
 was  a  great  concourse  of  folk,  hardly  to  be  seen;  for   it  was
 night.  But  the  stars  of  Varda  now   glimmered  overhead,   and  the
 air  was  clean.  The  winds  of   Manwe  had   driven  the   vapours  of
 death  far  away  and   rolled  back   the  shadows   of  the   Sea.  Now
 Yavanna   arose   and   stood   upon   the  Green   Mound,  but   it  was
 bare  and  black.  She  laid  her   hands  upon   the  Trees,   but  they
 were   dead  and   dark;  and   each  branch   that  she   touched  broke
 and fell  lifeless at  her feet.  Then the  voices of  all the  host were
 lifted  in  lamentation;  and  it  seemed  to  those  that  mourned  that
 they  had  drained  to  the  dregs  the  cup  of  woe  that   Melkor  had
 filled for them. But it was not so.                                      
                                                                         
   $$2-3    For  Yavanna  spoke  before  the  Valar,  saying  ...  These
 paragraphs,  in  which  the  demand is  made upon  Feanor that  the light
 of the Silmarils  be released  for the  saving of  the Trees,  are almost
 identical to AAm $$118 - 19 (p.  107), with  only a  very few  changes of
 no   significance,   as  Feanor   answered  no   word:  Feanor   made  no
 answer'.                                                                 
   $$4-5    But  Feanor spoke  then, and  cried bitterly...  These para-
 graphs are virtually identical to AAm  $$120 -  1, except  at the  end of
 $120  and  the  beginning  of  $121.  In  AAm  Feanor  declared  that  he
 would  be the  first to  die 'of  all the  Children of  Eru', but  on the
 typescript  of  AAm,  after  the  emergence  of the  story of  Miriel, my
 father corrected 'I shall die' to 'I shall be slain', and this change was
 taken  up  here. The  form of  the passage  in the  new version  has been
 given and discussed on pp. 268 - 9.                                      
                                                                         
   $6   'Thou   hast   spoken,'   said  Mandos.   Then  again   there  was
 silence,  and  thought  was  stilled.  But  after  a while  Nienna arose,
 and  she  went  up  onto  the  Mound;   and  she   cast  back   her  grey
 hood, and  her eyes  shone like  stars in  the rain,  for her  tears were
 poured  out,  and  she  washed  away   the  defilements   of  Ungoliante.
 And   when   she   had   wept   she   sang   slowly,  mourning   for  the
 bitterness of the world and all hurts of the Marring of Arda.            
   $7  But  even  as   she  mourned,   there  was   heard  the   sound  of
 feet  hastening  in  the  night.  Then  through   the  throng   came  the
 sons   of   Feanor,   flying   from   the  North,   and  they   bore  new
 tidings  of  evil.  Maedros  spoke  for   them.  'Blood   and  darkness!'
 he cried. 'Finwe the king is slain, and the Silmarils are gone!'        
   Then  Feanor  fell  upon  his  face  and  lay  as  one dead,  until the
 full tale was told.                                                      
   $8  'My   lord,'  said   Maedros  to   Manwe,  'it   was  the   day  of
 festival,  but  the  king was  heavy with  grief at  the departure  of my

 father,  a  foreboding  was  on  him.  He  would   not  go   from  the
 house.  We were  irked by  the idleness  and silence  of the  day, and
 we   went   riding   towards   the   Green   Hills.  Our   faces  were
 northward,  but  suddenly  we   were  aware   that  all   was  growing
 dim.  The  Light  was failing.  In dread  we turned  and rode  back in
 haste,  seeing  great  shadows  rise  up  before  us.  But even  as we
 drew  near  to  Formenos  the  darkness  came  upon  us;  and  in  the
 midst  was  a  blackness  like  a  cloud that  enveloped the  house of
 Feanor.                                                               
   $9  'We  heard  the  sound  of  great  blows  struck.  Out   of  the
 cloud  we  saw  a  sudden  flame  of  fire.  And  then  there  was one
 piercing  cry.  But  when  we  urged  on  our  horses they  reared and
 cast  us  to the  ground, and  they fled  away wild.  We lay  upon our
 faces  without  strength;  for  suddenly  the cloud  came on,  and for
 a  while  we  were  blind.  But  it  passed  us  by  and   moved  away
 north  at  great  speed.  Melkor  was  there,  we  do  not  doubt. But
 not  he  alone!  Some  other  power  was  with  him,  some  huge evil:
 even as it passed it robbed us of all wit and will.                   
   $10   'Darkness   and   blood!   When   we   could  move   again  we
 came  to  the  house.  There  we  found  the king  slain at  the door.
 His  head  was  crushed  as with  a great  mace of  iron. We  found no
 others:  all  had  fled,  and  he  had stood  alone, defiant.  That is
 plain;  for  his  sword  lay  beside  him,  twisted and  untempered as
 if  by  lightning-stroke.  All  the  house  was  broken  and  ravaged.
 Naught  is  left. The  treasuries are  empty. The  chamber of  iron is
 torn apart. The Silmarils are taken!'                                  
   $11  [see  AAm  $123]  Then  suddenly   Feanor  rose,   and  lifting
 up   his   hand   before   Manwe   he   cursed   Melkor,   naming  him
 Morgoth,  the  Black  Foe  of  the  world.*  And  he  cursed  also the
 summons   of   Manwe   and   the   hour   in   which   he    came   to
 Taniquetil, thinking  in the  madness of  his grief  that had  he been
 at  Formenos,  his  strength  would  have  availed  more  than  to  be
 slain  also,  as  Morgoth  had  purposed.  Then  with  a  cry  he  ran
 from  the  Ring  of  Doom  and  fled into  the night,  distraught; for
 his  father  was  dearer  to  him  than  the Light  of Valinor  or the
 peerless  works  of  his hands:  and who  among sons,  of Elves  or of
 Men, have held their fathers of greater worth?                        
                                                                      
  (* [footnote  to the  text] By  that name  only was  he known  to the
 Eldar ever after. (In the ancient form used by  Feanor it  was Moring-
 otho.) [Cf. the note added in LQ to QS $60 (p. 194), where the ancient
 form is Moringotto.])                                                 

   $12  [see  AAm  $124]  After  him   Maedros  and   his  brethren
 went  in  haste,  dismayed,  for they  had not  known that  he was
 present  when  Maedros  spoke;  and  now   they  feared   that  he
 might slay  himself. All  those who  saw Feanor's  anguish grieved
 for him and forgave all his bitterness. But his  loss was  not his
 alone. Yavanna wept  even as  Nienna, in  dread lest  the Darkness
 should  now  swallow the  last rays  of the  Light of  Valinor for
 ever.  For  though  the Valar  did not  yet understand  fully what
 had  befallen,  they perceived  that Melkor  had called  upon some
 aid that came from beyond Arda.                                  
   The  Silmarils  had  passed  away,  and  all  one  it  may  seem
 whether  Feanor  had  said  yea  or  nay to  Yavanna. Yet,  had he
 said yea at the first, and so cleansed his heart ere  the dreadful
 tidings  came,  his after-deeds  would have  been other  than they
 proved. But now the doom of the Noldor drew near.                
                                                                 
                      OF THE THIEVES' QUARREL.                    
                                                                 
   $13   Meanwhile,  it   is  told,   Morgoth  escaping   from  the
 pursuit  of  the Valar  came to  the wastes  of Araman.  This land
 lay  northward  between  the  Mountains  of  the  Pelori  and  the
 Great Sea, as Avathar lay  to the  south. But  Araman was  a wider
 land,  and  between  the shores  and the  mountains were  long and
 dreary plains without hindrance  to passage,  but bleak,  and ever
 colder as the Ice drew nearer.                                   
   $14  Through  this  dim  land   Morgoth  and   Ungoliant  passed
 in haste, and so through the great  mists of  Oiomure came  to the
 Helkaraxe,  where  the  strait  between  Araman  and  Middle-earth
 was  filled  with  grinding ice;  and they  crossed over  and came
 back  at  last  to  the North  of the  Outer World.  Together they
 went  on, for  Morgoth could  not elude  Ungoliant, and  her cloud
 was still about  him, and  all her  eyes were  upon him.  But when
 they  had  come  to  that  region that  was after  called Lammoth,
 north of the  Firth of  Drengist, Morgoth  grew more  hopeful, for
 they were drawing near  to the  ruins of  Angband where  his great
 western  stronghold  had  been. But  Ungoliant perceived  his mood
 and guessed that he would soon try to escape  and defraud  her, if
 he  could.  Therefore  she  stayed  him,  and  demanded   that  he
 should now fulfill his promise.                                  
   $15 'Black-heart!' she  said (calling  him 'Master'  no longer).
 'I have done your bidding. But I hunger still.'                  
   'What  wouldst  thou   have  more?'   said  Morgoth.   'All  the

    world  for thy  belly? I  did not  vow to  give thee  that. I  am its
 Lord.'                                                                 
   'Not  so  much,'  said  she.  'But  there  was  a  great  treasury, of
 which  you  said  naught  to  me,  and  would  have  said   naught  even
 now,  if  I  had  not  watched  you.  I  will have  all that.  Yea, with
 both hands you shall give it!'                                         
   'Thou  hast  had  the  half  already,'  said  Morgoth.  For  when  she
 was  with  him  (against  his  will)  at  the sack  of Formenos,  he had
 let  her  feast  awhile  upon  the gems  of Feanor,  so that  she should
 not come to the chamber of iron.                                       
   'I hunger,' she said. 'I will have the other half!'                 
   Then  perforce   Morgoth  surrendered   to  her   the  gems   that  he
 bore  with  him,   one  by   one  and   grudgingly;  and   she  devoured
 them,   and   their   beauty   perished   from   the  world.   Then  her
 strength was renewed, but her lust unsated.                            
   'With  one  hand  you  give,'  she  said,  'with  the left  only. Open
 your right hand!'                                                      
   $16  In  his  right  hand  Morgoth  held  close  the   Silmarils  that
 he  had  taken  from  the  chamber  of  iron;   and  though   they  were
 locked  in  a  crystal  casket,  they  had  begun to  burn him,  and his
 hand  was  clenched  in  pain.  But  he  would not  open it.  'Nay!' he
 said.  'These  things  thou  shalt  not  have,  nor  see.  I  name  them
 unto  myself  for  ever.  Thou  hast  had  already  more  than  thy due.
 For  with  my  power  that  I  put  into  thee  thy  work   was  accomp-
 lished.  I  need  thee  no  more.  Go,  filth!  Gnaw  thy  lust  in some
 hole far away, or I will  put a  fire in  thy maw  that shall  burn thee
 for ever! '                                                            
   $17   But   Ungoliant   was   not  daunted.   She  had   grown  great,
 and  he  less  by  the  power  that  had  gone  out  of  him.   Now  she
 rose  against  him,  and  her  cloud  closed  about  him,  and  she cast
 upon  him  a   hideous  web   of  clinging   thongs  to   strangle  him.
 Then   Morgoth  sent   forth  a   terrible  cry   that  echoed   in  the
 mountains.  Therefore  that   region  was   called  Lammoth,*   for  the
 echoes  of  his  voice dwelt  there ever  after, so  that any  who cried
 aloud  in  that  land  awoke  them,  and  all  the  waste   between  the
 hills  and  the  sea  was  filled  with  a  clamour  as  of   voices  in
 anguish.                                                               
   $18  But  the  cry  of  Morgoth   in  that   hour  was   the  greatest
 and  most  dreadful  that  was  ever  heard   in  the   northern  world:
 the  mountains   shook,  and   the  earth   trembled,  and   rocks  were
                                                                       
  (* [footnote to the text] The Great Echo.)                            

 riven  asunder.  Deep  in  forgotten  places  that  cry  was   heard.  Far
 beneath  the  halls  of Angband,  in  vaults  to  which  the Valar  in the
 haste  of  their  assault  had  not descended,  the Balrogs  lurked still,
 awaiting  ever  the  return  of  their  lord.  Swiftly  they   arose,  and
 they  passed  with   winged  speed   over  Hithlum,   and  they   came  to
 Lammoth as a tempest of fire.                                             
   $19   Then   Ungoliant    quailed,   and    she   turned    to   flight,
 belching   black   vapours  to   cover  her;   but  the   Balrogs  pursued
 her  with  whips   of  flame   into  the   Mountains  of   Shadow,*  until
 Morgoth   recalled   them.  Then   her  webs   were  shorn   asunder,  and
 Morgoth was released, and he returned to Angband.                         
   $20   But   Ungoliant  went   into  Beleriand,   and  there   dwelt  for
 a   time  beneath   the  Eryd   Orgoroth  [>   Gorgoroth],  in   the  dark
 valley   that   was   after   called  Nan Dungorthebf + because   of  the
 horror  that  she  bred  there.  But  when  she  had  healed her  hurts as
 best  she  could,  and  had  spawned  there  a  foul  brood,   she  passed
 away.  For   there  were   other  evil   creatures  of   spider-form  that
 had  dwelt  there  since  the  days  of  the   delving  of   Angband;  and
 she   mated  with   them  and   devoured  them.   But  whither   she  went
 after no tale  tells. It  is said  that she  ended long  ago, when  in her
 uttermost famine she devoured herself at last.                            
   $21   Thus   ended   the   Thieves'   Quarrel;    and   the    fear   of
 Yavanna  that  the  Silmarils  would  be  swallowed   up  and   fall  into
 nothingness   did   not   come  to   pass.  But   they  remained   in  the
 power of Morgoth.                                                         
                                                                          
   The new version  ends here  in the  typescript; but  among the  pages of
 very  rough  draft  material  there  is  the  following  abandoned passage
 that continues the narrative for a short distance:                        
                                                                          
   Now   Morgoth,   having  achieved   his  malice   against  Valinor,     
 and  escaped  from  bondage,  gathered  again  all his  servants that     
 he  could  find;  and  through  all the  North ran  the news  that he     
 had  returned.  From  near  and far,  from the  ruins of  Utumno, and     
 from  deep  dales  and  shadows  under  the  mountains  and  from all     
 dark and hidden places they crept back to him.                            
   Then  swiftly  they  began  to  delve  anew  the  vast   vaults  of     
 Angband  and  to  uplift  its  pillared  halls  of  stone  amid smoke     
 and  fire,  and  above  them  were  reared  the  reeking   towers  of     
 Thangorodrim.                                                             
                                                                          
  (* [footnote to the text] Eryd Wethrin on the borders of Beleriand.)     
  (+ [footnote to the text] The Valley of Dreadful Death.)                 

 the Sun was first made after the death of the Trees (described in a         
 chapter omitted).' The significance of this will appear in Part Five.       
                                                                            
                                Note on Dating.                              
                                                                            
 It is convenient to collect here the evidence, such as it is, bearing on the
 date of this late rewriting, and the texts associated with it.              
   I  have  mentioned  that  in  a  letter  of December  1957 my  father told
 Rayner  Unwin  that  it  was  his  intention  to  'get  copies  made  of all
 copyable  material', with  a view  to 'remoulding'  The Silmarillion;  and I
 have  suggested  that  the  amanuensis  typescript  LQ  2  of  The Silmaril-
 lion  and  that  of  the  Annals  of  Aman,  which  were  made  on  the same
 typewriter  and  probably  belong  to  the  same  time,  may   therefore  be
 tentatively ascribed to about 1958 (see pp. 141 - 2).                       
   If  this  dating  is  accepted for  the moment,  then the  annals inserted
 into  the  manuscript   of  AAm   concerning  the   death  of   Miriel,  the
 'Doom  of  Manwe   concerning  the   espousals  of   the  Eldar',   and  the
 marriage  of  Finwe  to  Indis  must have  preceded 1958  or belong  to that
 year, since they appear  in the  typescript of  AAm as  typed (p.  101 notes
 1  and  4,  p.  127,  $120); while  the rider  FM 1  to LQ  concerning Finwe
 and   Miriel   is   certainly   contemporary   with   the   AAm   insertions
 (p.  205).  The story  of Finwe  and Miriel  in the  manuscript (A)  of Laws
 and  Customs  among  the  Eldar  certainly  followed  FM  1,  but   the  two
 texts were probably close in time (p. 233). It is thus  notable that  in the
 letter  written  by  my  father  in  October  1958 (see  pp. 267,  270) this
 story and its implications were in the forefront of his mind.               
   The  second  text  of  the  story  of  Finwe  and  Miriel  (FM 2,  p. 254)
 intended  for  inclusion  in  The  Silmarillion  very probably  preceded the
 typescript  (B)  of  Laws  and Customs  among the  Eldar, since  this latter
 was  typed  on a  new typewriter  with a  rather distinctive  typeface. Also
 typed  on  this  machine  were  the  Valaquenta  and the  texts of  the late
 rewriting of Chapter 6( - 7). The first letter  of my  father's that  I know
 of to be typed on the new typewriter is dated January 1959.                 
   There is no actual proof  of date  in any  of this,  of course,  but taken
 together it points clearly,  I think,  to the  late 1950s  as the  time when
 the  story  of  Finwe  and  Miriel  arose  and  Laws  and Customs  among the
 Eldar  was  written.  Further   evidence  is   provided  by   the  Athrabeth
 Finrod ah Andreth (see pp. 304, 360).                                       
