 PART FOUR.
          
 ATHRABETH
  FINROD
    AH     
 ANDRETH.

                         ATHRABETH FINROD AH ANDRETH.                      
                                                                          
 While  this  very  remarkable  and  hitherto  unknown  work,   'The  Debate
 of Finrod and Andreth', is set at a later time in the history of  the Elder
 Days than is otherwise reached  in this  book, it  should clearly  be given
 here on account  of its  association, both  in date  and content,  with the
 writings  and  revisions  of  the 'Second  Phase' of  the post-Lord  of the
 Rings history of The Silmarillion. I have thought it best  to let  it stand
 as  a  separate  Part  in  this  book  rather  than  include  it  with  the
 miscellaneous writings in Part Five, since unlike those it  is a  major and
 finished work, and is  referred to  elsewhere as  if it  had for  my father
 some 'authority'.                                                         
  The textual situation, so far as the actual narrative  of the  'Debate' is
 concerned,  is  simple.  There  is  one manuscript  ('A'), very  similar in
 style  and  appearance  to  that  of  Laws  and  Customs  among  the Eldar,
 and like it clear and fluent - although in this case  there are  some pages
 of  drafting  extant,  with  clear  indications  that  others  existed (see
 pp. 350 ff.).  There are  also two  amanuensis typescripts,  taken indepen-
 dently  from  the  manuscript  after all  emendation had  been made  to it.
 One of these ('B'), probably the first to be made, is  of slight  value: it
 has  many  errors,  and  was  looked  through very  cursorily by  my father
 with scarcely  any emendation.  The other  ('C'), extant  also in  a carbon
 copy,  is  a  better  text  though not  without errors;  this he  read more
 carefully  and  introduced  a  number  of  minor  changes, but  missed some
 errors through not  checking it  against the  manuscript. The  text printed
 here  is  therefore  established  from  the  manuscript, taking  up emenda-
 tions made to the typescripts.                                            
  Neither of  the typescripts  of the  Athrabeth has  any title;  both begin
 with the  words 'Now  it chanced  that on  a time  of spring...'  (p. 307).
 The  manuscript,  on  the  other  hand, bears  the title  Of Death  and the
 Children  of  Eru,  and  the  Marring  of  Men   (with  another   title  or
 sub-title  added  later,  The  Converse  of  Finrod  and Andreth),  and two
 pages  of   introductory  text   precede  the   sentence  with   which  the
 typescripts  open.  This  introduction to  the 'Converse'  was in  fact the
 continuation  of  an  essay  which   my  father   removed  and   let  stand
 separately: see pp. 424 ff., where this work, entitled Aman, is given.
  This   introductory  section   was  subsequently   typed  by   my  father,
 with  a  carbon  copy, on  the new  typewriter (see  p. 300),  and attached
 to the beginning of the copies of the  amanuensis typescript  C. It  has no
 title or heading. In typing it he  substantially recast  it; but  the actual

  matter of the manuscript  version was  largely retained,  so that  only a
  few differences need be noted (see pp. 305 - 6).                         
    As to the date of the work: that  it was  written after  the completion
  of  the  manuscript  of Laws  and Customs  among the  Eldar is  seen from
  my father's comments on the latter, 'But see full treatment of this later
  in Athrabeth Finrod ah Andreth' and 'But  see Athrabeth'  (pp. 251  - 2).
  It  is  evident  also  that  it  followed  the typescript  B of  Laws and
  Customs,  since  the word  hroa(r) is  used, a  term which  only replaced
  hrondo(r) in that typescript by hasty later correction (p. 209). The text
  and  the  very  elaborate  Commentary  (typed  on  the   new  typewriter)
  appended  to  it  are  preserved  in folded  newspapers of  January 1960;
  and it is clear from what is written on the newspapers (see p.  329) that
  the  material  was  complete  when they  were used  for this  purpose. It
  is  true  of  course  that January  1960 is  not thereby  proved to  be a
  terminus ad quem,  because it  could have  been indefinitely  later that
  the newspaper was so used; but  that, I  think, is  very unlikely,  and I
  would therefore place the work  in 1959.  The only  evidence that  can be
  set against this is the fact that the small  quantity of  original draft-
  material is all written on slips made  from documents  of the  year 1955;
  but if my father had a store  of such  paper, as  is likely  enough, this
  would  show  no  more  than that  initial work  on the  Athrabeth belongs
  to  that  year  or  later.  At the  same time  it must  be allowed  to be
  perfectly  possible  that  he  was  working  on  it  at intervals  over a
  substantial period of time.                                              
    There follows now the introductory text in the typescript version.     
                                                                          
  Now  the  Eldar  learned  that,  according  to  the  lore  of  the Edain,
  Men  believed  that  their  hroar  were  not   by  right   nature  short-
  lived,  but  had  been  made  so  by  the  malice of  Melkor. It  was not
  clear  to  the  Eldar  whether   Men  meant:   by  the   general  marring
  of  Arda  (which  they   themselves  held   to  be   the  cause   of  the
  waning  of  their  own  hroar);  or  by   some  special   malice  against
  Men  as  Men  that  was  achieved  in  the  dark  ages  before  the Edain
  and  the  Eldar  met  in  Beleriand;  or  by  both. But  to the  Eldar it
  seemed  that,  if  the  mortality  of  Men  had  come by  special malice,
  the  nature  of  Men  had   been  grievously   changed  from   the  first
  design  of  Eru;  and  this  was  a  matter  of   wonder  and   dread  to
  them,  for,  if  it  were  indeed  so,  then  the  power  of  Melkor must
  be  (or  have  been  in  the  beginning)  far   greater  than   even  the
  Eldar  had  understood;  whereas   the  original   nature  of   Men  must
  have  been  strange  indeed  and  unlike  that  of  any  others   of  the
  dwellers in Arda.                                                        
    Concerning  these  things  it  is  recorded  in  the  ancient  lore  of
  the   Eldar   that   once   Finrod   Felagund   and  Andreth   the  Wise-

 woman  conversed  in  Beleriand  long  ago.   This  tale,   which  the
 Eldar  call  Athrabeth  Finrod  ah Andreth,  is here  given in  one of
 the forms that have been preserved.                                   
                                                                      
 Finrod  (son  of  Finarfin,  son  of  Finwe)  was  the  wisest  of the
 exiled   Noldor,   being   more   concerned   than  all   others  with
 matters  of  thought  (rather  than  with  making  or  with  skill  of
 hand);  and  he  was  eager  moreover  to discover  all that  he could
 concerning  Mankind.  He  it  was  that first  met  Men  in  Beleriand
 and  befriended  them;  and  for this  reason he  was often  called by
 the  Eldar  Edennil, 'the  Friend of  Men'. His  chief love  was given
 to the people of Beor  the Old,  for it  was these  that he  had first
 found in the woods of eastern Beleriand.                              
    Andreth  was  a  woman  of  the  House  of  Beor,  the   sister  of
 Bregor  father  of  Barahir   (whose  son   was  Beren   One-hand  the
 renowned).  She  was  wise  in  thought,  and learned  in the  lore of
 Men  and  their  histories;  for  which  reason  the Eldar  called her
 Saelind, 'Wise-heart'.                                                
    Of   the   Wise   some   were   women,   and   they   were  greatly
 esteemed   among   Men,   especially  for   their  knowledge   of  the
 legends   of   ancient   days.   Another   Wise-woman    was   Adanel,
 sister  of  Hador  Lorindol  at  one  time  Lord  of  the   People  of
 Marach,  whose  lore   and  traditions,   and  their   language  also,
 were  different  from  those  of the  People of  Beor. But  Adanel was
 married  to  a  kinsman  of  Andreth,  Belemir of  the House  of Beor:
 he  was  grandsire  of  Emeldir,  mother  of   Beren.  In   her  youth
 Andreth  had  dwelt  long  in  Belemir's  house,  and  so  had learned
 from  Adanel  much  of  the  lore  of  the  People of  Marach, besides
 the lore of her own folk.                                             
    In  the  days  of  the  peace  before  Melkor  broke  the  Siege of
 Angband,  Finrod  would  often  visit  Andreth,   whom  he   loved  in
 great  friendship,  for  he  found  her  more  ready  to   impart  her
 knowledge  to  him  than  were  most   of  the   Wise  among   Men.  A
 shadow  seemed  to   lie  upon   them,  and   there  was   a  darkness
 behind  them,  of   which  they   were  loth   to  speak   even  among
 themselves.  And  they  were  in  awe  of  the  Eldar  and  would  not
 easily  reveal  to  them their  thought or  their legends.  Indeed the
 Wise  among  Men  (who  were  few)  for  the  most  part  kept  their
 wisdom  secret  and  handed  it  on  only  to  those whom  they chose.
                                                                      
    The chief difference between the manuscript and typescript versions
 of  this  introductory piece  concerns the  expanded genealogy  of the

 House  of  Beor,  for  here  the  manuscript  gives some  additional informa-
 tion concerning Adanel:                                                     
                                                                            
 Another  wise-woman,  though  of  a  different  House  and  different       
 tradition,  was  Adanel  sister  of  Hador.  She  married  Belemir of       
 the  House  of  Beor,  grandson  of  Belen  second  son  of  Beor the       
 Old,  to  whom  the  wisdom  of  Beor  (for  Beor  himself  had  been       
 one   of   the  wise)   was  chiefly   transmitted.  And   there  had       
 been  great  love  between  Belemir  and  Andreth  his  younger kins-       
 woman  (the  daughter  of  his  second   cousin  Eoromir),   and  she       
 dwelt long in his  house, and  so learned  much of  the lore  also of       
 the 'people of Marach' and the House of Hador from Adanel.                  
                                                                            
   If   to  the   genealogical  references   in  the   published  Silmarillion
 (pp.  142,  148,  and  the  Index  s.v.  Emeldir)  is added  this information
 from  the  introduction  to  the   Athrabeth  the   following  tree   can  be
 derived (the new names are printed in italic):                              
                                                                            
                          Beor the Old                                       
                                                                             
                                                                            
          Baran                           Belen                              
                                                                            
          Boron                                                              
                                                                            
          Boromir                        Belemir            Adanel   Hador
                                                                     Lorindol
                                                                            
 Andreth              Bregor                        Beren                    
                                                                            
          Bregolas              Barahir            Emeldir                   
                                                                            
                                      Beren One-hand                         
                                                                            
 Most  of  the  genealogical  information  about  the  House  of  Beor  in the
 published  Silmarillion  is  derived of  course from  post-Lord of  the Rings
 work  on  the  text:  in  QS  and  the  Annals  of  Beleriand (AB  2) Beren's
 father  Barahir  was  the  son  of  Beor the  Old, and  the People  of Marach
 had not emerged.                                                            
   Other  differences  in  the  manuscript  version  of  the  introduction are
 the statements that  Andreth 'learned  also all  that she  could hear  of the
 Eldar',  and  that  Finrod  was  often  called  by  the  Eldar  'Atandil  (or
 Edennil)' (see the 'Glossary' to the Athrabeth, p. 349).                    
                                                                            
   In  the first  footnote to  the opening  of the  narrative proper  the date
 of  the   Athrabeth  is   given  as   'about  409   during  the   Long  Peace
 (260  -  455)'. In  the year  260 Glaurung  first emerged  from the  gates of
 Angband,  and  in  455  befell  the  Dagor  Bragollach  or  Battle  of Sudden

        
                                                                           
 game,  when  the  Siege  of  Angband  was  broken.  According to  the older
 chronology  (see  V.130,  274;  still  preserved  in  the  Grey  Annals  of
 c.1951) Finrod  Felagund  had  encountered  Beor  in  the foothills  of the
 glue  Mountains  in the  year 400,  but the  date of  that meeting  had now
 been set back by ninety years, to 310 (third footnote to the text).        
  There  follows  now  'The  Debate  of  Finrod   and  Andreth',   which  as
 already noted has no title  in the  typescripts (B  and C),  and which  in the
 original  manuscript  (A)   runs  on   continuously  without   new  heading
 from the introduction.                                                     
                                                                           
  Now  it  chanced   that  on   a  time   of  spring *  Finrod  was   for  a
 while  a  guest  in  the  house  of Belemir;  and he  fell to  talking with
 Andreth   the   Wise-woman   concerning   Men   and   their    fates.   For
 at  that  time  Boron,  Lord  of  the  folk  of Beor,  had but  lately died
 soon after Yule, and Finrod was grieved.                                   
  'Sad  to  me,  Andreth,'  he  said,   'is  the   swift  passing   of  your
 people.  For  now  Boron  your   father's  father   is  gone;   and  though
 he  was  old,  you  say,  as  age  goes  among  Men,**  yet  I   had  known
 him  too  briefly.  Little  while  indeed  it  seems  to  me since  I first
 saw + Beor  in  the  east  of  this  land,  yet  now  he  is gone, and his
 sons, and his son's son also.'                                             
  'More  than  a  hundred  years  it  is  now,'  said  Andreth,   'since  we
 came   over   the   Mountains;   and   Beor  and   Baran  and   Boron  each
 lived  beyond  his  ninetieth   year.  Our   passing  was   swifter  before
 we found this land.'                                                       
  'Then are you content here?' said Finrod.                                 
  'Content?'   said   Andreth.   'No   heart   of   Man   is   content.  All
 passing and dying  is a  grief to  it; but  if the  withering is  less soon
 then that is some amendment, a little lifting of the Shadow.'              
  'What mean you by that?' said Finrod.                                     
  'Surely   you   know   well!'   said  Andreth.   'The  darkness   that  is
 now  confined  to  the  North,  but   once';  and   here  she   paused  and
 her  eyes  darkled,  as  if  her mind  were gone  back into  black years
 best  forgot.  'But  once  lay  upon  all  Middle-earth,  while   ye  dwelt
 in your bliss.'                                                            
                                                                           
 (* [footnote  to  the  text]  This  would  be  about  409  during  the Long
 Peace  (260-455).  At  that  time  Belemir  and  Adanel  were  old  in  the
 reckoning of  Men, being  some 70  years of  age; but  Andreth was  in full
 vigour,  being  not  yet  50  (48).  She  was  unwed,  as was  not uncommon
 for Wise-women of Men.)                                                  
 (**[footnote to the text] He was 93.)                                      
 (+ [footnote to the text] In 310, about 100 years before this.)            

   'It  was not  concerning the  Shadow that  I asked,'  said Finrod.
 'What mean you, I would say, by  the lifting  of it?  Or how  is the
 swift  fate  of  Men  concerned  with  it? Ye  also, we  hold (being
 instructed  by  the  Great  who  know),  are  Children  of  Eru, and
 your fate and nature is from Him.'                                 
   'I see,' said Andreth, 'that in this ye of  the High-elves  do not
 differ  from  your lesser  kindred whom  we have  met in  the world,
 though  they  have  never  dwelt  in  the Light.  All ye  Elves deem
 that  we  die  swiftly by  our true  kind. That  we are  brittle and
 brief,  and  ye  are  strong  and  lasting. We  may be  "Children of
 Eru", as ye say in your lore; but we  are children  to you  also: to
 be  loved  a little  maybe, and  yet creatures  of less  worth, upon
 whom  ye  may  look  down  from  the  height   of  your   power  and
 your knowledge, with a smile,  or with  pity, or  with a  shaking of
 heads.'                                                            
   'Alas,  you  speak  near  the  truth,' said  Finrod. 'At  least of
 many of my people;  but not  of all,  and certainly  not of  me. But
 consider  this  well,  Andreth,  when  we  name  you   "Children  of
 Eru" we do not speak lightly;  for that  name we  do not  utter ever
 in jest or without full intent. When we  speak so,  we speak  out of
 knowledge, not  out of  mere Elvish  lore; and  we proclaim  that ye
 are our kin, in a kinship far closer  (both of  hroa and  fea) than
 that  which  binds  together  all  other  creatures  of   Arda,  and
 ourselves to them.                                                 
   'Other creatures  also in  Middle-earth we  love in  their measure
 and  kind:  the beasts  and birds  who are  our friends,  the trees,
 and even the fair  flowers that  pass more  swiftly than  Men. Their
 passing we regret; but believe it to be a part  of their  nature, as
 much as are their shapes or their hues.                            
   'But for you, who are our nearer kin, our  regret is  far greater.
 Yet, if we consider the briefness of life in all  Middle-earth, must
 we not believe that your  brevity is  also part  of your  nature? Do
 not  your  own  people  believe this  too? And  yet from  your words
 and their bitterness I guess that you think that we err.'          
   'I  think  that  you  err,  and  all  who  think  likewise,'  said
 Andreth; 'and that that  error itself  comes of  the Shadow.  But to
 speak  of  Men.  Some  will  say  this  and  some  that;  but  most,
 thinking little, will ever hold that what is in their brief  span in
 the  world  has  ever  been so,  and shall  so ever  remain, whether
 they like it or no.  But there  are some  that think  otherwise; men
 call  them  "Wise",  but  heed them  little. For  they do  not speak
 with  assurance  or  with  one  voice,  having  no   sure  knowledge

 such  as  ye  boast  of,  but perforce  depending upon  <lore>, from
 which truth (if  it can  be found)  must be  winnowed. And  in every
 winnowing  there  is  chaff  with  the  corn  that  is  chosen,  and
 doubtless some corn with the chaff which is rejected.              
   'Yet  among  my   people,  from   Wise  unto   Wise  out   of  the
 darkness,  comes  the  voice  saying that  Men are  not now  as they
 were,  nor  as  their  true  nature  was  in  their  beginning.  And
 clearer still is this said by the Wise of the People of  Marach, who
 have  preserved  in  memory  a  name  for  Him  that  ye  call  Eru,
 though in  my  folk  He  was  almost  forgotten.  So  I  learn  from
 Adanel. They say  plainly that  Men are  not by  nature short-lived,
 but  have  become  so  through  the  malice  of  the  Lord   of  the
 Darkness whom they do not name.'                                   
   'That I can well believe,' said Finrod:  'that your  bodies suffer
 in  some  measure  the  malice  of  Melkor.  For  you  live  in Arda
 Marred,  as  do  we,  and  all  the  matter of  Arda was  tainted by
 him,  before  ye  or  we  came forth  and drew  our hroar  and their
 sustenance   therefrom:  all   save  only   maybe  Aman   before  he
 came there.(1) For  know,  it  is  not  otherwise  with  the  Quendi (2)
 themselves: their health  and stature  is diminished.  Already those
 of   us  who   dwell  in   Middle-earth,  and   even  we   who  have
 returned to  it, find  that the  change (3) of their bodies is swifter
 than  in  the  beginning.  And  that,  I  judge, must  forebode that
 they will prove less strong to last than they  were designed  to be,
 though this may not be clearly revealed for many long years.       
   'And  likewise  with  the  hroar  of  Men,  they  are  weaker than
 they should be. Thus  it comes  to pass  that here  in the  West, to
 which  of  old  his   power  scarcely   extended,  they   have  more
 health, as you say.'                                               
   'Nay,  nay!'  said  Andreth.  'You  do  not  understand  my words.
 For you are ever  in one  mind, my  lord: the  Elves are  the Elves,
 and  Men  are  Men,  and  though  they  have  a  common   Enemy,  by
 whom  both  are  injured,  still   the  ordained   interval  remains
 between  the  lords  and  the  humble,  the  firstcomers   high  and
 enduring, the followers lowly and of brief service.                
   'That is not  the voice  that the  Wise hear  out of  the darkness
 and  from  beyond  it.  Nay,  lord,  the  Wise  among  Men  say: "We
 were  not  made  for  death,  nor  born  ever  to  die.   Death  was
 imposed upon us."  And behold!  the fear  of it  is with  us always,
 and we flee from it for ever as the  hart from  the hunter.  But for
 myself I  deem that  we cannot  escape within  this world,  nay, not
 even  if  we  could  come  to  the  Light  beyond  the Sea,  or that

                                                    
                                                                   
 Aman  of  which  ye  tell.  In  that  hope  we  set  out  and  have
 journeyed  through  many  lives  of  Men;  but  the hope  was vain.
 So said the Wise, but that did not stay  the march,  for as  I have
 said,  they  are  little  heeded.  And  lo! we  have fled  from the
 Shadow to the last shores of Middle-earth, to find only that  it is
 here before us!'                                                   
       Then Finrod was  silent; but  after a  while he  said: 'These
 words  are   strange  and   terrible.  And   you  speak   with  the
 bitterness  of  one  whose  pride  has  been humiliated,  and seeks
 therefore  to  wound  those  to whom  she speaks.  If all  the Wise
 among  Men  speak  so,  then  well  I  can  believe  that  ye  have
 suffered some great hurt.  But not  by my  people, Andreth,  nor by
 any of the Quendi.  If we  are as  we are,  and ye  are as  we find
 you, that is not by any deed of ours, nor of  our desire;  and your
 sorrow  does  not rejoice  us nor  feed our  pride. One  only would
 say otherwise: that Enemy whom you do not name.                    
       'Beware of the chaff with your corn, Andreth!  For it  may be
 deadly: lies of the Enemy  that out  of envy  will breed  hate. Not
 all the voices that come out of the darkness  speak truth  to those
 minds that listen for strange news.                                
       'But  who  did  you this  hurt? Who  imposed death  upon you?
 Melkor,  it  is  plain  that you  would say,  or whatever  name you
 have for him  in secret.  For you  speak of  death and  his shadow,
 as if these were one and the  same; and  as if  to escape  from the
 Shadow was to escape also from Death.                              
       'But these two are not the same, Andreth. So I deem, or death
 would not be found at all  in this  world which  he did  not design
 but  Another.  Nay,  death  is  but  the  name  that  we   give  to
 something that he has tainted,  and it  sounds therefore  evil; but
 untainted its name would be good.'(4)                              
       'What do ye know of death? Ye do not fear  it, because ye (5) do
 not know it,' said Andreth.                                        
       'We have seen it, and we fear it,'  answered Finrod.  'We too
 may  die,  Andreth;  and  we  have  died.  My  father's  father was
 cruelly slain, and many have followed him, exiles in the  night, in
 the cruel ice, in the insatiable sea. And  in Middle-earth  we have
 died,  by  fire  and by  smoke, by  venom and  the cruel  blades of
 battle.  Feanor  is  dead,  and  Fingolphin  was trodden  under the
 feet of the Morgoth.(6)                                            
       'For what end? To overthrow the  Shadow, or  if that  may not
 be, to keep it  from spreading  once more  over all  Middle-earth -

 to defend  the Children  of Eru,  Andreth, all  the Children  and not
 the proud Eldar only!'                                               
   'I  had  heard,'  said  Andreth,  'that  it  was  to   regain  your
 treasure  that  your  Enemy  had  stolen;  but  maybe  the  House  of
 Finarphin is  not at  one with  the Sons  of Feanor.  Nonetheless for
 all your valour, I  say again:  "what know  ye of  death?" To  you it
 may be in pain, it may be bitter and a loss  - but  only for  a time,
 a  little  taken  from abundance,  unless I  have been  told untruth.
 For  ye  know that  in dying  you do  not leave  the world,  and that
 you may return to life.                                             
   'Otherwise  it  is  with  us: dying  we die,  and we  go out  to no
 return. Death is an  uttermost end,  a loss  irremediable. And  it is
 abominable; for it is also a wrong that is done to us.'             
   'That difference  I perceive,'  said Finrod.  'You would  say there
 are two deaths: the one is  a harm  and a  loss but  not an  end, the
 other  is  an end  without redress;  and the  Quendi suffer  only the
 first?'                                                              
   'Yes, but  there is  another difference  also,' said  Andreth. 'One
 is but  a wound  in the  chances of  the world,  which the  brave, or
 the  strong,  or  the  fortunate,  may  hope to  avoid. The  other is
 death  ineluctable;  death  the  hunter  who  cannot  in  the  end be
 escaped. Be a Man strong, or swift, or bold;  be he  wise or  a fool;
 be he evil, or be he in all the deeds of his days just  and merciful,
 let him love the world or loathe it, he  must die  and must  leave it
 - and become carrion that men are fain to hide or to burn.'         
   'And being thus pursued, have Men no hope?' said Finrod.          
   'They  have  no  certainty  and  no   knowledge,  only   fears,  or
 dreams  in  the  dark,'  answered  Andreth.  'But  hope?  Hope,  that
 is  another  matter,  of  which  even  the  Wise seldom  speak.' Then
 her  voice  grew  more  gentle.  'Yet,  Lord Finrod  of the  House of
 Finarphin,  of  the  high   and  puissant   Elves,  perhaps   we  may
 speak of it anon, you and I.'                                       
   'Anon  we  may,'  said  Finrod,  'but  as  yet   we  walk   in  the
 shadows  of  fear.  Thus  far,  then,  I  perceive  that   the  great
 difference  between Elves  and Men  is in  the speed  of the  end. In
 this only. For if  you deem  that for  the Quendi  there is  no death
 ineluctable, you err.                                               
   'Now   none  of   us  know,   though  the   Valar  may   know,  the
 future of Arda, or how long  it is  ordained to  endure. But  it will
 not endure for ever. It was made by  Eru, but  He is  not in  it. The
 One  only  has  no  limits. Arda,  and Ea  itself, must  therefore be

 bounded. You see  us, the  Quendi, still  in the  first ages  of our
 being,  and  the  end  is  far  off.  As maybe  among you  death may
 seem  to  a  young  man  in  his  strength; save  that we  have long
 years  of  life  and  thought already  behind us.  But the  end will
 come.  That  we  all  know.  And  then we  must.die; we  must perish
 utterly, it seems, for we  belong to  Arda (in hroa and fea).(7) And
 beyond  that  what?  "The  going  out  to  no  return," as  you say;
 "the uttermost end, the irremediable loss"?                        
   'Our  hunter  is  slow-footed,  but  he  never  loses  the  trail.
 Beyond  the  day  when  he  shall   blow  the mort,(8) we  have  no
 certainty, no knowledge. And no one speaks to us of hope.'         
   'I did not know this,' said Andreth; 'and yet...'                
   'And  yet  at  least  ours  is slow-footed,  you would  say?' said
 Finrod.  'True.  But  it  is  not  clear that  a foreseen  doom long
 delayed is in all ways a lighter  burden than  one that  comes soon.
 But if I have understood  your words  thus far,  you do  not believe
 that  this difference  was designed  so in  the beginning.  You were
 not at first doomed to swift death.                                
   'Much could be said  concerning this  belief (be  it a  true guess
 or no). But first I  would ask:  how do  ye say  that this  has come
 about?  By  the  malice  of  Melkor  I  guessed,  and  you  have not
 denied it. But I  see now  that you  do not  speak of  the diminish-
 ment that  all in  Arda Marred  suffer; but  of some  special stroke
 of enmity against your people, against Men as Men. Is that so?'
   'It is indeed,' said Andreth.                                    
   'Then  this  is  a  matter  of  dread,'  said  Finrod.   'We  know
 Melkor,  the  Morgoth,  and  know  him  to  be  mighty. Yea,  I have
 seen him, and I  have heard  his voice;  and I  have stood  blind in
 the  night  that  is  at  the  heart  of  his  shadow,  whereof you,
 Andreth,  know  nought  save  by  hearsay  and  the  memory  of your
 people.  But  never  even  in  the  night have  we believed  that he
 could  prevail  against  the  Children  of  Eru.  This one  he might
 cozen,  or that  one he  might corrupt;  but to  change the  doom of
 a whole people of the Children,  to rob  them of  their inheritance:
 if  he  could  do  that  in  Eru's  despite,  then greater  and more
 terrible is he by far than we guessed;  then all  the valour  of the
 Noldor  is  but  presumption  and  folly  -  nay,  Valinor  and  the
 Mountains of the Pelori are builded on sand.'                      
   'Behold!'  said  Andreth.  'Did  I  not  say that  ye do  not know
 death? Lo!  when you  are made  to face  it in  thought only,  as we
 know it in deed and in thought all our lives, at once you  fall into
 a despair.  We know,  if ye  do not,(9) that the Nameless is Lord of

 this World, and your valour, and  ours too,  is a  folly; or  at least
 it is fruitless.'                                                    
   'Beware!'  said  Finrod.  'Beware  lest   you  speak   the  unspeak-
 able,   wittingly   or   in  ignorance,   confounding  Eru   with  the
 Enemy  who  would  fain  have  you  do  so.  The  Lord  of  this World
 is  not  he,  but  the  One  who  made  him,  and  his  Vicegerent  is
 Manwe, the Elder King of Arda who is blessed.                        
   'Nay,   Andreth,   the   mind  darkened   and  distraught;   to  bow
 and yet to loathe; to flee and  yet not  to reject;  to love  the body
 and  yet  scorn  it,  the  carrion-disgust:  these  things   may  come
 from  the  Morgoth,  indeed.  But  to  doom  the  deathless  to death,
 from  father  unto son,  and yet  to leave  to them  the memory  of an
 inheritance  taken  away,  and  the  desire  for  what is  lost: could
 the Morgoth do this? No, I say.  And for  that reason  I said  that if
 your tale is true,  then all  in Arda  is vain,  from the  pinnacle of
 Oiolosse  to  the uttermost  abyss. For  I do  not believe  your tale.
 None could have done this save the One.                              
   'Therefore  I  say  to  you,  Andreth,  what  did  ye  do,  ye  Men,
 long  ago  in  the  dark?  How  did  ye anger  Eru? For  otherwise all
 your  tales  are  but  dark  dreams  devised  in  a  Dark  Mind.  Will
 you say what you know or have heard?'                                
   'I will not,' said Andreth. 'We  do nor  speak of  this to  those of
 other  race.  But  indeed  the  Wise  are  uncertain  and  speak  with
 contrary  voices;  for  whatever  happened  long  ago,  we  have  fled
 from it;  we have  tried to  forget, and  so long  have we  tried that
 now  we  cannot  remember  any  time  when  we  were  not  as  we  are
 -  save  only  legends  of  days  when  death  came  less  swiftly and
 our span was still far longer, but already there was death.'         
   'Ye  cannot  remember?'  said  Finrod.  'Are   there  no   tales  of
 your   days  before   death,  though   ye  will   not  tell   them  to
 strangers? '                                                         
   'Maybe,'  said  Andreth.  'If   not  among   my  folk,   then  among
 the folk of Adanel, perhaps.' She fell silent, and gazed at the fire.
   'Do  you  think  that  none  know  save  yourselves?'   said  Finrod
 at last. 'Do not the Valar know?'                                   
   Andreth  looked  up  and  her  eyes   darkened.  'The   Valar?'  she
 said.  'How  should  I   know,  or   any  Man?   Your  Valar   do  not
 trouble  us  either  with  care  or  with  instruction.  They  sent no
 summons to us.'                                                      
   'What  do  you  know  of  them?'  said  Finrod.  'I  have  seen them
 and   dwelt   among   them,  and   in  the   presence  of   Manwe  and
 Varda  I  have  stood  in  the  Light. Speak  not of  them so,  nor of

 anything  that  is  high  above  you.  Such  words  came  first out
 of the Lying Mouth.                                                
   'Has  it  never  entered  into  your  thought, Andreth,  that out
 there in ages long past  ye may  have put  yourselves out  of their
 care, and beyond  the reach  of their  help? Or  even that  ye, the
 Children of  Men, were  not a  matter that  they could  govern? For
 ye were too great. Yea, I mean this, and do  not only  flatter your
 pride: too  great. Sole  masters of  yourselves within  Arda, under
 the hand of the  One. Beware  then how  you speak!  If ye  will not
 speak to  others of  your wound  or how  ye came  by it,  take heed
 lest  (as  unskilled  leeches) ye  misjudge the  hurt, or  in pride
 misplace the blame.                                                
   'But let us turn now  to other  matters, since  you will  not say
 more of this. I would consider your first  state before  the wound.
 For  what you  say of  that is  also to  me a  wonder, and  hard to
 understand.  You  say:  "we  were  not  made  for  death,  nor born
 ever  to  die."  What  do  you  mean: that  ye were  as we  are, or
 otherwise? '                                                       
   'This  lore  takes  no  account  of you,'  said Andreth,  'for we
 knew  nothing  of  the   Eldar.  We   considered  only   dying  and
 not-dying. Of life as long as the world  but no  longer we  had not
 heard; indeed not until now has it entered my mind.'               
   'To speak truly,' said Finrod, 'I had thought that this belief of
 yours, that ye too  were not  made for  death, was  but a  dream of
 your  pride,  bred  in  envy  of  the Quendi,  to equal  or surpass
 them. Not so, you will say. Yet long ere ye came  to this  land, ye
 met  other  folk  of  the  Quendi,  and  by  some  were befriended.
 Were  ye  not  then  already mortal?  And did  ye never  speak with
 them  concerning  life   and  death?   Though  without   any  words
 they  would  soon  discover  your  mortality,  and  ere   long  you
 would perceive that they did not die.'                             
   '"Not  so"  I  say  indeed,'  answered  Andreth.  'We   may  have
 been  mortal when  first we  met the  Elves far  away, or  maybe we
 were not:  our lore  does not  say, or  at least  none that  I have
 learned. But  already we  had our  lore, and  needed none  from the
 Elves: we knew  that in  our beginning  we had  been born  never to
 die. And  by that,  my lord,  we meant:  born to  life everlasting,
 without any shadow o f any end.'                                  
   'Then  have  the  Wise  among  you  considered  how   strange  is
 the true nature that they claim for the Atani?' said Finrod.       
   'Is it so strange?' said Andreth. 'Many of the Wise hold  that in
 their true nature no living things would die.'                     

 
                                                                    
   'In that the Eldar would say that they err,'  said Finrod.  'To us
 your  claim  for  Men  is strange,  and indeed  hard to  accept, for
 two  reasons.  You  claim,   if  you   fully  understand   your  own
 words,  to  have  had  imperishable  bodies,  not  bounded   by  the
 limits of Arda, and  yet derived  from its  matter and  sustained by
 it. And  you claim  also (though  this you  may not  have perceived)
 to have had  hroar and  fear that  were from  the beginning  out of
 harmony. Yet harmony of hroa and fea is,  we believe,  essential to
 the  true  nature  unmarred  of all  the Incarnate: the Mirroanwi (10)
 as we call the Children of Eru.'                                    
   'The first difficulty I perceive,'  said Andreth,  'and to  it our
 Wise  have their  own answer.  The second,  as you  guess, I  do not
 perceive.'                                                          
   'Do  you  not?'  said  Finrod.  'Then  you  do not  see yourselves
 clearly.  But  it  may  often  happen that  friends and  kinsmen see
 some things plainly that are hidden from their friend himself.      
   'Now  we  Eldar  are  your  kinsmen,  and  your  friends  also (if
 you  will  believe  it), and  we have  observed you  already through
 three  lives  of  Men  with love  and concern  and much  thought. Of
 this then we are certain without debate, or else  all our  wisdom is
 vain: the fear of Men, though close akin indeed to the fear of the
 Quendi, are yet not  the same.  For strange  as we  deem it,  we see
 clearly that the  fear of  Men are  not, as  are ours,  confined to
 Arda, nor is Arda their home.                                       
   'Can  you  deny  it?  Now  we  Eldar  do  not  deny  that  ye love
 Arda and all that is  therein (in  so far  as ye  are free  from the
 Shadow)  maybe  even as  greatly as  do we.  Yet otherwise.  Each of
 our  kindreds   perceives  Arda   differently,  and   appraises  its
 beauties in different mode and  degree. How  shall I  say it?  To me
 the  difference seems  like that  between one  who visits  a strange
 country,  and  abides  there  a while  (but need  not), and  one who
 has  lived  in  that  land  always  (and  must).  To the  former all
 things  that  he  sees  are  new  and  strange,  and in  that degree
 lovable. To the other all things are familiar, the only  things that
 are, his own, and in that degree precious.'                         
   'If you mean that Men are the guests,' said Andreth.              
   'You  have  said  the  word,'  said  Finrod:  'that  name  we have
 given to you.'                                                      
   'Lordly as ever,' said Andreth. 'But even if we  be but  guests in
 a land where all is your own,  my lords,  as you  say, tell  me what
 other land or things do we know?'                                   
   'Nay, tell me!'  said Finrod.  'For if  you do  not know,  how can

 we?  But  do  you  know  that  the  Eldar  say  of  Men that  they look
 at  no  thing for  itself; that  if they  study it,  it is  to discover
 something else; that if they love it, it is only (so it  seems) because
 it  reminds  them  of  some  other  dearer  thing?  Yet  with  what  is
 this comparison? Where are these other things?                        
   'We  are  both,  Elves  and  Men,  in  Arda  and  of  Arda;  and such
 knowledge  as  Men  have  is  derived  from  Arda   (or  so   it  would
 appear).   Whence   then   comes   this  memory   that  ye   have  with
 you, even before ye begin to learn?                                   
   'It  is  not  of   other  regions   in  Arda   from  which   ye  have
 journeyed.  We  also  have  journeyed  from  afar.  But  were  you  and
 I  to  go  together  to  your   ancient  homes   east  away   I  should
 recognize  the  things  there  as  part of  my home,  but I  should see
 in  your  eyes  the  same  wonder  and  comparison  as  I  see  in  the
 eyes of Men in Beleriand who were born here.'                         
   'You   speak  strange   words,  Finrod,'   said  Andreth,   'which  I
 have not heard before.  Yet my  heart is  stirred as  if by  some truth
 that it recognizes even if it does not understand  it. But  fleeting is
 that  memory,  and  goes  ere  it  can  be  grasped;  and then  we grow
 blind.   And   those   among  us   who  have   known  the   Eldar,  and
 maybe  have  loved  them,  say  on  our  side:  "There is  no weariness
 in  the  eyes  of  the   Elves".  And   we  find   that  they   do  not
 understand  the  saying  that  goes  among  Men:  too  often   seen  is
 seen   no  longer.   And  they   wonder  much   that  in   the  tongues
 of   Men   the   same   word   may    mean   both    "long-known"   and
 "stale".                                                              
   'We  have  thought  that  this  was  so only  because the  Elves have
 lasting  life   and  undiminished   vigour.  "Grown-up   children"  we,
 the  guests,  sometimes  call  you,  my  lord.  And yet  - and  yet, if
 nothing  in Arda  for us  holds its  savour long,  and all  fair things
 grow   dim,   what   then?  Does   it  not   come  from   [the]  Shadow
 upon  our  hearts?  Or  do  you say  that it  is not  so, but  this was
 ever our nature, even before the wound?'                              
   'I  say  so,  indeed,'   answered  Finrod.   'The  Shadow   may  have
 darkened   your   unrest,   bringing   swifter   weariness   and   soon
 turning  it  to  disdain,  but the  unrest was  ever there,  I believe.
 And  if  this  is  so,  then can  you not  now perceive  the disharmony
 that  I  spoke  of?  If  indeed  your  Wisdom  had  lore like  to ours,
 teaching  that  the  Mirroaowi  are  made  of  a  union  of   body  and
 mind, of hroa  and fea,  or as  we say  in picture  the House  and the
 Indweller.                                                            
   'For  what  is  the  "death"  that  you  mourn  but  the  severing of

 these  two?  And  what is  the "deathlessness"  that you  have lost
 but that the two should remain united for ever?                   
   'But  what  then  shall  we  think  of  the union  in Man:  of an
 Indweller, who is but a guest here in  Arda and  not here  at home,
 with  a  House  that  is  built  of  the  matter  of Arda  and must
 therefore (one would suppose) here remain?                        
   'At least one would not hope for  this House  a life  longer than
 Arda of which it  is part.  Yet you  claim that  the House  too was
 immortal, do you not? I  would rather  believe that  such a  fea of
 its  own  nature  would  at  some  time  of   its  own   will  have
 abandoned  the  house  of  its  sojourn   here,  even   though  the
 sojourn  might  have  been  longer  than  is  now  permitted.  Then
 "death"  would  (as I  said) have  sounded otherwise  to you:  as a
 release,  or  return,  nay!  as  going  home! But  this you  do not
 believe, it seems?'                                               
   'Nay, I do not believe this,'  said Andreth.  'For that  would be
 contempt  of  the  body,  and   is  a   thought  of   the  Darkness
 unnatural  in  any  of  the  Incarnate  whose  life  uncorrupted is
 a  union of  mutual love.  But the  body is  not an  inn to  keep a
 traveller warm for a night, ere  he goes  on his  way, and  then to
 receive another. It is a house  made for  one dweller  only, indeed
 not only house but raiment also; and it is not clear to me  that we
 should in this case speak only of the raiment  being fitted  to the
 wearer rather than of the wearer being fitted to the raiment.     
   'I hold then that it is not to be thought  that the  severance of
 these  two  could  be  according  to  the true  nature of  Men. For
 were  it  "natural"  for  the  body  to be  abandoned and  die, but
 "natural" for the fea to  live on,  then there  would indeed  be a
 disharmony  in  Man, and  his parts  would not  be united  by love.
 His  body  would  be  a  hindrance  at  best,  or  a chain.  An im-
 position indeed,  not a  gift. But  there is  one who  imposes, and
 who  devises  chains, and  if such  were our  nature in  the begin-
 ning,  then  we  should  derive  it  from  him -  but that  you say
 should not be spoken.                                             
   'Alas!  Out  in  the darkness  men do  say this  nonetheless, but
 not the Atani as  thou knowest,  not now.  I hold  that in  this we
 are as ye are, truly Incarnates,  and that  we do  not live  in our
 right being and  its fullness  save in  a union  of love  and peace
 between  the  House  and  the   Dweller.  Wherefore   death,  which
 divides them, is a disaster to both.'                             
   'Ever  more  you  amaze  my   thought,  Andreth,'   said  Finrod.
 'For if your claim is true, then  lo! a  fea which  is here  but a

                                     
                                                                    
 traveller  is  wedded  indissolubly  to  a  hroa  of Arda;  to divide
 them is a grievous hurt, and yet  each must  fulfil its  right nature
 without  tyranny  of  the other.  Then this  must surely  follow: the
 fea  when  it  departs  must  take with  it the  hroa. And  what can
 this mean unless it be that the fea shall have  the power  to uplift
 the  hroa,  as  its  eternal  spouse  and  companion, into  an endur-
 ance   everlasting   beyond   Ea,   and   beyond  Time?   Thus  would
 Arda, or part thereof, be  healed not  only of  the taint  of Melkor,
 but  released  even  from  the  limits that  were set  for it  in the
 "Vision of Eru" of which the Valar speak.                           
  'Therefore I say that if this  can be  believed, then  mighty indeed
 under  Eru   were  Men   made  in   their  beginning;   and  dreadful
 beyond all other calamities was the change in their state.          
  'Is  it,  then,  a  vision  of  what  was designed  to be  when Arda
 was  complete  -  of living  things and  even of  the very  lands and
 seas  of  Arda made  eternal and  indestructible, for  ever beautiful
 and  new  -  with  which  the  fear  of  Men  compare  what  they see
 here?  Or  is  there  somewhere  else  a  world  of which  all things
 which we see,  all things  that either  Elves or  Men know,  are only
 tokens or reminders?'                                               
  'If so it resides in the  mind of  Eru, I  deem,' said  Andreth. 'To
 such questions how  can we  find the  answers, here  in the  mists of
 Arda  Marred?  Otherwise  it  might  have  been,  had  we   not  been
 changed;  but  being  as  we  are,  even  the  Wise  among   us  have
 given too  little thought  to Arda  itself, or  to other  things that
 dwell  here.  We  have  thought  most  of   ourselves:  of   how  our
 hroar and fear should have  dwelt together  for ever  in joy,  and of
 the darkness impenetrable that now awaits us.'                      
  'Then not only the  High Eldar  are forgetful  of their  kin!' said
 Finrod.  'But  this  is strange  to me,  and even  as did  your heart
 when  I  spoke  of  your  unrest,  so  now  mine leaps  up as  at the
 hearing of good news.                                               
  'This  then,  I   propound,  was   the  errand   of  Men,   not  the
 followers, but the heirs and fulfillers of all:  to heal  the Marring
 of  Arda,  already  foreshadowed  before  their  devising; and  to do
 more, as  agents of  the magnificence  of Eru:  to enlarge  the Music
 and surpass the Vision of the World!(11)                            
  'For  that  Arda  Healed  shall   not  be   Arda  Unmarred,   but  a
 third  thing  and  a  greater, and  yet the same.(12) I have conversed
 with  the  Valar  who were  present at  the making  of the  Music ere
 the  being  of  the  World  began. And  now I  wonder: Did  they hear
 the  end  of  the Music?  Was there  not something  in or  beyond the

                        
                                                                     
 final  chords  of  Eru  which,  being  overwhelmed thereby,  they did
 got perceive?(13)                                                    
   'Or  again, since  Eru is  for ever  free, maybe  he made  no Music
 and  showed   no  Vision   beyond  a   certain  point.   Beyond  that
 point  we  cannot  see  or  know,  until  by  our  own roads  we come
 there, Valar or Eldar or Men.                                        
   'As may a master in  the telling  of tales  keep hidden  the great-
 est  moment  until  it  comes  in due  course. It  may be  guessed at
 indeed,  in  some  measure,  by those  of us  who have  listened with
 full heart and mind;  but so  the teller  would wish.  In no  wise is
 the  surprise  and wonder  of his  art thus  diminished, for  thus we
 share, as it were, in his authorship. But not so, if all were told us
 in a preface before we entered in!'                                  
   'What  then  would  you  say  is  the   supreme  moment   that  Eru
 has reserved?' Andreth asked.                                        
   'Ah,  wise  lady!'  said Finrod.  'I am  an Elda,  and again  I was
 thinking of my own people. But  nay, of  all the  Children of  Eru. I
 was  thinking  that  by  the  Second  Children  we  might  have  been
 delivered  from  death.  For  ever  as  we  spoke  of  death  being a
 division of the united,  I thought  in my  heart of  a death  that is
 not  so:  but  the ending  together of  both. For  that is  what lies
 before us, so far as  our reason  could see:  the completion  of Arda
 and  its end,  and therefore  also of  us children  of Arda;  the end
 when all the long lives of the Elves shall be wholly in the past.(14)
   'And  then  suddenly  I  beheld  as  a  vision  Arda   Remade;  and
 there  the  Eldar  completed  but  not  ended  could  abide   in  the
 present  for  ever,(15) and there walk, maybe,  with the  Children of
 Men,  their  deliverers,  and  sing to  them such  songs as,  even in
 the  Bliss  beyond  bliss,  should  make the  green valleys  ring and
 the everlasting mountain-tops to throb like harps.'                  
   Then  Andreth  looked  under  her  brows  at  Finrod:   'And  what,
 when ye were not singing, would ye say to us?' she asked.            
   Finrod laughed. 'I can  only guess,'  he said.  'Why, wise  lady, I
 think that we should  tell you  tales of  the Past  and of  Arda that
 was  Before, of  the perils  and great  deeds and  the making  of the
 Silmarils!  We  were  the  lordly ones  then! But  ye, ye  would then
 be  at  home,  looking  at  all  things  intently,  as  your  own. Ye
 would be  the lordly  ones. "The  eyes of  Elves are  always thinking
 of  something  else,"  ye  would  say.  But  ye  would  know  then of
 what  we  were  reminded:  of  the days  when we  first met,  and our
 hands  touched  in  the  dark.  Beyond  the  End  of the  World we
 shall not change; for in memory is our great  talent, as  shall be

 seen  ever  more  clearly  as  the ages  of this  Arda pass:  a heavy
 burden  to  be,  I fear;  but in  the Days  of which  we now  speak a
 great  wealth.'  And  then  he paused,  for he  saw that  Andreth was
 weeping silently.                                                   
   'Alas,  lord!'  she  said. 'What  then is  to be  done now?  For we
 speak as if these things are, or as  if they  will assuredly  be. But
 Men  have  been  diminished  and  their  power  is  taken   away.  We
 look  for  no  Arda  Remade:  darkness  lies  before  us,  into which
 we stare in vain. If  by our  aid your  everlasting mansions  were to
 be prepared, they will not be builded now.'                         
   'Have ye then no hope?' said Finrod.                              
   'What  is  hope?'  she  said.  'An   expectation  of   good,  which
 though  uncertain  has  some  foundation  in  what  is   known?  Then
 we have none.'                                                      
   'That  is  one  thing that  Men call  "hope",' said  Finrod. 'Amdir
 we  call  it, "looking  up". But  there is  another which  is founded
 deeper. Estel we call it, that is "trust". It is not defeated  by the
 ways  of  the  world,  for  it  does  not  come from  experience, but
 from our nature and first  being. If  we are  indeed the  Eruhin, the
 Children  of  the  One,  then  He  will  not  suffer  Himself  to  be
 deprived  of  His  own,  not  by  any Enemy,  not even  by ourselves.
 This  is  the  last  foundation  of  Estel, which  we keep  even when
 we contemplate the  End: of  all His  designs the  issue must  be for
 His  Children's  joy.  Amdir  you have  not, you  say. Does  no Estel
 at all abide?'                                                      
   'Maybe,' she said. 'But no!  Do you  not perceive  that it  is part
 of  our  wound  that  Estel  should  falter  and  its  foundations be
 shaken?  Are  we  the  Children  of  the  One?  Are  we not  cast off
 finally? Or were we  ever so?  Is not  the Nameless  the Lord  of the
 World?'                                                             
   'Say it not even in question!' said Finrod.                       
   'It   cannot   be   unsaid,'  answered   Andreth,  'if   you  would
 understand  the  despair  in  which  we  walk.   Or  in   which  most
 Men walk.  Among the  Atani, as  you call  us, or  the Seekers  as we
 say: those who  left the  lands of  despair and  the Men  of darkness
 and journeyed  west in  vain hope:  it is  believed that  healing may
 yet  be  found, or  that there  is some  way of  escape. But  is this
 indeed  Estel?  Is  it  not  Amdir rather;  but without  reason: mere
 flight  in  a  dream from  what waking  they know:  that there  is no
 escape from darkness and death?'                                    
   'Mere  flight  in  a  dream  you say,'  answered Finrod.  'In dream
 many desires  are revealed;  and desire  may be  the last  flicker of

                     
                                                                 
 Estel. But  you  do  not  mean   dream,  Andreth.   You  confound
 dream  and  waking with  hope and  belief, to  make the  one more
 doubtful  and  the  other more  sure. Are  they asleep  when they
 speak of escape and healing?'                                   
   'Asleep  or   awake,  they   say  nothing   clearly,'  answered
 Andreth.  'How  or  when shall  healing come?  To what  manner of
 being shall those who see that time  be re-made?  And what  of us
 who before it go out  into darkness  unhealed? To  such questions
 only those of the <Old Hope> (as they  call themselves)  have any
 guess of an answer.'                                             
   'Those of the Old Hope?' said Finrod. 'Who are they?'          
   'A few,' she said; 'but their  number has  grown since  we came
 to this land, and they see that the Nameless can (as  they think)
 be  defied. Yet  that is  no good  reason. To  defy him  does not
 undo his work of old. And if the valour of the Eldar  fails here,
 then their despair will be deeper. For it was not on the might of
 Men, or of any  of the  peoples of  Arda, that  the old  hope was
 grounded.'                                                       
   'What then was this hope, if you know?' Finrod asked.          
   'They  say,'  answered  Andreth:  'they say  that the  One will
 himself enter into Arda, and heal  Men and  all the  Marring from
 the beginning to the end. This they say also, or they feign, is a
 rumour  that  has  come  down   through  years   uncounted,  even
 from the days of our undoing.'(16)                               
   'They say, they feign?' said Finrod. 'Are you  then nor  one of
 them?'                                                           
   'How can I be, lord?  All wisdom  is against  them. Who  is the
 One, whom ye call  Eru? If  we put  aside the  Men who  serve the
 Nameless, as  do many  in Middle-earth,  still many  Men perceive
 the  world  only  as  a  war between  Light and  Dark equipotent.
 But you will say: nay,  that is  Manwe and  Melkor; Eru  is above
 them. Is then Eru only  the greatest  of the  Valar, a  great god
 among  gods,  as  most  Men  will  say, even  among the  Atani: a
 king who dwells far from  his kingdom  and leaves  lesser princes
 to do here much as they  will? Again  you say:  nay, Eru  is One,
 alone without peer, and He  made Ea,  and is  beyond it;  and the
 Valar are greater than we, but yet no nearer  to His  majesty. Is
 this not so?'                                                    
   'Yes,' said Finrod. 'We say this,  and the  Valar we  know, and
 they say the same, all save one.  But which,  think you,  is more
 likely  to  lie:  those who  make themselves  humble, or  he that
 exalts himself?'                                                 

   'I do not doubt,'  said Andreth.  'And for  that reason  the saying
 of  Hope  passes  my  understanding.  How  could  Eru enter  into the
 thing  that  He  has  made,  and  than  which  He  is  beyond measure
 greater? Can the singer enter into his tale or the designer  into his
 picture? '                                                          
   'He  is  already  in  it, as  well as  outside,' said  Finrod. 'But
 indeed  the  "in-dwelling"  and  the  "out-living"  are  not  in  the
 same mode.'                                                         
   'Truly,'  said  Andreth. 'So  may Eru  in that  mode be  present in
 Ea  that  proceeded  from  Him.  But  they   speak  of   Eru  Himself
 entering  into  Arda,  and  that  is  a  thing wholly  different. How
 could  He  the  greater  do  this?  Would  it  not  shatter  Arda, or
 indeed all Ea? '                                                    
   'Ask  me  not,'  said   Finrod.  'These   things  are   beyond  the
 compass  of  the  wisdom of  the Eldar,  or of  the Valar  maybe. But
 I  doubt  that  our  words  may  mislead  us, and  that when  you say
 "greater"  you  think  of  the  dimensions  of  Arda,  in  which  the
 greater vessel may not be contained in the less.                    
   'But  such  words  may  not  be  used  of  the Measureless.  If Eru
 wished  to  do  this,  I  do  not  doubt  that He  would find  a way,
 though I cannot foresee it. For, as  it seems  to me,  even if  He in
 Himself were to enter in, He  must still  remain also  as He  is: the
 Author  without.  And  yet,  Andreth,  to  speak  with   humility,  I
 cannot  conceive  how  else  this  healing  could be  achieved. Since
 Eru  will  surely  not suffer  Melkor to  turn the  world to  his own
 will  and  to  triumph in  the end.  Yet there  is no  power conceiv-
 able  greater  than  Melkor  save  Eru  only.  Therefore  Eru,  if He
 will  not  relinquish  His  work  to  Melkor,  who must  else proceed
 to mastery, then Eru must come in to conquer him.                   
   'More:  even  if  Melkor  (or  the  Morgoth  that  he  has  become)
 could  in  any  way be  thrown down  or thrust  from Arda,  still his
 Shadow  would  remain,  and  the  evil  that   he  has   wrought  and
 sown  as  a  seed  would  wax  and  multiply. And  if any  remedy for
 this is to be found, ere all is ended,  any new  light to  oppose the
 shadow,  or  any  medicine  for  the  wounds: then  it must,  I deem,
 come from without.'                                                 
   'Then,  lord,'  said  Andreth, and  she looked  up in  wonder, 'you
 believe in this Hope?'                                              
   'Ask me not yet,' he answered. 'For it is still  to me  but strange
 news  that  comes  from  afar.  No  such  hope  was  ever  spoken  to
 the  Quendi.  To  you  only  it  was  sent.  And  yet through  you we
 may hear it and  lift up  our hearts.'  He paused  a while,  and then

 
                                                                    
  looking  gravely  at  Andreth  he  said:  'Yes,  Wise-woman,  maybe
  it  was  ordained  that  we  Quendi,  and ye  Atani, ere  the world
  grows  old,  should  meet  and bring  news one  to another,  and so
  we  should  learn  of  the  Hope from  you: ordained,  indeed, that
  thou and I,  Andreth, should  sit here  and speak  together, across
  the gulf that divides our kindreds, so that while the  Shadow still
  broods in the North we should not be wholly afraid.'               
     'Across the gulf that divides our  kindreds!' said  Andreth. 'Is
  there no bridge but mere words?' And then she wept again.          
     'There may be. For some.  I do  not know,'  he said.  'The gulf,
  maybe, is between our  fates rather,  for else  we are  close akin,
  closer than any other creatures in the world. Yet perilous is it to
  cross a  gulf set  by doom;  and should  any do  so, they  will not
  find joy upon the other side, but the griefs of both. So I deem.
     'But   why   dost   thou   say  "mere   words"?  Do   not  words
  overpass  the  gulf  between  one  life  and another?  Between thee
  and  me  surely  more  has  passed  than empty  sound? Have  we not
  drawn near at all? But that is, I think, little comfort to thee.'
     'I have not asked  for comfort,'  said Andreth.  'For what  do I
  need it?'                                                          
     'For  the  doom  of  Men  that  has  touched  thee as  a woman,'
  said Finrod. 'Dost thou  think that  I do  not know?  Is he  not my
  brother  dearly  loved? Aegnor: (17) Aikanar, the Sharp-flame, swift
  and eager. And  not long  are the  years since  you first  met, and
  your  hands  touched  in  this  darkness.  Yet  then  thou  wert  a
  maiden, brave  and eager,  in the  morning upon  the high  hills of
  Dorthonion.'(18)                                                   
     'Say  on!' said  Andreth. 'Say:  who art  now but  a wise-woman,
  alone, and age that shall not  touch him  has already  set winter's
  grey in thy hair! But say not thou to me, for so he once did!'(19)
     'Alas!' said Finrod. 'That is  the bitterness,  beloved adaneth,
  woman of Men, is it not? that has  run through  all your  words. If
  I  could  speak  any  comfort, you  would deem  it lordly  from one
  on my  side of  the sundering  doom. But  what can  I say,  save to
  remind you of the Hope that you yourself have revealed?'          
     'I did  not say  that it  was ever  my hope,'  answered Andreth.
  'And  even were  it so,  I would  still cry:  why should  this hurt
  come  here  and  now?  Why  should  we  love  you,  and  why should
  ye love us (if ye do), and yet set the gulf between?'           
     'Because we were so made, close kin,' said Finrod. 'But  we did
  not make ourselves, and therefore we, the Eldar, did not set the
  gulf. Nay, adaneth, we are not lordly in this, but pitiful.(20) That

                                                          
                                                                       
  word  will  displease  thee.  Yet  pity  is  of two  kinds: one  is of
  kinship recognized, and is near to  love; the  other is  of difference
  of fortune perceived, and is near to pride. I speak of the former.'
      'Speak of neither to me!' said Andreth. 'I  desire neither.  I was
  young  and  I  looked on  his flame,  and now  I am  old and  lost. He
  was  young  and   his  flame   leaped  towards   me,  but   he  turned
  away, and he is young still. Do candles pity moths?'                  
      'Or  moths  candles,  when   the  wind   blows  them   out?'  said
  Finrod.  'Adaneth,  I  tell  thee,   Aikanar  the   Sharp-flame  loved
  thee.  For  thy sake  now he  will never  take the  hand of  any bride
  of  his  own  kindred,  but  live  alone to  the end,  remembering the
  morning  in  the  hills  of  Dorthonion.  But too  soon in  the North-
  wind  his  flame  will  go  out! Foresight  is given  to the  Eldar in
  many things  not far  off, though  seldom of  joy, and  I say  to thee
  thou  shalt  live  long  in the  order of  your kind,  and he  will go
  forth before thee and he will not wish to return.'                    
      Then  Andreth  stood  up  and  stretched  her  hands to  the fire.
  'Then  why  did  he  turn  away?  Why  leave  me while  I had  still a
  few good years to spend?'                                             
      'Alas!' said Finrod. 'I fear the truth will not satisfy thee. The
  Eldar  have  one  kind,  and ye  another; and  each judges  the others
  by themselves - until  they learn,  as do  few. This  is time  of war,
  Andreth, and  in such  days the  Elves do  not wed  or bear  child;(21)
  but  prepare  for  death -  or for  flight. Aegnor  has no  trust (nor
  have I) in this  siege of  Angband that  it will  last long;  and then
  what  will become  of this  land? If  his heart  ruled, he  would have
  wished  to  take  thee  and flee  far away,  east or  south, forsaking
  his  kin,  and  thine.  Love  and  loyalty  hold him  to his.  What of
  thee  to thine?  Thou hast  said thyself  that there  is no  escape by
  flight within the bounds of the world.'                               
      'For  one year,  one day,  of the  flame I  would have  given all:
  kin, youth, and hope itself: adaneth I am,' said Andreth.             
      'That  he  knew,'  said  Finrod;  'and  he  withdrew  and  did not
  grasp what lay to  his hand:  elda he  is. For  such barters  are paid
  for  in  anguish  that  cannot  be  guessed,  until  it comes,  and in
  ignorance  rather  than  in  courage  the  Eldar  judge that  they are
  made.                                                                 
      'Nay,  adaneth,  if  any  marriage  can  be  between  our  kindred
  and  thine, then  it shall  be for  some high  purpose of  Doom. Brief
  it will be and hard at the end. Yea, the least  cruel fate  that could
  befall would be that death should soon end it.'                       
      'But  the  end  is  always  cruel  -  for  Men,' said  Andreth. 'I

 would  not  have  troubled  him,  when  my  short  youth  was  spent.
 I would  not have  hobbled as  a hag  after his  bright feet,  when I
 could no longer run beside him! '                                    
    'Maybe  not,'  said Finrod.  'So you  feel now.  But do  you think
 of  him?  He  would  not  have  run  before   thee.  He   would  have
 stayed at  thy  side  to  uphold  thee. Then  pity thou  wouldst have
 had  in  every  hour,  pity inescapable.  He would  not have  thee so
 shamed.                                                              
    'Andreth  adaneth,  the  life and  love of  the Eldar  dwells much
 in  memory;  and  we  (if  not ye)  would rather  have a  memory that
 is  fair but  unfinished than  one that  goes on  to a  grievous end.
 Now  he  will  ever remember  thee in  the sun  of morning,  and that
 last  evening  by  the  water  of  Aeluin  in which  he saw  thy face
 mirrored  with  a  star  caught  in  thy  hair  -  ever,   until  the
 North-wind  brings  the  night  of  his flame.  Yea, and  after that,
 sitting  in  the  House  of  Mandos  in the  Halls of  Awaiting until
 the end of Arda.'                                                    
    'And  what  shall  I  remember?'  said  she.  'And  when  I  go to
 what  halls  shall  I  come?  To  a  darkness   in  which   even  the
 memory  of  the  sharp  flame  shall  be  quenched?  Even  the memory
 of rejection. That at least.'                                        
    Finrod  sighed  and  stood   up.  'The   Eldar  have   no  healing
 words  for  such  thoughts, adaneth,'  he said.  'But would  you wish
 that  Elves  and  Men  had  never  met?  Is the  light of  the flame,
 which  otherwise  you  would  never  have  seen,  of  no  worth  even
 now?  You  believe  yourself   scorned?  Put   away  at   least  that
 thought,  which  comes  out  of  the  Darkness,  and then  our speech
 together will not have been wholly in vain. Farewell! '              
                                                                     
    Darkness fell in the room. He took her  hand in  the light  of the
 fire. 'Whither go you?' she said.                                    
    'North away,'  he said:  'to the  swords, and  the siege,  and the
 walls  of defence  - that  yet for  a while  in Beleriand  rivers may
 fun  clean, leaves  spring, and  birds build  their nests,  ere Night
 comes.'                                                              
   'Will he be there, bright and tall, and the wind in his hair?
 Tell him. Tell him not to be reckless. Not to seek danger beyond
 need!'
   'I will tell him,' said Finrod. 'But I might as well tell thee not
 to weep. He is a warrior, Andreth, and a spirit of wrath. In
 every stroke that he deals he sees the Enemy who long ago did
 thee this hurt.

   'But you are not for Arda. Whither you go may you find light.          
 Await us there, my brother - and me.'                                    
                                                                         
                                   NOTES.                                 
                                                                         
  1. Perhaps to be compared with this is a  passage in  the Debate  of the
     Valar  in  Laws  and  Customs   (p.  247),   where  Nienna   said  to
     Manwe:  'Though  the death  of severance  may find  out the  Eldar in
     thy realm, yet one thing cometh not to  it, and  shall not:  and that
     is  deforming  and  decay';  to which  is added  in a  footnote: 'Yet
     after  the  slaying  of  the Trees  it did  so while  Melkor remained
     there;  and  the body  of Finwe,  slain by  Melkor, was  withered and
     passed into dust, even as the Trees themselves had withered.'        
  2. Here  and at  several, but  by no  means all,  subsequent occurrences
     Quendi    was    emended    to   Elves    on   the    typescript   C.
  3. change  was  an  emendation  to  the typescript  B (only);  the manu-
     script has growth.                                                   
  4. Cf.  the  words  of  Pengolod  to   AElfwine  at   the  end   of  the
     Ainulindale (p. 37), of the mortality  of Men,  Death is  their fate,
     the  gift  of Iluvatar,  which as  Time wears  even the  Powers shall
     envy.  But  Melkor has  cast his  shadow upon  it, and  confounded it
     with darkness, and brought forth evil out  of good,  and fear  out of
     hope.'                                                               
  5. The  manuscript  has  here:  'What  do ye  know of  death? Ye  do not
     fear it, because you do not know it.'  The typist  of C  replaced the
     first ye by you; my father let this stand, but corrected the original
     occurrence of you to ye.  On the  opening page  of the  typescript he
     noted that ye is used for the plural only,  and that  you 'represents
     the Elvish pronoun of  polite address',  while thou,  thee 'represent
     the  familiar  (or  affectionate) pronoun'.  This distinction  is not
     always  maintained  in  the  manuscript;  but  in  a number  of cases
     you,  where  ye  might  be  expected,  may  be  intended, and  I have
     only corrected the forms where error seems certain.                  
  6. This is a strange error. Fingolfin died  in 456,  the year  after the
     Dagor Bragollach (V.132, repeated in  the Grey  Annals): see  p. 306.
  7. Cf.  Laws  and  Customs,  p.  220:  'The new  fea, and  therefore in
     their beginning all  fear, they  [the Eldar]  believe to  come direct
     from  Eru  and  from  beyond  Ea.  Therefore many  of them  hold that
     it cannot be asserted that the fate of  the Elves  is to  be confined
     within    Arda    for    ever    and     with    it     to    cease.'
  8. mort: the note sounded on a horn at the death of the quarry.         
  9. The distinction  between ye  (plural) and  you (singular)  is presum-
     ably intended (see note 5).                                          
 10. The  manuscript  has  Mirruyainar,  followed  in   both  typescripts.
     On  B  my  father emended  the name  to Mirroyainar  here but  not at
     the  second  occurrence (p.  316); on  C he  changed it  to Mirroanwi

      
                                                                         
      at both occurrences. See the 'Glossary' to the Athrabeth, p. 350.
  11. In the margin of the manuscript,  repeated in  the typescript  C, is
      written  against  this  paragraph:  'In  the Music  of Eru  Men only
      entered after the discords of Melkor.'  Of course  this was  true of
      the  Elves  also.  See  Author's  Note  1 to  the Commentary  on the
      Athrabeth and note 10 (p. 358).                                     
  12. Cf. the words of Manwe  at the  end of  the Debate  of the  Valar in
      Laws  and   Customs  (p.   245):  'For   Arda  Unmarred   hath  two
      aspects or senses. The first is the Unmarred  that they  [the Eldar)
      discern in  the Marred...:  this is  the ground  upon which  Hope is
      built. The second is the Unmarred that shall be:  that is,  to speak
      according  to  Time  in  which  they  have  their  being,  the  Arda
      Healed,  which  shall  be  greater  and  more  fair than  the first,
      because of the Marring: this is the Hope that sustaineth.'          
  13. It is said in the Ainulindale' (p.  13, $19)  that 'the  history was
      incomplete  and  the circles  not full-wrought  when the  vision was
      taken  away',  to which  in the  final text  D (p.  31) was  added a
      footnote, attributed to Pengolod:                                   
       And some have said  that the  Vision ceased  ere the  fulfilment of
      the  Dominion  of  Men  and  the  fading  of  the  Firstborn; where-
      fore,  though the  Music is  over all,  the Valar  have not  seen as
      with sight the Later Ages or the ending of the World.               
      In  the  'lost'  typescript  AAm' of  the opening  of the  Annals of
      Aman (p. 64) it is said that Nienna could not endure  to the  end of
      the  Music,  and  that  'therefore she  has not  the hope  of Manwe'
      (p. 68).                                                            
  14. See p. 312 and note 7.                                              
  15. On the conception  of Arda  Complete see  note (iii)  at the  end of
      Laws and Customs (p. 251).                                          
  16. It  was  of  course  fundamental  to  the  whole  conception  of the
      Elder Days that  Men awoke  in the  East at  the first  Sunrise, and
      that they had  existed for  no more  than a  few hundred  years when
      Finrod  Felagund  came  upon Beor  and his  people in  the foothills
      of the Blue Mountains. There  have been  suggestions earlier  in the
      Athrabeth  that Andreth  was looking  much further  back in  time to
      the  awakening  of Men  (thus she  speaks of  'legends of  days when
      death came less swiftly and our span was still far longer', p. 313);
      in  her  words  here,  'a rumour  that has  come down  through years
      uncounted',  a profound  alteration in  the conception  seems plain.
      The chronology  of the  Years of  the Sun  is however  maintained in
      the  Athrabeth,  with  the  dating  of  the  meeting  of  Finrod and
      Andreth  as  'about  409  during the  Long Peace  (260 -  455)' (see
      p. 306). See further p. 378.                                        
  17. Both  here  and  on  p.  324  the  name  was  written  Egnor  in the
      manuscript,  subsequently  changed  to  Aegnor;  cf.  p.  177  ($42)
      and p. 197.                                                         

 18.  Cf.  QS  $117  (V.264):  'Angrod  and  Egnor   watched  Bladorion
      from  the  northern  slopes  of  Dorthonion'  (during  the  Siege  of
      Angband),  and  $129  (V.276):  'Barahir  [son   of  Beor   the  Old]
      dwelt mostly on the north marches with Angrod and Egnor.'            
 19.  The  sentence 'But  say not  thou to  me, for  so he once did' was an
      addition  to  the  manuscript;  Finrod has  begun to  address Andreth
      as thou from shortly before this point. But from here  to the  end of
      the text the usage is very confused,  inconsistent in  the manuscript
      and  with  inconsistent emendation  to the  typescript (both  thou to
      you  and  you to  thou); it  seems that  my father  was in  two minds
      as to which  forms Finrod  should employ,  and I  have left  the text
      as it stands.                                                        
 20.  pitiful: i.e. filled with pity, compassionate.                    
 21.  Cf. Laws  and Customs,  p. 213:  'it would  seem to  any of  the Eldar
      a  grievous  thing  if  a  wedded  pair  were  sundered   during  the
      bearing of a child, or while the first years of its childhood lasted.
      For  which  reason the  Eldar would  beget children  only in  days of
      happiness and peace if they could.'                                  
                                                                          
                                     *                                     
                                                                          
 The  Athrabeth  Finrod  ah  Andreth  perhaps  marks  the   culmination  of
 my  father's  thought  on  the  relation  of  Elves  and Men,  in Finrod's
 exalted  vision  of  the  original  design  of  Eru  for Mankind;  but his
 central purpose was to explore fully for the first time the nature of 'the
 Marring  of  Men'.  In  the long  account of  his work  that he  wrote for
 Milton Waldman in 1951 (Letters no.131, pp. 147 - 8) he had said:         
   The  first  fall of  Man... nowhere  appears -  Men do  not come  on the
 stage until all that is long past, and there is only a  rumour that  for a
 while  they  fell  under  the  domination  of  the  Enemy  and  that  some
 repented.                                                                 
 In  the  Athrabeth  Finrod approaches  this 'rumour'  directly: 'Therefore
 I say to you, Andreth, what  did ye  do, ye  Men, long  ago in  the dark?
 How  did  ye  anger  Eru?  ...  Will  you  say  what  you  know   or  have
 heard?' He is met by a  blank refusal:  '"I will  not," said  Andreth. "We
 do  not  speak  of  this  to  those  of  other  race"';  but  to  Finrod's
 subsequent  question  'Are  there  no  tales  of  your days  before death,
 though ye will not tell them  to strangers?'  Andreth replies:  'Maybe. If
 not  among  my  folk,  then  among  the  folk  of  Adanel,  perhaps.'  The
 legend  of  the  Fall  of  Man preserved  among certain  of the  Edain was
 (as will be seen shortly) about to enter.                                 
   Presenting  the   fundamental  differences   of  destiny,   nature,  and
 experience  between  Elves  and  Men  in  the  form  of   a  philosophical
 debate  between  Finrod  Lord  of   Nargothrond  and   Andreth  descendant
 of  Beor  the  Old,  the  argument  is   nonetheless  conducted   with  an
 increasing intensity, and bitterness on the part  of Andreth,  the bearing
 of  which  (though  known   to  both   speakers  independently)   is  only

  revealed at the end. But to  this passionate work  my father  appended a
  long discursive and critical commentary in a very different  vein, which
  follows here.                                                           
    The  newspapers  in  which  the  Athrabeth  and  the  commentary  were
  preserved (see p. 304) bear the inscription:                            
                                                                         
                            Addit. Silmarillion.                          
                               ------------                              
                        Athrabeth Finrod ah Andreth.                      
                               ------------                              
                                 Commentary.                              
                                                                         
  On one of these wrappers my  father added:  'Should be  last item  in an
  appendix' (i.e. to The Silmarillion).                                   
    This  commentary  he typed  himself, in  top copy  and carbon,  with a
  few  subsequent  emendations  almost  identical  in both.  Following the
  commentary  are  numbered  notes   that  bulk   much  larger   than  the
  commentary  itself,  since  some  of  them  constitute  short  essays. I
  distinguish these from my own numbered  notes to  the text  (pp. 357ff.)
  by the words 'Author's Note'.                                           
    Very  rough  drafting  for  the  commentary is  extant, and  thar this
  followed  the  making  of  the amanuensis  typescripts of  the Athrabeth
  itself is seen from the occurrence in it of the word Mirroanwi (see note
  10 above).                                                              
                                                                         
                        ATHRABETH FINROD AH ANDRETH                       
                      The Debate of Finrod and Andreth                    
                                                                         
  This  is  not  presented  as  an  argument  of  any  cogency for  Men in
  their   present   situation   (or   the  one   in  which   they  believe
  themselves  to  be),  though  it   may  have   some  interest   for  Men
  who  start  with  similar  beliefs  or  assumptions  to  those  held  by
  the Elvish king Finrod.                                                 
    It  is  in  fact  simply  part  of  the  portrayal  of  the  imaginary
  world  of  the  Silmarillion,  and  an  example  of  the  kind  of thing
  that  enquiring  minds  on  either  side,  the  Elvish  or   the  Human,
  must  have   said  to   one  another   after  they   became  acquainted.
  We  see  here  the  attempt  of a  generous Elvish  mind to  fathom the
  relations  of  Elves  and  Men,  and  the  part  they  were  designed to
  play   in  what   he  would   have  called   the  Oienkarme   Eruo  (The
  One's   perpetual    production),   which    might   be    rendered   by
  'God's management of the Drama'.                                        
                                                                         
         There are certain things in this world that have to be accepted

 as 'facts'. The  existence of  Elves: that  is of  a race  of beings
 closely  akin  to  Men,  so  closely  indeed   that  they   must  be
 regarded  as  physically  (or biologically)  simply branches  of the
 same  race.(1) The Elves   appeared  on   Earth  earlier,   but  not
 (mythologically  or  geologically)  much earlier;(2) they were  'im-
 mortal',  and  did  not  'die'  except by  accident. Men,  when they
 appeared on  the scene  (that is,  when they  met the  Elves), were,
 however, much as they  now are:  they 'died',  even if  they escaped
 all accidents, at about the age of 70  to 80.  The existence  of the
 Valar: that is of certain angelic Beings (created,  but at  least as
 powerful  as  the  'gods'  of  human  mythologies),  the   chief  of
 whom still resided in  an actual  physical part  of the  Earth. They
 were  the  agents  and  vice-gerents  of  Eru  (God). They  had been
 for  nameless  ages  engaged  in  a  demiurgic labour (3) completing to
 the  design  of Eru  the structure  of the  Universe (Ea);  but were
 now  concentrated  on  Earth  for the  principal Drama  of Creation:
 the  war  of  the  Eruhin  (The  Children  of  God), Elves  and Men,
 against  Melkor.  Melkor,  originally  the  most  powerful   of  the
 Valar,(4) had become a  rebel,  against  his  brethren  and  against
 Eru, and was the prime Spirit of Evil.                             
   With  regard  to  King  Finrod,  it  must  be  understood  that he
 starts with certain  basic beliefs,  which he  would have  said were
 derived  from  one  or more  of these  sources: his  created nature;
 angelic instruction; thought; and experience.                      
   1.  There  exists Eru  (The One);  that is,  One God  Creator, who
 made  (or  more  strictly designed)  the World,  but is  not Himself
 the World.  This world,  or Universe,  he calls  Ea, an  Elvish word
 that means 'It is', or 'Let It Be'.                                
   2.  There  are  on  Earth  'incarnate'  creatures, Elves  and Men:
 these are made of a union of hroa and fea  (roughly but  not exactly
 equivalent to 'body' and 'soul'). This,  he would  say, was  a known
 fact concerning Elvish nature,  and could  therefore be  deduced for
 human nature from the close kinship of Elves and Men.              
   3. Hroa and  fea he  would say  are wholly  distinct in  kind, and
 not  on  the  'same plane  of derivation  from Eru',  (Author's Note
 1,  p.  336)  but  were  designed each  for the  other, to  abide in
 perpetual  harmony. The  fea is  indestructible, a  unique identity
 which   cannot  be   disintegrated  or   absorbed  into   any  other
 identity.  The  hroa,  however,  can  be  destroyed  and  dissolved:
 that is a fact of experience. (In such a case he would  describe the
 fea as 'exiled' or 'houseless'.)                                   
   4. The separation of fea  and hroa  is 'unnatural',  and proceeds

 not  from  the  original  design,  but  from  the  'Marring  of  Arda',
 which is due to the operations of Melkor.                             
   5.  Elvish   'immortality'  is   bounded  within   a  part   of  Time
 (which  he  would  call  the  History  of   Arda),  and   is  therefore
 strictly to be called rather  'serial longevity',  the utmost  limit of
 which  is  the  length  of  the  existence of  Arda. (Author's  Note 2,
 p. 337) A corollary of this is that the Elvish fea is also  limited to
 the Time  of  Arda,  or at  least held  within it  and unable  to leave
 it, while it lasts.                                                   
   6. From this it would follow in  thought, if  it were  not a  fact of
 Elvish  experience,  that  a  'houseless'  Elvish  fea  must  have the
 power  or  opportunity  to  return  to  incarnate life,  if it  has the
 desire or  will to  do so.  (Actually the  Elves discovered  that their
 fear  had  not  this  power  in  themselves,  but that  the opportunity
 and  means  were  provided  by  the  Valar,  by  the   special  permis-
 sion  of  Eru  for  the amendment  of the  unnatural state  of divorce.
 It was not lawful for the Valar  to force  a fea  to return;  but they
 could   impose  conditions,   and  judge   whether  return   should  be
 permitted  at  all,  and  if  so,  in  what  way  or  after  how long.)
 (Author's Note 3, p. 339)                                             
   7.  Since  Men  die,  without  accident,  and  whether  they  will to
 do  so  or  not, their  fear must  have a  different relation  to Time.
 The   Elves  believed,   though  they   had  no   certain  information,
 that the  fear of  Men, if  disembodied, left  Time (sooner  or later),
 and never returned. (Author's Note 4, p. 340)                         
   The  Elves  observed  that  all  Men  died   (a  fact   confirmed  by
 Men).  They  therefore  deduced   that  this   was  'natural'   to  Men
 (sc.  was  by  the design  of Eru),  and supposed  that the  brevity of
 human  life  was  due  to  this character  of the  human fea:  that it
 was  not  designed  to  stay  long  in Arda.  Whereas their  own fear,
 being  designed  to   remain  in   Arda  to   its  end,   imposed  long
 endurance  on  their  bodies;  for  they  were  (as  a fact  of experi-
 ence) in far greater control of them. (Author's Note 5, p. 341)       
                                                                      
   Beyond  the  'End  of  Arda'  Elvish  thought  could  not  penetrate,
 and  they  were  without  any  specific  instruction.   (Author's  Note
 6,  p.  341)  It  seemed  clear  to  them  that  their hroar  must then
 end,  and  therefore  any  kind  of  re-incarnation  would  be  imposs-
 ible.  (Author's Note  7, p.  342) All  the Elves  would then  'die' at
 the End   of  Arda.   What  this   would  mean   they  did   not  know.
 They said  therefore   that  Men   had  a   shadow  behind   them,  but
 the Elves had a shadow before them.                                    

   Their  dilemma  was  this: the  thought of  existence as  fear only
 was revolting to  them, and  they found  it hard  to believe  that it
 was  natural  or  designed  for  them,  since  they  were essentially
 'dwellers  in  Arda', and  by nature  wholly in  love with  Arda. The
 alternative: that their fear would also cease to exist at  'the End',
 seemed  even  more  intolerable.  Both  absolute   annihilation,  and
 cessation   of   conscious   identity,   were  wholly   repugnant  to
 thought and desire. (Author's Note 8, p. 343)                       
   Some  argued  that,  although  integral  and  unique  (as  Eru from
 whom  they  directly  proceeded),  each  fea,  being   created,  was
 finite, and might therefore be also  of finite  duration. It  was not
 destructible   within  its   appointed  term,   but  when   that  was
 reached  it  ceased to  be; or  ceased to  have any  more experience,
 and 'resided only in the Past'.                                     
   But they saw that this  did not  provide any  escape. For,  even if
 an  Elvish  fea  was able  'consciously' to  dwell in  or contemplate
 the  Past,  this  would  be  a condition  wholly unsatisfying  to its
 desire.  (Reference  to  Author's  Note  8)  The  Elves had  (as they
 said  themselves) a  'great talent'  for memory,  but this  tended to
 regret rather  than to  joy. Also,  however long  the History  of the
 Elves might become  before it  ended, it  would be  an object  of too
 limited  range. To  be perpetually  'imprisoned in  a tale'  (as they
 said), even if it was a  very great  tale ending  triumphantly, would
 become  a torment.(5) For greater  than  the  talent  of  memory  was
 the  Elvish talent  for making,  and for  discovery. The  Elvish fea
 was  above  all  designed  to  make things  in co-operation  with its
 hroa.                                                               
   Therefore in  the last  resort the  Elves were  obliged to  rest on
 'naked estel'  (as they  said): the  trust in  Eru, that  whatever He
 designed  beyond  the  End  would  be  recognized  by  each  fea  as
 wholly  satisfying  (at the  least). Probably  it would  contain joys
 unforeseeable.  But  they  remained  in  the  belief  that  it  would
 remain  in  intelligible  relation  with  their  present  nature  and
 desires, proceed from them, and include them.                       
                                                                    
   For  these  reasons  the  Elves  were  less  sympathetic  than  Men
 expected  to  the  lack of  hope (or  estel) in  Men faced  by death.
 Men  were, of  course, in  general entirely  ignorant of  the 'Shadow
 Ahead'   which   conditioned   Elvish   thought   and   feeling,  and
 simply  envied  Elvish  'immortality'.  But the  Elves were  on their
 part  generally  ignorant  of  the  persistent  tradition  among  Men
 that Men were also by nature immortal.                              

   As  is  seen  in  the  Athrabeth,  Finrod  is  deeply  moved  and
 amazed  to  discover  this  tradition.  He  uncovers  a concomitant
 tradition  that  the  change  in  the condition  of Men  from their
 original  design  was  due  to  a  primeval  disaster,  about which
 human lore  is unclear,  or Andreth  is at  least unwilling  to say
 much. (Author's Note  9, p.  343) He  remains, nonetheless,  in the
 opinion that the condition  of Men  before the  disaster (or  as we
 might  say,  of unfallen  Man) cannot  have been  the same  as that
 of the Elves.  That is,  their 'immortality'  cannot have  been the
 longevity  within  Arda  of  the Elves;  otherwise they  would have
 been  simply  Elves,  and  their  separate introduction  later into
 the  Drama  by  Eru  would  have  no function.  He thinks  that the
 notion  of  Men  that,  unchanged,  they  would  not have  died (in
 the sense of  leaving Arda)  is due  to human  misrepresentation of
 their  own  tradition,  and  possibly  to  envious   comparison  of
 themselves to  the Elves.  For one  thing, he  does not  think this
 fits,  as  we  might  say, 'the  observable peculiarities  of human
 psychology',  as   compared  with   Elvish  feelings   towards  the
 visible world.                                                    
   He therefore guesses that it  is the  fear of  death that  is the
 result of the disaster.  It is  feared because  it now  is combined
 with  severance of  hroa and  fea. But  the fear  of Men  must have
 been  designed  to  leave  Arda  willingly  or  indeed by  desire -
 maybe  after a  longer time  than the  present average  human life,
 but still in a  time very  short compared  with Elvish  lives. Then
 basing  his  argument  on  the  axiom that  severance of  hroa and
 fea is unnatural and contrary to design, he comes  (or if  you like
 jumps)  to  the  conclusion  that  the  fea  of unfallen  Man would
 have taken with it its hroa into  the new  mode of  existence (free
 from  Time).  In  other  words, that  'assumption' was  the natural
 end of each human life, though as far as  we know  it has  been the
 end  of  the  only  'unfallen'  member  of Mankind.(6) He then has a
 vision  of  Men  as  the  agents  of the  'unmarring' of  Arda, not
 merely  undoing  the  marring  or  evil wrought  by Melkor,  but by
 producing  a  third  thing,  Arda  Re-made -  for Eru  never merely
 undoes  the  past,  but  brings  into  being something  new, richer
 than the 'first design'. In Arda  Re-made Elves  and Men  will each
 separately find joy and content, and an interplay of  friendship, a
 bond of which will be the Past.                                   
   Andreth  says  that  in  that  case  the  disaster  to   Men  was
 appalling;  for  this  re-making  (if  indeed  it  was  the  proper
 function  of  Men)  cannot  now   be  achieved.   Finrod  evidently

 remains in the hope that it will  be achieved,  though he  does not
 say how that  could be.  He now  sees, however,  that the  power of
 Melkor  was  greater  than  had  been   understood  (even   by  the
 Elves, who  had actually  seen him  in incarnate  form): if  he had
 been able to change Men, and so destroy the plan.(7)              
   More  strictly  speaking,  he  would  say  that  Melkor  had  not
 'changed'  Men,  but  'seduced'  them  (to  allegiance  to himself)
 very early in their history, so that Eru had changed  their 'fate'.
 For  Melkor  could  seduce  individual  minds  and  wills,  but  he
 could not make this heritable, or alter (contrary  to the  will and
 design of Eru) the relation  of a  whole people  to Time  and Arda.
 But  the power  of Melkor  over material  things was  plainly vast.
 The  whole  of  Arda  (and  indeed  probably  many  other  parts of
 Ea) had been marred by him.  Melkor was  not just  a local  Evil on
 Earth,  nor  a  Guardian  Angel  of  Earth who  had gone  wrong: he
 was the Spirit of Evil, arising even before the  making of  Ea. His
 attempt  to  dominate  the  structure  of  Ea,   and  of   Arda  in
 particular, and alter the designs  of Eru  (which governed  all the
 operations  of  the  faithful  Valar),  had  introduced evil,  or a
 tendency  to  aberration  from  the design,  into all  the physical
 matter  of Arda.  It was  for this  reason, no  doubt, that  he had
 been  totally  successful  with  Men,  but  only partially  so with
 Elves  (who  remained  as  a  people  'unfallen').  His  power  was
 wielded over matter,  and through  it. (Author's  Note 10,  p. 344)
 But by nature the fear  of Men  were in  much less  strong control
 of their hroar than was the case with  the Elves.  Individual Elves
 might be seduced to  a kind  of minor  'Melkorism': desiring  to be
 their  own  masters  in  Arda, and  to have  things their  own way,
 leading in extreme cases to rebellion against  the tutelage  of the
 Valar; but not one had ever  entered the  service or  allegiance of
 Melkor  himself,  nor  ever  denied  the  existence   and  absolute
 supremacy  of  Eru.  Some  dreadful  things  of  this  sort, Finrod
 guesses,  Men  must have  done, as  a whole;  but Andreth  does not
 reveal  what  were Men's  traditions on  this point.  (Reference to
 Author's Note 9)                                                  
   Finrod,  however,  sees  now  that,  as  things were,  no created
 thing  or  being  in Arda,  or in  all Ea,  was powerful  enough to
 counteract or heal Evil: that is to subdue  Melkor (in  his present
 person,  reduced  though  that  was)  and  the  Evil  that  he  had
 dissipated and sent  out from  himself into  the very  structure of
 the world.                                                        
   Only  Eru  himself  could do  this. Therefore,  since it  was un-

 thinkable that  Eru  would  abandon  the  world  to  the  ultimate
 triumph  and  domination  of  Melkor  (which  could mean  its ruin
 and reduction to chaos),  Eru Himself  must at  some time  come to
 oppose  Melkor.  But  Eru could  not enter  wholly into  the world
 and its history,  which is,  however great,  only a  finite Drama.
 He  must  as  Author  always  remain  'outside'  the  Drama,  even
 though that  Drama  depends  on His  design and  His will  for its
 beginning  and  continuance,  in every  detail and  moment. Finrod
 therefore thinks  that He  will, when  He comes,  have to  be both
 'outside'  and  inside;  and  so  he  glimpses the  possibility of
 complexity  or  of  distinctions  in  the  nature  of  Eru,  which
 nonetheless leaves Him 'The One'. (Author's Note 11, p. 345)      
   Since  Finrod  had  already  guessed  that the  redemptive func-
 tion  was  originally  specially  assigned  to  Men,  he  probably
 proceeded to the expectation that 'the coming of Eru', if  it took
 place,  would  be  specially  and  primarily  concerned  with Men:
 that is  to an  imaginative guess  or vision  that Eru  would come
 incarnated  in  human  form.  This,  however,  does not  appear in
 the Athrabeth.                                                    
                                                                  
   The argument is not, of  course, presented  in the  Athrabeth in
 these terms, or in this order, or so precisely. The Athrabeth is a
 conversation,  in  which  many  assumptions  and steps  of thought
 have to be supplied by the reader. Actually, though it  deals with
 such things as death and the relations  of Elves  and Men  to Time
 and Arda, and to  one another,  its real  purpose is  dramatic: to
 exhibit the generosity  of Finrod's  mind, his  love and  pity for
 Andreth, and the tragic situations that must arise in  the meeting
 of Elves and Men (in the ages of the youth of  the Elves).  For as
 eventually  becomes  plain, Andreth  had in  youth fallen  in love
 with  Aegnor,  Finrod's  brother;  and  though  she  knew  that he
 returned her love (or could have done  so if  he had  deigned to),
 he had not declared it, but had left her -  and she  believed that
 she was rejected as too lowly for an Elf.  Finrod (though  she was
 not aware of this) knew about this situation.  For this  reason he
 understood  and  did  not  take  offence  at  the  bitterness with
 which  she  spoke  of  the  Elves,  and  even  of  the  Valar.  He
 succeeded in the end  in making  her understand  that she  was not
 'rejected' out of scorn or Elvish lordliness; but that  the depar-
 ture  of  Aegnor  was  for  motives of  'wisdom', and  cost Aegnor
 great pain: he was an equal victim of the tragedy.                
   In  the  event  Aegnor  perished  soon after  this conversation,(8)

 when  Melkor  broke  the Siege  of Angband  in the  ruinous Battle
 of  Sudden  Flame,  and the  destruction of  the Elvish  realms in
 Beleriand  was  begun. Finrod  took refuge  in the  great southern
 stronghold of Nargothrond; but not long after sacrificed  his life
 to save Beren One-hand.  (It is  probable, though  nowhere stated,
 that Andreth herself perished at this time,  for all  the northern
 realm,  where Finrod  and his  brothers, and  the People  of Beor,
 dwelt  was  devastated  and  conquered  by  Melkor. But  she would
 then be a very old woman.)(9)                                     
   Finrod  thus was  slain before  the two  marriages of  Elves and
 Men  had  taken  place,  though  without his  aid the  marriage of
 Beren  and  Luthien  would  not  have come  to pass.  The marriage
 of Beren certainly  fulfilled his  prediction that  such marriages
 would  only  be  for  some  high  purpose  of  Doom, and  that the
 least cruel fate would be that death should soon end them.        
                                                                  
                 Author's Notes on the 'Commentary'.               
                                                                  
                               Note 1.                             
                                                                  
 Because fear were held to be  directly created  by Eru,  and 'sent
 into' Ea; whereas Ea was achieved mediately by the Valar.         
   According to  the Ainulindale'  there were  five stages  in Cre-
 ation.  a.  The  creation of  the Ainur.  b. The  communication by
 Eru of his  Design to  the Ainur.  c. The  Great Music,  which was
 as it were a rehearsal, and remained  in the  stage of  thought or
 imagination.  d.  The  'Vision'  of  Eru, which  was again  only a
 foreshowing of possibility,  and was  incomplete. e.  The Achieve-
 ment, which is still going on.                                    
   The Eldar held  that Eru  was and  is free  at all  stages. This
 freedom  was shown  in the  Music by  His introduction,  after the
 arising  of  the  discords  of  Melkor,  of  the  two  new themes,
 representing  the  coming  of  Elves  and Men,  which were  not in
 His  first  communication.(10) He may therefore  in stage  5 intro-
 duce things directly, which were not in the Music  and so  are not
 achieved  through  the  Valar.  It  remains, nonetheless,  true in
 general to regard Ea as achieved through their mediation.         
   The additions of Eru, however, will not be 'alien'; they will be
 accommodated  to  the  nature  and  character of  Ea and  of those
 that  dwell  in  it;  they  may  enhance the  past and  enrich its
 purpose  and  significance,  but  they  will  contain  it  and not
 destroy it.                                                       
   Thus the 'newness' of the themes of the  Children of  Eru, Elves

                     
                                                                    
 and Men, consisted in the  association of  fear with,  or 'housing'
 them in,  hroar  belonging to  Ea, in  such a  way that  either were
 incomplete without the others. But the fear were  not spirits  of a
 wholly  different  kind  to the  Ainur; whereas  the bodies  were of
 a kind closely akin to the bodies  of living  things already  in the
 primary  design  (even  if  adapted  to   their  new   function,  or
 modified by the indwelling fear).                                   
                                                                    
                               Note 2.                               
                                                                    
 Arda,  or  'The  Kingdom  of  Arda'  (as  being  directly  under the
 kingship  of  Eru's  vice-gerent  Manwe) is  not easy  to translate,
 since neither 'earth' nor 'world' are entirely  suitable. Physically
 Arda  was  what  we  should  call  the  Solar System.(11) Presumably
 the  Eldar  could  have  had  as  much  and as  accurate information
 concerning this, its structure, origin, and its relation to the rest
 of  Ea  (the  Universe)  as  they  could comprehend.  Probably those
 who  were  interested  did  acquire  this  knowledge.  Not  all  the
 Eldar  were  interested  in  everything;  most of  them concentrated
 their attention on (or as they said 'were in love with') the Earth.
   The  traditions  here  referred  to  have   come  down   from  the
 Eldar  of  the  First  Age,  through Elves  who never  were directly
 acquainted   with   the   Valar,  and   through  Men   who  received
 'lore'  from   the  Elves,   but  who   had  myths   and  cosmogonic
 legends,  and  astronomical  guesses,  of   their  own.   There  is,
 however,  nothing  in  them  that  seriously conflicts  with present
 human  notions  of  the  Solar  System,  and  its size  and position
 relative to the Universe. It  must be  remembered, however,  that it
 does  not  necessarily  follow  that  'True  Information' concerning
 Arda  (such  as  the  ancient  Eldar  might  have received  from the
 Valar)  must  agree  with  Men's present  theories. Also,  the Eldar
 (and   the  Valar)   were  not   overwhelmed  or   even  principally
 impressed  by  notions  of  size   and  distance.   Their  interest,
 certainly the interest of the Silmarillion  and all  related matter,
 may  be  termed  'dramatic'.  Places or  worlds were  interesting or
 important because of what happened in them.                         
   It is certainly the case with the Elvish traditions that the prin-
 cipal part of Arda was the Earth  (Imbar 'The  Habitation'),(12) as
 the scene of the  Drama of  the war  of the  Valar and  the Children
 of  Eru  with  Melkor:  so  that  loosely used  Arda often  seems to
 mean the Earth: and  that from  this point  of view  the function
 of the Solar System  was to  make possible  the existence  of Imbar.
 With regard to the relation of Arda to Ea, the assertion  that the

 principal  demiurgic  Ainur  (the  Valar), including  the originally
 greatest of all, Melkor, had  taken up  their 'residence' in Arda,(13)
 ever  since  its  establishment,  also  implies that  however minute
 Arda was dramatically the chief point in Ea.                       
   These  views  are  not  mathematical  or  astronomical,   or  even
 biological, and so cannot be held necessarily  to conflict  with the
 theories  of  our  physical  sciences.  We  cannot  say  that  there
 'must' be elsewhere  in Ea  other solar  systems 'like'  Arda, still
 less that, if there  are, they  or any  one of  them must  contain a
 parallel  to  Imbar.  We  cannot  even  say  that  these  things are
 mathematically  very 'likely'.  But even  if the  presence elsewhere
 in  Ea  of  biological  'life'  was   demonstrable,  it   would  not
 invalidate the Elvish view that Arda (at least while it  endures) is
 the   dramatic   centre.  The   demonstration  that   there  existed
 elsewhere  Incarnates,  parallel to  the Children  of Eru,  would of
 course  modify  the picture,  though not  wholly invalidate  it. The
 Elvish answer would  probably be:  'Well, that  is another  Tale. It
 is not  our Tale.  Eru can  no doubt  bring to  pass more  than one.
 Not  everything  is  adumbrated  in the  Ainulindale'; or  the Ainu-
 lindale'  may   have  a   wider  reference   than  we   knew:  other
 dramas, like in kind if different  in process  and result,  may have
 gone on in Ea,  or may  yet go  on.' But  they would  certainly add:
 'But  they  are  not  going  on  now.  The  drama  of  Arda  is  the
 present  concern  of Ea.'  Actually it  is plainly  the view  of the
 Elvish tradition  that the  Drama of  Arda is  unique. We  cannot at
 present assert that this is untrue.                                
   The  Elves  were  of  course  primarily  and deeply  (more deeply
 than  Men)  concerned  with  Arda,  and  Imbar  in  particular. They
 appear to have held  that the  physical universe,  Ea, had  a begin-
 ning and would have an end: that it  was limited  and finite  in all
 dimensions. They certainly held that all  things or  'makings', that
 is  constructed   (however  simply   and  incipiently)   from  basic
 matter,   which   they  called   erma,(14) were impermanent,  within
 Ea.  They   were  therefore   much  concerned   with  'The   End  of
 Arda'.  They  knew  themselves  to  be  limited  by  Arda;  but  the
 length of its existence  they do  not seem  to have  known. Possibly
 the  Valar  did  not  know.  More  probably,   they  were   not  in-
 formed  by the  will or  design of  Eru, who  appears in  the Elvish
 tradition  to  demand  two  things  from  His  Children  (of  either
 Kindred):  belief  in  Him,  and  proceeding  from  that,   hope  or
 trust in Him (called by the Eldar estel).                          
   But  in  any case,  whether adumbrated  in the  Music or  not, the

                      
                                                                   
 End could  be brought  about by  Eru at  any time  by intervention,
 so that it  could not  be certainly  foreseen. (A  minor and  as it
 were  foreshadowing  intervention  of  this  sort  was  the  catas-
 trophe  in  which  Numenor  was   obliterated,  and   the  physical
 residence  of the  Valar in  Imbar was  ended.) The  Elvish concep-
 tion of the End was in fact catastrophic. They  did not  think that
 Arda  (or  at any  rate Imbar)  would just  run down  into lifeless
 inanition.  But this  conception was  not embodied  by them  in any
 myth or legend. See Note 7.                                        
                                                                   
                               Note 3                               
                                                                   
 In Elvish tradition their re-incarnation  was a  special permission
 granted  by  Eru  to  Manwe,  when  Manwe  directly  consulted  Him
 at the time of the debate concerning  Finwe and  Miriel.(15) (Miriel
 'died' in Aman by refusing to live any longer in  the body,  and so
 raised the whole  question of  the unnatural  divorce of  an Elvish
 fea and its hroa, and of the bereavement of Elves that still lived:
 Finwe, her husband,  was left  solitary.) The  Valar, or  Mandos as
 the  mouthpiece   of  all   commands  and   in  many   cases  their
 executor,  were  given power  to summon,  with full  authority, all
 houseless  fear  of  Elves  to  Aman.  There  they were  given the
 choice to remain  houseless, or  (if they  wished) to  be re-housed
 in  the  same  form  and  shape  as they had had.(16) Normally they
 must  nonetheless  remain  in  Aman.(17) Therefore, if they dwelt in
 Middle-earth,  their  bereavement  of  friends  and  kin,  and  the
 bereavement  of  these,  was  not  amended.  Death  was  not wholly
 healed.  But  as  Andreth  saw,  this  certitude  concerning  their
 immediate  future  after  death,  and  the  knowledge  that  at the
 least they would again if they wished be able  as incarnates  to do
 and  make  things  and  continue  their  experience  of  Arda, made
 death  to  the Elves  a totally  different thing  from death  as it
 appeared to Men.                                                   
 They were  given a  choice, because  Eru did  not allow  their free
 will  to  be  taken  away.  Similarly  the  houseless   fear  were
 summoned,   not  brought,   to  Mandos.   They  could   refuse  the
 summons,  but  this  would  imply  that  they  were  in   some  way
 tainted,  or  they  would  not  wish  to  refuse  the  authority of
 Mandos:  refusal  had  grave  consequences,  inevitably  proceeding
 from the rebellion against authority.                              
 They   'normally   remained   in   Aman'.   Simply   because   they
 were,  when  rehoused,  again  in   actual  physical   bodies,  and
 return to Middle-earth was therefore  very difficult  and perilous.

 Also during the  period of  the Exile  of the  Noldor the  Valar had
 for  the  time  being  cut  all  communications (by  physical means)
 between   Aman  and   Middle-earth.  The   Valar  could   of  course
 have  arranged  for  the  transference,  if  there  was sufficiently
 grave  reason.  Bereavement  of  friends  and  kin  was, apparently,
 not considered a  sufficient reason.  Probably under  instruction of
 Eru. In any case, as far as  the Noldor  were concerned,  these had,
 as  a  people, cut  themselves off  from mercy;  they had  left Aman
 demanding  absolute  freedom  to  be  their  own  masters,  to carry
 on  their  war  against  Melkor  with  their  own   unaided  valour,
 and  to  face  death  and  its  consequences.  The  only  case  of a
 special  arrangement  recorded  in  the Histories  is that  of Beren
 and  Luthien.  Beren  was  slain  soon  after  their  marriage,  and
 Luthien  died  of  grief.  They  were both  re-housed and  sent back
 to  Beleriand;  but both  became 'mortal'  and died  later according
 to  the  normal  human  span.  The  reasons  for  this,  which  must
 have  been  done by  an express  permission of  Eru, were  not fully
 apparent  until  later,  but  were certainly  of unique  weight. The
 grief  of  Luthien  was  so  great  that according  to the  Eldar it
 moved   the   pity   of   even   Mandos   the  Unmoved.   Beren  and
 Luthien  together  had  achieved  the  greatest  of  all  the  deeds
 against  Melkor:  regaining one  of the  Silmarils. Luthien  was not
 of  the  Noldor but  daughter of  Thingol (of  the Teleri),  and her
 mother  Melian  was  'divine',  a  maia  (one  of the  minor members
 of the spirit-race of  the Valar).  Thus from  the union  of Luthien
 and  Beren which  was made  possible by  their return,  the infusion
 of  a  'divine'  and  an  Elvish  strain  into  Mankind  was  to  be
 brought   about,   providing   a  link   between  Mankind   and  the
 Elder World, after the establishment of the Dominion of Men.       
                                                                   
                                Note 4.                              
                                                                   
 Sooner or later: because the Elves believed that  the fear  of dead
 Men  also  went  to  Mandos  (without  choice  in the  matter: their
 free  will  with  regard  to  death  was  taken  away).  There  they
 waited until  they were  surrendered to  Eru. The  truth of  this is
 not  asserted. No  living Man  was allowed  to go  to Aman.  No fea
 of a dead Man ever  returned to  life in  Middle-earth. To  all such
 statements  and  decrees  there  are  always  some  exceptions  (be-
 cause  of  the  'freedom of  Eru'). Earendil  reached Aman,  even in
 the  time of  the Ban;  but he  bore the  Silmaril recovered  by his
 ancestress Luthien,(18) and   he   was   half-elven,   he   was  not
 allowed to return to  Middle-earth. Beren  returned to  actual life,

 for a short  time; but  he was  not actually  seen again  by living
 Men.                                                              
   The  passing  'oversea'  to  Eressea  (an  isle  within  sight of
 Aman)  was  permitted  to,  and  indeed   urged  upon,   all  Elves
 remaining  in  Middle-earth  after  the  downfall  of   Morgoth  in
 Angband.  This  really  marked  the  beginning  of the  Dominion of
 Men,  though  there  was  (in  our  view)  a  long  twilight period
 between  the  downfall  of  Morgoth  and  the  final  overthrow  of
 Sauron: lasting, that is, through  the Second  and Third  Ages. But
 at the end  of the  Second Age  came the  great Catastrophe  (by an
 intervention  of  Eru  that foreshadowed,  as it  were, the  End of
 Arda):  the  annihilation  of  Numenor, and  the 'removal'  of Aman
 from  the  physical  world.  The  passing 'oversea',  therefore, of
 Mortals  after  the  Catastrophe -  which is  recorded in  The Lord
 of the Rings - is not quite the same thing.  It was  in any  case a
 special  grace.  An   opportunity  for   dying  according   to  the
 original plan for the unfallen: they went to a state in  which they
 could  acquire  greater  knowledge  and  peace  of mind,  and being
 healed  of  all  hurts  both  of  mind  and  body,  could  at  last
 surrender  themselves: die  of free  will, and  even of  desire, in
 estel. A thing which Aragorn achieved without any such aid.       
                                                                  
                               Note 5                              
                                                                  
 They  were  thus  capable  of  far  greater  and   longer  physical
 exertions  (in  pursuit of  some dominant  purpose of  their minds)
 without  weariness;  they  were  not  subject  to   diseases;  they
 healed  rapidly  and  completely  after  injuries  that  would have
 proved  fatal to  Men; and  they could  endure great  physical pain
 for long periods. Their  bodies could  not, however,  survive vital
 injuries,  or violent  assaults upon  their structure;  nor replace
 missing members (such as  a hand  hewn off).  On the  reverse side:
 the Elves could die, and  did die,  by their  will; as  for example
 because  of  great  grief  or  bereavement,   or  because   of  the
 frustration  of their  dominant desires  and purposes.  This wilful
 death  was  not regarded  as wicked,  but it  was a  fault implying
 some defect or  taint in  the fea,  and those  who came  to Mandos
 by this means might be refused further incarnate life.            
                                                                  
                               Note 6.                             
                                                                  
 Because the Valar had no information; or because information      
 was withheld. See Note 2 [fifth paragraph].                       

                                Note 7.                             
                                                                   
 See  Note   2.  The   Elves  expected   the  End   of  Arda   to  be
 catastrophic.  They  thought  that  it  would  be  brought  about by
 the dissolution of the structure of Imbar  at least,  if not  of the
 whole system. The  End of  Arda is  not, of  course, the  same thing
 as  the  end  of  Ea.  About this  they held  that nothing  could be
 known,  except  that  Ea  was  ultimately  finite. It  is noteworthy
 that  the Elves  had no  myths or  legends dealing  with the  end of
 the world.  The myth  that appears  at the  end of  the Silmarillion
 is  of  Numenorean  origin;(19) it is clearly  made  by  Men, though
 Men  acquainted  with  Elvish tradition.  All Elvish  traditions are
 presented as 'histories', or as accounts of what once was.         
   We  are  here  dealing  with  Elvish thought  at an  early period,
 when  the Eldar  were still  fully 'physical'  in bodily  form. Much
 later,  when  the  process  (already  glimpsed  by   Finrod)  called
 'waning'  or  'fading'  had  become more  effective, their  views of
 the End of Arda, so far as  it affected  themselves, must  have been
 modified.  But  there  are  few  records of  any contacts  of Elvish
 and   Human   thought   in   such   latter  days.   They  eventually
 became housed, if it can be called that, not  in actual  visible and
 tangible hroar, but only in  the memory  of the  fea of  its bodily
 form, and its desire for it;  and therefore  not dependent  for mere
 existence  upon  the  material of Arda.(20) But they appear  to have
 held, and indeed still to hold, that this desire for the  hroa shows
 that their later  (and present)  condition is  not natural  to them,
 and  they  remain in  estel that  Eru will  heal it.  'Not natural',
 whether  it  is  due  wholly,  as  they  earlier  thought,   to  the
 weakening  of  the  hroa  (derived from  the debility  introduced by
 Melkor  into  the substance  of Arda  upon which  it must  feed), or
 partly  to  the  inevitable  working  of  a  dominant  fea   upon  a
 material  hroa  through  many  ages. (In  the latter  case 'natural'
 can refer only to  an ideal  state, in  which unmarred  matter could
 for  ever  endure  the indwelling  of a  perfectly adapted  fea. It
 cannot refer to the actual design of  Eru, since  the Themes  of the
 Children  were  introduced  after  the  arising  of the  discords of
 Melkor.  The 'waning'  of the  Elvish hroar  must therefore  be part
 of  the  History  of  Arda  as  envisaged  by Eru,  and the  mode in
 which  the  Elves  were  to  make  way  for  the  Dominion  of  Men.
 The Elves  find their  supersession by  Men a  mystery, and  a cause
 of grief; for they say  that Men,  at least  so largely  governed as
 they are by the evil of Melkor, have less and less love for  Arda in
 itself, and  are largely  busy in  destroying it  in the  attempt to

                   
                                                                      
 dominate it. They still believe that Eru's healing of all the griefs
 of  Arda  will  come  now  by  or  through Men;  but the  Elves' part
 in the healing or redemption will  be chiefly  in the  restoration of
 the  love  of  Arda,  to  which   their  memory   of  the   Past  and
 understanding  of  what  might  have   been  will   contribute.  Arda
 they say  will  be  destroyed  by  wicked Men  (or the  wickedness in
 Men);  but  healed  through   the  goodness   in  Men.   The  wicked-
 ness, the  domineering lovelessness,  the Elves  will offset.  By the
 holiness  of  good  men  -  their  direct  attachment to  Eru, before
 and  above  all  Eru's  works (21) - the Elves may be  delivered from
 the last of their griefs: sadness;  the sadness  that must  come even
 from the unselfish love of anything less than Eru.)                   
                                                                      
                                Note 8.                                
                                                                      
 Desire.  The  Elves  insisted  that  'desires', especially  such fun-
 damental  desires  as  are  here  dealt  with,  were  to be  taken as
 indications  of  the  true  natures  of  the  Incarnates, and  of the
 direction  in  which  their  unmarred   fulfilment  must   lie.  They
 distinguished  between  desire  of  the  fea (perception  that some-
 thing right or necessary is not  present, leading  to desire  or hope
 for it); wish, or personal  wish (the  feeling of  the lack  of some-
 thing,  the  force  of  which primarily  concerns oneself,  and which
 may have little or no reference  to the  general fitness  of things);
 illusion,  the  refusal  to  recognize  that things  are not  as they
 should  be,  leading  to  the  delusion  that they  are as  one would
 desire them  to be,  when they  are not  so. (The  last might  now be
 called  'wishful thinking',  legitimately; but  this term,  the Elves
 would  say,  is  quite illegitimate  when applied  to the  first. The
 last  can  be  disproved  by reference  to facts.  The first  not so.
 Unless  desirability  is  held to  be always  delusory, and  the sole
 basis  for  the  hope  of  amendment.  But  desires  of the  fea may
 often  be  shown  to   be  reasonable   by  arguments   quite  uncon-
 nected  with  personal  wish.   The  fact   that  they   accord  with
 'desire',  or  even  with  personal wish,  does not  invalidate them.
 Actually the Elves  believed that  the 'lightening  of the  heart' or
 the  'stirring  of  joy'  (to  which  they  often  refer),  which may
 accompany  the  hearing  of  a  proposition  or  an argument,  is not
 an indication of its falsity but of the recognition by the  fea that
 it is on the path of truth.)                                          
                                                                      
                                Note 9.                                
    It is probable that Andreth was actually unwilling to say more.

 Partly by a kind of loyalty  that restrained  Men from  revealing to
 the  Elves  all that  they knew  about the  darkness in  their past;
 partly  because  she  felt  unable  to  make up  her own  mind about
 the  conflicting   human  traditions.   Longer  recensions   of  the
 Athrabeth,  evidently  edited   under  Numenorean   influence,  make
 her  give,  under  pressure, a  more precise  answer. Some  are very
 brief,  some  longer.  All agree,  however, in  making the  cause of
 disaster  the  acceptance  by  Men of  Melkor as  King (or  King and
 God).  In  one  version  a  complete  legend  (compressed  in  time-
 scale) is given explicitly as a Numenorean  tradition, for  it makes
 Andreth say: This  is the  Tale that  Adanel of  the House  of Hador
 told  to  me.  The   Numenoreans  were   largely,  and   their  non-
 Elvish  traditions  mainly, derived  from the  People of  Marach, of
 whom  the   House  of  Hador  were   the  chieftains.(22) The legend
 bears  certain  resemblances  to  the  Numenorean   traditions  con-
 cerning  the  part  played  by  Sauron in  the downfall  of Numenor.
 But  this does  not prove  that it  is entirely  a fiction  of post-
 downfall  days.  It  is  no  doubt mainly  derived from  actual lore
 of  the  People  of  Marach,  quite  independent  of  the Athrabeth.
 [Added  note:  Nothing  is hereby  asserted concerning  its 'truth',
 historical  or otherwise.]  The operations  of Sauron  naturally and
 inevitably  resembled  or  repeated  those  of  his  master.  That a
 people  in  possession  of such  a legend  or tradition  should have
 later  been  deluded  by  Sauron  is  sad  but,  in  view  of  human
 history generally, not incredible. Indeed if fish had  fish-lore and
 Wise-fish,  it is  probable that  the business  of anglers  would he
 very little hindered.(23)                                          
   The 'Tale of Adanel' is attached [pp. 345 - 9].                  
                                                                   
                               Note 10.                             
                                                                   
 'Matter'  is not  regarded as  evil or  opposed to  'Spirit'. Matter
 was  wholly  good in  origin. It  remained a  'creature of  Eru' and
 still  largely good,  and indeed  self-healing, when  not interfered
 with:  that  is, when  the latent  evil intruded  by Melkor  was not
 deliberately  roused  and  used  by evil  minds. Melkor  had concen-
 trated  his  attention on  'matter', because  spirits could  only be
 dominated  completely  by  fear;  and fear  was most  easily exerted
 through matter (especially  in the  case of  the Incarnates,  whom
 he most desired  to subjugate).  For example  by fear  that material
 things  that  were  loved  might  be  destroyed,  or  the  fear  (in
 Incarnates)  that  their  bodies  might be  hurt. (Melkor  also used
 and perverted for his purposes the 'fear of  Eru', fully  or vaguely

 understood.   But  this   was  more   difficult  and   perilous  and
 required more  cunning.  Lesser spirits  might be  lured by  love or
 admiration of himself  and his  powers, and  so led  at last  into a
 posture  of  rebellion  against Eru.  Their fear  of Him  might then
 be  darkened,  so  that  they adhered  to Melkor,  as a  captain and
 protector,  becoming  at  last  too  terrified  to  return   to  the
 allegiance  of  Eru,  even  after  they  had  discovered  Melkor and
 had begun to hate him.)                                             
                                                                    
                               Note 11.                              
                                                                    
 This  is  actually already  glimpsed in  the Ainulindale',  in which
 reference  is  made  to  the 'Flame  Imperishable'. This  appears to
 mean the Creative activity of Eru  (in some  sense distinct  from or
 within  Him),  by  which  things  could  be   given  a   'real'  and
 independent   (though   derivative   and  created)   existence.  The
 Flame Imperishable is sent out from Eru,  to dwell  in the  heart of
 the  world,  and  the  world  then  Is,  on  the  same plane  as the
 Ainur, and they can enter into it. But this is  not, of  course, the
 same as the re-entry of Eru to  defeat Melkor.  It refers  rather to
 the  mystery  of 'authorship',  by which  the author,  while remain-
 ing 'outside' and independent of  his work,  also 'indwells'  in it,
 on  its  derivative  plane,  below  that  of his  own being,  as the
 source and guarantee of its being.                                  
                                                                    
                       [The 'Tale of Adanel']                        
                                                                    
 Then Andreth being urged by Finrod said at last:  'This is  the tale
 that Adanel of the House of Hador told to me.'                      
                                                                    
    Some  say  the  Disaster  happened  at   the  beginning   of  the
 history  of  our  people,  before any  had yet  died. The  Voice had
 spoken  to  us,  and we  had listened.  The Voice  said: 'Ye  are my
 children. I have sent you to dwell here. In time ye will inherit all
 this Earth, but  first ye  must be  children and  learn. Call  on me
 and I shall hear; for I am watching over you.'                      
    We  understood  the  Voice  in  our  hearts,  though  we  had  no
 words  yet. Then  the desire  for words  awoke in  us, and  we began
 to  make  them.  But we  were few,  and the  world was  wide and
 strange.  Though  we  greatly  desired  to understand,  learning was
 difficult, and the making of words was slow.                     
   In  that  time  we  called often  and the  Voice answered.  But it
 seldom answered our questions,  saying only:  'First seek  to find
 the answer for yourselves. For ye  will have  joy in  the finding,

 and  so  grow  from  childhood  and  become  wise.  Do  not  seek  to
 leave childhood before your time.'                                  
   But  we  were  in  haste,  and we  desired to  order things  to our
 will;  and  the  shapes  of  many  things  that  we  wished  to  make
 awoke  in  our  minds.  Therefore  we  spoke  less  and  less  to the
 Voice.                                                              
   Then  one  appeared  among  us,  in  our  own  form   visible,  but
 greater  and more  beautiful; and  he said  that he  had come  out of
 pity.  'Ye  should  not have  been left  alone and  uninstructed,' he
 said.  'The  world  is  full  of  marvellous  riches  which knowledge
 can   unlock.   Ye   could   have   food   more  abundant   and  more
 delicious  than  the  poor  things  that  ye now  eat. Ye  could have
 dwellings of ease,  in which  ye could  keep light  and shut  out the
 night. Ye could be clad even as I.'                                 
   Then  we looked  and lo!  he was  clad in  raiment that  shone like
 silver and gold, and he  had a  crown on  his head,  and gems  in his
 hair. 'If ye wish to be like me,' he said, 'I  will teach  you.' Then
 we took him as teacher.                                             
   He  was  less swift  than we  had hoped  to teach  us how  to find,
 or  to  make for  ourselves, the  things that  we desired,  though he
 had  awakened  many  desires  in our  hearts. But  if any  doubted or
 were  impatient,  he  would  bring  and  set  before  us all  that we
 wished for. 'I am the Giver of Gifts,' he said; 'and the  gifts shall
 never fail as long as ye trust me.'                                 
   Therefore  we  revered  him,  and  we   were  enthralled   by  him;
 and  we  depended  upon  his  gifts,  fearing  to  return  to  a life
 without  them  that  now  seemed  poor  and  hard.  And  we  believed
 all  that  he  taught.  For  we were  eager to  know about  the world
 and  its  being:  about  the beasts  and birds,  and the  plants that
 grew  in  the  Earth;  about  our  own making;  and about  the lights
 of  heaven,  and  the  countless stars,  and the  Dark in  which they
 are set.                                                            
   All  that  he  taught  seemed  good,  for  he had  great knowledge.
 But  ever  more  and  more  he  would  speak  of the  Dark. 'Greatest
 of all is the Dark,' he said, 'for It has  no bounds.  I came  out of
 the Dark, but I am  Its master.  For I  have made  Light. I  made the
 Sun  and  the  Moon  and  the  countless  stars.  I will  protect you
 from the Dark, which else would devour you.'                        
   Then  we  spoke of  the Voice.  But his  face became  terrible; for
 he was angry.  'Fools!' he  said. 'That  was the  Voice of  the Dark.
 It wishes to keep you from me; for It is hungry for you.'           
   Then  he  went  away,  and  we  did not  see him  for a  long time,

                              
                                                                      
  and without his gifts we were poor. And there came a day when        
  suddenly the Sun's light began to fail, until it was blotted out     
  and a great shadow fell on the world; and all the beasts and         
  birds were afraid. Then he came again, walking through the           
  shadow like a bright fire.                                           
   We fell upon our faces. 'There are some among you who are           
  still listening to the Voice of the Dark,' he said, 'and therefore It
  is drawing nearer. Choose now! Ye may have the Dark as Lord,         
  or ye may have Me. But unless ye take Me for Lord and swear to       
  serve Me, I shall depart and leave you; for I have other realms       
  and dwelling places, and I do not need the Earth, nor you.'          
   Then in fear we spoke as he commanded, saying: 'Thou art            
  the Lord; Thee only we will serve. The Voice we abjure and will      
  not hearken to it again.'                                            
   'So be it!' he said. 'Now build Me a house upon a high place,       
  and call it the House of the Lord. Thither I will come when I        
  will. There ye shall call on Me and make your petitions to Me.'      
   And when we had built a great house, he came and stood              
  before the high seat, and the house was lit as with fire. 'Now,' he
  said, 'come forth any who still listen to the Voice!'                
   There were some, but for fear they remained still and said          
  naught. 'Then bow before Me and acknowledge Me!' he said.           
  And all bowed to the ground before him, saying: 'Thou art the        
  One Great, and we are Thine.'                                        
   Thereupon he went up as in a great flame and smoke, and we          
  were scorched by the heat. But suddenly he was gone, and it was
  darker than night; and we fled from the House.                       
   Ever after we went in great dread of the Dark; but he seldom        
  appeared among us again in fair form, and he brought few gifts.      
  If at great need we dared to go to the House and pray to him to      
  help us, we heard his voice, and received his commands. But          
  now he would always command us to do some deed, or to give           
  him some gift, before he would listen to our prayer; and ever the
  deeds became worse, and the gifts harder to give up.                 
   The first Voice we never heard again, save once. In the             
  stillness of the night It spoke, saying: 'Ye have abjured Me, but
  ye remain Mine. I gave you life. Now it shall be shortened, and     
  each of you in a little while shall come to Me, to learn who is
  your Lord: the one ye worship, or I who made him.'                 
  Then our terror of the Dark was increased; for we believed          
  at the Voice was of the Darkness behind the stars. And some         
  of us began to die in horror and anguish, fearing to go out into

 the  Dark. Then  we called  on our  Master to  save us  from death,
 and  he  did not  answer. But  when we  went to  the House  and all
 bowed down  there, at  last he  came, great  and majestic,  but his
 face was cruel and proud.                                         
   'Now  ye  are  Mine  and must  do My  will,' he  said. 'I  do not
 trouble that some of you die and go  to appease  the hunger  of the
 Dark;  for  otherwise  there  would  soon  be  too  many   of  you,
 crawling like lice on the Earth. But if ye  do not  do My  will, ye
 will feel My anger, and ye will die sooner, for I will slay you.'
   Thereafter  we  were  grievously  afflicted,  by  weariness,  and
 hunger,  and  sickness; and  the Earth  and all  things in  it were
 turned against us. Fire and  Water rebelled  against us.  The birds
 and beasts shunned us,  or if  they were  strong they  assailed us.
 Plants gave us poison; and we feared the shadows under trees.     
   Then  we  yearned  for  our  life  as  it  was before  our Master
 came;  and we  hated him,  but feared  him no  less than  the Dark.
 And  we  did  his  bidding,   and  more   than  his   bidding;  for
 anything  that  we  thought  would  please  him,  however  evil, we
 did, in the hope that he would lighten our afflictions, and  at the
 least would not slay us.                                          
   For most of us this was in  vain. But  to some  he began  to show
 favour:  to  the  strongest and  cruellest, and  to those  who went
 most  often  to the  House. He  gave gifts  to them,  and knowledge
 that  they kept  secret; and  they became  powerful and  proud, and
 they enslaved us, so that  we had  no rest  from labour  amidst our
 afflictions.                                                      
   Then  there  arose  some  among  us  who  said  openly  in  their
 despair:  'Now  we  know  at  last  who  lied,  and who  desired to
 devour  us. Not  the first  Voice. It  is the  Master that  we have
 taken who is the Darkness; and he did  not come  forth from  it, as
 he said, but he dwells in it. We will  serve him  no longer!  He is
 our Enemy.'                                                       
   Then  in fear  lest he  should hear  them and  punish us  all, we
 slew them, if we could; and those that fled we  hunted; and  if any
 were  caught,  our  masters,  his  friends,  commanded   that  they
 should  be taken  to the  House and  there done  to death  by fire.
 That  pleased  him  greatly,  his  friends said;  and indeed  for a
 while it seemed that our afflictions were lightened.              
   But it is told that there were a  few that  escaped us,  and went
 away  into far  countries, fleeing  from the  shadow. Yet  they did
 not escape from  the anger  of the  Voice; for  they had  built the
 House  and  bowed  down  in  it.  And  they  came  at  last  to the

 land's end and the shores of the impassable water; and behold!             
 the Enemy was there before them.                                            
                                                                           
 Together  with  the  Athrabeth  papers there  is a  Glossary (as  my father
 termed it), a  brief index  of names  and terms  with definitions  and some
 etymological information.  This is  confined to  the Athrabeth  itself, and
 so from  the  nature  of  the  work  is  not  large,  but  there are  a few
 omissions  (as  Athrabeth,  Andreth,  and  names of  the People  of Beor).
 Written  in manuscript,  it was  made after  the amanuensis  typescripts of
 the Athrabeth  had  been  taken  from  the   manuscript  and   emended,  as
 the  entry Mirroanwi  shows (see  p. 326  note 10).  It seems  curious that
 my  father  should have  provided this,  since most  of the  definitions or
 explanations  would  be  unnecessary  to  one  who  had read  The Silmaril-
 lion,  and  taken  with  the explanations  of fundamental  conceptions that
 appear  in  the  Commentary  may  suggest  that  he  conceived  it   as  an
 independent  work  -  although  on  one  of   the  newspaper   wrappers  of
 the Athrabeth papers (p.  329) he  noted that  it should  be the  last item
 in an Appendix (to The Silmarillion).                                      
    Most  of  the  information provided  is readily  found elsewhere,  and I
 give only a selection of the entries, in whole or in part, with very slight
 editing for purposes of clarity.                                           
                                                                           
 Adaneth  Sindarin, 'woman, mortal woman'.
 Arda  'kingdom', sc. the 'kingdom of Manwe'. The 'Solar System', or
   Earth as the dramatic centre of this, as the scene of the war of the
   'Children of Eru' against Melkor.
 Edennil  (Quenya Atandil) 'devoted to the Atani, Men'; name given
   to Finrod.
 [Extracted from entry Eldar:] But only part of the Eldar actually
   reached Aman. A large part of the Third Host (Lindar 'Singers', also
   called Teleri Those Behind ) remained in the West of Middle-earth.
   These are the Sindar 'Grey-elves'.... The Elves who were in or who
   ever had dwelt in Aman were called the High-elves (Tareldar).(24)
 fea  'spirit': the particular 'spirit' belonging to and 'housed' in any
   one hroa of the Incarnates. It corresponds, more or less, to 'soul';
   and to 'mind', when any attempt is made to distinguish between
   mentality, and the mental processes of Incarnates, conditioned and
   limited by the co-operation of the physical organs of the hroa. It was
   thus in its being (apart from its experience) the impulse and power
   to think: enquire and reflect, as distinct from the means of acquiring
   data. It was conscious and self-aware: 'self' however in Incarnates
   included the hroa. The fea was said by the Eldar to retain the
   impress or memory of the hroa and of all the combined experiences
   of itself and its body. (Quenya fea (dissyllabic) is from older * 'phaya.
   Sindarin faer, of the same meaning, corresponds to Quenya faire'
   'spirit (in general)', as opposed to matter (erma) or 'flesh' (hrave').)

  Finarphin I Finarfin  [the name is given thus in alternative spellings]
  hroa  See fea. (The Quenya form is derived from older * srawa. The         
    Sindarin form of hroa and hrave  (srawe) was rhaw: cf. Mirroanwi.)       
  Mandos  [extract] (The name Mandos (stem mandost-) means ap-               
    proximately 'castle of custody': from mbando 'custody, safe-              
    keeping', and osto 'a strong or fortified building or place'. The         
    Sindarin form of mbando, Quenya mando, was band, occurring                
    in Angband 'Iron-gaol', the name given to Morgoth's dwelling,             
    Quenya Angamando.)                                                        
  Melkor (also Melko)  [extract] (Melkor, in older form Melkore,            
    probably means 'Mighty-rising', sc. 'uprising of power'; Melko            
    simply 'the Mighty One'.)(25)                                             
  Mirroanwi  Incarnates; those (spirits) 'put into flesh'; cf. hroa. (From
    * mi-srawanwe.)                                                           
  Noldor  The name means 'lore-masters' or those specially devoted to        
    knowledge. (The most ancient form was ngolodo, Quenya noldo,              
    Sindarin golodh: in the transcription n = the Feanorian letter for the
    back nasal, the ng of king.)(26) The Quenya word nole meant 'lore,           
    knowledge', but its Sindarin equivalent gul, owing to its frequent      
    use in such combinations as morgul (cf. Minas Morgul in The Lord          
    of the Rings) was only used for evil or perverted knowledge,              
    necromancy, sorcery. This word gul was also used in the language          
    of Mordor.                                                                
  Valar  [extract] (The name) means 'those with power, the Powers'.          
    But it should more strictly be translated 'the Authorities'. The          
    'power' of the Valar resided in the 'authority' they had from Eru.        
    They had sufficient 'power' for their functions - that is, vast or        
    godlike power over, and knowledge of, the physical structure of the       
    Universe, and understanding of the designs of Eru. But they were          
    forbidden to use force upon the Children of Eru. The stem melk- (27)      
    (seen in Melkor) on the other hand means 'power' as force and             
    strength.                                                                 
                                                                           
  I have referred (p. 303) to the existence of original draft material for
  the Athrabeth. The chief element in this is a small bundle of slips made
  from Merton College documents of 1955 and written very rapidly in         
  ball-point pen; but it is plain that my father was following an earlier
  text, no longer extant, which he could not read at all points: words are
  marked with queries, dots are put in for missing phrases (some of         
  which were filled in doubtfully afterwards), and some sentences do not
  seems to be correct. This draft, which I will call 'A', corresponds to the
  section in the final text from Finrod's words 'But what then shall we     
  think of the union in Man' on p. 317 to 'then Eru must come in to con-
  quer him' on p. 322; but the one is in certain respects extraordinarily
  different from the other. I give here two extracts to illustrate this.
  The first takes up from Finrod's questions (p. 318) 'Or is there some- ?

  where else  a world  of which  all things  which we  see, all  things that
  either Elves or Men know, are only tokens or reminders?':                 
      'If so it resides only in the mind of Eru,' said Andreth. 'But to such
  questions  I  know  no  answer.  This  much  only  can  I say:  that among
  us  some  hold  that  our errand  here was  to heal  the Marring  of Arda,
  and by making the hroa partake in the life of  the fea  to put  it beyond
  any  marring  of  Melkor  or  any  other  spirit of  malice for  ever. But
  that   "Arda   Healed"  (or   Remade)  shall   not  be   "Arda  Unmarred",
  but a third thing and  a greater.  And that  third thing  maybe is  in the
  mind  of  Eru,  and  is  in  his  answer.  You  have spoken  to me  of the
  Music  and  you  have  conversed  with  the  Valar  who  were  present  at
  its  making  ere the  world began.  Did they  hear the  end of  the Music?
  Or  was  there  not  something  beyond  the  final  chords  of  Eru, which
  (being   overwhelmed   thereby)  the   Valar  did   not  hear?   Or  again
  maybe,  since  Eru  is  for  ever  free, He  made no  music and  showed no
  Vision  beyond  a  certain  point.  Beyond   that  point   (which  neither
  Valar  nor  Eldar...)  we  cannot  see  or  know, until,  each by  our own
  roads, we come there.'                                                    
      'In what did Melkor's malice show itself?'                            
      Darkness  lies  over  that.  Saelon  (sc. Andreth)(28) has   little  to
  answer.  'Some  men   say  that   he  blasphemed   Eru,  and   denied  His
  existence,  or  His  power,  and  that  our  fathers  assented,  and  took
  Melkor to  be a  Lord and  God; and  that thereby  our fear  denied their
  own  true  nature,  and  so  became  darkened   and  weakened   almost  to
  the death (if  that be  possible for  fear). And  through the  weakness of
  the fear our hroar  fell into  unhealth, and  lay open  to all  evils and
  disorders  of  the  world.  And  others  say  that  Eru  himself  spoke in
  wrath,  saying:  "If  the  Darkness  be  your God,  little here  shall you
  have  of  Light, but  shall leave  it soon  and come  before Me,  to learn
  who lieth: Melkor or I Who made him."'(29)                                
                                                                           
  The  second  passage  corresponds  in  its  placing  to that  beginning at
  Andreth's words in  the final  text (p.  321) 'Asleep  or awake,  they say
  nothing clearly':                                                         
                                                                           
    '... Some say  that ...  Eru will  find a  way of  healing that  will heal
    both  our  fathers  and  ourselves  and  those that  shall follow  us. But
    how that  shall come  to pass,  or to  what manner  of being  this healing
    will make us,  only those  of the  Hope (as  we say)  can guess;  none can
    clearly assert.                                                         
      'But  there  are  among  us  a  few  (of  whom  I am  one) who  have the
    Great  Hope,  as  we  call  it,  and  believe  that  His  secret  has been
    handed  down  from  the  days  before  our  wounding.  This  is  the Great
    Hope:  that  Eru  will  himself  enter  into  Arda  and  heal Men  and all
    the Marring.'                                                           
      'But  this  is  a  strange  thing!  Do you  claim to  have known  of Eru
    before ever we met? What is his name?'                                 

 'As it is with you, but different only in form of sound: The One.'
 'But  still  this  passes  my  understanding,'  said Finrod.  'For how
 could Eru enter into the thing  that He  has made,  and than  which He
 is infinitely greater? Can the poet  enter his  story or  the designer
 enter his picture?'                                                   
 'He is already in it, and outside it,' said Saelon, 'though not in the
 same mode.'                                                           
 'Yea verily,' said Finrod,  'and so  is Eru  in that  mode I  sense in
 Arda.  But  you  speak  of  Eru  entering into  Arda, which  is surely
 another  matter.  How  could  he  do  so,  who is  infinitely greater:
 would it not shatter Arda, or indeed Ea?'                             
 'He could find  a way,  I doubt  not,' said  Saelon, 'though  indeed I
 cannot conceive the way.  But whatever  you think,  that is  the Great
 Hope of Men. And  I do  not see  - so  to speak  with humility  - what
 else  could  be  done;  since  Eru  will surely  not suffer  Melkor to
 triumph  and  abandon  His  own  work.  But  there  is   nothing  more
 powerful that  is conceivable  than Melkor,  save Eru  only. Therefore
 Eru, if he will not relinquish his work to Melkor, who  is......., Eru
 must come in to conquer him.                                          
                                                                          
 At this point the draft text A ends. It will be seen in the first  of these
 passages  that  the  large  vision  of  Finrod  in  the  final form  of the
 Athrabeth  concerning  'Arda  Remade',  which  arises  in  his   mind  from
 the  words  of  Andreth, was  originally a  belief held  by certain  of the
 Atani,  and  it  is Andreth  who proposes  the idea  that this  vision was
 absent from the end of  the Music  of the  Ainur, or  was not  perceived by
 them;  while  in  the  second  passage  Andreth  names  herself  as  one of
 those who entertains  'the Great  Hope', and  to Finrod's  incredulity that
 Eru  could  enter  into Arda  she provides  those same  speculative answers
 that are given to Finrod in the  final text.  It is  thus apparent  that my
 father's  ideas  concerning  not  only  the  structure  and  tenor  of  the
 'Converse of Finrod  and Andreth'  but the  very nature  of the  beliefs of
 the  first  Men  in  Beleriand   underwent  a   major  development   as  he
 worked on the Athrabeth.                                                  
                                                                          
   An  isolated  page  ('B')  written,  like  draft A,  on a  Merton College
 document  of  1955, carries  an interesting  passage that  was not  used in
 the final version.                                                        
                                                                          
      'What  says  the   wisdom  of   Men  concerning   the  nature   of  the
   Mirruyaina?'   said   Finrod.  'Or   what  do   you  hold,   Andreth,  who
   know also much of the teaching of the Eldar?'                           
      'Men  say  various  things,  be  they  Wise   or  no,'   said  Andreth.
   'Many  hold  that  there  is but  a single  thing: the  body, and  that we
   are  one  of  the beasts,  though the  latest come  and the  most cunning.
   But  others  hold  that  the  body  is  not all,  but contains  some other
   thing. For  often we  speak of  the body  as a  "house", or  as "raiment",

                      
                                                                                 
 and   that   implies   an   indwelling,    though   of    what   we    speak   in
 uncertainty.(30)                                                                 
  'Among    my   folk    men   speak    mostly   of    the   "breath"    (or   the
 "breath  of  life" ),  and  they  say  that  if it  leaves the  house, it  may by
 seeing  eyes  be  seen  as  a  wraith,  a  shadowy  image  of  the  living  thing
 that was.'                                                                       
  'That  is  but  a  guess,'   said  Finrod,   'and  long   ago  we   said  things
 similar,   but   we   know   now   that   the  Indweller   is  not   "breath"(31)
 (which  the  hroa  uses),  and  that  seeing   eyes  cannot   see  one   that  is
 houseless,  but  that  the  living  eyes  may  draw  from  the  fea   within  an
 image   which   the   houseless   conveys   to   the   housed:   the   memory  of
 itself.'                                                                         
  'Maybe,'   said    Andreth.   'But    among   the    people   of    Marach   men
 speak  rather  of  the  "fire",  or  the  "fire  on   the  hearth",   from  whose
 burning  the  house  is  warmed,  and  from   which  arise   the  heats   of  the
 heart, or the smokes of wrath.'                                                  
  'That  is  another  guess,'  said  Finrod,  'and  holds   also  some   truth,  I
 believe.'                                                                        
  'Doubtless,'   said   Andreth.   'But   those   who    speak   thus,    of   the
 "breath"  or  of  the  "fire",  do  not  think   of  it   as  belonging   to  Men
 only,  but  as  the  life  of  all  living  things.  As  Men  have  their houses,
 but  beasts  also  have  their  dwellings  in  holes  or in  nests, so  both have
 a life within that may grow cold or go forth.'                                   
  'Then  in  what   way  do   Men  differ   from  beasts   in  such   lore?'  said
 Finrod. 'How can they claim ever to have had a life indestructible?'             
  'The   Wise   have   considered   this,'   said   Andreth.   'And   among   them
 are  some  that   speak  more   after  the   manner  of   the  Eldar.   But  they
 speak  rather  of  three  things:  the  earth  and  the  fire  and  the  Dweller.
 By  which  they  intend  the  stuff  of  which  the  body  is  built,   which  of
 itself  is  inert  and  does  not  grow  or  move;  and  the  life   which  grows
 and  takes  to  itself  increase;  and  the  Indweller  who  dwells   there,  and
 is master both of house and of hearth - or once was.'                            
  'And  wishes  never  to  leave  them   -  and   once  need   never  do   so?  It
 was then the Indweller who suffered the wound?' said Finrod.                     
  'Not   so,'   said   Andreth.   'Clearly   not   so;   but   Man,   the   whole:
 house, life, and master.'                                                        
  'But  the  Master  must have  been the  one that  was wronged  (as you          
 say), or did wrong (as I  guess); for  the house  might suffer  for the          
 folly of the  Master, but  hardly the  Master for  the misdeeds  of the          
 house! But let that be, for you do not desire  to speak  of it.  Do you          
 yourself hold this belief?'                                                      
  'It is not a belief,' said  Andreth. 'For  we do  not know  enough for          
 any  certainty  concerning  earth  or  growth  or  thought,  and  maybe          
 never  shall;  for if  they were  designed by  the One,  then doubtless          
 they will  ever  hold  for  us some  mystery inscrutable,  however much          
 we learn. But it is a guess that is near, I hold.'                             

  Here this text ends.  Finally, there  is another  isolated slip  ('C'), again
  taken from a document dated 1955, as follows:                                
                                                                              
    Query:  Is  it  not   right  to   make  Andreth   refuse  to   discuss  any
    traditions or legends of the 'Fall'? Already it is (if inevitably) too like
    a  parody  of  Christianity.  Any  legend  of  the   Fall  would   make  it
    completely so?                                                             
                                                                              
    Originally  instead  of  refusal  to  talk  of it  Andreth was  made (under
    pressure) to say something of this sort:                                   
      It  is  said  that  Melkor  looked fair  in ancient  days, and  that when
    he  had  gained  Men's  love  he  blasphemed  Eru,  denying  his  existence
    and  claiming  that  he  was  the  Lord,  and  Men  assented  and  took him
    as  Lord  and  God.  Thereupon  (say  some)   our  spirits   having  denied
    their  own  true  nature  at  once  became   darkened  and   weakened;  and
    through  this  weakness  they  lost  the  mastery  of  their  bodies, which
    fell  into  unhealth.  Others  say  that  Eru   Himself  spoke   in  wrath,
    saying: 'If the Darkness be your god, little  shall ye  have here  of Light
    [later > on earth  ye shall  have little  Light], and  shall leave  it soon
    and  come  before  Me  to  learn  who  lieth:  your  god  or  I   who  made
    him.' And these are the most afraid of death.                              
                                                                              
  This  is  very  difficult  to  interpret. My  father's initial  question must
  mean  (in  view  of the  following sentences):  'It is  surely right  to make
  Andreth  refuse ...',  implying 'as  is now  the case,  as the  text stands'.
  But  he  then  proceeded  to  write  a  passage  in  which  Andreth  did  not
  refuse  to   say  something   of  such   traditions,  but   consented  'under
  pressure'  (I  do  not  know  how  to  interpret  the  word  'Originally'  in
  'Originally  instead  of  refusal  to talk  of it');  and this  was evidently
  where  the  germ  of  what  would  become  the 'Tale  of Adanel',  the legend
  of  the  Fall,  first  appeared.  But  this  sketch of  what Andreth  said to
  Finrod  about  the Fall  of Man  is very  close to,  indeed largely  the same
  as,  what  she  said  in  the  draft  text  A  (p. 351);  and that  draft was
  itself  derived from  a previous  writing now  lost (p.  350). It  seems then
  that  that  lost  writing  contained  no  account  of  the  Fall, and  it was
  presumably  to  this that  my father's  question referred:  'Is it  not right
  to  make  Andreth  refuse  to  discuss  any  traditions  or  legends  of  the
  "Fall"?'                                                                     
    The  remarks  with  which  text  C  begins  are  evidence  that  he  was in
  some   way   concerned    about   these    new   developments,    these   new
  directions, in the underlying 'theology'  of Arda,  or at  any rate  their so
  explicit  expression. Certainly,  if one  looks back  to earlier  writings of
  his,  one  must  become  aware  of  a  significant  shift.  In   the  account
  written  for  Milton  Waldman  in  1951  (Letters  no.131,  p.  147)  he  had
  said:                                                                        
    The  Doom  (or  the   Gift)  of   Men  is   mortality,  freedom   from  the

  circles of the world. Since the point of view of the whole cycle  is the
  Elvish, mortality is not explained mythically:  it is  a mystery  of God
  of  which  no  more  is  known  than  that  'what  God has  purposed for
  Men is hidden: a grief and an envy to the immortal Elves....            
      In the cosmogony there is a fall: a  fall of  Angels we  should say.
  Though quite different in form, of  course, to  that of  Christian myth.
  These tales are 'new', they are  not directly  derived from  other myths
  and  legends,  but  they  must  inevitably  contain  a large  measure of
  ancient  wide-spread  motives  or  elements. After  all, I  believe that
  legends  and  myths  are  largely  made of  'truth', and  indeed present
  aspects of  it that  can only  be received  in this  mode; and  long ago
  certain  truths  and  modes  of  this  kind  were  discovered  and  must
  always  reappear.  There  cannot  be any  'story' without  a fall  - all
  stories are ultimately about the  fall -  at least  not for  human minds
  as we know them and have them.                                          
      So, proceeding, the Elves have  a fall,  before their  'history' can
  become  storial.  (The  first  fall  of  Man,  for   reasons  explained,
  nowhere  appears  -  Men  do not  come on  the stage  until all  that is
  long past, and there is only a rumour that for a  while they  fell under
  the domination of the Enemy and that some repented.)                    
  'The first fall of Man,  for reasons  explained, nowhere  appears.' What
  were  those  reasons?  My  father  must  have  been  referring   to  the
  beginning of this letter, where he  wrote of  the Arthurian  legend that
  'it is involved in, and explicitly contains the Christian religion', and
  went on:                                                                
                                                

                                                                    
    For reasons which I will not elaborate, that seems to me fatal. Myth
    and fairy-story must, as all art, reflect and contain in solution
    elements of moral and religious truth (or error), but not explicit, not
    in the known form of the primary 'real' world.
    Some years before the time of that letter, however, in one of the
  curious 'Sketches' associated with The Drowning of Anadune, he had
  referred briefly to the original Fall of Men, and there it was accom-
  panied by a very strange speculation on God's original design for
  mankind (IX.401):
    Men (the Followers or Second Kindred) came second, but it is
    guessed that in the first design of God they were destined (after
    tutelage) to take on the governance of all the Earth, and ultimately
    to become Valar, to 'enrich Heaven', Iluve. But Evil (incarnate in
    Meleko) seduced them, and they fell.
  A little later in the same text (IX.402) he wrote:
    Though all Men had 'fallen', not all remained enslaved. Some
    repented, rebelled against Meleko, and made friends of the Eldar,
    and tried to be loyal to God.
  There is certainly a belief expressed here (whatever weight was to be
  attached to it - for by whom was it 'guessed'?) that the Fall introduced

 a change incalculably vast in  the nature  and destiny  of Men,  a change
 brought about by the 'Spirit of Evil', Melkor.                           
   But in 1954  he was  saying, in  the draft  of a  long letter  to Peter
 Hastings      that      was      not      sent      (Letters     no.153):
 ...  my  legendarium,   especially  the   'Downfall  of   Numenor'  which
 lies  immediately behind  The Lord  of the  Rings, is  based on  my view:
 that   Men  are   essentially  mortal   and  must   not  try   to  become
 'immortal' in the flesh.                                                 
 To this he added a footnote:                                             
   Since 'mortality' is thus represented as a special gift  of God  to the
 Second  Race  of  the  Children  (the  Eruhini, the  Children of  the One
 God)  and  not  a  punishment  for  a  Fall,  you  may  call   that  'bad
 theology'.  So  it  may  be,  in  the  primary  world,   but  it   is  an
 imagination  capable  of  elucidating  truth, and  a legitimate  basis of
 legends.                                                                 
 And again, in another letter of  1954, to  Father Robert  Murray (Letters
 no.156, footnote to p. 205) he wrote:                                    
   But  the  view  of  the  myth  [of  the  Downfall  of Numenor]  is that
 Death  -  the  mere  shortness  of  human  life-span -  is not  a punish-
 ment for the Fall, but  a biologically  (and therefore  also spiritually,
 since body and spirit are integrated) inherent part of Man's nature.     
                                                                         
   It  seems  to me  therefore that  there are  problems in  the Athrabeth
 Finrod  ah  Andreth  for  the  interpretation of  my father's  thought on
 these matters; but I am unable to  resolve them.  It is  unfortunate that
 the questionings with which this slip of paper begins are so elliptically
 expressed, especially the words 'Already it is (if inevitably) too like a
 parody of Christianity.' Obviously, he  was not  referring to  the legend
 of the Fall: he was saying clearly that the introduction of such a legend
 would  make  'it'  -  presumably,  the  Athrabeth  -  altogether  into 'a
 parody of Christianity'.                                                 
   Was  he   referring  then   to  the   astonishing  conception   in  the
 Athrabeth of 'the Great Hope  of Men',  as it  is called  in the  draft A
 (p. 352), 'the Old Hope' as it is called in the final text (p. 321), that
 Eru himself will enter into Arda  to oppose  the evil  of Melkor?  In the
 Commentary  (p.  335)  this  was  further  defined: 'Finrod  ... probably
 proceeded  to  the  expectation  that  "the  coming of  Eru", if  it took
 place, would be specially and primarily  concerned with  Men: that  is to
 an  imaginative  guess  or  vision  that  Eru  would  come  incarnated in
 human  form'  -  though my  father noted  that 'This  does not  appear in
 the Athrabeth'. But this surely is not parody, nor even parallel, but the
 extension - if only represented  as vision,  hope, or  prophecy -  of the
 'theology' of Arda into specifically, and of course  centrally, Christian
 belief; and a manifest challenge  to my  father's view  in his  letter of
 1951  on  the  necessary  limitations  of  the  expression of  'moral and
 religious truth (or error)' in a 'Secondary World'.                      

                                 NOTES.                                      
                                                                            
   1.  Cf.  my  father's  draft  letter  of  September  1954  (Letters no.153,
       p.  189):  'Elves  and  Men  are  evidently  in  biological  terms  one
       race, or  they could  not breed  and produce  fertile offspring  - even
       as a rare event', and the following passage.                          
   2.  According  to  the  chronology  of  the  Annals   of  Aman   the  Elves
       awoke in the Year of the Trees  1050 (p.  71, $37),  450 of  such Years
       before  the  rising   of  the   Sun,  or   something  more   than  4300
       years of our time (for the reckoning see p.  59); see  p. 327  note 16.
   3.  demiurgic  labour:  the  creative  work  of  'demiurges', in  the sense
       of mighty but limited beings subordinate to God.                      
   4.  On  Melkor  as  'originally  the  most  powerful  of  the   Valar'  see
       p.  65,  $2.  There are  a number  of references  in the  late writings
       to  the  supremacy  of  Melkor's  power  in  the  beginning,   but  see
       especially  the  essay  Melkor  Morgoth  given  on  pp.  390 ff.  It is
       curious that  in his  letter to  Rhona Beare  of October  1958 (Letters
       no.211)  my  father  wrote:  'In  the  cosmogonic  myth  Manwe  is said
       to   be   "brother"   of  Melkor,   that  is   they  were   coeval  and
       equipotent in the mind of the Creator.'                               
   5.  Cf.  Finrod's  words  in  the  Athrabeth,  p. 319:  'Beyond the  End of
       the  World we  shall not  change; for  in memory  is our  great talent,
       as shall be seen ever more clearly  as the  ages of  this Arda  pass: a
       heavy  burden  to  be,  I  fear;  but  in  the  Days  of  which  we now
       speak a great wealth.'                                                
   6.  The  reference  is  to  the  Virgin  Mary.  See  the  footnote (Letters
       p. 286) to the draft continuation of the letter referred to in  note 4.
   7.  This analysis  does not  adhere strictly  to the  actual course  of the
       Athrabeth,  and  (as  is  expressly  stated, p.  335) was  not intended
       to do so. Thus it was in  fact Finrod  who said  that 'the  disaster to
       Men  was  appalling'  ('dreadful  beyond   all  other   calamities  was
       the change  in their  state', p.  318); and  his recognition  that 'the
       power  of  Melkor  was   greater  than   had  been   understood'  comes
       much  earlier  in  the  debate  ('to  change  the   doom  of   a  whole
       people  of  the  Children,  to  rob  them of  their inheritance:  if he
       could  do  that in  Eru's despite,  then greater  and more  terrible is
       he by far than we guessed', p. 312).                                  
   8.  'Aegnor  perished  soon  after  this conversation':  in fact,  46 years
       later (see note 9).                                                   
   9.  In  the  Grey  Annals  (and  in the  published Silmarillion)  Finrod is
       clearly  represented  as  ruling  his great  realm from  the stronghold
       of  Nargothrond  (founded  centuries  before)   during  the   Siege  of
       Angband,  and  at  the  Battle  of  Sudden  Flame  he  is said  to have
       been  'hastening  from  the south'  (The Silmarillion  p. 152).  At the
       end  of the  Athrabeth, on  the other  hand, he  tells Andreth  that he
       is  leaving  for  the North,  'to the  swords, and  the siege,  and the

  walls of defence' (p. 325), and in the present passage it is said that
  he and his  brothers and  the People  of Beor  dwelt in  'the northern
  realm'  and  that  when  the  Siege  was  broken  he 'took  refuge' in
  Nargothrond.                                                          
     The  last  sentence  of  the  paragraph  'But she  would then  be a
  very  old  woman'  was  a   late  addition.   Against  it   my  father
  pencilled  'about 94';  cf. the  footnote to  the opening  sentence of
  the  Athrabeth,  p.  307:  Andreth  was 48  years old  at the  time of
  the  conversation  with  Finrod,  stated  to  have  taken  place about
  the year 409, and thus 'about 94' in 455,  the year  of the  Battle of
  Sudden Flame.                                                         
10.   In the Ainulindale' (p. 11, $13) it was  expressly stated that the
  Children of Iluvatar 'came    with the  Third Theme,  and were  not in
  the  theme  which  Iluvatar  propounded  at  the  beginning'.  Of  the
  Second  Theme  it  is  said  in  the  Ainulindale'  (p. 14,  $24) that
  'Manwe   ...   was   the   chief  instrument   of  the   Second  Theme
  that Iluvatar had raised up against the discord of Melkor.'           
     It  is  perhaps  possible  that  by  'the  two  new themes'  in the
  present  passage  my  father  was  thinking  of  the  introduction  of
  Elves  and  Men  into  the  Music  as  allied  'themes'  that  in  the
  Ainulindale'  were described  as 'the  Third Theme',  but it  seems to
  me  more  probable  that  a  different  conception  of  the  Music had
  entered. In this connection, in a passage in  the final  rewriting and
  elaboration  of QS  Chapter 6  (p. 275,  $50) it  is told  that Melkor
  spoke  secretly  to  the  Eldar  in Aman  concerning Men,  although he
  knew  little  about  them,  'for  engrossed  with  his own  thought in
  the  Music  he  had   paid  small   heed  to   the  Second   Theme  of
  Iluvatar'. If this was not  simply an  inadvertence, it  might support
  the  view  that  the  Second  and  Third   Themes  had   become  those
  that  introduced  Elves  and  Men  -  although it  would surely  be in
  the Second Theme  that the  Elves entered,  and Men  in the  Third. It
  may  be noted  also that  in the  draft continuation  of the letter to
  Rhona  Beare  of  October  1958  (Letters  no.212),  to  which  I have
  several  times  referred,  my  father  wrote:  'Their   "themes"  were
  introduced  into  the  Music  by  the  One,   when  the   discords  of
  Melkor arose';  and there  is a  further reference  to 'the  Themes of
  the Children' in Author's Note 7 (p. 342).                            
11.   Against the opening sentences of Note 2 is  written in the margin:
  'Arda  means  Realm'.  With  the   statement  here   that  'Physically
  Arda  was what  we should  call the  Solar System',  and in  the third
  paragraph  of  this  Note  that 'the  principal part  of Arda  was the
  Earth   (Imbar   "The   Habitation")',   though  'loosely   used  Arda
  often  seems  to mean  the Earth',  cf. the  list of  names associated
  with  the  revision  of  the  Quenta  Silmarillion  in  1951  (p.  7):
  'Arda   Elvish  name   of  Earth   =  our   world.  Also   Kingdom  of
  Arda  =  fenced  region'.  The  statements  in  this  Note   imply  of

         course  a  radical   transformation  of   the  cosmological   myth,  a
         recrudescence of  the abandoned  ideas seen  in the  Ainulindale' text
         C' of the later 1940s (pp. 3 - 6,  43). Much  further writing  on this
         subject will  be found  in texts  given in  Part Five  (see especially
         Texts I and II, pp. 370, 375 ff.).                                   
   12.   The  term  Imbar  has  not  occurred  before;   but  cf.   Ambar  'the
         Earth'  (IV.235  ff.,  and  the  Etymologies,  V.372,  'Quenya  a-mbar
         "oikoumene",  Earth';   also   Ambar-metta    the   ending    of   the
         world'  in  Aragorn's  words  at  his  coronation,  The Return  of the
         King p. 245).                                                         
   13.   'the  principal  demiurgic  Ainur...  had  taken up  their "residence"
         in Arda': cf. the Ainulindale'  (p. 14,  $21): 'Thus  it came  to pass
         that  of  the  Holy  Ones some  abode still  with Iluvatar  beyond the
         confines  of  the  World;  but  others,  and  among  them many  of the
         greatest  and  most  fair, took  the leave  of Iluvatar  and descended
         into   it.'   -   On   the   word  'demiurgic'   see  note   3  above.
   14.   erma:  in  the  typescript  B  of  Laws and  Customs appears  the word
         orma,  a later  pencilled alteration  of the  word hron  ('the general
         hron [> orma] of Arda'), p. 218.                                      
   15.   This is a  reference to  a conception  not yet  met: see  the Appendix
         to this Part, pp. 361 ff.                                             
   16.   The possibility of return to incarnate life  through childbirth  is no
         longer countenanced: see note 15.                                     
   17.   'Normally  they  must  nonetheless  remain   in  Aman':   the  reasons
         for this are explained later in this Note. See further pp. 364 - 5.
   18.   Luthien was  not the  ancestress of  Earendil, son  of Tuor  and Idril
         Celebrindal  of  Gondolin;   she  was   the  grandmother   of  Elwing,
         wife of Earendil.                                                     
   19.   'The myth that appears at the end of the Silmarillion':  in so  far as
         the reference is to any actual written text, this is the conclusion of
         QS (V.333, $$31 - 2), the Prophecy of Mandos.                        
   20.   Cf. Laws and Customs (typescript text B, p. 219):                     
            As  ages  passed  the  dominance  of  their  fear  ever increased,
         'consuming'  their  bodies  ...  The  end  of  this  process  is their
         'fading'  ...;  for  the  body  becomes at  last, as  it were,  a mere
         memory   held   by   the  fea;   and  that   end  has   already  been
         achieved  in  many  regions  of  Middle-earth, so  that the  Elves are
         indeed deathless and may not be destroyed or changed.                 
   21.   'before  and  above  all  Eru's  works';  i.e.  'before and  above the
         works of Eru, of whatever kind'.                                      
   22.   For  previous references  to the  People of  Marach see  pp. 305  - 6,
   23.   309, 344.                                                             
         Another  version  of  Note  9 is  extant, the  opening of  which reads
         thus:                                                                 
            It is probable  that Andreth  was actually  unwilling to  say more.
         She  may  also  have  felt  unable  to  make  up  her  mind  about the

       conflicting   human   traditions  on   the  point.   Longer  recensions
       of  the   Athrabeth,  which   appear  to   have  been   'edited'  under
       Numenorean   influence   (the    Numenoreans   were    mainly   derived
       from  the  People  of   Marach,  who   had  more   specific  traditions
       concerning  what  we  should  call  the  Fall),  make  her  give, under
       pressure, a more precise answer. Briefly this:                         
            Some  say  the  disaster  happened  very early  in the  history of
       our  people;  some  say  in  the  first  generation.  The Voice  of the
       One  had  spoken  to  us,  some  say   by  a   Messenger,  some   by  a
       Voice  only,  some  that  it  was   by  a   knowledge  in   our  hearts
       which  we  had  from   the  beginning.   But  we   were  few   and  the
       world  seemed  very  wide;  and  we  wondered  much  at  all   that  we
       saw,  but  we  were  ignorant,  and  yet   desired  greatly   to  know,
       and  we  were  in  haste  to  make  things,  the  shapes of  which grew
       in our minds.                                                          
            Then  one  came  among  us,  in  our  own  shape, but  greater and
       more beautiful...                                                      
       From this point the text  differs from  the 'Tale  of Adanel'  (p. 346)
       only in very minor details of wording; but  it stops  (not at  the foot
       of a  page) at  the words  'we would  hear his  voice, and  receive his
       commands' (the 'Tale of Adanel' p. 347).                               
          This first version was  rejected and  set aside,  and at  some later
       stage my father noted on  the typescript:  'The rest  of the  notes and
       the  conclusion  of  the  legend  of  Melkor's  Deception  seems  lost.
       The full copy  was sent  to Mrs.  E. J.  Neave (my  aunt) in  Wales not
       long  before  her  death.  It  seems never  to have  come back.  Lost -
       or  destroyed  by  her  hasty  executors?'  Then  afterwards  he  noted
       against  this  that  the  complete  text  of the  Notes and  the legend
       (the  'Tale  of  Adanel')  had been  found. The  keeping of  his papers
       in separate places for fear of loss led to such distresses in his later
       years.  -  Jane  Neave  died  in   1963;  see   the  Note   on  Dating,
       p. 300.                                                                
  24.  With  the   names  Lindar   'Singers'  of   the  Teleri   and  Tareldar
       'High-elves'  cf.  the  Index  to  The  Silmarillion,  entries  Teleri,
       Eldar.                                                                 
  25.  It  is  notable  that  the  old  form  Melko  is   given  here   as  an
       alternative form.                                                      
  26.  See  p.101 note 2.
  27.  melk-:  this  stem  was   first  written   with  two   vowels,  perhaps
       melek-, but the second vowel seems to have been inked out.             
  28.  Saelon: replaced by Saelind ('Wise-heart'), p. 305.                    
  29.  Cf. the words of the Voice of Eru in the 'Tale of Adanel', p. 347.     
  30.  The meaning is:  'though we  speak in  uncertainty of  what it  is that
       "indwells" '.                                                          
  31.  Cf. the footnote at the end of Laws and Customs, p. 250.              

                                   APPENDIX.                                
                                                                           
                       'The Converse of Manwe and Eru'                      
                and later conceptions of Elvish reincarnation.              
                                                                           
 The statement  at the  beginning of  Note 3  (p. 339)  that 'in  Elvish tra-
 dition  their  re-incarnation  was a  special permission  granted by  Eru to
 Manwe,  when  Manwe  directly  consulted  Him  at  the  time  of  the debate
 concerning  Finwe  and  Miriel'  seems  very  strange in  the light  of Laws
 and  Customs  among  the  Eldar,  where  it   was  stated   very  explicitly
 (p. 221) that 'A houseless fea  that chose  or was  permitted to  return to
 life re-entered  the incarnate  world through  child-birth. Only  thus could
 it return' (to which such 'a rare and strange case' as  that of  Miriel, who
 was  'rehoused  in  her  own  body',  is  noted as  the only  exception). In
 Laws  and  Customs  it  is  a  presupposition  of  the  whole   matter  that
 Miriel  might  in  the  nature  of things  return from  death if  she would;
 thus Ulmo said  in the  Debate of  the Valar  that 'the  fea of  Miriel may
 have departed by  necessity, but  it departed  in the  will not  to return',
 and that 'therein   was her fault' (p. 242). It cannot be thought  that Laws
 and  Customs  was  written  on  the  basis  that  rebirth was  only 'granted
 as a special permission'  by Eru  to Manwe  'at the  time of  the debate
 concerning  Finwe  and  Miriel',  an  idea  of  which  there  is no  hint or
 suggestion in that work.                                                   
  The  explanation  of  this  is  that   after  the   writing  of   Laws  and
 Customs  my  father's  views  concerning  the  fate  of  Elves who  had died
 underwent  a  radical  change,  and  the passage  cited from  Note 3  to the
 Commentary on the Athrabeth does not in fact refer to 'rebirth' at all.
  There  exists  a  text  entitled  The  Converse  of  Manwe  and  Eru, which
 followed   Laws   and   Customs   but   preceded   the  Commentary   on  the
 Athrabeth.  This  work  (in typescript)  was planned  as twofold,  the first
 part  being  the  questions  of  Manwe  and  the  replies  of  Eru,  and the
 second  an  elaborate  philosophical  discussion  of  the  significance  and
 implications;  but  it  was  abandoned  before  it   was  finished,   and  a
 second,  more  ample  version  of  the  'Converse' was  given up  after only
 a couple  of pages.  I give  the first  part, the  'Converse', only,  in the
 original shorter recension.                                                
                                                                           
 Manwe   spoke   to   Eru,  saying:   'Behold!  an   evil  appears   in  Arda
 that  we  did  not  look   for:  the   First-born  Children,   whom  Thou
 madest   immortal,   suffer   now   severance   of   spirit   and  body.
 Many   of   the   fear   of   the   Elves   in   Middle-earth   are  now
 houseless;   and   even   in   Aman   there   is   one.  The   houseless  we
 summon  to  Aman,  to  keep  them   from  the   Darkness,  and   all  who
 hear  our  voice  abide  here  in waiting.  What further  is to  be done?
 Is there   no  means   by  which   their  lives   may  be   renewed,  to

 follow   the  courses   which  Thou   hast  designed?   And  what   of  the
 bereaved who mourn those that have gone?'                                  
   Eru answered: 'Let the houseless be re-housed! '                         
   Manwe asked: 'How shall this be done?'                                  
   Eru   answered:   'Let   the   body  that   was  destroyed   be  re-made.
 Or let the naked fea be re-born as a child.'                              
   Manwe   said:   'Is   it   Thy   will  that   we  should   attempt  these
 things? For we fear to meddle with Thy Children.'                          
   Eru  answered:  Have  I  not  given  to  the  Valar  the  rule  of  Arda,
 and  power  over  all  the  substance thereof,  to shape  it at  their will
 under  My  will?  Ye   have  not   been  backward   in  these   things.  As
 for   my  First-born,   have  ye   not  removed   great  numbers   of  them
 to Aman from the Middle-earth in which I set them?'                        
   Manwe   answered:   'This   we   have   done,   for   fear   of   Melcor,
 and  with  good  intent,  though   not  without   misgiving.  But   to  use
 our   power   upon   the   flesh   that  Thou   hast  designed,   to  house
 the   spirits   of   Thy  Children,   this  seems   a  matter   beyond  our
 authority, even were it not beyond our skill.'                             
   Eru  said:  'I  give you  authority. The  skills ye  have already,  if ye
 will  take  heed.  Look  and  ye  will   find  that   each  spirit   of  My
 Children  retaineth  in  itself  the  full  imprint   and  memory   of  its
 former  house;  and  in  its  nakedness  it  is  open  to  you, so  that ye
 may  clearly  perceive  all  that  is  in  it.  After  this imprint  ye may
 make  for it  again such  a house  in all  particulars as  it had  ere evil
 befell it. Thus ye may send it back to the lands of the Living.'           
   Then    Manwe    asked    further:   '0    Iluvatar,   hast    Thou   not
 spoken   also   of   re-birth?   Is   that   too   within  our   power  and
 authority? '                                                               
   Eru  answered:  'It  shall  be  within  your  authority,  but  it  is not
 in  your  power.  Those  whom  ye  judge  fit  to   be  re-born,   if  they
 desire   it   and   understand   clearly   what   they   incur,   ye  shall
 surrender to Me; and I will consider them.'                                
                                                                           
   It  will  be  seen  that  wholly new  dimensions to  the question  of the
 return  of  the Dead  to the  Living had  now entered.  My father  had come
 to  think  that  before  the  death  of  Miriel  there  had never  been any
 're-housing' of the fear of the Dead, and that it was  only in  response to
 the  appeal  of  Manwe  that  Eru  decreed  such  a  possibility   and  the
 modes  by  which  it  might  be  brought  about.  One  such  mode   is  the
 rebirth of the fea as a child, but such of the Dead as desire it are to be
 surrendered  to  Eru  to  await  His  judgement  in  their case.  The other
 mode is the making, by the Valar, of 'such  a house  in all  particulars as
 it  had  ere  evil  befell it':  the reincarnation  of the  Dead in  a hroa

                                         
                                                                          
 identical to that  which death  had overtaken.  The long  discussion that
 follows  the  'Converse'  is  very  largely concerned  with the  ideas of
 'identity' and 'equivalence' in relation to  this form  of reincarnation,
 represented as a commentary by Eldarin loremasters.                       
                                                                          
  A  hastily  written  manuscript  on  small  slips  of   paper,  entitled
 'Reincarnation of Elves', seems to  show my  father's reflections  on the
 subject  between  the  abandonment  of  The  Converse  of  Manwe  and Eru
 and  the  Commentary  on the  Athrabeth. In  this discussion  he referred
 in rapid and  elliptical expression  to the  difficulties at  every level
 (including practical and psychological) in the idea of  the reincarnation
 of the fea as the newborn child of second  parents, who  as it  grows up
 recaptures the memory of its  previous life:  'the most  fatal objection'
 being  that 'it  contradicts the  fundamental notion  that fea  and hroa
 were each fitted to the other: since hroar have  a physical  descent, the
 body of rebirth, having different parents, must  be different',  and this
 must be a condition of pain to the reborn fea.                            
  He  was  here  abandoning,  and  for  good,  the  long-rooted conception
 (see  pp.  265  - 7)  of rebirth  as the  mode by  which the  Elves might
 return  to  incarnate  life:  from  his  scrutiny  of the  mythical idea,
 questioning its validity in the terms he had adopted, it had come to seem
 to him a  serious flaw  in the  metaphysic of  Elvish existence.  But, he
 said, it was a 'dilemma', for the  reincarnation of  the Elves  'seems an
 essential element in the tales'. 'The only solution,' he decided  in this
 discussion, was the idea of the remaking  in identical  form of  the hroa
 of the Dead in the  manner declared  by Eru  in The  Converse of  Manu e'
 and Eru: the fea retains a memory, an imprint, of  its hroa,  its 'former
 house', so powerful and precise that the  reconstruction of  an identical
 body can proceed from it.                                                 
  The   idea   of   a   'Converse'   between   Manwe   and  Eru   was  not
 abandoned, and is  indeed referred  to in  'Reincarnation of  Elves' (but
 the 'Converse' as given above must have  been in  existence, since  in it
 Eru expressly  declares rebirth  to be  a mode  of reincarnation  open to
 the 'houseless' fea, whereas in the present discussion  such an  idea is
 firmly  rejected  and  allowed  no place  in 'the  only solution'  to the
 'dilemma').  The  new conception  proceeds, in  outline, as  follows. The
 Music  of the  Ainur had  contained no  prevision of  the death  of Elves
 and the existence  of their  'houseless' fear,  since according  to their
 nature  they were  to be  immortal within  the life  of Arda.  There were
 many such fear of Elves  who had  died in  Middle-earth gathered  in the
 Halls of Mandos, but it was not until the  death of  Miriel in  Aman that
 Manwe appealed directly to Eru  for counsel.  Eru 'accepted  and ratified
 the position' - though making  it plain  to Manwe  that the  Valar should
 have contested Melkor's  domination of  Middle-earth far  earlier, and
 that they had lacked estel: they should have trusted that in a legitimate
 war Eru  would not  have permitted  Melkor so  greatly to  damage Arda

  that the  Children could  not come,  or could  not inhabit  it (cf.  LQ $20,
  p. 161:  'And Manwe  said to  the Valar:  "This is  the counsel  of Iluvatar
  in  my  heart:  that  we  should  take  up  again  the  mastery of  Arda, at
  whatsoever   cost,   and   deliver   the   Quendi   from   the   shadows  of
  Melkor."  Then  Tulkas  was  glad;  but  Aule  was grieved,  and it  is said
  '.hat  he (and  others of  the Valar)  had before  been unwilling  to strive
  with  Melkor,  foreboding  the hurts  of the  world that  must come  of that
  strife').                                                                   
    It is then said that 'the  fear of  the Dead  all go  to Mandos  in Aman:
  or  rather  they  are  now  summoned  thither  by  the  authority  given  by
  Eru.  A place  is made  for them.'  This appears  to mean  that it  was only
  now  that  Mandos  was  empowered  to  summon  the   spirits  of   the  Dead
  to  Aman;  but  the  following words  'A place  is made  for them'  are hard
  to  understand,  since  they seem  to deny  even that  the Halls  of Waiting
  existed  before  Manwe  spoke  to  Eru  (despite  the  statement  earlier in
  'Reincarnation  of  Elves'  that  there were  many houseless  fear gathered
  in Mandos before the 'Converse' took place).                                
    The  Valar  are  now  given  the  authority  to  reincarnate the  fear of
  Elves who have died  in hroar  identical to  those they  have lost;  and the
  text  continues:   The  re-housed   fea  will   normally  remain   in  Aman.
  Only  in  very  exceptional  cases,  as  Beren  and  Luthien,  will  they be
  transported   back   to   Middle-earth....   Hence  death   in  Middle-earth
  had  much  of  the  same  sort  of  sorrow  and  sunderance  for  Elves  and
  Men.  But,  as  Andreth  saw,  the  certainty  of  living  again  and  doing
  things in incarnate  form made  a vital  difference to  death as  a personal
  terror' (cf. the Athrabeth p. 311).                                         
    In  what  appears  to   be  a   second  thought   my  father   then  asked
  whether  it  might  not  be possible  that the  'houseless' fea  was itself
  allowed  (being  instructed)  to  rebuild  its  hroa  from  its  memory (and
  this, as appears from very  late writing  on the  subject of  the reincarna-
  tion  of Glorfindel  of Gondolin,  became his  firm and  stable view  of the
  matter).  He  wrote  here:  'Memory  by  a fea  of experience  is evidently
  powerful,  vivid,  and  complete.  So  the  underlying  conception  is  that
  "matter"  will  be  taken  up  into  "spirit",  by  becoming  part   of  its
  knowledge  -  and  so  rendered  timeless  and  under  the  spirit's com-
  mand.   As   the   Elves   remaining   in  Middle-earth   slowly  "consumed"
  their  bodies  -  or  made  them  into  raiments  of  memory?  The resurrec-
  tion of the body (at least as far as Elves  were concerned)  was in  a sense
  incorporeal. But while it could pass physical barriers at will, it  could at
  will  oppose a  barrier to  matter. If  you touched  a resurrected  body you
  felt it. Or if it willed it could simply elude you - disappear. Its position
  in space was at will.'                                                      
                                                                             
    Neither in the passage on the subject of reincarnation in the             
  Commentary on the Athrabeth (p. 331, $6) nor in the Note 3 that             
  refers to it (p.  339) is  there any  mention of  rebirth; while  the latter

  very evidently echoes the words of  'Resurrection of  Elves'. Thus  it is
  strongly implied in Note 3, if not expressly stated, that it was  only at
  the  time  of  Manwe  s  speech  with  Eru  that  Mandos  was  given the
  power actually to  summon the  fear of  the Dead;  and the  passage that
  follows this in the Note is closely similar to what is said in 'Resurrec-
  tion of Elves':                                                          
    They were given the  choice to  remain houseless,  or (if  they wished)
  to  be  re-housed  in  the  same  form  and  shape   as  they   had  had.
  Normally  they  must  nonetheless  remain  in  Aman.  Therefore,  if they
  dwelt  in Middle-earth,  their bereavement  of friends  and kin,  and the
  bereavement   of   these,  was   not  amended.   Death  was   not  wholly
  healed.  But  as  Andreth  saw, this  certitude concerning  their immedi-
  ate  future  after  death,  and  the  knowledge  that  at the  least they
  would  again  if  they  wished  be  able  as  incarnates  to do  and make
  things  and  continue  their  experience  of  Arda,  made  death  to  the
  Elves a totally different thing from death as it appeared to Men.        
                                                                          
    An  interesting  point  in  respect  of  the chronology  of composition
  arises from  the remark  found both  in 'Reincarnation  of Elves'  and in
  Note  3  to  the  Commentary  that  death  for  Elves  and death  for Men
  were very different things 'as Andreth  saw'. Thus  the Athrabeth  was in
  existence  when  'Reincarnation  of  Elves'  was  written;  but  the Com-
  mentary  followed  'Reincarnation'.  This   seems  clear   evidence  that
  there  was  an  interval  between  the  writing of  the actual  Debate of
  Finrod and Andreth and the writing of the Commentary on it.              

                                                                          
                                                                          
    One  further  passage  in  'Reincarnation  of  Elves'  should  be  men-
 tioned. In a sort of aside from the  course of  his thoughts,  moving more
 rapidly (even) than his  pen, my  father remarked  that 'the  exact nature
 of existence  in Aman  or Eressea  after their  "removal" must  be dubious
 and  unexplained',  as  must  the  question  of  'how  "mortals"  could go
 there at all'. On this he observed  that Eru  had 'long  before' committed
 the  Dead of  mortals also  to Mandos;  cf. QS  $86 (V.247):  'What befell
 their spirits after death the Elves know not. Some say that they too go
 to the halls of Mandos; but their place of  waiting there  is not  that of
 the   Elves;   and   Mandos   under  Iluvatar   alone  save   Manwe  knows
 whither  they  go after  the time  of recollection  in those  silent halls
 beside  the  Western  Sea.  The  sojourn   of  Frodo   (he  went   on)  in
 Eressea  -  then  on  to  Mandos?  - was  only an  extended form  of this.
 Frodo would eventually leave the world (desiring  to do  so). So  that the
 sailing in ship was equivalent to death.'                                 
   With this may be  contrasted what  he wrote  at the  end of  his account
 of The Lord of the Rings in  his letter  to Milton  Waldman of  1951 (a
 passage omitted in Letters but printed in IX.132):                        
   To Bilbo and Frodo the special  grace is  granted to  go with  the Elves
 they loved - an  Arthurian ending,  in which  it is,  of course,  not made

  explicit whether this is an 'allegory' of  death, or  a mode  of healing
  and restoration leading to a return.                                   
 In his letter  to Naomi  Mitchison of  September 1954  (Letters no.154),
 however, he said:
  ... the mythical idea underlying is that for mortals, since their 'kind'
  cannot be changed for ever, this  is strictly  only a  temporary reward:
  a healing  and redress  of suffering.  They cannot  abide for  ever, and
  though they cannot return to  mortal earth,  they can  and will  'die' -
  of free will, and leave the world. (In this setting the return of Arthur
  would be quite impossible, a vain imagining.)                           
  And much later, in a draft letter of 1963 (Letters no.246), he wrote:
  Frodo  was sent  or allowed  to pass  over Sea  to heal  him -  if that
  could  be  done,  before  he  died.  He would  have eventually  to 'pass
  away':  no mortal  could, or  can, abide  for ever  on earth,  or within
  Time. So he went both to a purgatory  and to  a reward,  for a  while: a
  period of  reflection and  peace and  a gaining  of a  truer understand-
  ing of his position in littleness and in greatness, spent still  in Time
  amid  the  natural  beauty of  'Arda Unmarred',  the Earth  unspoiled by
  evil.                                                                   
