  PART FIVE.
           
    MYTHS
 TRANSFORMED.

                              MYTHS TRANSFORMED.                            
                                                                          
 In this last section of the book I  give a  number of  late writings  of my
 father's,  various  in  nature  but concerned  with, broadly  speaking, the
 reinterpretation  of  central  elements  in  the 'mythology'  (or legendar-
 ium as he called it) to accord with the imperatives  of a  greatly modified
 underlying   conception.   Some   of  these   papers  (there   are  notable
 exceptions)  offer  exceptional  difficulty:  fluidity of  ideas, ambiguous
 and allusive expression, illegible  passages. But  the greatest  problem is
 that there is very little firm indication of date external or  relative: to
 order  them  into  even  an  approximate  sequence  of   composition  seems
 impossible  (though  I believe  that virtually  all of  them come  from the
 years  that  saw  the  writing  of  Laws  and  Customs  among   the  Eldar,
 the Athrabeth, and late  revisions of  parts of  the Quenta  Silmarillion -
 the late 1950s, in  the aftermath  of the  publication of  The Lord  of the
 Rings).                                                                   
 i'.  In  these  writings can  be read  the record  of a  prolonged interior
 debate.  Years  before  this  time,  the  first  signs  have  been  seen of
 emerging  ideas  that  if pursued  would cause  massive disturbance  in The
 Silmarillion:  I  have  shown,  as  I  believe, that  when my  father first
 began to  revise and  rewrite the  existing narratives  of the  Elder Days,
 before The  Lord of  the Rings  was completed,  he wrote  a version  of the
 Ainulindale  that  introduced  a  radical  transformation  of   the  astro-
 nomical myth, but that for that time he stayed his  hand (pp.  3 -  6, 43).
 But now, as  will be  seen in  many of  the essays  and notes  that follow,
 he had come to  believe that  such a  vast upheaval  was a  necessity, that
 the  cosmos of  the old  myth was  no longer  valid; and  at the  same time
 he  was  impelled  to  try  to  construct  a  more secure  'theoretical' or
 'systematic' basis  for elements  in the  legendarium that  were not  to be
 dislodged.  With  their  questionings,  their  certainties  giving  way  to
 doubt,  their  contradictory  resolutions,  these writings  are to  be read
 with a sense of intellectual  and imaginative  stress in  the face  of such
 a  dismantling  and reconstitution,  believed to  be an  inescapable neces-
 sity, but never to be achieved.                                           
                                                                          
  The  texts,  arranged  in  a  very  loose  'thematic'  sequence,  are num-
 bered  in Roman  numerals. Almost  all have  received very  minor editing
 (matters  of  punctuation,  insertion of  omitted words,  and suchlike).
 Numbered notes (not present in all cases) follow the individual texts.

                                    I.
                                                                        
 I give first a short statement written on two slips found pinned  to one
 of  the  typescripts  of  the  Annals of  Aman, which  would date  it to
 1958  or  later  (if my  general conclusions  about dating  are correct,
 p. 300).                                                                
                                                                        
 This  descends  from  the  oldest   forms  of   the  mythology   -  when
 it  was  still   intended  to   be  no   more  than   another  primitive
 mythology,   though   more   coherent   and   less   'savage'.   It  was
 consequently   a  'Flat   Earth'  cosmogony   (much  easier   to  manage
 anyway): the Matter of Numenor had not been devised.                    
    It  is  now  clear  to  me  that  in  any  case  the  Mythology  must
 actually  be  a  'Mannish' affair.  (Men are  really only  interested in
 Men  and  in  Men's  ideas  and  visions.)  The  High  Eldar  living and
 being  tutored  by  the  demiurgic  beings  must   have  known,   or  at
 least  their  writers  and  loremasters  must  have  known,  the 'truth'
 (according  to  their  measure  of  understanding).  What  we   have  in
 the  Silmarillion  etc.  are  traditions  (especially  personalized, and
 centred   upon   actors,   such  as   Feanor)  handed   on  by   Men  in
 Numenor   and   later   in   Middle-earth   (Arnor   and   Gondor);  but
 already  far  back  -  from  the  first  association  of   the  Dunedain
 and   Elf-friends   with   the   Eldar  in   Beleriand  -   blended  and
 confused with their own Mannish myths and cosmic ideas.                 
    At   that  point   (in  reconsideration   of  the   early  cosmogonic
 parts)  I  was  inclined   to  adhere   to  the   Flat  Earth   and  the
 astronomically  absurd   business  of   the  making   of  the   Sun  and
 Moon.  But  you  can  make  up  stories  of  that  kind  when  you  live
 among    people   who    have   the    same   general    background   of
 imagination,  when  the  Sun  'really'  rises  in  the  East   and  goes
 down   in  the   West,  etc.   When  however   (no  matter   how  little
 most  people  know  or  think  about  astronomy)   it  is   the  general
 belief that  we live  upon a  'spherical' island  in 'Space'  you cannot
 do this any more.                                                       
    One  loses,  of  course,  the  dramatic  impact  of  such  things  as
 the  first  'incarnates'  waking  in  a  starlit world  - or  the coming
 of  the  High  Elves  to  Middle-earth  and  unfurling their  banners at
 the first rising of the Moon.                                           
                                                                        
    I have given this first, because - though jotted down at great speed-
 it is an express statement of my father's views at this time, in three,
 major respects. The astronomical myths of the Elder Days cannot be      
 regarded as a record of the traditional beliefs of the Eldar in any pure
 form, because the High-elves of Aman cannot have been thus              

  ignorant;  and  the   cosmological  elements   in  The   Silmarillion  are
  essentially a record of mythological ideas, complex in  origin, prevailing
  among Men.(1) In this note, however,  my father  appears to  have accepted
  that these ideas do not in themselves necessarily  lead to  great upheaval
  in  the  essential  'world-structure' of  The  Silmarillion,  but  on  the
  contrary  provide a  basis for  its retention  ('At that  point ...  I was
  inclined  to  adhere to  the Flat  Earth'). The  conclusion of  this brief
  statement  appears  then  to  be  a  further  and  unconnected  step: that
  the cosmological myth of The Silmarillion  was a  'creative error'  on the
  part of its maker, since  it could  have no  imaginative truth  for people
  who know very well that such an 'astronomy' is delusory.                  
    As  he  stated  it,  this  may  seem  to  be  an  argument  of  the most
  doubtful  nature,  raising indeed  the question,  why is  the myth  of the
  Two  Trees (which  so far  as record  goes he  never showed  any intention
  to  abandon) more  acceptable than  that of  the creation  of the  Sun and
  the Moon from the last  fruit and  flower of  the Trees  as they  died? Or
  indeed, if this is true, how can it be acceptable that the Evening Star is
  the Silmaril cut by Beren from Morgoth's crown?                           
    It is at any rate clear, for he stated it unambiguously enough,  that he
  had come to believe that the art  of the  'Sub-creator' cannot,  or should
  not attempt to, extend  to the  'mythical' revelation  of a  conception of
  the shape of the Earth and the origin of  the lights  of heaven  that runs
  counter  to the  known physical  truths of  his own  days: 'You  cannot do
  this  any  more'.  And  this   opinion  is   rendered  more   complex  and
  difficult  of  discussion  by  the  rise  in  importance  of  the  Eldarin
  'loremasters'  of  Aman,  whose  intellectual  attainments  and  knowledge
  must  preclude  any  idea that  a 'false'  astronomy could  have prevailed
  among them. It seems  to me  that he  was devising  - from  within it  - a
  fearful weapon against his own creation.                                  
    In this brief  text he  wrote scornfully  of 'the  astronomically absurd
  business of the making of the Sun and Moon'. I think  it possible  that it
  was the actual nature of this myth that led him finally to abandon  it. It
  is  in  conception  beautiful,  and  not  absurd;  but  it  is exceedingly
  'primitive'. Of the original 'Tale of  the Sun  and Moon'  in The  Book of
  Lost Tales I wrote (1.201):                                               
      As a result of this fullness and intensity of description,  the origin
  of the Sun and Moon in the last  fruit and  last flower  of the  Trees has
  less  of  mystery  than  in  the  succinct and  beautiful language  of The
  Silmarillion;  but  also much  is said  here to  emphasize the  great size
  of the 'Fruit of Noon', and  the increase  in the  heat and  brilliance of
  the Sunship after its launching, so that the reflection rises less readily
  that if the Sun that  brilliantly illumines  the whole  Earth was  but one
  fruit  of  Laurelin  then  Valinor  must  have  been painfully  bright and
  hot in the days of the Trees. In the early story  the last  outpourings of
  life  from  the  dying  Trees  are utterly  strange and  'enormous', those
  of   Laurelin   portentous,   even  ominous;   the  Sun   is  astoundingly

  bright  and  hot  even  to the  Valar, who  are awestruck  and disquieted
  by  what  has been  done (the  Gods knew  'that they  had done  a greater
  thing than they at first knew'); and  the anger  and distress  of certain
  of the Valar at the burning light of  the Sun  enforces the  feeling that
  in the last fruit of Laurelin a  terrible and  unforeseen power  has been
  released.                                                               
 As  the  Quenta  Silmarillion  evolved  and  changed  the  myth  had been
 diminished in the scale  and energy  of its  presentation; indeed  in the
 final form of the chapter,  and in  the Annals  of Aman,  the description
 of the actual origin of the Sun and Moon is reduced to a few lines.      
  Yet  even  as  hope  failed  and  her  song faltered,  behold! Telperion
 bore  at  last  upon a  leafless bough  one great  flower of  silver, and
 Laurelin a single fruit of gold.                                         
    These  Yavanna  took,  and  then  the Trees  died, and  their lifeless
 stems  stand  yet  in  Valinor,  a  memorial  of  vanished  joy.  But the
 flower  and  fruit  Yavanna  gave  to  Aule,  and  Manwe  hallowed  them;
 and  Aule  and  his folk  made vessels  to hold  them and  preserve their
 radiance, as is said  in the  Narsilion, the  Song of  the Sun  and Moon.
 These  vessels  the  gods  gave to  Varda, that  they might  become lamps
 of heaven, outshining the ancient stars...                               
 The  grave  and  tranquil  words  cannot entirely  suppress a  sense that
 there  emerges  here  an  outcropping,  as  it  were,  uneroded,  from an
 older level, more fantastic, more bizarre.  As indeed  it does:  such was
 the nature of the work, evolved over so many years. But it did  not stand
 in the work  as an  isolated myth,  a now  gratuitous element  that could
 be excised; for bound up  with it  was the  myth of  the Two  Trees ('the
 Elder  Sun and  Moon'), giving  light through  long ages  to the  land of
 Valinor,  while  Middle-earth  lay  in  darkness,  illumined only  by the
 stars in the firmament of  Arda. In  that darkness  the Elves  awoke, the
 People of the Stars; and after the death of the  Trees the  ancient Light
 was  preserved  only  in  the Silmarils.  In 1951  my father  had written
 (Letters no.131, p. 148):                                                
  There  was  the  Light  of  Valinor  made  visible in  the Two  Trees of
 Silver  and  Gold.  These  were  slain by  the Enemy  out of  malice, and
 Valinor  was  darkened,  though  from  them,   ere  they   died  utterly,
 were  derived  the  lights  of Sun  and Moon.  (A marked  difference here
 between these legends and most others  is that  the Sun  is not  a divine
 symbol, but a second-best thing, and the  'light of  the Sun'  (the world
 under  the  sun)  become  terms  for  a  fallen  world, and  a dislocated
 imperfect vision.)                                                       
 But: 'You cannot do this any more.' In the following  pages will  be seen
 how,  driven  by  this  conviction,  he  attempted  to  undo what  he had
 done, but to retain what he might. It is remarkable that he never at this
 time seems to have felt that what he said in  this present  note provided
 a resolution of the problem that he believed to exist:                   

  
                                                                          
     What we  have in  the Silmarillion  etc. are  traditions... handed  on by
     Men  in   Numenor  and   later  in   Middle-earth  (Arnor   and  Gondor);
     but  already  far  back  -  from  the first  association of  the Dunedain
     and  Elf-friends  with  the  Eldar  in Beleriand  - blended  and confused
     with their own Mannish myths and cosmic ideas.                        
                                                                          
     It is tempting to suppose that when my father wrote that 'in          
  reconsideration  of  the  early  cosmogonic  parts'  he was  'inclined to
  adhere to the Flat Earth and  the astronomically  absurd business  of the
  making  of the  Sun and  Moon', he  was referring  to Ainulindale'  C and
  the  Annals  of  Aman.  If  this  were  so,  it  might  account  for  the
  developments  in  Ainulindale'  C  discussed on  pp. 27  - 9,  where Arda
  becomes a small world within the vastness of Ea -  but retains  the 'Flat
  Earth' characteristics of Ilu from the Ambarkanta and before.            
                                                                          
     In  connection  with  my father's  statement that  the legends  of The
  Silmarillion  were  traditions  handed  on  by Men  in Numenor  and later
  in  the  Numenorean  kingdoms  in  Middle-earth,  this  is  a  convenient
  place to give an entirely isolated note carefully typed  (but not  on his
  later typewriter) on a small slip and headed 'Memorandum'.               
                                                                          
     The   three   Great   Tales   must   be   Numenorean,   and   derived
  from   matter   preserved   in   Gondor.   They   were   part   of   the
  Atanatarion   (or   the   Legendarium   of   the   Fathers    of   Men).
  ?Sindarin Nern in Edenedair (or In Adanath).                             
     They   are   (1)   Narn  Beren   ion   Barahir   also   called  Narn
  e-Dinuviel (Tale of the Nightingale)                                     
             (2)    Narn   e-mbar    Hador    containing     (a)    Narn
  i  Chin  Hurin  (or  Narn e-'Rach   Morgoth  Tale   of  the   Curse  of
  Morgoth);   and   (b)   Narn  en   El   (or   Narn e-Dant   Gondolin  ar
  Orthad en El)                                                            
     Should not these be given as Appendices to the Silmarillion?          
                                                                          
  In  the  question  with  which  this  ends   my  father   was  presumably
  distinguishing  between  long  and  short  forms  of  the  tales.  -  Two
  further notes on this slip, typed at the same time as the above, refer to
  'the Tale of Turin' and suggest that he was working on it at  that time.(2)
  I do not know of any precise evidence  to date  the great  development of
  the 'Turin Saga', but it certainly belongs to an earlier period  than the
  writings given in the latter part of this book.                          
     The idea  that the  legends of  the Elder  Days derived  from Numenor-
  ean  tradition appears  also in  the abandoned  typescript (AAm')  of the
  Annals of Aman that  my father  made himself (p. 64).(3) In this text the
  preamble states:                                                         
                                                                          
           Here begin the 'Annals of Aman'. Rumil made them in the Elder
           Days, and they were held in memory by the Exiles. Those parts

                       
                                                                 
     which we learned and remembered were thus set down in Numenor
     before the Shadow fell upon it.                              

                            NOTES.                                      
                                                                       
  1. Very similar remarks are made in Note 2 to the Commentary on
     the Athrabeth (p. 337):
       Physically Arda was what we should call the Solar System.
       Presumably the Eldar could have had as much and as accurate
       information concerning this, its structure, origin, and its relation
       to the rest of Ea as they could comprehend.
     A little further on in this same Note it is said:
       The traditions here referred to have come down from the Eldar
       of the First Age, through Elves who never were directly ac-
       quainted with the Valar, and through Men who received 'lore'
       from the Elves, but who had myths and cosmogonic legends, and
       astronomical guesses, of their own. There is, however, nothing in
       them that seriously conflicts with present human notions of the
       Solar System, and its size and position relative to the Universe.
     The sentence which I have italicised suggests an assured commit-
     ment, at the least, to the re-formation of the old cosmology. - For
     references in the Commentary on the Athrabeth to the Numenorean
     part in the transmission of legends of the Elder Days see
     pp. 342, 344, 360.
  2. These are a proposal that Niniel (Nienor) should 'in her looks and
     ways' remind Turin of Lalaeth, his sister who died in childhood
     (see Unfinished Tales p. 147 note 7), and another, marked with a
     query, that Turin should think of the words of Saeros, the Elf of
     Doriath, when he finds Niniel naked in the eaves of the Forest
     of Brethil (Unfinished Tales pp. 80, 122).
       On the back of this slip my father wrote (in a furious scribble in
     ball-point pen):
       The cosmogonic myths are Numenorean, blending Elven-lore
       with human myth and imagination. A note should say that the
       Wise of Numenor recorded that the making of stars was not so,
       nor of Sun and Moon. For Sun and stars were all older than
       Arda. But the placing of Arda amidst stars and under the
       [?guard] of the Sun was due to Manwe and Varda before
       the assault of Melkor.
     I take the words 'the Wise of Numenor recorded that the making
     of stars was not so, nor of Sun and Moon' to mean that the
     making of the Sun, Moon and stars was not derived from 'Elven-
     lore'. It is to be noted that Arda here means 'the Earth', not 'the
     Solar System'.
  3. I have said (p. 64) that I would be inclined to place AAm* with the

                                                            
                                                                           
    writing of the original manuscript of the Annals rather than to            
    some later time, but this is no more than a guess.
                         
                                 II.                                       

 This is  a text  of a  most problematic  nature, a  manuscript in  ink that
 falls  into  two  parts  which  are  plainly  very  closely  associated:  a
 discussion,  with  proposals  for  the  'regeneration'  of  the  mythology;
 and an abandoned narrative. Neither has title or heading.                  
                                                                           
 The   Making   of   the   Sun  and   Moon  must   occur  long   before  the
 coming  of  the  Elves;  and  cannot  be  made  to  be  after the  death of
 the   Two   Trees  -   if  that   occurred  in   any  connexion   with  the
 sojourn  of  the  Noldor  in  Valinor.  The  time  allowed  is  too  short.
 Neither  could  there  be  woods  and  flowers  &c.  on  earth,  if  there
 had been no light since the overthrow of the Lamps!(1)                     
 But how can, nonetheless, the Eldar be called the 'Star-folk'?             
 Since   the   Eldar   are   supposed   to   be   wiser   and   have   truer
 knowledge  of  the  history  and  nature   of  the   Earth  than   Men  (or
 than  Wild  Elves),  their  legends  should  have  a  closer   relation  to
 the  knowledge  now  possessed  of  at   least  the   form  of   the  Solar
 System   (=   Kingdom   of   Arda);(2) though it   need  not,   of  course,
 follow any 'scientific' theory of its making or development.               
 It    therefore    seems    clear    that    the    cosmogonic    mythology
 should  represent  Arda  as  it is,  more or  less: an  island in  the void
 'amidst   the   innumerable  stars'.   The  Sun   should  be   coeval  with
 Earth,   though   its  relative   size  need   not  be   considered,  while
 the   apparent   revolution   of   the   Sun  about   the  Earth   will  be
 accepted.*                                                                 
 The   Stars,   therefore,   in   general   will   be   other   and  remoter
 parts  of  the  Great  Tale  of  Ea,  which  do  not  concern the  Valar of
 Arda.  Though,  even  if  not   explicitly,  it   will  be   an  underlying
 assumption   that   the  Kingdom   of  Arda   is  of   central  importance,
 selected  amid  all  the  immeasurable  vast  of  Ea   as  the   scene  for
 the  main  drama  of  the  conflict  of  Melkor  with  Iluvatar,   and  the
 Children   of   Eru.   Melkor   is   the  supreme   spirit  of   Pride  and
 Revolt,  not  just  the  chief  Vala  of  the  Earth,  who  has  turned  to
 evil.(3)                                                                   
                                                                           
 (* [marginal note] It is or would be in any case  a 'fact  of life'  for any
 intelligence that chose the Earth for a place of life and labour. [There is
 no indication  where this  is to  go, but  nowhere else  on the  page seems
 suitable.])                                                                

   Varda,  therefore,  as one  of the  great Valar  of Arda,  cannot be
 said to have 'kindled'  the stars,  as an  original subcreative  act -
 not at least the stars in general.(4)                                 
   The  Story,  it  seems,  should  follow  such  a  line as  this. The
 entry  of  the  Valar  into  Ea   at  the   beginning  of   Time.  The
 choosing  of  the  Kingdom  of  Arda  as  their  chief  abiding  place
 (?  by  the  highest  and  noblest  of  the  Ainur,(5) to whom Iluvatar
 had  intended  to  commit  the  care  of the  Eruhini). Manwe  and his
 companions  elude  Melkor  and  begin  the   ordering  of   Arda,  but
 Melkor  seeks  for  them  and  at  last finds  Arda,(6) and contests the
 kingship with Manwe.                                                  
   This  period   will,  roughly,   correspond  to   supposed  primeval
 epochs   before   Earth  became   habitable.  A   time  of   fire  and
 cataclysm.  Melkor  disarrayed  the  Sun  so  that  at periods  it was
 too  hot,  and  at  others  too  cold.  Whether  this  was due  to the
 state of the Sun, or alterations in the  orbit of  Earth, need  not be
 made precise: both are possible.                                      
   But after  a battle  Melkor is  driven out  from Earth  itself. (The
 First  Battle?)  He finds  he can  only come  there in  great secrecy.
 At  this  time  he begins  first to  turn most  to cold  and darkness.
 His  first  desire  (and weapon)  had been  fire and  heat. It  was in
 the  wielding  of flame  that Tulkas  (? originally  Vala of  the Sun)
 defeated  him  in  the  First  Battle.  Melkor therefore  comes mostly
 at night and  especially to  the North  in winter.  (It was  after the
 First Battle that Varda  set certain  stars as  ominous signs  for the
 dwellers in Arda to see.)                                             
   The   Valar   to   counteract   this   make   the   Moon.   Out   of
 earth-stuff  or  Sun? This  is to  be a  subsidiary light  to mitigate
 night * (as  Melkor  had made  it), and  also a  'vessel of  watch and
 ward'  to  circle  the  world.(7) But Melkor  gathered  in   the  Void
 spirits of cold &c. and suddenly assailed it, driving out  the Vala
 Tilion.(8) The   Moon   was  thereafter   long  while   steerless  and
 vagrant and called Rana (neuter).(9)                                  
   [If  Tulkas  came  from  the  Sun,  then  Tulkas  was the  form this
 Vala  adopted  on  Earth,  being  in  origin  Auron  (masculine).  But
 the Sun is feminine; and it is better  that the  Vala should  be Aren,
 a   maiden   whom   Melkor   endeavoured  to   make  his   spouse  (or
 ravished);(10) she went  up  in  a  flame  of  wrath  and  anguish and
                                                                      
  (* [marginal note] But not to drive it away. It was necessary to have
 an  alternation,  'because  in Ea  according to  the Tale  nothing can
 endure endlessly without weariness and corruption.')                  

 her  spirit was  released from  Ea, but  Melkor was  blackened and
 burned, and his form  was thereafter  dark, and  he took  to dark-
 ness. (The Sun itself was Anar neuter or Ur, cf. Rana, Ithil.)]
   The  Sun  remained  a  Lonely  Fire,  polluted  by  Melkor,  but
 after the  death of  the Two  Trees Tilion  returned to  the Moon,
 which  remained  therefore  an  enemy of  Melkor and  his servants
 and creatures of night - and so beloved of Elves later &c.      
   After the  capture of  the Moon  Melkor begins  to be  more bold
 again. He  establishes permanent  seats in  the North  deep under-
 ground.  From  thence  proceeds the  secret corruption  which per-
 verts the labours of the Valar (especially of Aule and Yavanna).
   The  Valar  grow  weary.  At   length  discovering   Melkor  and
 where  he  dwells they  seek to  drive him  out again,  but Utumno
 proves too strong.                                               
   Varda has  preserved some  of the  Primeval Light  (her original
 chief concern  in the  Great Tale).  The Two  Trees are  made. The
 Valar make their  resting place  and dwellings  in Valinor  in the
 West.                                                            
   Now one of the objects  of the  Trees (as  later of  the Jewels)
 was the  healing of  the hurts  of Melkor,  but this  could easily
 have a selfish aspect: the staying of history - not going  on with
 the Tale. This effect it had on  the Valar.  They became  more and
 more  enamoured  of  Valinor,  and  went  there  more   often  and
 stayed  there  longer.  Middle-earth was  left too  little tended,
 and too little protected against Melkor.                         
   Towards the end of the Days of Bliss, the Valar find  the tables
 turned.  They are  driven out  of Middle-earth  by Melkor  and his
 evil  spirits  and monsters;  and can  only themselves  come there
 secretly and briefly (Orome and Yavanna mainly).                 
   This period must be brief. Both  sides know  that the  coming of
 the  Children  of  God  is  imminent.  Melkor desires  to dominate
 them  at  once  with  fear  and  darkness  and  enslave  them.  He
 darkens the world [added in margin: for 7 years?] cutting  off all
 vision of the sky so far as he can,  and though  far south  (it is
 said)  this was  not effective.  From the  far North  (where [they
 are]  dense)  to  the  middle (Endor)(11) great clouds  brood. Moon
 and stars are invisible. Day is only a dim twilight at  full. Only
 light [is] in Valinor.                                           
   Varda arises  in her  might and  Manwe of  the Winds  and strive
 with  the Cloud  of Unseeing.  But as  fast as  it is  rent Melkor
 closes the veil again - at least over Middle-earth. Then  came the
 Great  Wind  of  Manwe,  and the  veil was  rent. The  stars shine

 out  clear  even  in  the North  (Valakirka) and  after the  long dark
 seem terribly bright.                                                 
   It  is  in  the dark  just before  that the  Elves awake.  The first
 thing  they  see  in  the  dark is  the stars.  But Melkor  brings up
 glooms  out  of  the  East,  and  the  stars  fade  away  west.  Hence
 they think from the beginning of light and beauty in the West.        
   The Coming of Orome.                                                
   The  Third  Battle  and  the captivity  of Melkor.  The Eldar  go to
 Valinor.  The  clouds  slowly  disperse  after  the capture  of Melkor
 though  Utumno  still  belches.  It  is  darkest   eastward,  furthest
 from the breath of Manwe.                                             
   The March of the Eldar is through great Rains?                      
   Men  awake  in  an  Isle  amid  the  floods  and  therefore  welcome
 the  Sun  which  seems  to  come  out  of  the  East.  Only  when  the
 world is drier do they leave the Isle and spread abroad.              
   It  is  only  Men  that  met  Elves  and  heard  the rumours  of the
 West that go that  way. For  the Elves  said: 'If  you delight  in the
 Sun, you will walk in the path it goes.'                              
   The coming of Men will therefore be much further back.(12)          
 This  will be  better; for  a bare  400 years  is quite  inadequate to
 produce  the  variety,  and  the  advancement (e.g.  of the  Edain) at
 the time of Felagund.(13)                                             
   Men  must  awake  while  Melkor  is  still  in  Arda?  -  because of
 their Fall.(14) Therefore in some period during the Great March.         
                                                                      
   This text  ends here.  There follows  now the  associated narrative,
 identical in appearance to the foregoing discussion (both elements are
 written in the same rather unusual script).                           
                                                                      
   After  the  Valar,  who  before were  the Ainur  of the  Great Song,
 entered  into  Ea,  those  who  were  the   noblest  among   them  and
 understood   most   of   the   mind  of   Iluvatar  sought   amid  the
 immeasurable  regions  of  the  Beginning  for  that place  where they
 should  establish  the  Kingdom  of   Arda  in   time  to   come.  And
 when  they  had  chosen  that  point  and region  where it  should be,
 they  began  the  labours  that  were   needed.  Others   there  were,
 countless  to  our  thought   though  known   each  and   numbered  in
 the  mind  of  Iluvatar,  whose  labour  lay  elsewhere  and  in other
 regions  and  histories  of  the  Great  Tale,  amid stars  remote and
 worlds  beyond  the  reach  of  the  furthest  thought.  But  of these
 others  we  know  nothing  and  cannot  know,  though  the   Valar  of
 Arda, maybe, remember them all.                                       
   Chief  of  the  Valar  of  Arda  was  he  whom the  Eldar afterwards

 named  Manwe,  the  Blessed:  the  Elder  King,  since  he  was  the
 first of all kings in [Arda >] Ea.  Brother to  him was  Melkor, the
 potent, and he had, as has been told, fallen  into pride  and desire
 of  his  own  dominion.  Therefore  the   Valar  avoided   him,  and
 began  the  building  and   ordering  of   Arda  without   him.  For
 which reason it  is said  that whereas  there is  now great  evil in
 Arda and many things therein  are at  discord, so  that the  good of
 one  seemeth  to  be the  hurt of  another, nonetheless  the founda-
 tions  of  this  world are  good, and  it turns  by nature  to good,
 healing itself from within by the power  that was  set there  in its
 making; and evil in Arda would  fail and  pass away  if it  were not
 renewed  from  without:  that is:  that comes  from wills  and being
 [sic] that are other than Arda itself.                             
   And  as  is  known  well,  the  prime   among  these   is  Melkor.
 Measureless  as  were  the  regions  of  Ea,  yet in  the Beginning,
 where  he  could  have  been  Master  of  all  that  was done  - for
 there  were many  of the  Ainur of  the Song  willing to  follow him
 and serve  him, if  he called  - still  he was  not content.  And he
 sought  ever  for  Arda  and  Manwe,  his  brother,  begrudging  him
 the  kingship,  small though  it might  seem to  his desire  and his
 potency;  for he  knew that  to that  kingship Iluvatar  designed to
 give the highest royalty in Ea, and  under the  rule of  that throne
 to  bring  forth  the  Children  of  God. And  in his  thought which
 deceived him, for the liar shall lie unto himself, he  believed that
 over  the  Children  he  might  hold  absolute  sway  and   be  unto
 them sole lord and  master, as  he could  not be  to spirits  of his
 own  kind,  however  subservient  to  himself.  For  they  knew that
 the  One  Is, and  must assent  to Melkor's  rebellion of  their own
 choice;  whereas  he  purposed  to withhold  from the  Children this
 knowledge  and  be  for  ever   a  shadow   between  them   and  the
 light.                                                             
   As  a  shadow Melkor  did not  then conceive  himself. For  in his
 beginning he  loved and  desired light,  and the  form that  he took
 was  exceedingly  bright;  and  he  said  in  his  heart:  'On  such
 brightness  as  I  am  the  Children  shall  hardly endure  to look;
 therefore to know of aught else or  beyond or  even to  strain their
 small minds to  conceive of  it would  not be  for their  good.' But
 the  lesser  brightness  that  stands before  the greater  becomes a
 darkness.  And  Melkor   was  jealous,   therefore,  of   all  other
 brightnesses,  and  wished to  take all  light unto  himself. There-
 fore Iluvatar, at  the entering  in of  the Valar  into Ea,  added a
 theme to the Great Song which was not  in it  at the  first Singing,

 and he called one  of the  Ainur to  him. Now  this was  that Spirit
 which   afterwards   became   Varda   (and   taking    female   form
 became  the  spouse  of  Manwe).  To  Varda  Iluvatar said:  'I will
 give unto thee a parting gift. Thou shalt take into Ea a  light that
 is  holy,  coming new  from Me,  unsullied by  the thought  and lust
 of Melkor, and with thee it shall enter into Ea, and  be in  Ea, but
 not of Ea.'  Wherefore Varda  is the  most holy  and revered  of all
 the Valar, and  those that  name the  light of  Varda name  the love
 of Ea  that Eru  has, and  they are  afraid, less  only to  name the
 One. Nonetheless  this gift  of Iluvatar  to the  Valar has  its own
 peril, as have all his free gifts: which is in the end no  more than
 to say that they play a part in  the Great  Tale so  that it  may be
 complete;  for  without  peril  they  would  be  without  power, and
 the giving would be void.                                           
   When  therefore  at  last  Melkor  discovered  the  abiding  place
 of  Manwe  and  his friends  he went  thither in  great haste,  as a
 blazing  fire.  And  finding  that  already  great labours  had been
 achieved  without  his  counsel,  he  was  angered,  and  desired to
 undo what was done or to alter it according to his own mind.        
   But   this   Manwe   would   not   suffer,   and  there   was  war
 therefore  in  Arda.  But  as  is  elsewhere  written Melkor  was at
 that  time  defeated  with  the  aid  of Tulkas  (who was  not among
 those  who  began  the  building of  Ea) and  driven out  again into
 the Void that lay about Arda. This  is named  the First  Battle; and
 though  Manwe  had  the  victory, great  hurt was  done to  the work
 of the Valar; and  the worst  of the  deeds of  the wrath  of Melkor
 was  seen  in the  Sun. Now  the Sun  was designed  to be  the heart
 of Arda, and the Valar  purposed that  it should  give light  to all
 that  Realm,  unceasingly  and   without  wearying   or  diminution,
 and that from its  light the  world should  receive health  and life
 and  growth.  Therefore  Varda  set  there   the  most   ardent  and
 beautiful of all those spirits that  had entered  with her  into Ea,
 and  she  was  named  Ar(i),(15) and Varda gave  to  her  keeping  a
 portion of the gift of Iluvatar so  that the  Sun should  endure and
 be  blessed and  give blessing.  The Sun,  the loremasters  tell us,
 was  in  that beginning  named As  (which is  as near  as it  can be
 interpreted  Warmth,  to  which  are joined  Light and  Solace), and
 that the spirit therefore was called Azie (or later Arie).          
   But Melkor, as hath been told, lusted after all light, desiring it
 jealously  for  his  own.  Moreover  he  soon  perceived that  in As
 there  was  a  light  that had  been concealed  from him,  and which
 had  a  power  of  which  he  had not  thought. Therefore,  afire at

 once  with  desire  and  anger, he  went to  As [written  above: Asa],
 and he spoke  to Arie,  saying: 'I  have chosen  thee, and  thou shalt
 be  my  spouse,  even  as  Varda is  to Manwe,  and together  we shall
 wield  all  splendour  and   mastery.  Then   the  kingship   of  Arda
 shall be mine in deed as in right, and  thou shalt  be the  partner of
 my glory.'                                                            
   But  Arie  rejected  Melkor  and  rebuked  him,  saying:  'Speak not
 of right,  which thou  hast long  forgotten. Neither  for thee  nor by
 thee  alone  was  Ea  made;  and  thou  shalt  not  be  King  of Arda.
 Beware therefore; for there is in  the heart  of As  a light  in which
 thou hast  no part,  and a  fire which  will not  serve thee.  Put not
 out thy hand to it. For  though thy  potency may  destroy it,  it will
 burn thee and thy brightness will be made dark.'                      
   Melkor  did  not  heed  her warning,  but cried  in his  wrath: 'The
 gift  which  is  withheld  I  take!'  and  he ravished  Arie, desiring
 both  to  abase  her and  to take  into himself  her powers.  Then the
 spirit  of  Arie  went  up  like  a  flame of  anguish and  wrath, and
 departed  for  ever  from  Arda,*  and  the  Sun  was  bereft  of  the
 Light  of  Varda,  and  was  stained  by  the  assault of  Melkor. And
 being for  a long  while without  rule it  flamed with  excessive heat
 or  grew  too  cool,  so  that  grievous  hurt  was  done to  Arda and
 the  fashioning  of  the  world  was  marred  and delayed,  until with
 long  toil  the  Valar  made  a  new  order.+     But  even   as  Arie
 foretold,  Melkor  was  burned  and   his  brightness   darkened,  and
 he  gave  no  more  light,  but  light pained  him exceedingly  and he
 hated it.                                                             
   Nonetheless   Melkor   would   not   leave   Arda   in   peace;  and
 above  all  he begrudged  to the  Valar their  dwelling on  Earth, and
 desired to injure their  labours there,  or bring  them to  naught, if
 he  could.  Therefore  he  returned  to  Earth,  but  for fear  of the
 might  of  the  Valar  and  of  Tulkas more  than all  he came  now in
 secret.  And  in  his  hatred  of  the  Sun  he came  to the  North at
 night  in  winter.  At  first  he would  depart when  the long  day of
 summer  came;   but  after   a  time,   becoming  bolder   again,  and
 desiring  a  dwelling  place  of  his  own,   he  began   the  delving
                                                                      
  (* [marginal note] Indeed some say that it was released from Ea.)    
  (+ [marginal note] Also some of the Wise have said that the ordering
 of Arda, as to the placing and courses of its parts, was disarrayed by
 Melkor, so that the Earth was at times drawn too near to the  Sun, and
 at others went too far off.)                                          

 underground  of  his  great  fortress  in  the  far  North,  which  was
 afterwards named Utumno (or Udun).                                         
   The  Valar  therefore,  when  they  became  aware  by  the  signs  of
 evil  that  were  seen  upon  Earth  that   Melkor  had   stolen  back,
 sought  in  vain   for  him,   though  Tulcas   and  Orome   went  wide
 over   Middle-earth   even   to   the   uttermost   East.   When   they
 perceived  that   Melkor  would   now  turn   darkness  and   night  to
 his  purposes,  as  he  had  aforetime  sought  to  wield  flame,  they
 were  grieved; for  it was  a part  of their  design that  there should
 be  change  and  alteration  upon  Earth,  and  neither  day  perpetual
 nor  night  without   end.*  For   by  Night   the  Children   of  Arda
 should  know  Day,  and  perceive  and  love   Light;  and   yet  Night
 should  also  in  its  kind  be  good  and  blessed,  being  a  time of
 repose,  and  of  inward  thought;  and  a vision  also of  things high
 and  fair that  are beyond  Arda, but  are veiled  by the  splendour of
 Anar.  But  Melkor  would  make  it  a  time of  peril unseen,  of fear
 without  form,   an  uneasy   vigil;  or   a  haunted   dream,  leading
 through despair to the shadow of Death.                                    
   Therefore   Manwe   took   counsel  with   Varda,  and   they  called
 Aule  to their  aid. And  they resolved  to alter  the fashion  of Arda
 and  of  Earth,  and  in their  thought they  devised Ithil,  the Moon.
 In  what  way  and  with  what  labours  they  wrought  in   deed  this
 great  device  of  their  thought,  who  shall  say:  for which  of the
 Children  hath  seen the  Valar in  the uprising  of their  strength or
 listened  to  their counsels  in the  flower of  their youth?  Who hath
 observed   their   labour  as   they  laboured,   who  hath   seen  the
 newness of the new?                                                        
   Some  say that  it was  out of  Earth (16) itself that Ithil  was made,
 and   thus   Ambar (17) was diminished;  others   say  that   the  Moon
 was  made  of  like  things  to  the  Earth  and  of  that which  is Ea
 itself as it was made in the Tale.(18)                                     
   Now   when   the   Moon   was   full-wrought   it   was   set   above
 Ambar,  and  directed  to  go   ever  round   and  about,   bringing  a
 light  to  dark  places from  which the  Sun had  departed. But  it was
 a  lesser  light,  so  that  moonlight  was not  the same  as sunlight,
 and  there  was  still  change  of  light  upon  the   Earth;  moreover
                                                                           
  (* [footnote to the text] For it is indeed of the nature of Ea and the
 Great  History  that  naught  may  stay unchanged  in time,  and things
 which do so, or appear to do so, or  endeavour to  remain so,  become a
 weariness, and are loved no longer (or are at best unheeded).)            
                                                                           
                                                                           

 there  was  still  also  night  under the  stars, for  the Moon  and the
 Sun were at certain times and seasons both absent.                      
   This  at  least  is  what  came  after to  be by  that doom  spoken by
 Iluvatar.....  the  evil  of  Melkor  should  in  its own  despite bring
 forth  things  more  fair  than  the  devising  of  his  .....  For some
 have  held  that  the  Moon  was  at first  aflame,  but was  later made
 [?strong]  and  life  .....:  later  but  while  Arda   was  unfashioned
 and still in the turmoils of Melkor.                                    
   So  much  is  known  to  the  Wise,  that  Tilion  -  [sic]  and  that
 Melkor  was  filled  with  new  wrath  at  the   rising  of   the  Moon.
 Therefore  for  a  while  he  left  Ambar  again and  went out  into the
 Outer  Night,  and   gathered  to   him  some   of  those   spirits  who
 would answer his call.                                                  
                                                                        
   A  page  of  rough  and  disconnected  notes  obviously  preceded this
 text,  but  must  belong  to  much  the  same time:  ideas found  in the
 discussion and  synopsis preceding  the narrative  are found  also here,
 such as the 'great darkness of  shadow' created  by Melkor  that blotted
 out the Sun. In these notes my father was  still asking  himself whether
 he should 'keep  the old  mythological story  of the  making of  the Sun
 and  Moon,  or alter  the background  to a  "round earth"  version', and
 observing  that  in  the  latter  case  the  Moon  would  be  a  work of
 Melkor's to provide 'a safe retreat' - thus returning to the idea of the
 origin of the Moon found  years before  in text  C* of  the Ainulindale'
 (p. 41,  $31). Doubt  and lack  of certain  direction are  very strongly
 conveyed,  as he  wrestled with  the intractable  problems posed  by the
 presence  of  the  Sun in  the sky  under which  the Elves  awoke, which
 was lit only by the stars.(19)                                          
                                                                        
   There are features in the present text that clearly associate  it with
 the  Commentary  on  the  Athrabeth  (see  notes 2  and 3  below), among
 them the use of the name Arda to mean  the Solar  System; but  while the
 Earth itself is  in the  Commentary named  Imbar it  has here  the older
 name Ambar  (see note  17). There  can be  no doubt,  I think,  that the
 present text was the  earlier of  the two.  On the  other hand,  no more
 finished or complete presentation of the new  conceptions at  large, the
 'new mythology', is found; and it seems at any rate arguable  that while
 committed  in mind  to the  abandonment of  the old  myth of  the origin
 of  the Sun  and Moon  my father  left in  abeyance the  formulation and
 expression of  the new.  It may  be, though  I have  no evidence  on the
 question  one  way  or the  other, that  he came  to perceive  from such
 experimental  writing  as  this  text  that  the  old structure  was too
 comprehensive, too interlocked in all  its parts,  indeed its  roots too
 deep, to withstand such a devastating surgery.                          

                             NOTES.                                      
                                                                        
 1. In  AAm  $15  (p.  52)  'there was  great growth  of trees  and herbs,
    and  beasts and  birds came  forth' in  the light  of the  Lamps: that
    was  the  Spring  of  Arda.  But  after the  destruction of  the Lamps
    Yavanna  'set  a  sleep  upon  many  fair  things  that had  arisen in
    the  Spring,  both  tree and  herb and  beast and  bird, so  that they
    should  not  age  but  should  wait  for  a  time  of  awakening  that
    yet should be' ($30, p. 70).                                         
 2. On   the   astronomical   knowledge   to   be   presumed   among   the
    High-elves   cf.   Note  2   to  the   Commentary  on   the  Athrabeth
    (p. 337)  - where  as here  Arda is  equated with  the Solar  System -
    and Text I (p. 370).                                                 
 3. The  thought  of this  paragraph is  closely paralleled  in Note  2 to
    the   Commentary   on   the   Athrabeth  (p.   337),  and   the  final
    sentence is very similar  to what  is said  in the  Commentary itself,
    p. 334 ('Melkor was not just a local Evil on Earth...').             
 4. In  AAm  $24  (p. 54)  it is  told that  after the  Fall of  the Lamps
    'Middle-earth  lay  in  a twilight  beneath the  stars that  Varda had
    wrought  in  the  ages forgotten  of her  labours in  Ea', and  in $34
    (p.  71) Varda  looked out  from Taniquetil  'and beheld  the darkness
    of the Earth  beneath the  innumerable stars,  faint and  far', before
    she  began  the  making  of  new and  brighter stars;  so also  in the
    revised   Quenta   Silmarillion   (p.    159,   $19):    'Then   Varda
    made  new stars  and brighter  against the  coming of  the First-born.
    Wherefore  she  whose  name  out  of  the  deeps   of  time   and  the
    labours  of  Ea was  Tintalle, the  Kindler, was  called after  by the
    Elves Elentari, the Queen of the Stars.' But if she can  still perhaps
    be  called  Elentari,  she  can  no  longer  be called  Tintalle  (see
    however p. 388 and note 3).                                          
       In  a  late  emendation  to  the  final text  D of  the Ainulindale
    (p.  34,  $36)  the  words concerning  Varda 'she  it was  who wrought
    the  Stars'  were  changed  to  'she  it  was  who wrought  the Great
    Stars'; and it seems possible that this was done in  the light  of the
    ideas presented here.                                                
 5. Cf.  Note  2  to  the  Commentary  on  the  Athrabeth  (p.  337), with
    note 13 to that passage.                                             
 6. This is of course  altogether different  from the  form of  the legend
    in the Ainulindale' (p.  14, $23):  'But Melkor,  too, was  there from
    the first, and he meddled in  all that  was done';  while in  the text
    C* (p. 40) Melkor entered Arda before the other Ainur.               
 7. The  legend  in  Ainulindale'   C*  that   Melkor  himself   made  the
    Moon  so  that  he  'could  observe  thence  all that  happened below'
    (p. 41, $31) had been abandoned (but see p. 383).                    
 8. In  AAm  (p.  131,  $172)  and  in QS  ($75) Tilion  was no  Vala, but
    'a   young   hunter   of   the   company  of   Orome'.  In   AAm  $179

      appears the story that Morgoth assailed Tilion, 'sending  spirits of
      shadow against him', but unavailingly.                              
 9.   On  names  of  the  Sun  and   Moon  see   QS  $75   and  commentary
      (V.241, 243) and the later revision  of the  passage (p.  198); also
      AAm $171 and commentary (pp. 130, 136).                             
 10.  In  AAm  (p.  133,  $179)  it  was told  that 'Arien  Morgoth feared
      with a great fear, and dared not to come nigh her'.                 
 11.  On the name Endor see AAm $38 (pp. 72, 76).                         
 12.  See p. 327 note 16.                                                 
 13.  'at the time of  Felagund': i.e.  at the  time when  Finrod Felagund
      encountered Men, first of the High-elves to do so (p. 307).         
 14.  'Men must  awake while  Melkor is  still in  Arda?': 'Arda'  must be
      an error for 'Middle-earth' (i.e. before his captivity in Aman).
 15.  An s is pencilled over the r of Ar(i).                              
 16.  Above  Earth  my  father  wrote  Ambar,  then  struck  it  out,  and
      wrote 'Mar = House'. See the next note.                             
 17.  In  Note  2  to the  Commentary on  the Athrabeth  (p. 337,  and see
      note  12  to that  passage) appears  Imbar, translated  'the Habita-
      tion', = Earth, 'the principal part of Arda' (= the Solar System).
 18.  From  this  point  the  manuscript  becomes  very  rough,  in places
      illegible, and soon peters out.                                     
 19.  In other scribbled notes (written at the  same time  as text  II and
      constituting a part of that manuscript) my  father wrote  that Varda
      gave the holy light received in gift from Iluvatar (see p.  380) not
      only to the Sun and to the Two  Trees but  also to  'the significant
      Star'.  The  meaning  of  this  is nowhere  explained. Beside  it he
      wrote  Signifer,  and  many experimental  Elvish names,  as Taengyl,
      Tengyl, Tannacolli or Tankol,  Tainacolli; also  a verbal  root tana
      'show, indicate'; tanna 'sign'; and kolla 'borne, worn, especially a
      vestment or cloak', with the note 'Sindikoll-o is masculinized'.

                                   III.                                 
                                                                       
 This very brief and hasty statement was found in  a small  collection of
 such notes folded in  a newspaper  of April  1959. It  was written  on a
 slip of paper torn from a bill from Merton College  dated in  June 1955;
 a similar bill of October 1955 was used  for a  passage of  drafting for
 the Athrabeth (p. 352). I have  noticed (p.  304) that  the use  of such
 documents of  the year  1955 might  suggest that  the Athrabeth  was not
 the work  of a  single concentrated  period, although  if my  father had
 prepared a supply of such slips for brief notes or passages  of drafting
 and other purposes the date would be misleading.                       
                                                                       
 What happened in Valinor after the Death of the Trees? Aman            
 was 'unveiled' - it had been covered with  a dome  (made by            

 Varda)   of   mist   or  cloud   down  through   which  no   sight  would
 pierce  nor  light. This  dome was  lit by  stars -  in imitation  of the
 great  Firmament   of  Ea.   This  now   rendered  Valinor   dark  except
 for  starlight  [i.e.  after  the  death  of the  Trees]. It  was removed
 and  Aman  was  lit  by  the  Sun  -  its  blessing  was   thus  removed.
 (Melkor's   defilement   of   the   Sun   must   thus  precede   the  Two
 Trees  which  had  light  of  Sun  and  Stars  before  Melkor  [?tainted]
 it  -  or  the  Trees  [?could  ?would]  be  lit  by  light   before  the
 [?Turbulence] of Melkor.)                                                
                                                                         
   I  do  not  feel  altogether certain  of the  meaning of  the extremely
 elliptical  concluding  sentence in  brackets, but  it should  perhaps be
 interpreted thus - as the statement of  a problem  arising from  what has
 been  said.  The  Dome  of  Varda  must  have  been  contrived  after the
 ravishing of Arie  by Melkor,  in order  to keep  out the  Sun's polluted
 light,(1) and Aman was lit beneath  the Dome  by the  Two Trees.  But on
 the other hand, it is an essential idea that the light  of the  Trees was
 derived  from  the  Sun  before it  was 'tainted'.  A resolution  of this
 conflict may be found (reading 'could', not 'would', in the  last phrase)
 in the idea that the light of the Trees was an unsullied  light preserved
 by Varda from a time before the assaults of Melkor.                      
   In the initial discussion in text II it is made clear that the  Sun had
 been  defiled  before  the Two  Trees came  into being:  'Now one  of the
 objects of the Trees... was the healing of the hurts of Melkor' (p. 377);
 but  it  is  also said  that 'Varda  has preserved  some of  the Primeval
 Light... The Two  Trees are  made.' This  appears to  be the  solution to
 which  my  father  came  in  the  present text,  thus suggesting  that it
 preceded  text  II.  On the  other hand,  there is  no suggestion  of the
 Dome of Varda in  text II,  and that  text gives  the impression  that my
 father  was  beginning a  new story,  working it  out as  he went.  It is
 probably vain to try to establish  a clear  sequence of  composition from
 these papers, since he might  return to  the same  problem and  find what
 appears to be the same resolution at different times.                    
   It is a notable  fact that  the Dome  of Varda  appears in  my father's
 final work on the  narrative text  of the  Quenta Silmarillion  Chapter 6
 (p.  286,  $57). Where  in AAm  (p. 98,  $108) it  was told  that Melkor,
 with  Ungoliante  beside  him,  looked  out  from  the  summit  of  Mount
 Hyarantar  and  'saw  afar  ... the  silver domes  of Valmar  gleaming in
 the mingling  of the  lights of  Telperion and  Laurelin', in  the Quenta
 Silmarillion  Ungoliante  (now,  in  the  changed  story,  lying  on  the
 summit alone) 'saw the  glimmer of  the stars  in the  dome of  Varda and
 the  radiance  of  Valmar  far  away.'  Thus  when  later  in  the  final
 rewriting ('The Rape of the Silmarils', p. 293, $1) it is told that above
 the  Valar  sitting  in  the  Ring  of  Doom  'the  stars  of  Varda  now

 glimmered overhead', it must be the stars of the Dome that were         
 glimmering.(2)                                                          
                                                                        
                                  NOTES.                                 
                                                                        
 1. But in text IV (p. 388) it is  said that  the Dome  of Varda  was made
    'to keep out any spirits or spies of Melkor'.                        
 2. In the  corresponding passage  in the  Annals of  Aman (p.  106, $117)
    it is said: 'the gods sat in  shadow, for  it was  night. But  now night
    only  as  it  may be  in some  land of  the world,  when the  stars peer
    fitfully  through  the wrack  of great  clouds, and  cold fogs  drift in
    from  a  sullen shore  of the  sea.' In  the published  Silmarillion the
    final  text  ('the  stars of  Varda now  glimmered overhead')  was used;
    this  does  not indeed  introduce any  difficulty within  the narrative,
    but I did not at that time perceive the significance of the words.
                                                                        
                                   IV                                    
                                                                        
 There is a further statement  about the  Dome of  Varda in  a manuscript
 to  which I  have several  times referred  (VI.466; VIII.20;  IX.73), an
 analysis (in intention) of all fragments of other languages found in The
 Lord of  the Rings.  The passage  that I  quote here  comes from  a long
 note  on  the  song  to  Elbereth  at  the  end  of  the  chapter  'Many
 Meetings'.  It may  be mentioned  incidentally that  my father  noted on
 the word menel: 'the heavens, the  apparent dome  of the  sky. (Probably
 a  Quenya  word  introduced  into  Sindarin.  It  was  opposed  to kemen
 "the  Earth"  as  an  apparent flat  floor under  menel. But  these were
 "pictorial" words, as the  lore of  the Eldar  and the  Numenoreans knew
 much astronomy.)'                                                       
   The  passage  concerning  the  Dome  arises  from  the  statement that
 Elbereth has el-  'star' prefixed  (with the  note 'But  since b  is not
 mutated  the  name  is  probably  to  be  referred  to  *elen-barathi  >
 elmbereth').                                                             
                                                                        
   The  mythological  association  of   Varda  with   the  stars   is  of
 twofold  origin.  In  the  'demiurgic  period',  before  the  establish-
 ment  of  Arda  'the  Realm',  while  the  Valar  in  general (including
 an   unnamed   host   of   others   who  never   came  to Arda)(1)  were
 labouring   in   the   general   construction  of   Ea  (the   World  or
 Universe),   Varda   was   in   Eldarin   and  Numenorean   legend  said
 to  have  designed  and  set  in  their  places  most  of  the principal
 stars;  but  being  (by  destiny  and  desire)   the  future   Queen  of
 Arda,  in  which  her  ultimate  function lay,  especially as  the lover
 and  protectress  of  the  Quendi,  she  was  concerned  not  only  with
 the great  Stars in  themselves, but  also in  their relations  to Arda,

 and   their   appearance    therefrom   (and    their   effect    upon   the
 Children  to   come).  Such   forms  and   major  patterns,   therefore,  as
 we  call  (for  instance)  the  Plough,  or  Orion,  were  said  to  be  her
 designs.  Thus  the   Valacirca  or   'Sickle  of   the  Gods',   which  was
 one   of   the   Eldarin   names  for   the  Plough,   was,  it   was  said,
 intended  later  to  be   a  sign   of  menace   and  threat   of  vengeance
 over   the   North  in   which  Melkor   took  up   his  abode   (Varda  was
 the   most   foresighted  of   all  the   Valar,  possessing   the  clearest
 memory  of  the  Music  and  Vision  in   which  she   had  played   only  a
 small part as actor or player, but had listened most attentively).(2)           
   Later,   when   the   Valar   took   refuge    from   Melkor,    and   the
 imminent  ruin  of  Arda,  and   built  and   fortified  Valinor   in  Aman,
 it   was   Varda  who   made  the   great  dome   above  Valinor,   to  keep
 out  any  spirits  or  spies  of  Melkor.  It  was  made  as   a  simulacrum
 of  the  true  firmament   (Tar-menel),  and   the  patterns   were  therein
 repeated,  but  with  apparent  stars  (or   'sparks':  tinwi)   of  greater
 relative  size  to  the  total visible  area. So  that the  lesser firmament
 of Valinor (Nur-menel) was very brilliant.                                      
   From   this   work   (chiefly:   but    also   her    original   demiurgic
 labours   were   included)   she  was   called  'Star-kindler'.   Note  that
 Velen  properly  referred  to  the  real  stars  of  Ea  (but   could  also
 naturally   be   transferred   to   their   imagines).  The   words  tinwe,
 nille'  (Vtin  'spark',  Vngil  'silver  glint')  and  Sindarin  tim,  gil
 referred    properly    to   the    Valinorian   imagines.    Hence   Quenya
 Tintalle   from   tinta   cause   to  sparkle,   but  also   Elentari  Queen
 of Stars'; Sindarin Elbereth, but also Gilthoniel.(3)                           
                                                                                
   This  note  on  Elbereth  ends  with  a   slightly  jumbled   and  obscure
 statement to the effect  that Gilthoniel  is derived  from the  stems Vngil
 and Vthan / than 'kindle, set light to'; iel a feminine suffix correspond-
 ing to male -we.                                                                
   These  remarks  on  Varda  seem  to  raise further  questions. In  text II
 (pp.  375  -  6)  my   father  declared   that  'the   cosmogonic  mythology
 should  represent  Arda  as  it  is,  more or  less: an  island in  the void
 "amidst  the  innumerable stars"';  that 'the  Stars, therefore,  in general
 will  be other  and remoter  parts of  the Great  Tale of  Ea, which  do not
 concern  the  Valar  of Arda';  and that  'Varda, therefore,  as one  of the
 great Valar  of Arda,  cannot be  said to  have "kindled"  the stars,  as an
 original subcreative act - not at least the stars in general.' I  have taken
 this to mean  (p. 384  note 4)  that the  'star-making' of  Varda was  to be
 confined  to  (at  most)  the  making  of  the  'Great  Stars'   before  the
 Awakening  of  the  Elves.  In  the  present  text,   on  the   other  hand,
 appears  the  remarkable  conception  that  the  'demiurgic'  work  of Varda
 was  the  making  and  disposition  of  certain  'principal'   stars,  which
                                                                                
                                                                                j

  should in ages to come, after the establishment of  the Earth,  be visible
  in its skies as figures significant of its history - the 'dramatic centre'
  of Ea.                                                                    
    While  I think  it certain  that this  text comes  from the  late 1950s,
  there seems no way in which to  date it  more precisely  either externally
  or in relation to other writings.                                         
                                                                           
                                    NOTES.                                  
                                                                           
  1. Cf.  text  II  (p.  378):  'Others  there  were,  countless  to  our
     thought...,  whose  labour  lay  elsewhere  and  in  other  regions and
     histories  of  the  Great  Tale,  amid stars  remote and  worlds beyond
     the reach of the furthest thought.'                                    
  2. It is a curious point that what is said here of  Varda's part  in the
     Music of the  Ainur is  largely repeated  from what  is told  of Nienna
     in  the  'lost'  typescript  of  the  beginning of  the Annals  of Aman
     (AAm*, p. 68, $26). There it is told of her that she 'took little part'
     in the Music, but  'listened intent  to all  that she  heard. Therefore
     she  was  rich  in memory,  and farsighted,  perceiving how  the themes
     should unfold in the Tale of Arda.'                                    
  3. It  is interesting  to compare  what is  said here  about the  names of
     Varda  with  what  my  father  said  on  the  subject  in a  note dated
     3  February 1938  (V.200): 'Tintalle'  Kindler can  stand -  but tinwe'
     in  Quenya  only  =  spark  (tinta- to  kindle). Therefore  Tinwerina >
     Elerina, Tinwerontar > Elentari'.                                      
                                                                           
                                      V.                                    
                                                                           
  This  brief  comment,  entitled  'Sun  The Trees  Silmarils', is  found on
  a single sheet, together with other more  substantial writings  similar in
  appearance, preserved in a folded newspaper of November 1958.             
                                                                           
  The making of the Sun after the Death of the Trees is  not only           
  impossible 'mythology' now - especially since the Valar must be           
  supposed to know the truth about the structure  of Ea  (and not           
  make  mythical  guesses  like  Men)  and  to  have communicated           
  this to the Eldar (and  so to  Numenoreans!) -  it is  also im-           
  possible chronologically in the Narrative.                                
    The Sun existed as part of the Kingdom of Arda. In so  far as           
  there  was  darkness  (and  diminishment  of  growth   in  Arda           
  consequently)  when the  Valar removed  to Aman  it was  due to           
  obscurations devised by Melkor: clouds  and smokes  (a volcanic           
  era!).                                                                    
    The Sun was the immediate source  of the  light of  Arda. The           
  Blessedness  of  the  Trees  (as  compared  with  other growing           

 things  later)  was  that  they  were  kindled  and  illumined  with the      
 light  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  before  these  were tainted.  The attack      
 of  Melkor  on  the  Sun  (and  Moon)   must  therefore   be  subsequent      
 to   the   establishment  of   Valinor,  and   be  Melkor's   effort  to      
 produce darkness.                                                             
   Since  the   Silmarils  were   kindled  from   the  Trees   after  the      
 Death  of  the  Trees,  this  'light  of  the  Unmarred   Sun'  remained      
 only in them.                                                                 
                                                                              
   In text III, my  father's note  on the  removal of  the Dome  of Varda      
 after the death of the Trees, he was  confronted by  the problem  (if my      
 analysis of his meaning is correct, p. 386) that 'Melkor's defilement of      
 the Sun must  precede the  Two Trees',  whereas the  light of  the Trees      
 was  derived  from  the unsullied  light of  the Sun  and Moon.  Here he      
 concludes  that 'the  attack of  Melkor on  the Sun  (and Moon)  must be      
 subsequent to the establishment of Valinor'.                                  
   The word after in the concluding sentence is  no more  than a  slip in      
 extremely rapid writing.                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                             :i
                                    VI.                                        
                                                                              
 This text, entitled  Melkor with  Morgoth written  beneath, is  from the      
 same collection as is text III (found in a newspaper dated  April 1959),      
 and  was written  on four  slips made  from further  copies of  the same      
 Merton  College  documents  dated June  1955 as  is the  draft A  of the      
 Athrabeth (pp. 350 - 2). The slip on which text  III is  written carries      
 also preliminary drafting for the present essay on Melkor.                    
   It is notable  that text  VI begins  with a  reference to  'Finrod and      
 Andreth', which was therefore in existence, at least in some form.            
                                                                              
                              Melkor Morgoth.                                  
                                                                              
 Melkor  must  be  made  far  more  powerful  in  original   nature  (cf.      
 'Finrod  and  Andreth').  The   greatest  power   under  Eru   (sc.  the      
 greatest  created  power).(1) (He  was  to  make   I  devise   I  begin;      
 Manwe (a little less great) was to improve, carry out, complete.)             
   Later,  he  must  not be  able to  be controlled  or 'chained'  by all      
 the  Valar  combined.  Note  that  in  the  early  age  of  Arda  he was      
 alone able to drive the Valar out of Middle-earth into retreat.               
   The   war   against   Utumno   was  only   undertaken  by   the  Valar      
 with  reluctance,  and  without  hope  of  real  victory, but  rather as      
 a  covering  action  or  diversion,  to  enable them  to get  the Quendi      
 out  of  his  sphere  of   influence.  But   Melkor  had   already  pro-      
 gressed   some   way   towards   becoming   'the   Morgoth,   a   tyrant      
 (or  central  tyranny  and  will), + his agents'.(2) Only   the  total      

 contained  the  old  power  of the  complete Melkor;  so that  if 'the
 Morgoth'  could  be   reached  or   temporarily  separated   from  his
 agents  he  was  much  more  nearly  controllable  and  on   a  power-
 level  with the  Valar. The  Valar find  that they  can deal  with his
 agents (sc. armies,  Balrogs, etc.)  piecemeal. So  that they  come at
 last  to  Utumno  itself  and find  that 'the  Morgoth' has  no longer
 for the moment  sufficient 'force'  (in any  sense) to  shield himself
 from  direct  personal  contact.  Manwe  at  last faces  Melkor again,
 as  he  has  not  done  since  he  entered  Arda.  Both   are  amazed:
 Manwe  to  perceive  the  decrease  in  Melkor  as  a  person;  Melkor
 to perceive this also  from his  own point  of view:  he has  now less
 personal  force  than  Manwe,  and  can  no  longer  daunt   him  with
 his gaze.                                                             
   Either  Manwe  must  tell  him  so  or  he  must   himself  suddenly
 realize  (or  both)  that this  has happened:  he is  'dispersed'. But
 the  lust  to  have  creatures  under   him,  dominated,   has  become
 habitual  and  necessary  to  Melkor,  so  that  even  if  the process
 was  reversible  (possibly  was  by   absolute  and   unfeigned  self-
 abasement  and  repentance  only)  he  cannot  bring  himself   to  do
 it.*  As  with  all  other  characters  there  must  be   a  trembling
 moment  when  it  is  in  the balance:  he nearly  repents -  and does
 not, and becomes much wickeder, and more foolish.                     
   Possibly  (and  he  thinks  it  possible)  he  could  now   at  that
 moment  be  humiliated  against  his  own  will  and  'chained'  -  if
 and  before  his  dispersed  forces  reassemble.  So -  as soon  as he
 has  mentally  rejected  repentance  -  he  (just  like  Sauron after-
 wards  on  this  model)   makes  a   mockery  of   self-abasement  and
 repentance.  From  which  actually  he  gets   a  kind   of  perverted
 pleasure  as   in  desecrating   something  holy   -  [for   the  mere
 contemplating  of  the  possibility  of  genuine  repentance,  if that
 did  not  come  specially  then  as a  direct grace  from Eru,  was at
 least  one  last  flicker  of  his true  primeval nature.](3) He feigns
 remorse  and  repentance.   He  actually   kneels  before   Manwe  and
 surrenders  -  in the  first instance  to avoid  being chained  by the
 Chain  Angainor,  which  once  upon  him  he  fears  would   not  ever
 be  able  to  be  shaken off.  But also  suddenly he  has the  idea of
                                                                      
  (* [footnote to the text] One of the  reasons for  his self-weakening
 is that he has given to his 'creatures', Orcs, Balrogs, etc.  power of
 recuperation  and  multiplication.  So  that  they  will  gather again
 without further specific orders. Part of his native creative power has
 gone out into making an independent evil growth out of his control.)

 penetrating  the  vaunted  fastness  of  Valinor,  and  ruining   it.  So
 he  offers  to  become  'the  least  of  the Valar'  and servant  of them
 each and all, to help (in advice and  skill) in  repairing all  the evils
 and  hurts  he  has  done.  It  is  this offer  which seduces  or deludes
 Manwe  -  Manwe  must   be  shown   to  have   his  own   inherent  fault
 (though  not  sin):*  he  has  become  engrossed  (partly  out  of  sheer
 fear  of  Melkor,  partly  out  of  desire  to  control  him)  in  amend-
 ment,  healing,  re-ordering  -  even  'keeping  the  status  quo'  -  to
 the  loss  of  all  creative  power  and  even  to  weakness  in  dealing
 with  difficult  and  perilous  situations.  Against  the advice  of some
 of the Valar (such as Tulkas) he grants Melkor's prayer.                 
   Melkor  is  taken  back  to  Valinor  going  last  (save   for  Tulkas +
 who   follows   bearing    Angainor   and    clinking   it    to   remind
 Melkor).                                                                 
   But   at   the  council   Melkor  is   not  given   immediate  freedom.
 The  Valar  in  assembly  will  not  tolerate  this.  Melkor  is remitted
 to   Mandos   (to   stay   there   in   'reclusion'  and   meditate,  and
 complete his repentance - and also his plans for redress).(4)            
   Then  he  begins  to  doubt  the   wisdom  of   his  own   policy,  and
 would  have  rejected  it  all  and  burst out  into flaming  rebellion -
 but  he  is  now  absolutely  isolated  from  his  agents  and  in  enemy
 territory.  He  cannot.  Therefore  he  swallows  the  bitter  pill  (but
 it  greatly   increases  his   hate,  and   he  ever   afterward  accused
 Manwe of being faithless).                                               
   The  rest  of  the  story,  with  Melkor's  release, and  permission to
 attend  the  Council  sitting  at the  feet of  Manwe (after  the pattern
 of  evil  counsellors  in  later  tales,  which it  could be  said derive
 from  this  primeval  model?),  can   then  proceed   more  or   less  as
 already told.                                                            
                                                                         
 In this short essay it is seen that in his reflections on the nature of
 Melkor,  the  vastness  of his  primeval power  and its  'dispersion', my
                                                                         
 (* [footnote   to   the  text]   Every  finite   creature  must have some
 weakness: that is some  inadequacy to  deal with  some situations.  It is
 not sinful when not willed, and when the creature does his best  (even if
 it is not what should be done) as he sees it - with the  conscious intent
 of serving Eru.)
 (+ [footnote to the text] Tulkas  represents the  good side  of 'violence'
 in the war against evil. This is an absence of all compromise  which will
 even face apparent evils (such as war) rather than  parley; and  does not
 (in any kind of pride) think that any one less than Eru can redress this,
 or rewrite the tale of Arda.)                                            

  father  had  been  led  to  propose  certain  important  alterations   in  the
  narrative  of  the  legends  as  told  in  the  Quenta Silmarillion  (pp. 161,
  186)  and  in  the  Annals  of  Aman  (pp. 75,  80, 93).  In the  narrative as
  it  stood,  and  as  it remained,(5) there  was   no  suggestion  that  Melkor
  feigned  repentance  when  (no  longer  able  to  'daunt  him with  his gaze')
  he   faced   Manwe   in   Utumno   -   already   harbouring   'the   idea   of
  penetrating  the  vaunted  fastness  of  Valinor,  and  ruining  it'.  On  the
  contrary,   'Tulkas   stood   forth  as   the  champion   of  the   Valar  and
  wrestled  with  him  and  cast  him  upon  his  face, and  bound him  with the
  chain   Angainor'(6) (an  ancient   element,   going   back   to   the  richly
  pictorial  and  'primitive'  account  in  the  story   of  'The   Chaining  of
  Melko'  in  The  Book  of Lost  Tales, 1.100  - 4).  Moreover, in  the present
  text  it  was  now,  defeated  at  Utumno,  that  Melkor  offered   to  become
  'the least of the Valar', and to aid them in the redress of all the evils that
  he  had  brought  to  pass,  whereas  in the  narratives he  did this  when he
  came  before  the  Valar  after  he  had  endured the  ages of  his incarcera-
  tion  in  Mandos  and  sued   for  pardon.   Of  Manwe   it  was   said,  when
  Melkor  was  allowed  to  go  freely  about  Valinor,  that  he  believed that
  his evil was  cured: 'for  he himself  was free  from the  evil and  could not
  comprehend  it'.  No  such   flaw  or   'inherent  fault'   in  Manwe   as  is
  described  in  this  essay  was suggested;(7) although it was told  that Ulmo,
  and  Tulkas,  doubted  the  wisdom  of  such  clemency  (and  this  too  is an
  element  that  goes  back  to  The  Book   of  Lost   Tales:  'Such   was  the
  doom  of  Manwe...  albeit  Tulkas  and  Palurien   thought  it   merciful  to
  peril' (I.105)).                                                              

                              NOTES.                                       
                                                                          
  1. Cf. Finrod's words in the Athrabeth (p. 322): 'there is no power
     conceivable greater than Melkor save Eru only'.
  2. The earliest reference to the idea of the 'dispersion' of Melkor's
     original power is found in the Annals of Aman $179 (p. 133):
       For as he grew in malice, and sent forth from himself the evil
       that he conceived in lies and creatures of wickedness, his power
       passed into them and was dispersed, and he himself became ever
       more earth-bound, unwilling to issue from his dark strongholds.
     Cf. also Annals $128 (p. 110). - The expression 'the Morgoth' is
     used several times by Finrod in the Athrabeth.
  3. The square brackets were put in after the writing of the passage.
  4. 'his plans for redress': i.e. redress of the evils he has brought about.
  5. The second passage in QS, in which the pardon of Melkor is
     recounted (p. 186, $48), was changed in the final rewriting of
     Chapter 6: see p. 273, $48. But though the changed text intro-
     duced the ideas that any complete reversal of the evils brought
     about by Melkor was impossible, and that he was 'in his beginning

     the  greatest  of  the  Powers', the  narrative was  not altered  in respect
     of changes envisaged in this essay (see note 7).                            
  6. Alteration  to  the  old  story of  the encounter  at Utumno  might have
     entered  if  QS  Chapter  3  (in  which  this  is  recounted) had  formed a
     part  of  the  late  rewriting  that  transformed  the  old Chapter  6; but
     see note 7.                                                                 
  7. In  the  final  rewriting of  QS Chapter  6 (p.  273, $48)  this remained
     the  case  (note  5);  and  the  original  story  was  also  retained  that
     it  was  in   Valinor  after   his  imprisonment,   not  at   Utumno,  that
     Melkor  made   his  promises   of  service   and  reparation.   This  might
     suggest  that  the  present  essay  was  written  after  the  new  work  on
     QS  (almost  certainly  dating  from  the  end  of  the  1950s,   p.  300),
     supporting  the  idea  that  the  date  of  the  documents  on   which  the
     essay was written (1955) is misleading (see p. 385).                        
                                                                             
                                      VII.                                    
                                                                             
 This essay is found in two forms. The earlier  ('A') is  a fairly  brief text
 of  four  pages  in  manuscript, titled  'Some notes  on the  "philosophy" of
 the  Silmarillion';  it  is  rapidly  expressed  and  does  not have  a clear
 ending.  The  second ('B')  is a  greatly expanded  version of  twelve pages,
 also  in  manuscript,  of  far  more  careful  expression  and  beginning  in
 fine  script,  but  breaking  off  unfinished,  indeed  in  the  middle  of a
 sentence. This is titled 'Notes on motives in the Silmarillion'.             
 The  relation  between  the  two  forms  is  such  that   for  most   of  its
 length there is no need to give any of the text of A, for all of  its content
 is  found  embedded  in  B.  From  the  point  (p. 401)  where the  Valar are
 condemned  for  the raising  of the  Pelori, however,  the texts  diverge. In
 B  my  father  introduced  a  long palliation  of the  conduct of  the Valar,
 and  the essay  breaks off  before the  matter of  the concluding  section of
 A was reached (see note 6); this is therefore given at the end of B.         
 The  text  of  B  was  subsequently  divided and  lettered as  three distinct
 sections, here numbered (i), (ii), and (iii).                                
                                                                             
                     Notes on motives in the Silmarillion.                    
                                                                             
                                      (i)                                     
 Sauron  was  'greater',  effectively, in  the Second  Age than               
 Morgoth at the end of the First. Why?  Because, though  he was               
 far smaller by natural stature, he had not yet fallen  so low.               
 Eventually  he  also squandered  his power  (of being)  in the               
 endeavour to gain control of others. But he was not obliged to               
 expend  so  much  of  himself. To  gain domination  over Arda,               
 Morgoth  had  let  most of  his being  pass into  the physical               
 constituents of the Earth - hence all things that were born on               

 Earth  and  lived  on  and  by   it,  beasts   or  plants   or  incarnate
 spirits,  were  liable  to  be  'stained'.  Morgoth  at  the time  of the
 War  of  the  Jewels  had  become   permanently  'incarnate':   for  this
 reason   he  was   afraid,  and   waged  the   war  almost   entirely  by
 means of devices, or of subordinates and dominated creatures.            
    Sauron,  however,  inherited  the  'corruption'  of  Arda,   and  only
 spent  his  (much  more  limited)  power  on  the Rings;  for it  was the
 creatures  of  earth,  in  their  minds  and  wills,  that he  desired to
 dominate.   In   this   way   Sauron   was   also   wiser   than  Melkor-
 Morgoth.   Sauron   was   not   a   beginner    of   discord;    and   he
 probably   knew   more   of   the   'Music'   than   did   Melkor,  whose
 mind  had  always  been  filled  with  his  own  plans  and  devices, and
 gave   little   attention  to   other  things.   The  time   of  Melkor's
 greatest  power,  therefore,  was  in  the  physical  beginnings  of  the
 World;  a  vast  demiurgic  lust  for  power   and  the   achievement  of
 his  own  will  and designs,  on a  great scale.  And later  after things
 had   become   more   stable,   Melkor   was   more  interested   in  and
 capable  of  dealing  with  a  volcanic   eruption,  for   example,  than
 with  (say)  a  tree.  It  is   indeed  probable   that  he   was  simply
 unaware  of  the  minor   or  more   delicate  productions   of  Yavanna:
 such as small flowers.*                                                  
    Thus,   as   'Morgoth',   when   Melkor   was   confronted    by   the
 existence  of  other  inhabitants   of  Arda,   with  other   wills  and
 intelligences,  he  was  enraged  by  the mere  fact of  their existence,
 and  his  only  notion  of  dealing  with  them  was  by  physical force,
 or  the  fear  of  it. His  sole ultimate  object was  their destruction.
 Elves,  and  still  more  Men,  he  despised  because  of   their  'weak-
 ness': that  is their  lack of  physical force,  or power  over 'matter';
 but  he  was  also  afraid   of  them.   He  was   aware,  at   any  rate
 originally  when  still  capable  of  rational  thought,  that  he  could
 not  'annihilate'** them:  that  is,  destroy  their  being;   but  their
 physical  'life',  and   incarnate  form   became  increasingly   to  his
 mind   the   only   thing   that   was   worth   considering.+    Or   he
                                                                         
  (* [footnote to the text] If such things were forced upon his attention,
 he  was  angry  and  hated  them,  as  coming from  other minds  than his
 own.)                                                                    
                                                                         
 (**[bracketed  note  inserted  into  the  text]  Melkor  could   not,  of
 course, 'annihilate' anything of matter,  he could  only ruin  or destroy
 or  corrupt  the  forms  given  to matter  by other  minds in  their sub-
 creative activities.)                                                    
                                                                         
 (+ [footnote without indication of reference in the text] For this)

 became  so  far  advanced  in  Lying  that  he  lied  even  to himself,
 and  pretended  that  he  could  destroy  them  and  rid  Arda  of them
 altogether.   Hence   his   endeavour   always   to  break   wills  and
 subordinate   them  to   or  absorb   them  into   his  own   will  and
 being,  before  destroying  their  bodies.  This  was  sheer  nihilism,
 and  negation  its  one  ultimate  object:  Morgoth  would   no  doubt,
 if  he  had  been  victorious,  have  ultimately  destroyed   even  his
 own  'creatures',  such  as  the Orcs,  when they  had served  his sole
 purpose   in   using   them:   the  destruction   of  Elves   and  Men.
 Melkor's  final  impotence  and  despair  lay  in  this:  that  whereas
 the  Valar  (and  in  their  degree  Elves  and  Men) could  still love
 'Arda   Marred',   that   is   Arda   with  a   Melkor-ingredient,  and
 could  still  heal  this  or  that  hurt,  or  produce  from  its  very
 marring,  from  its  state  as  it  was,  things beautiful  and lovely,
 Melkor  could  do   nothing  with   Arda,  which   was  not   from  his
 own  mind  and   was  interwoven   with  the   work  and   thoughts  of
 others: even left  alone he  could only  have gone  raging on  till all
 was  levelled  again  into  a  formless  chaos.  And  yet  even  so  he
 would  have  been  defeated,  because  it  would still  have 'existed',
 independent of his own mind, and a world in potential.                 
   Sauron  had  never  reached  this  stage  of  nihilistic  madness. He
 did not  object to  the existence  of the  world, so  long as  he could
 do  what  he  liked  with  it.  He  still  had  the relics  of positive
 purposes,  that  descended  from  the  good  of  the  nature  in  which
 he  began:  it  had  been  his  virtue  (and  therefore also  the cause
 of  his  fall,  and  of  his  relapse)  that  he  loved  order  and co-
 ordination,  and  disliked  all  confusion  and wasteful  friction. (It
 was  the  apparent  will  and  power  of Melkor  to effect  his designs
 quickly  and  masterfully  that  had  first  attracted Sauron  to him.)
 Sauron  had,  in   fact,  been   very  like   Saruman,  and   so  still
 understood   him   quickly   and   could   guess   what  he   would  be
 likely  to  think  and  do,  even without  the aid  of palantiri  or of
 spies;  whereas  Gandalf  eluded   and  puzzled   him.  But   like  all
 minds  of  this  cast,  Sauron's  love  (originally)  or  (later)  mere
 understanding  of  other   individual  intelligences   was  correspond-
 ingly  weaker;  and  though  the  only  real   good  in,   or  rational
 motive  for,  all  this  ordering  and  planning  and  organization was
 the  good  of  all  inhabitants  of   Arda  (even   admitting  Sauron's
                                                                       
 ( reason he himself came to fear 'death' - the destruction of his assumed
 bodily  form  -  above  everything,  and  sought to  avoid any  kind of
 injury to his own form.)                                               

 right  to  be their  supreme lord),  his 'plans',  the idea  coming from
 his   own isolated  mind, became  the sole  object of  his will,  and an
 end, the End, in itself.*                                               
   Morgoth   had  no   'plan':  unless   destruction  and   reduction  to
 nil  of  a  world  in  which  he  had  only  a  share  can  be  called a
 'plan'.  But  this  is, of  course, a  simplification of  the situation.
 Sauron  had  not  served  Morgoth,  even  in  his  last  stages, without
 becoming  infected  by  his  lust  for  destruction,  and his  hatred of
 God  (which  must  end  in  nihilism).  Sauron  could  not,  of  course,
 be  a  'sincere'  atheist.  Though  one  of  the  minor  spirits created
 before  the  world,  he  knew   Eru,  according   to  his   measure.  He
 probably   deluded   himself   with   the   notion   that    the   Valar
 (including   Melkor)   having   failed,   Eru   had   simply   abandoned
 Ea,  or  at  any  rate  Arda,  and  would  not  concern himself  with it
 any  more.  It  would  appear  that  he interpreted  the 'change  of the
 world'   at   the   Downfall   of   Numenor,   when  Aman   was  removed
 from  the  physical  world,  in  this  sense:  Valar  (and  Elves)  were
 removed  from  effective  control,  and  Men   under  God's   curse  and
 wrath.  If  he  thought  about  the   Istari,  especially   Saruman  and
 Gandalf,   he   imagined   them   as   emissaries   from    the   Valar,
 seeking   to   establish   their   lost   power  again   and  'colonize'
 Middle-earth,  as  a  mere  effort  of  defeated  imperialists  (without
 knowledge  or  sanction  of  Eru).   His  cynicism,   which  (sincerely)
 regarded  the  motives   of  Manwe   as  precisely   the  same   as  his
 own,   seemed   fully  justified   in  Saruman.   Gandalf  he   did  not
 understand.   But   certainly   he   had   already   become   evil,  and
 therefore  stupid,  enough  to  imagine  that  his  different  behaviour
 was  due  simply  to  weaker  intelligence  and  lack of  firm masterful
 purpose.  He   was  only   a  rather   cleverer  Radagast   -  cleverer,
 because  it   is  more   profitable  (more   productive  of   power)  to
 become absorbed in the study of people than of animals.                 
   Sauron  was  not  a  'sincere'  atheist,  but  he   preached  atheism,
 because  it  weakened  resistance   to  himself   (and  he   had  ceased
 to  fear  God's  action  in  Arda).  As   was  seen   in  the   case  of
 Ar-Pharazon.   But   there   was   seen  the   effect  of   Melkor  upon
 Sauron:  he  spoke  of  Melkor  in  Melkor's  own  terms:  as a  god, or
 even  as  God.  This  may  have  been  the  residue  of  a  state  which
                                                                        
  (* [footnote to the text] But his capability of corrupting other minds,
 and even engaging their service, was a  residue from  the fact  that his
 original  desire  for  'order'  had  really  envisaged  the  good estate
 (especially physical well-being) of his 'subjects'.)                    

 was  in  a  sense  a  shadow  of good:  the ability  once in  Sauron at
 least  to  admire  or  admit  the  superiority  of  a being  other than
 himself.  Melkor,  and  still  more  Sauron  himself  afterwards,  both
 profited  by  this  darkened  shadow  of  good  and  the   services  of
 'worshippers'.   But   it   may   be  doubted   whether  even   such  a
 shadow  of  good  was  still  sincerely  operative  in  Sauron  by that
 time.  His  cunning  motive  is  probably   best  expressed   thus.  To
 wean  one  of  the  God-fearing  from  their allegiance  it is  best to
 propound  another  unseen  object  of   allegiance  and   another  hope
 of  benefits;  propound  to  him  a  Lord  who  will  sanction  what he
 desires  and not  forbid it.  Sauron, apparently  a defeated  rival for
 world-power,   now   a   mere   hostage,   can  hardly   propound  him-
 self;  but  as  the  former  servant  and   disciple  of   Melkor,  the
 worship  of  Melkor  will  raise  him  from  hostage  to  high  priest.
 But  though  Sauron's  whole  true  motive   was  the   destruction  of
 the  Numenoreans,  this  was  a  particular  matter  of   revenge  upon
 Ar-Pharazon,   for   humiliation.   Sauron   (unlike   Morgoth)   would
 have  been  content  for  the   Numenoreans  to   exist,  as   his  own
 subjects,  and  indeed  he  used  a   great  many   of  them   that  he
 corrupted to his allegiance.                                           
                                                                       
                                  (ii)                                  
                                                                       
 No  one,  not  even  one  of  the  Valar,  can read  the mind  of other
 'equal  beings':*  that  is  one  cannot   'see'  them   or  comprehend
 them  fully  and  directly  by  simple   inspection.  One   can  deduce
 much   of   their   thought,  from   general  comparisons   leading  to
 conclusions  concerning  the  nature  and   tendencies  of   minds  and
 thought,   and   from   particular   knowledge   of   individuals,  and
 special  circumstances.  But  this  is  no  more reading  or inspection
 of  another  mind  than  is  deduction   concerning  the   contents  of
 a  closed  room,  or  events  taken  place  out  of  sight.  Neither is
 so-called  'thought-transference'  a  process  of   mind-reading:  this
 is  but the  reception, and  interpretation by  the receiving  mind, of
 the   impact  of   a  thought,   or  thought-pattern,   emanating  from
 another mind,  which is  no more  the mind  in full  or in  itself than
 is  the  distant  sight of  a man  running the  man himself.  Minds can
 exhibit or  reveal themselves  to other  minds by  the action  of their
                                                                       
  (* [marginal note] All rational minds I  spirits deriving  direct from
 Eru are 'equal' - in order and status - though not necessarily 'coeval'
 or of like original power.)                                            

 own wills (though it  is doubtful  if, even  when willing  or desiring
 this, a mind can  actually reveal  itself wholly  to any  other mind).
 It  is  thus  a  temptation  to minds  of greater  power to  govern or
 constrain  the  will  of  other, and  weaker, minds,  so as  to induce
 or   force  them   to  reveal   themselves.  But   to  force   such  a
 revelation,  or  to  induce  it by  any lying  or deception,  even for
 supposedly  'good'  purposes  (including  the  'good'  of  the  person
 so  persuaded  or  dominated), is  absolutely forbidden.  To do  so is
 a  crime, and  the 'good'  in the  purposes of  those who  commit this
 crime swiftly becomes corrupted.                                     
   Much  could   thus  'go   on  behind   Manwe's  back':   indeed  the
 innermost  being  of  all  other  minds, great  and small,  was hidden
 from  him.  And  with  regard  to  the  Enemy, Melkor,  in particular,
 he  could  not  penetrate  by  distant  mind-sight  his   thought  and
 purposes,  since  Melkor  remained  in  a fixed  and powerful  will to
 withhold  his  mind:   which  physically   expressed  took   shape  in
 the   darkness   and   shadows   that   surrounded   him.   But  Manwe
 could  of  course  use,  and  did  use, his  own great  knowledge, his
 vast  experience  of  things  and  of  persons,  his  memory   of  the
 'Music', and his own far sight, and the tidings of his messengers.
   He,  like  Melkor,  practically never  is seen  or heard  of outside
 or  far  away  from  his  own  halls and  permanent residence.  Why is
 this?  For  no  very  profound  reason.   The  Government   is  always
 in  Whitehall.  King  Arthur  is  usually  in  Camelot   or  Caerleon,
 and  news  and  adventures  come  there  and  arise there.  The 'Elder
 King'  is  obviously  not going  to be finally defeated  or destroyed,
 at  least  not  before  some  ultimate  'Ragnarok'(1) - which even for
 us is still in the future, so he can have  no real  'adventures'. But,
 if you keep  him at  home, the  issue of  any particular  event (since
 it  cannot  then  result  in  a  final  'checkmate')  can   remain  in
 literary  suspense.  Even  to  the  final  war  against Morgoth  it is
 Fionwe  son  of  Manwe  who  leads  out  the   power  of   the  Valar.
 When  we  move  out  Manwe it  will be  the last  battle, and  the end
 of the World (or of 'Arda Marred') as the Eldar would say.           
   [Morgoth's  staying  'at  home'  has,  as  described above,  quite a
 different reason: his fear of being killed or even hurt  (the literary
 motive  is  not  present,  for since  he is  pitted against  the Elder
 King, the issue of any one of  his enterprises  is always  in doubt).]
                                                                     
   Melkor 'incarnated' himself (as Morgoth) permanently. He           
 did this so as to control the hroa,(2) the 'flesh' or physical matter,
 of  Arda.  He attempted  to identify  himself with  it. A  vaster, and

 
                                                                  
 more perilous,  procedure, though  of similar  sort to  the opera-
 tions  of  Sauron  with  the  Rings.  Thus,  outside  the  Blessed
 Realm,  all  'matter' was  likely to  have a  'Melkor ingredient',(3)
 and  those  who had  bodies, nourished  by the  hroa of  Arda, had
 as it were a tendency, small or great,  towards Melkor:  they were
 none  of  them wholly  free of  him in  their incarnate  form, and
 their bodies had an effect upon their spirits.                    
    But  in  this way  Morgoth lost  (or exchanged,  or transmuted)
 the greater part  of his  original 'angelic'  powers, of  mind and
 spirit, while gaining a terrible grip upon the physical world. For
 this reason he had  to be  fought, mainly  by physical  force, and
 enormous  material  ruin  was  a   probable  consequence   of  any
 direct  combat  with  him,  victorious or  otherwise. This  is the
 chief  explanation  of  the  constant reluctance  of the  Valar to
 come  into  open   battle  against   Morgoth.  Manwe's   task  and
 problem  was  much  more   difficult  than   Gandalf's.  Sauron's,
 relatively  smaller,  power   was  concentrated;   Morgoth's  vast
 power   was   disseminated.  The   whole  of   'Middle-earth'  was
 Morgoth's  Ring,  though  temporarily  his  attention  was  mainly
 upon  the  North-west.  Unless  swiftly  successful,  War  against
 him  might  well  end  in  reducing  all  Middle-earth  to  chaos,
 possibly even all Arda. It is easy to  say: 'It  was the  task and
 function of the Elder  King to  govern Arda  and make  it possible
 for  the  Children  of  Eru  to  live in  it unmolested.'  But the
 dilemma of the Valar  was this:  Arda could  only be  liberated by
 a physical battle; but a probable result of such a battle  was the
 irretrievable  ruin of  Arda. Moreover,  the final  eradication of
 Sauron  (as  a  power  directing  evil)  was  achievable   by  the
 destruction  of  the  Ring.  No  such  eradication of  Morgoth was
 possible, since this required the  complete disintegration  of the
 'matter' of Arda.  Sauron's power  was not  (for example)  in gold
 as such, but in a particular form  or shape  made of  a particular
 portion   of   total  gold.   Morgoth's  power   was  disseminated
 throughout  Gold,  if  nowhere  absolute  (for  he did  not create
 Gold)  it  was  nowhere  absent. (It  was this  Morgoth-element in
 matter,  indeed,  which was  a prerequisite  for such  'magic' and
 other evils as Sauron practised with it and upon it.)             
    It is  quite possible,  of course,  that certain  'elements' or
 conditions  of  matter had  attracted Morgoth's  special attention
 (mainly, unless in the remote past, for reasons of his own plans).
 For  example,  all  gold  (in  Middle-earth) seems  to have  had a
 specially 'evil' trend - but not silver.  Water is  represented as

                          
                                                                        
  being  almost  entirely  free  of  Morgoth. (This,  of course,  does not
  mean  that  any  particular  sea,  stream, river,  well, or  even vessel
  of water could not be poisoned or defiled - as all things could.)      
                                                                        
                                   (iii)                                 
                                                                        
  The   Valar   'fade'   and   become   more   impotent,    precisely   in
  proportion   as   the   shape   and   constitution  of   things  becomes
  more  defined  and  settled.  The  longer  the  Past,  the  more  nearly
  defined   the   Future,  and   the  less   room  for   important  change
  (untrammelled  action,  on  a  physical  plane,  that  is  not  destruc-
  tive  in  purpose).  The  Past,  once  'achieved',  has  become  part of
  the  'Music  in  being'.  Only  Eru may  or can  alter the  'Music'. The
  last  major  effort,  of  this  demiurgic  kind, made  by the  Valar was
  the lifting up  of the  range of  the Pelori  to a  great height.  It is
  possible to view this as, if  not an  actually bad  action, at  least as
  a  mistaken  one.  Ulmo  disapproved of it.(4) It  had  one   good,  and
  legitimate, object: the  preservation incorrupt  of at  least a  part of
  Arda. But  it seemed  to have  a selfish  or neglectful  (or despairing)
  motive  also;  for  the  effort  to preserve  the Elves  incorrupt there
  had  proved  a  failure  if  they  were  to  be  left  free:   many  had
  refused  to  come  to  the   Blessed  Realm,   many  had   revolted  and
  left  it.  Whereas,  with  regard  to  Men,  Manwe  and  all  the  Valar
  knew  quite  well  that  they  could  not  come  to  Aman  at  all;  and
  the  longevity  (co-extensive  with  the  life  of  Arda)  of  Valar and
  Eldar  was  expressly  not  permitted  to  Men.  Thus  the   'Hiding  of
  Valinor'  came  near  to  countering   Morgoth's  possessiveness   by  a
  rival  possessiveness,  setting  up  a  private  domain  of   light  and
  bliss  against  one  of  darkness  and  domination:   a  palace   and  a
  pleasaunce (5) (well-fenced) against a fortress and a dungeon.(6)          
      This  appearance  of  selfish   faineance  in   the  Valar   in  the
  mythology   as   told   is   (though   I  have   not  explained   it  or
  commented  on  it)  I  think  only  an   'appearance',  and   one  which
  we are apt  to accept  as the  truth, since  we are  all in  some degree
  affected  by  the   shadow  and   lies  of   their  Enemy,   the  Calum-
  niator.  It  has  to  be  remembered  that  the  'mythology'  is  repre-
  sented  as  being  two  stages  removed  from  a  true  record:   it  is
  based  first  upon  Elvish  records  and  lore   about  the   Valar  and
  their   own   dealings   with   them;   and   these   have   reached  us
  (fragmentarily)    only   through    relics   of    Numenorean   (human)
  traditions,  derived  from  the  Eldar,  in  the  earlier  parts, though
  for   later   times  supplemented   by  anthropocentric   histories  and

 tales.(7) These, it is  true,  came down  through the  'Faithful' and
 their  descendants   in  Middle-earth,   but  could   not  altogether
 escape  the  darkening of  the picture  due to  the hostility  of the
 rebellious Numenoreans to the Valar.                                
   Even  so, and  on the  grounds of  the stories  as received,  it is
 possible  to  view  the  matter  otherwise.  The  closing  of Valinor
 against  the  rebel  Noldor  (who  left  it  voluntarily   and  after
 warning) was in itself just. But, if we dare to attempt to  enter the
 mind  of  the  Elder  King,  assigning  motives  and  finding faults,
 there  are  things  to  remember  before  we  deliver   a  judgement.
 Manwe  was  the  spirit  of  greatest  wisdom  and prudence  in Arda.
 He  is  represented  as  having  had  the  greatest knowledge  of the
 Music,  as  a  whole,  possessed  by  any  one  finite  mind;  and he
 alone  of  all  persons  or  minds  in  that  time is  represented as
 having  the  power  of  direct  recourse  to  and  communication with
 Eru.  He  must  have  grasped  with  great clarity  what even  we may
 perceive dimly:  that it  was the  essential mode  of the  process of
 'history' in Arda  that evil  should constantly  arise, and  that out
 of  it  new  good  should  constantly  come.  One especial  aspect of
 this is the strange  way in  which the  evils of  the Marrer,  or his
 inheritors,  are  turned into  weapons against  evil. If  we consider
 the  situation  after  the  escape  of  Morgoth and  the reestablish-
 ment  of  his abode  in Middle-earth,  we shall  see that  the heroic
 Noldor  were  the  best  possible  weapon  with  which  to  keep Mor-
 goth  at bay,  virtually besieged,  and at  any rate  fully occupied,
 on  the  northern  fringe  of  Middle-earth,  without  provoking  him
 to a frenzy  of nihilistic  destruction. And  in the  meanwhile, Men,
 or  the  best  elements  in  Mankind,  shaking  off his  shadow, came
 into  contact  with  a  people  who  had  actually  seen  and experi-
 enced the Blessed Realm.                                            
   In  their  association  with  the  warring  Eldar  Men  were raised
 to their fullest  achievable stature,  and by  the two  marriages the
 transference  to  them,  or  infusion  into  Mankind, of  the noblest
 Elf-strain  was  accomplished,  in readiness  for the  still distant,
 but inevitably approaching, days when the Elves would 'fade'.       
   The  last  intervention with  physical force  by the  Valar, ending
 in  the  breaking  of  Thangorodrim,  may  then be  viewed as  not in
 fact  reluctant  or even  unduly delayed,  but timed  with precision.
 The  intervention  came  before  the  annihilation  of the  Eldar and
 the   Edain.   Morgoth  though   locally  triumphant   had  neglected
 most  of  Middle-earth  during  the  war; and  by it  he had  in fact
 been  weakened:  in power  and prestige  (he had  lost and  failed to

 recover  one  of  the  Silmarils),  and  above  all   in  mind.   He  had
 become  absorbed  in  'kingship',  and  though  a  tyrant   of  ogre-size
 and  monstrous  power,  this  was  a  vast  fall  even  from  his  former
 wickedness  of  hate,  and  his  terrible  nihilism.  He  had  fallen  to
 like  being  a  tyrant-king   with  conquered   slaves,  and   vast  obe-
 dient armies.(8)                                                         
   The  war  was  successful,  and  ruin  was  limited  to  the  small (if
 beautiful)  region  of   Beleriand.  Morgoth   was  thus   actually  made
 captive  in  physical  form,(9) and in   that  form   taken  as   a  mere
 criminal   to   Aman   and   delivered   to  Namo   Mandos  as   judge  -
 and  executioner.  He  was  judged,  and  eventually  taken  out  of  the
 Blessed   Realm  and   executed:  that   is  killed   like  one   of  the
 Incarnates.  It  was  then  made   plain  (though   it  must   have  been
 understood   beforehand   by   Manwe   and   Namo)   that,    though   he
 had   'disseminated'   his   power   (his   evil   and   possessive   and
 rebellious  will)  far  and wide  into the  matter of  Arda, he  had lost
 direct control of  this, and  all that  'he', as  a surviving  remnant of
 integral  being,  retained  as  'himself'  and  under  control   was  the
 terribly   shrunken  and   reduced  spirit   that  inhabited   his  self-
 imposed   (but   now   beloved)   body.   When   that   body   was   des-
 troyed  he  was  weak  and  utterly  'houseless',  and  for that  time at
 a  loss  and  'unanchored'  as  it  were.  We  read  that  he   was  then
 thrust  out  into  the  Void.(10) That  should  mean  that  he   was  put
 outside  Time  and  Space,  outside  Ea  altogether;  but  if  that  were
 so  this  would  imply  a  direct  intervention of  Eru (with  or without
 supplication  of  the   Valar).  It   may  however   refer  inaccurately *
 to the extrusion or flight of his spirit from Arda.                      
   In  any  case,   in  seeking   to  absorb   or  rather   to  infiltrate
 himself  throughout  'matter',  what  was  then  left   of  him   was  no
 longer  powerful  enough  to  reclothe  itself.  (It  would   now  remain
 fixed  in  the  desire   to  do   so:  there   was  no   'repentance'  or
 possibility  of  it:  Melkor  had  abandoned  for  ever  all  'spiritual'
 ambitions,  and  existed  almost  solely  as  a  desire  to  possess  and
 dominate  matter,  and  Arda  in  particular.)  At  least  it  could  not
 yet   reclothe   itself.   We   need   not   suppose   that   Manwe  was
 deluded  into  supposing  that  this  had  been  a  war  to  end  war, or
                                                                         
   (* [footnote  to the  text] Since  the minds  of Men  (and even  of the
 Elves) were inclined to confuse the 'Void', as a conception of  the state
 of  Not-being,  outside  Creation  or  Ea,  with  the conception  of vast
 spaces within Ea, especially those conceived to lie all about the enisled
 'Kingdom of Arda' (which we should probably call the Solar System).)     

 even  to  end  Melkor.  Melkor  was  not  Sauron.  We  speak   of  him
 being  'weakened,  shrunken,  reduced';  but  this  is  in  comparison
 with  the  great  Valar.  He  had  been  a  being  of  immense potency
 and life. The Elves certainly held and taught  that fear  or 'spirits'
 may  grow  of  their  own life  (independently of  the body),  even as
 they  may  be  hurt  and  healed,  be  diminished and renewed.(11) The
 dark  spirit  of  Melkor's  'remainder'  might  be   expected,  there-
 fore,  eventually  and  after long  ages to  increase again,  even (as
 some  held)  to   draw  back   into  itself   some  of   its  formerly
 dissipated  power.  It  would  do  this  (even  if  Sauron  could not)
 because of its relative greatness. It did not repent, or  turn finally
 away  from  its  obsession, but  retained still  relics of  wisdom, so
 that  it  could  still  seek  its  object  indirectly, and  not merely
 blindly. It would rest, seek to heal itself, distract itself  by other
 thoughts  and  desires  and  devices  -  but  all  simply  to  recover
 enough  strength to  return to  the attack  on the  Valar, and  to its
 old  obsession.  As  it  grew  again it  would become,  as it  were, a
 dark  shadow,  brooding  on  the  confines   of  Arda,   and  yearning
 towards it.                                                          
   Nonetheless  the   breaking  of   Thangorodrim  and   the  extrusion
 of  Melkor  was  the  end  of  'Morgoth'  as  such,  and for  that age
 (and  many  ages after).  It was  thus, also,  in a  sense the  end of
 Manwe  s  prime  function  and  task  as  Elder  King, until  the End.
 He had been the Adversary of the Enemy.                              
   It  is  very  reasonable  to  suppose  that  Manwe knew  that before
 long  (as  he  saw  'time')  the  Dominion  of  Men  must  begin,  and
 the  making  of  history  would  then  be   committed  to   them:  for
 their  struggle  with  Evil  special   arrangements  had   been  made!
 Manwe   knew   of  Sauron,   of  course.   He  had   commanded  Sauron
 to   come  before   him  for   judgement,  but   had  left   room  for
 repentance  and  ultimate  rehabilitation.  Sauron  had   refused  and
 had  fled  into  hiding.  Sauron,  however,  was  a  problem  that Men
 had to  deal with  finally: the  first of  the many  concentrations of
 Evil  into  definite  power-points  that  they  would have  to combat,
 as  it  was  also  the  last of  those in  'mythological' personalized
 (but non-human) form.                                                
   It  may  be noted  that Sauron's  first defeat  was achieved  by the
 Numenoreans  alone  (though   Sauron  was   not  in   fact  overthrown
 personally:  his  'captivity'  was  voluntary  and  a  trick).  In the
 first   overthrow   and  disembodiment   of  Sauron   in  Middle-earth
 (neglecting the matter of Luthien) (12)                              
                                                                     
 Here the long version B breaks off, at the foot of a page. I give now

  the conclusion of version A from the point where the texts diverge (see
  p. 394  and note  6), beginning  with the  sentence corresponding  to B
  (p. 401) 'The last major effort, of  this demiurgic  kind, made  by the
  Valar...'                                                              
                                                                        
  The last  effort of  this sort  made by  the Valar  was the  raising up
  of  the  Pelori  -  but  this  was  not  a  good act:  it came  near to
  countering  Morgoth  in  his  own  way  -  apart  from  the  element of
  selfishness in its object of preserving  Aman as  a blissful  region to
  live in.                                                               
    The  Valar  were  like  architects  working  with  a   plan  'passed'
  by   the   Government.   They   became   less   and    less   important
  (structurally!)  as  the  plan  was  more  and  more  nearly  achieved.
  Even  in  the  First  Age  we  see  them after  uncounted ages  of work
  near  the  end  of  their  time  of  work  -  not  wisdom  or  counsel.
  (The  wiser  they  became  the  less  power  they  had  to  do anything
  - save by counsel.)                                                    
    Similarly   the   Elves   faded,    having   introduced    'art   and
  science'.(13) Men will also 'fade', if it  proves to  be the  plan that
  things  shall  still  go  on,  when  they  have  completed  their func-
  tion.  But  even  the  Elves  had  the  notion that  this would  not be
  so:  that  the  end  of  Men  would  somehow  be  bound  up   with  the
  end  of  history,  or  as they  called it  'Arda Marred'  (Arda Sahta),
  and   the   achievement   of   'Arda   Healed'   (Arda   Envinyanta).(14)
  (They  do  not  seem  to  have  been  clear  or  precise  -  how should
  they  be!  -  whether  Arda  Envinyanta  was   a  permanent   state  of
  achievement,   which   could   therefore   only  be   enjoyed  'outside
  Time',  as  it  were: surveying  the Tale  as an  englobed whole;  or a
  state  of  unmarred  bliss within  Time and  in a  'place' that  was in
  some  sense  a  lineal  and historical  descent of  our world  or 'Arda
  Marred'.  They  seem  often  to  have   meant  both.   'Arda  Unmarred'
  did  not  actually  exist,  but  remained  in  thought  -  Arda without
  Melkor, or  rather without  the effects  of his  becoming evil;  but is
  the  source  from  which  all  ideas  of   order  and   perfection  are
  derived. 'Arda  Healed' is  thus both  the completion  of the  'Tale of
  Arda'  which  has  taken  up  all  the  deeds   of  Melkor,   but  must
  according  to the  promise of  Iluvatar be  seen to  be good;  and also
  a state of redress and bliss beyond the 'circles of the world'.) (15)  
                                                                        
    Evil is  fissiparous. But  itself barren.  Melkor could  not 'beget',
  or  have  any  spouse  (though  he  attempted  to  ravish  Arien,  this
  was  to  destroy  and  distain'(16) her, not to beget fiery offspring).
  Out of  the discords  of the  Music -  sc. not  directly out  of either

 of  the  themes,(17) Eru's or Melkor's,  but  of  their  dissonance  with
 regard  one  to  another  -  evil  things  appeared  in  Arda,  which did
 not  descend  from  any  direct  plan  or  vision  of  Melkor:  they were
 not  'his  children';  and  therefore,  since all  evil hates,  hated him
 too.  The  progeniture  of  things  was   corrupted.  Hence   Orcs?  Part
 of  the  Elf-Man  idea  gone  wrong.  Though  as  for  Orcs,   the  Eldar
 believed   Morgoth   had   actually   'bred'   them   by   capturing  Men
 (and   Elves)   early   and   increasing  to   the  utmost   any  corrupt
 tendencies they possessed.                                               
                                                                         
   Despite  its  incomplete state  (whether due  to the  loss of  the con-
 clusion of the fully developed form of the essay  or to  its abandonment,
 see  note  6)  this  is  the  most comprehensive  account that  my father
 wrote of how, in his later years, he had come  to 'interpret'  the nature
 of  Evil  in  his  mythology;  never  elsewhere  did  he  write  any such
 exposition  of  the  nature  of  Morgoth,  of  his  decline,  and  of his
 corruption  of  Arda,  nor  draw  out  the  distinction  between  Morgoth
 and Sauron: 'the whole of Middle-earth was Morgoth's Ring'.              
   To place this essay in sequential relation to the other 'philosophical'
 or 'theological' writings  given in  this book  with any  certainty seems
 scarcely  possible,  though  Fionwe  son of  Manwe on  p. 399  (for Eonwe
 herald  of  Manwe')  may suggest  that it  stands relatively  early among
 them (see pp. 151 - 2). It shows a marked  likeness in  tone to  the many
 letters  of  exposition  that  my father  wrote in  the later  1950s, and
 indeed  it  seems  to  me  very  possible  that the  correspondence which
 followed the publication of The Lord  of the  Rings played  a significant
 part in the development  of his  examination of  the 'images  and events'
 of the mythology.(18)                                                    

                            NOTES.                                     
                                                                      
 1. Ragnarok: 'the Doom of the Gods' (Old Norse): see IX.286.        
 2. hroa: so written here and at the second occurrence below  (and in
    text A), not as elsewhere always hroa, where it  means the  body of
    an incarnate being.  The word  used for  'physical matter'  in Laws
    and  Customs  was  hron,  later changed  to orma  (p. 218  and note
    26); in the Commentary on the  Athrabeth and  in the  'Glossary' of
    names the word is erma (pp. 338, 349).                             
 3. On this sentence see p. 271.                                        
 4. Overt  condemnation,  strongly  expressed,  of  the  Valar  for the
    Hiding of Valinor is found in the story of that  name in  The Book
    of Lost Tales (1.208 - 9), but disappears in the later versions. Of
    the old story I noted (1.223) that 'in The Silmarillion there is no
    vestige of  the tumultuous  council, no  suggestion of  a disagree-
    ment  among  the  Valar,  with  Manwe,  Varda  and   Ulmo  actively

      disapproving  the  work  and  holding  aloof  from  it',  and  I com-
      mented:                                                              
         It is most curious to observe that  the action  of the  Valar here
      sprang   essentially   from  indolence   mixed  with   fear.  Nowhere
      does  my  father's  early  conception  of  the  faineant  Gods appear
      more  clearly.  He   held  moreover   quite  explicitly   that  their
      failure  to  make  war  upon  Melko  then  and   there  was   a  deep
      error,  diminishing  themselves,  and  (as  it  appears) irreparable.
      In  his  later  writing the  Hiding of  Valinor remained  indeed, but
      only  as  a  great  fact  of  mythological  antiquity;  there  is  no
      whisper of its condemnation.                                         
      The last words refer  to the  actual Silmarillion  narratives. Ulmo's
      disapproval  now  reappears,  and  is  a  further  evidence   of  his
      isolation in the counsels of the Valar (see p. 253 note 11);  cf. his
      words  to  Tuor  at  Vinyamar  (having  spoken  to  him,  among other
      things, of 'the hiding  of the  Blessed Realm',  though what  he said
      is not told): Therefore, though in the days of  this darkness  I seem
      to oppose the will of my  brethren, the  Lords of  the West,  that is
      my  part  among  them, to  which I  was appointed  ere the  making of
      the World' (Unfinished Tales p. 29).
  5.  pleasaunce  (=  pleasance):  a  'pleasure-garden'.  My   father  used
      this  word  several  times  in  The  Book of  Lost Tales  (see 1.275,
      pleasance), for example of the gardens of Lorien.                    
  6.  At  this  point  my  father  wrote  on  the  manuscript  later:  'See
      original  short  form  on  Fading of  Elves (and  Men)'. See  p. 394.
      This seems a clear indication that B  was not  completed, or  that if
      it was its conclusion was early lost.                                
  7.  Cf. the statement on this subject in the brief text I, p. 370.       
  8.  Since this discussion is introduced in justification of the Hiding of
      Valinor, the bearing of  the argument  seems to  be that  the history
      of Middle-earth  in the  last centuries  of the  First Age  would not
      have  been  possible  of  achievement  had  Valinor remained  open to
      the return of the Noldor.                                            
  9.  As, of course, had  happened to  Melkor long  before, after  the sack
      of Utumno.                                                           
 10.  Cf.  the  conclusion  of QS  (V.332, $29):  'But Morgoth  himself the
      Gods  thrust  through  the  Door  of  Night  into the  Timeless Void,
      beyond the Walls of the World'.                                      
 11.  The following was added marginally after the page was written:       
       If they do not sink below a certain  level. Since  no fea  can be
       annihilated,  reduced  to  zero  or not-existing,  it is  no[t] clear
       what  is  meant.  Thus  Sauron  was  said  to  have fallen  below the
       point  of  ever  recovering,  though  he  had  previously  recovered.
       What  is  probably  meant  is  that a  'wicked' spirit  becomes fixed
       in a certain desire or ambition, and  if it  cannot repent  then this
       desire  becomes  virtually  its whole  being. But  the desire  may be

       wholly beyond the weakness it  has fallen  to, and  it will  then be     
       unable  to  withdraw  its  attention  from the  unobtainable desire,   j
       even to attend to itself. It will then remain  for ever  in impotent     
       desire or memory of desire.                                              
                                                                               
  12. A reference to  the legend  of the  defeat of  Sauron by  Luthien and     
      Huan  on  the  isle  of  Tol-in-Gaurhoth,  where  Beren  was  impris-     
      oned (The Silmarillion pp. 174 - 5).                                      
  13. Cf.  Letters  no.181   (1956):  'In   this  mythological   world  the     
      Elves  and  Men  are  in their  incarnate forms  kindred, but  in the     
      relation of their "spirits" to the world in time  represent different     
      "experiments",    each  of  which  has  its  own  natural  trend, and     
      weakness. The Elves represent, as it  were, the  artistic, aesthetic,   1
      and  purely  scientific  aspects  of  the Humane  nature raised  to a     
      higher level than is actually seen in Men.'                               
  14. In  the text  FM 2  of 'Finwe  and Miriel'  (p. 254,  footnote) 'Arda     
      Marred'  is  Arda  Hastaina.  Arda  Envinyanta, at  both occurrences,     
      was first written Arda Vincarna.                                          
  15. With this passage in brackets cf. especially note (iii) at the end of     
      Laws  and  Customs  (p.  251);  also  pp.  245, 254  (footnote), 318.     
  16. distain: an archaic verb meaning 'stain', 'discolour', 'defile'.          
  17. The  Three Themes  of Iluvatar  in the  Music of  the Ainur  are here     
      treated as a single theme,  in opposition  to the  discordant 'theme'     
      of Melkor.                                                                
  18. In a letter of June 1957 (Letters no.200) he wrote:                       
         I  am sorry  if this  all seems  dreary and  'pompose'. But  so do     
      all  attempts  to  'explain' the  images and  events of  a mythology.     
      Naturally the stories come first. But it is, I suppose, some  test of     
      the consistency of  a mythology  as such,  if it  is capable  of some   ]
      sort of rational or rationalized explanation.                             

                                    VIII.                                  
                                                                          
 In the last sentence of the original short version of text VII (p.  406) my
 father  wrote  that  the  Eldar  believed  that   Morgoth  bred   the  Orcs
 'by  capturing Men  (and Elves)  early' (i.e.  in the  early days  of their
 existence).  This  indicates  that his  views on  this subject  had changed
 since the Annals of Aman. For the theory of the  origin of  the Orcs  as it
 stood, in point  of written  record in  the narratives,(1) at this time see
 AAm   $42   -   5   (pp.   72-4,   and   commentary   p.   78),   and  $127
 (pp. 109  - 10,  and commentary  pp. 123  - 4).  In the  final form  in AAm
 (p.   74)   'this    is   held    true   by    the   wise    of   Eressea':
 all  those  of  the  Quendi  that  came  into  the  hands  of  Melkor,  ere
 Utumno  was  broken,  were  put  there  in  prison,  and  by  slow  arts of
 cruelty   and   wickedness   were   corrupted   and   enslaved.   Thus  did

 Melkor  breed the  hideous race  of the  Orkor in  envy and  mockery of
 the Eldar, of whom  they were  afterwards the  bitterest foes.  For the
 Orkor  had  life and  multiplied after  the manner  of the  Children of
 Iluvatar;  and  naught  that  had life  of its  own, nor  the semblance
 thereof, could ever  Melkor make  since his  rebellion in  the Ainulin-
 dale before the Beginning: so say the wise.                            
 On the typescript of AAm  my father  noted against  the account  of the
 origin of the Orcs: 'Alter this. Orcs are not Elvish' (p. 80).         
                                                                       
 The present text, entitled 'Orcs', is a short essay (very much a record
 of 'thinking with the pen') found in the same small collection gathered
 in a newspaper of 1959 as texts III and VI. Like them it was written on
 Merton College papers of 1955; and like text VI  it makes  reference to
 'Finrod and Andreth' (see pp. 385, 390).                               
                                                                       
                                  Orcs.                                 
                                                                       
 Their  nature  and  origin  require  more  thought.  They are  not easy
 to work into the theory and system.                                    
 (1). As   the  case   of  Aule   and  the   Dwarves  shows,   only  Eru
 could  make  creatures  with  independent   wills,  and   with  reason-
 ing  powers.  But  Orcs  seem  to  have  both:  they  can try  to cheat
 Morgoth / Sauron, rebel against him, or criticize him.                 
 (2).  ?   Therefore   they   must    be   corruptions    of   something
 pre-existing.                                                          
 (3).  But   Men   had  not   yet  appeared,   when  the   Orcs  already
 existed.  Aule  constructed  the  Dwarves  out  of  his  memory  of the
 Music;  but  Eru  would  not  sanction  the  work  of  Melkor so  as to
 allow   the   independence  of   the  Orcs.   (Not  unless   Orcs  were
 ultimately remediable, or could be amended and 'saved'?)               
 It  also   seems  clear   (see  'Finrod   and  Andreth')   that  though
 Melkor  could  utterly  corrupt  and  ruin   individuals,  it   is  not
 possible   to   contemplate   his  absolute   perversion  of   a  whole
 people,   or   group   of   peoples,   and   his   making   that  state
 heritable.(2) [Added later:  This latter  must (if a fact) be an act of
 Eru.]                                                                  
 In  that  case  Elves, as  a source,  are very  unlikely. And  are Orcs
 'immortal',  in  the  Elvish  sense?  Or   trolls?  It   seems  clearly
 implied  in The  Lord of  the Rings  that trolls  existed in  their own
 right, but were 'tinkered' with by Melkor.(3)                          
 (4).  What   of   talking   beasts   and   birds  with   reasoning  and
 speech?   These   have   been   rather   lightly   adopted   from  less
 'serious'  mythologies,   but  play   a  part   which  cannot   now  be
 excised.  They  are  certainly  'exceptions'  and  not  much  used, but

 sufficiently  to show  they are  a recognized  feature of  the world.
 All other creatures accept them as natural if not common.           
   But  true  'rational'  creatures,  'speaking  peoples', are  all of
 human   /   'humanoid'   form.   Only   the   Valar  and   Maiar  are
 intelligences  that  can  assume  forms  of  Arda  at will.  Huan and
 Sorontar  could  be  Maiar  -  emissaries  of  Manwe.(4) But unfortu-
 nately  in  The  Lord  of the  Rings Gwaehir  and Landroval  are said
 to be descendants of Sorontar.(5)                                   
   In any case is it likely  or possible  that even  the least  of the
 Maiar  would  become  Orcs?  Yes:  both  outside  Arda  and   in  it,
 before  the  fall  of  Utumno.  Melkor had  corrupted many  spirits -
 some  great,  as  Sauron,  or less  so, as  Balrogs. The  least could
 have   been  primitive   (and  much   more  powerful   and  perilous)
 Orcs;  but  by  practising  when  embodied  procreation   they  would
 (cf.   Melian)  [become]   more  and   more  earthbound,   unable  to
 return  to spirit-state  (even demon-form),  until released  by death
 (killing),  and  they  would  dwindle  in  force. When  released they
 would,  of  course,  like  Sauron,  be  'damned':  i.e.   reduced  to
 impotence,  infinitely recessive:  still hating  but unable  more and
 more  to  make  it  effective  physically  (or   would  not   a  very
 dwindled dead Orc-state be a poltergeist?).                         
   But  again  -  would  Eru  provide  fear  for  such  creatures? For
 the Eagles etc. perhaps. But not for Orcs.(6)                       
   It  does  however  seem  best  to  view  Melkor's  corrupting power
 as always starting, at least, in the moral or theological  level. Any
 creature  that  took  him  for  Lord  (and  especially  those   v  ho
 blasphemously   called   him   Father   or   Creator)   became   soon
 corrupted  in  all parts  of its  being, the  fea dragging  down the
 hroa  in  its  descent  into  Morgothism:  hate  and  destruction. As
 for  Elves  being  'immortal':  they  in  fact  only  had  enormously
 long  lives,  and  were  themselves  physically  'wearing  out',  and
 suffering a slow progressive weakening of their bodies.             
   In  summary:  I  think  it must  be assumed  that 'talking'  is not
 necessarily the sign of the possession of a 'rational soul' or fea.(7)
 The   Orcs   were   beasts   of   humanized   shape   (to   mock  Men
 and  Elves)  deliberately  perverted  I converted  into a  more close
 resemblance  to  Men.   Their  'talking'   was  really   reeling  off
 'records'  set  in  them  by Melkor.  Even their  rebellious critical
 words  -  he  knew  about  them.  Melkor   taught  them   speech  and
 as  they  bred  they  inherited  this;  and  they  had  just  as much
 independence  as   have,  say,   dogs  or   horses  of   their  human
 masters.  This  talking  was  largely  echoic  (cf. parrots).  In The

 Lord  of the  Rings Sauron  is said  to have  devised a  language for
 them.(8)                                                             
   The  same  sort  of  thing  may  be  said of  Huan and  the Eagles:
 they  were  taught  language  by the  Valar, and  raised to  a higher
 level - but they still had no fear.                                 
   But  Finrod  probably  went too  far in  his assertion  that Melkor
 could  not  wholly  corrupt  any  work  of  Eru,  or  that  Eru would
 (necessarily) interfere  to abrogate  the corruption,  or to  end the
 being  of  His  own  creatures  because   they  had   been  corrupted
 and fallen into evil.(9)                                             
   It  remains  therefore  terribly  possible  there  was   an  Elvish
 strain  in  the  Orcs.(10) These may then even  have been  mated with
 beasts  (sterile!)  -  and  later  Men.  Their  life-span   would  be
 diminished.  And  dying  they  would  go  to  Mandos  and be  held in
 prison till the End.                                                 
                                                                     
   The text as written ends here, but my father subsequently added the
 following passage. The words with which it opens  are a  reference to
 text Vl, Melkor Morgoth (p. 390).                                    
                                                                     
   See 'Melkor'. It  will there  be seen  that the  wills of  Orcs and
 Balrogs etc.  are part  of Melkor's  power 'dispersed'.  Their spirit
 is  one of  hate. But  hate is  non-cooperative (except  under direct
 fear).  Hence  the  rebellions,  mutinies,  etc.  when  Morgoth seems
 far off. Orcs  are beasts  and Balrogs  corrupted Maiar.  Also (n.b.)
 Morgoth  not  Sauron  is  the  source  of  Orc-wills. Sauron  is just
 another  (if  greater)  agent.  Orcs  can  rebel against  him without
 losing  their  own  irremediable allegiance  to evil  (Morgoth). Aule
 wanted  love.  But  of  course  had  no  thought  of  dispersing  his
 power.  Only  Eru  can  give  love  and  independence.  If  a  finite
 sub-creator  tries  to  do  this  he  really  wants  absolute  loving
 obedience, but it turns into robotic servitude and becomes evil.     

                           NOTES.                                     
                                                                     
  1. In a long letter to Peter Hastings of September 1954, which was
     not sent (Letters no.153), my father wrote as follows on the
     question of whether Orcs 'could have "souls" or "spirits"':
       ... since in my myth at any rate I do not conceive of the making
       of souls or spirits, things of an equal order if not an equal power
       to the Valar, as a possible 'delegation', I have represented at
       least the Orcs as pre-existing real beings on whom the Dark
       Lord has exerted the fullness of his power in remodelling and
       corrupting them, not making them.... There might be other

     'makings' all the same which were more like puppets filled           
     (only at a distance) with their maker's mind and  will, or           
     ant-like operating under direction of a queen-centre.                
                                                                         
     Earlier  in this  letter he  had quoted  Frodo's words  to Sam  in the
     chapter  'The  Tower  of   Cirith  Ungol':   'The  Shadow   that  bred
     them  can  only  mock,  it  cannot make:  not real  new things  of its
     own. I don't think it gave life to the orcs, it  only ruined  them and
     twisted them'; and he went on: 'In the legends of the Elder Days  it ?
     is  suggested  that  the  Diabolus  subjugated  and corrupted  some of
     the earliest  Elves ...'  He also  said that  the Orcs  'are fundamen-
     tally a race of "rational incarnate" creatures'.                     
  2. In the Athrabeth (p. 312) Finrod declared:                           
     But  never  even  in  the  night  have   we  believed   that  [Melkor)
     could  prevail  against  the  Children  of  Eru.  This  one  he  might
     cozen,  or  that  one  he  might corrupt;  but to  change the  doom of
     a  whole  people  of  the  Children,  to  rob  them of  their inherit-
     ance: if he  could do  that in  Eru's despite,  then greater  and more
     terrible is he by far than we guessed...                             
  3. In The Lord of the Rings Appendix F (I) it is said of Trolls:        
     In  their  beginning  far  back  in  the twilight  of the  Elder Days,
     these  were  creatures  of  dull  and  lumpish   nature  and   had  no
     more  language  than  beasts.  But  Sauron  had  made  use   of  them,
     teaching  them  what  little  they could  learn, and  increasing their
     wits with wickedness.                                                
     In the  long letter  of September  1954 cited  in note  1 he  wrote of
     them:                                                                
     I am  not sure  about Trolls.  I think  they are  mere 'counterfeits',
     and  hence  (though  here  I  am  of  course  only  using  elements of
     old   barbarous   mythmaking   that   had   no   'aware'   metaphysic)
     they  return  to  mere  stone  images  when  not  in  the   dark.  But
     there are other  sorts of  Trolls beside  these rather  ridiculous, if
     brutal,  Stone-trolls,  for  which  other  origins  are  suggested. Of
     course...  when  you  make  Trolls  speak  you   are  giving   them  a
     power,  which  in  our  world   (probably)  connotes   the  possession
     of a 'soul'.                                                         
  4. See p. 138.  - At  the bottom  of the  page bearing  the brief  text V
     (p. 389)  my father  jotted down  the following,  entirely unconnected
     with the matter of the text:                                         
     Living  things   in  Aman.   As  the   Valar  would   robe  themselves
     like  the  Children,  many   of  the   Maiar  robed   themselves  like
     other lesser living things, as trees, flowers, beasts. (Huan.)       
  5. 'There  came  Gwaihir  the  Windlord,   and  Landroval   his  brother,
     greatest of all the  Eagles of  the North,  mightiest of  the descend-
     ants  of  old  Thorondor'  ('The  Field  of  Cormallen' in  The Return
     of the King).                                                        

  6. At this point there is a note that begins 'Criticism  of (1)  (2) (3)
     above' (i.e. the opening points of this text, p. 409) and then refers
     obscurely to the 'last  battle and  fall of  Barad-dur etc.'  in The
     Lord  of  the  Rings.  In  view   of  what   follows  my   father  was
     presumably   thinking   of   this  passage   in  the   chapter  'Mount
     Doom':                                                                
        From all  his policies  and webs  of fear  and treachery,  from all
     his  stratagems  and  wars  his  mind   shook  free;   and  throughout
     his realm a tremor  ran, his  slaves quailed,  and his  armies halted,
     and  his  captains  suddenly  steerless, bereft  of will,  wavered and
     despaired. For they were forgotten.                                   
    The note continues:                                                  
        They had little or no will when not actually 'attended to'  by the
     mind  of  Sauron.  Does  their  cheating   and  rebellion   pass  that
     possible to such animals as dogs etc.?                                
  7. Cf. the end of the passage cited from the letter of 1954 in note 3.
  8. Appendix F (I):  'It is  said that  the Black  Speech was  devised by
     Sauron in the Dark Years'.                                            
  9. See the citation  from the  Athrabeth in  note 2.  Finrod did  not in
     fact assert the latter part of the opinion here attributed to him.
 10. The assertion that 'it remains therefore terribly possible  there was
     an Elvish  strain in  the Orcs'  seems merely  to contradict  what has
     been  said about  their being  no more  than 'talking  beasts' without
     advancing  any  new  considerations.  In  the  passage  added  at  the
     end of the text the statement that 'Orcs are beasts' is repeated.     

                                 IX.                                
                                                                   
 This is another and quite separate note on the origin of  the Orcs,
 written quickly in pencil, and without any indication of date.     
                                                                   
 This suggests - though it is not explicit - that the 'Orcs' were of
 Elvish origin. Their origin is more  clearly dealt  with elsewhere.
 One  point  only  is  certain:  Melkor  could  not  'create' living
 'creatures' of independent wills.                                  
   He (and all the  'spirits' of  the 'First-created',  according to
 their  measure)  could  assume  bodily  shapes;  and he  (and they)
 could  dominate  the  minds  of  other  creatures,  including Elves
 and Men, by force, fear, or deceits, or sheer magnificence.        
   The  Elves from  their earliest  times invented  and used  a word
 or words with a  base (o)rok  to denote  anything that  caused fear
 and/or  horror.  It would  originally have  been applied  to 'phan-
 toms' (spirits assuming visible forms) as well as to  any independ-
 ently existing creatures. Its application  (in all  Elvish tongues)

 specifically to the creatures called Orks  - so  I shall  spell it  in The
 Silmarillion - was later.                                                 
   Since   Melkor   could   not  'create'   an  independent   species,  but
 had  immense   powers  of   corruption  and   distortion  of   those  that
 came  into  his  power,  it  is  probable  that  these  Orks  had  a mixed
 origin.  Most  of  them  plainly   (and  biologically)   were  corruptions
 of   Elves  (and   probably  later   also  of   Men).  But   always  among
 them  (as  special  servants  and  spies  of   Melkor,  and   as  leaders)
 there   must   have   been   numerous   corrupted   minor    spirits   who
 assumed   similar   bodily   shapes.   (These  would   exhibit  terrifying
 and demonic characters.)                                                  
   The  Elves  would  have  classed  the  creatures  called   'trolls'  (in
 The  Hobbit  and  The  Lord  of  the  Rings)  as   Orcs  -   in  character
 and  origin  -  but   they  were   larger  and   slower.  It   would  seem
 evident that they were corruptions of primitive human types.              
                                                                          
   At  the  bottom  of  the  page  my father  wrote: 'See  The Lord  of the
 Rings  Appendix  p. 410';  this is  the passage  in Appendix  F concerning
 Trolls.                                                                   
   It seems possible that his opening words in this  note 'This  suggests -
 though  it  is  not  explicit  -  that  the <Orcs>  were of  Elvish origin
 actually refer to the previous text given here, VIII, where he first wrote
 that 'Elves, as a source, are very unlikely', but later concluded that 'it
 remains  therefore terribly  possible there  was an  Elvish strain  in the
 Orcs'.  But  if  this is  so, the  following words  'Their origin  is more
 clearly dealt with elsewhere' must refer to something else.               
   He  now  expressly  asserts the  earlier view  (see p.  408 and  note 1)
 that the Orcs were in origin  corrupted Elves,  but observes  that 'later'
 some  were  probably  derived  from  Men.  In  saying  this  (as  the last
 paragraph  and  the  reference  to  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  Appendix  F
 suggest) he seems to  have been  thinking of  Trolls, and  specifically of
 the  Olog-hai,  the  great Trolls  who appeared  at the  end of  the Third
 Age  (as  stated  in  Appendix F):  'That Sauron  bred them  none doubted,
 though  from  what  stock  was  not known.  Some held  that they  were not
 Trolls  but  giant  Orcs; but  the Olog-hai  were in  fashion of  body and
 mind  quite  unlike  even  the  largest  of Orc-kind,  whom they  far sur-
 passed in size and power.'                                                
   The   conception   that   among   the   Orcs   'there  must   have  been
 numerous  corrupted  minor  spirits  who  assumed  similar  bodily shapes'
 appears also in text  VIII (p.  410): 'Melkor  had corrupted  many spirits
 - some great, as  Sauron, or  less so,  as Balrogs.  The least  could have
 been primitive (and much more powerful and perilous) Orcs'.               

                                     X.                                   
                                                                         
 I give here a text of an altogether different kind, a very  finished essay
 on the origin of the Orcs.  It is  necessary to  explain something  of the
 relations of this text.                                                  
   There  is  a  major  work, which  I hope  to publish  in The  History of
 Middle-earth,  entitled  Essekenta Eldarinwa  or Quendi  and Eldar.  It is
 extant in a good typescript  made by  my father  on his  later typewriter,
 both  in top  copy and  carbon; and  it is  preceded in  both copies  by a
 manuscript page which describes the content of the work:                 
        Enquiry  into   the  origins   of  the   Elvish  names   for  Elves
 and    their    varieties   clans    and   divisions:    with   Appendices
 on    their   names    for   the    other   Incarnates:    Men,   Dwarves,
 and Orcs; and on their analysis of their own language,                   
          Quenya: with a note on the 'Language of the Valar'.             
 With  the  appendices  Quendi  and  Eldar  runs  to  nearly  fifty closely
 typed  pages,  and  being  a  highly  finished  and lucid  work is  of the
 utmost interest.                                                         
   To one of the title pages my father subjoined the following:           
      To which is added an abbreviation of the Osanwe-kenta or           
      'Communication   of   Thought'   that  Pengolodh   set  at   the  end
 of his Lammas or 'Account of Tongues'                                    
 This is a separate work of eight  typescript pages,  separately paginated,
 but found  together with  both copies  of Quendi  and Eldar.  In addition,
 and not referred to on the title-pages, there is  a further  typescript of
 four pages  (also found  with both  copies of  Quendi and  Eldar) entitled
 Orcs; and this is the text given here.                                   
   All  three  elements  are  identical  in  general  appearance,  but Orcs
 stands apart from the others, having  no linguistic  bearing; and  in view
 of this I have thought it legitimate to abstract it and  print it  in this
 book  together  with  the  other  discussions  of the  origin of  the Orcs
 given as texts VIII and IX.                                              
   As to the date of  this complex,  one of  the copies  is preserved  in a
 folded  newspaper  of  March  1960.  On  this  my father  wrote: '"Quendi
 and Eldar" with Appendices'; beneath is  a brief  list of  the Appendices,
 the  items  all  written  at  the  same time,  which includes  both Osanwe
 and Origin of Orcs (the same is true  of the  cover of  the other  copy of
 the  Quendi  and  Eldar  complex).  All  the  material  was thus  in being
 when  the  newspaper  was  used  for  this  purpose,  and although,  as in
 other similar cases, this does  not provide  a perfectly  certain terminus
 ad quem, there seems no  reason to  doubt that  it belongs  to 1959  - 60
 (cf. p. 304).                                                            
   Appendix  C  to  Quendi  and  Eldar,  'Elvish  Names  for the  Orcs', is
 primarily  concerned  with  etymology,  but  it  opens with  the following
 passage:                                                                 

 It is  not here  the place  to debate  the question  of the  origin of
 the  Orcs.  They  were  bred  by  Melkor, and  their breeding  was the
 most  wicked  and  lamentable  of  his  works  in  Arda,  but  not the
 most  terrible. For  clearly they  were meant  in his  malice to  be a
 mockery  of  the  Children  of  Iluvatar,  wholly  subservient  to his
 will, and nursed in an unappeasable hatred of Elves and Men.          
   The  Orcs  of  the  later   wars,  after   the  escape   of  Melkor-
 Morgoth  and  his  return  to   Middle-earth,  were   neither  spirits
 nor  phantoms,  but  living  creatures,  capable  of  speech   and  of
 some  crafts  and  organization,  or  at  least  capable  of  learning
 such  things  from  higher  creatures  or  from  their   Master.  They
 bred  and  multiplied  rapidly  whenever   left  undisturbed.   It  is
 unlikely,  as  a  consideration of  the ultimate  origin of  this race
 would  make  clearer,  that  the  Quendi  had  met  any  Orcs  of this
 kind,  before  their  finding  by  Orome and  the separation  of Eldar
 and Avari.                                                            
   But  it  is  known  that  Melkor  had  become  aware  of  the Quendi
 before  the Valar  began their  war against  him, and  the joy  of the
 Elves  in  Middle-earth  had  already  been  darkened  by  shadows  of
 fear.  Dreadful  shapes  had  begun  to  haunt  the  borders  of their
 dwellings,  and  some  of  their  people  vanished  into  the darkness
 and  were  heard  of  no  more.  Some  of these  things may  have been
 phantoms   and   delusions;   but   some   were,   no   doubt,  shapes
 taken  by  the  servants   of  Melkor,   mocking  and   degrading  the
 very  forms  of  the  Children. For  Melkor had  in his  service great
 numbers  of  the  Maiar,  who  had  the  power,  as had  their Master,
 of taking visible and tangible shape in Arda.                         
                                                                      
   No doubt my father was led from his words here 'It is unlikely, as a
 consideration of the ultimate origin of this race would  make clearer,
 that the Quendi had met any Orcs of this kind, before their finding by
 Orome' to write that 'consideration'  which follows  here. It  will be
 seen that one passage of this initial statement was re-used.          
                                                                      
                                  Orcs.                                
                                                                      
 The  origin  of  the  Orcs  is a  matter of  debate. Some  have called
 them  the  Melkorohini,  the  Children  of   Melkor;  but   the  wiser
 say:  nay,  the slaves  of Melkor,  but not  his children;  for Melkor
 had  no  children.(1) Nonetheless, it  was  by  the  malice  of Melkor
 that  the  Orcs arose,  and plainly  they were  meant by  him to  be a
 mockery   of  the   Children  of   Eru,  being   bred  to   be  wholly
 subservient  to  his  will  and  filled  with  unappeasable  hatred of
 Elves and Men.                                                        

                     
                                                                    
     Now  the  Orcs of  the later  wars, after  the escape  of Melkor-
  Morgoth  and  his return  to Middle-earth,  were not  'spirits', nor
  phantoms,  but  living  creatures,  capable   of  speech   and  some
  crafts  and  organization;  or  at least  capable of  learning these
  things  from  higher  creatures  and  from  their Master.  They bred
  and multiplied  rapidly, whenever  left undisturbed.  So far  as can
  be  gleaned  from  the  legends  that  have  come  down  to  us from
  our  earliest days,(2) it would seem that the  Quendi had  never yet
  encountered  any  Orcs  of  this  kind  before  the coming  of Orome
  to Cuivienen.                                                      
     Those  who  believe that  the Orcs  were bred  from some  kind of
  Men,  captured  and  perverted  by  Melkor,   assert  that   it  was
  impossible  for  the  Quendi  to  have  known  of  Orcs  before  the
  Separation  and  the  departure of  the Eldar.  For though  the time
  of  the  awakening of  Men is  not known,  even the  calculations of
  the loremasters that place it earliest do not assign it a  date long
  before   the Great March (3)  began,   certainly  not   long  enough
  before  it to  allow for  the corruption  of Men  into Orcs.  On the
  other hand, it is plain that soon  after his  return Morgoth  had at
  his  command  a  great  number  of  these  creatures,  with  whom he
  ere  long  began  to  attack the  Elves. There  was still  less time
  between  his return  and these  first assaults  for the  breeding of
  Orcs and for the transfer of their hosts westward.                 
     This view of the origin of the Orcs thus meets  with difficulties
  of  chronology.  But  though  Men  may  take  comfort  in  this, the
  theory  remains  nonetheless  the  most  probable.  It  accords with
  all that is  known of  Melkor, and  of the  nature and  behaviour of
  Orcs  -  and  of  Men.  Melkor  was impotent  to produce  any living
  thing,  but  skilled  in  the  corruption  of  things  that  did not
  proceed  from  himself, if  he could  dominate them.  But if  he had
  indeed  attempted  to  make  creatures  of his  own in  imitation or
  mockery  of  the  Incarnates,  he  would,   like  Aule,   only  have
  succeeded  in  producing  puppets:  his  creatures would  have acted
  only  while  the  attention  of  his  will was  upon them,  and they
  would  have  shown  no   reluctance  to   execute  any   command  of
  his, even if it were to destroy themselves.                        
     But  the  Orcs  were  not  of  this  kind.  They  were  certainly
  dominated  by  their  Master,  but  his  dominion  was by  fear, and
  they were aware  of this  fear and  hated him.  They were  indeed so
  corrupted  that  they  were pitiless,  and there  was no  cruelty or
  wickedness  that   they  would   not  commit;   but  this   was  the
  corruption of  independent wills,  and they  took pleasure  in their

 deeds.  They  were  capable  of  acting  on  their  own,   doing  evil
 deeds  unbidden  for  their  own   sport;  or   if  Morgoth   and  his
 agents  were  far  away,  they  might   neglect  his   commands.  They
 sometimes  fought  [>  They  hated  one  another  and   often  fought]
 among themselves, to the detriment of Morgoth's plans.                
   Moreover,  the  Orcs  continued  to  live  and  breed  and  to carry
 on  their  business  of  ravaging  and  plundering  after  Morgoth was
 overthrown.  They   had  other   characteristics  of   the  Incarnates
 also.   They   had   languages   of   their   own,  and   spoke  among
 themselves  in  various  tongues  according  to  differences  of breed
 that  were  discernible  among  them.  They  needed  food  and  drink,
 and  rest,  though  many  were  by  training  as  tough as  Dwarves in
 enduring  hardship.  They  could  be  slain,  and  they  were  subject
 to  disease;  but  apart  from  these  ills  they  died  and  were not
 immortal,  even  according  to  the  manner  of  the   Quendi;  indeed
 they  appear  to  have  been  by  nature  short-lived   compared  with
 the span of Men of higher race, such as the Edain.                    
   This  last  point was  not well  understood in  the Elder  Days. For
 Morgoth   had   many  servants,   the  oldest   and  most   potent  of
 whom   were  immortal,   belonging  indeed   in  their   beginning  to
 the Maiar;  and these  evil spirits  like their  Master could  take on
 visible  forms.  Those  whose  business  it  was  to  direct  the Orcs
 often  took  Orkish  shapes,  though  they   were  greater   and  more
 terrible.(4) Thus it was  that the  histories speak  of Great  Orcs or
 Orc-captains  who  were  not  slain,  and  who  reappeared  in  battle
 through years far longer than the span of the lives of Men.*(5)       
   Finally,  there is  a cogent  point, though  horrible to  relate. It
 became   clear   in   time   that  undoubted   Men  could   under  the
 domination  of  Morgoth  or  his  agents  in  a  few   generations  be
 reduced  almost  to  the  Orc-level  of  mind  and  habits;  and  then
 they  would  or  could  be  made  to  mate  with  Orcs,  producing new
 breeds,  often  larger  and  more  cunning.  There  is  no  doubt that
 long  afterwards,  in  the  Third  Age,  Saruman   rediscovered  this,
 or  learned  of  it in  lore, and  in his  lust for  mastery committed
 this,  his  wickedest  deed:  the  interbreeding  of  Orcs   and  Men,
                                                                      
  (* [footnote to the text] Boldog, for instance, is a name that occurs
 many times in the tales of the War. But it is possible that Boldog was
 not a personal name, and either a title, or  else the  name of  a kind
 of  creature:  the  Orc-formed  Maiar, only  less formidable  than the
 Balrogs.)                                                             

 producing   both   Men-orcs   large    and   cunning,    and   Orc-men
 treacherous and vile.                                                 
   But   even  before   this  wickedness   of  Morgoth   was  suspected
 the  Wise  in  the Elder  Days taught  always that  the Orcs  were not
 'made'  by  Melkor,  and  therefore  were  not  in their  origin evil.
 They  might  have  become   irredeemable  (at   least  by   Elves  and
 Men),  but  they  remained  within the  Law. That  is, that  though of
 necessity,  being  the  fingers  of  the  hand  of Morgoth,  they must
 be  fought  with  the  utmost severity,  they must  not be  dealt with
 in  their  own  terms  of  cruelty  and  treachery. Captives  must not
 be  tormented,  not  even  to  discover  information  for  the defence
 of  the  homes  of  Elves  and  Men.  If  any  Orcs   surrendered  and
 asked  for  mercy,  they must  be granted  it, even  at a  cost.* This
 was the  teaching of  the Wise,  though in  the horror  of the  War it
 was not always heeded.                                                
   It  is  true,  of  course,  that  Morgoth  held  the  Orcs  in  dire
 thraldom;  for  in  their   corruption  they   had  lost   almost  all
 possibility  of  resisting  the  domination  of  his  will.  So  great
 indeed  did  its  pressure  upon  them become  ere Angband  fell that,
 if  he  turned  his  thought  towards  them,  they  were  conscious of
 his  'eye'  wherever  they  might  be;  and when  Morgoth was  at last
 removed  from  Arda  the  Orcs   that  survived   in  the   West  were
 scattered,  leaderless  and  almost  witless,  and  were  for  a  long
 time without control or purpose.                                      
   This  servitude  to  a  central  will that  reduced the  Orcs almost
 to  an ant-like  life was  seen even  more plainly  in the  Second and
 Third   Ages   under   the   tyranny   of   Sauron,   Morgoth's  chief
 lieutenant.  Sauron  indeed  achieved  even  greater control  over his
 Orcs  than  Morgoth  had  done.  He  was,  of  course, operating  on a
 smaller scale, and he  had no  enemies so  great and  so fell  as were
 the  Noldor  in  their  might  in  the  Elder  Days.  But he  had also
 inherited from those days difficulties, such as  the diversity  of the
 Orcs  in  breed  and  language,  and  the feuds  among them;  while in
 many  places  in   Middle-earth,  after   the  fall   of  Thangorodrim
 and   during   the   concealment  of   Sauron,  the   Orcs  recovering
 from  their  helplessness had  set up  petty realms  of their  own and
                                                                      
  (* [footnote to the text] Few Orcs ever did so in the Elder Days, and
 at no time would any Orc  treat with  any Elf.  For one  thing Morgoth
 had  achieved  was  to convince  the Orcs  beyond refutation  that the
 Elves were crueller than themselves, taking captives only  for 'amuse-
 ment', or to eat them (as the Orcs would do at need).)                

                                                                    
                                                                         
 had    become    accustomed    to   independence.    Nonetheless   Sauron
 in  time  managed  to  unite  them  all  in  unreasoning  hatred  of  the
 Elves  and  of  Men  who  associated  with  them;   while  the   Orcs  of
 his  own  trained  armies  were  so  completely   under  his   will  that
 they  would  sacrifice   themselves  without   hesitation  at   his  com-
 mand.*  And  he  proved  even  more  skilful  than  his  Master  also  in
 the  corruption  of  Men  who  were  beyond  the   reach  of   the  Wise,
 and  in  reducing  them  to  a  vassalage,  in  which  they  would  march
 with the Orcs, and vie with them in cruelty and destruction.             
   It  is  thus  probably  to  Sauron  that  we  may  look for  a solution
 of   the   problem   of   chronology.   Though   of   immensely   smaller
 native  power  than  his  Master,  he   remained  less   corrupt,  cooler
 and  more  capable  of  calculation.   At  least   in  the   Elder  Days,
 and  before  he  was  bereft  of  his  lord  and fell  into the  folly of
 imitating   him,   and   endeavouring    to   become    himself   supreme
 Lord   of   Middle-earth.   While   Morgoth   still  stood,   Sauron  did
 not   seek   his   own   supremacy,   but   worked   and    schemed   for
 another,   desiring   the  triumph   of  Melkor,   whom  in   the  begin-
 ning  he  had  adored.  He  thus  was  often  able  to   achieve  things,
 first  conceived  by  Melkor,  which  his  master  did  not or  could not
 complete in the furious haste of his malice.                             
   We   may   assume,   then,  that   the  idea   of  breeding   the  Orcs
 came  from  Melkor,  not  at  first  maybe  so  much  for  the  provision
 of  servants  or  the infantry  of his  wars of  destruction, as  for the
 defilement   of   the   Children   and   the   blasphemous   mockery   of
 the  designs  of  Eru.  The  details  of   the  accomplishment   of  this
 wickedness   were,   however,   left   mainly   to   the   subtleties  of
 Sauron.  In  that  case  the  conception  in  mind  of  the  Orcs  may go
 far   back   into   the   night   of   Melkor's   thought,   though   the
 beginning  of  their  actual  breeding  must   await  the   awakening  of
 Men.                                                                     
   When   Melkor   was   made   captive,  Sauron   escaped  and   lay  hid
 in  Middle-earth;  and  it  can  in  this  way  be  understood   how  the
 breeding   of  the   Orcs  (no   doubt  already   begun)  went   on  with
 increasing   speed   during   the   age   when   the   Noldor   dwelt  in
 Aman;  so  that  when  they  returned  to  Middle-earth  they   found  it
 already  infested  with this  plague, to  the torment  of all  that dwelt
                                                                         
  (* [footnote to the text] But there  remained one  flaw in  his control,
 inevitable. In the kingdom of hate and fear, the strongest thing is hate.
 All  his  Orcs  hated  one another,  and must  be kept  ever at  war with
 some 'enemy' to prevent them from slaying one another.)                  

 there,   Elves  or   Men  or   Dwarves.  It   was  Sauron,   also,  who
 secretly  repaired  Angband  for  the  help  of   his  Master   when  he
 returned;(6) and there   the  dark   places  underground   were  already
 manned  with  hosts  of  the  Orcs  before  Melkor  came  back  at last,
 as  Morgoth  the  Black  Enemy,  and  sent  them  forth  to  bring  ruin
 upon   all  that   was  fair.   And  though   Angband  has   fallen  and
 Morgoth  is  removed,  still   they  come   forth  from   the  lightless
 places  in  the  darkness  of their  hearts, and  the earth  is withered
 under their pitiless feet.                                              
                                                                        
   This  then,  as  it  may  appear, was  my father's  final view  of the
 question: Orcs were bred from  Men, and  if 'the  conception in  mind of
 the Orcs may go  far back  into the  night of  Melkor's thought'  it was
 Sauron  who,  during  the ages  of Melkor's  captivity in  Aman, brought
 into being the black armies that were  available to  his Master  when he
 returned.                                                               
   But, as always, it is not quite  so simple.  Accompanying one  copy of
 the typescript of this essay are some pages in  manuscript for  which my
 father used the blank reverse sides of papers provided by the publishers
 dated  10  November  1969.  These pages  carry two  notes on  the 'Orcs'
 essay: one, discussing the spelling of the word orc, is given on p. 422;
 the other is a note arising  from something  in the  essay which  is not
 indicated, but which is obviously the passage on  p. 417  discussing the
 puppet-like nature inevitable in creatures brought into being by  one of
 the great Powers themselves: the note was intended to stand  in relation
 to the words 'But the Orcs were not of this kind'.                      
                                                                        
   The  orks,  it  is  true,  sometimes  appear  to  have   been  reduced
 to  a  condition  very   similar,  though   there  remains   actually  a
 profound   difference.   Those   orks   who   dwelt   long   under   the
 immediate  attention  of  his  will  - as  garrisons of  his strongholds
 or   elements   of   armies   trained  for   special  purposes   in  his
 war-designs  -  would  act  like  herds, obeying  instantly, as  if with
 one  will,  his commands  even if  ordered to  sacrifice their  lives in
 his   service.   And   as   was   seen   when   Morgoth   was   at  last
 overthrown  and  cast  out,  those  orks  that  had  been   so  absorbed
 scattered  helplessly,  without  purpose  either  to  flee or  to fight,
 and soon died or slew themselves.                                       
   Other    originally    independent    creatures,    and    Men   among
 them  (but  neither  Elves  nor  Dwarves),  could  also  be  reduced  to
 a  like  condition.  But 'puppets',  with no  independent life  or will,
 would  simply  cease  to  move  or  do  anything  at  all when  the will
 of  their  maker  was  brought  to  nothing.  In  any  case  the  number
 of  orks  that  were  thus  'absorbed'  was  always  only  a  small part

 of  their  total.  To  hold   them  in   absolute  servitude   required  a
 great   expense   of  will.   Morgoth  though   in  origin   possessed  of
 vast   power  was   finite;  and   it  was   this  expenditure   upon  the
 orks,   and   still   more   upon   the   other   far    more   formidable
 creatures  in  his service,  that in  the event  so dissipated  his powers
 of   mind   that   Morgoth's   overthrow   became   possible.   Thus   the
 greater  part  of  the  orks,  though  under  his  orders  and   the  dark
 shadow  of  their  fear  of  him,  were  only  intermittently  objects  of
 his   immediate   thought   and   concern,   and   while   that   was  re-
 moved   they   relapsed   into    independence   and    became   conscious
 of  their  hatred  of  him  and  his  tyranny.  Then  they  might  neglect
 his orders, or engage in                                                  
                                                                          
   Here the text breaks off. But the curious thing  is that  rough drafting
 for  the  second  paragraph  of  this  note  (written  on  the  same paper
 bearing the same date) begins thus:                                       
                                                                          
   But  Men  could  (and  can  still)  be  reduced  to  such  a  condition.
 'Puppets'  would  simply  cease  to  move  or  'live'  at  all,  when  not
 set  in  motion  by  the  direct  will  of  their  maker.  In   any  case,
 though   the  number   of  orks   at  the   height  of   Morgoth's  power,
 and  still  after  his  return  from  captivity, seems  to have  been very
 great,  those  who   were  'absorbed'   were  always   a  small   part  of
 the total.                                                                
                                                                          
    The words that I have italicised deny an essential conception of the
 essay.                                                                    
   The other note reads thus:                                              
                                                                          
                                   Orcs.                                   
                                                                          
   This   spelling   was  taken   from  Old   English.  The   word  seemed,
 in itself, very suitable  to the  creatures that  1 had  in mind.  But the
 Old  English  orc  in  meaning  -  so  far  as  that  is  known  -  is not
 suitable.(7) Also the  spelling  of  what,  in  the  later  more organized
 linguistic  situation,  must  have  been  a  Common   Speech  form   of  a
 word  or  group  of  similar  words  should  be   ork.  If   only  because
 of  spelling  difficulties  in  modern  English:  an  adjective orc  + ish
 becomes  necessary,  and  orcish  will  not  do.(8) In any  future  publi-
 cation I shall use ork.                                                   
                                                                          
   In text IX (the brief  writing in  which my  father declared  the theory
 of Elvish origin to be certain) he  spelt the  word Orks,  and said  'so I
 shall spell it in The Silmarillion'. In the present essay, obviously later
 than text IX, it is spelt Orcs;  but now,  in 1969  or later,  he asserted
 again that it must be Orks.                                               

                              NOTES.                                      
                                                                         
 1. See text VII, p. 406. - On  one copy  of the  text my  father pencilled
    against this sentence the names Eruseni, Melkorseni.                  
 2. 'legends  that  have  come  down to  us from  our earliest  days'; this
    purports  then  to  be  an   Elvish  writing.   Sauron  is   spoken  of
    subsequently as a being of the past ('This servitude to a  central will
    ...  was seen  even more  plainly in  the Second  and Third  Ages under
    the tyranny of Sauron', p. 419); but in the last sentence of  the essay
    the Orcs are a plague that still afflicts the world.                  
 3. The time  of the  Awakening of  Men is  now placed  far back;  cf. text
    II  (p.  378),  The  March  of the  Eldar is  through great  Rains? Men
    awake  in  an  Isle  amid  the  floods';  'The   coming  of   Men  will
    therefore  be  much  further  back';  'Men  must  awake   while  Melkor
    is still in [Middle-earth] - because of their  Fall. Therefore  in some
    period  during  the  Great  March'  (see  p.  385  note  14).   In  the
    chronology  of  the  Annals  of  Aman  and the  Grey Annals  the Great
    March  began  in  the  Year  of  the  Trees  1105  (p.  82),   and  the
    foremost  companies  of  the  Eldar  came  to the  shores of  the Great
    Sea in 1125; Men awoke in  Hildorien in  the year  of the  first rising
    of  the  Sun,  which  was  the  Year  of  the Trees  1500. Thus  if the
    Awakening  of  Men  is  placed  even  very  late in  the period  of the
    Great  March  of  the  Eldar  it  will be  set back  by more  than 3500
    Years of the Sun. See further p. 430 note 5.                          
 4. Cf.  text  IX,  p.  414:  'But  always  among  them [Orcs]  (as special
    servants and  spies of  Melkor, and  as leaders)  there must  have been
    numerous   corrupted   minor   spirits   who  assumed   similar  bodily
    shapes'; also text VIII, p. 410.                                      
 5. The footnote at this point, stating  that 'Boldog,  for instance,  is a
    name  that  occurs  many  times  in  the  tales  of  the War',  and was
    perhaps  not  a  personal  name,  is  curious.  Boldog  appears several
    times  in  the  Lay  of  Leithian as  the name  of the  Orc-captain who
    led  a  raid  into Doriath  (references in  the Index  to The  Lays of
    Beleriand);  he  reappears  in   the  Quenta   (IV.113),  but   is  not
    mentioned  thereafter.  I  do  not know  of any  other reference  to an
    Orc named Boldog.                                                     
 6. On the later  story that  Angband was  built by  Melkor in  the ancient
    days  and  that  it  was  commanded by  Sauron see  p. 156,  $12. There
    has   been   no  reference   to  the   repairing  of   Angband  against
    Morgoth's  return,  and  cf.  the  last  narrative  development  in the
    Quenta  Silmarillion  of  the  story  of  his  return  (p.  295,  $14):
    Morgoth   and   Ungoliant   'were   drawing  near   to  the   ruins  of
    Angband where his great western stronghold had been.'                 
 7. See p. 124.                                                           
 8. 'orcish  will not  do': because  it would  be pronounced  'orsish'. The

  
                                                                          
      Orkish language was so spelt in The Lord of the Rings from the       
     First Edition.                                                        
                                                                          
                                     XI.                                   
                                                                          
  This concluding text, entitled Aman, is a  clear manuscript  written with
  little  hesitation or  correction. I  had regarded  it as  an independent
  essay, and in doubt where best to place it had  left it  to the  end; but
  when  this book  had been  fully completed  and prepared  for publication
  I  realised that  it stands  in fact  in very  close relationship  to the
  manuscript of Athrabeth Finrod ah Andreth.                               
    That manuscript opens with an introductory section (given in  the type-
  script version that my father subsequently made, pp. 304 -  5), beginning
  with  the  statement that  some Men  believed that  their hroar  were not
  by  nature short-lived,  but had  become so  by the  malice of  Melkor. I
  had not observed the significance of some lines at the head of this first
  page of the Athrabeth, which my  father had  struck through:  these lines
  begin with the words 'the hroa,  and it  would live  on, a  witless body,
  not even a beast but a  monster', and  end '...  Death itself,  in either
  agony  or  horror,  would  with  Men  enter into  Aman itself.'  Now this
  passage is virtually identical to the conclusion of the present text, the
  last page of which begins at precisely the same point.                   
    It is clear, therefore, that  Aman originally  led into  the Athrabeth,
  but  that  my  father  removed  it  to  stand  alone  and copied  out the
  concluding passage on  a separate  sheet. At  the same  time, presumably,
  he gave the  remainder (the  Athrabeth and  its introduction)  the titles
  Of  Death  and  the  Children  of  Eru, and  the Marring  of Men  and The
  Converse of Finrod and Andreth.(1)                                       
    It  might  have been  preferable to  place Aman  with the  Athrabeth in
  Part Four; but I thought it unnecessary at  such a  late stage  to embark
  on a major upheaval of the structure of the book, and so left it to stand
  separately here.                                                         
                                                                          
                                    Aman.                                  
                                                                          
  In   Aman   things  were   far  otherwise   than  in   Middle-earth.  But
  they  resembled  the  mode  of  Elvish  life,  just  as  the  Elves  more
  nearly resemble the Valar and Maiar than do Men.                         
    In  Aman  the  length of  the unit  of 'year'  was the  same as  it was
  for  the  Quendi.  But  for  a  different  reason.  In  Aman  this length
  was   assigned   by   the  Valar   for  their   own  purposes,   and  was
  related   to  that   process  which   may  be   called  the   'Ageing  of
  Arda'.   For   Aman   was   within   Arda   and   therefore   within  the
  Time   of   Arda   (which   was   not   eternal,   whether   Unmarred  or
  Marred).  Therefore  Arda  and  all  things  in  it  must   age,  however

                                                       
                                                                 
  slowly, as it proceeds from beginning to end. This  ageing could
  be perceived by the Valar in about that length of  time (propor-
  tionate  to  the  whole  of  Arda's  appointed span)  which they
  called a Year; but not in a less period.(2)                     
      But as for the Valar themselves, and the Maiar also in their
  degree: they could live at any speed of thought or  motion which
  they chose or desired.*(3)                                      
                                                                           
     * They  could  move  backward  or  forward  in  thought,   and  return
       again  so  swiftly  that  to those  who were  in their  presence they
       did  not  appear  to  have  moved.  All  that  was  past  they  could
       fully perceive;  but being  now in  Time the  future they  could only
       perceive or explore in so far as its design was made clear to them in
       the  Music,  or  as  each one  of them  was specially  concerned with
       this or that part of Eru's design, being His agent or  Subcreator. In
       this way of perception they  could foresee  none of  the acts  of the
       Children,  Elves  and  Men,  in  whose  conceiving  and  introduction
       into Ea none  of the  Valar had  played any  part at  all; concerning
       the Children they could only deduce  likelihood, in  the same  way as
       can  the  Children themselves,  though from  a far  greater knowledge
       of  facts  and  the  contributory events  of the  past, and  with far
       greater  intelligence  and  wisdom.  Yet  there  always  remained  an
       uncertainty  with  regard to  the words  and deeds  of Elves  and Men
       in Time not yet unfolded.                                            

 The  unit, or  Valian Year,  was thus  not in  Aman related  to the
 natural rates of 'growth' of any person or thing that  dwelt there.
 Time  in  Aman  was  actual  time,  not  merely  a mode  of percep-
 tion. As, say, 100 years went by in Middle-earth  as part  of Arda,
 so  100  years  passed  in  Aman, which  was also  a part  of Arda.
 It  was,  however,  the  fact  that  the  Elvish speed  of 'growth'
 accorded with the unit of Valian  time +  that made it possible for
 the  Valar  to  bring the  Eldar to  dwell in  Aman. In  one Valian
                                                                   
 (+  Not by the design of the Valar, though doubtless not  by chance.
   That is, it may be that Eru in designing the natures of  Elves and
   Men and their relations one to another and  to the  Valar ordained
   that  the  'growth'  of the  Elves should  accord with  the Valian
   perception of the progress or ageing  of Arda,  so that  the Elves
   should be  able to  cohabit with  the Valar  and Maiar.  Since the
   Children appeared in the Music, and also in the Vision,  the Valar
   knew something or  indeed much  of the  ordained natures  of Elves
   and  Men  before  they  came into  existence. They  knew certainly
   that Elves should be 'immortal' or of very long  life, and  Men of
   brief life. But it was probably only during  the sojourn  of Orome
   among  the  fathers  of  the  Quendi  that  the  Valar  discovered)

 precisely what was the mode of their lives with regard to  the lapse
 of Time.)                                                          
                                                                   
 year  the  Eldar  dwelling  there  grew  and  developed in  much the
 same  way  as  mortals  did  in  one  year  upon   Middle-earth.  In
 recording  the  events  in  Aman,  therefore,  we  may  as  did  the
 Eldar  themselves  use  the Valian unit,(4)  though  we   must  not
 forget  that within  any such  'year' the  Eldar enjoyed  an immense
 series  of  delights  and  achievements which  even the  most gifted
 of  Men  could  not  accomplish  in   twelve  times   twelve  mortal
 years.(5) Nonetheless the  Eldar  'aged'  at the  same speed in Aman
 as they had done in their beginning upon Middle-earth.             
 But  the  Eldar  were  not  native  to  Aman,  which  had  not been,
 by  the  Valar,  designed for  them. In  Aman, before  their coming,
 there  had  dwelt  only  the  Valar  and  their  lesser  kindred the
 Maiar.  But  for  their  delight  and  use there  were in  Aman also
 a  great  multitude  of  creatures,  without  fear,  of  many kinds:
 animals  or  moving  creatures,  and  plants  that   are  steadfast.
 There, it is believed, were  the counterparts  of all  the creatures
 that are or have been on Earth,(6) and others  also that  were  made
 for  Aman  only.  And each  kind had,  as on  Earth, its  own nature
 and natural speed of growth.                                       
 But  since  Aman  was  made  for  the  Valar,  that they  might have
 peace and  delight therein,  ail those  creatures that  were thither
 transplanted  or  were  trained or  bred or  brought into  being for
 the  purpose  of  inhabitation  in  Aman  were  given  a   speed  of
 growth such that  one year  of the  life natural  to their  kinds on
 Earth should in Aman be one Valian Year.                           
 For  the  Eldar this  was a  source of  joy. For  in Aman  the world
 appeared  to  them  as  it  does to  Men on  Earth, but  without the
 shadow  of  death  soon  to  come.  Whereas  on  Earth  to  them all
 things  in  comparison  with  themselves  were  fleeting,  swift  to
 change  and  die  or pass  away, in  Aman they  endured and  did not
 so  soon  cheat  love  with  their  mortality.  On  Earth  while  an
 elf-child  did  but  grow  to  be  a man  or a  woman, in  some 3000
 years, forests would rise and  fall, and  all the  face of  the land
 would  change,  while  birds  and   flowers  innumerable   would  be
 born and die in loar upon loar under the wheeling Sun.             
 But  beside  all this  Aman is  called also  the Blessed  Realm, and
 in this was found its blessedness: in  health and  joy. For  in Aman
 no creatures  suffered any  sickness or  disorder of  their natures;
 nor  was  there  any  decay  or  ageing  more  swift  than  the slow

 ageing of Arda itself. So that all things coming at last  to fullness
 of form and  virtue remained  in that  state, blissfully,  ageing and
 wearying  of  their  life  and  being  no  swifter  than   the  Valar
 themselves. And this blessing also was granted to the Eldar.         
   On  earth  the  Quendi  suffered  no  sickness,  and the  health of
 their  bodies  was  supported  by  the might  of the  longeval fear.
 But their bodies, being of the  stuff of  Arda, were  nonetheless not
 so enduring as their  spirits; for  the longevity  of the  Quendi was
 derived  primarily  from  their  fear,  whose  nature  or  'doom' was
 to abide in Arda until its end. Therefore, after the vitality  of the
 hroa  was  expended  in  achieving  full growth,  it began  to weaken
 or  grow  weary.  Very  slowly   indeed,  but   to  all   the  Quendi
 perceptibly.  For a  while it  would be  fortified and  maintained by
 its indwelling fea, and then its  vitality would  begin to  ebb, and
 its  desire for  physical life  and joy  in it  would pass  ever more
 swiftly  away.  Then  an  Elf  would  begin  (as  they  say  now, for
 these  things  did not  fully appear  in the  Elder Days)  to 'fade',
 until the fea as it were consumed  the hroa  until it  remained only
 in the love and memory of the spirit that had inhabited it.          
   But  in  Aman,  since  its  blessing  descended  upon the  hroar of
 the  Eldar,  as  upon  all other  bodies, the  hroar aged  only apace
 with  the  fear, and  the Eldar  that remained  in the  Blessed Realm
 endured  in  full  maturity  and  in  undimmed  power  of   body  and
 spirit conjoined for ages beyond our mortal comprehension.           
                                                                     
                          Aman and Mortal Men.(7)                     
                                                                     
 If  it is  thus in  Aman, or  was ere  the Change  of the  World, and
 therein  the  Eldar had  health and  lasting joy,  what shall  we say
 of  Men? No  Man has  ever set  foot in  Aman, or  at least  none has
 ever  returned  thence;  for  the Valar  forbade it.  Why so?  To the
 Numenoreans   they   said   that   they  did   so  because   Eru  had
 forbidden  them  to  admit  Men  to  the  Blessed  Realm;   and  they
 declared  also  that  Men  would  not  there  be  blessed   (as  they
 imagined)  but  accursed,  and  would  'wither  even as  a moth  in a
 flame too bright'.                                                   
   Beyond  these  words  we  can  but  go  in guess.  Yet we  may con-
 sider  the  matter  so.  The  Valar  were not  only by  Eru forbidden
 the attempt, they could not alter the  nature, or  'doom' of  Eru, of
 any  of  the  Children,  in  which  was included  the speed  of their
 ' growth (relative to the whole life of Arda) and the length of their
 : life-span. Even the Eldar in that respect remained unchanged.      

   Let us  suppose then  that the  Valar had  also admitted  to Aman
 some of the Atani, and (so  that we  may consider  a whole  life of
 a Man in such a state) that 'mortal' children  were there  born, as
 were  children  of  the  Eldar.  Then,  even  though  in   Aman,  a
 mortal  child would  still grow  to maturity  in some  twenty years
 of the Sun, and the natural  span of  its life,  the period  of the
 cohesion  of  hroa  and  fea,  would  be  no  more  than,  say, 100
 years.  Not  much  more,  even  though  his  body  would  suffer no
 sickness  or  disorder  in  Aman,  where  no  such  evils  existed.
 (Unless Men  brought these  evils with  them -  as why  should they
 not? Even  the Eldar  brought to  the Blessed  Realm some  taint of
 the Shadow upon Arda in which they came into being.)              
   But  in  Aman  such  a creature  would be  a fleeting  thing, the
 most swift-passing of  all beasts.  For his  whole life  would last
 little  more  than  one  half-year,  and  while  all  other  living
 creatures  would  seem  to  him  hardly  to  change, but  to remain
 steadfast  in life  and joy  with hope  of endless  years undimmed,
 he would rise and  pass -  even as  upon Earth  the grass  may rise
 in  spring  and  wither  ere  the  winter.  Then  he  would  become
 filled  with  envy, deeming  himself a  victim of  injustice, being
 denied the graces given  to all  other things.  He would  not value
 what  he had,  but feeling  that he  was among  the least  and most
 despised  of  all  creatures,  he  would grow  soon to  contemn his
 manhood,  and  hate  those  more  richly  endowed.  He   would  not
 escape the fear and sorrow of his swift mortality  that is  his lot
 upon  Earth,  in  Arda  Marred,  but  would   be  burdened   by  it
 unbearably to the loss of all delight.                            
   But if any  should ask:  why could  not in  Aman the  blessing of
 longevity be granted to him, as it was to the  Eldar? This  must be
 answered.  Because  this  would  bring  joy  to  the  Eldar,  their
 nature being different from that of  Men. The  nature of  an Elvish
 fea was to endure  the world  to the  end, and  an Elvish  hroa was
 also longeval by nature;  so that  an Elvish  fea finding  that its
 hroa  endured  with  it,  supporting  its indwelling  and remaining
 unwearied  in  bodily  delight,  would  have  increased   and  more
 lasting joy [sic]. Some indeed of the Eldar doubt that  any special
 grace  or  blessing  was  accorded to  them, other  than admittance
 to Aman. For they hold that the  failure of  their hroar  to endure
 in vitality unwearied as long as their fear -  a process  which was
 not observed until the later ages - is due to the Marring  of Arda,
 and  comes  of  the  Shadow,  and  of  the  taint  of  Melkor  that
 touches all the matter (or hroa)(8) of Arda, if not indeed of all Ea.

 So  that  all  that happened  in Aman  was that  this weakness  of the
 Elvish  hroar  did  not  develop  in  the  health  of  Aman   and  the
 Light of the Trees.                                                   
   But  let  us  suppose  that   the  'blessing   of  Aman'   was  also
 accorded  to  Men.*  What  then?  Would  a  great  good  be   done  to
 them?  Their  bodies  would  still  come  swiftly  to full  growth. In
 the  seventh  part  of  a  year  a  Man  could  be  born   and  become
 full-grown,  as  swiftly  as  in  Aman  a  bird  would  hatch  and fly
 from  the  nest.  But  then  it  would  not  wither  or age  but would
 endure in vigour  and in  the delight  of bodily  living. But  what of
 that  Man's  fea?  Its  nature  and  'doom'  could  not  be  changed,
 neither  by  the  health of  Aman nor  by the  will of  Manwe himself.
 Yet it is (as the Eldar hold) its nature  and doom  under the  will of
 Eru  that  it  should  not  endure  Arda for  long, but  should depart
 and  go  elsewhither,  returning  maybe  direct  to  Eru  for  another
 fate  or  purpose  that  is  beyond  the  knowledge  or  guess  of the
 Eldar.                                                                
   Very  soon  then  the  fea  and  hroa  of  a Man  in Aman  would not
 be  united  and  at peace,  but would  be opposed,  to the  great pain
 of both. The hroa being in  full vigour  and joy  of life  would cling
 to  the  fea,  lest  its  departure  should  bring death;  and against
 death it would revolt as would a great beast in full life  either flee
 from  the  hunter  or  turn  savagely  upon  him.  But  the  fea would
 be  as  it  were  in  prison,  becoming  ever  more  weary of  all the
 delights  of  the  hroa,  until  they  were  loathsome to  it, longing
 ever  more  and  more to  be gone,  until even  those matters  for its
 thought  that  it  received  through  the hroa  and its  senses became
 meaningless.  The  Man  would  not  be  blessed,  but   accursed;  and
 he  would  curse  the  Valar  and  Aman  and all  the things  of Arda.
 And  he  would  not  willingly  leave  Aman,   for  that   would  mean
 rapid  death,  and he  would have  to be  thrust forth  with violence.
 But  if  he  remained in Aman,(9) what  should  he  come to,  ere Arda
 were  at  last fulfiilled and he found release?  Either his  fea would
 be  wholly  dominated  by  the   hroa,  and   he  would   become  more
 like  a  beast,  though  one  tormented  within. Or  else, if  his fea
 were  strong,  it  would  leave  the  hroa.  Then  one  of  two things
 would  happen:  either  this  would  be  accomplished  only  in  hate,
                                                                      
  (* Or (as some Men hold) that their  hroar are  not by  nature short-
 lived,  but  have  become  so through  the malice  of Melkor  over and
 above the general marring of Arda, and that this hurt could be healed
 and undone in Aman.)                                                  

 by violence, and the  hroa, in  full life,  would be  rent and  die in
 sudden  agony;  or  else  the  fea  would  in  loathing   and  without
 pity  desert  the  hroa, and  it would  live on,  a witless  body, not
 even  a  beast  but  a monster,  a very  work of  Melkor in  the midst
 of Aman, which the Valar themselves would fain destroy.               
   Now  these  things  are  but  matters  of  thought,  and might-have-
 beens;  for  Eru  and  the   Valar  under   Him  have   not  permitted
 Men as they are (10) to  dwell in  Aman. Yet  at least  it may be seen
 that  Men  in  Aman  would  not  escape  the   dread  of   death,  but
 would  have  it in  greater degree  and for  long ages.  And moreover,
 it  seems  probable  that  death  itself, either  in agony  or horror,
 would with Men enter into Aman itself.                                
                                                                      
   At this point Aman as originally written (see p. 424) continued with
 the  words  'Now  some Men  hold that  their hroar  are not  indeed by
 nature short-lived ...', which became the  beginning of  the introduc-
 tory passage to the Athrabeth (see p. 304).                           

                             NOTES.                                      
                                                                        
  1. The number III  and a  further title  The Marring  of Men  (the other
     titles  remaining)  was  given  to  the second  part, while  Aman was
     numbered II. No writing numbered I is found.                        
  2. It will be seen that, as a consequence of  the transformation  of the
     'cosmogonic  myth',  a  wholly  new conception  of the  'Valian Year'
     had  entered.  The  elaborate computation  of Time  in the  Annals of
     Aman (see pp. 49 - 51, 59 - 60) was based on the 'cycle' or'  the Two
     Trees that had ceased to exist  in relation  to the  diurnal movement
     of  the  Sun  that  had  come  into   being  -   there  was   a  'new
     reckoning'. But the 'Valian Year' is now, as it  appears, a  'unit of
     perception' of  the passage  of the  Time of  Arda, derived  from the
     capacity of the Valar to perceive  at such  intervals the  process of
     the ageing of Arda from its beginning to its end. See note 5.       
  3. My   father   wrote   the   following   passage  ('They   could  move
     backward  or  forward   in  thought   ...')  in   the  body   of  the
     manuscript at this point, but in a  small italic  script, and  I have
     preserved  this  form  in  the  text  printed;  similarly   with  the
     following passage that  interrupts the  main text  at the  words 'the
     unit of Valian time'.                                               
  4. 'we  may... use  the Valian  unit': in  other words,  presumably, the
     old structure  of dates  in the  chronicle of  Aman may  be retained,
     although the meaning  of those  dates in  terms of  Middle-earth will
     be radically different. See note 5.                                 
  5. There  is   now  a   vast  discrepancy   between  Valian   Years  and
     'mortal years'; cf. also 'his whole life would last little  more than

     one half-year' (p. 428), 'In the seventh part of a year a Man could
     be born and become full-grown' (p. 429). In notes not given in
     this book, in which my father was calculating on this basis the
     time of the Awakening of Men, he expressly stated that 144 Sun
     Years = 1 Valian Year (in this connection see Appendix D to The
     Lord of the Rings: 'It seems clear that the Eldar in Middle-earth
     ... reckoned in long periods, and the Quenya word yen... really
     means 144 of our years'). Placing the event 'after or about the
     time of the sack of Utumno, Valian Year 1100' (see pp. 75, 80), a
     gigantic lapse of time could now be conceived between the
     'arising' of Men and their first appearance in Beleriand.
  6. For this use of 'Earth' in opposition to 'Aman', very frequent in
     this essay, see p. 282.
  7. The sub-heading Aman and Mortal Men was a later addition.
  8. With this use of the word hroa cf. text VII, p. 399: 'the hroa, the
     "flesh" or physical matter, of Arda'.
  9. This passage, from 'And he would not willingly leave Aman ...',
     was a later addition. As the text was written, it continued on
     from 'all the things of Arda' to 'And what should he come to...'
 10. The words 'as they are' were a later addition of the same time as
     those referred to in notes 7 and 9.

                                  APPENDIX.                                
                                                                          
                           SYNOPSIS OF THE TEXTS.                          
                                                                          
 This list is intended  as no  more than  a very  concise statement  of the
 manuscripts and typescripts  referred to  in this  book (other  than those
 in Part Five).                                                            
                                                                          
                                Ainulindale.                               
                                                                          
 B.      Manuscript, dating from the 1930s, given in V.155 ff.             
 C*.     Author's  typescript,  introducing  radical  changes  in  the cos-
         mology, in existence by 1948; see pp. 3 - 7, 39 ff.               
                                                                          
 C.      Rewriting of B, using  the old  manuscript (see  pp. 3,  7); given
         in full pp. 8 ff.                                                 
                                                                          
 D.      Fine  manuscript,  the  last  version  of  the  Ainulindale',  de-
         veloped from C; given in part pp. 29 ff.                          
                                                                          
                       Annals of Valinor                                   
                                                                          
 AV 1.   'The Earliest Annals of Valinor', given in IV.262 ff.             
 AV 2.   'The Later Annals of Valinor', given in V.109 ff.                 
                                                                          
 -       For the rewriting of the opening of AV 2 preceding the            
         Annals of Aman see p. 47.                                         
                                                                          
                         Annals of Aman.                                   
                                                                          
 AAm.    Manuscript,   dating  from   the  early   1950s,  given   in  full
         pp.  48  ff;  divided  editorially into  six sections  followed by
         notes and commentary.                                             
                                                                          
 AAm*.   Author's typescript of the opening of AAm, with many              
         departures from the manuscript (pp. 64 - 8, 79 - 80).             
                                                                          
 AAm typescript.  Amanuensis typescript, dating from about  1958 (see
         pp.  141  -  2,  300).  Annotations and  alterations made  to this
         are  given  at  the  end of  the commentaries  on each  section of
         AAm.                                                              
                                                                          
                       Quenta Silmarillion.                                
                                                                          
 Q.      'The Quenta' (Qenta Noldorinwa), dating from 1930, given          
         in IV.76 ff.                                                      
                                                                          
 QS.     Quenta  Silmarillion,  fine  manuscript  abandoned  at the  end of
                                                                          
         1937, given in V.199 ff.                                          

    QS typescript.  Author's typescript; new text (entitled Eldanyare) of           
             the opening chapters, dating from December 1937 - January            
             1938 (see p. 143).                                                   
    LQ 1.    'Later Quenta 1', amanuensis typescript of revised QS, made              
             in 1951( - 2); see p. 141.                                           
    LQ 2.    'Later Quenta 2', amanuensis typescript incorporating all                
             alterations made to LQ 1, made about 1958; see pp. 141 - 2.          
    LQ.      For the uses of this abbreviation see pp. 184, 200.                       
                                                                                 
                      Laws and Customs among the Eldar.                           
                                                                                 
    A.       Manuscript, given in full in its latter part (pp. 233 ff.), from     
             the point where the typescript B breaks off (see pp. 207 - 8).       
                                                                                 
    B.       Author's typescript, unfinished, given in full pp. 209 ff.           
                                                                                 
                     Late recasting and development of parts of                   
                                  The Silmarillion.                               
                                                                                 
    Vq 1.    Author's typescript developed from LQ 2 Chapter 1 'Of the            
                                                                                 
             Valar' (see pp. 199 - 200).                                          
                                                                                 
    Vq 2.    Author's typescript following Vq 1, entitled Valaquenta              
             (pp. 200 ff.).                                                       
                                                                                 
    FM 1.    Manuscript rider to QS; the first text treating the story of         
                                                                                 
             Finwe and Miriel (pp. 205 ff.).                                      
                                                                                 
    FM 2.    Author's typescript, second text of the story of Finwe and           
                                                                                 
             Miriel in the Silmarillion narrative (pp. 254 - 5 ff.).              
                                                                                 
    FM 3.    Author's typescript, superseded by FM 4; see pp. 255 - 6.            
    FM 4.    Author's typescript, final text of the story of Finwe and            
                                                                                 
             Miriel; given in full pp. 256 ff.                                    
                                                                                 
    A.       Author's  typescript  (continuation  of  FM  3),  superseded  by  B;
             see pp. 271 - 2, 282.                                                
                                                                                 
    B.       Author's  typescript  (continuation   of  FM   4),  the   last,  and
             extensively  developed,  text  of  the  remainder  of  the  original
             Chapter 6 and the beginning of Chapter 7 (pp. 272 ff.).              
                                                                                 
                                  Athrabeth.                                      
                                                                                 
    A.       Manuscript, given (with author's typescript version of the           
             introductory section) in full pp. 304 ff.                            
                                                                                 
    B,C.     Amanuensis typescripts (see p. 303).                                 
                                                                                 
    Commentary.   Author's typescript of the Commentary on the                       
             Athrabeth, with extensive notes; given in full pp. 329 ff.           

