
                                 FOREWORD.                              
                                                                       
 As  is  well  known,  the  manuscripts  and typescripts  of The  Lord of
 the  Rings  were  sold  by  J.  R. R.  Tolkien to  Marquette University,
 Milwaukee, a few  years after  its publication,  together with  those of
 The  Hobbit  and  Farmer  Giles  of  Ham,  and also  Mr. Bliss.  A long
 time  elapsed  between  the  shipment  of  these  latter  papers,  which
 reached  Marquette in  July 1957,  and that  of The  Lord of  the Rings,
 which  did  not arrive  until the  following year.  The reason  for this
 was  that  my father  had undertaken  to sort,  annotate, and  date the
 multifarious  manuscripts  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings,  but  found it
 impossible at that time to do  the work  required. It  is clear  that he
 never did so, and in the end let  the papers  go just  as they  were; it
 was  noted  when  they  reached   Marquette  that   they  were   'in  no
 order'.  Had  he done  so, he  must have  seen at  that time  that, very
 large  though  the  manuscript  collection   was,  it   was  nonetheless
 incomplete.                                                            
   Seven  years  later, in  1965, when  he was  working on  the revision
 of The  Lord of  the Rings,  he wrote  to the  Director of  Libraries at
 Marquette,  asking  if  a  certain  scheme  of dates  and events  in the
 narrative  was  to  be found  there, since  he had  'never made  out any
 full schedule or note of the papers transferred to you.' In  this letter
 he  explained  that  the transfer  had taken  place at  a time  when his
 papers  were  dispersed  between  his   house  in   Headington  (Oxford)
 and  his  rooms  in  Merton  College;  and  he  also  said  that  he now
 found  himself  still  in  possession of  'written matter'  that 'should
 belong  to  you'.  when  he  had finished  the revision  of The  Lord of
 the Rings he would look into the question. But he did not do so.       
   These  papers  passed  to  me  on  his  death  eight years  later; but
 though   Humphrey   Carpenter   made   reference   to   them    in   his
 Biography  (1977)  and  cited  from  them  some  early notes,  I neglec-
 ted  them  for  many  years,  being  absorbed  in   the  long   work  of
 tracing  the  evolution  of  the-narratives  of  the  Elder   Days,  the
 legends  of  Beleriand  and  Valinor.  The  publication  of  Volume  III
 of  'The  History  of  Middle-earth'  was  already approaching  before I
 had  any  idea  that the  'History' might  extend to  an account  of the
 writing  of The  lard  of  the  Rings.  During  the  last  three  years,
 however,  I  have  been  engaged  at   intervals  in   the  decipherment
 and  analysis  of The  Lord of  the Rings  manuscripts in  my possession

 (a task still far from completed). It  has emerged  from this  that the
 papers  left  behind  in 1958  consist largely  of the  earliest phases
 of  composition,  although  in  some  cases  (and  most notably  in the
 first  chapter,  which  was  rewritten  many  times   over)  successive
 versions  found  among  these   papers  bring   the  narrative   to  an
 advanced  state. In  general, however,  it was  only the  initial notes
 and  earliest  drafts,  with  outlines  for the  further course  of the
 story,  that  remained in  England when  the great  bulk of  the papers
 went to Marquette.                                                    
   I  do not  of course  know how  it came  about that  these particular
 manuscripts  came  to  be  left  out of  the consignment  to Marquette;
 but  I  think  that  an  explanation  in  general  terms  can  be found
 readily  enough.  Immensely  prolific as  my father  was ('I  found not
 being able to use a pen or pencil as defeating as the loss of  her beak
 would  be  to  a  hen,'  he  wrote  to  Stanley  Unwin  in  1963,  when
 suffering  from  an  ailment  in his  right arm),  constantly revising,
 re-using,  beginning  again,  but  never  throwing  any of  his writing
 away,  his  papers  became  inextricably  complex,   disorganised,  and
 dispersed. It does not seem likely that at the time of the  transfer to
 Marquette  he  would  have  been  greatly  concerned  with or  have had
 any  precise  recollection  of  the  early  drafts,  some of  them sup-
 planted   and   overtaken  as   much  as   twenty  years   before;  and
 no  doubt  they  had  long  since  been   set  aside,   forgotten,  and
 buried.                                                               
   However  this  may  be,  it  is  self-evidently  desirable  that  the
 separated  manuscripts  should  be  joined  together  again,   and  the
 whole  corpus  preserved  in  one  place.  This   must  have   been  my
 father's intention at the time  of the  original sale;  and accordingly
 the  manuscripts  at  present  in  my  keeping will  be handed  over to
 Marquette University.                                                 
   The greater part of the material cited or described  in this  book is
 found in  the papers  that remained  behind; but  the third  section of
 the  book  (called  'The  Third Phase')  constituted a  difficult prob-
 lem,  because  in  this  case  the  manuscripts  were divided.  Most of
 the  chapters  in  this  'phase'  of composition  went to  Marquette in
 1958, but substantial parts  of several  of them  did not.  These parts
 had  become  separated  because  my  father  had  rejected  them, while
 using  the  remainder  as  constituent  elements  in new  versions. The
 interpretation  of  this  part  of  the history  would have  been alto-
 gether  impossible  without  very  full  co-operation  from  Marquette,
 and  this  I  have  abundantly  received. Above  all, Mr  Taum Santoski
 has  engaged  with  great  skill  and  care in  a complex  operation in

 which  we  have  exchanged  over  many   months  annotated   copies  of
 the  texts;  and  it has  been possible  in this  way to  determine the
 textual  history,  and  to reconstruct  the original  manuscripts which
 my  father  himself  dismembered nearly  half a  century ago.  I record
 with  pleasure  and deep  appreciation the  generous assistance  that I
 have  received  from  him,  and  also  from Mr  Charles B.  Elston, the
 Archivist  of  the  Memorial  Library  at   Marquette,  from   Mr  John
 D. Rateliff, and from Miss Tracy Muench.                               
                                                                       
   This attempt to give an account of  the first  stages in  the writing
 of The Lard of the  Rings has  been beset  by other  difficulties than
 the  fact  of  the  manuscripts  being  widely  sundered;  difficulties
 primarily in the interpretation of  the sequence  of writing,  but also
 in the presentation of the results in a printed book.                  
   Briefly, the writing proceeded in a series of 'waves'  or (as  I have
 called  them  in  this  book)  'phases'. The  first chapter  was itself
 reconstituted  three  times  before  the  hobbits  ever  left Hobbiton,
 but the story then went  all the  way to  Rivendell before  the impulse
 failed.  My  father  then  started  again   from  the   beginning  (the
 'second phase'), and then again (the  'third phase');  and as  new nar-
 rative  elements  and  new  names  and  relations among  the characters
 appeared  they  were  written  into   previous  drafts,   at  different
 times.  Parts  of  a  text were  taken out  and used  elsewhere. Alter-
 native  versions  were  incorporated  into  the  same   manuscript,  so
 that the story could  be read  in more  than one  way according  to the
 directions  given.  To  determine  the  sequence  of  these exceedingly
 complex  movements  with  demonstrable  correctness  at  all  points is
 scarcely  possible.  One  or-two  dates  that  my  father wrote  in are
 insufficient  to  give more  than very  limited assistance,  and refer-
 ences to the progress of the work in his letters  are unclear  and hard
 to  interpret.  Differences  of  script  can  be very  misleading. Thus
 the  determination  of  the  history  of  composition  has to  be based
 very  largely  on  clues  afforded  by  the  evolution  of   names  and
 motives in the narrative itself; but in this there is every possibility
 of  going  astray  through  mistaking the  relative dates  of additions
 and  alterations.  Exemplification  of  these  problems  will  be found
 throughout  the  book.  I do  not suppose  for one  moment that  I have
 succeeded  in  determining  the  history  correctly  at   every  point:
 indeed  there remain  several cases  where the  evidence appears  to be
 contradictory  and  I  can  offer  no  solution.  The  nature  of  the
 manuscripts  is  such  that   they  will   probably  always   admit  of
 differing  interpretations.  But  the  sequence  of composition  that I

 propose,  after  much   experimentation  with   alternative  theories,
 seems to me to fit the evidence very much the best.                  
   The  earliest plot-outlines  and narrative  drafts are  often barely
 legible,  and  become  more  difficult  as  the work  proceeded. Using
 any scrap of the wretched paper  of the  war years  that came  to hand
 -  sometimes  writing  not   merely  on   the  backs   of  examination
 scripts  but  across  the scripts  themselves -  my father  would dash
 down elliptically his thoughts for the  story to  come, and  his first
 formulations  of  narrative,  at  tearing  speed.  In  the handwriting
 that he used for  rapid drafts  and sketches,  not intended  to endure
 long  before  he  turned  to  them   again  and   gave  them   a  more
 workable  form,  letters  are  so  loosely  formed  that a  word which
 cannot  be  deduced  or  guessed  at  from the  context or  from later
 versions  can  prove  perfectly  opaque  after  long  examination; and
 if,  as  he  often  did, he  used a  soft pencil  much has  now become
 blurred  and  faint.  This  must  be  borne  in  mind  throughout: the
 earliest drafts were put  urgently to  paper just  as the  first words
 came  to  mind  and   before  the   thought  dissolved,   whereas  the
 printed text (apart from a sprinkling of dots and queries in  the face
 of  illegibility)  inevitably  conveys  an  air  of  calm  and ordered
 composition, the phrasing weighed and intended.                      
                                                                     
   Turning  to  the  way  in which  the material  is presented  in this
 book,  the  most  intractable  problem  lies  in  the  development  of
 the  story  through  successive  drafts,  always  changing  but always
 closely  dependent on  what preceded.  In the  rather extreme  case of
 the  opening  chapter  'A  Long-expected  Party',  there  are  in this
 book  six  main  texts  to  be  considered and  a number  of abandoned
 openings. A complete  presentation of  all the  material for  this one
 chapter would almost constitute a book in  itself, not  to speak  of a
 mass  of  repetition  or near-repetition.  On the  other hand,  a suc-
 cession of texts reduced to  extracts and  short citations  (where the
 versions differ significantly from their predecessors) is not  easy to
 follow, and if the development is  traced at  all closely  this method
 also takes up  much space.  There is  no really  satisfactory solution
 to  this.  The  editor  must  take  responsibility  for  selecting and
 emphasizing  those elements  that he  considers most  interesting and
 most significant. In general I give  the earliest  narrative complete,
 or  nearly  complete,  in  each chapter,  as the  basis to  which sub-
 sequent   development   can  be   referred.  Different   treatment  of
 the  manuscripts  calls  for  different  arrangement of  the editorial
 element:  where  texts  are given  more or  less in  full much  use is

 made  of  numbered  notes  (which  may  constitute  an  important part
 of the presentation of a  complex text),  but where  they are  not the
 chapter proceeds rather as a discussion with citations.              
   My  father  bestowed  immense  pains  on  the  creation of  The Lord
 of the Rings, and my intention has been that this record of  his first
 years of work on it should reflect those pains. The first part  of the
 story, before the Ring  left Rivendell,  took by  far the  most labour
 to achieve (hence the length  of this  book in  relation to  the whole
 story);  and  the  doubts,  indecisions,  unpickings,  restructurings,
 and  false  starts  have  been  described.  The result  is necessarily
 extremely  intricate;  but  whereas  it would  be possible  to recount
 the  history  in  a  greatly  reduced  and  abbreviated  form,   I  am
 convinced that to omit  difficult detail  or to  oversimplify problems
 and explanations would rob the study of its essential interest.      
   My object has been to give  an account  of the  writing of  The Lord
 of  the  Rings, to  exhibit the  subtle process  of change  that could
 transform  the  significance  of  events and  the identity  of persons
 while  preserving  those  scenes  and  the  words  that   were  spoken
 from the earliest drafts. I therefore (for  example) pursue  in detail
 the  history  of  the two  hobbits who  ultimately issued  in Peregrin
 Took  and  Fredegar  Bolger,  but  only  after the  most extraordinary
 permutations  and  coalescences  of  name,  character,  and  role;  on
 the other  hand I  refrain from  all discussion  that is  not directly
 relevant to the evolution of the narrative.                          
   In  the  nature  of  the  book,  I   assume  conversance   with  The
 Fellowship  of  the  Ring,  and  comparison  is  made   throughout  of
 course  with  the  published  work.  Page-references  to   The  Fellow-
 ship  of  the  Ring  (abbreviated  FR) are  given to  the three-volume
 hardback  edition  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  (LR)   published  by
 George   Allen   and   Unwin   (now   Unwin   Hyman)    and   Houghton
 Mifflin  Company,  this  being  the  edition  common  to  both England
 and America, but I think that  it will  be found  in fact  that almost
 all such references can be readily  traced in  any edition,  since the
 precise point referred to in  the final  form of  the story  is nearly
 always evident from the context.                                     
   In the 'first phase' of writing, which took the story  to Rivendell,
 most  of  the  chapters  were title-less,  and subsequently  there was
 much  shifting  in  the  division  of  the  story into  chapters, with
 variation in titles and numbers. I have thought  it best  therefore to
 avoid  confusion  by  giving  many of  my chapters  simple descriptive
 titles,  such  as  'From Hobbiton  to the  Woody End',  indicating the
 content  rather  than  relating  them  to  the  chapter-titles  in The

                                                      
                                                                      
 Fellowship of the Ring. As a title for the book it seemed  suitable to
 take one  of my  father's own  suggested but  abandoned titles  for the
 first volume of The  Lord of  the Rings.  In a  letter to  Rayner Unwin
 of  8  August  1953  (The  Letters  of J. R. R. Tolkien, no.  139) he
 proposed The Return of the Shadow.                                   
                                                                      
   No account is given in this  book of  the history  of the  writing of
 The  Hobbtit up  to its  original publication  in 1937,  aithough, from
 the  nature  of  its  relationship  to  The  Lord  of  the  Rings,  the
 published  work  is  constantly  referred  to.  That   relationship  is
 curious  and  complex.  My  father  several  times  expressed  his view
 of it, but most fully and (as I  think) most  accurately in  the course
 of  a  long  letter  to  Christopher  Bretherton  written in  July 1964
 (Letters no. 257).                                                    
                                                                      
   I  returned  to  Oxford  in  Jan.  1926,  and by  the time  The Hobbit
   appeared  (1937)  this  'matter  of  the Elder  Days' was  in coherent
   form.  The  Hobbit  was  not  intended  to  have  anything to  do with
   it. I had  the habit  while my  children were  still young  of invent-
   ing  and  telling  orally,  sometimes  of  writing  down,  'children's
   stories'   for   their   private    amusement...   The    Hobbit   was
   intended  to  be  one  of  them.  It had  no necessary  connexion with
   the  'mythology',   but  naturally   became  attracted   towards  this
   dominant  construction  in  my  mind,  causing  the  tale   to  become
   larger  and  more  heroic  as it  proceeded. Even  so it  could really
   stand   quite   apart,   except   for  the   references  (unnecessary,
   though they give an  impression of  historical depth)  to the  Fall of
   Gondolin,  the  branches  of  the  Elfkin,  and  the  quarrel  of King
   Thingol, Luthien's father, with the Dwarves....                     
      The  magic  ring  was  the one  obvious thing  in The  Hobbit that
   could  be  connected  with  my  mythology.  To  be  the  burden  of  a
   large  story it  had to  be of  supreme importance.  I then  linked it
   with  the  (originally)  quite  casual  reference to  the Necromancer,
   whose  function  was  hardly  more  than  to  provide  a   reason  for
   Gandalf  going  away  and  leaving  Bilbo  and  the  Dwarves  to  fend
   for  themselves,  which  was   necessary  for   the  tale.   From  The
   Hobbit  are  also  derived  the  matter  of  the Dwarves,  Durin their
   prime  ancestor,  and  Moria;  and  Elrond.  The  passage  in  Ch. iii
   relating  him  to  the  Half-elven  of the  mythology was  a fortunate
   accident,  due  to  the  difficulty   of  constantly   inventing  good
   names  for  new  characters.  I  gave  him  the name  Elrond casually,
   but  as  this  came  from  the  mythology  (Elros  and Elrond  the two
   sons  of  Earendel)  I  made  him  half-elven. Only  in The Lord was

 he  identified  with  the  son   of  Earendel,   and  so   the  great-
 grandson  of  Luthien  and  Beren,  a  great  power and  a Ringholder.
                                                                       
 How  my  father  saw  The  Hobbit  - specifically  in relation  to 'The
 Silmarillion' - at the time of its publication is shown clearly  in the
 letter that he wrote to G. E. Selby on 14 December 1937:               
                                                                       
 I don't much approve of The Hobbit myself, preferring  my own          
 mythology (which is just touched on) with its  consistent no-          
 menclature - Elrond, Gondolin, and Esgaroth have  escaped out          
 of it - and organized history, to this rabble of Eddaic-named          
 dwarves out of Voluspa, newfangled  hobbits and  gollums (in-          
 vented in an idle hour) and Anglo-Saxon runes.                         
                                                                       
 The  importance  of  The  Hobbit  in  the history  of the  evolution of
 Middle-earth lies then,  at this  time, in  the fact  that it  was pub-
 lished, and that a sequel to  it was  demanded. As  a result,  from the
 nature  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  as  it  evolved, The  Hobbit was
 drawn into  Middle-earth -  and transformed  it; but  as it  stood in
 I937 it was not a part of it. Its significance for Middle-earth lies in
 what it would do, not in what it was.                                  
 Later,  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  in  turn  reacted  upon  The  Hobbit
 itself,  in  published   and  in   (far  more   extensive)  unpublished
 revisions of the text; but all that lies of course far in the future at
 the point which this History has reached.                              
                                                                       
 In  the  manuscripts  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  there  is  extreme
 inconsistency  in  such  matters  as  the  use  of capital  letters and
 hyphens,  and  the  separation  of  elements  in  compound   names.  In
 my  representation  of  the  texts  I  have  not imposed  any standard-
 ization  in  this  respect,  though  using consistent  forms in  my own
 discussions.                                                           
