 THE FIRST PHASE.

                                      I.                                    
                            A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY.                          
                                                                           
                                     (i)                                    
                              The First Version.                            
                                                                           
 The original written starting-point of The Lord of the  Rings -  its 'first
 germ', as my father scribbled on the text long after - has  been preserved:
 a manuscript of five pages entitled A long-expected party. I think  that it
 must have been to this  (rather than  to a  second, unfinished,  draft that
 soon  followed it)  that my  father referred  when on  19 December  1937 he
 wrote  to  Charles  Furth at  Allen and  Unwin: 'I  have written  the first
 chapter  of a  new story  about Hobbits  - "A  long expected  party".' Only
 three days before he had written to Stanley Unwin:                         
  I think it is plain that... a sequel or successor to The Hobbit  is called
 for. I promise to give this thought and attention. But I  am sure  you will
 sympathize  when  I  say  that  the construction  of elaborate  and consis-
 tent  mythology  (and  two  languages)  rather occupies  the mind,  and the
 Silmarils  are  in  my  heart.  So  that goodness  knows what  will happen.
 Mr  Baggins  began  as  a  comic  tale  among  conventional  Grimm's fairy-
 tale dwarves, and  got drawn  into the  edge of  it -  so that  even Sauron
 the  terrible  peeped  over  the  edge.  And  what  more  can  hobbits  do?
 They  can  be  comic,  but  their  comedy  is  suburban  unless  it  is set
 against things more elemental.                                             
 From this it seems plain that on the 16th of December he had not  only not
 begun writing, but in all  probability had  not even  given thought  to the
 substance of 'a new story  about Hobbits'.  Not long  before he  had parted
 with the manuscript of the third version of The  Silmarillion to  Allen and
 Unwin; it was unfinished,  and he  was still  deeply immersed  in it.  In a
 postscript to this letter to Stanley  Unwin he  acknowledged, in  fact, the
 return of  The Silmarillion  (and other  things) later  on that  day. None-
 theless, he must have begun on the new story there and then.               
                                                                           
  When he first put pen to paper  he wrote  in large  letters 'When  M', but
 he stopped before completing the final stroke  of the  M and  wrote instead
 'When  Bilbo...'  The text  begins in  a handsome  script, but  the writing
 becomes  progessively  faster  and  deteriorates  at the  end into  a rapid
 scrawl not at all points legible. There are a good many alterations  to the
 manuscript. The text that follows represents the original  form as  I judge
 it to have been, granting that what is 'original' and what is not cannot be
 perfectly distinguished.  Some changes  can be  seen to  have been  made at
 the moment of writing, and these  are taken  up into  the text;  but others

 are characteristic anticipations of the following version, and  these are
 ignored.  In any  case it  is highly  probable that  my father  wrote the
 versions  of  this  opening chapter  in quick  succession. Notes  to this
 version follow immediately on the end of the text (p. 17).              
                                                                        
                          A long-expected party (1).                     
                                                                        
 When   Bilbo,   son   of   Bungo   of   the   family  of   Baggins,  [had
 celebrated  >]  prepared  to  celebrate  his  seventieth  birthday  there
 was  for  a  day  or  two  some talk  in the  neighbourhood. He  had once
 had  a  little   fleeting  fame   among  the   people  of   Hobbiton  and
 Bywater  -  he  had  disappeared  after  breakfast  one  April  30th and
 not  reappeared   until  lunchtime   on  June   22nd  in   the  following
 year.  A  very  odd  proceeding  for  which  he   had  never   given  any
 good  reason,  and  of  which  he  wrote  a  nonsensical  account.  After
 that  he  returned  to  normal  ways;  and the  shaken confidence  of the
 district  was  gradually   restored,  especially   as  Bilbo   seemed  by
 some   unexplained   method   to  have   become  more   than  comfortably
 off, if not positively  wealthy. Indeed  it was  the magnificence  of the
 party  rather than  the fleeting  fame that  at first  caused the  talk -
 after  all  that  other  odd  business  had  happened  some  twenty years
 before  and  was  becoming  decently   forgotten.  The   magnificence  of
 the preparations for  the party,  I should  say. The  field to  the south
 of  his  front  door  was  being  covered  with   pavilions.  Invitations
 were  being  sent  out  to  all  the  Bagginses  and  all the  Tooks (his
 relatives  on  his  mother's  side),  and  to  the Grubbs  (only remotely
 connected);  and  to   the  Burroweses,   the  Boffinses,   the  Chubbses
 and  the  Proudfeet:  none  of  whom  were  connected  at all  within the
 memory  of  the  local  historians  -  some  of them  lived on  the other
 side  of  the  shire; but  they were  all, of  course, hobbits.  Even the
 Sackville-Bagginses,  his  cousins  on  his   father's  side,   were  not
 forgotten.   There  had   been  a   feud  between   them  and   Mr  Bilbo
 Baggins,  as  some  of  you  may  remember.  But  so  splendid   was  the
 invitation-card,  all  written  in  gold,  that  they  were   induced  to
 accept;  besides,  their  cousin  had  been  specializing  in  good  food
 for  a  long time,  and his  tables had  a high  reputation even  in that
 time  and  country  when  food  was  still  what  it  ought  to   be  and
 abundant enough for all folk to practise on.                            
   Everyone  expected  a  pleasant  feast;  though  they   rather  dreaded
 the after-dinner speech  of their  host. He  was liable  to drag  in bits
 of what he called poetry, and even to allude,  after a  glass or  two, to
 the  absurd  adventures  he  said  he  had  had   long  ago   during  his

                                                     
 ridiculous  vanishment.  They  had  a  eery  pleasant  feast:  indeed  an
 engrossing  entertainment.  The  purchase   of  provisions   fell  almost
 to  zero  throughout  the  whole  shire  during  the  ensuing  week;  but
 as  Mr  Baggins'  catering  had  emptied  all  the  stores,  cellars  and
 warehouses  for  miles  around,  that  did  not  matter.  Then  came  the
 speech.  Most  of  the  assembled   hobbits  were   now  in   a  tolerant
 mood,  and  their  former  fears  were  forgotten.  They   were  prepared
 to listen to anything, and to  cheer at  every full  stop. But  they were
 not  prepared  to   be  startled.   But  they   were  -   completely  and
 unprecedentedly startled; some even had indigestion.                    
       'My dear  people,' began  Mr Baggins.  'Hear, hear!'  they replied
 in  chorus.  'My  dear  Bagginses,'  he  went  on,  standing  now  on his
 chair,  so  that the  light of  the lanterns  that illuminated  the enor-
 mous  pavilion  flashed  upon  the  gold   buttons  of   his  embroidered
 waistcoat   for   all   to  see.   'And  my   dear  Tooks,   and  Grubbs,
 and   Chubbs,   and   Burroweses,   and   Boffinses,   and  Proudfoots.'(2)
 'Proudfeet'  shouted  an  elderly  hobbit  from  the  back.  His  name of
 course  was  Proudfoot,  and  merited;  his  feet were  large, exception-
 ally  furry,  and  both  were  on  the  table.  'Also my  dear Sackville-
 Bagginses  that  I  welcome  back  at  last   to  Bag-end,'   Bilbo  con-
 tinued.   'Today  is   my  seventieth   birthday.'  'Hurray   hurray  and
 many  happy returns!  ' they  shouted. That  was the  sort of  stuff they
 liked: short, obvious, uncontroversial.                                 
       'I  hope  you  are  all  enjoying  yourselves  as  much  as  I am.'
 Deafening  cheers,  cries  of  yes  (and  no),  and  noises  of  trumpets
 and  whistles.  There  were  a  great  many  junior  hobbits  present, as
 hobbits  were  indulgent  to their  children, especially  if there  was a
 chance  of  an  extra  meal.  Hundreds  of  musical  crackers   had  been
 pulled.  Most  of  them  were   labelled  'Made   in  Dale'.   What  that
 meant  only  Bilbo  and  a  few  of  his  Took-nephews  knew;   but  they
 were  very  marvellous  crackers.  'I  have  called  you  all  together,'
 Bilbo  went  on  when  the  last cheer  died away,  and something  in his
 voice made a  few of  the Tooks  prick up  their ears.  'First of  all to
 tell you  that I  am immensely  fond of  you, and  that seventy  years is
 too  short  a time  to live  among such  excellent and  charming hobbits'
 - 'hear hear!''I don't know half of you half  as well  as I  should like,
 and less than half of you half as well as you deserve.' No cheers,  a few
 claps  -  most  of  them  were  trying  to  work  it  out.  'Secondly  to
 celebrate  my  birthday  and  the  twentieth  year  of  my  return'  - an
 uncomfortable  rustle.  'Lastly  to  make   an  Announcement.'   He  said
 this  very  loud  and  everybody  sat  up  who  could.  'Goodbye!   I  am
 going away after dinner. Also I am going to get married.'               

   He  sat  down.  The  silence was  flabbergastation. It  was broken
 only  by  Mr  Proudfoot, who  kicked over  the table;  Mrs Proudfoot
 choked in the middle of a drink.                                    
                                                                    
   That's that. It merely serves  to explain  that Bilbo  Baggins got
 married and had  many children,  because I  am going  to tell  you a
 story about one of his  descendants, and  if you  had only  read his
 memoirs up to the date of Balin's visit - ten years at  least before
 this birthday party - you might have been puzzled.(3)               
   As  a  matter  of  fact  Bilbo  Baggins  disappeared  silently and
 unnoticed - the ring was in his hand even while  he made  his speech
 - in the middle of the confused outburst of  talk that  followed the
 flabbergasted  silence.  He  was  never  seen  in   Hobbiton  again.
 When  the carriages  came for  the guests  there was  no one  to say
 good-bye to. The carriages  rolled away,  one after  another, filled
 with  full  but  oddly  unsatisfied  hobbits.  Gardeners   came  (by
 appointment)  and  cleared  away  in  wheelbarrows  those  that  had
 inadvertently  remained.  Night  settled  down  and passed.  The sun
 rose. People came to  clear away  the pavilions  and the  tables and
 the chairs and the lanterns and  the flowering  trees in  boxes, and
 the spoons  and knives  and plates  and forks,  and crumbs,  and the
 uneaten food - a very small parcel. Lots of  other people  came too.
 Bagginses  and  Sackville-Bagginses  and  Tooks,  and   people  with
 even less  business. By  the middle  of the  morning (when  even the
 best-fed  were  out  and  about again)  there was  quite a  crowd at
 Bag-end,  uninvited  but  not  unexpected.  ENTER  was painted  on a
 large  white  board  outside  the  great  front-door.  The  door was
 open.  On  everything  inside  there  was a  label tied.  'For Mungo
 Took,  with  love  from  Bilbo';  'For  Semolina Baggins,  with love
 from her nephew', on a waste-paper basket  - she  had written  him a
 deal of letters (mostly of good advice).  'For Caramella  Took, with
 kind  remembrances  from  her  uncle',  on  a  clock  in  the  hall.
 Though  unpunctual  she  had  been  a niece  he rather  liked, until
 coming late one  day to  tea she  had declared  his clock  was fast.
 Bilbo's clocks were never either slow or fast, and he did not forget
 it.  'For  Obo  Took-  Took,  from his  great-nephew', on  a feather
 bed;  Obo  was  seldom  awake  before  i  a noon  or after  tea, and
 snored.  'For  Gorboduc  Grubb  with  best  wishes from  B. Baggins'
 -on a gold fountain-pen; he never answered  letters. 'For Angelica's
 use'  on a  mirror -  she was  a young  Baggins and  thought herself
 very  comely.(4) 'For  Inigo  Grubb-Took',  on  a   complete  dinner-
 service  -  he  was  the  greediest  hobbit  known to  history. 'For

 Amalda Sackville-Baggins as a present',  on a  case of  silver spoons.
 She was the wife of  Bilbo's cousin,  the one  he had  discovered years
 ago  on  his  return  measuring  his  dining-room  (you   may  remember
 his  suspicions  about  disappearing  spoons:  anyway  neither  he  nor
 Amalda had forgotten).(5)                                             
   Of  course  there  were  a  thousand  and   one  things   in  Bilbo's
 house,  and  all  had  labels-  most  of  them  with some  point (which
 sank  in  after  a time).  The whole  house-furniture was  disposed of,
 but not a penny piece of money,  nor a  brass ring  of jewelry,  was to
 be   found.   Amalda   was   the   only   Sackville-Baggins  remembered
 with a label - but then there was a notice in the  hall saying  that Mr
 Bilbo  Baggins  made  over  the  desirable  property  or  dwelling-hole
 known   as   Bag-end   Underhill  together   with  all   lands  thereto
 belonging   or  annexed   to  Sago   Sackville-Baggins  and   his  wife
 Amalda  for  them  to  have  hold possess  occupy or  otherwise dispose
 of at their pleasure  and discretion  as from  September 22nd  next. It
 was  then  September  21st  (Bilbo's  birthday  being  on the  20th of
 that  pleasant  month).  So  the Sackville-Bagginses  did live  in Bag-
 end after all -  though they  had had  to wait  some twenty  years. And
 they had a great deal of difficulty too getting all the  labelled stuff
 out - labels got torn and mixed,  and people  tried to  do swaps  in the
 hall,  and  some  tried to  make off  with stuff  that was  [not] being
 carefully  watched;  and  various  prying  folk  began  knocking  holes
 in  walls  and  burrowing  in  cellars  before  they could  be ejected.
 They  were  still  worrying  about  the  money  and  the  jewelry.  How
 Bilbo  would  have  laughed. Indeed  he was  - he  had foreseen  how it
 would all fall out, and was enjoying the joke quite privately.        
   There, I suppose it has become all too plain. The  fact is,  in spite
 of  his  after-dinner  speech,  he  had  grown  suddenly very  tired of
 them  all.  The  Tookishness  (not of  course that  all Tooks  ever had
 much  of  this  wayward   quality)  had   quite  suddenly   and  uncom-
 fortably  come  to  life  again.  Also  another secret  - after  he had
 blowed his last fifty  ducats on  the party  he had  not got  any money
 or  jewelry  left,  except  the  ring,  and  the  gold  buttons  on his
 waistcoat. He had spent it all in  twenty years  (even the  proceeds of
 his beautiful.... which he had sold a few years back).(6)             
   Then  how  could he  get married?  He was  not going  to just  then -
 he merely said 'I am going  to get  married'. I  cannot quite  say why.
 It  came  suddenly  into  his  head. Also  he thought  it was  an event
 that might occur in the future -  if he  travelled again  amongst other
 folk,  or  found  a  more  rare  and  more  beautiful  race  of hobbits
 somewhere.  Also  it  was  a  kind  of   explanation.  Hobbits   had  a

 curious  habit in  their weddings.  They kept  it (always  officially and
 very  often actually)  a dead  secret for  years who  they were  going to
 marry,  even  when   they  knew.   Then  they   suddenly  went   and  got
 married  and  went off  without an  address for  a week  or two  (or even
 longer).  When  Bilbo  had  disappeared  this  is   what  at   first  his
 neighbours  thought.  'He  has  gone  and  got   married.  Now   who  can
 it be? - no one  else has  disappeared, as  far as  we know.'  Even after
 a  year  they-  would  have  been  less  surprised  if  he had  come back
 with  a  wife. For  a long  while some  folk thought  he was  keeping one
 in  hiding,  and  quite  a  legend  about  the  poor  Mrs  Bilbo  who was
 too ugly to be seen grew up for a while.                                 
   So  now  Bilbo  said  before  he  disappeared:  'I  am  going   to  get
 married.'  He  thought  that  that  -  together with  all the  fuss about
 the  house  (or  hole)  and  furniture  -  would keep  them all  busy and
 satisfied for  a long  while, so  that no  one would  bother to  hunt for
 him for  a bit.  And he  was right  - or  nearly right.  For no  one ever
 bothered  to  hunt  for  him  at  all.  They  decided  he  had  gone mad,
 and run off till he met a pool or a river or a steep fall, and  there was
 one  Baggins  the  less.   Most  of   them,  that   is.  He   was  deeply
 regretted  by  a  few  of  his  younger friends  of course  (... Angelica
 and  Sar......).  But  he  had  not  said  good-bye  to all  of them  - 0
 no. That is easily explained.                                            
                                                                         
                                   NOTES.                                 
                                                                         
 1. The  title  was  written  in  subsequently,  but  no doubt  before the
 chapter was finished, since my father referred to it by this title in his
 letter       of       19       December       1937        (p.       11).
 2. After 'Burroweses' followed  'and Ogdens',  but this  was struck  out -
 almost certainly at the time of writing.  'Proudfoots' was  first written
 'Proudfeet', as earlier in the chapter, but as the next sentence shows it
 was changed in the act of writing.                                       
 3. The reference  is to  the conclusion  of The  Hobbit, when  Gandalf and
 Balin called at Bag End 'some years afterwards'.                         
 4. At this point a present to Inigo Baggins of a case of  hairbrushes was
 mentioned, but struck out, evidently at  the time  of writing,  since the
 present to another Inigo (Grubb-Took) immediately follows.               
 5. Various  changes  were made  to the  names and  other details  in this
 passage,  not  all  of  which  were taken  up in  the third  version (the
 second  ends  before  this point).  Mungo Took's  gift (an  umbrella) was
 specified;  and  Caramella  Took  was  changed   from  niece   to  cousin.
 Gorboduc   Grubb   became   Orlando   Grubb.   Pencilled   proposals  for
 the  name  of  Mrs  Sackville-Baggins,  replacing  Amalda,  are  Lonicera

 (Honeysuckle) and Griselda, and her husband Sago (named in the                   
 next paragraph of the text) became Cosmo.                                        
 6. Cf.  the  end  of  The  Hobbit:  'His  gold  and  silver  was  mostly [after-
 wards  changed  to  largely]  spent  in  presents,  both  useful   and  extrava-
 gant'.  The  illegible  word  here  might  possibly  be  arms,  but it  does not
 look  like  it,  and  cf.  the same  passage in  The Hobbit:  'His coat  of mail
 was  arranged  on  a  stand  in  the  hall  (until  he  lent  it to  a Museum).'
                                 *                                               
 Writing of this draft in his Biography, Humphrey Carpenter says                  
                                                                                 
 (p. 185):                                                                          
 The  reason  for  his  disappearance,  as  given  in this  first draft,  is that
 Bilbo  'had  not  got any  money or  jewels left'  and was  going off  in search
 of  more  dragon-gold.  At  this  point  the  first   version  of   the  opening
 chapter breaks off, unfinished.                                                  
 But  it may  be argued  that it  was in  fact finished:  for the  next completed
 draft  of  the  chapter  (the  third  - the  second seems  certainly unfinished,
 and breaks off at a much earlier point) ends only  a very  little further  on in
 the narrative (p. 34), and shortly before the end has:                           
 But  not  all  of  them  had  said good-bye  to him.  That is  easily explained,
 and soon will be.                                                                
 And  the  explanation  is  not  given, but  reserved for  the next  chapter. Nor
 is it made so explicit in the first draft that Bilbo was 'going off in search of
 more  dragon-gold'.  That  lack  of  money  was  a reason  for leaving  his home
 is  certainly  the  case,  but  a  sudden  Tookish  disgust with  hobbit dulness
 and  conventionality  is  also  emphasized;  and in  fact there  is not  so much
 as  a  hint  of  what  Bilbo  was  planning to  do. It  may well  be that  on 19
 December  1937   my  father   had  no   idea.  The   rapidly-written  conclusion
 of  the  text  strongly  suggests uncertain  direction (and  indeed he  had said
 earlier in the  chapter that  the story  was going  to be  about one  of Bilbo's
 descendants).                                                                    
 But  while  there  is  no  sign  of  Gandalf,  most of  the essentials  and many
 of the details of the actual party as it is described in  The Fellowship  of the
 Ring   (FR)   emerge   right   at   the   beginning,   and  even   some  phrases
 remained.   The   Chubbs   (or  Chubbses,   p.  13),   the  Boffinses,  and  the
 Proudfoots  now  appear  -  the   families  named   Burrowes  (Burrows   in  FR)
 and  Grubb  had  been  mentioned  at  the  end of  The Hobbit,  in the  names of
 the auctioneers at the sale of Bag End; and the hobbits' land  is for  the first
 time  called  'the shire'  (see, however,  p. 31).  But the  first names  of the
 hobbits  were  only  at  the  beginning  of  their  protean  variations  -  such
 names  as  Sago   and  Semolina   would  be   rejected  as   unsuitable,  others
 (Amalda,  Inigo,  Obo)  would  have  no  place  in  the  final  genealogies, and
 yet  others  (Mungo,  Gorboduc)  would  be  given  to  different  persons;  only
 the vain Angelica Baggins survived.                                              
                                                                                 
                                        *                                         

                                      (ii)                                    
                               The Second Version.                            
                                                                             
 The  next  manuscript,  while  closely  based  on  the first,  introduced much
 new  material  -  most  notably  the  arrival of  Gandalf, and  the fireworks.
 This version breaks off at the words 'Morning went on' (FR p. 45).           
  The  manuscript  was  much  emended,  and  it  is  very difficult  to distin-
 guish  those  changes  made  at  the  time  of  composition  from  those  made
 subsequently:  in  any  case  the third  version no  doubt followed  hard upon
 the second, superseding it before it was  completed. I  give this  second text
 also in full, so far as it goes, but in this case I include virtually  all the
 emendations made to it (in some  cases the  original reading  is given  in the
 notes which follow the text on p. 25).                                       
                                                                             
                                   Chapter 1.                                 
                                                                             
                             A long-expected party.                           
                                                                             
 When  Bilbo,  son  of Bungo,  of the  respectable family  of Baggins         
 prepared  to celebrate  his seventy-first'  birthday there  was some         
 little  talk  in  the  neighbourhood, and  people polished  up their         
 memories.(2) Bilbo  had  once  had  some  brief  notoriety  amoug the         
 hobbits  of  Hobbiton  and  Bywater  -  he  had   disappeared  after         
 breakfast one  April 30th  and had  not reappeared  until lunch-time         
 on  June 22nd  in  the following  year. A  very odd  proceeding, and         
 one  for which  he had  never accounted  satisfactorily. He  wrote a         
 book about it, of course: but even those who had read it  never took         
 that seriously. It is no good talking to hobbits about dragons: they         
 either disbelieve  you, or  feel uncomfortable;  and in  either case         
 tend  to  avoid  you  afterwards.  Mr  Baggins,  however,  had  soon         
 returned  to  more  or  less  normal  ways;  and  though  the shaken         
 confidence of the countryside was never quite restored, in  time the         
 hobbits agreed to pardon the  past, and  Bilbo was  on calling-terms         
 again with all his relatives  and neighbours,  except of  course the         
 Sackville-Bagginses.  For  one  thing  Bilbo  seemed  by   some  un-         
 explained  method  to  have  become  more  than comfortably  off, in         
 fact  positively  wealthy.  Indeed  it was  the magnificence  of the         
 preparations  for  his birthday-party  far more  than his  brief and         
 distant fame that caused the talk. After all that other odd business         
 had  happened  some  twenty  years  ago and  was all  but forgotten;         
 the party  was going  to happen  that very  month of  September. The         
 weather was fine, and there was talk of a display of  fireworks such         
 as had not been seen since the days of Old Took.                             

   Time  drew  nearer.  Odd-looking   carts  with   odd-looking  pack-
 ages began to toil up the Hill to Bag-end (the residence of  Mr Bilbo
 Baggins).  They arrived  by night,  and startled  folk peered  out of
 their doors  to gape  at them.  Some were  driven by  outlandish folk
 singing  strange  songs,  elves,  or  heavily  hooded  dwarves. There
 was  one  huge  creaking  wain  with  great lumbering  tow-haired Men
 on  it  that caused  quite a  commotion. It  bore a  large B  under a
 crown.(3) It could not get across the bridge by the  mill, and  the Men
 carried  the  goods  on their  backs up  the hill  - stumping  on the
 hobbit road like elephants. All the beer  at the  inn vanished  as if
 down  a drain  when they  came downhill  again. Later  in the  week a
 cart came trotting in in broad daylight.  An old  man was  driving it
 all alone. He wore a tall  pointed blue  hat and  a long  grey cloak.
 Hobbit boys and girls ran after the cart all the way up the  hill. It
 had  a  cargo  of fireworks,  that they  could see  when it  began to
 unload: great bundles of them, labelled with a red G.               
   'G for grand,' they shouted; and that was as good  a guess  as they
 could  make  at  its  meaning.  Not  many  of  their  elders  guessed
 better: hobbits  have rather  short memories  as a  rule. As  for the
 little  old man,(4) he vanished  inside Bilbo's  front door  and never
 reappeared.                                                         
                                                                    
   There  might  have  been  some  grumbling about  'dealing locally',
 but  suddenly  orders  began  to  pour  out  from  Bag-end,  and into
 every  shop  in  the  neighbourhood  (even  widely   measured).  Then
 people  stopped  being  merely  curious,  and   became  enthusiastic.
 They  began  to  tick  off  the  days  on  the calendar  till Bilbo's
 birthday,  and  they  began  to  watch  for  the postman,  hoping for
 invitations.                                                        
   Then  the  invitations  began  pouring  out,  and  the  post-office
 of  Hobbiton  was   blocked,  and   Bywater  post-office   was  snowed
 under,  and  voluntary  postmen   were  called   for.  There   was  a
 constant  stream  of  them  going  up  The  Hill to  Bag-end carrying
 letters  containing hundreds  of polite  variations on  'thank-you, I
 shall  certainly  come.'  During all  this time,  for days  and days,
 indeed since  September [10th >] 8th,  Bilbo had  not been  seen out
 or about by anyone. He either  did not  answer the  bell, or  came to
 the  door  and  cried 'Sorry  - Busy!'  round the  edge of  it. They
 thought  he  was  only writing  invitation cards,  but they  were not
 quite right.                                                        
   Finally the field to the south of his front door - it  was bordered
 by his kitchen garden on one side and the  Hill road  on the  other -

 began  to  be  covered  with  tents and  pavilions. The  three hobbit-
 families  of  Bagshot  Row  just  below  it  were  immensely  excited.
 There was one specially large pavilion,  so large  that the  tree that
 stood in the field was inside it, standing growing in the  middle.(5) It
 was  hung  all  over  with  lanterns.  Even  more  promising  was  the
 erection of a huge  kitchen in  a corner  of the  field. A  draught of
 cooks  arrived.  Excitement  rose  to  its  height.  Then  the weather
 clouded  over.  That  was  on Friday,  the eve  of the  party. Anxiety
 grew  intense.  Then  Saturday  September   [20th  >]   22nd (6) actually
 dawned.  The  sun  got  up,  the  clouds  vanished,  flags   were  un-
 furled, and the fun began.                                           
   Mr Baggins called it a party - but  it was  several rolled  into one
 and  mixed  up.  Practically  everybody  near at  hand was  invited to
 something or other -  very few  were forgotten  (by accident),  and as
 they turned up anyhow it  did not  matter. Bilbo  met the  guests (and
 additions) at the gate in  person. He  gave away  presents to  all and
 sundry - the latter were those  that went  out again  by the  back way
 and came in again by the  front for  a second  helping. He  began with
 the  youngest  and  smallest,  and  came  back  again  quickly  to the
 smallest  and  youngest.  Hobbits  give  presents  to other  people on
 their birthdays: not very expensive ones,  of course.  But it  was not
 a  bad  system.  Actually  in  Hobbiton and  Bywater, since  every day
 in  the  year  was  somebody's  birthday, it  meant that  every hobbit
 got  a  present (and  sometimes more)  almost every  day of  his life.
 But they did not get tired of  them. On  this occasion  the hobbit-fry
 were  wildly excited  - there  were toys  the like  of which  they had
 never seen before. As you have guessed, they came from Dale.         
   When  they  got  inside the  grounds the  guests had  songs, dances,
 games  -  and  of  course food  and drink.  There were  three official
 meals: lunch, tea, and dinner (or  supper); but  lunch and  tea were
 marked  chiefly  by  the  fact  that  at  those  times  everybody  was
 sitting  down and  eating at  the same  time. Drinking never stopped.
 Eating  went  on pretty  continuously from  elevenses to  six o'clock,
 when the fireworks started.                                          
   The  fireworks  of course  (as you  at any  rate have  guessed) were
 by Gandalf, and brought by him in  person, and  let off  by him  - the
 main  ones:  there  was  generous  distribution  of  squibs, crackers,
 sparklers,  torches,  '  dwarf-candles,  elf-fountains, goblin-barkers
 and  thunderclaps.  They  were of  course superb.  The art  of Gandalf
 naturally got the older the better. There were  rockets like  a flight
 of scintillating  birds singing  with sweet  voices; there  were green
 trees  with  trunks  of  twisted  smoke:  their  leaves opened  like a

 whole   spring   unfolding   in   a  few   minutes,  and   their  shining
 branches   dropped   glowing   flowers    down   upon    the   astonished
 hobbits  -  only  to  disappear  in  a  sweet  scent before  they touched
 head  hat  or  bonnet.  There  were  fountains  of butterflies  that flew
 into the trees; there  were pillars  of coloured  fires that  turned into
 hovering  eagles,  or sailing  ships, or  a flight  of swans;  there were
 red  thunderstorms  and  showers  of  yellow  rain;  there  was  a forest
 of silver spears that went suddenly up into the  air with  a yell  like a
 charging  army  and  came  down  into  The  Water  with  a  hiss  like  a
 hundred  hot  snakes.  And  there  was  also  one  last  thing  in  which
 Gandalf  rather  overdid  it  -  after all,  he knew  a great  deal about
 hobbits  and  their  beliefs.  The lights  went out,  a great  smoke went
 up, it shaped itself like a mountain,  it began  to glow  at the  top, it
 burst  into  flames of  scarlet and  green, out flew a  red-golden dragon
 (not life-size, of course, but terribly life-like): fire came out  of its
 mouth,  its  eyes  glared down,  there was  a roar  and it  whizzed three
 times  round  the  crowd.  Everyone  ducked  and  some  fell   flat.  The
 dragon  passed  like  an  express  train  and burst  over Bywater  with a
 deafening explosion.                                                    
   'That  means  it  is  dinner-time,'  said  Gandalf.  A   fortunate  re-
 mark,  for  the  pain  and  alarm  vanished  like  magic.  Now  really we
 must hurry  on, for  all this  is not  as important  as it  seemed. There
 was  a  supper for  all the  guests. But  there was  also a  very special
 dinner-party  in  the  great  pavilion  with  the  tree.  To  that  party
 invitations  had  been  limited  to  twelve  dozen,  or  one   gross  (in
 addition  to  Gandalf  and  the  host),   made  up   of  all   the  chief
 hobbits,  and  their  elder  children,  to  whom  Bilbo  was  related  or
 with   whom   he  was   connected,  or   by  whom   he  had   been  well-
 treated  at  any  time,  or  for  whom  he  felt some  special affection.
 Nearly  all  the  living  Baggins[es]  had  been  invited; a  quantity of
 Tooks  (his  relations  on  his  mother's  side);  a  number   of  Grubbs
 (connections    of    his    grandfather's),   dozens    of   Brandybucks
 (connections   of   his   grandmother's),   and   various    Chubbs   and
 Burrowses  and  Boffins   and  Proudfeet   -  some   of  whom   were  not
 connected  with  Bilbo   at  all,   within  the   memory  of   the  local
 historians;  some  even  lived  right  on  the other  side of  the Shire;
 but  they  were all,  of course,  hobbits. Even  the Sackville-Bagginses,
 his  first  cousins on  his father's  side, were  not omitted.  There had
 been   some  coolness   between  them   and  Mr   Baggins,  as   you  may
 remember,  dating  from  some  20  years  back.   But  so   splendid  was
 the  invitation  card,  written  all  in  gold,  that  they  felt  it was
 impossible  to  refuse. Besides,  their cousin  had been  specializing in

 food for a  good many  years, and  his tables  had a  high reputation
 even in that time and country, when food was still all that  it ought
 to be, and abundant enough for  all folk  to practise  both discrimi-
 nation and satisfaction.                                            
   All the 144 special guests  expected a  pleasant feast;  though they
 rather dreaded the after-dinner speech of their  host. He  was liable
 to drag in bits of what he  called 'poetry';  and sometimes,  after a
 glass or two, would allude to the  absurd adventures  he said  he had
 had  long  ago -  during his  ridiculous vanishment.  Not one  of the
 144 were  disappointed:  they  had  a  eery  pleasant  feast,  indeed
 an  engrossing  entertainment:  rich,  abundant,  varied,   and  pro-
 longed. The  purchase of  provisions fell  almost to  zero throughout
 the district during  the ensuing  week; but  as Mr  Baggins' catering
 had depleted most of the  stores, cellars,  and warehouses  for miles
 around, that did not matter much.                                   
   After  the  feast  (more  or  less)  came the  Speech. Most  of the
 assembled.hobbits were now  in a  tolerant mood  - at  that delicious
 stage which they called filling up the 'corners' (with sips  of their
 favourite  drinks  and  nips  of  their favourite  sweetmeats): their
 former  fears  were  forgotten.  They  were  prepared  to  listen  to
 anything,  and  to  cheer  at  every  full  stop.  But they  were not
 prepared to be startled.  Yet startled  they certainly  were: indeed,
 completely blowed: some even got indigestion.                       
   My dear people, began Mr Baggins, rising in his place.            
   'Hear, hear, hear!  ' they  answered in  chorus, and  seemed reluc-
 tant to follow their own advice. Meanwhile Bilbo  left his  place and
 went and stood on  a chair  under the  illuminated tree.  The lantern
 light  fell  upon his  beaming face;  the gold  buttons shone  on his
 flowered  waistcoat.  They could  all see  him. One  hand was  in his
 pocket. He raised the other.                                        
   My  dear  Bagginses! he  began  again.  And   my  dear   Tooks  and
 Brandybucks   and    Crubbs   and    Chubbs   and    Burroweses   and
 Bracegirdles and Boffises and Proudfoots.                            
   'Proudfeet!'  shouted  an  elderly  hobbit   from  the   back.  His
 name, of course,  was Proudfoot,  and merited:  his feet  were large,
 exceptionally furry, and both were on the table.                    
   Also my good  Sackville-Bagginses that  I welcome  back at  last to
 Bag-end. Today is my seventy-first birthday!                        
   'Hurray,  hurray!  Many   Happy  Returns!   '  they   shouted,  and
 they hammered  joyously on  the tables.  Bilbo was  doing splendidly.
 That  was the  sort of  stuff they  liked: short,  obvious, uncontro-
 versial.                                                            

   I  hope  you  are  all  enjoying  yourselves  as  much  as   I  am.
 Deafening  cheers.  Cries  of  Yes  (and  No).  Noises  of  horns  and
 trumpets,  pipes  and  flutes,  and  other musical  instruments. There
 were  many  junior  hobbits  present,   for  hobbits   were  easygoing
 with their children in the matter of sitting up  late -  especially if
 there was a chance of  getting them  an extra  meal free  (bringing up
 young  hobbits  took  a   great  deal   of  provender).   Hundreds  of
 musical  crackers  had  been  pulled.  Most  of  them  bore  the  mark
 Dale  on  them  somewhere  or other,  inside or  out. What  that meant
 only Bilbo and a few of his close  friends knew  (and you  of course);
 but  they  were  very  marvellous  crackers.  They  contained  instru-
 ments  small  but  of  perfect  make  and  enchanting tone.  Indeed in
 one  corner  some  of   the  younger   Tooks  and   Brandybucks,  sup-
 posing Bilbo to have  finished his  speech (having  said all  that was
 needed),  now  got  up  an  impromptu  orchestra,  and  began  a merry
 dance  tune.  Young  Prospero  Brandybuck (7) and  Melba  Took   got  on
 a table and started to dance the flip-flap, a  pretty thing  if rather
 vigorous. But Bilbo had not finished.                                
   Seizing a horn  from one  of the  children he  blew three  very loud
 notes.  The  noise  subsided.  I shall  not keep  you long,  he cried.
 Cheering broke out again. BUT  I have  called you  all together  for a
 Purpose.                                                             
   Something  in  his  voice made  a few  of the  Tooks prick  up their
 ears. Indeed for three Purposes. First of all, to tell  you that  I am
 immensely fond of you all; and that seventy-one years  is too  short a
 time to live among such excellent and admirable hobbits.             
   Tremendous outburst of approval.                                   
   I don't know half ofyou half as mell as I would like, and  less than
 half of you half as mell as you deserve.                             
   No cheers this  time: it  was a  bit too  difficult. There  was some
 scattered clapping; but not all of them had  yet had  time to  work it
 out and see if it came to a compliment in the end.                   
   Secondly,  to  celebrate  my  birthday,  and the  twentieth anniver-
 sary  of  my  return.   No  cheers;   there  was   some  uncomfortable
 rustling.                                                            
   Lastly,  to  make  an  Announcement.  He  said  this  so  loudly and
 suddenly  that  everyone  sat  up  who  could.  I  regret  to announce
 that - though, as I have said, 71 years is far too short a  time among
 you - this is the END. I am going. I am  leaving after  dinner. Good-
 bye!                                                                 
   He   stepped   down.  One   hundred  and   forty-four  flabbergasted
 hobbits  sat  back  speechless.  Mr  Proudfoot  removed his  feet from

 the  table.  Mrs  Proudfoot  swallowed  a  large  chocolate  and choked.
 Then  there  was  complete   silence  for   quite  forty   winks,  until
 suddenly    every    Baggins,    Took,    Brandybuck,    Chubb,   Grubb,
 Burrowes,   Bracegirdle,  Boffin   and  Proudfoot   began  to   talk  at
 once.                                                                   
   'The  hobbit's  mad. Always  said so.  Bad taste  in jokes.  Trying to
 pull the fur  off our  toes (a  hobbit idiom).  Spoiling a  good dinner.
 Where's   my   handkerchief.   Won't   drink   his  health   now.  Shall
 drink  my  own.  Where's  that  bottle.  Is  he  going  to  get married?
 Not  to  anyone  here  tonight.  Who  would  take  him?   Why  good-bye?
 Where is there to go to? What is he leaving?'  And so  on. At  last old
 Rory  Brandybuck (8) (well-filled  but  still pretty  bright) was  heard to
 shout: 'Where is he now, anyway? Where's Bilbo?'                        
   There was not a sign of their host anywhere.                          
                                                                        
   As  a  matter  of  fact  Bilbo  Baggins  had disappeared  silently and
 unnoticed  in  the  midst  of  all the  talk. While  he was  speaking he
 had  already  been  fingering a  small ring (9) in his  trouser-pocket. As
 he  stepped  down  he  had  slipped it  on -  and he  was never  seen in
 Hobbiton again.                                                         
   When  the  carriages  came  for  the guests  there was  no one  to say
 good-bye  to.  The  carriages  rolled  away,  one after  another, filled
 with   full   but   oddly  unsatisfied   hobbits.  Gardeners   came  (by
 arrangement)   and  cleared   away  in   wheelbarrows  those   that  had
 inadvertently   remained   behind,    asleep   or    immoveable.   Night
 settled  down  and  passed.  The  sun  rose.  The  hobbits  rose  rather
 later. Morning went on.                                                 
                                                                        
                                  NOTES.                                 
                                                                        
 1. seventy-first  emended from  seventieth; but  seventy-first in  the text
    of Bilbo's farewell speech as first written.                         
 z. At this point my father wrote at first:
     Twice before this he had been a matter of local news: a rare
     achievement for a Baggins. The first time was when he was left an
     orphan, when barely forty years old, by the untimely death of his
     father and mother (in a boating accident). The second time was
     more remarkable.
    Such a fate in store for Bungo Baggins and his wife seems most
    improbable in the light of the words of the first chapter of The Hobbit:
     Not that Belladonna Took ever had any adventures after she
     became Mrs Bungo Baggins. Bungo, that was Bilbo's father, built
     the most luxurious hobbit-hole for her... and there they remained
     to the end of their days.

 They  seem  an  unlikely  couple  to  have  gone  'fooling about  with boats',
 in  Gaffer  Gamgee's  phrase,  and  his  recognition  of  this  was  no  doubt
 the  reason  why  my  father  immediately  struck  the  passage  out;  but the
 boating  accident  was  not  forgotten,  and  it  became  the  fate  of (Rollo
 Bolger   >)   Drogo   Baggins   and   his   Brandybuck   wife,   Primula,  for
 whom it was a less improbable end (see p. 37) -                                
                                                                               
3. At  this  stage  only  20  years  separated  Bilbo's adventure  in?he Hobbit
 and  his  farewell  party,  and  my  father  clearly  intended  the  B  on  the
 waggon  to  stand  for  Bard,  King  of  Dale.  Later,   when  the   years  had
 been  greatly  lengthened  out,  it  would  be  Bain  son  of  Bard  who  ruled
 in Dale at this time.                                                          
4. In  the  original  Hobbit  Gandalf  at  his first  appearance was  described as
 'a  little  old  man',  but  afterwards  the  word  'little'  was  removed. See
                                                                               
 P- 315.                                                                        
5. The  single tree  in the  field below  Bag End  was already  in the            
 illustration of Hobbiton that appeared as the frontispiece to The              
 Hobbit, as also were Bilbo's kitchen-garden and the hobbit-holes of            
 Bagshot Row (though that name first appears here).                             
6. September 20th was the date of Bilbo's birthday in the first version
 (p. 16).                                                                      
7. Prospero  Brandybuck  was  first  written  Orlando  Brandybuck,  the           
 second bearer of the name: in the list of Bilbo's gifts in the first           
 version (p. 17 note 5) Gorboduc Grubb had  been changed  to Orlando           
 Grubb.                                                                         
8. A  very   similar  passage,   indicating  the   outraged  comments   of  the
 guests,  was  added  to the  manuscript of  the original  draft at  this point,
 but   it   was   Inigo   Grubb-Took   who   shouted    'Where   is    he   now,
 anyway?'   It   was   the   greedy   Inigo   Grubb-Took   who    received   the
 dinner-service  (p.  15),  and  in this  respect he  survived into  the third
 version              of      the  chapter.
9. a small ring: emended from his famous ring.                                  
                                                                               
 I have given this text in full, since taken together with the first it provides
 a  basis  of  reference  in  describing  those  that  follow,  from  which only
 extracts are given; but it will be seen that the Party  - the  preparations for
 it, the fireworks, the feast - had already reached  the form  it retains  in FR
 (pp.  34-9),  save in  a few  and quite  minor features  of the  narrative (and
 here and there in tone).  This is  the more  striking when  we realize  that at
 this stage my father still had very little idea of where he  was going:  it was
 a beginning without a destination (but see pp. 42-3).                          
 Certain changes made to the manuscript towards its end have not been           
 taken up in the text given above. In Bilbo's speech, his words 'Secondly,      
 to  celebrate  my  birthday,  and  the  twentieth  anniversary  of  my  return'

 and the comment 'No cheers; there was some uncomfortable rustling'           
 were removed, and the following expanded passage substituted:                
                                                                             
   Secondly,  to   celebrate  OUR   birthdays:  mine   and  my   honourable  and
   gallant  father's.  Uncomfortable  and  apprehensive   silence.  I   am  only
   half the man that he  is: I  am 72,  he is  144. Your  numbers are  chosen to
   do  honour  to  each  of  his honourable  years. This  was really  dreadful -
   a  regular  braintwister,  and  some  of them  felt insulted,  like leap-days
   shoved in to fill up a calendar.                                           
                                                                             
 This  change gives  every appearance  of belonging  closely with  the writing
 of the manuscript:  it is  clearly written  in ink,  and seems  distinct from
 various  scattered  scribbles in  pencil. But  the appearance  is misleading.
 Why  should  Bilbo  thus  refer  to  old  Bungo  Baggins,  underground  these
 many  years?  Bungo  was  pure  Baggins,  'solid and  comfortable' (as  he is
 described in The Hobbit),  and surely  died solidly  in his  bed at  Bag End.
 To call him 'gallant' seems odd,  and for  Bilbo to  say 'I  am half  the man
 that he is' and 'he is 144' rather tastelessly whimsical.                    
   The explanation is in fact simple: it was not  Bilbo who  said it,  but his
 son,  Bingo  Baggins, who  enters in  the third  version of  'A Long-expected
 Party'. The textual  point would  not be  worth mentioning  here were  it not
 so striking an example  of my  father's way  of using  one manuscript  as the
 matrix  of the  next version,  but not  correcting it  coherently throughout:
 so in this case, he made no structural alterations to the earlier part of the
 story, but pencilled in the name 'Bingo' against 'Bilbo' on the last pages of
 the  manuscript,  and  (to  the  severe  initial  confusion  of  the  editor)
 carefully rewrote a  passage of  Bilbo's speech  to make  it seem  that Bilbo
 had taken leave of his senses. It is clear, I think, that  it was  the sudden
 emergence  of  this  radical  new  idea  that  caused  him  to  abandon  this
 version.                                                                     
   Other hasty changes  altered 'seventy-first'  to 'seventy-second'  and '71'
 to '72' at each occurrence, and  these belong  also with  the new  story that
 was emerging. In this text, Bilbo's age in  the opening  sentence was  70, as
 in the first version, but it was changed to 71 in the  course of  the chapter
 (note z above).  The number  of guests  at the  dinner-party was  already 144
 in the text as first written, but nothing is made of this figure; that it was
 chosen for  a particular  reason only  appears from  the expanded  passage of
 the  speech given  above: 'I  am 72,  he is 144. Your  numbers are  chosen to
 do honour to each of his honourable years.'  It seems  clear that  the change
 of  71  to  72  was  made  because 72  is half  of 144. The number  of guests
 came first, when  the story  was still  told of  Bilbo, and  at first  had no
 significance beyond its being a dozen dozens, a gross.                       
   A few other  points may  be noticed.  Gandalf was  present at  the dinner-
 party;  Gaffer  Gamgee  had  not  yet  emerged,  but  'old  Rory  Brandybuck'
 makes  his  appearance  (in  place of  Inigo Grubb-Took,  note 8  above); and
 Bilbo does not  disappear with  a blinding  flash. At  each stage  the number
 of  hobbit  clans named  is increased:  so here  the Brandybucks  emerge, and

 the Bracegirdles were pencilled in, to appear in the third version as       
 written.                                                                    
                                                                            
                                    (iii)                                    
                               The Third Version.                             
                                                                            
 The  third  draft  of 'A  Long-expected Party'  is complete,  and is  a good
 clear manuscript with relatively  little later  correction. In  this section
 numbered notes again appear at the end (p. 34).                             
   Discussion of  the change  made to  Bilbo's speech  in the  second version
 has already indicated the central new feature of the third: the story is now
 told not of Bilbo, but of his son. On  this substitution  Humphrey Carpenter
 remarked (Biography p. 185):                                                
                                                                            
   Tolkien had as yet  no clear  idea of  what the  new story  was going  to be
   about.  At  the  end  of  The  Hobbit  he  had  stated that  Bilbo 'remained
   very happy to the end  of his  days, and  those were  extraordinarily long.'
   So  how  could  the  hobbit  have   any  new   adventures  worth   the  name
   without  this  being  contradicted?  And  had  he not  explored most  of the
   possibilities  in  Bilbo's  character?  He  decided   to  introduce   a  new
   hobbit, Bilbo's son - and to  give him  the name  of a  family of  toy koala
   bears  owned by  his children,  'The Bingos'.(1) So  he crossed  out 'Bilbo'
   in the first draft and above it wrote 'Bingo'.                            
                                                                            
 This explanation is plausible. In the first draft, however, my  father wrote
 that the story of the birthday party  'merely serves  to explain  that Bilbo
 Baggins  got  married  and had  many children,  because I  am going  to tell
 you a story about  one of  his descendants'  (in the  second version  we are
 given no indication at all of what  was going  to happen  after the  party -
 though there  is possibly  a suggestion  of something  similar in  the words
 (p. 22) 'Now really we must hurry on, for all this is not as important as it
 seemed'). On the other hand, there  are explicit  statements in  early notes
 (p. 41) that for a time it  was indeed  going to  be Bilbo  who had  the new
 'adventure'.                                                                
   The first part of the third version  is almost  wholly different  from the
 two  preceding,  and  I  give  it  here in  full, with  a few  early changes
 incorporated.                                                               
                                                                            
                            A long-expected party.                           
                                                                            
 When  Bingo,  son  of  Bilbo,  of  the well-known  Baggins family,          
 prepared to celebrate his [fifty-fifth >] seventy-second (3) birthday          
 there was some talk in the neighbourhood,  and people  polished up          
 their  memories.  The  Bagginses  were  fairly  numerous  in those          

 parts,  and  generally  respected; but  Bingo belonged  to a  branch of
 the family that was a  bit peculiar,  and there  were some  odd stories
 about  them.  Bingo's  father,  as  some  still  remembered,  had  once
 made  quite  a  stir  in  Hobbiton  and  Bywater  - he  had disappeared
 one  April  30th  after  breakfast,  and   had  not   reappeared  until
 lunch-time  on  June   22nd  in   the  following   year.  A   very  odd
 proceeding,  and  one  for  which  he  had  never  accounted  satisfac-
 torily. He wrote a book about  it, of  course; but  even those  who had
 read it never took that seriously. It is no good telling  hobbits about
 dragons:  they  either disbelieve  you, or  feel uncomfortable;  and in
 either case tend to avoid you afterwards.                             
   Bilbo  Baggins,  it  is  true,  had  soon  returned  to  normal  ways
 (more   or   less),  and   though  his   reputation  was   never  quite
 restored,  he  became  an  accepted  figure  in  the  neighbourhood. He
 was  never  perhaps  again  regarded  as  a   'safe  hobbit',   but  he
 was   undoubtedly   a   'warm'   one.   In   some  mysterious   way  he
 appeared  to   have  become   more  than   comfortably  off,   in  fact
 positively  wealthy;  so  naturally,  he  was  on  visiting  terms with
 all his  neighbours and  relatives (except,  of course,  the Sackville-
 Bagginses).  He  did  two  more  things  that  caused  tongues  to wag:
 he  got  married  when seventy-one  (a little  but not  too late  for a
 hobbit),  choosing  a  bride  from  the  other side  of the  Shire, and
 giving  a   wedding-feast  of   memorable  splendour;   he  disappeared
 (together  with  his  wife)  shortly  before  his  hundred-and-eleventh
 birthday,  and  was  never  seen  again.  The  folk  of   Hobbiton  and
 Bywater  were  cheated of  a funeral  (not that  they had  expected his
 for many a year yet), so they had a  good deal  to say.  His residence,
 his  wealth,  his  position  (and  the  dubious  regard  of  the neigh-
 bourhood)  were  inherited  by  his  son  Bingo,  just  before  his own
 birthday  (which  happened  to  be  the  same  as his  father's). Bingo
 was,  of  course,  a  mere  youngster  of  39, who  had hardly  cut his
 wisdom-teeth;  but  he  at  once  began  to   carry  on   his  father's
 reputation  for   oddity:  he   never  went   into  mourning   for  his
 parents,  and said  he did  not think  they were  dead. To  the obvious
 question:  'Where  are  they   then?'  he   merely  winked.   He  lived
 alone,  and  was  often  away  from  home.  He  went  about a  lot with
 the  least  well-behaved  members  of  the  Took  family   (his  grand-
 mother's people  and his  father's friends),  and he  was also  fond of
 some  of  the  Brandybucks.  They  were  his  mother's  relatives.  She
 was  Primula  Brandybuck (4) of the Brandybucks  of   Buckland,  across
 Brandywine River on the  other side  of the  Shire and  on the  edge of
 the  Old Forest  - a  dubious region.(5) Folk in  Hobbiton did  not know

                                                                              
                                                                              
  much  about  it,   or  about   the  Brandybucks   either;  though   some  had
  heard  it  said  that  they  were  rich,  and  would  have  been  richer, but
  for  a  certain  'recklessness'  -  generosity,  that  is,  if any  came your
  way.                                                                         
      Anyway,   Bingo   had   lived   at   Bag-end   Underhill  now   for  some
  [16   >]   33   years   without   giving  any   scandal.  His   parties  were
  sometimes  a  bit  noisy,  perhaps,   but  hobbits   don't  mind   that  kind
  of   noise   now  and   again.  He   spent  his   money  freely   and  mostly
  locally.   Now   the   neighbourhood   understood   that   he   was  planning
  something   quite   unusual   in   the  way   of  parties.   Naturally  their
  memories   awoke   and   their   tongues    wagged,   and    Bingo's   wealth
  was  again  guessed  and   re-calculated  at   every  fireside.   Indeed  the
  magnificence   of   the   preparations  quite   overshadowed  the   tales  of
  the old folk about his father's vanishments.                                 
      'After   all,'   as  old   Gaffer  Gamgee   of  Bagshot   Row (7) remarked,
  'them  goings-on  are  old  affairs  and over;  this here  party is  going to
  happen  this  very  month  as  is.'  It  was  early  September  and  as  fine
  as   you   could   wish.   Somebody   started   a  rumour   about  fireworks.
  Very  soon  it  was  accepted  that   there  were   going  to   be  fireworks
  such  as  had  not  been  seen  for  over  a  century,  not  since   the  Old
  Took died.                                                                   
                                                                              
  It is interesting to see the figures III and 33 emerging, though afterwards
  they would be differently achieved: here, Bilbo was r  x i  when he  left the
  Shire,  and  Bingo  lived  on at  Bag End  for 33  years before  his farewell
  party; afterwards, r x z was Bilbo's age at the time of the  party -  when it
  had  become  his  party  again -  and 33  Bingo's (Frodo's)  age at  the same
  time.                                                                        
      In this passage we also see the emergence  of a  very important  piece of
  topography   and   toponymy':   Buckland,   the   Brandywine,  and   the  Old
  Forest. For the names first written here see note 5.                         
                                                                              
      For  the  account  in  this version  of the  preparations for  the Party,
  the  Party  itself,  and  its  immediate  aftermath,  my father  followed the
  emended  second  version (pp.  19 -  25) extremely  closely, adding  a detail
  here and there, but for  the most  part doing  little more  than copy  it out
  (and of course changing 'Bilbo' to 'Bingo'  where necessary).  I give  here a
  list  of interesting  - though  mostly extremely  minor -  shifts in  the new
  narrative. The page references are to those of the second version.           
                                                                              
 (20 - 1) 'B under a crown' on the waggon driven by Men becomes 'B            
  painted in yellow', and 'B' was emended on the text to  'D' (i.e.            
  'Dale').                                                                     
                                                                              
  When the Men came down the Hill again, it is added  that 'the                
  elves and dwarves did not return', and 'the draught of cooks'                

 who  arrived  were  'to  supplement  the   elves  and   dwarves  (who
 seemed  to  be  staying  at  Bag-end  and doing  a lot  of mysterious
 work)'.                                                               
                                                                      
 The  notice  refusing  admittance  on   the  door   of  Bag   End  now
 appears,  and  'a  special  entrance was  cut in  the bank  leading to
 the  road;  wide  steps  and  a large  white gate  were built'  (as in
 FR).   Gaffer   Gamgee  comes   in  again:   'he  stopped   even  pre-
 tending to garden.'                                                   
                                                                      
 The day of the party was still a Saturday (September 22nd).           
                                                                      
 Many of the toys ('some obviously magical') that had come             
 from Dale were 'genuinely dwarf-made'.                                
                                                                      
(22). It is Bingo, not Gandalf, who at  the end  of the  fireworks says
 'That is the signal for supper! ', and though it was said at first, as
 m the second  version, that  the total  of 144 guests did  not include
 the  host and  Gandalf, this  was struck  out (see  p. 106,  note 12).
                                                                      
 A  new  Hobbit  family-name  enters  in  the  list  of   guests:  'and
 various    Burroweses,    Slocums,    Bracegirdles,    Boffinses   and
 Proudfoots',  but  'Slocums'  was   then  changed   to  'Hornblowers',
 which  was  also  added in  to the  text at  subsequent points  in the
 chapter.  The  Bolgers   appear  in   pencilled  additions,   and  are
 present from the start in  the fourth  version. In  his letter  to the
 Observer   newspaper   published   on   20   February   1938  (Letters
 no. 25) my father said: 'The full list of their wealthier families is:
 Baggins,   Boffin,   Bolger,   Bracegirdle,    Brandybuck,   Burrowes,
 Chubb,   Grubb,   Hornblower,   Proudfoot,   Sackville,   and   Took.'
 -   The  Grubbs,   connexions  of   Bingo's  grandfather,   became  by
 a   pencilled   change   connexions  of   his  grandmother;   and  the
 Chubbs,  in  a reverse  change, were  first said  to be  connexions of
 his grandmother and then of his grandfather.                          
 Where  in  the  first  and  second versions  it is  said that  some of
 the hobbits at the party came from 'the other side  of the  shire', it
 is now said that  some of  them 'did  not even  live in  that county',
 changed to 'in that Shire', and 'in  that Shire'  was retained  in the
 fourth  version. The  use of  'that' rather  than 'the'  suggests that
 the  later  use  (cf.  the  Prologue  to  LR,  p.  14:   'The  Hobbits
 named  it  the  Shire,  as  the  region  of  the  authority  of  their
 Thain') was only in the process of emergence.                         
                                                                      
 The   coldness   between   the   Bagginses   of   Bag   End   and  the
 Sackville-Bagginses  had  now  lasted,  not 20 years  as in  the first
 two   versions,  but   'some  seventy-five   years  and   more':  this
 figure depends  on III (Bilbo's age  when he  finally disappeared)
 less 51 (he  was 'about  fifty years  old or  so' at  the time  of his
 great  adventure,  according  to  The  Hobbit),  plus  the   16  years

  of Bingo's solitary residence at Bag End. 'Seventy-five' was              
  emended to 'ninety' (a round figure), which belongs with the              
  change of 16 to 33 (p. 30).                                              
                                                                           
 (23). Bingo was liable to allude to 'the absurd adventures of his           
  "gallant and famous" father'.                                             
                                                                           
 (24). The  two  young  hobbits who  got on  the table  and danced  are still
 Prospero    Brandybuck    and   Melba    Took,   but    Melba was   changed
 in pencil first to Arabella and then to Amanda.                            
                                                                           
 Bingo  now said,  as did  Bilbo in  FR (p.  38), 'I  like less  than half
 of you half as well as you deserve.'                                       
                                                                           
 Bingo's  second  purpose'  is expressed  in exactly  the words             
 written into the second version (see p. 27): 'to celebrate OUR             
 birthdays: mine and my honourable and  gallant father's.  I am             
 only half the man he is: I am 72, and he is 144', &c.                       
                                                                           
 Bingo's last words, 'I am leaving after dinner', were corrected            
 on the manuscript to 'I am leaving now.'                                   
                                                                           
 (25). The  collected  comments  after  Bingo's  concluding  remarks  now
  begin:  'The  hobbit's  mad.  Always  said  so.  And  his  father.  He's
  been   dead   33   years,   I   know.  144,   all  rubbish.'   And  Rory
  Brandybuck   shouts:   'Where   is   Bilbo  -   confound  it,   Bingo  I
  mean. Where is he?'                                                       
                                                                           
   After 'he was never seen in Hobbiton again' is added. "The ring
   was his father's parting gift.'
  From the point where the second version ends at the words 'Morning
 went on' the third goes back to the original draft (p. 15) and follows it
 closely until near the end, using pretty well the same phrases, and largely
 retaining the original list (as emended, p. 17 note 5) of names and labels
 for the recipients of presents from Bag End- these being now, of course,
 presents from Bilbo's son Bingo.
    Semolina Baggins is called 'an aunt, or first cousin once removed',
    Caramella Took (changed later to Bolger) 'had been favoured among
 [Bingo's] junior and remoter cousins',
    Obo Took-Took who received a feather-bed remained as a great-
 uncle, but Obo was emended on the manuscript to Rollo;
    Corboduc (> Otfando) Grubb of the first draft, recipient of a gold
 fountain-pen, becomes Orfando Burrowes;
    Mungo Took, lnigo Grubb-Took, and Angelica Baggins remain; and
 two new beneficiaries are named before Mrs Sackville-Baggins at the end
 of the list:
    For the collection of Hugo Bracegirdle, from contributor: on an
   (empty) bookcase. Hugo was a great borrower of books, but a small
   returner.

    For  Cosimo  Chubb,  treat  it  as  your  own,  Bingo: on  the barometer.
  Cosimo used to bang it with a  large fat  finger whenever  he came  to call.
  He  was  afraid  of  getting wet,  and wore  a scarf  and macintosh  all the
  year round.                                                                
    For  Grimalda  [>  Lobelia]  Sackville-Baggins,  as a  present: on  a case
  of  silver  spoons.  It  was  believed  by  Bilbo   Baggins  that   she  had
  acquired  a  good  many  of  his  spoons  while  he  was  away -  ninety odd
  years  before.  Bingo  inherited  the  belief,  and  Grimalda   [)  Lobelia]
  knew it.                                                                   
                                                                            
  It  is  also  mentioned  that  'Bingo  had very  carefully disposed  of his
 treasures:  books,  pictures,  and  a  collection  of  toys.  For  his wines
 he  found  a  very  good  (if  temporary)  home.  Most   of  them   went  to
 Marmaduke  Brandybuck'  (predecessor  of   Meriadoc).  The   original  draft
 is closely followed in the absence of any money or jewelry, and in the legal
 notice  disposing  of  Bag  End  to  the  Sackville-Bagginses  (but  Bilbo's
 cousin  now  becomes  Otho,  and  their  occupancy  is  to  start  from Sep-
 tember 24th)- 'and they got Bag-end after all,  though they  had to  wait 93
 years longer for it than they had once expected': III less 51 plus 33, see
 pp. 31-2.(8) Sancho  Proudfoot appears,  excavating in  the pantry  where he
 thought there was an echo (as  in FR,  p. 48);  physically attacked  by Otho
 Sackville-Baggins, he was only finally ejected by the lawyers,  first called
 'Grubbs  and  Burrowes', as  in The  Hobbit, then  changed to  'Messrs. lago
 Grubb and Folco Burrowes (Bingo's lawyers)'.                                
  The conclusion of the third version I give in full.                        
                                                                            
  The   fact  is   Bingo's  money   had  become   a  legend,   and  everybody
 was   puzzled   and   anxious  -   though  still   hopeful.  How   he  would
 have  laughed.  Indeed  he  was  as  near  laughing  as  he  dared  at  that
 very   moment,   for   he   was   inside  a   large  cupboard   outside  the
 dining-room  door,  and  heard  most  of  the  racket.  He  was  inside,  of
 course,   not   for   concealment,   but   to   avoid  being   bumped  into,
 being   totally   invisible.   He   had  to   laugh  rather   privately  and
 silently,  but  all  the  same  he  was  enjoying his  joke: it  was turning
 out so much like his expectation.                                           
                                                                            
  I  suppose  it  is  now  becoming  all  too  plain  to  everyone   but  the
 anxious  and  grabsome  hobbits.  The  fact  is  that  (in spite  of certain
 things  in  his  after-dinner  speech)  Bingo   had  grown   suddenly  tired
 of  them  all.  A  violent  fit  of  Tookishness  had  come  over him  - not
 of  course  that  all  Tooks  had  much  of  this  wayward   quality,  their
 mothers     being     Chubbs,     Hornblowers,     Bolgers,    Bracegirdles,
 Grubbs   and   what   not;   but   Tooks   were  on   the  whole   the  most
 jocular  and  unexpected  of  Hobbits.  Also  I   can  tell   you  something
 more,   in   case   you   have   not   guessed:  Bingo   had  no   money  or

                                           
                                                                              
  jewelry  left!  Practically  none,  that  is.  Nothing  worth  digging  up  a
  nice  hobbit-hole  for.  Money  went   a  prodigious   way  in   those  days,
  and  one  could  get  quite  a lot  of things  without it;  but he  had blown
  his  last  500   ducats  on   the  birthday   party.  That   was  Brandybuck-
  some  of  him.  After  that  he  had  nothing  left  but  the buttons  on his
  waistcoat,  a  small  bag-purse of  silver, and  his ring.  In the  course of
  33  years  he  had contrived  to spend  all the  rest -  what was  left, that
  is,  by his  father, who  had done  a bit  of spending  in fifty  years (9) (and
  had required some travelling-expenses).                                      
      Well,  there  it  is.  All  things  come  to  an  end.  Evening  came on.
  Bag-end  was   left   empty  and   gloomy.  People   went  away   -  haggling
  and  arguing,  most  of  them.  You  could  hear   their  voices   coming  up
  the  Hill  in   the  dusk.   Very  few   gave  a   thought  to   Bingo.  They
  decided  he  had  gone  mad,  and  run   off,  and   that  was   one  Baggins
  the  less,  and  that  was  that.  They  were   annoyed  about   the  legend-
  ary   money,   of   course,  but   meanwhile  there   was  tea   waiting  for
  them.   There   were   some,   of   course,   who   regretted    his   sudden
  disappearance   -   a   few  of   his  younger   friends  were   really  dis-
  tressed.  But  not  all  of  them  had   said  good-bye   to  him.   That  is
  easily explained, and soon will be.                                          
                                                                              
      Bingo   stepped  out   of  the   cupboard.  It   was  getting   dim.  His
  watch  said  six.  The  door  was  open,  as  he  had  kept  the  key  in his
  pocket.  He  went  out,  locked  the  door  (leaving  the  key),  and  looked
  at the sky. Stars were coming out.                                           
      'It is going to be a fine night,'  he said.  'What a  lark! Well,  I must
  not   keep   them   waiting.   Now   we're   off.   Goodbye!'    He   trotted
  down  the  garden,  jumped   the  fence,   and  took   to  the   fields,  and
  passed like an invisible rustle in the grasses.                              
                                                                              
                                     NOTES.                                    
                                                                              
 1. I find it difficult to believe this, yet if it is not so the coincidence is
  strange.  If  Bingo  Baggins  did  get  his  name  from  this  source,  I can
  only   suppose   that   the   demonic   character  (composed   of  monomaniac
  religious  despotism  and  a  lust  for  destruction through  high explosive)
  of  the  chief  Bingo  (not  to  mention  that  of  his  appalling  wife), by
  which   my   sister   and   I   now   remember   them,   developed   somewhat
  later.                                                                       
 2. The  substitution  was  not  made  in  the first  draft, but  in pencilled
  corrections to the end of the second version (p. 27).                        
 3. The  change  of 'fifty-fifth'  to  'seventy-second' was  made at  the same
  time  as  the  16  years  during  which  Bingo  lived  at  Bag End  after his

  
                                                                              
      parents'  departure  were  changed  to  33  (note  6).  These   changes  were
      made  before  the  chapter  was  finished,  since  later  in  it,  in Bingo's
      farewell  speech, the  revised figures  are present  from the  first writing.
      When  at  the  outset  he  wrote  'fifty-fifth  birthday'  and '16  years' my
      father  was  presumably  intending  to  get  rid  of  the idea,  appearing in
      rewriting  of  the  second  version  (see   p.  27),   that  the   number  of
      144 guests  was  chosen  for  an   inner  reason,   since  on   Bingo's  55th
      birthday  his  father  Bilbo  would  have  been  127  (having left  the Shire
      16 years before at the age of x x i, when Bingo was 39).                 
  4.  Primula  was  first  written  Amalda. In  the first  version (p.  16) Amalda
      was  the  name  of  Mrs  Sackville-Baggins.  In  the  fourth  version  of  'A
      long-expected  party',  when  Bilbo  had  returned  to  his  bachelor  state,
      Primula Brandybuck, no longer his wife, remained Bingo's mother.         
  5.  My  father  first  wrote  here:  the  Brandybucks  of   Wood  Eaton   on  the
      other  side  of  the  shire, on  the edge  of Buckwood  - a  dubious region.'
      He  first  changed  (certainly  at  the  time  of  writing)  the name  of the
      Brandybuck  stronghold   from  Wood   Eaton  (a   village  in   the  Cherwell
      valley  near  Oxford)   to  Bury   Underwood  (where   'Bury'  is   the  very
      common    English    place-name    element    derived   from    Old   English
      byrig,  the  dative  of  burg  'fortified place,  town'); then  he introduced
      the  name  of   the  river,   replaced  Bury   Underwood  by   Buckland,  and
      replaced Buckwood by the Old Forest.                                     
  6.  This change was made at the same time as '55' to '72' for Bingo's years
      at the time of the birthday party; see.note 3.                           
  7.  This is  the first  appearance of  Gaffer Gamgee,  living in  Bagshot Row
      (first mentioned in the second version, p. ax).                          
  8.  As mentioned in note 3, the later figure  of 72  for 55  as Bingo's  age on
      this birthday, and 33 for 16 as  the number  of years  in which  he lived
      on  alone  at  Bag  End   after  Bilbo's   departure,  which   appear  as
      emendations in the early part of the text, are in the  later part  of the
      chapter present from the first writing.                                  
      One would expect 'sixty' (III less 51): see pp. 3 I, 252.           
                                                                              
                              Note on Hobbit-names.                            
                                                                              
  It  will  be seen  that delight  in the  names and  relations of  the hobbit-
  families  of  the  Shire from  which the  ramifying genealogies  would spring
  was present from the  start. In  no respect  did my  father chop  and change
  more  copiously.  Already   we  have   met,  apart   from  Bilbo   and  Bungo
  Baggins and Belladonna Took who appeared. in The Hobbit:                     
    Baggins: Angelica; Inigo; Semolina                                         
    Bolger: Caramella (replacing Caramella Took)                               
    Bracegirdle: Hugo                                                          
    Brandybuck:   Amalda   >   Primula;   Marmaduke;   Orlando    >   Prospero;
       Rory                                                                    

 Burrowes: Folco; Orlando (replacing Orlando Grubb)                           
 Chubb: Cosimo                                                               
 Grubb: Gorboduc > Orlando; Iago                                             
 Crubb-Took: Inigo                                                           
 Proudfoot: Sancho                                                            
 Sackville-Baggins: Amalda > Lonicera or Griselda > Grimalda >                
     Lobelia; Sago > Cosmo > Otho                                            
 Took: Caramella; Melba > Arabella > Amanda; Mungo                           
 Took-Took: Obo > Rollo                                                      
                                                                            
                                     (iv)                                    
                              The Fourth Version.                            
                                                                            
 Two  further  changes,  embodying  an  important  shift,  were  made  to the
 manuscript  of  the third  version. They  were carefully  made, in  red ink,
 but  concomitant  changes  later in  the text  were not  made. In  the first
 sentence of the chapter (p. 28) 'Bingo, son of Bilbo' was altered to 'Bingo
 Bolger-Baggins'; and in the third sentence 'Bingo's father' was  altered to
 'Bingo's uncle (and guardian), Bilbo Baggins.'                              
 We  come  now  therefore  to  a  further  stage,  where  the  'long-expected
 party' is still Bingo's, not Bilbo's, but Bingo is his nephew, not  his son,
 and Bilbo's marriage (as was inevitable, I think) has been rejected.        
 The  fourth  version  is a  typescript, made  by my  father. It  was emended
 very heavily later on, but these changes belong to the  second phase  of the
 writing  of  The  Fellowship  of  the  Ring,  and  here  I ignore  them. The
 alterations  to the  third version  just referred  to were  now incorporated
 into  the  text  (which  therefore  now  begins: 'When  Bingo Bolger-Baggins
 of  the  well-known  Baggins  family  prepared  to  celebrate  his  seventy-
 second  birthday...'),  but  otherwise it  proceeds as  an exact  copy of the
 third version as far as 'he was on  visiting terms  with all  his neighbours
 and relatives (except, of course, the Sackville-Bagginses)'(p. 29) . Here it
 diverges.                                                                   
                                                                            
 But  folk  did  not  bother  him  much.  He  was  frequently  out.   And  if
 he  was  in,  you  never  knew  who  you  would   find  with   him:  hobbits
 of  quite  poor  families,  or  folk  from  distant  villages,  dwarves, and
 even sometimes elves.                                                       
 He  did  two  more  things  that  caused   tongues  to   wag.  At   the  age
 of  ninety-nine  he  adopted  his  nephew  -  or   to  be   accurate  (Bilbo
 scattered  the  titles  nephew  and  niece  about  rather   recklessly)  his
 first  cousin   once  removed,   Bingo  Bolger,   a  lad   of  twenty-seven.
 They  had  heard  very  little  about  him,  and  that  not  too  good (they

 said).  As a  matter of  fact Bingo  was the  son of  Primula Brandy-
 buck  (and  Rollo  Bolger, who  was quite  unimportant); and  she was
 the  daughter  of  Mirabella  Took  (and  Gorboduc   Brandybuck,  who
 was  rather  important);  and  she  was   one  of   three  remarkable
 daughters  of the  Old Took,  for long  the head  of the  hobbits who
 lived across The  Water. And  so the  Tooks come  in again-  always a
 disturbing  element,  especially  when  mixed  with  Brandybuck.  For
 Primula  was  a  Brandybuck  of   Buckland,  across   the  Brandywine
 River, on the other side  of the  Shire and  at the  edge of  the Old
 Forest  -  a  dubious  region.  Folk  in Hobbiton  did not  know much
 about  it, or  about the  Brandybucks either;  though some  had heard
 it said that they were rich, and would have been richer, if  they bad
 not  been  reckless.  What  had  happened  to  Primula  and  her hus-
 band  was  not  known  for  certain  in  Hobbiton.  There  was rumour
 of a boating accident on the Brandywine River -  the sort  of thing
 that  Brandybucks  would  go  in  for.  Some  said that  Rollo Bolger
 had  died  young of  overeating; others  mid that  it was  his weight
 that had sunk the boat.                                             
    Anyway,   Bilbo   Baggins   adopted   Master   Bolger,   announced
 that  he  would  make  him  his  heir,  changed  his name  to Bolger-
 Baggins,  and  still further  offended the  Sackville-Bagginses. Then
 shortly  before  his   hundred-and-eleventh  birthday   Bilbo  disap-
 peared finally and was never  seen in  Hobbiton again.  His relatives
 and neighbours lost  the chance  of a  funeral, and  they had  a good
 deal  to  say.  But  it  made no  difference: Bilbo's  residence, his
 wealth, his position  (and the  dubious regard  of the  more influen-
 tial hobbits), were inherited by Bingo Bolger-Baggins.              
    Bingo  was  a  mere youngster  of thirty-nine  and had  hardly cut
 his  wisdom-teeth;  but  he  at once  began to  carry on  his uncle's
 reputation for oddity.  He refused  to go  into mourning,  and within
 a  week  gave a  birthday-party -  for himself  and his  uncle (their
 birthdays  happened  to be  on the  same day).  At first  people were
 shocked, but he kept up the custom  year after  year, until  they got
 used to it. He said he  did not  think Bilbo  Baggins was  dead. When
 they  asked  the  obvious  question:  'Where is  he then?'  he merely
 winked.  He  lived  alone,  and  was  often away  from home.  He went
 about  a  good  deal  with  the  least  well-behaved  members  of the
 Took  family  (his  grandmother's people);  and he  was also  fond of
 the Brandybucks {his mother's relatives).                           
    Anyway,  Bingo  Bolger-Baggins  had  been  the  master  of Bag-end
 Underhill  now   for  thirty-three   years  without   doing  anything
 outrageous. His parties were sometimes a bit noisy...               

                                                                              
                                                                                  
   With   Gorboduc   Brandybuck   and   Mirabella   Took   (one   of   'the   three
   remarkable  daughters  of   the  Old   Took'  who   had  been   mentioned  in?he
   Hobbit)   the  genealogy   now  becomes   that  of   LR,  except   that  Primula
   Brandybuck's  husband  (Bilbo  in  the  third  version)  is  Rollo  Bolger,  not
   Drogo Baggins; and the boating accident reappears (see p. 25, note a).          
        From  here  to  the  end  the  typescript  follows  the  third  version (as
   emended)  very  closely,  and  there  is  little further  to add.  Bilbo becomes
   Bingo's  'uncle'  throughout,  of  course; Bingo  was liable  to allude  to 'the
   absurd  adventures  of  his  "gallant  and  famous"  uncle'  (see  p.  32). But,
   with this  change, Bingo's  remarks in  his speech  on the  ages of  himself and
   his  uncle  and  the  number of  guests at  the party  remain exactly  the same,
   and 'The ring was his uncle's parting gift' (ibid.).                            
        Small  changes  of  wording move  the text  towards the  final form  in FR;
   for  example,  where  in  the  third  version  Rory  Brandybuck is  described as
   'well-filled but still brighter than many', it is now said of him that his 'wits
   neither   old   age,   nor  surprise,   nor  an   enormous  dinner,   had  quite
   clouded'.  But  to  set  out  even  a  portion of  such developments  in expres-
   sion  between  closely  related  versions  would  obviously  be   quite  imprac-
   ticable.  There are  however a  few minor  narrative shifts  which I  collect in
   the  following  notes,  with  page-references  indicating  where   the  relevant
   passages in earlier versions are to be found.                                   
                                                                                  
   (30) Gaffer Gamgee had a little more to say:                                    
                                                                                  
       '...  A  very  nice  well-spoken  gentlehobbit  is  Mr   Bolger-Baggins,  as
       I've  always  said.'  And  that  was  perfectly true;  for Bingo  had always
       been   very  polite   to  Gaffer   Gamgee,  calling   him  Mr   Gamgee,  and
       discussing potatoes with him over the hedge.                                
                                                                                  
   (21, 31) The day of the  party now  becomes Thursday  (not Saturday)            
   22 September (a change made to the typescript, but carefully over an            
   erasure and clearly belonging to the time of typing).                           
                                                                                  
       (31)  There  is  no  further  reference  to  Gandalf in  the chapter,  after the
       fireworks.                                                                  
                                                                                  
   (24, 32) The young hobbits who danced on the table are Prospero                 
       Took and Melissa Brandybuck.                                                
                                                                                  
       (32  - 3)  Several names  are changed  among the  recipients of  gifts from
       Bag  End,  Caramella  (Took   ))  Bolger   becomes  Caramella   Chubb;  the
       comatose  Rollo   Took-  Took   becomes  Fosco   Bolger  (and   is  Bingo's
       uncle);  Inigo  Grubb-Took  the   glutton,  who   had  survived   from  the
       first  draft,  is  now  Inigo  Grubb;  and  Cosimo  Chubb   the  barometer-
       tapper becomes Cosimo Hornblower.                                           
                                                                                  
       (33) It is now added that 'The poorer hobbits did very well, especially     
       old Gaffer Gamgee, who got about half a ton of potatoes', that Bingo        
       had  a  collection  of  magical  toys;  and  that  he  and  his   friends  drank

 nearly  all  the  wine, the  remainder still  going to  Marmaduke Brandy-
 buck.                                                                    
                                                                         
 (16, 33) The legal notice in the hall at  Bag End  is extended,  and fol-
 lowed by a new passage:                                                  
                                                                         
   Bingo  Bolger-Baggins  Esqre.  departing  hereby  devises  delivers  and
   makes  over  by free  gift   the  desirable  property  and   messuage  or
   dwelling-hole  known  as  Bag-end Underhill  with  all  lands  thereto
   belonging   and  annexed   to  Otho   Sackville-Baggins  Esqre.   and  his
   wife Lobelia for them jointly  to have  hold possess  occupy let on lease
   or  otherwise  dispose  of  at  their  pleasure  as  from  September  the
   twenty  fourth  in  the  seventy second  year  of  the  aforesaid  Bingo
   Bolger-Baggins  and  the  one  hundred  and  forty  fourth year  of Bilbo
   Baggins who as  former rightful  mvners hereby  relinquish all  claims to
   the abovesaid property as from the date aforesaid.                     
    The  notice  was  signed  Bingo  Bolger-Baggins  for  self   and  uncle.
   Bingo was  not a  lawyer, and  he mereIy  put things  that way  to please
   Otho   Sackville-Baggins,   who   was  a   lawyer.  Otho   certainly  was
   pleased, but  whether by  the language  or the  property is  difficult to
   say.  Anyway,  as soon  m he  had read  the notice  he shouted:  'Ours at
   last!' So I suppose it was  all right,  at least  according to  the legal
   notions  of hobbits.  And that  is how  the Sackville-Bagginses  got Bag-
   end in the end, though  they had  to wait  ninety-three years  longer for
   it than they had once expected.                                        
                                                                         
 (33) The lawyers who ejected Sancho Proudfoot do not appear.             
                                                                         
 An  addition  is  made  to the  passage describing  the character  of the
 Tooks:  'and  since  they  had  inherited  both  enormous  wealth  and no
 little courage from the Old Took, they carried things  off with  a pretty
 high hand at times.'                                                     
                                                                         
 (34) The reference to Bilbo's  having 'done  a bit  of spending  in fifty
 years' was  changed; the  text now  reads: '-  what was  left him  by his
 Uncle, that is; for Bilbo had done a bit of spending in his time.'       
                                                                         
 'A  few  were distressed  at his  sudden disappearance;  one or  two were
 not distressed, because they  were in  the know  - but  they were  not at
 Bag-end.'                                                                
                                                                         
 Thus it is never explained why Bingo (or Bilbo in the first version), for
 whom money  was now  a severe  problem (and  one of  the reasons  for his
 departure),  simply  handed over  'the desirable  property known  as Bag-
 end' to the Sackville-Bagginses 'by free gift'.                          
 There  were  further  twists  still  to  come  in this  amazingly sinuous
 evolution  before  the  final  structure  was reached,  but this  was how
 the  opening  chapter  stood  for  some  time, and  Bingo Bolger-Baggins,
 'nephew' or more  properly first  cousin once  removed of  Bilbo Baggins,

  is present throughout the original form of  Book I of The Fellowship  of the        
  King. I set out briefly  here the  major shifts  and stages  encountered thus        
  far.                                                                                 
                                                                                      
                                  A Long-expected party.                               
                                                                                      
  Version I. Bilbo gives the party, aged 70. ('I am going to tell you a
                   story about one of his descendants')                                
                                                                                      
  Version II. Bilbo gives the party, aged 71.                                           
                                                                                      
  Version III. Bilbo married, and disappeared from Hobbiton with his                    
               wife (Primula Brandybuck) when he was III.                                         
               His son Bingo Baggins gives the party, aged 72.                                      
                                                                                      
  Version IV. Bilbo, unmarried, adopted his young cousin Bingo Bolger
                   (son of Primula Brandybuck), changed his name to Bingo              
                   Bolger-Baggins,    and   disappeared    from   Hobbiton    when   he
                   was III.                                                                           
  His adopted cousin Bingo Bolger-Baggins gives the party,                             
  aged 72.                                                                             
                                                                                      
                                           (v)                                         
                               'The Tale that is Brewing'.                             
                                                                                      
  It was to the fourth version (writing on  the typescript  shows that  it went        
  to Allen and Unwin)  that my  father referred  in a  letter to  Charles Furth        
  on 1 February 1938, six weeks after he began the new book:                           
                                                                                      
    Would    you   ask    Mr   Unwin    whether   his    son   [Rayner    Unwin,   then
    twelve  years  old],  a  very reliable  critic, would  rare to read  the  first
    chapter   of   the  sequel   to  The   Hobbit?  I   have  typed   it.  I   have  no
    confidence  in  it,  but  if  he  thought  it  a  promising  beginning,  could  add
    to it the tale that is brewing.                                                    
                                                                                      
  What  was  'the  tale  that  is  brewing'?  The  texts  of  'A  Long-expected  Party'
  provide  no  clues,  except  that  the  end  of  the third  version (p.  34) makes it
  clear  that  when  Bingo  left  Bag  End  he  was  going  to meet,  and go  off with,
  some  of his  younger friends  - and  this is  hinted at  already at  the end  of the
  first  draft  (p.  17); in  the fourth  version this  is repeated,  and 'one  or two'
  of  his  friends  were  'in  the  know' -  and 'they  were not  at Bag-end'  (p. 39).
  Of  course  it  is  clear,  too,  that  Bilbo  is  not dead;  and (with  knowledge of
  what  was  in  fact  to  come)  we  may   count  the   references  to   Buckland  and
  the Old Forest (pp. 29, 37) as further hints.                                        
    But  there  are  some  jottings  from  this  time,  written  on  two  sides   of  a
  single  sheet  of  paper,  that  do  give  some  inkling   of  what   was  'brewing'.
  The first of these reads:                                                            

  Bilbo   goes   off   with   3   Took   nephews:   Odo,  Frodo,   and  Drogo
  [changed  to  Odo,  Drogo,  and  Frodo].  He  has  only  a  small   bag  of
  money.  They  walk  all  night  -  East.  Adventures:   troll-like:  witch-
  house  on  way   to  Rivendell.   Elrond  again   [added:  (by   advice  of
  Gandalf?)]. A tale in Elrond's house.                                     
    Where  is  G[andalf]  asks  Odo  -  said  I  was  old and  foolish enough
  now to take care of myself said B. But I dare say  he will  turn up,  he is
  apt to.                                                                   
                                                                           
 There follows a note to the effect that while Odo believed  no more  than a
 quarter of 'B.'s  stories', Drogo  was less  sceptical, and  Frodo believed
 them  'almost  completely'.  The character  of this  last nephew  was early
 established, though he was destined to disappear (see p. 70): he is not the
 forerunner of  Frodo in  LR. All  this seems  to have  been written  at one
 time.  On  the  face of  it, it  must belong  with the  second (unfinished)
 version  of  'A  Long-expected  Party', since  it is  Bilbo who  'goes off'
 (afterwards  my  father bracketed  the words  'Bilbo goes  off with  3 Took
 nephews'  and  wrote  'Bingo'  above). The  implication is  presumably that
 when Bilbo set out with his nephews Gandalf was no longer present.         
  Then follows, in pencil: 'Make  return of  ring a  motive.' This  no doubt
 refers  to  the  statement  in  the third  version that  'The ring  was his
 [Bingo's] father's parting gift' (p. 32).                                  
  After a note suggesting  the coming  of a  dragon to  Hobbiton and  a more
 heroic role for hobbits, a suggestion rejected with a pencilled 'No', there
 follows, apparently all written  at one  time (but  with a  later pencilled
 heading 'Conversation of Bingo and Bilbo'):                                
                                                                           
  'No  one,'  said B.,  'can escape  quite unscathed  from dragons.  The only
  thing  is  to  shun them  (if you  can) like  the Hobbitonians,  though not
  nec[essarily]  to  disbelieve  in them  (or refuse  to remember  them) like
  the  H[obbitonians].  Now  I  have   spent  all   my  money   which  seemed
  once  to  me too  much and  my own  has gone  after it  [sic]. And  I don't
  like  being  without  after [?having]  - in  fact I  am being  lured. Well,
  well, twice one is not always two, as  my father  used to  say. But  at any
  rate I think  I would  rather wander  as a  poor man  than sit  and shiver.
  And  Hobbiton  rather  grows on  you in  20 years,  don't you  think; grows
  too  heavy  to  bear,  I  mean. Anyway,  we are  off -  and it's  autumn. I
  enjoy autumn wandering.'                                                  
                                                                           
    Asks  Elrond  what  he  can  do  to  heal  his  money-wish  and unsettle-
  ment. Elrond tells  him of  an island.  Britain? Far  west where  the Elves
  still reign. Journey to perilous isle.                                    
    I want to look again on a live dragon.                                  
                                                                           
 This  is  certainly  Bilbo,  and  the  passage  (though  not of  course the
 pencilled  heading) precedes  the third  version, as  the reference  to '20
 years' shows (see pp. 22, 31). - At the foot  of the  page are  these faint
 pencilled scrawls:                                                         

  Bingo goes to find his father.                                             
  You said you.... end your days in contentment - so I hope to               
 The illegible word might possibly be 'want'. -  On the  reverse of  the page
 is the following coherent passage in ink:                                   
                                                                            
  The  Ring:  whence  its  origin.  Necromancer?  Not  very   dangerous,  when
  used  for good  purpose. But  it exacts  its penalty.  You must  either lose
  it, or yourself. Bilbo could not bring himself to  lose it.  He starts  on a
  holiday  [struck out:  with his  wife] handing  over ring  to Bingo.  But he
  vanishes.  Bingo worried.  Resists desire  to go  and find  him -  though he
  does travel round a lot looking for  news. Won't  lose ring  as he  feels it
  will ultimately bring him to his father.                                   
     At  last  he  meets  Gandalf.   Gandalf's  advice.   You  must   stage  a
  disappearance,  and  the  ring  may  then  be   cheated  into   letting  you
  follow a similar path.  But you  have got  to really  disappear and  give up
  the past. Hence the 'party'.                                               
     Bingo  confides  in  his  friends.  Odo,  Frodo, and  Vigo (?)  insist on
  coming  too.  Gandalf  rather  dubious.  You  will  share  the same  fate as
  Bingo,  he  said,  if  you  dare the  ring. Look  what happened  to Primula.
                                                                            
 A  couple  of  pencilled  changes  were  made  to  this: above  'Vigo(?)' my
 father  wrote  'Marmaduke';  and  he  bracketed the  last sentence.  - Since
 Bingo is here Bilbo's son this note belongs with the third version.  But the
 watery  death  of  Primula  Brandybuck  (no longer  Bilbo's wife,  but still
 Bingo's mother) is first recorded  in the  fourth version  (p. 37),  and the
 Ring  could  not  possibly  be  associated  with  that  event;  so  that the
 reference to 'Primula' here must refer to something else  of which  there is
 no other trace.                                                             
  Particularly  noteworthy  is  the  suggestion  that the  idea of  the Party
 arose  from  Gandalf's advice  to Bingo  concerning the  Ring. It  is indeed
 remarkable that already at this stage, when my father  was still  working on
 the opening chapter, so much  of the  Ring's nature  was already  present in
 embryo. - The final two notes are in pencil. The first reads:               
                                                                            
  Bilbo  goes  to  Elrond  to  cure  dragon-longing,  and  settles  down in
  Rivendell.  Hence  Bingo's  frequent  absences  from  home.  The  dragon-
  longing comes on Bingo. Also ring-lure.                                    
                                                                            
 With  Bingo's  'frequent absences  from home'  cf. 'he  was often  away from
 home' in the third version (p. 29), and 'Resists desire to go and find him -
 though he does travel round a lot looking for news' in the note on  the Ring
 given above. And the last:                                                  
                                                                            
  Make  dubious  regions  -  Old  Forest  on  way   to  Rivendell.   South  of
  River.  They  turn  aside  to  call  up  Frodo Br[andybuck]  [written above:
  Marmaduke],   get   lost   and   caught   by   Willowman   and   by  Barrow-
  wights. T. Bombadil comes in.                                              
 'South' was changed from 'North', and 'East' is written in the margin.      

    On a separate page  (in fact  on the  back of  my father's  earliest surviving
  map of the Shire)  is a  brief 'scheme'  that is  closely associated  with these
  last notes; at the head of it  my father  afterwards wrote  Genesis of  'Lord of
  the Rings'.                                                                     
                                                                                 
    B.B.  sets  out  with  z  nephews. They  turn S[outh]  ward to  collect Frodo
    Brandybuck.   Get   lost  in   Old  Forest.   Adventure  with   Willowman  and
    Barrow-wights. T. Bombadil.                                                   
        Reach  Rivendell  and  find  Bilbo.  Bilbo  had  had  a  sudden  desire to
    visit  the  Wild  again.  But  meets  Gandalf   at  Rivendell.   Learns  about
    [sic;  here  presumably  the  narrative  idea  changes]  Gandalf   had  turned
    up  at  Bag-end.  Bilbo  tells  him  of  desire  for  Wild  and  gold.  Dragon
    curse  working.  He  goes  to  Rivendell  between   the  worlds   and  settles
    down.                                                                       
        Ring must eventually go back to Maker, or draw you towards it.            
    Rather a dirty trick handing it on?                                           
                                                                                 
  It  is  interesting  to  see  the  idea  already  present  that  Bingo  and  his
  companions  would  turn  aside  to  'collect'  or 'call  up' another  hobbit, at
  first   named   Frodo   Brandybuck,   but   changed   to    Marmaduke   (Brandy-
  buck).  Frodo  Brandybuck  also  appears  in  initial  drafting  for  the second
  chapter  (p.  45)  as  one  of Bingo's  three companions  on his  departure from
  Hobbiton.  There  are  various  ways  of  combining  all  these   references  to
  the  three  (or  two)  nephews,  so  as  to  present  a  series   of  successive
  formulations,  but  names  and  roles  were still  entirely fluid  and ephemeral
  and  no  certainty  is  possible.  Only  in the  first full  text of  the second
  chapter  does  the  story  become clear  (for a  time): Bingo  set out  with two
  companions, Odo Took and Frodo Took.                                            
    It   is   to   be   noted  that   Tom  Bombadil,   the  Willow-man,   and  the
  Barrow-wights  were  already  in   existence  years   before  my   father  began
  The turd of the Rings; see p. 115.                                            

                                     *
                                                                                 
  On 11 February 1938 Stanley Unwin reported to my father that his son           
  Rayner had read the first chapter and was delighted with it. On 17              
  February my father wrote to Charles Furth at Allen and Unwin:                   
                                                                                 
    They say it is the first step that costs the effort. I do not find it so. I am
    sure  I  could  write  unlimited  'first  chapters'.  I  have  indeed  written
    many.  The  Hobbit  sequel  is  still  where  it  was,  and  I  have  only the
    vaguest  notions  of  how  to  proceed.  Not  ever  intending  any  sequel,  I
    fear  I  squandered  all  my   favourite  'motifs'   and  characters   on  the
    original 'Hobbit'.                                                            
                                                                                 
  And on the following day he replied to Stanley Unwin:                           
                                                                                 
    I  am  most  grateful  to  your  son  Rayner:  and   am  encouraged.   At  the
    same time I find it only  too easy  to write  opening chapters  - and  for the

  moment  the  story  is  not  unfolding.  I  have  unfortunately  very little
  time,  made   shorter  by   a  rather   disastrous  Christmas   vacation.  I
  squandered  so  much  on  the  original  'Hobbit'  (which  was not  meant to
  have a sequel) that  it is  difficult to  find anything  new in  that world.
                                                                             
 But on 4 March  1938, in  the course  of a  long letter  to Stanley  Unwin on
 another subject, he said:                                                    
                                                                             
  The  sequel  to  The Hobbit  has now  progressed as  far as  the end  of the
  third chapter. But stories tend to get out of  hand, and  this has  taken an
  unpremeditated  turn.  Mr  Lewis  and  my  youngest  boy  are reading  it in
  bits as a serial. I hesitate to bother your son, though  I should  value his
  criticism. At any rate if he would like to read  it in  serial form  he can.
                                                                             
 The  'unpremeditated  turn',  beyond  any  doubt, was  the appearance  of the
 Black Riders.                                                                

                                       II.                                     
                              FROM HOBBITON TO THE                             
                                   WOODY END.                                 
                                                                              
 The  original  manuscript  drafts  for  the second  chapter of The Lord  of the
 Rings   do   not  constitute   a  completed   narrative,  however   rough,  but
 rather,  disconnected  parts  of  the  narrative,  in places  in more  than one
 version,  as  the  story expanded  and changed  in the  writing. The  fact that
 my father had typed out the  first chapter  by r  February 1938 (p.  40), but
 on 17 February wrote  (p. 43)  that while  first chapters  came easily  to him
 'the Hobbit sequel is still where it was,' suggests strongly that  the original
 drafting  of  this second  chapter followed  the typing  of the  fourth version
 of 'A Long-expected Party'.                                                   
  There  followed  a  typescript  text,  with  a  title  'Three's   Company  and
 Four's More'; this will be given in full,  but before  doing so  earlier stages
 of the story (one of them of the utmost interest) must be looked at.          
  The   first   rough   manuscript  begins   with  Odo   and  Frodo   Took  (but
 Frodo  at  once  changed  to  Drogo)  sitting on  a gate  at night  and talking
 about  the  events  at  Bag  End  that   afternoon,  while   'Frodo  Brandybuck
 was  sitting  on a  pile of  haversacks and  packs and  looking at  the stars.'
 Frodo  Brandybuck,  it  seems,  was  brought  in  here  from the  role prepared
 for  him  in the  notes given  on pp.  42-3, in  one of  which he  was replaced
 by   Marmaduke   (Brandybuck).   Bingo,   coming   up   behind   silently   and
 invisibly,  pushed  Odo  and  Drogo  off  the  gate;  and  after   the  ensuing
 raillery the draft continues:                                                 
                                                                              
  'Have you three any idea where we are going to?' said Bingo.                 
  'None whatever,' said Frodo, ' - if you mean, where we are going             
 to land finally. With such a captain it  would be  quite impossible           
 to guess that. But we all know where we are making for first.'                
  'What we don't know,' put in Drogo, 'is  how long  it is  going to           
 take us on foot. Do you? You have usually taken a pony.'                      
  'That is not much faster, though it is less tiring. Let me see - I           
 have never done the  journey in  a hurry  before, and  have usually           
 taken five and a half weeks (with plenty of rests). Actually I have           
 always had some adventure,  milder or  less so,  every time  I have           
 taken the road to Rivendell.'                                                 
  'Very well,' said Frodo, 'let's  put a  bit of  the way  behind us           
 tonight. It is jolly under the stars, and cool.'                              

   'Better  turn  in  soon  and  make  an  early  start,'said  Odo  (who  was
 fond of bed). 'We shall do more tomorrow if we begin fresh.'                
   'I  back  councillor  Frodo,' said  Bingo.  So  they   started,  shoulder-
 ing  packs,  and  gripping  long  sticks.  They   went  very   quietly  over
 fields  and  along  hedgerows  and  the  fringes  of  small  coppices  until
 night   fell,  and   in  their   dark  [?green)   cloaks  they   were  quite
 invisible   without   any   rings.   And  of   course  being   Hobbits  they
 could  not  be  heard  -  not  even  by  Hobbits.   At  last   Hobbiton  was
 far  behind,  and  the  lights  in  the  windows   of  the   last  farmhouse
 were  twinkling  on  a   hilltop  a   long  way   away.  Bingo   turned  and
 waved a hand in farewell.                                                   
   At  the  bottom  of  a  slight  hill  they  struck  the  main road  East -
 rolling  away  pale  grey  into  the  darkness,  between  high  hedges  and
 dark   wind-stirred   trees.   Now   they   marched   along   two   by  two;
 talking  a  little.,  occasionally  humming,  often tramping  in time  for a
 mile   or   so   without   saying  anything.   The  stars   swung  overhead,
 and the night got late.                                                     
   Odo  gave  a  big  yawn  and  slowed  down.  'I  am  so sleepy,'  he said,
 'that  I  shall  fall  down  on  the  road.  What  about  a  place  for  the
 night?'                                                                    
                                                                            
   Here the original  opening draft  ends. Notably,  the hobbits  are setting
 out  expressly  for  Rivendell,  and  Bingo  has  been  there  several times
 before; cf. the note given on p.  42: 'Bilbo...  settles down  in Rivendell.
 Hence  Bingo's frequent  absences from  home.' But  there is  no indication,
 nor has there been any, why they should be in any particular hurry.         
   It is clear that when the hobbits  struck the  East Road  they took  to it
 and walked eastward along it. At this stage there is no suggestion of a side
 road  to  Buckland,  nor  indeed  that  Buckland  played  any part  in their
 plans.                                                                      
   A  revised  beginning  followed.  Drogo  Took  was  dropped,  leaving  Odo
 and  Frodo  as Bingo's  companions (Frodo  now in  all probability  a Took).
 The  passage  concerning  Rivendell  has gone,  and instead  the plan  to go
 first  'to  pick up  Marmaduke' appears.  The description  of the  walk from
 Hobbiton  is  now  much  fuller,  and  largely  reaches  the  form   in  the
 typescript text (p.  50); it  is interesting  to observe  here the  point of
 emergence of the road to Buckland:                                          
                                                                            
   After  a  rest  on  a  bank  under  some  thinly  clad  birches  they went
 on  again,  until  they  struck  a  narrow  road.  It  went   rolling  away,
 pale  grey  in  the  dark,  up  and  down   -  but   all  the   time  gently
 climbing   southward.   It  was   the  road   to  Buckland,   climbing  away
 from  the  main  East   Road  in   the  Water   Valley,  and   winding  away
 past  the  skirts  of  the  Green  Hills  towards  the south-east  corner of

                             
                                                                              
 the Shire, the Wood-end as the Hobbits called it. They marched                
 along it, until it plunged between high hedges and  dark trees                
 rustling their dry leaves gently in the night airs.                           
                                                                              
  Comparison  of  this  with  the  description of  the East  Road in  the first
 draft ('rolling  away pale  grey into  the darkness,  between high  hedges and
 dark wind-stirred  trees') shows  that the  one was  derived from  the other.
 Perhaps as a result, the crossing of the East  Road is  omitted; it  is merely
 said that the Buckland road diverged from it (contrast FR p. 80).             
  After  Odo's  words  (typescript text  p. 50)  'Or are  you fellows  going to
 sleep on your legs?' there follows:                                          
                                                                              
                The Road goes ever on and on                                   
                down from the Door where it began:                             
                before us far the Road has gone,                               
                and we come after it, who can;                                
                pursuing it with weary feet,                                  
                until it joins some larger way,                               
                where many paths and errands meet,                            
                and whither then? - we cannot say.                             
                                                                              
 There is no  indication, in  the manuscript  as written,  who spoke  the verse
 (for which there is also a good deal of rough working); in the typescript text
 (pp. 52 - 3) it is given to Frodo and displaced to a later point in the story.
  The  second  draft  then  jumps to  the following  day, and  takes up  in the
 middle of a sentence:                                                         
                                                                              
 ...  on  the  flat  among  tall  trees  growing  in  scattered fashion  in the
 grasslands,  when  Frodo  said:  'I  can  hear  a   horse  coming   along  the
 road behind! '                                                                
  They looked back, but the windings of the road hid the traveller.            
  'I  think  we  had  better   get  out   of  sight,'   said  Bingo;   'or  you
 fellows  at  any  rate.  Of  course  it  doesn't  matter  very  much,   but  I
 would rather not be met by anyone we know.'                                   
  They  [written  above  at  the  same  time:   Odo  & F.]  ran   quickly  to
 the  left  down  into  a  little  hollow  beside  the  road,  and   lay  flat.
 Bingo  slipped  on  his  ring  and  sat  down  a  few  yards  from  the track.
 The   sound   of   hoofs   drew   nearer.   Round   a   turn   came   a  white
 horse, and on  it sat  a bundle  - or  that is  what it  looked like:  a small
 man  wrapped  entirely  in  a  great  cloak   and  hood   so  that   only  his
 eyes peered out, and his boots in the stirrups below.                         
  The   horse   stopped   when   it   came   level   with  Bingo.   The  figure
 uncovered  its  nose  and  sniffed;  and  then  sat  silent  as  if listening.
 Suddenly a laugh came from inside the hood.                                   
  'Bingo   my   boy!'   said   Gandalf,   throwing   aside    his   wrappings.

 'You   and   your   lads   are   somewhere   about.   Come   along   now  and
 show  up,  I  want  a  word  with  you!  '  He  turned  his  horse  and  rode
 straight  to  the  hollow  where  Odo  and  Frodo  lay.  'Hullo! hullo!  ' he
 said. 'Tired already? Aren't you going any further today?'                   
   At   that   moment  Bingo   reappeared  again.   'Well  I'm   blest,'  said
 he.  'What  are  you   doing  along   this  way,   Gandalf?  I   thought  you
 had  gone  back  with  the  elves  and   dwarves.  And   how  did   you  know
 where we were?'                                                              
   'Easy,'  said  Gandalf.  'No  magic.  I  saw  you  from  the  top   of  the
 hill,  and  knew  how  far  ahead  you  were.  As  soon   as  I   turned  the
 corner  and  saw  the  straight  piece  in  front  was   empty  I   knew  you
 had   turned   aside   somewhere   about   here.   And   you   have   made  a
 track  in  the long  grass that  I can  see, at  any rate  when I  am looking
 for it.'                                                                     
                                                                             
   Here this draft stops, at the foot of a  page, and  if my  father continued
 beyond this point the manuscript is lost; but I think it far more likely that
 he  abandoned  it  because  he  abandoned  the  idea   that  the   rider  was
 Gandalf  as  soon as  written. It  is most  curious to  see how  directly the
 description  of  Gandalf led  into that  of the  Black Rider  - and  that the
 original  sniff  was  Gandalf's! In  fact the  conversion of  the one  to the
 other was first carried out  by pencilled  changes on  the draft  text, thus:
                                                                             
   Round a turn  came a  white [>  black] horse,  and on  it sat  a bundle  - or
   that is what it looked  like: a  small [>  short] man  wrapped entirely  in a
   great [added:  black) cloak  and hood  so that  only his  eyes peered  out [>
   so that his face was entirely shadowed]...                                 
                                                                             
 If the  description of  Gandalf in  the draft  is compared  with that  of the
 Black Rider in the typescript text (p. 54) it will be seen that  with further
 refinement the one still remains  very closely  based on  the other.  The new
 turn in the story was indeed 'unpremeditated' (p.44).                        
   Further  rough  drafting  begins  again  with  the  workings  for  the song
 Upon  the  hearth  the  fire  is  red  and   continues  through   the  second
 appearance of the  Black Rider  and the  coming of  the Elves  to the  end of
 the  chapter.  This  material  was  followed  very  closely  indeed   in  the
 typescript  text  and  need  not  be  further  considered  (one or  two minor
 points  of  interest in  the development  of the  narrative are  mentioned in
 the  Notes).  There is  however a  separate section  in manuscript  which was
 not taken up into the typescript, and this very  interesting passage  will be
 given separately (see p. 73).                                                
   I  give  here  the  typescript  text  - which  became an  extremely complex
 and now very battered document. It is clear that  as soon  as, or  before, he
 had finished it my father  began revising  it, in  some cases  retyping pages
 (the  rejected  pages  being  retained),  and  also  writing  in  many  other
 changes  here  and  there,  most  of  these being  very minor  alterations of

  wording.(1) In the text that follows I take up all these revisions silently, but
  some earlier readings of interest are detailed in the Notes at  the end  of it
  (pp. 65 ff.).                                                                 
                                                                               
                                        II.                                     
                                                                               
                         Three's Company and Four's More.(2)                    
                                                                               
  Odo  Took  was  sitting  on  a  gate  whistling   softly.  His   cousin  Frodo
  was  lying   on  the   ground  beside   a  pile   of  packs   and  haversacks,
  looking  up  at  the  stars,  and  sniffing  the  cool   air  of   the  autumn
  twilight.                                                                     
    'I   hope   Bingo   has   not   got   locked   up   in   the   cupboard,  or
  something,' said Odo. 'He's late: it's after six.'                            
    'There's  no  need  to  worry,'  said   Frodo.  'He'll   turn  up   when  he
  thinks  fit.  He  may  have  thought  of  some  last  irresistible  joke,  or
  something:   he's   very   Brandybucksome.   But   he'll   come   all   right;
  quite reliable in the long run is Uncle Bingo.'                               
    There   was   a  chuckle   behind  him.   'I'm  glad   to  hear   it,'  said
  Bingo  suddenly  becoming  visible;  'for  this   is  going   to  be   a  very
  Long Run. Well, you fellows, are you quite ready to depart?'                  
    'It's  not  fair  sneaking  up  with  that  ring  on,'  said  Odo.  'One day
  you will hear what I think of you, and you won't be so glad.'                 
    'I  know  already,'   said  Bingo   laughing,  'and   yet  I   remain  quite
  cheerful. Where's my pack and stick? '                                        
    'Here  you  are!  '  said  Frodo  jumping  up.  'This  is  your  little lot:
  pack, bag, cloak, stick.'                                                     
    'I'm  sure  you  have  given  me  all  the  heaviest  stuff,' puffed  Bingo,
  struggling into the straps. He was a bit on the stout side.                   
    'Now   then!'   said   Odo.   'Don't   start  being   Bolger-like.  There's
  nothing  there,  except  what   you  told   us  to   pack.  You'll   feel  the
  weight less, when you have walked off a bit of your own.'                     
    'Be  kind  to  a  poor  ruined  hobbit! '  laughed Bingo.  'I shall  be thin
  as  a  willow-wand,  I'm  sure,   before  a   week  is   out.  But   now  what
  about it? Let's have a council! What shall we do first?'                      
    'I  thought  that  was  settled,'  said   Odo.  'Surely   we  have   got  to
  pick up Marmaduke first of all?'                                              
    '0  yes!  I  didn't   mean  that,'   said  Bingo.   'I  meant:   what  about
  this evening? Shall we walk a little or a lot? All night or not at all?'      
    'We'd   better   find   some   snug   corner   in   a  haystack,   or  some-
  where,  and  turn  in   soon,'  said   Odo,  'We   shall  do   more  tomorrow,
  if we start fresh.'                                                           
    'Let's  put  a  bit  of  the  road  behind  us  to-night,'  said  Frodo.  'I

 want to  get away  from Hobbiton.  Beside it's  jolly under  the stars,
 and cool.'                                                            
   'I  vote for  Frodo,' said  Bingo. And  so they  started, shouldering
 their  packs,  and  swinging  their  stout   sticks.  They   went  very
 quietly  over  fields  and  along  hedgerows  and  the borders  of cop-
 pices, until night fell. In their dark grey cloaks they  were invisible
 without  the  help  of  any  magic  rings,  and  since  they  were  all
 hobbits,  they  made  no  noise  that  even  hobbits  could   hear  (or
 indeed even wild creatures in the woods and fields).                  
   After  some  time  they   crossed  The   Water,  west   of  Hobbiton,
 where  it  was  no  more  than a  winding ribbon  of black,  lined with
 leaning  alders.  They  were  now  in  Tookland;  and  they   began  to
 climb  into   the  Green   Hill  Country   south  of   Hobbiton.(3) They
 could  see  the village  twinkling away  down in  the gentle  valley of
 The  Water.  Soon it  disappeared in  the folds  of the  darkened land,
 and  was  followed  by  Bywater beside  its grey  pool. When  the light
 of  the  last  farmhouse  was  far  behind, peeping  out of  the trees,
 Bingo turned and waved a hand in farewell.                            
   'Now we're really  off,' he  said. 'I  wonder if  we shall  ever look
 down into that valley again.'                                         
                                                                      
   After  they  had  walked  for  about  two  hours  they   rested.  The
 night  was  clear,  cool,  and  starry,  but smoky  wisps of  mist were
 creeping  up  the  hills  from  the  streams  and  deep  meadows. Thin-
 clad  birches  swaying  in  a  cold  breeze  above  their heads  made a
 black net against  the pale  sky. They  ate a  very frugal  supper (for
 hobbits),  and  then went  on again.  Odo was  reluctant, but  the rest
 of the council pointed out  that this  bare hillside  was no  place for
 passing the  night. Soon  they struck  a narrow  road. It  went rolling
 up and down until it faded grey into  the gathering  dark. It  was' the
 road  to  Buckland,  climbing  away  from  the  main  East Road  in the
 Water-valley,  and  winding  over  the  skirts   of  the   Green  Hills
 towards  the  south-eastern  corner  of  the  Shire,  the Woody  End as
 the hobbits called it. Not many of them lived in that part.           
   Along  this  road  they  marched.  Soon  it  plunged  into  a  deeply
 cloven track between tall trees that  rustled their  dry leaves  in the
 night.  It  was  very  dark.  At first  they talked,  or hummed  a tune
 softly together:  then they  marched on  in silence,  and Odo  began to
 lag behind. At last he stopped, and gave a big yawn.                  
   'I am so sleepy,' he said, 'that soon I shall fall down on  the road.
 What about a place for the  night? Or  are you  fellows going  to sleep
 on your legs?'(4)                                                     

   'When   does   Marmaduke   expect   us?'   asked    Frodo.   'Tomorrow
 night?'                                                                
   'No,'  said  Bingo.  'We  should  not  get  there  by  tomorrow night,
 even  with  a  forced  march,  unless  we  went   on  many   more  miles
 now.  And  I  must  say  I  don't  feel like  it. It  is getting  on for
 midnight already. But it is  all right.  I told  Marmaduke to  expect us
 the night after tomorrow; so there is no hurry.'                       
   'The  wind's  in  the  West,'  said  Odo.  'If  we  go down  the other
 side of this hill we are climbing, we ought  to find  a spot  fairly dry
 and sheltered.'                                                        
   At  the top  of the  hill over  which the  road ran  they came  upon a
 patch  of  fir-wood,  dry  and  resin-scented.  Leaving  the  road  they
 went  into  the  deep  darkness of  the wood,  and gathered  dead sticks
 and cones to make a  fire. Soon  they had  a merry  crackle of  flame at
 the foot of a great fir, and sat round it for a while, until  they began
 to nod  with sleep.  Then each  in an  angle of  the great  tree's roots
 they  curled  up  in  their  cloaks  and  blankets,  and were  soon fast
 asleep.                                                                
   There  was  no  danger:  for  they  were  still  in  the Shire.  A few
 creatures  came  and  looked at  them, when  the fire  had died  away. A
 fox  passing  through  the  wood   on  business   of  his   own  stopped
 several  minutes  and  sniffed.  'Hobbits!'  he  thought.   'Well,  what
 next?  I  have  heard  a  good  many tales  of queer  goings on  in this
 Shire;  but  I  have  never  heard  of  a hobbit  sleeping out  of doors
 under  a   tree!  Three   of  them!   There's  something   mighty  queer
 behind  this.'  He  was quite  right, but  he never  found out  any more
 about it.                                                              
   The   morning   came   rather   pale   and   clammy.  Bingo   woke  up
 first,  and  found that  a tree-root  had made  a hole  in his  back and
 that his neck was stiff. It did not seem such a lark as  it had  the day
 before. 'Why  on earth  did I  give that  beautiful feather-bed  to that
 old  pudding  Fosco?'(5) he  thought. 'The  tree-roots would  have been
 much better for him."Wake  up, hobbits!  ' he  cried. 'It's  a beautiful
 morning! '                                                             
   'What's  beautiful  about  it?'  said  Odo, peering  over the  edge of
 his  blanket  with  one  eye.  'Have  you  got  the bath-water  hot? Get
 breakfast ready for half past nine.'                                   
   Bingo  stripped  the  blanket  off  him,  and rolled  him over  on top
 of Frodo; and then  he left  them scuffling  and walked  to the  edge of
 the  wood.  Away  eastward  the  sun  was  rising red  out of  the mists
 that  lay  thick  on  the  world.   Touched  with   gold  and   red  the
 autumn  trees  in  the  distance  seemed  to  be  sailing rootless  in a

 shadowy sea. A  little below  him to  the left  the road  plunged down
 into a hollow between two slopes and vanished.                       
   When  he  got  back  the  other  two  had  got  a  good  fire going.
 'Water! ' they shouted. 'Where's the water? '                        
   'I don't keep water in my pockets,' said Bingo.                    
   'I thought you had gone  to find  some,' said  Odo. 'You  had better
 go now.'                                                             
   'Why?'  asked  Bingo.  'We  had  enough  left  for   breakfast  last
 night; or I thought we had.'                                         
   'Well,  you  thought  wrong,'  said  Frodo.  'Odo  drank   the  last
 drop, I saw him.'                                                    
   'Then  he  can  go  and  find  some more,  and not  put it  on Uncle
 Bingo. There's a stream at the foot of the slope; the road  crosses it
 just below where we turned aside last night.'                        
   In the end, of course, they  all went  with their  water-bottles and
 the  small  kettle they  had brought  with them.  They filled  them in
 the stream where it fell a foot or two  over a  small outcrop  of grey
 stone in its path. The water was icy  cold; and  Odo spluttered  as he
 bathed  his  face  and  hands.  Luckily  hobbits  grow no  beards (and
 would not shave if they did).                                        
   By the time their breakfast was  over, and  their packs  all trussed
 up again, it was ten o'clock at least,  and beginning  to turn  into a
 day  even  finer and  hotter than  the day  of Bingo's  birthday, that
 already  seemed  quite  a  long  while  past.   They  went   down  the
 slope, across the  stream, and  up the  next slope,  and by  that time
 their  cloaks,  blankets, water,  food, spare  clothes and  other gear
 already  seemed  a  heavy  load.  The  day's  march  was  going  to be
 something quite different from a country walk.                       
   After a time the  road ceased  to roll  up and  down: it  climbed to
 the top of a steep bank in a tired  zigzagging sort  of way,  and then
 prepared to  go down  for the  last time.  In front  of them  they saw
 the lower lands dotted  with small  clumps of  trees that  melted away
 in  the  distance  to  a  hazy  woodland  brown.  They   were  looking
 across  the  Woody  End  towards  the   Brandywine  River.   The  road
 wound away before them like a piece of string.                       
   'The road goes on for ever,' said Odo, 'but I can't without  a rest.
 It is high time for lunch.'                                          
   Frodo  sat  down on  the bank  at the  side of  the road  and looked
 away east into the haze, beyond  which lay  the River  and the  end of
 the Shire in which he had spent all  his life.  Suddenly he  spoke, as
 if half to himself:                                                  

        The Road goes ever on and on                                    
          Down from the door where it began.                          
        Now far ahead the Road has gone,                   
          And we must follow if we can,                     
        Pursuing it with weary feet,                                   
          Until it joins some larger way,                            
        Where many paths and errands meet.                  
          And whither then? We cannot say.(6)               
                                                                      
  'That  sounds  like  a  bit  of  Old   Bilbo's  rhyming,'   said  Odo.
 'Or  is  it one  of Bingo's  imitations? It  does not  sound altogether
 encouraging.'                                                         
  'No, I made it up, or at any rate it came to me,' said Frodo.        
  'I've never heard it before, certainly,' said  Bingo. 'But  it reminds
 me  very  much of  Bilbo in  the last  years, before  he went  away. He
 used often to say that there was only one  Road in  all the  land; that
 it was like  a great  river: its  springs were  at every  doorstep, and
 every  path  was  its  tributary.  "It's  a dangerous  business, Bingo,
 going out  of your  door," he  used to  say. "You  step into  the Road,
 and  if  you  don't  keep  your  feet,  there is  no knowing  where you
 might get swept off to. Do you realize that this is the very  path that
 goes through Mirkwood, and that if  you let  it, it  might take  you to
 even  farther  and  worse   places  than   the  Lonely   Mountain?"  He
 used  to  say  that  on  the  path outside  the front-door  at Bag-end;
 especially after he had been out for a walk.'                         
  'Well,  the  Road  won't  sweep  me  anywhere for  an hour  at least,'
 said  Odo,  unslinging  his  pack.  The  others  followed  his example,
 putting  their  packs  against  the bank  and their  legs out  into the
 road. After a rest they had lunch (a frugal one) and then more rest.
  The  sun  was  beginning  to  get  lower  and  the light  of afternoon
 was on the land as they went down  the hill.  So far  they had  not met
 a  soul  on the  road. This  way was  not much  used, and  the ordinary
 way  to  Buckland  was  along  the  East  Road  to  the meeting  of the
 Water  and  the  Brandywine  River,  where  there  was  a  bridge,  and
 then  south  along the  River. They  had been  jogging along  again for
 an  hour  or  more,  when  Frodo  stopped  a  moment  as  if listening.
 They   were   now   on  level   ground,  and   the  road,   after  much
 winding,  lay  straight  ahead  through  grassland sprinkled  with tall
 trees, outliers of the approaching woods.                             
  'I can hear  a horse  or a  pony coming  along the  road behind,' said
 Frodo.                                                                

  They looked back, but the turn of the road prevented them            
 from seeing far.                                                      
  'I think we had better get out of sight,' said Bingo; 'or you  two at
 any rate. Of course, it does  not matter  much, but  I have  a feeling
 that I would rather not be seen by anyone just now.'                  
  Odo and Frodo  ran quickly  to the  left, down  into a  little hollow
 not far from the road, and  lay flat.  Bingo slipped  on his  ring and
 stepped  behind  a tree.  The sound  of hoofs  drew nearer.  Round the
 turn  came  a  black  horse,  no hobbit-pony  but a  full-sized horse;
 and on it sat a bundle, or that is what it looked like: a  broad squat
 man,  completely  wrapped  in  a  great  black  cloak  and   hood,  so
 that  only  his  boots  in  the  stirrups showed  below: his  face was
 shadowed and invisible.                                               
  When  it  came  on  a  level  with  Bingo,  the  horse  stopped.  The
 riding figure sat quite still, as if listening.  From inside  the hood
 came a noise as of  someone sniffing  to catch  an elusive  scent; the
 head turned from side to side  of the  road. At  last the  horse moved
 on again, walking slowly at first, and then taking to a gentle trot.
  Bingo  slipped  to  the  edge  of  the  road  and watched  the rider,
 until he dwindled in the  distance. He  could not  be quite  sure, but
 it  seemed  to him  that suddenly,  before they  passed out  of sight,
 the horse and rider turned aside and rode into the trees.             
  'Well, I call that very queer,  and even  a little  disturbing,' said
 Bingo  to  himself,  as  he walked  back to  his companions.  They had
 remained  flat  in  the  grass,  and  had   seen  nothing;   so  Bingo
 described to them the rider and  his strange  behaviour. 'I  can't say
 why, but I felt perfectly certain he was looking  or smelling  for me:
 and also I felt very clearly that I did not want  him to  discover me.
 I've never seen or felt anything quite like it in the Shire before.'
  'But what has one of the Big People got  to do  with us?'  said Odo.
 'And what is he doing in this  part of  the world  at all?  Except for
 those  Men  from  Dale  the  other day (7) I haven't  seen one  of that
 Kind in our Shire for years.'                                         
  'I  have  though,'  said   Frodo,  who   had  listened   intently  to
 Bingo's description of the black rider. 'It reminds me of something
 I  had  almost  forgotten. I  was walking  away up  in the  North Moor
 - you know, right  up on  the northern  borders of  the Shire  - early
 last spring, when a similar  rider met  me. He  was riding  south, and
 he  stopped  and  spoke,  though  he did  not seem  able to  speak our
 language  very  well;  he  asked  me if  I knew  where a  place called
 Hobbiton  was,  and if  there were  any folk  called Baggins  there. I
 thought it very queer at  the time;  and I  had a  queer uncomfortable

 feeling, too. I could not see any face under his hood. I  never heard
 whether he turned up in Hobbiton or  not. If  I did  not tell  you, I
 meant to.'                                                          
   'You didn't tell me, and  I wish  you had,'  said Bingo.  'I should
 have  asked  Gandalf  about  it;  and probably  we should  have taken
 more care on the road.'                                             
   'Then  you  know  or  guess  something   about  the   rider?'  said
 Frodo. 'What is he?'                                                
   'I  don't  know,  and  I  don't  want to  guess,' said  Bingo. 'But
 somehow I don't believe  either of  these riders  (if there  are two)
 was really one of  the Big  People, not  one of  the kind  like Dale-
 men, I mean.  I wish  Gandalf was  here; but  now it  will be  a long
 time before we find him. In a way I  suppose I  ought to  be pleased;
 but  I  am  not  quite  prepared for  adventures yet,  and I  was not
 expecting any in our own Shire. Do  you two  wish to  go on  with the
 Journey?'                                                           
   'Of course! ' said Frodo. 'I am not going to turn back, not  for an
 army of goblins.'                                                   
   'I shall go where Uncle  Bingo goes,'  said Odo.  'But what  is the
 next thing to  do? Shall  we go  on at  once, or  stay here  and have
 some food? (9) I should like a bite and a sip, but  somehow I  think we
 had  better  move on  from here.  Your talk  of sniffing  riders with
 invisible noses has made me feel quite uncomfortable.'              
   'I think we will move on now,' said  Bingo; 'but  not on  the road,
 in  case  that  rider  comes  back,  or another  one follows  him. We
 ought to do a good step more  today; Buckland  is still  miles away.'
                                                                    
   The  shadows  of  the trees  were long  and thin  on the  grass, as
 they started off again. They now kept a stone's throw to the  left of
 the  road, but  their going  was slow,  for the  grass was  thick and
 tussocky  and  the  ground  uneven.  The  sun   had  gone   down  red
 behind the hills at their  back, and  evening was  coming on,  by the
 time they had  come to  the end  of the  straight stretch.  There the
 road bent southward, and began  to wind  again as  it entered  a wood
 of ancient scattered oak trees.'4                                   
   Close to the road they came on the huge hulk of  an aged  tree." It
 was still alive and had leaves on small branches that it had  put out
 round  the  broken  stumps  of  its  long  fallen  limbs; but  it was
 hollow, and could be entered by a great  crack on  the far  side. The
 hobbits went in  and sat  upon the  floor of  old leaves  and decayed
 wood.  There  they  rested  and  had  a  meal,  talking  quietly  and
 listening in between.                                               

   They  had just  finished and  were thinking  of setting  out again,
 when  they  heard  quite  clearly  the  sound  of hoofs  walking slow
 along the  road outside.  They did  not move.  The hoofs  stopped, as
 far as they could judge, on the road beside their tree, but  only for
 a  moment.  Soon  they  went  on  again  and  faded  away -  down the
 road, in the direction of Buckland. When Bingo at  last stole  out of
 the tree and peered up and  down the  road, there  was nothing  to be
 seen.                                                                
   'Most peculiar!' he said, coming back to the  others. 'I  think we
 had better wait inside here for a bit.'                              
   It grew almost dark inside the tree-trunk. 'I really think we shall
 have to go  on now,'  said Bingo.  'We have  done very  little to-day
 and we shan't get to Buckland tomorrow night at this rate.'          
   Twilight  was  about  them,  when  they  crept  out.  There  was no
 living sound, not even a  bird-call in  the wood.  The West  wind was
 sighing in the branches.  They stepped  into the  road and  looked up
 and down again.                                                      
   'We  had  better  risk  the road,'  said Odo.  'The ground  is much
 too  rough  off  the  track,  especially  in a  fading light.  We are
 probably  making  a  fuss  about nothing.  It is  very likely  only a
 wandering  stranger who  has got  lost; and  if he  met us,  he would
 just  ask  us  the  way to  Buckland or  Brandywine Bridge,  and ride
 on.'                                                                 
   'I hope you are right,' said  Bingo. 'But  anyway there  is nothing
 for it but the open road. Luckily it winds a good deal.'             
   'What  if  he  stops  us  and  asks  if  we  know where  Mr Bolger-
 Baggins lives?'said Frodo.                                           
   'Give  him  the  true  answer:  Nowhere,'  said  Bingo. 'Forward!'
                                                                     
   They  were  now  entering  the  Woody  End, and  the road  began to
 fall gently but steadily, making south-east  towards the  lowlands of
 the  Brandywine  River.  A  star  came  out  in  the  darkening East.
 They went abreast and  in step,  and their  spirits rose;  the uncom-
 fortable  feeling  vanished,  and  they  no  longer listened  for the
 sound of hoofs. After  a mile  or two  they began  to hum  softly, as
 hobbits have a way of  doing when  twilight closes  in and  the stars
 come out. With most hobbits it is  a bed-song  or a  supper-song; but
 these  hobbits  hummed  a  walking-song   (though  not,   of  course,
 without  any  mention  of  bed  and supper).  Bilbo Baggins  had made
 the words (the tune was as old as the hills), and taught it  to Bingo
 as they  walked in  the lanes  of the  Water-valley and  talked about
 Adventure.                                                           

       Upon the hearth the fire is red,                                 
       Beneath the roof there is a bed;                                  
       But not yet weary are our feet,                                  
       Still mund the corner me may meet                                
       A sudden tree or standing stone                                  
       That none have seen, but me alone.                               
       Tree and flower and leaf and grass,                              
         Let them pass! Let them pass!                        
       Hill and mater under sky,                                        
         Pass them by! Pass them by!                                   
                                                                       
       Still round the corner there may wait                            
       A new road or a secret gate,                                     
       And even if me pass them by,                                     
       We still shall know which way they lie,                        
       And whether hidden pathways run                                 
       Towards the Moon or to the Sun.                                 
       Apple, thorn, and nut and sloe,                          
         Let them go! Let them go!                             
       Sand and stone and pool and dell,                      
         Fare you mell! Fare you mell!                        
                                                                       
       Home is behind, the world ahead,                       
       And there are many paths to tread                                
       Through shadow to the edge of night,                             
       Until the stars are all alight.                                  
       Then world behind and home ahead,                               
       We'll wander back to fire and bed.                                
       Mist and twilight, cloud and shade,                              
         Away shall fade! Away shall fade!          
       Fire and lamp and meat and bread,          
         And then to bed! And then to bed! (12)                        
                                                                       
  The  song  ended.  'And  now  to  bed!  And  now  to bed!'  sang Odo
 in a loud voice. 'Hush! ' said Frodo. 'I think I hear hoofs again.'
  They  stopped  suddenly,   and  stood   as  silent   as  tree-shadows,
 listening.  There  was  a  sound  of  hoofs  on   the  road   some  way
 behind, but  coming slow  and clear  in the  stillness of  the evening.
 Quickly  and  quietly  they  slipped  off  the  road  and ran  into the
 deeper shade under the oak-trees.                                      
  'Don't let's go too far!' said Bingo. 'I don't want to be seen, but I
 want to see what I can this time.'                                     
  'Very well! ' said Odo; 'but don't forget the sniffing!'              

   The  hoofs  drew  nearer.  They  had  no  time  to find  any hiding-
 place (13) better  than  the general  darkness under  the trees.,  so Odo
 and  Frodo  lay  behind  a  large tree-trunk,  while Bingo  slipped on
 his ring and crept forward  a few  yards towards  the road.  It showed
 grey and pale, a line of fading light through the  wood. Above  it the
 stars were  now coming  out thick  in the  dim sky,  but there  was no
 moon.                                                                
   The  sound  of  hoofs  ceased.  As  Bingo  watched he  saw something
 dark pass across the lighter space between two  trees, and  then halt.
 It looked  like the  black shade  of a  horse led  by a  smaller black
 shadow.  The  black shadow  stood close  to the  point where  they had
 left  the road,  and it  swayed from  side to  side. Bingo  thought he
 heard  the  sound  of  sniffing. The  shadow bent  to the  ground, and
 then began to crawl towards him.                                     
   At  that  moment  there  came   a  sound   like  mingled   song  and
 laughter. Voices clear and fair rose and fell in the starlit  air. The
 black  shadow  straightened  and  retreated.(14) It climbed on  to the
 shadowy  horse  and  seemed  to  vanish  across  the  road   into  the
 darkness on the other side. Bingo breathed again.                    
   'Elves!  '  said  Frodo in  an excited  whisper behind  him. 'Elves!
 How  wonderful!  I  have  always  wished to  hear elves  singing under
 the stars; but I did not know any lived in the Shire.'               
   'Oh  yes! '  said Bingo.  'Old Bilbo  knew there  were some  down in
 the  Woody  End.  They  don't  really  live  here,  though;  but  they
 often  come across  the river  in spring  and autumn.  I am  very glad
 they do!'                                                            
   'Why?' said Odo.                                                   
   'You didn't see, of course,' said Bingo; 'but  that black  rider (or
 another  of  the  same  sort)  stopped  just  here  and  was  actually
 crawling  towards  us,  when  the song  started. As  soon as  he heard
 the voices he slipped away.'                                         
   'Did he sniff?' asked Odo.                                         
   'He  did,'  said  Bingo.  'It  is  mysterious,   urcomfortably  mys-
 terious.'                                                            
   'Let's find the Elves, if we can,' said Frodo.                     
   'Listen!  They  are  coming  this  way,' said  Bingo. 'We  have only
 to wait by the road.'                                                
   The  singing drew  nearer. One  clear voice  rose above  the others.
 It  seemed  to be  singing in  the secret  elf-tongue, of  which Bingo
 knew only a  little, and  the others  knew nothing,  yet the  sound of
 the  words  blending  with  the  tune  seemed  to  turn into  words in
 their  own  listening  thought,  which  they  only  partly understood.

                                                                  
                                                                       
 Frodo  and  Bingo  afterwards  agreed  that  the  song  went something
 like this:                                                             
                                                                       
                Snow-white! Snow-white! O Lady clear!                 
                    O Queen beyond the Western Seas!                    
            O Light to us that wander here                             
              Amid the world of woven trees!                            
                                                                       
            Gilthoniel! O Elbereth!                                     
                Clear are thy eyes and cold thy breath!             
            Snow-white! Snow-white! We sing to thee             
                In a far land beyond the Sea.                           
                                                                       
              O Stars that in the Sunless Year                          
               With shining hand by her were sown,                    
               In windy fields now bright and clear                    
                 We see your silver blossom blown!                      
                                                                       
            O Elbereth! Gilthoniel!                                    
               We still remember, we who dwell                        
            In this far land beneath the trees,                         
                  Thy starlight on the Western Seas."                   
                                                                       
  The  hobbits  sat  in  shadow  by  the   roadside.  Before   long  the
 Elves  came  down  the  road  towards  the  valley. They  passed slowly
 and  the  hobbits  could  see  the starlight  glimmering on  their hair
 and  in  their  eyes.(16) They  bore  no  lights, yet  as they  walked a
 shimmer,  like  the  light  of  the  moon  above the  rim of  the hills
 before it  rises, seemed  to fall  about their  feet. They  had stopped
 singing, and as the-last elf passed  he turned  and looked  towards the
 hobbits, and laughed.                                                  
  'Hail Bingo! ' he said. 'You are out late - or are you perhaps lost? '
 Then  he  called  aloud  in  the  elf-tongue,   and  all   the  company
 stopped and gathered round.                                            
  'Well! Isn't this wonderful!  ' they  said. 'Three  hobbits in  a wood
 at  night!  What  is  the  meaning  of this?  We haven't  seen anything
 like it, since dear Bilbo went away.'                                  
  'The  meaning  of  this,  my  good  Elves,'  said  Bingo,  'is  simply
 that we seem to be going  the same  way as  you are.  I was  brought up
 by Bilbo, so I like walking, even  under the  stars. And  I can  put up
 with Elves for lack of other company! '                                
  'But  we  have  no  need  of  other  company,   and  hobbits   are  so
 dull,' they laughed.  'Come along  now, tell  us all  about it!  We see

 you  are  simply  swelling  with  secrets  we  should  like   to  hear.
 Though   some   we   know,  of   course,  and   some  we   guess.  Many
 Happy  Returns  of  yesterday  -  we  have  heard  all  about  that, of
 course, from the Rivendell people.'"                                  
   'Then who are you, and who is your lord?' said Bingo.               
   'I am Gildor,' said the Elf  who had  hailed him.  'Gildor Inglorion
 of  the  house  of  Finrod.  We are  exiles, one  of the  few companies
 that still remain east of the  Sea, for  our kindred  went back  to the
 West  long  ago.  We  are Wise-elves,  and the  elves of  Rivendell are
 our kinsfolk.'(18)                                                    
   '0 Wise People,' said Frodo, 'tell us about the Black Rider!'      
   'The  Black  Rider!'  they  said  in  low  voices.  'Why  do  you ask
 about the Black Rider?'                                               
   'Because  three  Black  Riders  have  overtaken  us  today,   or  one
 three  times,'(19) said  Bingo;  'and   only  a   few  moments   ago  one
 slipped away as you drew near.'                                       
   The  Elves  did  not  answer at  once, but  spoke together  softly in
 the elf-tongue.  At last  Gildor turned  to the  hobbits: 'We  will not
 speak  more  of  this here,'  he said.  'We think  you had  better come
 with us. As you know, it is  not our  custom; but  for Bilbo's  sake we
 will take you on our road,  and you  shall lodge  with us  to-night, if
 you wish.'                                                            
   'I  thank  you  indeed,  Gildor  Inglorion,'  said  Bingo  bowing. '0
 Fair  Folk!  This  is  a  good  fortune  beyond  my  best  hope,'  said
 Frodo.  Odo  also  bowed,   but  said   nothing  aloud.   'Rather  good
 luck?' he whispered to Bingo.  'I suppose  we shall  get a  really good
 bed and supper?'                                                      
   'You can reckon  your luck  in the  morning,' said  Gildor, as  if he
 had  been  spoken  to.  'We  shall  do  what  we  can,  though  we have
 heard that hobbits are hard to satisfy.'                              
   'I   beg   your   pardon,'   stammered   Odo.  Bingo   laughed:  'You
 must be careful of  Elvish ears,  Odo!' 'We  count our  luck already,'
 he said to the Elves; 'and I think that you will find that we  are very
 easy to please (for hobbits).' He  added in  the elf-tongue  a greeting
 that  Bilbo  had  taught  him:  'The  stars  shine on  the hour  of our
 meeting.'                                                             
   'Be careful,  friends! '  cried Gildor  laughing. 'Speak  no secrets!
 Here  is  a  scholar  in  the  elf-latin.(20) Bilbo  was  indeed  a  good
 master!  Hail! elf-friend,'  he said,  bowing to  Bingo, 'come  now and
 join  our  company! '  You had  best walk  in the  middle, so  that you
 will not stray. You may be weary before we halt.'                     
   'Why? Where are you going?' asked Bingo.                            

                                      
                                                                    
  'To the woods near Woodhall down in the valley. It is some         
 miles; but  it will  shorten your  journey to  Buckland to-         
 morrow.'                                                            
                                                                    
  They  marched  along  in  silence,  and  passed  like  shadows  and
 faint  lights;  for  both  Elves  and hobbits  could walk  when they
 wished  without  a  sound.  They sang  no more  songs. Odo  began to
 feel sleepy, and stumbled once or twice; but each time a tall elf by
 his side put out his arm and saved him from a fall.                 
  The  woods on  either side  became denser;  the trees  were younger
 and more thick,  and as  the road  went lower  there were  many deep
 brakes of hazel. At last they turned  right from  the road:  a green
 ride  lay  almost  unseen  through  the  thicket This  they followed
 until they came suddenly to a wide  space of  grass, grey  under the
 night. The wood  bordered it  on three  sides; but  on the  east the
 ground fell steeply, and the tops of the dark  trees growing  in the
 fold below were level with their feet. Beyond them the low  land lay
 dim and flat under the stars. Nearer at hand there was a  twinkle of
 lights: the village of Woodhall.                                    
  The Elves sat on the grass, and  seemed to  take no  further notice
 of  the hobbits.  They spoke  together in  soft voices.  The hobbits
 wrapped  themselves  in  cloak  and  blankets, and  drowsiness crept
 over them. The  night drew  on, and  the lights  in the  valley went
 out. Odo fell asleep, pillowed on a smooth hillock.                 
  Out  of the  mists away  eastward a  pale gold  light went  up. The
 yellow  moon rose;  springing swiftly  out of  the shadow,  and then
 climbing  round  and slow  into the  sky. The  Elves all  burst into
 song. Suddenly under the trees to one side a fire  sprang up  with a
 red light.                                                          
  'Come! ' the Elves called to the  hobbits. 'Come!  Now is  the time
 for speech and merriment.'                                          
  Odo  sat  up  and  rubbed  his  eyes.  He  shivered.  'Come, little
 Odo!' said an elf. 'There is a fire in the hall,  and some  food for
 hungry guests.'                                                     
  On the  south side  of the  green-sward the  wood drew  close. Here
 there was a space green-floored, but  entirely overshadowed  by tall
 trees.  Their  trunks  ran like  pillars down  each side,  and their
 interlaced branches made a  roof above.  In the  middle there  was a
 wood-fire blazing; upon the sides of  the tree-pillars  torches with
 lights of gold and silver were burning  steadily without  smoke. The
 Elves sat round the fire upon the grass  or upon  the sawn  rings of
 old trunks. Some went  to and  fro bearing  cups and  pouring drink;

 others  brought  food  on  heaped plates  and dishes,  and set  them on
 the grass.                                                            
   'This is poor fare,' they said to  the hobbits;  'for we  are lodging
 in the greenwood far  from our  halls. If  ever you  are our  guests at
 home, we will treat you better.'                                      
   'It seems to me good enough for a birthday party,' said Bingo.      
   Actually it was Odo that ate the least  after all.  The drink  in his
 cup  seemed  sweet and  fragrant; he  drained it,  and felt  all weari-
 ness  slip  away,  and  yet  sleep came  softly down  upon him.  He was
 already  half  wrapped  in  warm dreams  as he  ate; and  afterwards he
 could  remember nothing  more than  the taste  of bread  - yet  a bread
 that was  like the  best hobbit-bread  ever baked  (and that  was Bread
 indeed) eaten  after a  long fast,  only this  bread was  better. Frodo
 afterwards recalled little of either food  or drink,  for his  mind was
 filled with  the light  under the  trees, the  elf-faces, the  sound of
 voices so various  and so  beautiful that  he felt  in a  waking dream.
 But  he  remembered  taking  a  draught  that  had  the  warmth   of  a
 golden  autumn  afternoon  and  the cool  of a  clear fountain;  and he
 remembered  too  the  taste of  fruits, sweet  as wild  berries, richer
 than  the  tended  fruits  of  hobbit-gardens  (and  those  are  fruits
 indeed).                                                              
   Bingo  sat  and  ate  and  drank  and   talked,  and   simply  remem-
 bered having had  something of  all the  foods he  liked best;  but his
 mind  was  chiefly  on  the  talk.  He  knew  something  of   the  elf-
 tongue, and  listened eagerly.  Now and  again he  spoke to  those that
 served  him  and  thanked  them  in  their  own  language.  They smiled
 on him and said laughing: 'Here is a jewel among hobbits!'(22)        
   After a while  Odo and  Frodo fell  fast asleep,  and were  lifted up
 and  borne  away  to  bowers  under  the  trees;  they were  laid there
 upon  soft  beds  and  slept  the  night   away.  But   Bingo  remained
 talking with Gildor, the leader of the Elves.(23)                     
   'Why did you choose this moment to set out?' asked Gildor.          
   'Well, really it chose itself,' answered  Bingo. 'I  had come  to the
 end  of  my  treasure.  It  had always  held me  back from  the Journey
 which half of  my heart  wished for,  ever since  Bilbo went  away; but
 now  it  was  gone.  So  I  said  to  my  stay-at-home half:  "There is
 nothing  to  keep  you  here.   The  Journey   might  bring   you  some
 more treasure, as it  did for  old Bilbo;  and anyway  on the  road you
 will be able to live more easily without any. Of course if you  like to
 stay in Hobbiton and earn  your living  as a  gardener or  a carpenter,
 you  can."  The  stay-at-home  half  surrendered;  it  did not  want to
 make  other people's  chairs or  grow other  people's potatoes.  It was

                                        
                                                                    
 soft and fat. I think the Journey will do it good. But of course the
 other half is not really looking for treasure,  but for  Adventure -
 later rather than sooner. At the moment it also is soft and fat, and
 finding walking over the Shire quite enough.'                       
  'Yes!'  laughed  Gildor.  'You  still  look  just like  an ordinary
 hobbit!'                                                           
  'I daresay,' said Bingo. 'But  my birthday  the day  before yester-
 day (24) seems already a long way  behind. Still  a hobbit  I am,  and a
 hobbit I shall always be.'                                          
  'I  only  said  look,'  replied  the Elf.  'You seem  to me  a most
 peculiar  hobbit inside,  quite as  peculiar as  Bilbo; and  I think
 strange  things  will  happen  to you  and your  friends. If  you go
 looking for Adventure, you usually  find as  much of  it as  you can
 manage. And it often happens  that when  you think  it is  ahead, it
 comes on you unexpectedly from behind.'                             
  'So  it  seems,'  said Bingo.  'But I  did not  expect it  ahead or
 behind so soon - not in our own Shire.'                             
  'But it is not your Shire alone, nor for  ever,' said  Gildor. 'The
 Wide World is all about  it. You  can fence  yourselves in,  but you
 have no means of fencing it out.'                                   
  'All the same, it is  disturbing,' said  Bingo. 'I  want to  get to
 Rivendell, if I can - though I hear the road has not grown easier of
 late years. Can you tell me anything to guide me or help me?'       
  'I do not think you will find  the road  too hard.  But if  you are
 thinking of what you call the Black Rider,  that is  another matter.
 Have  you  told  me  all  your  reasons  for  leaving  secretly? Did
 Gandalf tell you nothing?'                                          
  'Not even a hint, at  least none  that I  understood. I  seldom saw
 him after Bilbo went  away, twice  a year  at most.  I saw  him last
 spring, when he turned  up unexpectedly  one night;  and I  told him
 then  of  the  plan  I  was beginning  to make  for the  Journey. He
 seemed  pleased,  and  told  me  not to  put it  off later  than the
 autumn. He came again to help  me with  the Party,  but we  were too
 busy then to talk much, and  he went  off with  the dwarves  and the
 Rivendell elves as soon as the fireworks were over. He did hint that
 I might meet him  again in  Rivendell, and  suggested that  I should
 make for that place first.'                                         
  'Not later than the autumn! ' said  Gildor. 'I  wonder. He  may all
 the same not have known that they were  in the  Shire; yet  he knows
 more about them than we do. If he did not  tell you  any more,  I do
 not feel inclined to do  so, for  fear of  frightening you  from the
 Journey. Because I think it is clear that your Journey  started none

 
                                                                       
 too  soon;  by  what  seems  strange good  luck you  went just  in time.
 You  ought  to  go  on,  and  not  turn  back,   though  you   have  met
 adventure,   and   danger,   much   sooner   than   you   expected.  You
 ought  to  go  quickly;  but  you  must  be careful,  and look  not only
 ahead, but also behind, and even perhaps to both sides as well.'      
   'I wish you  would say  things plainer,'  said Bingo.  'But I  am glad
 to be told that I ought to go on; for that is what I want to do.  Only I
 now  rather  wonder  if  I  ought to  take Odo  and Frodo.  The original
 plan  was  just  a  Journey, a  sort of  prolonged (and  perhaps perman-
 ent)  holiday  from  Hobbiton, and  I am  sure they  did not  expect any
 more  adventures  for  a  long  time  than  getting  wet and  hungry. We
 had no idea we should be pursued.'                                     
   '0  come!   They  must   have  known   that  if   you  intend   to  go
 wandering  out  of  the  Shire  into  the  Wide   World,  you   must  be
 prepared  for  anything.  I  cannot see  that it  makes so  much differ-
 ence,  if  something has  turned up  rather soon.  Are they  not willing
 to go on?'                                                             
   'Yes, they say so.'                                                  
   'Then  let  them  go  on! (25) They  are lucky  to be  your companions:
 and  you  are  lucky  to  have  them.  They  are  a great  protection to
 you.'                                                                  
   'What do you mean?'                                                 
   'I think the Riders  do not  know that  they are  with you,  and their
 presence has confused the scent, and puzzled them.'                    
   'Dear me! It is all very mysterious. It is  like solving  riddles. But
 I have always heard that talking to Elves is like that.'               
   'It  is,'  laughed  Gildor. 'And  Elves seldom  give advice;  but when
 they  do,  it  is  good.  I  have advised  you to  go to  Rivendell with
 speed  and care.  Nothing else  that I  could tell  you would  make that
 advice   any   better.(26) We  have   our  own   business  and   our own
 sorrows, and those have  little to  do with  the ways  of hobbits  or of
 other  creatures.  Our  paths  cross  those ways  seldom, and  mostly by
 accident.  In  our  meeting  there  is   perhaps  something   more  than
 accident, yet I do not feel sure that I ought to  interfere. But  I will
 add a little more advice:  if a  Rider finds  you or  speaks to  you, do
 not  answer,  and  do  not  name  yourself.  Also do  not again  use the
 ring to escape from his  search. I  do not  know, but  I guess  that the
 use of the ring helps them more than you.'                             
   'More  and  more  mysterious!  '  said  Bingo.  '1 can't  imagine what
 information  would  be  more   frightening  than   your  hints;   but  I
 suppose you know best.'                                                
   'I do indeed,' said Gildor, 'and I will say no more.'                

   'Very well!' said Bingo. 'I am now all of  a twitter;  but I  am much
 obliged to you.'                                                        
   'Be  of  good  heart! '  said Gildor.  'Sleep now!  In the  morning we
 shall  have  gone;  but  we  will  send our  messages through  the land.
 The  wandering  Companies  shall  know  of  you  and  your   Journey.  I
 name  you  elf-friend,  and  wish  you  well.  Seldom  have we  had such
 delight  in  strangers;  and it  is pleasant  to hear  words of  our own
 tongue from the lips of other wanderers in.the World.'                  
                                                                        
   Bingo  felt   sleep  coming   upon  him,   even  as   Gildor  finished
 speaking.  'I  will  sleep  now,'  he said.  Gildor led  him to  a bower
 beside  Odo  and  Frodo,  and  he  threw  himself upon  a bed,  and fell
 at once into a dreamless slumber.                                       
                                                                        
                                  NOTES.                                  
                                                                        
 1. For emendation of the typescript at this stage  my father  used black
  ink. This was fortunate,  for otherwise  the historical  unravelling of
  the text would be scarcely possible: in a  later phase  of the  work he
  returned to it and covered it with  corrections in  blue and  red inks,
  blue chalk and pencil. In one case, however, an  addition in  black ink
  belongs demonstrably to the later phase. It is possible  therefore that
  some  of  the  emendations  which  I  have  adopted  into the  text are
  really later; but none seem to me to be so, and in any case all changes
  of  any  narrative significance  are detailed  in the  following notes.
 2. The meaning of this title is not clear. The phrase  'Three's company,
  but   four's   more'   is   used   however   by   Marmaduke  Brandybuck
  during  the conversation  in Buckland,  where he  asserts that  he will
  certainly be one  of the  party (p.  103). Conceivably,  therefore, my
  father gave the original second chapter this title because  he believed
  that it would extend as far  as the  arrival in  Buckland. Subsequently
  he  crossed out  the words  'and Four's  More', but  it cannot  be said
  when this was done.                                                    
 3. In the second draft of the opening of the chapter, which  had reached
  virtually the form of the typescript text in this passage, the crossing
  of  the  East  Road  was omitted,  and the  omission remains  here (see
                                                                        
    p.47).                                                                 
 4. In the draft text the verse The Road goes ever on and on is placed     
    here (see p. 47).                                                      
 5. Fosco Bolger, Bingo's uncle: see p. 38.                                
 6. In FR (pp. 82-3) the verse has I for we in lines 4 and 8,  but is
    otherwise  the  same;  there, however,  it is  an echo  from Bilbo's
    speaking it in Chapter x (FR p.44). For the earliest form see p. 47;
    and see further p.246 note 18.                                       
 7. Men from Dale: see pp. 20, 30.                                         

  8. The next portion of the narrative, from 'I have though,' said Frodo      
     and extending to the end of the song Upon the hearth the fire is red      
     (p. 57), was early re-typed to replace two pages of the original      
     typescript, and a substantial alteration and expansion of the story      
     was introduced (see notes g and x x).      
  9. This first part of the re-typed section (see note 8) was not greatly      
     changed from the earlier form. In the earlier, Frodo described his      
     encounter with a Black Rider 'up in the North Moors' in the      
     previous spring in almost exactly the same words; but Bingo's      
     response was somewhat different:      
      'That makes it even queerer,' said Bingo. 'I am glad I had the      
     fancy not to be seen on the road. But, somehow, I don't believe      
     either of these riders was one of the Big People, not of the Kind      
     like the Dale-men, I mean. I wonder what they were? I rather      
     wish Gandalf was here. But, of course, he went away immediately      
     after the fireworks with the elves and dwarves, and it will be ages      
     before we see him now.'      
      'Shall we go on now, or stay here and have some food?' asked      
     Odo...      
   In the later versions of A Long-expected Party there is no reference      
   to Gandalf after the fireworks (see pp. 31, 38; 63).      
 10. There the road bent southward: on the map of the Shire in FR the      
  road does not bend southward 'at the end of the straight stretch'; it      
  bends left or northward, while a side road goes on to Woodhall. But      
  at this stage there was only one road, and at the place where the   
  hobbits met the Elves it was falling steadily, 'making south-east      
  towards the lowlands of the Brandywine River' (p. 56). Certainly by   
  oversight, the present passage was preserved with little change in      
  the original edition of FR (p. 86):      
    The sun had gone down red behind the hills at their backs, and      
    evening was coming on before they came to the end of the long      
    level over which the road ran straight. At that point it bent      
    somewhat southward, and began to wind again, as it entered a      
    wood of ancient oak-trees.   
  It was not until the second edition of 1966 that my father changed      
  the text to agree with the map:      
    At that point it bent left and went down into the lowlands of the      
    Yale making for Stock; but a lane branched right, winding      
    through a wood of ancient oak-trees on its way to Woodhall. 'That    
    is the way for us,' said Frodo.      
        Not far from the road-meeting they came on the huge hulk of a      
    tree...      
  This is also the reason for change in the second edition of 'road' to      
  'lane' (also 'path', 'way') at almost all the many subsequent occur-      
  rences in FR pp. 86-90: it was the 'lane' to Woodhall they were on,      
  not the 'road' to Stock.      
                                                                            
                                                                           

   11.   The  entire  passage  from  'Close  to the  road they  came on  the huge
         hulk of  an aged  tree' is  an expansion  in the  replacement typescript
         (see note 8) of a few sentences in the earlier:                        
              Inside  the  huge  hollow  trunk  of  an  aged  tree,   broken  and
         stumpy  but  still  alive  and  in  leaf,  they rested  and had  a meal.
         Twilight  was  about  them  when  they  came  out  and  prepared  to  go
         on  again.  'I  am  going to  risk the  road now,'  said Bingo,  who had
         stubbed  his  toes  several  times  against hidden  roots and  stones in
         the grass. 'We are probably making a fuss about nothing.'              
         Though  the enlarged  description of  the hollow  tree was  preserved in
         FR (p. 86), the second passage of a Black  Rider was  not, and  the tree
         has  again  no  importance  beyond  being  the  scene  of  the  hobbits'
         meal.  In  the  third  chapter  Bingo,  talking  to  Marmaduke  in Buck-
         land, refers to this story of a Rider  heard while  they sat  inside the
         tree (p. 103); see also note 19 below.                                 
   12.   The version of  the song  in the  rejected typescript  (see note  8) had
         the second and third verses thus:                                      
                                                                               
                      Home is behind, the world ahead,                          
                     And there are many paths to tread;                         
                     And round the corner there may wait                      
                     A new road or a secret gate,                               
                     And hidden pathways there may run                          
                     Towards the Moon or to the Sun.                           
                        Apple, thorn, @c.                                       
                                                                               
                      Down hill, up hill walks  the way                        
                      From sunrise to the falling day,                          
                      Through shadow to the edge of night,                       
                      Until the stars are all alight; @c.                       
                                                                               
   13.   In the initial drafting for this passage Bingo  proposed that  they stow
         their burdens in the  hollow of  an old  broken oak  and then  climb it,
         but  this  was  rejected as  soon as  written. This  was no  doubt where
         the 'hollow tree' motive first appeared.                               
   14.   In the original draft my father  first wrote  here: 'Suddenly  there was
         a  sound  of laughter  and a  creak of  wheels on  the road.  The shadow
         straightened  up  and retreated.'  This was  soon replaced,  without the
         creak  of  wheels  being  explained; but  it suggests  that he  had some
         intervention other than Elves in mind.                                 
   15.   This  was  another  portion  that  was  re-typed.  The  passage  immedi-
         ately  preceding  the  Elves' song  was different  in the  earlier form:
         It  seemed  to  be singing  in the  secret elf-tongue,  and yet  as they
         listened  the  sounds,  or  the  sounds  and  the tune  together, seemed
         to  turn  into  strange  words  in  their own  thought, which  they only
         partly   understood.   Frodo   afterwards  said   that  he   thought  he
         heard words like these:                                                

                                                
                                                                            
      The song also had certain differences, including a second verse that
      was rejected.                                                          
                                                                            
                 O Elbereth! O Elbereth!                                     
                   O Queen beyond the Western Seas!                     
                 O Light to him that wandereth                                 
                   Amid the world of woven trees!                        
                                                                            
                 O Stars that in the Sunless Year                        
                   Were kindled by her silver hand,                       
                 That under Night the shade of Fear                      
                   Should fly like shadow from the land!                
                                                                            
                 O Elbereth! Gilthonieth!                                     
                   Clear are thy eyes, and cold thy breath! @c.        
                                                                            
      In the last verse the form is Gilthoniel.  Extensive rough  workings are
      also  found,  in which  the first  line of  the song  appears also  as O
      Elberil! O Elberil!  (and the  third O Light to  us that  wander still);
      from  these  is  also seen  the meaning  of the  Sunless Year,  since my
      father  first  wrote  the  Flowering  Years (with  reference to  the Two
      Trees;  see  the Quenta  Silmarillion $19,  V.212). -  It seems  to have
      been here  that the  name Elbereth  was first  applied to  Varda, having
      been previously that  of one  of the  sons of  Dior Thingol's  Heir: see
      V.351.                                                                 
16. In the original draft it  was added  here that  the Elves  'were crowned
  with  red  and  yellow  leaves';  rejected,  no doubt,  because it  was dark
  and they bore no lights.                                                   
17. At an earlier point in the  chapter (p.  52) the  typescript read  'a day
  even  finer  and  hotter  than  the  day  before  (Bingo's   birthday,  that
  already  seemed  quite  a  long  while  past).'  It  was  of  course  on the
  evening  of  the  day  following  the  birthday  party  that  Bingo  and his
  companions  set   out,  and   my  father   realising  this   simply  changed
  'before'  to  'of'  and  removed  the  brackets,  as  in  the  text printed.
  Here,  however,  he  neglected   to  change   'yesterday'  (see   also  note
  24).  These  slips  are  odd,  but  do  not  seem  to  have  any  particular
  significance.                                                              
        It  is  seen  subsequently  how  these  Elves  could  have  'heard all
  about  that  from  the  Rivendell people',  for Bingo  tells Gildor  (p. 63)
  that  Gandalf  'went  off  with  the  dwarves  and  the Rivendell  elves as
  soon  as  the  fireworks  were  over.'  The  meeting  between  them   is  in
  fact   mentioned later   (p. 101).
18. The typescript  runs straight  on from  me have  heard all  about that,
  of  course, from  the  Rivendell  people to 'O Wise  People, '  said Frodo,
  and  the  passage  beginning  'Then  who  are  you, and  who is  your lord?'
  said Bingo is an  addition. In  the typescript  as typed  the leader  of the
  Elves  is  not  named  until  towards the  end, where  after they  had eaten

                         
                                                                             
      'Bingo  remained  talking  with   Gildor,  the   leader  of   the  Elves'
      (p. 62);  all references  to Gildor  before that  are corrections  in ink
  19. As  the  text  was typed,  Bingo said:  'Because we  have seen  two Black
      Riders,  or  one  twice over,  today.' The  changed text  accompanies the
      story  of  the  Rider  who  paused  momentarily  beside  the  hollow tree
      (see note r r ).                                                        
  20. For the 'elf-latin' (Qenya) see the Lhammas $4, V. 172.                
  21. This  passage  is  an  alteration  of  the  text  as  typed,  which read:
      ... we  are very  easy to  please (for  hobbits). For  myself I  can only
      say  that  the delight  of meeting  you has  already made  this a  day of
      bright Adventure.'                                                      
        'Bilbo  was  a  good  master,' said  the  Elf  bowing. 'Come  now, join
      our  company,  and  we  will  go.  You  had best  walk in  the middle...'
  22. This sentence replaced the following:                                   
        'Be  careful,  friends,'  said  one laughing.  'Speak no  secrets! Here
      is a scholar in the elf-latin and all  the dialects.  Bilbo was  indeed a
      good master.'                                                           
      See note 21 and the altered passage referred to there.                  
  23. This is the first occurrence of  the name  Gildor in  the text  as typed;
      see note r 8.                                                           
  24. For  my  birthday  the  day  before  yesterday  the  text  as  typed  had
      yesterday; see note 17.                                                
  25. The  conversation  between  Bingo  and  Gildor  to  this   point,  begin-
      ning  at  You  can  fence  yourselves  in,  but  you  have  no  means  of
      fencing it out (p. 63), is the last of the replacement  typescript pages.
      The differences from the  earlier form  are in  fact very  slight, except
      in these  points. Bingo  did not  say that  Gandalf had  told him  not to
      put off his  journey later  than the  autumn, but  simply 'He  helped me,
      and  seemed  to  think  it  a  good idea';  and Gildor's  reply therefore
      begins  differently:  'I  wonder.  He  may  not have  known they  were in
      the  Shire;  yet  he  knows  more  about  them  than  we  do.'  And Bingo
      said  that  Odo  and  Frodo 'only  know that  I am  on a  Journey -  on a
      sort   of   prolonged   (and  possibly   permanent)  holiday   from  Hob-
      biton; and making for Rivendell to begin with.'                         
  26. Struck  from  the  typescript  here:  'and  it  might  prevent  you  from
      taking it.'                                                             
  27. Struck  from  the  typescript  here:  '(for  the  matter  is  outside the
      concern of such Elves as we are).'                                      
                                                                             
                                        *                                     
                                                                             
  It is characteristic that while the dramatis personae are  not the  same, and
  the  story  possesses  as yet  none of  the dimension,  the gravity,  and the
  sense of vast danger, imparted  by the  second chapter  of The  Fellowship of
  the  Ring,  a  good  part of  'Three is  Company' was  already in  being; for

  once the journey has started not only the structure  of the  final narrative
  but  much  of  the  detail  is  present,  though countless  modifications in
  expression were to  come, and  in several  substantial passages  the chapter
  was scarcely changed afterwards.                                            
    While  'Bingo' is  directly equatable  with the  later 'Frodo',  the other
  relations are more complex. It is true that,  comparing the  text as  it was
  at  this  stage  with  the  final form  in FR,  it may  be said  simply that
  'Odo'  became  'Pippin'  while  Frodo  Took  disappeared: of  the individual
  speeches  in  this  chapter  which  remained  into  FR  almost  every remark
  made  by  Odo was  afterwards given  to Pippin.  But the  way in  which this
  came about was in  fact strangely  tortuous, and  was by  no means  a simple
  substitution  of  one  name for  another (see  further pp.  323 -  4). Frodo
  Took  is  seen  as  a  less  limited  and  more aware  being than  Odo, more
  susceptible to the beauty and otherness of the  Elves; it  is he  who speaks
  The Road goes ever on and on, and it is to him that the recollection  of the
  words of the song to Elbereth is  first attributed  (note 15).  Some element
  of  him  might  be  said  to  be  preserved  in  Sam  Gamgee (who  of course
  imparts a new  and entirely  distinctive air  to the  developed form  of the
  chapter);  it  was  Frodo  Took  who  with  bated  breath  whispered  Elves!
  when their voices were first heard coming down the road.                    
    Most remarkable is the fact that when the  story of  the beginning  of the
  Journey,  the  coming  of  the  Black  Riders, and  the meeting  with Gildor
  and his company,  was written,  and written  so that  its content  would not
  in essentials be changed afterwards, Bingo has no  faintest inkling  of what
  the  Riders  want  with  him.  Gandalf  has  told  him  nothing.  He  has no
  reason to associate the Riders with his ring, and no reason to regard  it as
  more than a highly convenient magical device - he  slips it  on each  time a
  Rider passes, naturally.                                                    
    Of course, the fact that Bingo  is wholly  ignorant of  the nature  of the
  pursuing  menace,  utterly  baffled by  the black  horsemen, does  not imply
  that my father was also. There are  several suggestions  that new  ideas had
  arisen  in the  background, not  explicitly conveyed  in the  narrative, but
  deliberately reduced to dark hints of danger  in the  words of  Gildor (that
  this was so will be seen more clearly at the beginning of the next chapter).
  It may be that it  was the  'unpremeditated' conversion  of the  cloaked and
  muffled  horseman  who  overtook  them  on  the  road  from  Gandalf   to  a
  'black rider' (p. 48), combining with the idea already present  that Bilbo's
  ring was of dark origin and strange  properties (pp.  42 -  3) that  was the
  impulse of the new conceptions.                                             
    From  the  early  rewriting  of  the   conversation  between   Gildor  and
  Bingo  (see  p.  63  and  note  25)  it  emerges  that  Gandalf  had  warned
  Bingo  not  to  delay  his  departure  beyond  the  autumn  (though without,
  apparently, giving him any reason  for the  warning), and  in both  forms of
  the  text  Gildor  evidently  knows  something about  the Riders,  says that
  'by what seems  strange good  luck you  went just  in time',  and associates
  them with the Ring: warning  Bingo against  using it  again to  escape them,

  and suggesting  that the  use of  it 'helps  them more  than you.'  (The Ring
  had  not  been  mentioned  in  their  conversation, but  we can  suppose that
  Bingo  had  previously  told  Gildor  that  he  had used  it when  the Riders
  came by).                                                                    
    The  idea  of  the  Riders  and  the  Ring  was  no  doubt  evolving  as my
  father wrote. I think it very possible that when he first described the halts
  of  the  black  horsemen  beside  the  hiding  hobbits  he  imagined  them as
  drawn by scent alone (see p. 75); and it  is not  clear in  any case  in what
  way the use of the Ring  would 'help  them more  than you.'  As I  have said,
  it is deeply characteristic that these scenes  emerged at  once in  the clear
  and  memorable  form  that  was  never  changed, but  that their  bearing and
  significance  would  afterwards  be  enormously  enlarged.  The  'event' (one
  might say) was fixed, but its  meaning capable  of indefinite  extension; and
  this is seen, over and over again, as a  prime mark  of my  father's writing.
  In  FR,  from  the  intervening  chapter  The  Shadow of  the Past,  we have
  some  notion  of what  that other  feeling was  which struggled  with Frodo's
  desire to  hide, of  why Gandalf  had so  urgently forbidden  him to  use the
  Ring,  and  of  why he  was driven  irresistibly to  put it  on; and  when we
  have  read  further  we  know  what  would  have  happened  if  he  had.  The
  scenes  here are  empty by  comparison, yet  they are  the same  scenes. Even
  such slight remarks as  Bingo's 'I  don't know,  and I  don't want  to guess'
  (p. 55)  - in  the context,  a mere  expression of  doubt and  discomfort, if
  with a  suggestion that  Gandalf must  have said  something, or  rather, that
  my  father  was  beginning  to think  that Gandalf  must have  said something
  -  survived  to take  on a  much more  menacing significance  in FR  (p. 85),
  where  we have  a very  good idea  of what  Frodo chose  not to  guess about.
                                                                              
    Frodo  Took's  story  of  his  meeting  with a  Rider on  the moors  in the
  North  of  the  Shire  in  the  previous  spring is  the forerunner  of Sam's
  sudden  remembering  that   a  Rider   had  come   to  Hobbiton   and  spoken
  with  Gaffer  Gamgee  on  the  evening  of  their  departure;  but  it  seems
  strange that the beginning of the hunt for  'Baggins' should  be set  so long
  before (see p. 74 and note 4).                                               
                                                                              
    The  striking  out  of  Gildor's  words  'for  the  matter  is  outside the
  concern of such Elves as we are' (note 27) is interesting. At first, I think,
  my father thought of these  Elves as  'Dark-elves'; but  he now  decided that
  they  (and  also  the  Elves  of Rivendell)  were indeed  'High Elves  of the
  West',  and he  added in  Gildor's words  to Bingo  on p.  60 (see  note 18):
  they  were  'Wise-elves'  (Noldor  or  Gnomes),  'one  of  the  few companies
  that still remain east of the Sea', and he himself is Gildor Inglorion of the
  house of Finrod. With  these words  of Gildor's  cf. the  Quenta Silmarillion
  $28, in V.332:                                                               
                                                                              
    Yet  not  all  the Eldalie  were willing  to forsake  the Hither  Lands where
    they  had  long  suffered  and  long  dwelt;  and some  lingered many  an age
    in  the West  and North...  But ever  as the  ages drew  on and  the Elf-folk

  faded upon earth, they would set  sail at  eve from  the western  shores of
  this world, as still they do, until now there linger few anywhere  of their
  lonely companies.                                                         
                                                                           
 At this time Finrod was the name of the third son of  Finwe (first  Lord of
 the  Noldor).  This  was later  changed to  Finarfin, when  Inglor Felagund
 his  son  took  over  the  name  Finrod (see I.44), but  my father  did not
 change  'of  the  house of  Finrod' here  (FR p. 89) to  'of the  house of
 Finarfin'  in the  second edition  of The  Lord of  the Rings.  See further
 p. 188 (end of note g).                                                    
                                                                           
  The  geography  of the  Shire was  now taking  more substantial  shape. In
 this  chapter  there  emerge  the  North  Moor(s);  the Green  Hill Country
 lying to the south of  Hobbiton; the  Pool of  Bywater (described  in rough
 drafting for the passage as a 'little lake'); the East Road to  the Brandy-
 wine  Bridge,  where  the  Water  joined the  Brandywine; the  road branch-
 ing off from it southward and leading in a direct line to Buckland; and the
 hamlet of Woodhall in the Woody End.                                       

                                      III.                                   
                            OF GOLLUM AND THE RING.                          
                                                                            
 I  have  suggested  that  by  this  stage  my  father knew  a good  deal more
 about  the  Riders  and  the  Ring  than  Bingo  did,  or  than  he permitted
 Gildor  to  tell;  and evidence  for this  is found  in the  manuscript draft
 referred to on p. 48. This begins, at any rate, as a draft for a part  of the
 conversation  between  Bingo  and  Gildor,  but  the  talk  here  moves  into
 topics  which   my  father   excluded  from   the  typescript   version  (pp.
 62-5). Gildor is not  yet named,  in fact,  and indeed  it was  apparently in
 this text that  he emerged  as an  individual: at  first the  conversation is
 between Bingo and an undifferentiated plural 'they'.                        
  The  passage  begins  with  an  apparently  disconnected   sentence:  'Since
 he did not tell his companions what he discovered  I think  I shall  not tell
 you.'  (Does  this  refer  to  what  Bingo discovered  from the  Elves?) Then
 follows:                                                                    
                                                                            
  'Of  course,'  they  said,  'we  know  that you  are in  search of         
 Adventure; but it often happens that when you think it is ahead, it         
 comes  up  unexpectedly  from  behind.  Why  did  you  choose  this         
 moment to set out?'                                                         
  'Well, the moment was  really inevitable,  you know,'  said Bingo.         
 'I  had  come  to  the  end  of  my  treasure.  And by  wandering I         
 thought I might find some more, like old Bilbo, and at least should         
 be able more easily to live without any. I thought too it  might be         
 good for me. I was getting rather soft and fat.'                            
  'Yes,' they laughed, 'you look just like an ordinary hobbit.'              
  'But though I can do a few things - like carpentry  and garden-         
 ing: I did not feel inclined somehow to make other people's chairs,         
 or grow other people's vegetables for a living. I suppose some tiny         
 touch of dragon-curse came to me. I am gold-lazy.'                           
  'Then Gandalf did  not tell  you anything?  You were  not actually         
 escaping.'                                                                  
  'What do you mean? What from?'                                             
  'Well, this black rider,' they said.                                       
  'I don't understand them at all.'                                          
  'Then Gandalf told you nothing? '                                          
  'Not  about  them.  He  warned  Bilbo  a long  time ago  about the         
 Ring, of  course. Don  t use  it too  much!> he  used to  say. <And         

 only  use  it  for  proper  purposes.  I  mean,  do  not  use it  except for
 jest,  or  for  escaping  from  danger  and  annoyance  -  don't use  it for
 harm,  or  for  finding  out  other  people's  secrets,  and  of  course not
 for  theft  or  worse  things.  Because  it may  get the  better of  you." I
 did not understand.                                                         
   'I  seldom  saw  Gandalf  after  Bilbo  went  away.   But  about   a  year
 ago  he  came  one  night,  and  I  told  him  of the  plan I  was beginning
 to   make  for   leaving  Bag-end.   "What  about   the  Ring?"   he  asked.
 "Are   you   being   careful?  Do   be  careful:   otherwise  you   will  be
 overcome by it." I had  as a  matter of  fact hardly  ever used  it -  and I
 did not use it again after that talk until my birthday party.'              
   'Does anyone else know about it?'                                         
   'I  cannot  say;  but  I don't  think so.  Bilbo kept  it very  secret. He
 always  told  me  that  I  was  the  only  one  who  knew  about it  (in the
 Shire).(2) I  never  told  anyone  else   except  Odo   and  Frodo   who  are
 my  best  friends.  I  have  tried  to  be  to  them what  Bilbo was  to me.
 But  even  to  them  I  never  spoke  of  the  Ring  until  they  agreed  to
 come  with  me  on  this  Journey  a   few  months   ago.  They   would  not
 tell  anyone  -  though  we  often  speak  of  it  among ourselves.  - Well,
 what  do  you  make of  it all?  I can  see you  are bursting  with secrets,
 but I cannot guess any of them.'                                            
   'Well,'  said  the  Elf.  'I  don't  know  much   about  this.   You  must
 find Gandalf as quick as you  can -  Rivendell I  think is  the place  to go
 to. But it is my belief that the Lord of the Ring' is looking for you.'     
   'Is that bad or good?'                                                    
   'Bad;  but  how  bad  I  cannot  say.  Bad  enough  if  he only  wants the
 ring  back  (which  is  unlikely);   worse,  if   he  wants   payment;  very
 bad  indeed  if  he  wants you  as well  (which is  quite likely).  We fancy
 that  he  must  at  last  after  many years  have found  out that  Bilbo had
 it.   Hence  the   asking  for   Baggins.'  But   somehow  the   search  for
 Baggins   failed,   and   then   something   must   have   been   discovered
 about  you.  But  by  strange  luck  you  must  have  held  your  party  and
 vanished  just  as  they  found  out  where  you  lived.  You  put  off  the
 scent; but they are hot on it now.'                                         
   'Who are they?'                                                           
   'Servants  of  the  Lord  of  the  Ring  -  [? people]  who  have  passed
 through the Ring.'                                                          
                                                                            
   This ends a sheet, and  the following  sheet is  not continuous  with what
 precedes;  but  as  found  among  my  father's   papers  they   were  placed
 together, and on both  of them  he wrote  (later) 'About  Ring-wraiths'. The
 second passage is also part of a conversation, but there is no indication of

  who the speaker is (whoever it  is, he  is obviously  speaking to  Bingo). It
  was written at great speed and is extremely difficult to make out.           
                                                                              
    Yes,   if   the   Ring   overcomes   you,   you  yourself   become  perman-
  ently  invisible  -   and  it   is  a   horrible  cold   feeling.  Everything
  becomes   very   faint   like   grey   ghost   pictures  against   the  black
  background  in  which  you  live;  but  you  can  smell  more   clearly  than
  you  can  hear  or  see.(5) You  have  no  power  however   like  a   Ring  of
  making  other  things  invisible:  you  are  a   ringwraith.  You   can  wear
  clothes.  [>  you  are  just  a  ringwraith;  and  your clothes  are visible,
  unless  the  Lord  lends  you  a  ring.]  But  you  are  under   the  command
  of the Lord of the Rings.(6)                                                 
    I  expect  that  one  (or  more)  of  these  Ringwraiths  have   been  sent
  to get the ring away from hobbits.                                           
                                                                              
    In   the   very   ancient   days   the   Ring-lord   made  many   of  these
  Rings:  and  sent  them   out  through   the  world   to  snare   people.  He
  sent  them  to  all  sorts  of  folk  -  the  Elves had  many, and  there are
  now  many  elfwraiths   in  the   world,  but   the  Ring-lord   cannot  rule
  them;  the  goblins  got  many,  and  the  invisible  goblins  are  very evil
  and  wholly  under  the  Lord;  dwarves  I  don't   believe  had   any;  some
  say  the  rings  don't  work  on  them:  they  are  too  solid. Men  had few,
  but   they   were   most   quickly   overcome   and.....    The   men-wraiths
  are   also   servants   of   the   Lord.   Other   creatures  got   them.  Do
  you   remember   Bilbo's   story   of   Gollum? (7) We   don't   know   where
  Gollum  comes  in  -  certainly  not  elf,  nor  goblin;  he is  probably not
  dwarf;  we  rather  believe  he  really  belongs  to   an  ancient   sort  of
  hobbit.  Because  the  ring  seems  to  act  just  the   same  for   him  and
  you.   Long   ago   [? he   belonged]....   to   a  wise,   cleverhanded  and
  quietfooted   little   family.   But   he   disappeared    underground,   and
  though  he  used  the  ring  often  the  Lord  evidently  lost  track  of it.
  Until Bilbo brought it out to light again.                                   
    Of   course   Gollum   himself   may   have   heard   news   -    all   the
  mountains  were full  of it  after the  battle -  and tried  to get  back the
  ring, or told the Lord.                                                      
                                                                              
    At this point the manuscript stops. Here is a first  glimpse of  an earlier
  history of Gollum;  a suggestion  of how  the hunt  for the  Ring originated;
  and a first sketching of the idea  that the  Dark Lord  gave out  Rings among
  the peoples of  Middle-earth. The  Rings conferred  invisibility, and  (it is
  at least implied) this invisibility was associated with the fate (or at least
  the peril) of the bearers of the Rings: that they become  'wraiths' and  - in
  the case of goblins and men - servants of the Dark Lord.                     

    Now  at  some  very  early  stage  my  father  wrote  a  chapter,  without
  number or title, in which he made use of  the passage  just given;  and this
  is the first drafting of (a part of) what ultimately became Chapter  z, 'The
  Shadow  of  the  Past'.  As  I  have  noticed,  in the  second of  these two
  passages marked 'About Ring-wraiths'  it is  not clear  who is  speaking. It
  may be Gildor, or it may be Gandalf,  or (perhaps  most likely)  neither the
  one  nor  the other,  but indeterminate;  but in  any case  I think  that my
  father decided when writing the  draft text  of the  second chapter  that he
  would  not  have  Gildor  discussing  these  matters   with  Bingo   (as  he
  certainly does in the  first of  these 'Ring-wraith'  passages, p.  74), but
  would  reserve  them  for  Gandalf's  instruction,  and  that  this  was the
  starting-point of the chapter which I now give, in which as  I have  said he
  made use of the  second 'Ring-wraith'  passage. Whether  he wrote  this text
  at once,  before going  on to  the third  chapter (IV  in this  book), seems
  impossible  to  say; but  the fact  that Marmaduke  is mentioned  shows that
  it  preceded  'In  the  House  of  Tom   Bombadil',  where   'Meriadoc'  and
  'Merry' first appear. This, at any rate, is a convenient place to put it.
    Subsequently my father referred to it as  a 'foreword'  (see p.  224), and
  it is clear that it was written as a possible new beginning for the book, in
  which  Gandalf  tells  Bingo  at  Bag  End,  not  long  before   the  Party,
  something of the history and nature of his Ring, of his  danger, and  of the
  need for him to leave his home.  It was  composed very  rapidly and  is hard
  to  read.  I  have  introduced  punctuation  where needed,  and occasionally
  put  in  silently  necessary  connective  words.  There  are  many pencilled
  alterations and additions  which are  here ignored,  for they  are anticipa-
  tions of a later version of the chapter; but changes  belonging to  the time
  of composition are adopted into the text. There is no title.                
                                                                             
    One day  long ago  two people  were sitting  talking in  a small          
  room.  One  was  a  wizard  and the  other was  a hobbit,  and the          
  room was the  sitting-room of  the comfortable  and well-furnished          
  hobbit-hole  known  as  Bag-end,  Underhill,  on the  outskirts of          
  Hobbiton in  the middle  of the  Shire. The  wizard was  of course          
  Gandalf  and  he  looked  much  the  same as  he had  always done,          
  though ninety years and more (8) had gone by since he last came into          
  any story that  is now  remembered. The  hobbit was  Bingo Bolger-          
  Baggins, the nephew (or really first cousin  once removed)  of old          
  Bilbo  Baggins,  and his  adopted heir.  Bilbo had  quietly disap-          
  peared many years before, but he was not forgotten in Hobbiton.             
    Bingo  of  course  was  always  thinking  about  him;  and  when          
  Gandalf paid him a visit their  talk usually  came back  to Bilbo.          
  Gandalf  had  not  been  to  Hobbiton for  some time:  since Bilbo          
  disappeared  his  visits  had  become fewer  and more  secret. The          
  people of Hobbiton had not in fact seen or at any rate noticed him          

 
                                                                        
 for  many  years: he  used to  come quietly  up to  the door  of Bag-end
 in  the  twilight  and  step in  without knocking,  and only  Bingo (and
 one  or  two of  his closest  friends) knew  he had  been in  the Shire.
 This  evening  he  had  slipped  in  in  his  usual  way, and  Bingo was
 more  than  usually  glad  to  see   him.  For   he  was   worried,  and
 wanted  explanations  and  advice.'  They  were  now  talking  of Bilbo,
 and  his  disappearance,  and  particularly  about  the  Ring  (which he
 had  left  behind  with  Bingo) -  and about  certain strange  signs and
 portents  of  trouble brewing  after a  long time  of peace  and quiet.'
                                                                        
   'It  is  all  very  peculiar  -  and  most  disturbing  and   in  fact
 terrifying,'  said  Bingo.  Gandalf  was  sitting  smoking  in   a  high
 chair,  and  Bingo  near his  feet was  huddled on  a stool  warming his
 hands by a  small wood-fire  as if  he felt  chilly, though  actually it
 was  rather a  warm evening  for the  time of  the year  [written above:
 at  the  end  of  August].(11) Gandalf  grunted  -  the  sound  might have
 meant 'I quite agree, but it can't  be helped,'  or else  possibly 'What
 a silly thing to  say.' There  was a  long silence.  'How long  have you
 known all this?' asked Bingo  at length;  'and did  you ever  talk about
 it to Bilbo?'                                                           
   'I  guessed  a  good  deal  immediately,'  answered   Gandalf  slowly,
 as  if  searching  back  in  memory.  Already  to  him  the days  of the
 journey  and  the  Dragon  and  the  Battle  of  Five  Armies  began  to
 seem far  off -  in an  almost legendary  past. Perhaps  even he  was at
 last getting to feel his age a  little; and  in any  case many  dark and
 curious  adventures  had  befallen  him  since  then. 'I  guessed much,'
 he said, 'but soon I learnt more,  for I  went, as  Bilbo may  have told
 you,  to  the  land  of  the  Necromancer."  For  a  moment   his  voice
 faded  to  a whisper.  'But I  knew that  all was  well with  Bilbo,' he
 went on. 'Bilbo  was safe,  for that  kind of  power was  powerless over
 him - or so I thought, and I was right in a way (if not quite  right). I
 kept an eye on him  and it,  of course,  but perhaps  I was  not careful
 enough.'                                                                
   'I  am  sure  you  did  your  best,'  said  Bingo, meaning  to console
 him.  'O dearest  and  best  friend  of  our  house,  may   your  beard
 never  grow  less!  But  it  must  have  been rather  a blow  when Bilbo
 disappeared.'                                                           
   'Not  at  all,' said  Gandalf, with  a sudden  return to  his ordinary
 tones. He sent out a great jet of smoke  with an  indignant poof  and it
 coiled  round  his  head  like  a  cloud  on a  mountain. 'That  did not
 worry me. Bilbo is all right. It is you and all these other dear, silly,
 charming,  idiotic,  helpless  hobbits that  trouble me!  It would  be a

 mortal blow  if the  dark power  should overcome  the Shire,  and all
 these   jolly,  greedy,   stupid  Bolgers,   Bagginses,  Brandybucks,
 Hornblowers, Proudfoots and whatnot became Wraiths.'                 
   Bingo  shuddered.  'But  why  should  we?'   he  asked;   'and  why
 should  the Lord  want such  servants, and  what has  all this  to do
 with me and the Ring?'                                               
   'It is the only Ring left,' said Gandalf. 'And hobbits are the only
 people of whom the Lord has not yet mastered any one.                
   'In (13) the  ancient days  the dark  master made  many Rings,  and he
 dealt  them  out lavishly,  so that  they might  be spread  abroad to
 ensnare  folk.  The  elves  had  many,  and there  are now  many elf-
 wraiths in  the world;  the goblins  had some  and their  wraiths are
 very  evil  and   wholly  under   the  command   of  the   Lord.  The
 dwarves  it  is  said  had  seven,  but   nothing  could   make  them
 invisible. In them it only kindled to flames the  fire of  greed, and
 the foundation of  each of  the seven  hoards of  the Dwarves  of old
 was  a  golden  ring.  In this  way the  master controlled  them. But
 these  hoards  are  destroyed,  and the  dragons have  devoured them,
 and the rings  are melted,  or so  some say.(14) Men had  three rings,
 and others they found in secret places cast away by  the elf-wraiths:
 the  men-wraiths  are  servants  of  the Lord,  and they  brought all
 their rings back to him; till at last  he had  gathered all  into his
 hands again that had not been destroyed by fire - all save one.      
   'It fell from the hand of an elf as he swam across a river;  and it
 betrayed him, for he was  flying from  pursuit in  the old  wars, and
 he became  visible to  his enemies,  and the  goblins slew  him.' But
 a  fish  took  the  ring  and  was  filled  with  madness,  and  swam
 upstream, leaping over rocks and up waterfalls  until it  cast itself
 on a bank and spat out the ring and died.                            
   'There  was  long  ago living  by the  bank of  the stream  a wise,
 cleverhanded and  quietfooted little  family." I  guess they  were of
 hobbit-kind, or akin to the fathers  of the  fathers of  the hobbits.
 The most  inquisitive and  curious-minded of  that family  was called
 Digol. He was interested in roots  and beginnings;  he dived  in deep
 pools,  he  burrowed  under  trees and  growing plants,  he tunnelled
 into green mounds, and he  ceased to  look up  at flowers,  and hill-
 tops, or the birds that are in the upper air: his head and  eyes were
 downward.  He  found  the  ring in  the mud  of the  river-bank under
 the roots of a thorn tree; and  he put  it on;  and when  he returned
 home none of his  family saw  him while  he wore  it. He  was pleased
 with  his  discovery and  concealed it,  and he  used it  to discover
 secrets, and put his   knowledge  to   malicious  use,   and  became

 sharp-eyed and keen-eared for all that  was unpleasant.  It is  not to
 be  wondered  at  that  he  became  very  unpopular,  and  was shunned
 (when  visible)  by all  his relatives.  They kicked  him, and  he bit
 their  feet.  He  took  to muttering  to himself  and gurgling  in his
 throat.  So  they  called  him Gollum,  and cursed  him, and  told him
 to  go  far  away.  He  wandered  in  loneliness  up  the  stream  and
 caught  fish with  his fingers  in deep  pools and  ate them  raw. One
 day it was very  hot, and  as he  was bending  over a  pool he  felt a
 burning  on  the  back  of  his head,  and a  dazzling light  from the
 water  pained  his  eyes.  He  wondered, for  he had  almost forgotten
 about the sun; and for the last time he looked up  and shook  his fist
 at it; but as he lowered his eyes again he saw far  ahead the  tops of
 the  Misty  Mountains.  And   he  thought   suddenly:  "It   would  be
 cool  and  shady  under  those  mountains.  The  sun could  never find
 me there. And the roots  of those  peaks must  be roots  indeed; there
 must  be great  secrets buried  there which  have not  been discovered
 since  the  beginning."  So   he  journeyed   by  night   towards  the
 mountains,  and found  a hole  out of  which a  stream issued;  and he
 wormed  his  way  in  like a  maggot in  the heart  of the  hills, and
 disappeared  from  all  knowledge.   And  the   ring  went   into  the
 shadows  with  him,  and  even  the  Master lost  it. But  whenever he
 counted  his  rings,  besides  the  seven rings  that the  Dwarves had
 held and lost, there was also one missing.'                          
   'Gollum!'  said  Bingo.  'Do  you  mean   that  Gollum   that  Bilbo
 met? Is that his history? How very horrible and sad.  I hate  to think
 that he was connected with hobbits, however distantly.'              
   'But  that  surely  was  plain  from  Bilbo's  own   account,'  said
 Gandalf. 'It is the only thing that  explains the  events -  or partly
 explains  them.  There  was  a  lot  in the  background of  both their
 minds  and  memories  that  was  very  similar  - they  understood one
 another really (if you think of  it) better  than hobbits  ever under-
 stood dwarves, elves, or goblins.'                                   
   'Still,  Gollum  must have  been, or  be, very  much older  than the
 oldest hobbit that ever lived in field or burrow,' said Bingo.       
   'That was the Ring,' said Gandalf. 'Of course it is  a poor  sort of
 long life that the Ring gives, a kind of stretched life rather  than a
 continued  growing  -  a  sort of  thinning and  thinning. Frightfully
 wearisome,  Bingo,  in  fact  finally  tormenting.  Even  Gollum  came
 at last to feel it, to feel he could  not bear  it, and  to understand
 dimly  the  cause of  the torment.  He had  even made  up his  mind to
 get rid of it. But he was too full of malice. If you  want to  know, I
 believe  he  had begun  to make  a plan  that he  had not  the courage

 left to carry  out. There  was nothing  new to  find out;  nothing left
 but  darkness,  nothing  to do  but cold  eating, and  regretful remem-
 bering.  He  wanted  to  slip out  and leave  the mountains,  and smell
 the open air even if it killed him - as he  thought it  probably would.
 But  that  would  have meant  leaving the  Ring. And  that is  not easy
 to  do.  The  longer  you  have  had  one  the  harder  it  is.  It was
 especially hard  for Gollum,  as he  had had  a Ring  for ages,  and it
 hurt  him  and he  hated it,  and he  wanted, when  he could  no longer
 bear  to  keep  it, to  hand it  on to  someone else  to whom  it would
 become a burden - [? bind] itself as a blessing and turn to  a curse.(17)
 That is in fact the best way of getting rid of its power.'            
   'Why not give it to the goblins, then?' asked Bingo.                
   'I  don't  think  Gollum  would  have  found  that  amusing  enough,'
 said  Gandalf.  'The  goblins  are  already  so  beastly  and miserable
 that  it  was  wasting  malice  on  them.  Also  it  would   have  been
 difficult to escape from the hunters if there  was an  invisible goblin
 to reckon with. But I suppose he  might have  put it  in their  path in
 the  end (if  he had  plucked up  enough courage  to do  anything); but
 for  the  unexpected  arrival  of  Bilbo.  You  remember  how surprised
 he was. But as soon as the riddles started  a plan  formed in  his mind
 -  or half-formed.  I dare  say his  old bad  habits would  have beaten
 his  resolves and  he would  have eaten  Bilbo if  it had  proved easy.
 But  there  was  the sword,  you remember.  In his  heart, I  fancy, he
 never seriously expected to get a chance of eating Bilbo.'            
   'But he never gave Bilbo  the ring,'  said Bingo.  'Bilbo had  got it
 already! '                                                            
   'I  know,'  said  Gandalf.  'And  that  is why  I said  that Gollum's
 ancestry  only  partly   explained  events.   There  was,   of  course,
 something   much   more   mysterious   behind   the   whole   thing   -
 something  quite  beyond  the Lord  of the  Rings himself,  peculiar to
 Bilbo  and  his  great  Adventure. There  was a  queer fate  over these
 rings, and especially over [?  this] one.  They got  lost occasionally,
 and  turned  up  in  strange  places.  This  one  had  already  slipped
 away  from  its  owner  treacherously  once  before.  It   had  slipped
 away  from  Gollum  too.  That  is  why I  let Bilbo  keep the  ring so
 long.' But for the moment I am trying to explain Gollum.'             
   'I  see,'  said  Bingo  doubtfully.  'But do  you know  what happened
 afterwards? '                                                         
   'Not very clearly,' said  Gandalf. 'I  have heard  a little,  and can
 guess  more.  I  think  it  certain that  Gollum knew  in the  end that
 Bilbo  had  somehow  got  the  Ring.  He  may  well  have   guessed  it
 soon.  But  in any  case the  news of  the later  events went  all over

 Wilderland  and  far  beyond,  East,  West,  and  South   and  North.
 The  mountains  were  full of  whispers and  reports; and  that would
 give  Gollum  enough  to  think  about.(19) Anyway,  it  is  said that
 Gollum  left  the mountains  - for  the goblins  had become  very few
 there, and the deep places more than  ever dark  and lonely,  and the
 power of the ring had  left him.  He was  probably feeling  old, very
 old,  but  less  timid. But  I do  not think  he became  less wicked.
 There  is  no news  of what  happened to  him afterwards.  Of course,
 it is quite likely that wind and the mere  shadow of  sunlight killed
 him  pretty  quickly.  But it  is possible  that it  did not.  He was
 cunning.  He could  hide from  daylight or  moonlight till  he slowly
 grew more used to things. I  have in  fact a  horrible fancy  that he
 made his  slow sneaking  way bit  by bit  to the  dark tower,  to the
 Necromancer,  the  Lord of  the Rings.  I think  that Gollum  is very
 likely the beginning  of our  present trouble;  and that  through him
 the Lord found  out where  to look  for this  last and  most precious
 and potent of his Rings.'                                           
   'What a pity Bilbo did not stab the beastly  creature when  he said
 goodbye,' said Bingo....                                            
   'What  nonsense  you  do  talk  sometimes,  Bingo,'  said  Gandalf.
 'Pity!  It  was  pity that  prevented him.  And he  could not  do so,
 without doing wrong. It was against the rules. If he  had done  so he
 would not have had the ring,  the ring  would have  had him  at once.
 He might have been a wraith on the spot.'                           
   'Of course, of course,' said Bingo. 'What a thing to say  of Bilbo.
 Dear old Bilbo! But why did he  keep the  thing, or  why did  you let
 him? Didn't you warn him about it?'                                 
   'Yes,'  said  Gandalf.  'But  even  over Bilbo  it had  some power.
 Sentiment.......  He  liked  to  keep  it  as  a  memento. Let  us be
 frank  - he  continued to  be proud  of his  Great Adventure,  and to
 look  on  the  ring  now  and  again  warmed  his  memory,  and  made
 him  feel  just  a  trifle heroic.  But he  could hardly  have helped
 himself anyway: if  you think  for a  moment, it  is not  really very
 easy to get rid of a Ring once you have got it.'                    
   'Why  not?'  said  Bingo,  after  thinking for  a moment.  'You can
 give it away, throw it away, or destroy it.'                        
   'Yes,' said  Gandalf -  'or you  can surrender  it: to  the Master.
 That is if you wish to serve him, and to fall into his power,  and to
 greatly increase his power.'                                        
   'But no one would wish to do that,' said Bingo, horrified.        
   'Nobody  that   you  can   imagine,  perhaps,'   answered  Gandalf.
 'Certainly not  Bilbo. That  is what  made it  difficult for  him. He

 dared not throw it  away lest  it get  into evil  hands, and  be misused,
 and  find  its  way  back  to  the  Master  after  doing  much  evil.  He
 would  not  give  it  away  to  bad  folk  for  the  same reason;  and he
 would  not  give  it  away to  good folk  or people  he knew  and trusted
 because  he  did not  wish to  burden them  with it,  any sooner  than he
 was obliged. And he could not destroy it.'                              
   'Why not?'                                                            
   'Well, how would you destroy it? Have you ever tried?'                
   'No;  but  I  suppose  one  could  hammer  it,  or   melt  it,   or  do
 both.'                                                                  
   'Try  them,'  said  Gandalf,  'and  you  will   find  out   what  Bilbo
 found out long ago.'                                                    
   Bingo  drew  the Ring  out of  an inner  pocket, and  looked at  it. It
 was  plain  and  smooth  without  device,  emblem,  or  rune; but  it was
 of  gold, and  as he  looked at  it it  seemed to  Bingo that  its colour
 was  rich  and  beautiful,  and  its  roundness  perfect.  It   was  very
 admirable  and   wholly  precious.   He  had   thought  of   throwing  it
 into  the  hot  embers  of  the  fire.  He  found  he  could  not  do  so
 without  a  struggle.  He  weighed  the  Ring  in  his  hand,   and  then
 with an  effort of  will he  made a  movement as  if to  throw it  in the
 fire; but he found he had put it back in his pocket.                    
   Gandalf  laughed.  'You  see?  You  have  always   regarded  it   as  a
 great   treasure,   and   an   heirloom  from   Bilbo.  Now   you  cannot
 easily get rid of it. Though as a matter of fact, even if you took  it to
 an  anvil  and  summoned  enough  will   to  strike   it  with   a  heavy
 hammer,  you  would  make  no  dint  on  it.  Your  little  wood-fire, of
 course,  even if  you blew  all night  with a  bellows would  hardly melt
 any   gold.   But   old  Adam   Hornblower  the   smith  down   the  road
 could  not melt  it in  his furnace.  They say  only dragonfire  can melt
 them - but I wonder if that  is not  a legend,  or at  any rate  if there
 are  any  dragons  now  left  in  which  the  old fire  is hot  enough. I
 fancy  you  would  have  to  find  one  of  the  Cracks  of Earth  in the
 depths  of  the  Fiery  Mountain,  and  drop  it  down  into  the  Secret
 Fire, if you really wanted to destroy it.'>                             
   'After  all  your  talk,'  said  Bingo,  half  solemnly  and   half  in
 pretended  annoyance,  'I  really  do  want  to  destroy  it.   I  cannot
 think  how  Bilbo  put  up with  it for  so long,  if he  knew as  much -
 but he actually used it sometimes, and joked about it to me.'           
   'The  only  thing  to  do  with  such  perilous  treasures  that Adven-
 ture  has  bestowed  on  you  is  to  take  them   lightheartedly,'  said
 Gandalf.  'Bilbo  never  used  the  ring  for  any serious  purpose after
 he  came  back.  He  knew  that  it  was  too  serious  a  matter.  And I

 think he taught you well - after  he had  chosen you  as his  heir from
 among all the hobbits of his kindred.'                                
   There was  a long  silence again,  while Gandalf  puffed at  his pipe
 in  apparent  content,  though under  his lids  his eyes  were watching
 Bingo  intently.  Bingo gazed  at the  red embers,  that began  to glow
 as  the light  faded and  the room  grew slowly  dark. He  was thinking
 about  the  fabled  Cracks  of  Earth  and  the  terror  of  the  Fiery
 Mountain.                                                             
   'Well?'  said  Gandalf  at last.  'What are  you thinking  about? Are
 you making any plans or getting any ideas?'                           
   'No,'  said  Bingo  coming  back  to  himself,  and  finding  to  his
 surprise that he was in the dark. 'Or perhaps yes! As far as I  can see
 I have got to  leave Hobbiton,  leave the  Shire, leave  everything and
 go  away  and  draw  the  danger  after  me.  I  must  save  the  Shire
 somehow,  though  there  have  been  times  when   I  thought   it  too
 stupid  and  dull  for  anything,  and  fancied a  big explosion  or an
 invasion  of  dragons  might do  it good!  But I  don't feel  like that
 now. I feel that as long  as the  Shire lies  behind safe  and comfort-
 able,  I shall  find wandering  and adventures  bearable. I  shall feel
 there is some  foothold somewhere,  even if  I can't  ever stand  on it
 myself again. But  I suppose  I must  go alone.  I feel  rather minute,
 don't  you  know,  and  extremely  uprooted,  and, well,  frightened, I
 suppose. Help me, Gandalf, best of friends.'                          
   'Cheer  up,  Bingo,  my  lad,'  said  Gandalf,  throwing   two  small
 logs of wood on the  fire and  puffing it  with his  mouth. Immediately
 the  wood blazed  up and  filled the  room with  dancing light.  'No, I
 don't  think  you  need  or  should go  alone. Why  not ask  your three
 best friends to, beg them  to, order  them to  (if you  must) -  I mean
 the  three,  the  only  three  who you  have (perhaps  indiscreetly but
 perhaps  with  wise  choice)   told  about   your  secret   Ring:  Odo,
 Frodo,   and  Marmaduke   [written  above:  Meriadoc].  But   you  must
 go  quickly  -  and  make  it  a  joke,  Bingo,  a  joke, a  huge joke,
 a  resounding jest.  Don't be  mournful and  serious. Jokes  are really
 in  your  line.  That's  what  Bilbo  liked  about  you   (among  other
 things), if you care to know.'                                        
   'And  where  shall  we  go,  and  what  shall we  steer by,  and what
 shall be our quest?'  said Bingo,  without a  trace of  a smile  or the
 glimmer of a jest. 'When the huge joke is over, what then?'           
   'At  present  I  have  no  idea,' said  Gandalf, quite  seriously and
 much  to  Bingo's  surprise  and  dismay.  'But  it  will  be  just the
 opposite of Bilbo's adventure - to begin  with, at  any rate.  You will
 set  out on  a journey  without any  known destination;  and as  far as

 you have any object it will  not be  to win  new treasure  but to  get rid
 of  a  treasure  that  belongs  (one might say)  inevitably to  you. But
 you  cannot  even  start  without  going  East,  West,  South,  or  North;
 and   which   shall   we  choose?   Towards  danger,   and  yet   not  too
 rashly or too straight  towards it.  Go East.  Yes, yes,  I have  it. Make
 first  for  Rivendell,  and then  we shall  see. Yes,  we shall  see then.
 Indeed,   I  begin   to  see   already!  '   Suddenly  Gandalf   began  to
 chuckle.  He  rubbed  his   long  gnarled   hands  together   and  cracked
 the  finger-joints.  He  leant  forward  to  Bingo. 'I  have thought  of a
 joke,'  he said.  'Just a  rough plan  - you  can set  your comic  wits to
 work  on  it.'  And  his  beard  wagged  backwards  and  forwards   as  he
 whispered  long  in  Bingo's  ear.  The  fire  burned  low  again   -  but
 suddenly   in   the  darkness   an  unexpected   sound  rang   out.  Bingo
 was rocking with laughter.                                                
                                                                          
                                   NOTES.                                   
                                                                          
 1. My father's own thought  is surely  transparent here.  Bingo introduces
  the subject of the Ring as  if it  had some  connection with  the Riders,
  whereas  he  is  obviously  intended to  appear as  quite unable  even to
  guess at their significance;  and there  is no  suggestion in  the drafts
  that    the    Ring    had    been    mentioned   before    this   point.
 2. (in the Shire): my father first  wrote 'except  Gandalf'. The  words '(in
  the Shire)' probably mean no  more than  that: i.e.,  no one  save Bilbo
  and  Bingo,  and  outside  the  Shire  only  Gandalf,  and   anyone  else
  whom Gandalf might possibly have told.                                   
 3. This is probably the first  time that  the expression  The Lord  of the
  Ring was used; and  The Lord  of the  Rings occurs  below (note  6). (My
  father gave The Lord of the Ring as the title of the new work in a letter
  to Allen and Unwin of 31 August 1938).                                  
 4. Hence  the  asking for  Baggins: this  is not  mentioned in  the manu-
  script drafts, but  see the  typescript version,  p. 54  and note  g. The
  following  sentence,  'But  somehow  the search  for Baggins  failed, and
  then   something   must   have   been   discovered  about   you'  perhaps
  explains  the  story  that  Frodo  Took met  a Black  Rider on  the North
  Moor as early as the previous spring (see p. 71).                        
 5. My  father first  wrote here  that the  clothing of  one who  has thus
  become  permanently  invisible  was  invisible  also,  but  rejected  the
  statement as soon as written.                                            
 6. This seems  to be  the first  appearance of  the expression?he  Lord of
  the Rings; see note 3.                                                   
 7. After this  sentence my  father wrote:  'Gollum I  think some  sort of
  distant kinsman of the goblin sort.'  Since this  is contradicted  in the

      next sentence  it was  obviously rejected  in the  act of  writing; he
      crossed it out later.
 8.   ninety years and more: see pp. 31-3.                                   
 9.   At  no point  in this  text is  there any  further mention  of Bingo's
      'worry',  and  the  advice  that  he  asks is  entirely based  on what
      Gandalf now  tells him  and which  is obviously  entirely new  to him.
      There is also no further reference to the 'strange signs  and portents
      of  trouble  brewing' spoken  of in  the next  sentence, nor any expla-
      nation of Gandalf's remark  (p. 81)  that 'Gollum  is very  likely the
      beginning of our present trouble.'                                     
 10.  This ends the first page of the manuscript. At the head of  the second
      page  my  father  wrote in  pencil: 'Gandalf  and Bingo  discuss Rings
      and  Gollum',  and  'Draft:  Later  used  in   Chapter  II',   and  he
      numbered  the   pages  (previously   unnumbered)  in   Greek  letters,
      beginning at this point. Thus the first  page is  left out.  But these
      pencillings were clearly put in long after, and in  my view  they cast
      no doubt on the validity of the opening section as an integral part of
      the text. May  be it  had at  one time  become separated  and mislaid;
      but as the papers were found it was placed with the rest.             
 11.  Rumour of the  Party -  decided on  between Gandalf  and Bingo  at the
      end of this  text -  began to  circulate early  in September  (p. 30).
 12.  In  The Hobbit  (Chapter I)  Gandalf told  Thorin at  Bag End  that he
      found  his  father  Thrain 'in  the dungeons  of the  Necromancer'. In
      the Tale of  Years in  LR Appendix  B this, Gandalf's second  visit to
      Dol Guldur, took place in the  year 2850,  forty years  before Bilbo's
      birth; it  was then  that he  'discovered that  its master  was indeed
      Sauron'  (cf.  FR  p.  263).  But  here  the  meaning is  clearly that
      Gandalf went to  the land  of the  Necromancer after  Bilbo's acquisi-
      tion of the Ring. Later my father altered the text in pencil  to read:
      'for I went back once more to the land of the Necromancer.'           
 13.  Here the earlier draft concerning the Rings is used: see p. 75.       
 14.  See FR p. 60 and LR Appendix A pp. 357-8.                             
 15.  This is the first germ of the story of the death of Isildur.          
 16.  This is also derived from the text referred to in note 13.            
 17.  This sentence as first written ended: 'and he wanted to hand it  on to
      someone else.' It is to this that the following sentence refers.      
 18.  The passage beginning 'There was a  queer fate'  was an  addition, and
      'That is why I let Bilbo keep the ring so long' refers to the sentence
      ending '... peculiar to Bilbo and his great Adventure.'               
 19.  Cf. the draft passage given on p.  75: 'Of  course Gollum  himself may
      have heard news - all the mountains were full of it after the battle -
      and tried to get back the ring.'                                      
 20.  The first mention of the  Fiery Mountain  and the  Cracks of  Earth in
      its depths.                                                           
                                                                           
                                     *                                      

  It will be seen that a part of  the 'Gollum'  element in  'The Shadow  of the
  Past'  (Chapter  2  in FR)  was at  once very  largely achieved,  even though
  Digol * (later  Deagol)  is  Gollum  himself,  and  not  his  friend  whom he
  murdered,  though  Gandalf  had  never  seen  him (and  so no  explanation is
  given  of  how  he  knows  his  history, which  of its  nature could  only be
  derived  from  Gollum's  own  words),  and  though it  is only  surmised that
  he went at last to the Dark Lord.                                            
    It  is  important  to  realise  that  when  my  father  wrote this,  he was
  working  within  the  constraints  of  the  story  as  originally told in The
  Hobbit. As The Hobbit first  appeared, and  until 1951,  the story  was that
  Gollum,  encountering   Bilbo  at   the  edge   of  the   subterranean  lake,
  proposed  the  riddle game  on these  conditions: 'If  precious asks,  and it
  doesn't answer, we eats  it, my  preciousss. If  it asks  us, and  we doesn't
  answer,  we  gives  it  a  present,  gollum!'  When  Bilbo won  the contest,
  Gollum held to his promise, and went back in his  boat to  his island  in the
  lake to find his treasure, the ring which was to be his present to  Bilbo. He
  could not find it, for Bilbo had it in his pocket, and  coming back  to Bilbo
  he  begged  his  pardon  many  times:  'He  kept on  saying: "We  are ssorry:
  we didn't mean to cheat, we meant to give it our only present, if it  won the
  competition".'  '"Never  mind!"  he  [Bilbo]  said.  "The  ring   would  have
  been  mine  now,  if you  had found  it; so  you would  have lost  it anyway.
  And I will let you off on one  condition." "Yes,  what iss  it? What  does it
  wish us to  do, my  precious." "Help  me to  get out  of these  places", said
  Bilbo.'  And  Gollum  did  so;  and  Bilbo  'said   good-bye  to   the  nasty
  miserable  creature.'  On the  way up  through the  tunnels Bilbo  slipped on
  the ring, and Gollum at once  missed him,  so that  Bilbo perceived  that the
  ring was as Gollum had told him - it made you invisible.                     
    This is why, in the present  text, Gandalf  says 'I  think it  certain that
  Gollum  knew in  the end  that Bilbo  had got  the ring',  and why  my father
  had  Gandalf develop  a theory  that Gollum  was actually  ready to  give the
  ring  away:  'he wanted...  to hand  it on  to someone  else... I  suppose he
  might  have  put  it  in  [the  goblins']  path  in  the  end... but  for the
  unexpected  arrival  of  Bilbo...  as  soon  as  the  riddles started  a plan
  formed in his mind.' This is all carefully conceived in relation to  the text
  of The Hobbit as it then was, to meet the formidable difficulty: if  the Ring
  were  of  such  a  nature as  my father  now conceived  it, how  could Gollum
  have  really  intended  to  give  it  away  to  a stranger  who won  a riddle
  contest?  -  and  the  original text  of The Hobbit left  no doubt  that that
  was  indeed  his serious  intention. But  it is  interesting to  observe that
  Gandalf's   remarks   about  the   affinity  of   mind  between   Gollum  and
  Bilbo,  which  survived  into  FR  (pp.  63  - 4),  originally arose  in this
  context,  of  explaining  how  it  was  that  Gollum was  willing to  let his
  treasure go.                                                                 
                                                                              
  (* Old English digol, deagol, etc. 'secret, hidden'; cf. LR Appendix F (p. 415).)

            
                                                                             
  Turning  to  what  is  told  of  the Rings  in this  text, the  original idea
 (p.  75)  that  the  Elves  had  many Rings,  and that  there were  many 'Elf-
 wraiths' in the world, is still present, but the phrase 'the  Ring-lord cannot
 rule  them' is  not. The  Dwarves, on  the other  hand, at  first said  not to
 have  had  any,  now  had  seven,  each the  foundation of  one of  'the seven
 hoards  of  the  Dwarves', and  their distinctive  response to  the corruptive
 power  of  the  Rings  enters  (though  this was  already foreshadowed  in the
 first rough draft on  the subject:  'some say  the rings  don't wort  on them:
 they are too solid.') Men, at first said to have  had 'few',  now had  three -
 but 'others they found in secret places  cast away  by the  elf-wraiths' (thus
 allowing for  more than  three Black  Riders). But  the central  conception of
 the Ruling Ring is not yet present, though it was, so to  say, waiting  in the
 wings: for it is said that Gollum's Ring was not  only the  only one  that had
 not returned to the Dark  Lord (other  than those  lost by  the Dwarves)  - it
 was the 'most  precious and  potent of  his Rings'  (p. 81).  But in  what its
 peculiar potency lay we are  not told;  nor indeed  do we  learn more  here of
 the relation between  the invisibility  conferred by  the Rings,  the torment-
 ing longevity  (which now  first appears),  and the  decline of  their bearers
 into 'wraiths'.                                                              
  The element  of moral  will required  in one  possessed of  a Ring  to resist
 its power is strongly asserted. This is seen in Gandalf's  advice to  Bilbo in
 the original draft (p. 74): 'don't use it for harm, or  for finding  out other
 people's secrets, and of course  not for  theft or  for worse  things. Because
 it may get  the better  of you';  and still  more expressly  in his  rebuke to
 Bingo,  who  said  that it  was a  pity that  Bilbo did  not kill  Gollum: 'He
 could not do so, without  doing wrong.  It was  against the  rules. If  he had
 done  so  he would  not have  had the  ring, the  ring would  have had  him at
 once'  (p.  81).  This  element  remains  in  FR  (pp.  68 - 9), but  is more
 guardedly expressed: 'Be sure that he took so little hurt  from the  evil, and
 escaped in the end, because he began his ownership of the Ring so.'          
  The  end  of  the  chapter  -  with  Gandalf  actually himself  proposing the
 Birthday Party and Bingo's  'resounding jest'  - was  to be  quickly rejected,
 and is never heard of again.                                                 

                                        IV.                                     
                               TO MAGGOT'S FARM AND                             
                                     BUCKLAND.                                  
                                                                               
 The  third  of  the  original  consecutive  chapters  exists  in  complete  form
 only in a typescript, where it bears the number 'III' but has no  title; there
 are  also   however  incomplete   and  very   rough  manuscript   drafts,  which
 were  filled  out  and improved  in the  typescript but  in all  essentials left
 unchanged.  Near  the  end  the  typescript ceases  (note 16),  not at  the foot
 of a page, and the  remainder of  the chapter  is in  manuscript; for  this part
 also rough drafting exists.                                                    
  I again give the text in  full, since  in this  chapter the  original narrative
 was  far  removed  from  what  finally  went   into  print.   Subsequent  emend-
 ation  was  here  very  slight.  I  take  up  into  the  text  a  few manuscript
 changes  that  seem  to  me  to  be  in  all  probability contemporary  with the
 making of the typescript.                                                      
  The  end  of  the   chapter  corresponds   to  FR   Chapter  5   'A  Conspiracy
 Unmasked', at this stage there was no conspiracy.                              
                                                                               
                                       III.                                     
                                                                               
  In   the   morning   Bingo   woke   refreshed.   He  was   lying  in   a  bower
 made   by   a   living   tree   with   branches  laced   and  drooping   to  the
 ground;  his  bed  was  of  fern  and  grass,  deep   and  soft   and  strangely
 fragrant.   The   sun  was   shining  through   the  fluttering   leaves,  which
 were still green upon the tree. He jumped up and went out.                     
  Odo   and   Frodo   were  sitting   on  the   grass  near   the  edge   of  the
 wood; there was no sign of any elves.                                          
  'They  have   left  us   fruit  and   drink,  and   bread,'  said   Odo.  'Come
 and have breakfast! The bread tastes almost as good as last night.'            
  Bingo   sat   down   beside   them.   'Well?'   said   Odo.   'Did   you   find
 anything out?'                                                                 
  'No,  nothing,'  said  Bingo.  'Only  hints   and  riddles.   But  as   far  as
 I  could  make  them  out,  it  seems  to  me  that  Gildor  thinks   there  are
 several  Riders;  that  they  are  after  me;  that  they  are  now   ahead  and
 behind  and  on  both  sides  of  us; that  it is  no use  going back  (at least
 not   for  me);   that  we   ought  to   make  for   Rivendell  as   quickly  as
 possible,  and  if  we  find  Gandalf  there  so  much  the  better;   and  that
 we shall have an exciting and dangerous time getting there.'                   

                                                                   
                                                                      
   'I call that a lot  more than  nothing,' said  Odo. 'But  what about
 the sniffing?'                                                        
   'We did not discuss it,' said Bingo with his mouth full.            
   'You should have,' said Odo. 'I am sure it is very important.'      
   'In that case  I am  sure Gildor  would have  told me  nothing about
 it. But he did say that he  thought you  might as  well come  with me.
 I gathered that  the riders  are not  after you,  and that  you rather
 bother them.'                                                         
   'Splendid!  Odo  and  Frodo  are  to  take  care  of   Uncle  Bingo.
 They won't let him be sniffed at.'                                    
   'All right!'  said Bingo.  'That's settled.  What about  the method
 of advance?'                                                          
   'What  do  you  mean?'  said Odo.  'Shall we  hop, skip,  run, crawl
 on our stomachs, or just walk singing along? '                        
   'Exactly.  And shall  we follow  the road,  or risk  a cross-country
 cut?  There  is  no  choice  in  the  matter  of time;  we must  go in
 daylight,  because  Marmaduke  is  expecting us  to-night. In  fact we
 must get off as soon as possible; we  have slept  late, and  there are
 still quite eighteen miles to go.'                                    
   'You  have  slept  late, you  mean,' said  Odo. 'We  have been  up a
 long time.'                                                           
   So far Frodo had said  nothing. He  was looking  out over  the tree-
 tops  eastward.  He  now  turned  towards them.  'I vote  for striking
 across country,' he said. 'The land is  not so  wild between  here and
 the River. It ought not to be difficult to  mark our  direction before
 we leave this hill, and to keep pretty well to it. Buckland  is almost
 exactly  south-east  from  Woodhall (1) down  there  in  the  trees.  We
 should cut off  quite a  corner, because  the road  bears away  to the
 left - you can see a  bit of  it over  there -  and then  sweeps round
 south when it  gets nearer  to the  River.(2) We  could strike  it above
 Buckland before it gets really dark.'                                 
   'Short cuts make long delays,'  said Odo;  'and I  don't see  that a
 Rider is any worse on the road than in the woods.'                    
   'Except  that he  probably won't  be able  to see  so well,  and may
 not be able to ride  so fast,'  said Bingo.  'I am  also in  favour of
 leaving the road.'                                                    
   'All right! ' said Odo. 'I will follow you into every bog and ditch.
 You  two  are  as  bad  as Marmaduke.  I suppose  I shall  be outvoted
 by three to one, instead of two  to one,  when we  collect him,  if we
 ever do.'                                                             
                                                                      
        The sun was now hot again; but clouds were beginning to come

                                                            
                                                                      
 up from the West. It looked likely to turn to rain,  if the  wind fell.
 The  hobbits  scrambled  down  a  steep  green  bank  and  struck  into
 the  trees  below.  Their  line was  taken to  leave Woodhall  on their
 left,  and  there  was  some  thickish  wood  immediately  in  front of
 them, though after a mile or two  it had  looked from  above as  if the
 land  became  more  open.  There  was  a  good  deal   of  undergrowth,
 and they did not get  on very  fast. At  the bottom  of the  slope they
 found  a  stream  running  in  a  deeply  dug  bed with  steep slippery
 banks  overhung  with  brambles.  They  could  not  jump   across,  and
 they  had  the  choice  of  going  back and  taking a  new line,  or of
 turning aside  to the  left and  following the  stream until  it became
 easier to  cross. Odo  looked back.  Through the  trees they  could see
 the top  of the  bank which  fell from  the high  green which  they had
 just left. 'Look! ' he said, clutching Bingo by the arm. On the  top of
 the  slope  a  black  rider sat  on a  horse; he  seemed to  be swaying
 from side to side, as if sweeping all the land eastward with his gaze.
  The   hobbits  gave   up  any   idea  of   going  back,   and  plunged
 quickly  and  silently  into the  thickest bushes  by the  stream. They
 were  cut  off  from  the  West  wind  down  in  the  hollow,  and very
 soon  they  were  hot  and  tired.  Bushes,  brambles,   rough  ground,
 and their packs, all did what they could to hold them back.           
  'Whew!  '  said Bingo.  'Both parties  were right!  The short  cut has
 gone  crooked; but  we got  under cover  only just  in time.  Yours are
 the  sharpest  ears,  Frodo.  Can  you  hear  -  can you  hear anything
 behind?'                                                             
  They  stopped  and  looked  and  listened;  but there  was no  sign or
 sound  of  pursuit.  They  went  on  again,  until  the  banks  of  the
 stream  sank  and  its  bed  became  broad  and  shallow.   They  waded
 across and hurried into the  wood on  the other  side, no  longer quite
 sure  of  the  line  they  should take.  There were  no paths,  but the
 ground  was  fairly  level  and  open.  A  tall  growth of  young oaks,
 mixed with ash and  elm, was  all round  them, so  that they  could not
 see far. The  leaves of  the trees  blew upwards  in sudden  gusts, and
 spots of rain began  to fall;  then the  wind died  away, and  the rain
 came down steadily.                                                   
  They  trudged  along  fast  through  thick  leaves,  while  all  about
 them  the  rain  pattered  and trickled;  they did  not talk,  but kept
 glancing  from  side  to  side,  and sometimes  behind. After  about an
 hour  Frodo  said:  'I  suppose  we  have  not struck  too much  to the
 south,  and  are  not   walking  longwise   through  this   wood?  From
 above it looked like a narrow  belt, and  we ought  to have  crossed it
 by now, I should have thought.'                                       

 
                                                                      
   'It is no good starting going in zigzags  now,' said  Bingo. 'Let's
 keep  on.  The  clouds  seem  to  be  breaking,  and  we  may  get  a
 helpful glimpse of the sun again before long.'                        
   He  was right.  By the  time they  had gone  another mile,  the sun
 gleamed out of ragged clouds;  and they  saw that  they were  in fact
 heading too much to the south. They bore a little to their  left; but
 before long they  decided by  their feelings  as much  as by  the sun
 that it was time for a mid-day halt and some food.                    
   The rain was still falling at intervals; so they sat under  an elm-
 tree, whose leaves were still  thick, though  they were  fast turning
 yellow.  They  found that  the Elves  had filled  their water-bottles
 with some clear golden drink: it had the scent rather than  the taste
 of  honey  made  of  many  flowers,  and  was   mightily  refreshing.
 They  made  a  merry  meal,  and  soon  were  laughing  and  snapping
 their fingers at rain and black riders. The next few miles  they felt
 would  soon  be  put  behind them.  With his  back to  the tree-trunk
 Odo began to sing softly to himself:                                  
                                                                      
               Ho! ho! ho! To my bottle I go                           
               To heal my heart and drown my woe.                     
               Rain may fall and wind may blow,                      
               And many miles be still to go,                          
               But under the  elm-tree I will lie                    
               And  let the  clouds go  sailing by!                    
                                                                      
               Ho! ho! ho! ----                                        
                                                                      
 It will never  be known  whether the  next verse  was any  better than
 the first; for just at the moment there was a noise like a sneeze or a
 sniff.  Odo  never  finished his  song. The  noise came  again: sniff,
 sniff, sniff; it seemed to be quite close. They sprang to  their feet,
 and  looked  quickly  about;  but  there  was   nothing  to   be  seen
 anywhere near their tree.(3)                                          
   Odo  had  no  more  thought  of  lying  and  watching the  clouds go
 by.  He  was  the first  to be  packed and  ready to  start. In  a few
 minutes from the last sniff they were off again as fast as  they could
 go.  The wood  soon came  to an  end; but  they were  not particularly
 pleased, for  the land  became soft  and boggy,  and hobbits  (even on
 a  Journey)  don't  like  mud  and  clay  on their  feet. The  sun was
 shining again, and  they felt  both too  hot and  too exposed  to view
 away  from the  trees. Far  back now  behind them  lay the  high green
 where  they  had  breakfasted;  every  time  they looked  back towards
 it they expected to see the distant figure of  a horseman  against the

 sky.  But  none  appeared;  and  as  they  went  on  the land  about them
 got  steadily  more  tame.  There  were  hedges and  gates and  dikes for
 drainage;  everything  looked  quiet  and  peaceful,  just   an  ordinary
 corner of the Shire.                                                    
   'I  think  I  recognize  these  fields,'  said  Frodo  suddenly.  'They
 belong  to  old  Farmer  Maggot,(4) unless I am  quite lost.  There ought
 to be a lane  somewhere near,  that leads  from his  place into  the road
 a mile or two above Buckland.'(5)                                       
   'Does he live  in a  hole or  a house?' asked Odo,  who did  not know
 this part of the country.                                               
   It  was  a  curious thing  about the  hobbits of  those days  that this
 was  an  important  distinction.  All  hobbits  had,  of  course, origin-
 ally  lived  in  holes; but  now only  the best  and the  poorest hobbits
 did  so,  as a  rule. Important  hobbits lived  in luxurious  versions of
 the  simple  holes  of  olden  times;  but  the  sites  for  really  good
 hobbit-holes  were  not  to  be  found  everywhere.  Even   in  Hobbiton,
 one  of  the  most  important  villages,  there  were houses.  These were
 specially  favoured  by  the   farmers,  millers,   blacksmiths,  carpen-
 ters,  and  people  of  that  sort.  The  custom  of building  houses was
 supposed  to  have  started  among  the  hobbits  of  the   woody  river-
 side  regions,  where  the  land  was  heavy  and  wet  and  had  no good
 hills  or  convenient  banks.  They  began  making  artificial  holes  of
 mud (and  later of  brick), roofed  with thatch  in imitation  of natural
 grass.  That  was  a  long  time  ago, and  on the  edge of  history; but
 houses  were  still  considered  an   innovation.  The   poorest  hobbits
 still lived in holes of the most ancient sort - in fact just  holes, with
 only  one  window,  or  even  none.(6) But Odo  was  not thinking  about
 hobbit-history.  He  merely  wanted  to  know  where  to  look   for  the
 farm.  If  Farmer  Maggot  had  lived in  a hole,  there would  have been
 rising  ground   somewhere  near;   but  the   land  ahead   looked  per-
 fectly flat.                                                            
   'He  lives  in  a  house,' answered  Frodo. 'There  are very  few holes
 in  these  parts.  They  say  houses  were invented  here. Of  course the
 Brandybucks  have  that  great  burrow  of  theirs  at Bucklebury  in the
 high bank across  the River;  but most  of their  people live  in houses.
 There  are lots  of those  new-fashioned brick  houses -  not too  bad, I
 suppose,  in  their  way;  though  they  look  very  naked,  if  you know
 what I mean: no decent turf-covering, all bare and bony.'               
   'Fancy  climbing  upstairs  to  bed!  '  said  Odo.  'That seems  to me
 most inconvenient. Hobbits aren't birds.'                               
   'I  don't know,'  said Bingo.  'It isn't  as bad  as it  sounds; though
 personally  I  never  like  looking  out  of  upstairs windows,  it makes

                                                                    
                                                                        
 me  a  bit  giddy.  There  are  some  houses  that  have  three  stages,
 bedrooms  above  bedrooms.  I  slept  in   one  once   long  ago   on  a
 holiday; the wind kept me awake all night.'                             
   'What  a   nuisance,  if   you  want   a  handkerchief   or  something
 when you are downstairs, and find it is upstairs,' said Odo.            
   'You  could  keep  handkerchiefs  downstairs,  if  you  wished,'  said
 Frodo.                                                                  
   'You could, but I don't believe anybody does.'                        
   'That is not the houses' fault,' said Bingo; 'it is just the silliness
 of the  hobbits that  live in  them. The  old tales  tell that  the Wise
 Elves used to  build tall  towers; and  only went  up their  long stairs
 when they wished  to sing  or look  out of  the windows  at the  sky, or
 even  perhaps  the  sea.  They  kept everything  downstairs, or  in deep
 halls dug beneath the feet  of the  towers. I  have always  fancied that
 the  idea of  building came  largely from  the Elves,  though we  use it
 very  differently.  There  used to  be three  elftowers standing  in the
 land  away  west  beyond  the  edge  of  the  Shire.  I  saw  them once.
 They  shone  white  in  the  Moon.  The   tallest  was   furthest  away,
 standing alone on a hill. It was told that  you could  see the  sea from
 the  top  of  that  tower;  but  I  don't  believe  any hobbit  has ever
 climbed it.' If ever I live in a house, I shall  keep everything  I want
 downstairs,   and  only   go  up   when  I   don't  want   anything;  or
 perhaps I shall have  a cold  supper upstairs  in the  dark on  a starry
 night.'                                                                 
   'And have to carry  plates and  things downstairs,  if you  don't fall
 all the way down,' laughed Odo.                                         
   'No!'  said  Bingo.  'I  shall  have  wooden  plates  and  bowls,  and
 throw  them  out  of the  window. There  will be  thick grass  all round
 my house.'                                                              
   'But  you  would  still  have  to  carry  your supper  upstairs,' said
 Odo.                                                                    
   '0  well  then,  perhaps  I  should  not  have supper  upstairs,' said
 Bingo. 'It was only just an idea. I don't suppose I  shall ever  live in
 a  house.  As  far  as I  can see,  I am  going to  be just  a wandering
 beggar.'                                                                
   This  very  hobbit-like  conversation  went  on  for  some   time.  It
 shows  that  the  three  were  beginning   to  feel   quite  comfortable
 again,  as  they  got  back  into  tame and  familiar country.  But even
 invisible  sniffs  could  not  damp  for  long  the  spirits   of  these
 excellent  and  peculiarly  adventurous  hobbits,  not  in  any  kind of
 country.                                                                
   While  they  talked  they  plodded  steadily on.  It was  already late

 afternoon  when  they  saw  the  roof of  a house  peeping out  of a
 clump of trees ahead and to their left.                             
   'There is Farmer Maggot's!' said Frodo.                          
   'I think we will go round it,' said Bingo, 'and strike the lane on
 the far side of the house.  I am  supposed to  have vanished,  and I
 would rather not be seen sneaking off in the direction  of Buckland,
 even by good Farmer Maggot.'                                        
   They went on,  leaving the  farmhouse away  on their  left, hidden
 in  the  trees  several  fields  away.  Suddenly  a  small  dog came
 through a gap in a hedge, and ran barking towards them.             
   'Here! Here! Gip! Gip! ' said a voice. Bingo slipped on  his ring.
 There was no chance for the others to hide. Over the top of  the low
 hedge appeared a large round hobbit-face.                           
   'Hullo!  Hullo!  And  who  may  you  be,  and  what  may   you  be
 doing?' he asked.                                                   
   'Good  evening,  Farmer  Maggot!'  said Frodo.  'Just a  couple of
 Tooks, from away back yonder; and doing no harm, I hope.'           
   'Well  now,  let  me  see  -  you'll  be Mr  Frodo Took,  Mr Folco
 Took's  son,  if  I'm  not  mistook (and  I seldom  am: I've  a rare
 memory  for  faces).  You  used  to  stay  with young  Mr Marmaduke.
 Any   friend  of   Mr  Marmaduke   Brandybuck  is   welcome.  You'll
 excuse  my  speaking  sharp, before  I recognized  you. We  get some
 strange folk in these parts at times. Too near the river,'  he said,
 jerking back his  head. 'There's  been a  very funny  customer round
 here only an hour back. That's why I'm out with the dog.'           
   'What kind of a customer?' asked Frodo.                           
   'A  funny  customer  and  asking  funny  questions,'  said  Farmer
 Maggot,  shaking  his  head.  'Come  along  to my  house and  have a
 drink and  we'll pass  the news  more comfortably  like, if  you and
 your friend are willing, Mr Took.'                                  
   It  seemed  plain  that  Farmer  Maggot would  only pass  the news
 in  his  own  time  and  place, and  they guessed  that it  might be
 interesting;  so  Frodo  and  Odo  went  along  with  him.  The  dog
 remained  behind  jumping  and  frisking round  Bingo to  his annoy-
 ance.                                                               
   'What's come to the dog?' said the  farmer, looking  back. 'Here,
 Gip! Heel! ' he called. To Bingo's relief the dog obeyed,  though it
 turned back once and barked.                                        
   'What's  the  matter  with  you?'  growled Farmer  Maggot. 'There
 seems  to  be something  queer abroad  this day.  Gip went  near off
 his  head  when that  stranger came  along, and  now you'd  think he
 could see or smell something that ain't there.'                     

   They  went  into  the  farmer's   kitchen  and   sat  by   the  wide
 fireplace.  Mrs  Maggot  brought  them   beer  in   large  earthenware
 mugs.  It  was  a  good  brew,  and  Odo  found  himself  wishing that
 they were going to stay the night in the house.                      
   'I  hear  there  have  been fine  goings on  up Hobbiton  way,' said
 Farmer  Maggot.  'Fireworks  and  all;  and  this   Mr  Bolger-Baggins
 disappearing,  and  giving  everything  away.  Oddest  thing   I  have
 heard tell of in my time. I suppose it all comes  of living  with that
 Mr  Bilbo  Baggins.  My mother  used to  tell me  queer tales  of him,
 when I was a boy:  not but  what he  seemed a  very nice  gentleman. I
 have  seen  him  wandering  down this  way many  a time  when I  was a
 lad,  and  that Mr  Bingo with  him. Now  we take  an interest  in him
 in  these parts,  seeing as  he belongs  here, being  half Brandybuck,
 as  you  might  say.  We  never  thought  any good  would come  of his
 going  away  to  Hobbiton, and  folk are  a bit  queer back  there, if
 you'll pardon me. I was forgetting you come from those parts.'       
   '0,  folk  are  queer  enough  in  Hobbiton  -  and  Tookland,' said
 Frodo.  'We  don't  mind.  But  we  know,  I   mean  knew,   Mr  Bingo
 very well.  I don't  think any  harm's come  to him.  It really  was a
 very marvellous party, and  I can't  see that  anyone has  anything to
 complain of.' He gave the  farmer a  full and  amusing account  of the
 proceedings,  which  pleased  him  mightily.   He  stamped   his  feet
 and slapped his legs, and  called for  more beer;  and made  them tell
 his wife most of the tale over again, especially about  the fireworks.
 Neither of the Maggots had ever seen fireworks.                      
   'It must be a sight to do your eyes good,' said the farmer.        
   'No  dragons for  me! '  said Mrs  Maggot. 'But  I would  have liked
 to  have  been  at  that  supper.  Let's hope  old Mr  Rory Brandybuck
 will take the idea and give a party down in these  parts for  his next
 birthday.  -  And  what  did  you  say  has   become  of   Mr  Bolger-
 Baggins?' she said, turning to Frodo.                                
   'Well - er, well,  he's vanished,  don't you  know,' said  Frodo. He
 half  thought  he  heard  the  ghost  of a  chuckle somewhere  not far
 from his ear, but he was not sure.                                   
   'There  now  -  that  reminds  me!'  said  Farmer Maggot.  'What do
 you think that funny customer said?'                                 
   'What?' said Odo and Frodo together.                              
   'Well, he comes riding in at the gate and up  to the  door on  a big
 black horse;  all black  he was  himself too,  and cloaked  and hooded
 up  as  if  he  didn't want  to be  known. "Good  Heavens!" I  said to
 myself.  "Here's one  of the  Big People!  Now what  in the  Shire can
 he  want?"  We  don't see  many of  the Big  People down  here, though

 they come over the River at  times; but  I've never  heard tell  of any
 like this black chap. "Good day to you,"  I says.  "This lane  don't go
 no  further,  and  wherever  you  be  going your  quickest way  will be
 back  to  the  road." I  did not  like the  look of  him, and  when Gip
 came  out  he took  one sniff  and let  out a  howl as  if he  had been
 bitten; he put down his tail and bolted howling all the way.          
   '"I  come  from  over  yonder,"  he  answered  stiff  and  slow like,
 pointing   back  West,   over  my   fields,  Woodhall-way.   "Have  you
 ever seen  Mist-er Bolg-er  Bagg-ins?" he  asked in  a queer  voice and
 bent  down  towards  me,  but I  could see  no face,  his hood  fell so
 low. I had a  sort of  shiver down  my back;  but I  didn't see  why he
 should  come  riding  so  bold  over  my  land. "Be  off!" I  said. "Mr
 Bolger-Baggins  has  vanished,  disappeared,  if  you  take   my  mean-
 ing: gone into the blue, and you can follow him!"                     
   'He  gave  a  sort  of  hiss,  seeming  angry  and startled  like, it
 seemed  to  me;  and  he spurred  his great  horse right  at me.  I was
 standing  by  the  gate,  but  I jumped  out of  the way  mighty quick,
 and  he  rode  through  it  and  down the  lane like  mad. What  do you
 think of that?'                                                       
   'I don't know what to think,' said Frodo.                           
   'Well,  I'll  tell  you  what to  think,' said  the farmer.  'This Mr
 Bingo  has  got  himself  mixed  up  in  some trouble,  and disappeared
 a purpose. There  are plainly  some folk  as are  mighty eager  to find
 him. Mark  my words,  it'll all  be along  of some  of those  doings of
 old  Mr  Bilbo's.  He  ought  to  have  stuck  at  Bolger and  not gone
 tacking   on   Baggins.   They   are  queer   folk  up   Hobbiton  way,
 begging  your  pardon.  It's  the  Baggins  that   has  got   him  into
 trouble, mark my words! '                                             
   'That  certainly  is an  idea,' said  Frodo. 'Very  interesting, what
 you tell us. I suppose  you've never  seen any  of these  - er  - black
 chaps before?'                                                        
   'Not  that  I  remember,'  said  Farmer  Maggot,  'and  I  don't want
 to  see  any  again.  Now  I  hope you  and your  friend will  stay and
 have a bite and a sup with me and the wife.'                          
   'Thank  you  very  much!' said  Odo regretfully,  'but I  am afraid
 we ought to go on.'                                                   
   'Yes,'  said  Frodo,  'we  have  some  way  to  go before  night, and
 really we have already rested too long. But it is very kind of  you all
 the same.'                                                            
   'Well!  Here's  your  health  and  good   luck!'  said   the  farmer,
 reaching  for  his  mug. But  at that  moment the  mug left  the table,
 rose, tilted in the air, and then returned empty to its place.        

   'Help and save us! '  cried the  farmer jumping  up. 'Did  you see
 that? This is a queer day  and no  mistake. First  the dog  and then
 me seeing things that ain't.'                                       
   'Oh, I saw the mug too,' said Odo, unable to hide a grin.         
   'You did, did  you!' said  the farmer.  'I don't  see no  cause to
 laugh.' He  looked quickly  and queerly  at Odo  and Frodo,  and now
 seemed  only  too  glad  that  they were  going. They  said good-bye
 politely but hurriedly, and ran down the steps and out of  the gate.
 Farmer  Maggot  and  his  wife  stood whispering  at their  door and
 watched them out of sight.                                          
                                                                    
   'What did you want to play that  silly trick  for?' said  Odo when
 the farmhouse was  well behind.  'The old  man had  done you  a good
 turn with that Rider, or so it seemed to me.'                       
   'I daresay,' said a voice  behind him.  'But you  did me  a pretty
 poor turn, going  inside and  drinking and  talking, and  leaving me
 in the cold. As it was I only got half a mug. And now we are late. I
 shall make you trot after this.'                                    
   'Show us how to trot! ' said Odo.                                 
   Bingo  immediately reappeared  and went  off as  fast as  he could
 down the lane. The  others hurried  after him.  'Look! '  said Frodo
 pointing to one side. Along the edge of  the lane,  in the  mud made
 by the day's rain, there were deep hoofmarks.                       
   'Never mind! ' said Bingo. 'We  knew from  old Maggot's  talk that
 he went this way. It can't be helped. Come along! '                 
   They met  nothing in  the lane.  The afternoon  faded and  the sun
 went  down  into  low  clouds  behind  them.  The light  was already
 failing when they reached the end of the lane and came at  last back
 to the road.(8) It was  growing chilly  and thin  strands of  mist were
 crawling over the fields. The twilight was clammy.                  
   'Not too bad,'  said Frodo.  'It is  four miles  from here  to the
 landing stage opposite  Bucklebury. We  shall make  it before  it is
 quite dark.'                                                        
   They  now  turned  right  along  the  road,  which here  ran quite
 straight, drawing steadily nearer to  the River.  There was  no sign
 of any other traveller upon the way. Soon they  could see  lights in
 the distance ahead and to  their left,  beyond the  dim line  of the
 shadowy willow-trees along the borders of the  river, where  the far
 bank rose almost into a low hill.                                   
   'There's Bucklebury! ' said Frodo.                                
   'Thank goodness! ' said Odo. 'My feet are  sore, sticky,  and mud-
 tired. Also it is  getting chilly.'  He stumbled  into a  puddle and

                                                                           
                                                                           
  splashed up a fountain of dirty water. 'Drat  it! '  he said.  'I've nearly
  had  enough  of  to-day's  walk.  Do  you think  there is  any chance  of a
  bath  to-night?'  Without  waiting  for  an  answer  he  suddenly  began a
  hobbit bathroom song.                                                     
                                                                           
                     O Water mann and mater hot!                            
                     O Water boiled in pan and pot!                         
                     O Water blue and mater green,                          
                     O  Water  silver-clear  and  clean,                    
                        Of bath I sing my song!                             
                     O praise the steam expectant nose!                     
                     O bless the tub my weary toes!                         
                     O happy fingers come and play!                          
                     O arms and legs, you here may stay,                    
                            And wallow warm and long!                      
                         Put mire away! Forget the clay!                   
                     Shut out the night! Wash off the day!                    
                     In water lapping chin and knees,                       
                     In water kind now lie at ease,                        
                          Until the dinner gong!                            
                                                                           
      'Really  you  might  wait  till  you  are  in  the  bath!'  said  Frodo.
      'I  warn you,'  added Bingo,  'that you  will have  yours last,  or else
  you will not wallow very long.'                                           
      'Very  well,'  said Odo;  'only I  warn you  that if  you go  first you
  must  not  take  all  the  hot  water,  or I  shall drown  you in  your own
  bath. I want a hot bath and a clean one.'                                 
      'You  may  not  get  any,'  said  Bingo.  'I  don't  know  what  Marma-
  duke  has  arranged,  or  where  we  are  sleeping.  I didn't  order baths,
  and if we get them they will be our last for some time, I expect.'        
      Their  talk  flagged.  They   were  now   getting  really   tired,  and
  went  along  with  their  chins  down  and  their  eyes  in front  of their
  toes.  They  were  quite  startled  when  suddenly  a  voice   behind  them
  cried: 'Hi! ' It then burst into a loud song:                             
                                                                           
                     As1uas sitting by the way,                            
                        I saw three hobbits walking:                      
                      One was dumb with naught to say,                     
                        The others were not talking.                       
                                                                           
                     'Good night!'I said. 'Good night to you!'             
                        They heeded not my greeting:                        
                     One was deaf like the other two.                     
                        It was a merry meeting!                            

 
                                                                    
   'Marmaduke!'   cried   Bingo   turning   round.  'Where   did  you
 spring from?'                                                       
   'You  passed  me  sitting  at  the  road-side,'   said  Marmaduke.
 'Perhaps  I  ought  to  have  lain down  in the  road; but  then you
 would have just trodden on me and passed gaily on.'                 
   'We are tired,' said Bingo.                                       
   'So it seems. I told  you you  would be  - but  you were  so proud
 and stiff. "Ponies! Pooh!"  you said.  "Just a  little leg-stretcher
 before the real business begins."'                                  
   'As it happens  ponies would  not have  helped much,'  said Bingo.
 'We  have  been   having  adventures.'   He  stopped   suddenly  and
 looked up and down the dark road. 'We will tell you later.'         
   'Bless  me!'   said  Marmaduke.   'But  how   mean  of   you!  You
 shouldn't  have  adventures  without  me. And  what are  you peering
 about for? Are there some big bad rabbits loose?'                   
   'Don't be so Marmadukish all at once! I can't bear  it at  the end
 of the day,' said Odo. 'Let's get off our legs  and have  some food,
 and then you shall hear a tale. Can I have a bath?'                
   'What?'  said  Marmaduke.  'A  bath?  That  would  put  you  right
 out of training again. A bath! I  am surprised  at such  a question.
 Now lift up your chins and follow me! '                             
                                                                    
   A  few yards  further on  there was  a turning  to the  left. They
 went down  a path,  neat and  well-kept and  edged with  large white
 stones. It led them  quickly to  the river-bank.  There there  was a
 landing-stage big enough for  several boats.  Its white  posts glim-
 mered  in  the  gloom.  The  mists were  beginning to  gather almost
 hedge-high in the fields, but the  water before  them was  dark with
 only a few curling wisps of grey like steam among  the reeds  at the
 sides.  The Brandywine  River flowed  slow and  broad. On  the other
 side  two  lamps  twinkled  upon  another  landing-stage  with  many
 steps  going  up  the  high  bank  beyond.  Behind  it the  low hill
 loomed, and  out of  the hill  through stray  strands of  mist shone
 many   round  hobbit-windows,   red  and   yellow.  They   were  the
 lights of Brandy Hall, the ancient home of the Brandybucks.         
   Long,  long  ago  the  Brandybucks  had  crossed  the  River  (the
 original boundary of the Shire on this side), attracted by  the high
 bank and the drier rolling ground behind. But  their family  (one of
 the  oldest  hobbit  families)  grew,  and  grew, until  Brandy Hall
 occupied the whole of the low hill, and had three large front doors,
 several  back  doors, and  at least  fifty windows.  The Brandybucks
 and  their numerous  dependants then  began to  burrow and  later to

 build  all  round  about.  That  was  the  origin   of  the   village  of
 Bucklebury-by-the-River.  A  great  deal  of  the land  on the  west side
 of the river still belonged  to the  family, almost  as far  as Woodhall,
 but  most  of  the  actual  Brandybucks  lived  in  Buckland:  a  thickly
 inhabited  strip  between  the  River  and  the  Old  Forest,  a  sort of
 colony from the old Shire.                                               
   The  people of  the old  Shire, of  course, told  strange tales  of the
 Bucklanders;  but  as  a  matter  of fact  the Bucklanders  were hobbits,
 and  not  really  very  different  from  other  hobbits  of   the  North,
 South,  or  West  -  except in  one point:  they were  fond of  boats and
 some  of  them  could  swim.   Also  they   were  unprotected   from  the
 East  except  by  a  hedge,  THE  HEDGE.  It had  been planted  ages ago.
 It  now  ran  all  the  way  from  Brandywine  Bridge  to  Haysend  in  a
 big  loop,  furthest   from  the   River  behind   Bucklebury,  something
 like  forty  miles  from  end to  end." It  was thick  and tall,  and was
 constantly  tended.  But  of  course  it was  not a  complete protection.
 The  Bucklanders  kept  their  doors  locked,  and  that  also   was  not
 usual in the Shire.                                                      
                                                                         
   Marmaduke  helped  his  friends  into  a  small  boat  that lay  at the
 stage. He  then cast  off and  taking a  pair of  oars pulled  across the
 river.   Frodo   and   Bingo   had   often   been  to   Buckland  before.
 Bingo's    mother    was    a    Brandybuck.   Marmaduke    was   Frodo's
 cousin,  since  his  mother   Yolanda  was   Folco  Took's   sister,  and
 Folco   was   Frodo's    father.   Marmaduke    was   thus    Took   plus
 Brandybuck,  and  that  was  apt  to  be  a  lively  blend.' But  Odo had
 never  been  so  far  East  before.  He  had  a  queer  feeling  as  they
 crossed the slow silent river, as if he had now at last started, as if he
 was crossing a boundary and leaving his old life on the other shore.     
   They  stepped  quietly  out  of  the  boat.  Marmaduke  was   tying  it
 up,  when  Frodo  said  suddenly  in  a  whisper: 'I  say, look  back! Do
 you see anything?'                                                       
   On  the  stage  they  had  left  they  seemed  to  see  a   dark  black
 bundle  sitting  in  the  gloom; it  seemed to  be peering,  or sniffing,
 this way and that at the ground they had trodden.                        
   'What in the Shire is that?' said Marmaduke.                          
   'Our  Adventure,  that  we  have  been  and  left  behind on  the other
 side; or at least  I hope  so,' said  Bingo. 'Can  horses get  across the
 River?'                                                                  
   'What  have  horses  got  to  do  with  it?  They  can  get  across,  I
 suppose,  if  they  can  swim; but  I have  never seen  them do  it here.
 There are bridges. But what have horses to do with it?'                  

      
                                                                      
  'A  great  deal!'  said  Bingo. 'But  let's get  away!' He  took Mar-
 maduke  by  the  arm  and  hurried  him up  the steps  on to  the path
 above  the  landing.  Frodo  looked back,  but the  far shore  was now
 shrouded in mist and nothing more could be seen.                      
  'Where  are  you  taking  us  for  the  night?'  asked  Odo.  'Not to
 Brandy Hall?'                                                         
  'Indeed  not!'  said   Marmaduke.  'It's   crowded.  And   anyway  I
 thought you wanted to  be secret.  I am  taking you  to a  nice little
 house on the far side of Bucklebury. It's  a mile  more, I  am afraid,
 but it is quite cosy and out of the  way. I  don't expect  anyone will
 notice  us.  You  wouldn't  want  to  meet old  Rory just  now, Bingo!
 He is  in a  ramping mood  still, about  your behaviour.  They treated
 him badly at the inn at  Bywater on  the party  night (they  were more
 full  up  than  Brandy  Hall);  and  then his  carriage broke  down on
 the  way  home,  on the  hill above  Woodhall, and  he blames  you for
 these accidents as well.'                                             
  'I don't want  to see  him, and  I don't  much mind  what he  says or
 thinks,' said Bingo. 'I wanted to get out of the Shire unseen, just to
 complete the joke,  but now  I have  other reasons  for wanting  to be
 secret. Let's hurry.'                                                 
                                                                      
  They came at  length to  a little  low one-storied  house. It  was an
 old-fashioned building,  as much  like a  hobbit-hole as  possible: it
 had  a  round  door  and  round  windows  and  a  low rounded  roof of
 turf.  It was  reached by  a narrow  green path,  and surrounded  by a
 circle of  green lawn,  round which  close bushes  grew. It  showed no
 lights.                                                               
  Marmaduke   unlocked   the   door,   and   light   streamed   out  in
 friendly  fashion. They  slipped quickly  in, and  shut the  light and
 themselves  inside.  They  were  in  a  wide  hall from  which several
 doors  opened.  'Here  we  are!'  said  Marmaduke.  'Not a  bad little
 place. We often use it for guests, since Brandy Hall is so frightfully
 full of Brandybucks. I have got it quietly  ready in  the last  day or
 two.                                                                  
  'Splendid fellow! ' said Bingo. 'I  was dreadfully  sorry you  had to
 miss that supper.'                                                    
  'So  was  I,'  said  Marmaduke.  'And after  hearing the  accounts of
 Rory  and  Melissa (11) (both  entirely different,  but I  expect equally
 true), I am sorrier still. But  I had  a merry  ride with  Gandalf and
 the  dwarves  and  Elves.'  We  met  some  more  Elves  on  the  way, (13)
 and there  was some  fine singing.  I have  never heard  anything like
 it before.'                                                           

 build all  round  about.  That  was  the  origin  of  the   village  of
 Bucklebury-by-the-River.  A  great  deal  of  the land  on the  west side
 of the river still belonged  to the  family, almost  as far  as Woodhall,
 but  most  of  the  actual  Brandybucks  lived  in  Buckland:  a  thickly
 inhabited  strip  between  the  River  and  the  Old  Forest,  a  sort of
 colony from the old Shire.                                               
   The  people of  the old  Shire, of  course, told  strange tales  of the
 Bucklanders;  but  as  a  matter  of fact  the Bucklanders  were hobbits,
 and  not  really  very  different  from  other  hobbits  of   the  North,
 South,  or  West  -  except in  one point:  they were  fond of  boats and
 some  of  them  could  swim.   Also  they   were  unprotected   from  the
 East  except  by  a  hedge,  THE  HEDGE.  It had  been planted  ages ago.
 It  now  ran  all  the  way  from  Brandywine  Bridge  to  Haysend  in  a
 big  loop,  furthest   from  the   River  behind   Bucklebury,  something
 like  forty  miles  from  end to  end." It  was thick  and tall,  and was
 constantly  tended.  But  of  course  it was  not a  complete protection.
 The  Bucklanders  kept  their  doors  locked,  and  that  also   was  not
 usual in the Shire.                                                      
                                                                         
   Marmaduke  helped  his  friends  into  a  small  boat  that lay  at the
 stage. He  then cast  off and  taking a  pair of  oars pulled  across the
 river.   Frodo   and   Bingo   had   often   been  to   Buckland  before.
 Bingo's    mother    was    a    Brandybuck.   Marmaduke    was   Frodo's
 cousin,  since  his  mother   Yolanda  was   Folco  Took's   sister,  and
 Folco   was   Frodo's    father.   Marmaduke    was   thus    Took   plus
 Brandybuck,  and  that  was  apt  to  be  a lively  blend.(10) But  Odo had
 never  been  so  far  East  before.  He  had  a  queer  feeling  as  they
 crossed the slow silent river, as if he had now at last started, as if he
 was crossing a boundary and leaving his old life on the other shore.     
   They  stepped  quietly  out  of  the  boat.  Marmaduke  was   tying  it
 up,  when  Frodo  said  suddenly  in  a  whisper: 'I  say, look  back! Do
 you see anything? '                                                      
   On  the  stage  they  had  left  they  seemed  to  see  a   dark  black
 bundle  sitting  in  the  gloom; it  seemed to  be peering,  or sniffing,
 this way and that at the ground they had trodden.                        
   'What in the Shire is that?' said Marmaduke.                          
   'Our  Adventure,  that  we  have  been  and  left  behind on  the other
 side; or at least  I hope  so,' said  Bingo. 'Can  horses get  across the
 River?'                                                                  
   'What  have  horses  got  to  do  with  it?  They  can  get  across,  I
 suppose,  if  they  can  swim; but  I have  never seen  them do  it here.
 There are bridges. But what have horses to do with it?'                  

       
                                                                      
  'A  great  deal!'  said  Bingo. 'But  let's get  away!' He  took Mar-
 maduke  by  the  arm  and  hurried  him up  the steps  on to  the path
 above  the  landing.  Frodo  looked back,  but the  far shore  was now
 shrouded in mist and nothing more could be seen.                      
  'Where  are  you  taking  us  for  the  night?'  asked  Odo.  'Not to
 Brandy Hall?'                                                         
  'Indeed  not!'  said   Marmaduke.  'It's   crowded.  And   anyway  I
 thought you wanted to  be secret.  I am  taking you  to a  nice little
 house on the far side of Bucklebury. It's  a mile  more, I  am afraid,
 but it is quite cosy and out of the  way. I  don't expect  anyone will
 notice  us.  You  wouldn't  want  to  meet old  Rory just  now, Bingo!
 He is  in a  ramping mood  still, about  your behaviour.  They treated
 him badly at the inn at  Bywater on  the party  night (they  were more
 full  up  than  Brandy  Hall);  and  then his  carriage broke  down on
 the  way  home,  on the  hill above  Woodhall, and  he blames  you for
 these accidents as well.'                                             
  'I don't want  to see  him, and  I don't  much mind  what he  says or
 thinks,' said Bingo. 'I wanted to get out of the Shire unseen, just to
 complete the joke,  but now  I have  other reasons  for wanting  to be
 secret. Let's hurry.'                                                 
                                                                      
  They came at  length to  a little  low one-storied  house. It  was an
 old-fashioned building,  as much  like a  hobbit-hole as  possible: it
 had  a  round  door  and  round  windows  and  a  low rounded  roof of
 turf.  It was  reached by  a narrow  green path,  and surrounded  by a
 circle of  green lawn,  round which  close bushes  grew. It  showed no
 lights.                                                               
  Marmaduke   unlocked   the   door,   and   light   streamed   out  in
 friendly  fashion. They  slipped quickly  in, and  shut the  light and
 themselves  inside.  They  were  in  a  wide  hall from  which several
 doors  opened.  'Here  we  are!'  said Marmaduke.  'Not a  bad little
 place. We often use it for guests, since Brandy Hall is so frightfully
 full of Brandybucks. I have got it quietly  ready in  the last  day or
 two.'                                                                 
  'Splendid fellow! ' said Bingo. 'I  was dreadfully  sorry you  had to
 miss that supper.'                                                    
  'So  was  I,'  said  Marmaduke.  'And after  hearing the  accounts of
 Rory  and  Melissa (11) (both  entirely different,  but I  expect equally
 true), I am sorrier still. But  I had  a merry  ride with  Gandalf and
 the  dwarves  and  Elves.'  We  met  some  more  Elves  on  the  way,(13)
 and there  was some  fine singing.  I have  never heard  anything like
 it before.'                                                           

 'Did Gandalf send me any message?' asked Bingo.                          
 'No,  nothing  special.  I  asked  him,  when  we got  to Brandywine      
 Bridge, if he wouldn't come along with me  and wait  for you,  so as      
 to be a guide and helping hand. But he said  he was  in a  hurry. In      
 fact, if you want to know,  he said:  "Bingo is  now old  enough and      
 foolish enough to look after himself for a bit."'(14)                    
 "I hope he is right,' said Bingo.                                         
                                                                          
 The  hobbits  hung  up  their  cloaks  and  sticks, and  piled their      
 packs  on  the  floor.  Marmaduke  went  forward  and  flung  open a      
 closed door. Firelight came out and a puff of steam.                      
 'Bath! ' cried Odo. '0 blessed Marmaduke! '                               
 'Which way shall we go: eldest  first, or  quickest first?  You will      
 be last either way, Odo,' said Frodo.                                     
 'Ha!  ha!'  said  Marmaduke.  'What  kind  of  an  innkeeper  do you      
 think I am? In that room  there are  three tubs;  and also  a copper      
 over a merry furnace that seems to be nearly on the boil.  There are      
 also towels, soap, mats, jugs, and what not. Get inside!'                 
 The  three  rushed  in  and  shut  the  door.  Marmaduke  went  into     
 the  kitchen,  and  while  he was  busy there  he heard  snatches of      
 competing  songs  mixed  with  the  sound  of splashing  and wallow-     
 ing. Over all the rest Odo's voice suddenly rose in a chant:              
                                                                          
                 Bless the mater 0 my feet and toes!                       
               Bless it O my ten fingers!                                  
               Bless the water, O Odo!                                    
               And praise the name of Marmaduke! (15)                     
                                                                          
 Marmaduke   knocked  on   the  door.   'All  Bucklebury   will  know      
 you have arrived before long,' he said. 'Also there is such a thing as
 supper. I cannot live on praise much longer.'                             
 Bingo   came   out.   'Lawks!'  said   Marmaduke  looking   in.  The      
 stone floor was all in pools. Frodo was drying in front of the fire;      
 Odo was still wallowing.                                                  
 'Come  on,  Bingo!' said  Marmaduke.  'Let's  begin   supper,  and      
 leave them! '                                                             
 They  had  supper  in the  kitchen on  a table  near the  open fire.      
 The others soon arrived. Odo was the  last, but  he quickly  made up      
 for  lost  time.  When  they  had  finished  Marmaduke  pushed  back      
 the table, and drew chairs round the fire. 'We'll clear up later,' he     
 said. 'Now tell me all about it!'(16)                                     
                                                                          
 Bingo stretched his legs and yawned. 'It's easy  in here,'  he said,      
 'and  somehow  our  adventure  seems  rather  absurd,  and   not  so      

 important  as it  did out  there. But  this is  what happened.  A Black
 Rider  came  up  behind  us  yesterday  afternoon  (it  seems   a  week
 ago), and I am sure he was looking for us, or me.  After that  he kept-
 on  reappearing  (always  behind).  Let me  see, yes,  we saw  him four
 times  altogether,  counting  the  figure  on  the  landing-stage,  and
 once  we  heard  his  horse,(17) and  once  we thought  we heard  just a
 sniff.'                                                               
   'What  are  you  talking about?' said Marmaduke.  'What is  a black
 rider? '                                                              
   'A black figure on a horse,'  said Bingo.  'But I  will tell  you all
 about  it.'  He  gave  a  pretty  good account  of their  journey, with
 occasional  additions  and  interruptions  by   Frodo  and   Odo.  Only
 Odo  was  still positive  that the  sniff they  thought they  heard was
 really part of the mystery.                                           
   'I should think you were making it  all up,  if I  had not  seen that
 queer shape this evening,'  said Marmaduke.  'What is  it all  about, I
 wonder?'                                                             
   'So  do  we!'  said  Frodo.   'Do  you   think  anything   of  Farmer
 Maggot's guess, that it has something to do with Bilbo?'              
   'Well,  it  was  only  a  guess  anyway,'  said  Bingo.  'I  am  sure
 old  Maggot  does  not  know  anything.  I  should  have  expected  the
 Elves  to  tell  me,  if  the Riders  had anything  to do  with Bilbo's
 adventures.'                                                          
   'Old  Maggot  is  rather  a  shrewd   fellow,'  said   Marmaduke.  'A
 good  deal  goes  on  behind  his round  face which  does not  come out
 in his talk. He used to go into  the Old  Forest at  one time,  and had
 the  reputation  of  knowing  a  thing  or   two  outside   the  Shire.
 Anyway I can guess no better. What are you going to do about it?'     
   'There is nothing  to do,  ' said  Bingo, 'except  to go  home. Which
 is difficult for me, as I haven't got one now. I shall just have  to go
 on, as the Elves advised. But you need not come, of course.'          
   'Of  course  not,'  said  Marmaduke.  'I  joined  the party  just for
 fun, and I am certainly not going to  leave it  now. Besides,  you will
 need  me.  Three's  company,  but  four's  more.  And  if the  hints of
 the Elves mean  what you  think, there  are at  least four  Riders, not
 to  mention  an invisible  sniff, and  a black  bundle on  the landing-
 stage. My advice is: let  us start  off even  earlier tomorrow  than we
 planned, and see if we can't get a  good start.  I rather  fancy Riders
 will have to go round by the bridges to get across the River.'        
   'But  we  shall  have  to  go  much  the same  way,' said  Bingo. 'We
 shall have to strike the East Road near Brandywine Bridge.'           
   'That's  not  my  idea,'  said  Marmaduke. 'I  think we  should avoid

 the  road at  present. It's  a waste  of time.  We should  actually be
 going  back  westward  if  we  made  for  the  road-meeting  near  the
 Bridge.  We  must  make  a  short  cut  north-east  through   the  Old
 Forest. I will guide you.'                                            
                                                                      
   'How can you?' asked Odo. 'Have you ever been there?'               
   '0 yes,' said Marmaduke. 'All the Brandybucks go there              
 occasionally, when the fit takes them. I often go - only  in daylight,
 of course, when the woods are fairly  quiet and  sleepy. Still  I know
 my  way  about.  If  we  start  early and  push along  we ought  to be
 quite  safe  and clear  of the  Forest before  tomorrow night.  I have
 got five good ponies  waiting -  sturdy little  beasts: not  speedy of
 course, but good  for a  long day's  work. They're  stabled in  a shed
 out in the fields behind this house.'                                 
   'I don't like the idea at all,' said Odo. 'I would rather meet these
 Riders (if  we must  meet them)  on a  road, where  there is  a chance
 of meeting ordinary  honest travellers  as well.  I don't  like woods,
 and  I  have  heard  queer  tales  of  the Old  Forest. I  think Black
 Riders will be very much more at home there than we shall.'           
   'But we shall probably be out of it again before they get  in,' said
 Marmaduke.  'It  seems  to  me  silly,  anyway,  when  you  are begin-
 ning  an  adventurous  journey  to  start  by  going back  and jogging
 along  a  dull  river-side road  - in  full view  of all  the numerous
 hobbits  of  Buckland.'  Perhaps  you  would  like  to  call  and take
 leave of old Rory at the Hall. It would be polite  and proper;  and he
 might lend you a carriage.'                                           
   'I  knew  you  would  propose  something  rash,'  said  Odo.  'But I
 am not going to  argue any  more, if  the others  agree. Let's  vote -
 though I am sure I shall be the odd man out.'                         
   He  was  -  though  Bingo  and  Frodo  took  some  time  to  make up
 their minds.                                                          
   'There you are!  ' said  Odo. 'What  did I  say this  morning? Three
 to one! Well, I only hope it comes off all right.'                    
   'Now that's settled,'  said Marmaduke,  'we had  better get  to bed.
 But  first  we must  clear up,  and do  all the  packing we  can. Come
 on! '                                                                 
   It  was  some  time  before  the  hobbits  finished  putting  things
 away,  tidying  up,  and  packing  what  they  needed  in  the  way of
 stores for their journey.  At last  they went  to bed  - and  slept in
 proper beds (but without sheets)  for the  last time  for many  a long
 day."  Bingo could  not go  to sleep  for some  time: his  legs ached.
 He was glad he was riding in the morning. At last he fell  asleep into
 a  vague  dream,  in  which  he  seemed  to  be  lying under  a window

          
                                                                             
 that looked out into a sea of tangled trees: outside there was a             
 snuffling.                                                                   
                                                                             
                                    NOTES.                                    
                                                                             
 1.   It is at first sight puzzling that Frodo should  say that  'Buckland is
      almost  exactly  south-east  from  Woodhall',  and   again  immediately
      below that they  could strike  the road  again 'above  Buckland', since
      later in  this chapter  (p. 100)  Buckland is  described as  'a thickly
      inhabited  strip between  the River  and the  Old Forest',  defended by
      the  Hedge  some  forty  miles  long  -  clearly too  large an  area to
      be  described  as  'almost  exactly  south-east  from   Woodhall'.  The
      explanation  must  be,  however,  that  my  father changed  the meaning
      of the name Buckland in the course  of the  chapter. At  first Buckland
      was a place, a village, rather than a region (at its first occurrence it
      replaced   Bury  Underwood,   which  in   turn  replaced   Wood  Eaton,
      p. 35 note 5), and it still was so here; but further on in  the chapter
      the  village  of  Bucklebury-by-the-River  emerged  (p. 92),  and Buck-
      land  then  became  the  name  of  the  Brandybucks'  land  beyond  the
      River. See note 5, and the note on the Shire Map, p. 107.               
 2.   See the note on the Shire Map, p. 107.                                  
 3.   A  hastily  pencilled  note  on  the typescript  here reads:  'Sound of
      hoofs going by not far off.' See p. 287.                                
 4.   Maggot  was  later  struck  out  in pencil  and replaced  by Puddifoot,
      but only in this one instance. On the  earliest map  of the  Shire (see
      p. 107) the farm is marked, in  ink, Puddifoot,  changed in  pencil to
      Maggot.  The  Puddifoots  of  Stock  are  mentioned  in  FR,   p.  101.
 5.   Here  again  Buckland  still signifies  the village  (see note  x); but
      Bucklebury appears shortly  after (p.  92), the  name being  typed over
      an erasure.                                                             
 6.   The  substance  of  this passage  about hobbit-holes  and hobbit-houses
      was  afterwards  placed  in  the  Prologue.  See  further pp. 294, 312.
 7.   Towers  built  on  the  western  coasts  of  Middle-earth by  exiles of
      Numenor  are  mentioned  in  the   second  version   of  The   Fall  of
      Numenor  (V.28,  30).  -  The  substance  of  this  passage   was  also
      afterwards placed  in the  Prologue (see  note 6),  and there  also the
      towers  are  called  'Elf-towers'.  Cf. Of  the Rings  of Power  in The
      Silmarillion, p. 292: 'It is said that the towers  of Emyn  Beraid were
      not built indeed  by the  exiles of  Numenor, but  were raised  by Gil-
      galad for Elendil, his friend.'
 8.   came at last back to the mad: this is of course the road they  had been
      walking on originally, 'the road to Buckland', at  this time  there was
      no  causeway  road  running  south  from the  Brandywine Bridge  on the
      west bank of the river (and no village of Stock).                       
 9.   In FR (p. 109) the distance  is 'well  over twenty  miles from  end to
      end.' See p. 298.                                                       

                                           
                                                                              
  10. This   genealogy  was   afterwards  wholly   abandoned,  of   course,  but
      the   mother  of   Meriadoc  (Marmaduke)   remained  a   Took  (Esmeralda,
      who married Saradoc Brandybuck, known as 'Scattergold').                 
  11. Melissa  Brandybuck   appeared  in   the  fourth   version  of   'A  Long-
      expected  Party',  on  which  occasion   she  danced   on  a   table  with
      Prospero Took (p. 38).                                                   
  12. Bingo  told  Gildor  (p.  63)  that  Gandalf  'went  off with  the dwarves
      and  the Rivendell  elves as  soon as  the fireworks  were over.'  This is
      the   first   appearance   of  the   story  that   Marmaduke/Meriadoc  had
      been at Hobbiton but had left early.                                     
  13. We met  some more  Elves on  the way:  these were  the Elves  of Gildor's
      company,   who   thus   already   knew   about   the  Party   when  Bingo,
      Frodo and Odo encountered them (p. 68, note 17).                         
  14. Cf.  the  note  cited on  p. 41:  'Where is  G[andalf] asks  Odo -  said I
      was  old  and  foolish  enough  now  to  take  care  of  myself  said  B.'
  15. This 'chant' was emended on the typescript thus:                         
                                                                              
                 Bless the water, O my feet and toes!                         
                 Praise the bath, O my ten fingers!                            
                 Bless the water, O my knees and shoulders!                   
                 Praise the bath, O my ribs, and rejoice!                      
                 Let Odo praise the house of Brandybuck,                       
                 And praise the name of Marmaduke for ever.                    
                                                                              
      This  new  version  belongs  to  the  time  of  the manuscript  portion at
      the end of the chapter (note 16).                                        
  16. Here  the  typescript  ends,  and  the  remainder  is  in  manuscript; see
                                                                              
      p. 109.                                                                  
                                                                              
  17. and once we heard his horse: this is  a reference  to the  revised passage
      in the second chapter, where it  is told  that a  Black Rider  stopped his
      horse  for  a moment  on the  road beside  the tree  in which  the hobbits
      were sitting (p. 55 and note 11).                                       
  18. This  is  a  reference  to  the  road  within  Buckland.  Cf. p.  53: 'the
      ordinary  way  to  Buckland  was  along the  East Road  to the  meeting of
      the  Water  and  the  Brandywine  River,  where  there  was a  bridge, and
      then south along the River.'                                             
  19. It is clear from this that my father  had not  yet foreseen  the hobbits'
      visit to the house of Tom Bombadil.                                      
                                                                              
                              Note on the Shire Nap.                           
                                                                              
  There  are  four  extant  maps  of  the  Shire  made  by  my  father,  and two
  which  I  made,  but only  one of  them, I  think, can  contain an  element or
  layer  that  goes  back  to  the time  when these  chapters were  written (the
  first  months  of  1938).  This  is however  a convenient  place to  give some
  indications concerning all of them.                                          

 I. An  extremely  rough  map  (reproduced  as  the  frontispiece),  built up
  in  stages,   and  done   in  pencil   and  red,   blue,  and   black  inks;
  extending  from  Hobbiton   in  the   West  to   the  Barrow-downs   in  the
  East.  In  its inception  this was  the first,  or at  least the  first that
  survives.  Some  features  were  first  marked  in  pencil  and  then  inked
  over.                                                                       
 II. A map  on a  smaller scale  in faint  pencil and  blue and  red chalks,
  extending  to  the  Far  Downs  in  the  West,   but  showing   little  more
  than the courses of roads and rivers.                                       
 III. A map of roads and rivers  on a  larger scale  than II,  extending from
  Michel  Delving  in  the  West  to  the  Hedge  of  Buckland,   but  without
  any names (see on map V below).                                             
 IV. A  small  scale  map  extending  from  the Green  Hill country  to Bree,
  carefully   drawn   in  ink   and  coloured   chalks,  but   soon  abandoned
  and marking only a few features.                                            
 V. An  elaborate  map  in  pencil  and  coloured  chalks  which  I  made in
  1943  (see  p.  200),  for  which  III  (showing only  the courses  of roads
  and  rivers)  was  very  clearly  the  basis and  which I  followed closely.
  No doubt III was made by my father for this purpose.                       
 VI. The  map  which  was published  in The  Fellowship of  the Ring;  this I
  made  not  long  before  its  publication (that  is to  say, some  ten years
  after map V).                                                               
  In what follows I consider only certain  features arising  in the  course of
  this chapter.                                                               
    Buckland  is  almost  exactly  south-east from  Woodhall  (p.  89).  Buck-
  land was still here the name of the village (see  note 1  above); Bucklebury
  first  appears on  p. 92.  On map  I Bucklebury  does indeed  lie south-east
  (or strictly  east-south-east) from  Woodhall, but  on map  II the  Ferry is
  due east, and on  III it  is east-north-east,  whence the  representation on
  my maps V and VI. In the original edition of FR (p. 97)  the text  had here
  'The Ferry is south-east from Woodhall',  which was  corrected to  'east' in
  the  revised  edition  (second  impression  1967)  when  my  father observed
  the  discrepancy  with  the  published  map. The  shifting had  clearly come
  about unintentionally. (It  may be  noticed incidentally  that all  the maps
  show  Woodhall  on  a  side  road  (the  'lane')  going  off  from  that  to
  Buckland;  see p. 66, note 10).
  The  road  bean  away  to the  left... and  then sweeps  mund south  when it
  gets  nearer  to  the  River  (p.  89).  This  southward  sweep  is strongly
  marked  on  map  I  (and  repeated  on  map  II),  where  the  Buckland road
  joins the causeway road above the  village of  Stock (as  Frodo says  in FR,
  p. 97: 'It goes round the north end of the Marish so as to strike the cause-
  way  from  the  Bridge  above  Stock'). At  the time  when this  chapter was
  written there was  no causeway  road (note  8). This  is another  case where
  the text of FR accords  with map  I, but  not with  the published  map (VI);
  in this case, however, my father did not correct  the text.  On map  III the
  Buckland  road  does  not  'sweep round  south': but  after bearing  away to

                                                     
                                                                                    
 the  left  or  north  (before reaching  Woodhall) it  runs in  a straight  line due
 east  to  meet  the  road  from  the  Bridge.  This  I  followed  on  my map  V; but
 the  village  of  Stock  was  not  marked  on  III,  which  only  shows  roads and
 rivers,  and  I  placed  the  road-meeting  actually  in  the  village,  not  to the
 north  of  it.  Although,  as  I  clearly  recollect, map  V was  made in  his study
 and  in  conversation  with  him,  my  father  cannot  have  noticed  my   error  in
 this point. The published map simply follows V.                                     
  One   other   point   may   be   noticed   here.   Marmaduke   twice    (pp.   100,
 103)  refers  to  'bridges'  over  the  Brandywine,  but  none  of  the  maps  shows
 any  other  bridge  but   that  which   carried  the   East  Road,   the  Brandywine
 Bridge.                                                                             
                                 *
                                                   
    My father's letter to Stanley Unwin quoted on page 44 shows that he
 had finished this chapter by 4 March 1938. Three months later, on 4 June           
 1938, he wrote to Stanley Unwin saying:                                             
  I  meant  long  ago to  have thanked  Rayner for  bothering to  read the           
 tentative chapters, and for his excellent criticism. It agrees strikingly           
 with  Mr  Lewis', which  is therefore  confirmed. I  must plainly  bow to           
 my  two  chief  (and  most  well-disposed) critics.  The trouble  is that           
 'hobbit talk'* amuses me privately (and to a certain  degree also  my boy           
 Christopher)  more  than  adventures;  but  I  must  curb  this severely.           
 Although longing to do so, I have not had  a chance  to touch  any story-           
 writing since the Christmas vacation.                                               
 And he added that he could not 'see any loophole left for months.'  On 24           
 July he said in a letter to Charles Furth at Allen and Unwin:                       
  The sequel to the Hobbit has remained where it stopped.  It has  lost my           
 favour, and I have no idea what to do with it. For one thing the original           
 Hobbit  was  never  intended  to  have  a sequel  - Bilbo  'remained very           
 happy to the  end of  his days  and those  were extraordinarily  long': a           
 sentence I find an almost  insuperable obstacle  to a  satisfactory link.           
 For another nearly all the 'motives' that I can use were packed  into the           
 original book, so that a sequel  will appear  either 'thinner'  or merely           
 repetitional.  For  a  third:  I  am   personally  immensely   amused  by           
 hobbits  as  such,  and  can  contemplate  them  eating and  making their           
 rather fatuous jokes indefinitely; but I find that is  not the  case with           
 even  my  most  devoted  'fans' (such  as Mr  Lewis, and?  Rayner Unwin).           
 Mr  Lewis  says  hobbits  are  only amusing  when in  unhobbitlike situa-           
 tions. For a last: my mind on the 'story' side is really preoccupied with           
 the 'pure' fairy stories or mythologies of  the Silmarillion,  into which           
 even  Mr  Baggins  got dragged  against my  original will,  and I  do not           
                                                                                    
 (* Rayner  Unwin  had  said  that  the  second and  third chapters  'have I  think a
 little too much conversation and "hobbit talk" which tends to make it lag a little.')

                                    
                                                                             
 think I shall be able to move much outside it  - unless  it is  finished (and
 perhaps published) - which has a releasing effect.                           
 At the beginning of this extract  my father  was repeating  what he  had said
 in his letters  of 17  and 18  February quoted  on pp.  43 -  4, when  he had
 written no more than  'A Long-expected  Party'. But  it is  very hard  to see
 why  he  said here  that he  found the  sentence in  The Hobbit,  that Bilbo
 'remained  very  happy  to the  end of  his days  and those  were extraordin-
 arily long', 'an almost insuperable obstacle to  a satisfactory  link", since
 what  he  had  written  at  this  stage  was  not about  Bilbo but  about his
 'nephew'  Bingo,  and  in  so  far as  Bilbo was  mentioned nothing  had been
 said to show that he did not  remain happy  till the  end of  his extraordin-
 arily long days.                                                             
 This  then  is  where  the  narrative  stopped,  and  stayed  stopped through
 some  six  months  or  more.  With  abundant  'hobbit-talk'  on  the  way, he
 had  got  Bingo,  Frodo,  and  Odo  to  Buckland  on  the  way  to Rivendell,
 whither  Gandalf  had  preceded   them.  They   had  encountered   the  Black
 Riders,  Gildor  and  his  company  of  Elves,   and  Farmer   Maggot,  where
 their visit ended in a much  less satisfactory  way than  it would  do later,
 through an outrageous  practical joke  on Bingo's  part (the  comic potential
 of  which  had  by   no  means   been  exhausted);   they  had   crossed  the
 Brandywine,  and  arrived  at  the   little  house   prepared  for   them  by
 Marmaduke  Brandybuck.  In his  letter to  Charles Furth  just cited  he said
 that he had  'no idea  what to  do with  it', but  Tom Bombadil,  the Willow-
 man  and  the  Barrow-wights  were  already  envisaged as  possibilities (see
                                                                             
 pp. 42-3).                                                                   
 On  31 August  1938  he  wrote  again to  Charles Furth,  and now  a great
 change had taken place:                                                      
 In the last two or three  days... I  have begun  again on  the sequel  to the
 'Hobbit'  -  The  Lord  of the  Ring. It  is now  flowing along,  and getting
 quite  out  of  hand.  It  has  reached  about  Chapter  VII  and  progresses
 towards quite unforeseen goals.                                              
 He  said  'about  Chapter  VII'  on  account  of  uncertainty  over  chapter-
 divisions (see p. 132).                                                      
 The  passage  in  manuscript  at  the end  of the  present chapter  (see note
 i 6 above) was (I feel certain) added to the typescript at this time, and was
 the  beginning  of  this new  burst of  narrative energy.  My father  had now
 decided  that  the  hobbits'  journey would  take them  into the  Old Forest,
 that 'dubious region' which had  appeared in  the third  version of  'A Long-
 expected  Party'  (p.  29),  and  where  he  had  already suggested  in early
 notes  (p.  43)  that  the  hobbits  should  become  lost  and caught  by the
 Willow-man. And 'the sequel to The  Hobbit' is  given -  for the  first time,
 it seems - a title: The Lord of the Ring (see p. 74 and note 3).            

                                       V.                                     
                             THE OLD FOREST AND THE                           
                                  WITHYWINDLE.                                
                                                                             
 In the letter of  31 August  1938 quoted  at the  end of  the last  chapter my
 father said that 'in the last two or three days'  he had  turned again  to the
 book, that it was 'flowing along, and getting quite out of hand', and  that it
 had  reached  'about Chapter  VII'. It  is clear  that in  those few  days the
 hobbits  had  passed  through  the  Old  Forest  by  way  of  the  Withywindle
 valley,  stayed  in  the  house  of  Tom  Bombadil,  escaped from  the Barrow-
 wight, and reached Bree,                                                     
  There  is  very  little preliminary  sketching of  the original  fourth chap-
 ter, and such as there is I give here. There is  first a  page dashed  down in
 soft  pencil  and  now  very  difficult  to read;  I introduce  some necessary
 punctuation  and  small  connective  words  that  were  omitted,   and  expand
 the initial letters that stand for names.                                    
                                                                             
  They  got  on  to the  ponies and  rode off  into the  mist. After          
 riding more than an hour they came to  the Hedge.  It was  tall and          
 netted over with silver cobwebs.                                             
  'How do we get through this?' said Odo.                                    
  'There  is  a  way,'  said  Marmaduke.  Following  him  along  the          
 Hedge  they  came to  a small  brick-lined tunnel.  It went  down a          
 gully  and  dived  right under  the Hedge,  coming out  some twenty          
 yards at the far side, where it was closed by a gate of  close iron          
 bars. Marmaduke unlocked this, let them out,  and locked  it again.          
 As it snapped back they all felt a sudden pang.                              
  'There,'  said  Marmaduke.  'You  have  now left  the Shire  - and          
 are [?outside] and close to the edge of the Old Forest.'                     
  'Are the stories about it true?' said Odo.                                 
  'I don't know what stories you mean -  if you  mean the  old bogey          
 stories our nurses used to tell  us, about  goblins and  wolves and          
 things of that sort, no.  But it  is queer.  Everything in  the Old          
 Forest is very much more  alive, more  aware of  what is  going on,          
 than in the Shire. And they don't like  strangers. The  trees watch          
 you. But they don't do much in  daylight. [?Occasionally]  the most          
 malicious ones may drop a branch or stick  a root  out or  grasp at          
 you with long trailers. But at night things can get most disturbing          
 - I am told. I have only once been in the Old Forest, and then only          

 near the edge,  after dark.  I thought  the trees  were all  whispering to
 each  other  although  there  was   no  wind,   and  the   branches  waved
 about  and  groped.  They  do  say  the  trees   actually  move   and  can
 surround  strangers  and  hem  them  in.  They  used  long  ago  to attack
 the  Hedge,  come  and  plant  themselves right  by it  and lean  over it.
 But we  burn[t] the  ground all  along the  east side  for miles  and they
 gave  it  up.  There  are  also  queer  things living  deep in  the Forest
 and on the far side. But  I have  not heard  that they  are very  fierce -
 at  least  not   in  daytime.   But  something   makes  paths   and  keeps
 them  open.  There  is  the  beginning  of  a  great  and  broad  one that
 goes  more  or  less  in  our  direction.  That  is  the  one I  am making
 for.'                                                                     
   The   ground   was  rising   steadily  and   as  their   ponies  plodded
 along  the  trees  became  darker  and  thicker and  taller. There  was no
 sound,  save  an.occasional  drip;  but  they  all  got  an  uncomfortable
 feeling  which  steadily  increased  that  they   were  being   watched  -
 with  disapproval  if  not  dislike.  Marmaduke  tried  to  sing,  but his
 voice  soon  fell  to  a  hum  and  then  died away.  A small  branch fell
 from  an  old  tree  with  a  crack  on  the  ground  behind   them.  They
 stopped, startled, and looked round.                                      
   'The   trees   seem   to   object   to   my  singing,'   said  Marmaduke
 cheerfully. 'All right, we'll wait till we get to a more open point.'     
   Clearing hillock view sun up mist goes turns hot                        
   Trees bar way. They turn [?always...... side]                           
   Willowman. Meeting with Tombombadil.                                    
   [Struck out: Barrow-wights]                                             
   Camp on the downs                                                       
                                                                          
   Whereas this piece begins as narrative and tails off into notes, another
 page is expressly a 'sketch' of the story to be written:                  
                                                                          
   The  path  winds  on   and  they   get  tired.   They  cannot   get  any
 view. At  last they  see a  bare hillock  (crowned by  a few  pines) ahead
 looking  down  onto  the  path.  They  reach  this   and  find   the  mist
 gone,  and  the  sun  very  hot  and  nearly  above.  x  t  o'clock.  They
 rest  and  eat.  But  they  can  see  only  forest  all round,  and cannot
 make  out  either  Hedge  or  line  of  the road  northward, but  the bare
 downland  East  and  South  lies  green-grey   in  the   distance.  Beyond
 the  hillock  the  path  turns  southwards.  They  determine  to  leave it
 and  strike  N.E.  by  the  sun.  But trees  bar the  way. They  are going
 downhill,   and   brambles   and   bushes,   hazels   and   whatnot  block
 them.   Every.....   [?opening]   leads   them   away   to   their  right.
 Eventually   when   it   is   already   afternoon  they   find  themselves

 coming  to  a  willow-bordered  river  -  the  Withywindle.(1) Mar-          
 maduke knows this flows through the forest from the downs to join          
 the Brandywine at Haysend. There  seems some  sort of  rough path          
 going upstream. But  a great  sleepiness comes  on them.  Odo and          
 Bingo cannot go on without a rest. They sit down with their backs          
 to  a  great  willow,  while  Frodo and  Marmaduke attend  to the          
 ponies.  Willowman  traps Bingo  and Odo.  Suddenly a  singing is          
 heard  in  the  distance.  (Tom Bombadil  not named).  The Willow          
 relaxes its hold.                                                          
   They get  through to  end of  forest as  evening comes  on, and          
 climb on to the downs. It gets very cold - mist is followed  by a          
 chilly  drizzle. They  shelter under  a big  barrow. Barrow-wight          
 takes them  inside. They  wake to  find themselves  buried alive.          
 They  shout.  At  last  Marmaduke  and  Bingo  begin  a  song. An          
 answering song  outside. Tom  Bombadil opens  the stone  door and          
 lets them out. They go to his house for the  night -  two Barrow-          
 wights  come  [?galloping] after  them, but  stop every  time Tom          
 Bombadil turns and looks at them.                                          
                                                                           
   At this stage, then, their first encounter  with Tom  Bombadil was  to be
 very brief, and they would not be his guests until after their  escape from
 the barrow up on the downs; but  no narrative  of this  form is  found, and
 doubtless none was written.                                                
   It is of course possible that other preliminary  drafting has  been lost,
 but the earliest extant text of the original fourth chapter  (numbered 'IV'
 but with no title) looks like composition  ab initio,  with many  words and
 sentences  and  even  whole  pages  rejected  and replaced  at the  time of
 writing. For most of its length, however,  this is  an orderly  and legible
 manuscript,  though  rapidly written,  and increasingly  so as  it proceeds
 (see note 3). It is then remarkable that this text reaches at a  stroke the
 narrative as published in FR (Chapter 6, 'The Old  Forest'), with  only the
 most  minor  differences  -  other  than the  different cast  of characters
 (largely a matter of names) and different attribution of 'parts', and often
 and for substantial stretches with almost exactly the wording of  the final
 form.  My  father  might  well  say  that  The  lard of  the Ring  was 'now
 flowing along'.                                                            
   There  are  a  few  particular points  to notice.  First, as  regards the
 characters, the  'spoken parts'  are variously  distributed as  between the
 first form and the final. Fredegar Bolger is of course  not present  to see
 them off at the entrance to the tunnel  under the  Hedge, and  his question
 'How  are you  going to  get through  this?' (FR  p. 120)  is given  to Odo
 ('How do we get through this?', cf.  p. x  to). The  verse 0!  Wanderers in
 the  shadowed  land,(2) Frodo's in FR  (p. 123),  is here  Marmaduke's, but
 changed,  probably  immediately,  to  Frodo  Took's. Pippin's  objection to
 taking the path by the Withywindle (FR pp. 126 - 7) is Bingo's; and  in the

  scene  with Old  Man Willow  the parts  are quite  distinct. In  the original
  version  it  is  Bingo  and Odo  who are  totally overcome  by sleep  and lay
  themselves  against  the  willow-trunk,  and  it  is  Marmaduke  who  is more
  resistant  and  alarmed  at  the  onset  of  drowsiness.  Frodo  Took  ('more
  adventurous')  goes  down  to  the  river-bank  (as  does  Frodo  Baggins  in
  FR), and falling asleep at the  Willow's feet  is tipped  into the  water and
  held  under  by  a  root,  while  Marmaduke plays  the later  part of  Sam in
  rounding  up  the  ponies,  rescuing  Frodo  (Took   or  Baggins)   from  the
  river, and discussing with him how to  release the  prisoners from  the tree.
  Yet despite the later redistribution of parts in this  scene, and  the advent
  of Sam  Gamgee, the  old text  is very  close to  the final  form, as  may be
  seen from this example (cf. FR p. 128).                                      
                                                                              
  Marmaduke   gripped   him   [Frodo  Took]   by  the   back  of   his  jacket,
  and  dragged   him  from   under  the   tree-root,  and   laid  him   on  the
  bank. Almost at once he woke, and coughed and spluttered.                    
    'Do  you  know,'  he  said,  'the beast  threw me  in! I  felt it  and saw
  it: the big root just twizzled round and threw me in.'                       
    'You   were   dreaming,'    said   Marmaduke.    'I   left    you   asleep,
  though I thought it rather a silly place to sit in.'                         
    'What  about  the  other  two?  '  asked  Frodo.  'I  wonder  what  sort of
  dreams they've had?'                                                         
    They    went    round    to    the    landward    side.    Marmaduke   then
  understood  the  click.  Odo  had  vanished.   The  crack   he  lay   in  had
  closed  to,  so  that  not  a  chink could  be seen.  Bingo was  trapped; for
  his crack had closed to about his waist...                                   
                                                                              
   There are also a few minor points of topography to mention. It is said
 in the outline (p. 111) that the hillock was crowned with pines, and
 this was retained: it had 'a knot of pine-trees at the top', under which the
 hobbits sat. In FR (p. 124) the hill is likened to a bald head, and the trees
 about it to 'thick hair that ended sharply in a circle round a shaven
 crown.' - When later they came to the end of the gully and looked out
 from the trees at the Withywindle, they were at the top of a cliff:
 Suddenly the woodland trees came to an end, and the gully ended at
 the top of a bank that was almost a cliff. Over this the stream dived,
 and fell in a series of small waterfalls. Looking down they saw that
 below them was a wide space of grass and reeds...
   Marmaduke scrambled down to the river, and disappeared into the
 long grass and low bushes. After a while he reappeared and called up to
 them from a patch of turf some thirty feet below. He reported that
 there was fairly solid ground between the bank and the river...
 In FR (p. 126) it is clear that the hobbits, following the little stream
 down the gully, had reached the level of the Withywindle valley while
                                                  still in the deep woodland:

  Coming  to  the  opening  they  found  that  they  had  made  their  way down
  through a cleft in a high steep bank, almost a cliff. At its feet was  a wide
  space of grass and reeds...                                                  
       [Merry]  passed  out  into the  sunshine and  disappeared into  the long
  grasses. After a while he reappeared, and reported...                        
  Subsequently, in the  original version,  there is  anxiety about  the descent
  of the ponies from the cliff; they got down in  fact without  difficulty, but
  Frodo  Took 'put  too much  weight on  a grassy  lump that  stuck out  like a
  step, and went down with his head over heels for the last fifteen feet or so;
  but he came to no great  harm at  the bottom,  for the  ground was  soft.' In
  FR (p. 127) the hobbits merely 'filed out' from the trees.                   
    The  last  part  of  the  chapter,  in  which  Tom  Bombadil  appears,  and
  which  ends with  the same  words as  in FR  ('a golden  light was  all about
  them'), is so close to the final form (3) that  only one  small matter  need be
  mentioned. It is made just as clear here  as in  FR that  the path  which the
  hobbits  followed  beside  the  Withywindle  lay  on  the  north side  of the
  river,  the  side from  which they  descended out  of the  forest, and  it is
  therefore  strange  that  the  approach  to  Tom  Bombadil's house  should be
  described thus:                                                              
    The  grass  under  their  feet  was  smooth  and  short,  and seemed  to be
  mown  and  shaven.  The  forest  edge   behind  them   was  as   clipped  and
  trim  as  a  hedge.  The  path  was  edged  with  white  stones;  and turning
  sharp to the left went over a little bridge. It  then wound  up onto  the top
  of a round knoll...                                                          
  But the path was already on the left side of the river  as it  went upstream.
  Later on, this text was very heavily corrected,  and the  FR version  all but
  achieved; yet this detail  was retained:  'The path  was bordered  with white
  stones; and turning sharp  to the  left it  led them  over a  wooden bridge.'
  Later  again,  the  word  'left' was  changed to  'right', implying  that Tom
  Bombadil's  house  lay  on the  south side  of the  Withywindle. In  FR there
  is  no  mention  of  a  bridge. My  father's map  of the  Shire (see  p. 107:
  map  I)  probably  shows  that he  changed his  mind on  this point;  for the
  underlying  pencil  shows  'TB', with  a dark  mark beside  it, on  the south
  side, whereas the ink overlay shows  the house  to the  north of  the stream.
  See further pp. 327 - 8.                                                     
                                                                              
                                      NOTES.                                   
                                                                              
  1. The first occurrence of the name Withywindle,                           
  2. The verse has shadow-land for shadowed land in the first line, but is     
     otherwise as in FR. Rough working for a verse in this place is also       
     found. My father first wrote: 'O wanderers in the land of trees I         
     despair not for there is no wood', but this was broken off and the        
     following suggested:                                                      
                    think not of hearth that lies behind                       
                    but set your hearts on distant hills                       

                                 
                                                                          
         beyond the rising of the sun.                                     
         The journey is but new begun,                                    
         the road goes ever on before                                      
         past many a house and many a door                                 
         over mater and under wood                                         
 3. Towards  the  end  of  the  chapter  the  manuscript  becomes extremely
 confused.   From   the    point   where    Marmaduke   and    Frodo   Took
 discover  that  Bingo   and  Odo   are  trapped   by  the   Willow-man  my
 father  changed  from  ink  to  pencil,  and  degenerating  into  a  rapid
 scribble the chapter  seems to  have petered  out in  the course  of their
 rescue  by  Tom  Bombadil;  but  he  subsequently   erased  most   of  the
 pencilled  text,  or  overwrote  it  in ink,  and continued  on in  ink to
 the  end  of  the  chapter.  This  concluding  portion  departs  from  the
 preliminary  sketch  given  on  p.  112, where  the hobbits  after their
 rescue  went  up  on  to  the  Downs  and  were  captured  by  the Barrow-
 wight;  here,  as  in  FR,  Tom  invites them  to come  to his  house, and
 goes  on  ahead  up  the  path beside  the Withywindle.  The last  part of
 the  manuscript  is  probably, strictly  speaking, a  subsequent addition;
 but the matter is of slight importance, since  all this  writing obviously
 belongs to the same period of work, at the end of August 1938.           
                                                                          
                 Note on Tom Bombadil.                                     
                                                                          
   Tom Bombadil, Goldberry, Old Man Willow, and the Barrow-wight
 had already existed for some time, appearing in print in the pages of The
 Oxford Magazine (Vol. LII, no. 13, 15 February 1934). In a letter of
 1954 my father said:
    I don't think Tom needs philosophizing about, and is not improved by
    it. But many have found him an odd or indeed discordant ingredient.
    In historical fact I put him in because I had already 'invented' him
    independently (he first appeared in the Oxford Magazine) and wanted
    an 'adventure' on the way.*
    On a small isolated piece of paper are found the following verses. At
 the top of the page my father wrote: 'Date unknown - germ of Tom
 Bombadil so evidently in mid 1930s'; and this note was written at the
 same time as the text, which is certainly quite late. There is no trace of
 the text from which it was copied.
                                                                          
                      (Said I)                                             
         'Ho! Tom Bombadil                                                 
            Whither are you going                                          
         With John Pompador                                                 
            Down the River rowing?'                                        
                                                                          
 (* The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien, no. 153. Some major observations on Tom
 Bombadil are found in this letter and in no. 144.)                        

                             (Said he)                                     
        'Through Long Congleby,                                            
             Stoke Canonicorum,+                                           
         Past King's Singleton                                             
             To Bumby Cocalorum -                                          
                                                                          
         To call Bill Willoughby                                           
             Whatever he be doing,                                  
         And ax Harry Larraby                      
             What beer he is a-brewing.'                                  
                                                                          
                    (And he sang)                                          
    'Co, boat! Row! The willows are a-bending,                            
    reeds are leaning, wind is in the grasses.                            
    Flow, stream, flow! The ripples are unending;                           
    green they gleam, and shimmer as  it passes.                           
                                                                          
      Run, fair Sun, through heaven all the morning,                        
     rolling golden. Merry is our singing.                                  
    Cool the pools, though summer be a-burning;                            
      in shady glades let laughter run a-ringing!'                         
                                                                          
  The  poem  published  in The Oxford  Magazine  in  1934  bore  the title
 The Adventures of  Tom Bombadil  (in earlier  forms it  was The  History of
 Tom Bombadil). Many years later (1962) my  father made  it the  first poem
 in the collection to which it gave the title  (and added  also a  new poem,
 Bombadil  Goes  Boating,   in  which   he  meets   Farmer  Maggot   in  the
 Marish). Various changes were made  in this  later version,  and references
 to  the  Withywindle were  introduced, but  the old  poem was  very largely
 preserved. In it are to be found the origin of many things in this  and the
 following chapters - the closing crack in the Great  Willow (though  in the
 poem  it  was Tom  himself who  was caught  in it),  the supper  of 'yellow
 cream and honeycomb,  and white  bread, and  butter', the  'nightly noises'
 that  included  the  tapping  of  the  branches  of Old  Man Willow  on the
 window-pane,  the  words  of  the  Barrow-wight  (who   in  the   poem  was
 inside Tom's house) 'I am waiting for you', and much else.                
                                                                          
  + Mediaeval name of what is now Stoke Canon in Devonshire.               

                                      VI.                                   
                                 TOM BOMBADIL.                              
                                                                           
 A very brief outline shows my father's first thoughts for the next  stage of
 the hobbits' journey: their visit to the house of Tom Bombadil.            
                                                                           
   Tom  Bombadil  rescues  them  from  Willow Man.  He says  it was         
 lucky he came that way - he had  gone to  the water-lily  pool for         
 some white water-lilies for Goldberry (my wife).                           
   He  turns  out  to  know  Farmer  Maggot.  (Make  Maggot  not  a         
 hobbit, but some other kind of creature - not  dwarf, but  akin to         
 Tom Bombadil). They rest at  his house.  He says  only way  out is         
 along his path beside  the Withywindle.  Description of  feast and         
 [? willow] fire. Many noises at night.                                     
   Tom  Bombadil  wakes  them  singing derry  dol, and  opening all         
 the windows (he lives in a little house under the down-side facing         
 the forest edge and the [?east corner] of the wood). He tells them         
 to  go  north  but  avoid  the  high Downs  and barrows.  He manas         
 them of barrow-wights; tells them a song to  sing if  the barrow-         
 wights frighten them or                                                    
   A cold day. The mist thickens and they get lost.                         
                                                                           
 This scheme was written at great speed in pencil. As  will be  seen shortly,
 at  this  stage  the hobbits  only spent  the one  night with  Tom Bombadil,
 and  left  the  following  morning.  Another  set  of notes,  also obviously
 preceding the first actual narrative text, is also  very difficult  to read:
                                                                           
   Water-lily motive - last lilies of summer for Goldberry.                 
    Relation of Tom Bombadil to Farmer Maggot ( Maggot not a               
 hobbit?)                                                                   
   Tom Bombadil is an 'aborigine' - he knew  the land  before men,          
 before hobbits, before barrow-wights, yes before  the necromancer          
 - before the elves came to this quarter of the world.                      
   Goldberry says he is 'master of water, wood and hill'. Does all          
 this land belong to him? No! The  land and  the things  belong to          
 themselves. He is not the  possessor but  the master,  because he          
 belongs to himself.                                                        
   Description of Goldberry, with her hair as yellow as  the flag-          
 lilies, her green gown and light feet.                                     

   Barrow-wights  related to  Black-riders. Are  Black-riders actually          
 horsed Barrow-wights?                                                          
   The guests sleep - there is a noise as of wind surging in the edges          
 of  the  forest  and.....  through  the  panes  and  gables  and  the          
 doors. Galloping of [?horses] round the house.                                 
                                                                               
   The  first  actual narrative  (incomplete) of  this chapter  is a  very rough
 and  difficult  manuscript  in  ink,  becoming  very  rough  indeed  before  it
 peters out on the first morning at Bombadil's house.  It has  no title,  but is
 rather  oddly  numbered  'V  or  VI'.  Here,  even  more   than  in   the  last
 chapter, the final form - until just at the end - is already present in all but
 detail of expression.                                                          
   Most  interesting  is  the  story of  the hobbits'  dreams during  the night,
 which is told thus:                                                            
                                                                               
   In the  dead night  Bingo woke  and heard  noises: a  sudden fear            
 came  over  him  [?so  that]  he  did not  speak but  lay listening            
 breathless. He heard a sound like a strong  wind curling  round the            
 house  and  shaking  it,  and  down  the wind  came a  galloping, a            
 galloping, a  galloping: hooves  seemed to  come charging  down the            
 hillside from the east, up to the walls and round and round, hooves            
 thudding and wind blowing,  and then  dying away  back up  the hill            
 and into the darkness.                                                         
   'Black riders,'  thought Bingo.  'Black riders,  a black  host of            
 riders,' and he wondered if he  would ever  again have  the courage            
 even in the morning to leave the safety of these good  stone walls.            
 He lay and listened for a while,  but all  had become  quiet again,            
 and after a while he fell asleep. At his side Odo lay  dreaming. He            
 turned and groaned, and  woke to  the darkness,  and yet  the dream            
 went on. Tap, tap, squeak: the noise was like branches  fretting in            
 the wind, twigs like fingers  scraping wall  and window...  [@c. as            
 in FR p. 138].                                                                 
   It was the sound of water that Frodo heard falling into his sleep            
 and slowly waking him. Water  streaming gently  down at  first, and            
 then spreading  all round  the house,  gurgling under  the walls...            
 [@c. as in FR p. 139].                                                         
   Meriadoc (1) slept on through the night in deep content.                        
                                                                               
   As  told  here,  there  seems  no  reason  not   to  understand   that  Black
 Riders   (or   Barrow-wights)   actually   came   and   rode  round   Tom  Bom-
 badil's house during the night. It will be seen that it is said explicitly that
 Bingo moke,  and after  a while  fell asleep.  In the  initial sketch  given on
 p. 112 (where the  hobbits only  went to  stay with  Tom after  their capture
 by   a   Barrow-wight   up    on   the    Downs)   'Two    Barrow-wights   come

                     
                                                                          
 [?galloping] after them', cf. also the note on p. 118: 'Barrow-wights re-
 lated to Black-riders. Are Black-riders actually horsed Barrow-wights?' -
 followed by 'Galloping of [? horses] round  the house.'  In any  case, the
 end of the present text (unhappily so eccentrically  scribbled as  to make
 its interpretation extremely difficult) is explicit. Here, as in the later
 story, Bingo waking looks out of the east window of their  room on  to the
 kitchen-garden grey with dew.                                             
                                                                          
  He  had  expected to  see turf  right up  to the  walls, turf  all pocked
 with  hoof-marks.  Actually  his  view  was  screened  by  a tall  line of
 green  beans  on  poles,  but  above  and  far  beyond  them the  grey top
 of  the  hill  loomed  up  against  the  sunrise.  It  was a  grey morning
 with  soft  clouds,  behind  which  were  deeps  of  yellow and  pale red.
 The  light  was  broadening  quickly  and  the  red  flowers on  the beans
 began to shine against the wet green leaves.                              
                                                                          
  Frodo  looks from  the western  window, as  does Pippin  in FR,  and sees
 the  Withywindle  disappearing  into  the  mist  below,  and  the  flower-
 garden: 'there was no willow-tree to be seen.'                            
                                                                          
  'Good   morning,   merry   friends!   '  said   Tom,  opening   the  east
 window  wide.  A  cool  air  flowed  in.  'The sun  will [?heat]  you when
 the  day is  older. I  have been  walking far,  leaping on  the hill-tops,
 since  the  grey  twilight  [? came]  and the  night foundered,  wet grass
 underfoot.......'                                                         
  When  they  were  dressed  [struck  out  as   written:  Tom   took  them
 up  the  hillside]  the  sun  was  already  risen over  the hill,  and the
 clouds  were  melting  away.  In  the  forest  valley  trees  were appear-
 ing like  tall heads  rising out  of the  curling sea  of mist.  They were
 glad  of  breakfast  -  indeed they  were glad  to be  awake and  safe and
 at  the  merry  end of  a day  again. The  thought of  going was  heavy on
 them  -  and  not  only  for fear  of the  road. Had  it been  a [? merry]
 road  and  the  road  home  they   would  still   have  wished   to  tarry
 there.                                                                    
  But  they  knew  that  could  not  be.  Bingo  too  found  in  his  heart
 that  the  noise  of  hoofs  was   not  only   dream.  They   must  escape
 quickly  or  else...  [?  pursued] here.  So he  made up  his mind  to get
 such help and advice as [?old] Bombadil could or would give.              
  'Master,'  he  said,  'we  cannot  thank  you  for  your kindness  for it
 has  been  beyond  thanks.  But  we   must  go,   against  our   wish  and
 quickly.  For   I  heard   horsemen  in   the  night   and  fear   we  are
 pursued.'                                                                 
  Tom   looked   at   him.   'Horsemen,'  he   said.  'Dead   men  [?riding
 the  wind.  'Tis  long  since  they  came  hence.]  What ails  the Barrow-

                                              
                                                                             
 wights to leave their old mounds? You are strange folk to come out           
 of the Shire, [? even stranger than my news told me.] Now  you had           
 best tell me all - and I will give you counsel.'                             
                                                                             
  Here the text ends, but following it are these notes in pencil:             
                                                                             
  Make  it  sudden  rainy  day. They  spend it  at Tom's  house, and          
 tell  him  the tale;  and he  of Willow-man  and the.......(2) He is          
 concerned about the riders; but says he will think of counsel. Next          
 day is fine. He takes them  to the  hilltop. They....  the barrows.          
                                                                             
  This  is where  the story  of the  wet second  day spent  in long  talk with
 Bombadil  entered;  before  this  the weather  was to  have become  fine, and
 the  hobbits  were  to  have  left  when they  had told  Tom their  story and
 received his advice. In  this earliest  narrative Bingo  was so  convinced of
 the reality of what he had heard in the night that he raised the  matter with
 Tom,  and  Tom seems  to take  him seriously;  and in  this context  the word
 'Actually' (retained in FR) in 'Actually his view was screened by a tall line
 of beans on poles' suggests that if it had not been for this he  would indeed
 have seen the turf 'all pocked with hoof-prints.'                            
                                                                             
  A  second  narrative  followed,  obviously  written  immediately  after  the
 first, and this is complete. Here the chapter is numbered 'V',  still without
 title.  The  first  text  was  now  refined  and  ordered in  expression, the
 morning  bodes rain,  and the  new version  becomes, to  the point  where the
 first  ended,  scarcely  distinguishable  from  that  of  FR,  except  in the
 matter  of  the  'dreams'.  These  are  still  told  in the  same unambiguous
 language as if they were real events in the night; but  nothing more  is said
 of them afterwards than is said in FR. In the final story Frodo's dream  is a
 vision of Gandalf  standing on  the pinnacle  of Orthanc  and of  the descent
 of Gwaihir to bear  him away,  but that  vision is  still accompanied  by the
 sound of the Black Riders galloping out of the  East; and  it was  that sound
 that woke him. It is still said that he thought  in the  morning to  find the
 ground  round the  house marked  by hoofs,  but this  is now  no more  than a
 way of emphasising the vividness of his experience in the night.             
  The   remainder   of   the   second   version   of  the   chapter  generally
 approaches extraordinarily closely to the final form,(3) but  there are  not a
 few interesting differences.                                                 
  In  Tom  Bombadil's  long  talk  with  the  hobbits on  the second  day, his
 voice is described as 'always  in a  sing-song or  actually singing'  (cf. FR
 p.  140:  'Often  his  voice  would  turn to  song'). The  passage concerning
 Old Man Willow was first written thus:                                       
                                                                             
 Amongst his talk there was here and there much said of  Old Man              
 Willow,  and  Merry learned  enough to  content him  (more than              
 enough, for it was not comfortable lore), though not enough for              
 him to understand how that grey thirsty earth-bound  spirit had              

                    
                                                                         
 become  imprisoned  in  the  greatest  Willow  of  the  Forest.  The tree
 did  not  die,  though its  heart went  rotten, while  the malice  of the
 Old  Man  drew  power  out of  earth and  water, and  spread like  a net,
 like  fine  root-threads  in  the ground,  and invisible  twig-fingers in
 the air, till it had infected or subjugated nearly all the trees  on both
 sides of the valley.(5)                                                  
                                                                         
  Bombadil's  talk  about  the  Barrow-wights  of  the   Barrow-downs  re-
 mained almost word for word into FR (pp. 141 - 2), with  one difference:
 for FR 'A shadow came out of dark places far away' this text has  'A dark
 shadow  came  up  out  of  the middle  of the  world'; in  the underlying
 pencilled text (see note 3) can be read 'a dark shadow came up out of the
 South.' At the end of his talk, where FR has 'still on and back  Tom went
 singing out into ancient starlight', the present  version has  'and still
 further Tom went singing back  before the  Sun and  before the  Moon, out
 into the old starlight.'                                                 
  A detail worth remarking is the  sentence in  the old  version: 'Whether
 the morning  and evening  of one  day or  of many  days had  passed Bingo
 could not tell (nor  did he  ever discover  for certain).'  The bracketed
 words were soon to be removed,  when the  dating of  the journey  to Bree
 became precise; the hobbits stayed with  Bombadil on  the 26th  and 27th
 of September, and left on the morning of the 28th (see p. 160).          
  Tom  Bombadil's  answer  to  Bingo's  question  'Who  are  you, Master?'
 has some interesting differences from the final form (FR p. 142):        
                                                                         
  'Eh,  what?'  said  Tom  sitting  up,  and  his  eyes  glinted   in  the
 gloom.  'I  am  an Aborigine,  that's what  I am,  the Aborigine  of this
 land.  [Struck  out  at  once:  I  have  spoken  a  mort (6) of languages
 and   called   myself   by  many   names.]  Mark   my  words,   my  merry
 friends:   Tom   was   here   before   the  River   or  the   Trees.  Tom
 remembers  the  first  acorn  and  the  first  rain-drop.  He  made paths
 before  the  Big  People,  and  saw  the Little  People arriving.  He was
 here  before  the  kings  and  the  graves  and  the  [ghosts  >] Barrow-
 wights.  When  the  Elves  passed  westward  Tom   was  here   already  -
 before  the seas  were bent.  He saw  the Sun  rise in  the West  and the
 Moon  following,  before  the  new  order  of  days  was  made.  He  knew
 the  dark  under  the  stars  when  it  was  fearless  - before  the Dark
 Lord came from Outside.'                                                 
                                                                         
  In  FR Tom  Bombadil calls  himself 'Eldest',  not 'Aborigine'  (cf. the
 notes  given  on  p.  117:  'Tom  Bombadil is  an "aborigine"');  and the
 reference here to his having seen 'the Sun rise in the West and  the Moon
 following' was dropped  (though 'Tom  remembers the  first acorn  and the
 first rain-drop', which  was retained,  says the  same). These  words are
 extremely surprising; for in the Quenta Silmarillion which my  father had

  only set aside at the end of the previous year  it is  told that  'Rana [the
  Moon] was first wrought and made ready, and  first rose  into the  region of
  the stars, and was the elder of  the lights,  as was  Silpion of  the Trees'
  (V. 240); and the Moon first rose as Fingolfin  set foot  upon Middle-earth,
  but the Sun when he entered Mithrim (V.250).                                
    Tom  Bombadil  was  'there'  during   the  Ages   of  the   Stars,  before
  Morgoth came back to  Middle-earth after  the destruction  of the  Trees; is
  it to this event that he referred in his words (retained in FR) 'He knew the
  dark  under  the stars  when it  was fearless  - before  the Dark  Lord came
  from Outside'? It must be said that  it seems  unlikely that  Bombadil would
  refer to Valinor across the Great  Sea as  'Outside', especially  since this
  was  long  ages  'before  the  seas  were bent',  when Numenor  was drowned;
  it  would  seem  much more  natural to  interpret the  word as  meaning 'the
  Outer  Dark',  'the  Void'  beyond  the  Walls  of  the  World.  But  in the
  mythology  as  it  was  when  my father  began?he Lord  of the  Rings Melkor
  entered 'the World' with the other Valar, and never left it until  his final
  defeat. It was only with his return to  The Silmarillion  after The  Lord of
  the  Rings  was  completed  that  there  entered  the  account found  in the
  published  work  (pp.  35  -  7)  of  the  First  War,  in which  Melkor was
  defeated  by  Tulkas  and  driven  into  the  Outer  Dark,  from   which  he
  returned in secret while the Valar were  resting from  their labours  on the
  Isle of Almaren,  and overthrew  the Lamps,  ending the  Spring of  Arda. It
  seems  then  that either  Bombadil must  in fact  refer to  Morgoth's return
  from  Valinor  to  Middle-earth,  in  company  with  Ungoliant  and  bearing
  the Silmarils, or else that my father had already at  this date  developed a
  new conception of the earliest history of Melkor.                           
    After  the  reference  to  Farmer  Maggot,  from  whom  Tom  Bombadil  got
  his knowledge of the Shire, and whom  he 'seemed  to regard  as a  person of
  more  importance than  they had  fancied' (FR  p. 143),  this text  adds: We
  are kinsfolk, he and I. In a way of  speaking: distantly  and far  back, but
  near enough for friendship' (in the original draft: 'We  are akin,  he said,
  distantly, very distantly, but near enough to count').  Cf. the  notes given
  on  p.  117,  concerning  the  possibility  that Farmer  Maggot was  not a
  hobbit  at  all,  but  a  being  of  a  wholly different  kind, and  akin to
  Bombadil.(7) At the  end  of  this  passage,  the reference  in FR  to Tom's
  dealings with  Elves, and  to his  having had  news of  the flight  of Frodo
  (Bingo)  from  Gildor, is  absent from  the present  text. (Tom  indeed said
  earlier, FR p. 137, that  he and  Goldberry had  heard of  their wandering,
  and 'guessed you'd come ere long down to the  water', and  this is  found in
  both the original texts).                                                   
    Of Tom's questioning of Bingo it is  said here  that Bingo  'found himself
  telling  him more  about Bilbo  Baggins and  his own  history and  about the
  business of his sudden flight than he told before even to his three friends',
  in  FR  (p. 144)  this  became  'telling him  more about  Bilbo and  his own
  hopes and fears than he had told before even  to Gandalf.'  It may  be noted
  that in the old narrative thus far there has been no suggestion that Bingo's

                          
                                                                          
 departure from  Hobbiton was  a 'sudden  flight' -  except perhaps  in the
 'foreword' given  in Chapter  III, where  Gandalf said  to him  before the
 Party 'But you must go quickly' (p. 83).                                  
  The episode of Tom and the Ring is told  in virtually  the same  words as
 in FR, the only and very slight difference  being that  when Bingo  put on
 the  Ring  Tom  cried:  'Hey,  come  Bingo  there,  where be  you a-going?
 What be you a-grinning at? Are you tired of talking? Take off that Ring of
 yours  and  sit  down  a  moment. We  must talk  a while  more...' Against
 this my father  wrote later:  'Make the  seeing clearer',  and substituted
 (after 'where be you a-going? '): 'Did you think I should not see when you
 had the Ring on? Ha, Tom Bombadil's  not as  blind as  that yet.  Take off
 your golden Ring, and sit down a moment.'                                 
  Lastly,  at the  very end  of the  chapter, the  rhyme that  Tom Bombadil
 taught the hobbits to sing if in need of him is different from that in FR:
                                                                          
         Ho! Tom Bombadil! Whither do you wander?                          
         Up, down, near or far? Here, there, or yonder?                     
         By hill that stands, wood that grows, and by the mater falling,
         Here now we summon you! Can you hear us calling?                
                                                                          
 This rhyme was at first present in the next chapter, when Bingo sang it in
 the barrow; but it was replaced there at the  time of  writing by  Ho! Tom
 Bombadil,  Tom  Bombadillo!  etc.,  as  in  FR  (p.  153). In  the present
 passage my father wrote  in the  margin: 'Or  substitute rhyme  in chapter
 VI', and that was done (FR p. 145).                                      
                                                                          
                                   NOTES.                                  
                                                                          
 1. This  is  the first  occurrence of  Meriadoc for  Marmaduke in  a manu-
 script as originally written.
 2. The word looks  very much  like badgers.  If this  is so,  it must  be a
 reference  to  the  badgers  who  captured  Tom   Bombadil  in   the  poem
 ('By  the  coat  they  caught  him,  pulled  Tom  inside  the  hole,  down
 their  tunnels  brought  him');  see  The   Adventures  of   Tom  Bombadil
 (1962),  pp.  12  -  13 (the  verses describing  Tom's encounter  with the
 badgers  were  left  virtually  unchanged  in the  later version).  In the
 next text of this chapter  Tom was  telling the  hobbits 'an  absurd story
 about  badgers  and  their  odd  ways'  when  Bingo  slipped on  the Ring;
 and this was retained in FR.                                              
 3. The story of the wet second day at Bombadil's was  written ab  initio in
 pencil, then a part of  the manuscript  overwritten in  ink; for  the last
 part  of  the  chapter,  from  supper  on  the second  day, there  is both
 pencilled draft and manuscript in ink. But it is clear that all  this work
 was continuous and overlapping.                                           
 4.  The question about  Old Man  Willow on  the night  before is  asked by
 Merry  (by  Frodo  in  FR); i.e.  by one  who had  not been  imprisoned in
 the tree.                                                                 

5. A passage very close to that  in FR  (from 'Tom's  words laid  bare the
 hearts of trees') was  substituted, probably  while the  manuscript was
 in progress or very soon after.                                        
6. a mort: a great many.                                                
7. Conceivably,  some  pencilled  emendations  to  the typescript of the
 third chapter were added  at this  time and  in this  connection. Frodo
 Took's words of  Farmer Maggot,  'He lives  in a  house' (p.  92), were
 thus extended: 'He is not a hobbit - not  a pure  hobbit anyway.  He is
 rather large and has hair under his chin. But his family has  had these
 fields time out  of mind.'  And when  Maggot appears  (p.94),  'a large
 round hobbit-face'  was changed  to 'a  large round  hair-framed face.'
 Afterwards,  in the  Prologue to  LR, the  hobbits of  the Eastfarthing
 were  decribed  as being  'rather large  and heavy-legged'.  'they were
 well known to be Stoors in a large part of their  blood, as  indeed was
 shown  by  the  down  that  many  grew  on their  chins. No  Harfoot or
 Fallohide had any trace of a beard.' See p. 294.                       
   There has  already been  a hint  earlier that  Farmer Maggot  was not
 altogether what he  appeared to  be, in  Merry s  remark (p.  103): He
 used to go into the Old Forest at one time, and  had the  reputation of
 knowing a thing  or two  outside the  Shire.' This  was retained  in FR
                                                                       
 (p.113).                                                               

                                      VII.                                     
                                THE BARROW-WIGHT.                              
                                                                             
 My  father's  earliest  thoughts  on  the  encounter  with   the  Barrow-wight
 (written down while he was  working on  the story  of the  hobbits in  the Old
 Forest)  have  been  given on  p. 112. When  he came  to write  this chapter
 he began with a pencilled draft' that took the  story as  far as  the hobbits'
 waking  beside  the  standing stone  in the  hollow circle  on the  Downs, and
 leading their ponies  down from  it into  the fog  (FR p.  149). Like  many of
 his  preliminary  drafts,  this  would  be  virtually  illegible  had  he  not
 followed it closely  in the  first full  manuscript (in  ink), for  words that
 could  be  interpreted  in  a  dozen   ways  without   context  can   then  be
 identified  at  once.  In  this case  he did  no more  than improve  the hasty
 wording  of  the draft,  and add  the passage  describing the  view northwards
 from the stone pillar,  with the  dark line  in the  distance that  Merry took
 for trees bordering the East Road.                                           
  If the draft continued beyond  this point  it is  lost now;  but in  fact the
 manuscript  in  ink  could  well   be  the   primary  composition.   There  is
 however  a  very rough  pencilled plot-outline  for the  story from  the point
 where  'Bingo  comes  to  himself  inside  a  barrow',  and this  outline con-
 tinues the story to Rivendell. This  is so  rapidly written  and now  so faint
 that I cannot after  much effort  make it  all out.  The worst  part, however,
 is at  the beginning,  extending from  Bingo's finding  himself in  the barrow
 to  Tom's  waking  Odo,  Frodo, and  Merry, and  from what  is legible  it can
 be  seen  that  while  very  concise  and  limited all  the essentials  of the
 narrative were present. I shall not therefore try to represent this  part, but
 give the remainder of the outline in full in this place, since it is  of great
 interest  in  showing  my  father's  thoughts  on  the  further course  of the
 story  at  this juncture  - i.e.  before the  'Barrow-wight' chapter  had been
 completed.                                                                   
                                                                             
 Tom   sings   a   song   over   Odo   Frodo   Merry.  Wake   now  my         
 merry...!                                                                    
 .........(2) of the  [?pillar]  and   how  they   became  separated.         
 Tom puts a blessing or a curse on the gold and lays it on the top of         
 the  mound.  None  of  the  hobbits will  have any  but Tom  takes a         
 brooch for Goldberry.                                                        
  Tom says  he will  go with  them, after  chiding them  for sleeping         
 by  the stone  pillar. They  soon find  the Road  and the  way seems         
 short.  They  turn  along  the  Road.  [? Gallops] come  after them.         
 Tom turns and  holds up  his hand.  They fly  back.(3) As dusk falls         

 they  see  a...  light.   Tom  says   goodbye  -   for  Goldberry   will  be
 waiting.                                                                    
   They  sleep  at  the  inn  and  hear  news  of  Gandalf.  Jolly  landlord.
 Drinking song.                                                              
   Pass  rapidly  over  rest  of  journey  to  Rivendell.  Any riders  on the
 Road?  Make  them  foolishly  turn  aside  to   visit  Troll   Stones.  This
 delays  them.  One  day  at  last  they   halted  on   a  rise   and  looked
 forward   to   the   Ford.   Galloping   behind.   Seven   (3?   4?)  Black-
 riders   hastening   along   the   Road.   They   have   gold    rings   and
 crowns.  Flight  over   Ford.  Bingo   [written  above:   Gandalf?]  flings
 a  stone  and  imitates   Tom  Bombadil.   Go  back   and  ride   away!  The
 Riders  halt  as  if  astonished,  and  looking  up  at  the hobbits  on the
 bank  the  hobbits  can  see  no  faces  in  their   hoods.  Go   back  says
 Bingo,  but  he  is  not  Tom  Bombadil,  and  the  riders  ride   into  the
 ford.  But  just  then a  rumbling rush  is heard  and a  great [?  wall] of
 water   bowling   stones   roars   down  the   river  from   the  mountains.
 Elves arrive.                                                                
   The  Riders  draw  back  just  in  time  in   dismay.  The   hobbits  ride
 as hard as they can to Rivendell.                                           
   At    Rivendell    sleeping    Bilbo    Gandalf.     Some    explanations.
 Ringmail  of  Bingo  in  barrow  and  the  dark  rocks  -  (the   3  hobbits
 had  dashed  past  the  rocks  when  suddenly   they  all   became  [? shut]
 off??) Gandalf had sent the water down with Elrond's permission.            
   Gandalf astonished to hear about Tom.                                     
   Consultation of hobbits with Elrond and Gandalf.                          
   The Quest of the Fiery Mountain.                                          
                                                                            
 This  projection  ends  here.  While  my  father  had already  conceived the
 scene  at  the Ford,  with the  sudden rising  of the  Bruinen (and  the cry
 of  Bingo/Frodo  to  the  Riders: Go  back!), Strider  (not at  first called
 Strider)  would  only  emerge  with  the  greatly increased  significance of
 the  Inn  (which  here  first  appears)  at  Bree in  the next  chapter; and
 there  is  no hint  of Weathertop.  If the  'dark rocks'  are the  'two huge
 standing  stones'  through  which  Bingo/Frodo  passed  in  the  fog  on the
 Downs (FR p. 150) - they are called 'standing rocks' in the first version -
 it is odd that discussion  of this  was postponed  till the  hobbits reached
 Rivendell;   but  possibly   the  words   'some  explanations'   imply  that
 Gandalf  was  able  to  throw  light on  what had  happened.(4) On the 'Ring-
 mail of Bingo in barrow' see p. 223. The Cracks of Earth in the depths
 of  the  Fiery  Mountain  are  named  by  Gandalf  as  the  only  heat great
 enough to destroy Bilbo's ring (p. 82); here  for the  first time  the Fiery
 Mountain enters the story as  the goal  for which  they will  in the  end be
 bound.                                                                      

                                          
                                                                                
   The  first  full  manuscript  of  this  chapter  (simply  headed  'VI'  and as
 usual at this stage without title) is fully legible for most of its  length, but
 as  so  frequently  becomes  quicker  and  rougher,  ending  in   rapid  pencil.
 This  my  father  went  over  here  and  there  in  ink,  partly to  improve the
 expression, partly to clarify  his own  writing; this  certainly belongs  to the
 same period, but after he had started on the next chapter.                      
   As  with  the  previous  two  chapters,  the  final  form  of  FR   Chapter  8
 ('Fog  on  the  Barrow-downs')  is  very  largely  present:  for  most   of  its
 length   only   very   minor   alterations   were   made  afterwards.   In  what
 follows  I  note  points  of  difference  that  seem to  me of  interest, though
 most are very slight.                                                           
   In  the  opening  paragraph  the  song  and  vision  'in  dreams  or   out  of
 them' is told in the same words in the old text,  but is  ascribed not  to Bingo
 (Frodo in FR) alone, but to all the hobbits.                                    
   When  they  looked  back  over  the  forest and  saw the  knoll on  which they
 had  rested  before  their  descent  to the  Withywindle valley,  'the fir-trees
 growing there could be seen now small and dark in the West' (see p. 113).     
   When  the  hobbits  became  separated  in  the  fog,   and  Bingo   cried  out
 miserably  'Where  are  you?'  (FR  p.  150), my  father at  first had  a quite
 different story in mind:                                                        
                                                                                
   'Here! Here! ' came the voices suddenly plain and not far  to the             
 right.  Plunging  blindly  towards  them  he  bumped  suddenly into             
 the tail of a pony. An undoubted hobbit-voice  (it was  Odo's) gave             
 a shriek of fright, and [he] fell over something on the ground. The             
 something kicked him, and gave  a yell.  'Help! '  it cried  in the             
 undoubted voice of Odo.                                                         
   'Thank  goodness,'  said Bingo,  rolling on  the ground  in Odo's             
 arms. 'Thank goodness I have found you! '                                       
   'Thank  goodness  indeed!'  said  Odo in  a relieved  voice; 'but             
 need  you  really  run  away  without  warning  and then  jump down             
 out of the sky on top of me?'                                                   
                                                                                
   My father  rejected this  as soon  as written,  and wrote  instead, as  in FR:
 'There was no reply. He stood listening', etc.                                  
   A  first  version  of   the  Barrow-wight's   incantation  was   rejected  and
 replaced  by  the  form  that  appears in  FR (p.  152);  but the  changes made
 were very slight except in line 7, where for 'till the dark lord lifts his hand'
 the first version had 'till the king of the dark tower lifts his hand.'(5) In the
 rough  workings  for this  verse my  father wrote:  'The dark  lord sits  in the
 tower and looks  over the  dark seas  and the  dark world',  and also  'his hand
 stretches over the cold sea and the dead world.'                                
   The  arm  'walking  on  its  fingers'  crept  towards   Frodo  Took   (Sam  in
 FR);  and  where  in  FR  'Frodo  fell  forward  over  Merry,  and  Merry's face
 felt cold', in the  old version  Bingo fell  forward over  Frodo Took.  There is

  no evident  pattern in  the changed  ascriptions when  the 'cast  of charac-
  ters' was altered; so later in the chapter Odo says 'Where are my clothes?'
  (Sam  in  FR),  and  when  Tom Bombadil  says 'You  won't find  your clothes
  again'  it  is  Frodo  Took who  asks 'What  do you  mean?' (Pippin  in FR).
  In general I do not further note such points unless they seem significant.
    On  the  rejected  form  of  the  rhyme  taught  to  the  hobbits  by  Tom
  Bombadil  and  sung  by  Bingo  in  the  barrow  see p.  123. The  first two
  lines  of  the  rejected  rhyme  were used  later in  the chapter,  when Tom
  goes off after the ponies (FR p. 155).                                     
    When  Merry  said  'What  in  the  name of  wonder?' as  he felt  the gold
  circlet that had slipped over one eye, the old  version continues:  'Then he
  stopped,  and  a  shadow  came  over  his  face.  I  begin to  remember,> he
  said. "I thought I was dead - but don't let us  speak of  it."' There  is no
  mention of the Men of Carn Dum (FR p. 154).                                 
    Tom  Bombadil's  names  for  the  ponies  go back  to the  beginning, with
  the exception of  'Sharp-ears', who  was first  called 'Four-foot'!  When he
  bade the treasures lying in the sun on the top of the mound lie  there 'free
  to all finders, bird, beast, elves or men and all kind creatures', he added:
  'For the makers and owners of these things are  not here,  and their  day is
  long  past,  and  the  makers  cannot claim  them again  until the  world is
  mended."  And  when  he took  the brooch  for Goldberry  he said:  'Fair was
  she who long ago  wore this  on her  shoulder, and  Goldberry shall  wear it
  now, and we shall not forget  them, the  vanished folk,  the old  kings, the
  children  and  the  maidens, and  all those  who walked  the earth  when the
  world was younger.'                                                         
    While in the outline given on p. 125 the hobbits  refuse to  take anything
  from the treasure in the  mound, in  the first  text the  story is  that Tom
  chose for them  'bronze swords,  short, leaf-shaped  and keen',  but nothing
  further  is  said  in  description  of  them  (cf.  FR  p. 157),  though the
  following  was  added  in  pencil  and perhaps  belongs to  the time  of the
  writing  of the  manuscript: 'These,  he said,  were made  many ages  ago by
  men  out  of  the West.  They were  foes of  the Ring-lord.'  The manuscript
  continues:                                                                  
                                                                             
  and they hung them from the leather belts beneath  their jackets;           
  though they did not yet see the purpose of them. Fighting had not           
  occurred to any  of them  as among  the possible  adventures that           
  their flight might bring them to. As far as Bingo  could remember           
  even the great  and heroic  Bilbo had  somehow avoided  using his           
  small  sword  even  on  goblins  -  and  then  he  remembered the           
  spiders of Mirkwood and tightened his belt.                                 
                                                                             
  Of the  hints in  Tom's words  in FR  concerning the  history of  Angmar and
  the coming of Aragorn there is of course no suggestion.                     
    As already noted, the end  of the  chapter is  roughly pencilled  and here
  and there overwritten in  ink. The  crossing of  the dyke  - boundary  of an

                   
                                                                                  
 old   kingdom,   about   which   'Tom   seemed   to   remember    something   un-
 happy  and  would  not  say  much'  - and  their coming  at last  to the  Road is
 much  as  in  FR  (p.  158),  but  the  remainder  is  best  given  in  full,  as
 originally pencilled, so far as that can be made out.                             
                                                                                  
  Bingo   rode  down   onto  the   track  and   looked  both   ways.  There        
 was  no one  in sight.  'Well, here  we are  again at  last!' he  said. 'I        
 suppose  we  haven't  lost  more  than  a  day  by  Merry's short  cut. We        
 had better stick to the beaten way after this.'                                   
  'You had better,' said Tom, 'and ride fast.'                                     
  Bingo  looked  at  him.  Black  riders  came   back  into   his  thought.        
 He  looked  a  little  anxiously  back  towards the  setting sun,  but the        
 road  was  brown  and  empty.  'Do  you  think,'  he  asked  hesitatingly,        
 'do you think we shall be - er, pursued tonight?'                                 
  'Not  tonight,'  said  Tom.  'No,  not  tonight.  Not  perhaps  the  next        
 day. Not perhaps for days to come.                                                
                                                                                  
 The  next passage  is very  confused and  little can  be made  out (of  the first
 pencilled text); as overwritten in ink it reads:                                  
                                                                                  
 But  I  cannot  say  for certain.  Tom is  not master  of the  Riders that        
 come  out  of  the  Black  Land  far  beyond  his  country.' All  the same        
 the   hobbits  wished   that  Tom   was  coming   with  them.   They  felt        
 that  he  would  know  how  to  deal  with  them  -  if  anyone  did. They        
 were  now  at  last  going  forward  into  lands  wholly strange  to them,        
 and  beyond  all  but  the  most distant  legends of  the Shire,  and they        
 began  to  feel  really  lonely,  exiled,  and  rather  helpless.  But Tom        
 was  now  wishing  them  a   final  farewell,   bidding  them   have  good        
 heart, and ride till dark without halting.                                        
                                                                                  
 The pencilled text continues:                                                     
                                                                                  
 But  he  encouraged them  - a  little -  by telling  them that  he guessed        
 the   Riders-   (or   some   of   them)   were   seeking  now   among  the        
 mounds.   For   he   seemed  to   think  that   the  Riders   and  Barrow-        
 wights  had  some  kind  of  kinship  or understanding.  If that  were so,        
 it  might  prove  in  the  end  well  that  they  had been  captured. They        
 learned  from  him  that  some  miles  away  along  the  road was  the old        
 village  of  Bree, on  the west  side of  Bree-hill.(6) It had an  inn that        
 could   be   trusted:   the   White   Horse   [written   above:  Prancing        
 Pony).   The   keeper   was   a  good   man  and   not  unknown   to  Tom.        
 'Just  you  mention  my  name  and  he  will treat  you fairly.  There you        
 can  sleep  sound,  and  after  that  the  morning  will  speed  you  well        
 upon  your  way.  Go   now  with   my  blessing.'   They  begged   him  to        
 come  as  far  as  the  inn  and  drink  once  more  with  them.   But  he        

 laughed and refused,  saying: 'Tom  has his  house to  mind, and          
 Goldberry is waiting.' Then he turned, tossed up his hat, leaped          
 on Lumpkin's back, and rode over the bank and away  singing into          
 the gathering dusk.                                                       
                                                                          
 This  passage, as  far as  'Go now  with my  blessing', was  rejected, and
 a new version written in ink on a separate sheet; this second text  is the
 same  as  Tom's farewell  speech in  FR p.  159 ('Tom  will give  you good
 advice...'), but it is  here written  out in  verse-lines, and  with these
 differences:  the  'worthy  keeper' is  Barnabas Butterbur,  not Barliman,
 and the reference to him is followed by:                                  
                                                                          
          He knows Tom Bombadil, and Tom's name will help you.         
       Say 'Tom sent us here ' and he will treat you kindly.               
       There  you  can  sleep  sound,  and afterwards  the morning         
       Will speed you upon your way. Co  now with  my blessing!         
         Keep up your merry hearts, and ride to meet your fortune!         
                                                                          
 That these revisions are later than the first pencilled draft of  the next
 chapter is seen from the fact that throughout  that draft  the innkeeper's
 name was Timothy Titus, not yet Barnabas Butterbur (p. 140 note 3).      
   The end of this chapter is again overwritten in ink, but so far as I can
 make out this was  only to  clarify the  almost illegible  pencilled text:
                                                                          
   The  hobbits  stood  and  watched  him  out  of  sight.   Then,  feeling
 heavy  at  heart  (in  spite  of  his  encouragement), they  mounted their
 ponies,  not  without  some  glances  back  along   the  Road,   and  went
 off  slowly  into  the evening.  They did  not sing,  or talk,  or discuss
 the  events  of  the  night  before,  but  plodded  silently  along. Bingo
 and  Merry  rode  in  front,  Odo  and  Frodo,  leading  the  spare  pony,
 were behind.                                                              
   It  was  quite  dark  before  they  saw  lights twinkling  some distance
 ahead.  Before  them  rose  Bree  Hill,  barring  the  way,  a  dark slope
 against the misty  stars, and  under it  and on  its western  side nestled
 the little village.                                                       
                                                                          
                                   NOTES.                                  
                                                                          
 1. This  draft  is  in  fact continuous  with that  for the  Bombadil chapter
    (p. 123 note 3), but my father soon after  drew a  line on  the pencilled
    text  between  'and  led  them  with  candles back  to their  bedroom' and
 2. 'That  night  they heard  no noises',  entering the  chapter-number 'VI?'.
    The  illegible word  begins Expl  but the  remainder does  not seem  to be
    (Expl) anatton.                                                        
 3. Cf. the  outline given  on p.  112:  'two Barrow-wights  come [?gallop-
    ing]  after them,  but stop  every time  Tom Bombadil  turns and  looks at
    them.'                                                                 

  4.  In  a  very  early  form  of  the  chapter   'Many  Meetings'   (a  passage
      retained  word  for  word in  FR, pp.  231 -  2) Bingo  says to  Gandalf at
      Rivendell:  'You  seem  to know  a great  deal already.  I have  not spoken
      to  the  others  about  the  Barrow.  At  first  it  was too  horrible, and
      afterwards  there  were  other  things  to  think about.  How did  you know
      about  it?'  And  Gandalf  replies: 'You  have talked  long in  your sleep,
      Bingo.' But I doubt that this is relevant.                                 
  5.  The  'dark  tower'  of the  Necromancer is  referred to  by Gandalf  in the
      text given in Chapter III (p. 81), and  indeed goes  back to  The Hobbit,
      where  at  the  end  of  Chapter  VII 'Queer  Lodgings' Gandalf  speaks of
      the  'dark tower'  of the  Necromancer, in  the south  of Mirkwood.  But it
      is difficult to feel sure where at this stage my  father imagined  the Dark
      Tower to stand.  Tom Bombadil  says (p.  129)  that he  'is not  master of
      the  Riders  that  come  out  of the  Black Land  far beyond  his country',
      and  the  name  Mordor  had  certainly  arisen: cf.  the second  version of
      The  Fall  of  Numenor  (V.29,  31),  'And  they  came  at  last  even  to
      Mordor  the  Black  Country,  where   Sauron,  that   is  in   the  Gnomish
      tongue  named  Thu,  has  rebuilt  his  fortresses.'  See  further  p.  218
      note 17.                                                                   
  6.  My father first put 'an old village which had  an inn',  but the  change to
      'the old village of Bree, on the west side of Bree-hill. It had an inn' was
      almost  certainly  made  as  he  wrote  (and  'Prancing Pony'  above 'White
      Horse' likewise).  This is  where the  name first  appears, based  on Brill
      in Buckinghamshire, a place which he knew well, for  it sits  on a  hill in
      the  Little  Kingdom  of  Farmer   Giles  of   Ham  (see   Carpenter,  Bio-
      graphy,  p.  160).  The name  Brill is  derived from  the old  British word
      bre  'hill',  to  which  the  English  added  their own  word hyll;  cf. LR
      Appendix  F  (p.  414),  and  the Guide  to the  Names in  The Lard  of the
      Rings (in Lobdell, A Tolkien Compass, 1975), entry Archet.               

                                   VIII.                                
                              ARRIVAL AT BREE.                            
                                                                         
 My father continued on  into a  description of  the Breelanders  without a
 break. Subsequently he wrote over the original pencilled text in  ink, and
 in that form, necessarily, I give it here.'                              
                                                                         
 Little  in  a  sense  - it  had perhaps  some 50  houses on  the hillside,
 and  a  large  inn  because  of  the  goings  and  comings  on   the  Road
 (though  those  were  now  less  than  they  had  once  been). But  it was
 actually  a  village built  by Big  People -  mainly (the  nearest settled
 habitation  of  that  large  and  mysterious  race  to  the   Shire).  Not
 many  lived  as  far  West  as  that  in  those  days,  and  the Bree-folk
 (together   with  the   neighbouring  villages   of  Staddle   and  Crick)
 were  an  odd  and   rather  isolated   community,  belonging   to  nobody
 but   themselves   (and   more   accustomed   to  dealing   with  hobbits,
 dwarves,  and  the   other  odd   inhabitants  of   the  world   than  Big
 People  were  or   are).  They   were  brown-faced,   dark-haired,  broad,
 shortish,  cheerful  and  independent.   They  nor   any  one   else  knew
 why  or  when  they  had  settled  where  they   were.  The   land  there-
 abouts  and  for   many  miles   eastward  was   pretty  empty   in  those
 days.  There  were  hobbits  about,  of  course  - some  higher up  on the
 slopes  of  Bree-hill  itself,  and  many in  the valley  of Combe  on the
 east  side.  For not  all hobbits  lived in  the Shire  by any  means. But
 the  Outsiders  were a  rustic, not  to say  (though in  the Shire  it was
 often  said)  uncivilized  sort.  Some  were  in   fact  no   better  than
 tramps  and  wanderers,  ready  to dig  a hole  in any  bank, and  to stay
 there just as long  or short  a time  as it  suited them.  So the  folk of
 Bree  were,  you  see,   familiar  enough   with  hobbits,   civilized  or
 otherwise  -  for  Brandywine  Bridge  was  not  so   far  off.   But  our
 hobbits  were  not  familiar  with  Bree-folk,   and  the   houses  seemed
 strange, large and tall  (almost hillocks),  as they  trotted in  on their
 ponies.                                                                  
                                                                         
 My father then struck this out, and began again. He was  still numbering
 the pages  continuously from  the beginning  of Chapter  VI (the  story of
 the  Barrow-wight),  but  when  he  reached  Bingo's  song  at the  inn he
 realised that he was well into a new chapter, and wrote  in 'VII'  at this
 point, i.e. at the beginning of this new  account of  the people  of Bree.
 Once again there is no title.                                            

                                              
                                                                           
  The  manuscript  of  this  chapter  is  an  exceedingly  complicated docu-
 ment:  pencil  overlaid  with  ink  (sometimes  remaining  partly  legible,
 sometimes  not  at  all), pencil  not overlaid  but struck  through, pencil
 allowed to stand, and  fresh composition  in ink,  together with  riders on
 slips and complex directions for insertions. There is no reason  to suppose
 that the 'layers' are significantly separated  in time,  but the  story was
 evolving as my father wrote: and the only  way to  present a  coherent text
 is to give the manuscript in its last form. The chapter is given  almost in
 full, since although much was retained it can only be  seen clearly  from a
 complete text just what the story was; but for convenience I divide it into
 two chapters in this book,  breaking the  narrative at  the point  where FR
 Chapter  g  'At  the  Sign  of The  Prancing Potty'  ends and  10 'Strider'
 begins.                                                                    
  The  interrelations  of  chapter-structure  in the  following part  of the
 story are inevitably complex, and can best be seen from a table:           

        Original text.       
                            
  VII. Arrival at Bree, and
        Bingo's song.        
                            
    Conversation with Trotter
          and Butterbur.     
                            
    Attack on the inn.       
                            
    Journey to Weathertop.
                            
 VIII. Attack on Weathertop.
                            
    Weathertop to Rivendell.

  This Book.                              
                                         
  VIII. 9. 'At the Sign of The           
               Prancing Pony'.     
                                         
  IX. 10. 'Strider'.                    
                                         
      11.'A Knife in the Dark'.
                                         
  X.                                 
                                         
  XI. 12. 'Flight to the Ford'.          

   
                                                                          
  It will be seen at the beginning of this text that the presence of Men at
 Bree  had  been  temporarily  abandoned,  and  the  description  of  their
 appearance  in  the  rejected  passage just  given is  now applied  to the
 hobbits  of  the  Bree-land; the  innkeeper is  a hobbit,  and?he Prancing
 Pony has a round front door leading into the side of Bree-hill.           
                                                                          
  They  were  hobbit-folk   of  course   that  lived   in  Bree   (and  the
 neighbouring  villages  of  Combe  and  Archet).(2) Not  all   the  hobbits
 lived  in  the  Shire  by  any  means,  but the  Outsiders were  a rustic,
 not  to  say  (though in  the Shire  it was  often said)  uncivilized lot,
 and  not  held  in  much  account.  There  were   probably  a   good  many
 more  of  them  scattered  about  in  the  West  of  the  world  in  those
 days  than  people  in  the  Shire  imagined,  though  many   were  indeed
 no  better  than  tramps  and  wanderers,  ready  to dig  a rough  hole in
 any  bank,  and stay  only as  long as  it suited  them. The  villagers of
 Bree,  Combe,  and  Archet,  however,  were   settled  folk   (in  reality
 not  more  rustic  than  most of  their distant  relations in  Hobbiton) -

 but   they   were  rather   odd  and   independent,  and   belonged  to
 nobody   but   themselves.    They   were    browner-skinned,   darker-
 haired, slightly stouter,  a good  deal broader  (and perhaps  a trifle
 tougher)  than  the  average  hobbit  of  the  Shire. Neither  they nor
 anyone  else  knew  why  or  when  they  had  settled  just  there; but
 there  they  were,  moderately  prosperous  and  content. The  land all
 round  about  was very  empty for  leagues and  leagues in  those days,
 and few folk (Big  or Little)  would be  seen in  a day's  march. Owing
 to the  Road the  inn at  Bree was  fairly large;  but the  comings and
 goings,  East  or  West,  were  less than  they had  been, and  the inn
 was  now  chiefly  used  as  a meeting-place  for the  idle, talkative,
 sociable  or  inquisitive  inhabitants  of  the  villages  and  the odd
 inhabitants of the wilder country round about.                        
   When  our  four  hobbits  at  last  rode  into  Bree  they  were very
 glad.  The  inn  door  was  open.  It  was a  large round  door leading
 into the side of Bree-hill, at which  the road  turned, looping  to the
 right,  and  disappeared  in  the  darkness.  Light  streamed  into the
 road  from  the  door,  over  which  there  was  a  lamp  swinging  and
 beneath that  a sign  - a  fat white  pony standing  on his  hind legs.
 Over  the  door  was  painted in  white letters:  The Prancing  Pony by
 Barnabas Butterbur.(3) Someone was singing a song inside.               
   As the hobbits  got off  their ponies  the song  ended and  there was
 a  burst  of  laughter. Bingo  stepped inside,  and nearly  bumped into
 the largest and fattest hobbit that he had ever set eyes on in  all his
 days  in the  well-fed Shire.  It was  obviously Mr  Butterbur himself.
 He  had on  a white  apron and  was scuttling  out of  one door  and in
 through  another with  a tray  full of  full mugs.  'Can we...  ?' said
 Bingo.                                                                
   'Half  a  moment  if  you  please,'  the  landlord  shouted  over his
 shoulder, and vanished  into a  babel of  voices and  a cloud  of smoke
 beyond  the  door.  In  a  moment  he  was out  again wiping  his hands
 on  his  apron.  'Good  evening,  master,'  he said.  'What may  you be
 wanting? '                                                            
   'Beds for four and stabling for  five ponies,'  said Bingo,  'if that
 can  be  managed.  We  have  come  far  today.  Are  you  Mr Butterbur,
 perhaps? '                                                            
   'That's  right,'  he  answered,  'Barnabas   is  my   name,  Barnabas
 Butterbur at your service - if it is possible. But the house  is nearly
 full, and so are the stables.'                                        
   'I was afraid it might be,' said Bingo.  'I hear  it is  an excellent
 house.  We  were  specially  recommended  to  stop  here by  our friend
 Tom Bombadil.'                                                        

                                          
                                                                    
  'In  that  case  anything  can  be  managed!'  said  Mr  Butterbur,
 slapping  his  thighs  and beaming.  'Come right  inside! And  how is
 the  old  fellow?  Mad  and  merry,  but  merrier  than mad,  I'll be
 bound!  Why  didn't  he  come  along  too,  and  then we  should have
 had  some  fun!  Hi! Nob!(4) Come  here! Where  are you,  you woolly-
 footed  slow-coach?  Take   the  guests'   bags!  Where's   Bob?  You
 don't know? Well, find  out! Double  sharp. I  haven't got  six legs,
 nor six arms, nor six eyes either. Tell Bob.there's five  ponies that
 have  to  be  stabled.  And  well,  mind  you.  Well,  you  must make
 room  then,  if  they  have to  go in  bedrooms!(5) Come  right inside,
 sirs, all of you. Pleased to  meet you!  What names  did you  say? Mr
 Hill,  Mr  Rivers,  Mr  Green,  and  Mr  Brown.(6) Can't  say  I  have
 heard  those names  before, but  I am  pleased to  meet you  and hear
 them now.' Bingo had  made them  up, of  course, on  the spur  of the
 moment,  suddenly  feeling  that  it  would  not  be  at all  wise to
 publish their  real names  in a  hobbit-inn on  the high  road. Hill,
 Rivers,  Green,  Brown  sounded  much  stranger  as  names   to  hob-
 bits than they do to us,  and Mr  Butterbur had  his own  reasons for
 thinking  them  unlikely. However,  he said  nothing about  that yet.
 'But there,' he went on, 'I dare say  there are  lots of  queer names
 and queer folk that we never hear of in these parts. We don't  see so
 many  Shire-folk  in  these  days.  Time  was  when  the  Tooks, now,
 often came along to have a crack  with me  or my  old dad.  Rare good
 people  were the  Tooks. They  say they  had Bree  blood in  'em, and
 were not quite like other Shire-folk, but I don't know the  rights of
 it. But there! I must be  running off.  But wait  a minute  now! Four
 riders and five  ponies? Let  me see,  what does  that remind  me of?
 Never mind, it will come  back. All  in good  time. One  thing drives
 out another, as they say. I am a bit busy tonight. Lots of  folk have
 dropped  in,  unexpected.  Hi, Nob!  Take these  bags to  the guests'
 rooms. That's right. Seven  to ten  down the  west passage.  Be quick
 now!  And  will  you  be  wanting  supper?  You  will. I  thought so.
 Soon,  I  shouldn't  wonder. Very  well, masters,  soon it  shall be.
 This way now!  Here's a  room will  suit you  nicely, I  hope. Excuse
 me, now.  I must  be trotting.  'Tis hard  work for  two legs,  but I
 don't get thinner. I'll look in  again later.  If you  want anything,
 ring the hand-bell, and Nob will come. If he don't, shout!          
  Off he went, leaving them feeling  a little  breathless. He  had not
 stopped  talking  to  them  (mixed  with  the  giving  of  orders and
 instructions to  other scuttling  hobbits in  the passages)  from the
 time  that  he welcomed  Bingo, until  he ushered  them into  a small
 but cosy private parlour.  There was  a bit  of bright  fire burning;

 there  were  some  very  comfortable  chairs,  and  there  was  a  round
 table,  already  spread  with a  white cloth.  On it  was a  large hand-
 bell.  But  Nob,  a  small  round  curly-haired  red-faced  hobbit, came
 bustling back long before they thought of using it.                    
   'Will  you  be  wanting  anything  to drink,  masters?' he  asked. 'Or
 shall I show you your rooms, while supper is making?'                  
   They  were  washed,  and  in  the  middle  of  a  good  deep   mug  of
 beer  each,  before  Mr  Butterbur  came  trotting  in  again,  followed
 by  Nob.  A fine  smell came  with them.  In a  twinkling the  table was
 laid.  Hot  soup,  cold  meats,  new  loaves,  mounds of  butter, cheese
 and fresh fruits, all the good solid plain  food dear  to hobbit-hearts,
 was  set  before  them in  plenty. They  went at  it with  a will  - not
 without  a  passing  thought (in  Bingo's mind  especially) that  it had
 to  be  paid  for,  and that  they had  no endless  store of  money. The
 time  would  come  all  too  soon  when  they  would  have to  pass good
 inns  (even  if  they  could find  them).(7) Mr Butterbur  hovered round
 for  a  bit,  and  then  prepared to  leave. 'I  don't know  whether you
 would  care  to join  the company  after supper,'  he said,  standing in
 the  door.  'But perhaps  you would  rather find  your beds.  Still, the
 company  would  be  pleased  to  welcome  you,  if  you  had a  mind. We
 don't get travellers from  the Shire  - outsiders  we call  'em, begging
 your pardon - too often in these  days; and  we like  to hear  the news,
 or  any new  song you  may have  in mind.  But as  you like,  sirs. Ring
 the bell, if you wish for anything.'                                   
   There  was  nothing  omitted  that they  could wish  for, so  they did
 not  need  to  ring  the  bell.  So  refreshed  and encouraged  did they
 feel at the  end of  their supper  (about 55  minutes steady  going, not
 hindered  by   unnecessary  talk)   that  they   decided  to   join  the
 company.  At  least   Odo,  Frodo,   and  Bingo   did.  Merry   said  he
 thought it would be too stuffy. 'I shall either sit here quietly  by the
 fire, or else go out for a snuff of the  air outside.  Mind your  Ps and
 Qs, and don't forget that  you are  supposed to  be escaping  in secret,
 and  are  Mr  Hill,  Mr  Green,  and  Mr  Brown."All right,'  they said.
 'Mind  yourself!  Don't get  lost, and  don't forget  that it  is safest
 indoors.'  Then  they   went  and   joined  the   company  in   the  big
 meeting-room  of  the  inn.  The  gathering  was  large,  as  they  dis-
 covered  as  soon  as their  eyes became  used to  the light.  This came
 chiefly from a large fire on a wide hearth, for the  rather dim  rays of
 three   lamps   hanging  from   the  roof   were  clouded   with  smoke.
 Barnabas   Butterbur  was   standing  near   the  fire.   He  introduced
 them,  so  quickly  that  they  did   not  catch   half  the   names  he
 mentioned,   nor   discover   to   whom  the   names  they   caught  be-

 
                                                                     
 longed.  There  seemed  to  be  several  Mugworts  (an  odd  name  to
 their way of thinking), and  also other  rather botanical  names like
 Rushlight,  Heathertoes,  Ferny,  and   Appledore  (not   to  mention
 Butterbur);  there  were also  some (to  hobbits) natural  names like
 Banks,    Longholes,    Brockhouse,    Sandheaver,    and   Tunnelly,
 which  were  not  unknown among  the more  rustic inhabitants  of the
 Shire.                                                               
   But  they  got  on  well  enough   without  surnames   (which  were
 very little used in  that company).  On the  other side  the company,
 as  soon  as  they  discovered  that  the  strangers  were  from  the
 Shire,  were  disposed  to be  friendly, and  curious. Bingo  had not
 attempted  to  conceal  where  they  came  from,  knowing  that their
 clothes  and  talk  would give  them away  at once.  But he  gave out
 that  he  was  interested in  history and  geography, at  which there
 was  much  wagging  of heads  (although neither  of these  words were
 familiar in Bree-dialect); and that he was writing  a book  (at which
 there  was silent  astonishment); and  that he  and his  friends were
 going  to  try  and find  out something  about the  various scattered
 eastern hobbits. At this a regular chorus of voices broke out, and if
 Bingo  had  really  been  going  to write  such a  book (and  had had
 many  ears  and  sufficient patience)  he would  have learned  a good
 deal in a few minutes, and  also obtained  lots of  advice on  who to
 apply to for more and profounder information.                        
   But after  a time,  as Bingo  did not  show any  sign of  writing a
 book  on  the  spot,  the  company  returned   to  more   recent  and
 engaging topics, and  Bingo sat  in a  corner, listening  and looking
 round.  Odo  and  Frodo  made  themselves   very  quickly   at  home,
 and were soon (rather to Bingo's disquiet) giving lively  accounts of
 recent  events  in  the Shire.  There was  some laughter  and wagging
 of  heads,  and  some  questions.  Suddenly  Bingo  noticed   that  a
 queer-looking,  brown-faced  hobbit,  sitting  in the  shadows behind
 the  others,  was  also listening  intently. He  had an  enormous mug
 (more  like  a  jug)  in  front  of  him, and  was smoking  a broken-
 stemmed pipe  right under  his rather  long nose.  He was  dressed in
 dark  rough  brown  cloth,  and  had  a  hood  on,  in  spite  of the
 warmth,  -  and,  very  remarkably,  he   had  wooden   shoes!  Bingo
 could see them sticking out under the table in front of him.         
   'Who  is  that  over  there?'  said  Bingo,  when  he got  a chance
 to whisper to Mr Butterbur. 'I don't think you introduced him.'      
   'Him?'  said  Barnabas, cocking  an eye  without turning  his head.
 'O! that is one of the wild folk - rangers we call  'em. He  has been
 coming  in  now  and  again (in  autumn and  winter mostly)  the last

 few years; but he  seldom talks.  Not but  what he  can tell  some rare
 tales  when  he  has  a mind,  you take  my word.  What his  right name
 is  I  never  heard,  but  he's known  round here  as Trotter.  You can
 hear him  coming along  the road  in those  shoes: clitter-clap  - when
 he walks on a  path, which  isn't often.  Why does  he wear  'em? Well,
 that I can't say. But there ain't no  accounting for  East or  West, as
 we  say  here,  meaning  the  Rangers   and  the   Shire-folk,  begging
 your  pardon.'  Mr  Butterbur  was called  away at  that moment,  or he
 might have whispered on in that fashion indefinitely.                 
   Bingo  found  Trotter  looking  at  him,  as  if  he  had   heard  or
 guessed all that was said.  Presently the  Ranger, with  a click  and a
 jerk of  his hand,  invited Bingo  to come  over to  him; and  as Bingo
 sat  down  beside  him  he  threw  back  his   hood,  showing   a  long
 shaggy  head of  hair, some  of which  hung over  his forehead.  But it
 did not hide a pair of keen dark eyes. 'I'm Trotter,' he said in  a low
 voice. 'I  am very  pleased to  meet you,  Mr -  Hill, if  old Barnabas
 had  your  name  right?'(9) 'He  had,'  said  Bingo, rather  stiffly: he
 was  feeling  far  from  comfortable  under  the  stare  of  those dark
 eyes.                                                                 
   'Well, Mr Hill,' said Trotter,  'if I  were you,  I should  stop your
 young  friends  from  talking  too  much.   Drink,  fire,   and  chance
 meetings are well  enough, but  - well,  this is  not the  Shire. There
 are queer folk about - though I say it as shouldn't,'  he added  with a
 grin,  seeing  Bingo's  look.  'And  there  have been  queer travellers
 through Bree not long back,' he went on, peering at Bingo's face.     
   Bingo   peered   back,  but   Trotter  made   no  further   sign.  He
 seemed  suddenly  to  be  listening  to  Odo.  Odo  was  now  giving  a
 comic  account   of  the   Farewell  Party,   and  was   just  reaching
 Bingo's  disappearing  act.  There  was  a  hush of  expectation. Bingo
 felt  seriously  annoyed. What  was the  good of  vanishing out  of the
 Shire, if the ass  went away  and gave  their. names  to a  mixed crowd
 in  an  inn  on  the  highway!  Even  now  Odo had  said enough  to set
 shrewd  wits  (Trotter's  for  instance)  guessing;  and it  would soon
 become  obvious  that  'Hill'  was  no  other  than  Bolger-Baggins (of
 Bag-end  Underhill).  And  Bingo   somehow  felt   that  it   would  be
 dangerous, even disastrous, if Odo mentioned the Ring.                
   'You had better do something quick! ' said Trotter in his ear.      
   Bingo  jumped  on the  table, and  began to  talk. The  attention was
 shifted  from  Odo  at  once, and  several of  the hobbits  laughed and
 clapped  (thinking  possibly  that  Mr  Hill  had  been taking  as much
 ale  as  was  good  for  him).  Bingo suddenly  felt very  nervous, and
 found  himself,  as  was  his  habit  when  making a  speech, fingering

 
                                                                    
 the things in his pocket.  Vaguely he  felt the  chain and  the Ring
 there, and jingled it against a few copper coins;  but this  did not
 help him much, and after a few  suitable words,  as they  would have
 said in the Shire (such as 'We are  all very  much gratified  by the
 kindness of your reception', and  things of  that sort),  he stopped
 and  coughed.  'A  song!  A  song!'  they  shouted.  'Come  on now,
 Master, sing  us something.'  In desperation  Bingo began  an absurd
 song, which Bilbo had been fond of (he probably wrote it).(10)      
                                                                    
                               [Song].(11)                           
                                                                    
  There  was  loud  applause.  Bingo  had  a  good  voice,   and  the
 company  was  not  over  particular.  'Where's  old   Barney?'  they
 cried. 'He ought to hear this. He ought to larn his cat  the fiddle,
 and then we'd have a dance. Bring in some more  ale, and  let's have
 it again! ' They made  Bingo have  another drink  and then  sing the
 song  once more,  while many  of them  joined in;  for the  tune was
 well-known and they were quick at picking up words.                 
  Much  encouraged  Bingo  capered  about  on  the  table;  and  when
 he  came  a  second  time  to  'the  cow jumped  over the  moon', he
 jumped in  the air.  Much too  vigorously:(12) for  he came  down bang
 into a tray full of mugs, and then slipped and rolled off  the table
 with a crash,  clatter, and  bump. But  what interested  the company
 far  more  and  stopped  their  cheers  and  laughter  dead  was his
 vanishing.  As  Bingo  rolled  off the  table he  simply disappeared
 with a crash as if he had thudded through  the floor  without making
 a hole.                                                             
  The local hobbits sprang to  their feet  and shouted  for Barnabas.
 They  drew  away  from  Odo  and  Frodo,  who found  themselves left
 alone in a corner and eyed  darkly and  doubtfully from  a distance,
 as if they were  the companions  of a  travelling wizard  of dubious
 origin  and  unknown  powers  and  purpose.  There was  one swarthy-
 faced fellow who stood looking at them with a  knowing sort  of look
 that  made  them  feel uncomfortable.  Very soon  he slipped  out of
 the door followed by one of his friends: not a well-favoured pair.(13)
 Bingo  in  the  meanwhile  feeling  a fool  (quite rightly)  and not
 knowing  what  else  to  do  crawled  away under  the tables  to the
 corner  by  Trotter,  who  was sitting  still quite  unconcerned. He
 then sat back against the wall, and took off the  Ring. By  bad luck
 he had been fingering it in his pocket just at the fatal moment, and
 had slipped it on in his sudden surprise at falling.                
  'Hullo! '  said Trotter.  'What did  you mean  by that?  Worse than

 anything your friends could have said. You've  fair put  your foot          
 and finger in it, haven't you?'                                             
   'I  don't  know  what  you  mean,'   said  Bingo   (annoyed  and          
 alarmed).                                                                   
   'O yes you do,' said Trotter. 'But we had  better wait  till the          
 uproar  has  died  down.  Then,  if  you  don't  mind,  Mr Bolger-          
 Baggins, I should like a quiet word with you.'                              
   'What about?' said Bingo,  pretending not  to notice  the sudden          
 use of his proper name. 'O, wizards, and that sort of thing,' said          
 Trotter with a grin.  'You'll hear  something to  your advantage.'          
 'Very well,' said Bingo. 'I'll see you later.'                              
   In the meantime argument in a  chorus of  voices had  been going          
 on by the fireplace. Mr Butterbur  had come  trotting in,  and was          
 trying to listen to many  conflicting accounts  at the  same time.          
                                                                            
   The next part of the text, as far as the end of Chapter g in FR, is almost
 word for word the same as in the final version,  with only  such differences
 as  are  to be  expected: 'Mr  Underhill' of  FR is  'Mr Hill',  'There's Mr
 Took,  now:  he's  not  vanished'  is  'There's  Mr  Green  and   Mr  Brown,
 now: they've not vanished',  and there  is no  mention of  the Men  of Bree,
 of the Dwarves, or of  the strange  Men -  it is  simply 'the  company' that
 went off in a huff. But at the end, when Bingo said  to the  landlord: 'Will
 you see that our ponies are ready?', the old narrative differs:             
                                                                            
  'There now!' said the landlord, snapping  his fingers.  'Half a            
 moment. It's come back to me, as I said it would. Bless me! Four            
 hobbits and five ponies! '                                                  
                                                                            
 As already explained, though I end  this chapter  here the  earliest version
 goes  on  into what  was afterwards  Chapter 10  'Strider' without  a break;
 see the table on p. 133.                                                    
                                                                            
                                    NOTES.                                   
                                                                            
 1. Bits  of  the  underlying  text  can  in fact  be made  out: enough  to show
    that  the  conception  of Bree  as a  village of  Men, though  with 'hobbits
    about', was present.                                                     
                                                                            
 2.  Crick  (p.  132)  has  disappeared  for  good  (but  cf. 'Crickhollow');
  Staddle also, but only temporarily.                                        
 3. Barnabas  Butterbur  is  written  in  ink  over  the  original  name  in
  pencil:  Timothy  Titus.   Timothy  Titus   was  the   name  of   the  inn-
  keeper   in  the   underlying  pencilled   text  throughout   the  chapter.
  This  was  a  name  that  survived  from an  old story  of my  father's, of

                     
                                                                            
      which only a couple of pages exist (no doubt all that was  ever written
      down);  but  that  Timothy  Titus  bore  no  resemblance  whatsoever to
      Mr Butterbur.                                                          
  4.  Nob was at first called Lob;  this survived  into the  inked manuscript
      stage and was then changed.                                            
  5.  The original pencilled text went on from here:                         
       Come  right  inside.  Pleased  to  meet  you.  Mr  Took, did  you say?
      Lor   now,  I   remember  that   name.  Time   was  when   Tooks  would
      think nothing  of riding  out here  just to  have a  crack with  my old
      dad  or   me.  Mr   Odo  Took,   Mr  Frodo   Took,  Mr   Merry  Brandy-
      buck,  Mr  Bingo  Baggins.  Lemme  see,  what   does  that   remind  me
      of?  Never  mind,  it  will come  back. One  thing drives  out another.
      Bit  busy  tonight.  Lots  of  folk  dropped  in.  Hi, Nob!  Take these
      bags (etc.)                                                            
      My  father struck  this out,  noting 'hobbits  must hide  their names',
      and wrote these two passages on an added slip in pencil:               
       Mr  Frodo  Walker,  Mr  Odo  Walker  -  can't  say  I  have  met  that
      name  before.  (Bingo  had  made  it  up  on  the  spur of  the moment,
      suddenly realizing  that it  would not  be wise  to publish  their real
      names in a hobbit-inn on the high road).                               
       What  name  did  you  say  -  all  Walkers,  Mr  Ben Walker  and three
      nephews.  Can't  say  I  have  met  that name  before, but  I'm pleased
      to meet you.                                                           
      These also were struck out, and the  passage that  follows in  the text
      ('Come right inside, sirs, all  of you...'),  in pencil  overwritten in
      ink, was adopted.                                                      
  6.  In  the  underlying  pencilled  text  of this  passage my  father wrote
      Ferny but at once changed it to Hill; and in the text  in ink  he wrote
      Fellowes  but  changed  it to  Green. Later  on, in  rejected pencilled
      drafting,  Mr  Butterbur  says: 'You  don't say,  Mr Mugwort.  Well, as
      long  as  Mr  Rivers  and  the  two  Mr   Fellowes  don't   vanish  too
      (without paying the bill) he is welcome' (i.e. to vanish into thin air,
      as Mugwort has asserted that he did: FR p. 173).                       
  7.  Cf.  Bingo's words  to Gildor,  p. 62:  'I had  come to  the end  of my
      treasure.'  The present  passage was  rejected and  does not  appear in
      FR: but cf. p. 172 note 3.                                             
  8.  Appledore. 'apple-tree' (Old English  apuldor). -In  FR (p.  167) these
      'botanical'  names  are  primarily names  of families  of Men  in Bree.
  9.  The underlying pencilled text  still had  here: 'I  am very  pleased to
      meet  Mr  Bingo  Baggins', and  Trotter's next  words began.  "Well, Mr
      Bingo...' See note 5.                                                  
 10.  Here  follows:  'It  went  to  a  well-known  tune,  and   the  company
      joined  in  the  chorus', referring  to the  song which  was originally
      given  to  Bingo  here (see  note 11),  where there  is a  chorus; the
      sentence  was  struck  out  when 'The  Cat and  the Fiddle'  was chosen
      instead.                                                               

11.  My father  first wrote  here 'Troll  Song', and  a rough  and unfinished
 version  of  it  is found  in the  manuscript at  this point.  He apparently
 decided  almost  at  once  to  substitute  'The  Cat  and  the  Fiddle', and
 there  are also  two texts  of that  song included  in the  manuscript, each
 preceded by the words (as in FR p. 170):                                   
        It  was  about  an  Inn, and  I suppose  that is  what brought  it to
 Bingo's  mind.  Here  it  is  in full,  though only  a few  words of  it are
 now generally remembered.                                                   
      For the history and  early forms  of these  songs see  the Note  on the
 Songs  at  the  Prancing  Pony  that  follows.  -  That  there  was to  be a
 song  at  Bree  is  already  foreseen  in  the  primitive  outline  given on
 p.  126:  'They  sleep  at  the  inn  and  hear   news  of   Gandalf.  Jolly
 landlord. Drinking song.'
12.  In the  original text,  where the  song was  to be  the Troll  Song, the
 comments  of  the  audience  on  the  cat  and  the  fiddle  are  of  course
 absent.  Instead,  after  'the  company  was  not  over  particular',  there
 followed:                                                                   
        They made him have  a drink  and then  sing it  all over  again. Much
 encouraged   Bingo  capered   about  on   the  table,   and  when   he  came
 a  second  time  to  'his  boot  to  bear  where  needed'  he kicked  in the
 air. Much too realistically: he overbalanced and fell...                    
      The line His boot to bear where needed is found in  the version  of the
 Troll Song written for this episode.                                        
13. As the  people of  Bree were  conceived at  this stage,  the ill-favoured
 pair  would  presumably  be  hobbits;  and  indeed   in  the   next  chapter
 Bill  Ferny is  explicitly so  (p. 165).  His companion  here is  the origin
 of   the   'squint-eyed   Southerner'   who   had   come  up   the  Greenway
 (FR p. 168); but there  is no  suggestion as  yet of  that element  in what
 was still a very limited canvas.                                            
                                                                            
                    Note on the Songs at the Prancing Pony.                  
                              (i) The Troll Song.                            
                                                                            
   When  my  father  came  to  the  scene  where  Bingo sings  a song  in The
 Prancing  Pony  he  first  used  the  'Troll  Song'  (note  11  above). The
 original version of this, called The Root of the Boot, goes back to his time
 at the University of Leeds; it was privately printed in  a booklet  with the
 title  Songs  for the  Philologists, University  College, London,  1936 (for
 the  history  of this  publication see  pp.144-5).  My father  was extremely
 fond of this song, which went to the tune of The fox went out on a minter's
 night, and my delight in the line If  bonfire there  be, 'tis  underneath is
 among my  very early  recollections. Two  copies of  this booklet  came into
 my  father's  possession  later (in  1940-1), and  at some  time undetermin-
 able he corrected the text, removing some  minor errors  that had  crept in.
 I give the text here as printed in  Songs for  the Philologists,  with these
 corrections.                                                                

       A troll sat alone on his seat of stone,                
       And munched and mumbled a bare old bone;               
       And long and long he had sat there lone                
         And seen no man nor mortal -              
              Ortal! Portal!                                  
       And long and long he had sat there lone                
         And seen no man nor mortal.               
                                                             
       Up came Tom with his big boots on;                     
       'Hallo!'says he, 'pray what is yon?                   
       It looks like the leg o'me nuncle John                  
         As should be a-lyin ' in churchyard.                 
            Searchyard, Birchyard! etc.               
                                                             
       'Young man,' says the troll, 'that bone I stole;       
       But what be bones, when mayhap the soul               
       In heaven on high hath an aureole                       
         As big and as bright as a bonfire?            
              On fire, yon fire!'                             
                                                             
       Says Tom: 'Oddsteeth! 'tis my belief,                  
       If bonfire there be, 'tis underneath;                  
       For old man John was as proper a thief                 
         As ever more black on a Sunday -                     
              Grundy, Monday!                                 
                                                             
       But still I doan 't see what is that to thee,          
       Wi'me kith and me kin a-makin'free:                    
                So get to hell and ax leave o'he,            
                    Afore thou gnaws me nuncle!                
              Uncle, Bunck!'                                  
                                                             
       In the proper place upon the base                      
       Tom boots him right - but, alas! that race             
                Hath a stonier seat than its stony face;      
                   So he rued that net on the rumpo,          
              Lumpo, Bumpo!                                   
                                                             
       Now Tom goes lame since home he came,                  
       And his bootless foot is grievous game;               
       But troll's old seat is much the same,                  
           And the bone he boned * from its owner!             
              Donor, Boner!                                   
                                                             
 (* bone: steal, make off with.)                                

    In  addition to  correcting errors  in the  text printed  in Songs  for the
  Philologists my  father also  changed the  third line  in verse  3 to  Hath a
  halo in heaven upon its poll.                                                
    The original pencilled manuscript of the  song is  still extant.  The title
  was Pero @ Podex ('Boot and  Bottom'), and  verse 6  as first  written went:
                                                                              
                In the proper place upon the base                              
                Tom boots him right - but, alas! that race                     
                Hath as stony a seat as it is in face,                         
                       And Pero was punished by Podex.                         
                     Odex! Codex!                                              
                                                                              
    My  father  made  a  new  version  of  the song  for Bingo  to sing  in The
  Prancing  Pony,  suitable  to  the  intended  context,  and as  already ment-
  ioned this is found in the manuscript of the present chapter; but it is still
  in  a  rough  state,  and  uncertain,  and  was  abandoned when  still incom-
  plete. When he decided that he would not after all  use it  in this  place he
  did not at once reintroduce it into The Lord of  the Rings;  it will  be seen
  in Chapter XI that while the visit  of the  hobbits to  the scene  of Bilbo's
  encounter with the three  Trolls was  fully present  from the  first version,
  there was no song. It was only introduced here later; but the  earlier drafts
  of  Sam's  'Troll  Song'  proceed  in  series from  the version  intended for
  Bingo at Bree.                                                               
                                                                              
  Songs for the Philologists.                                                  
    The  origin  of  the material  in this  little booklet  goes back  to Leeds
  University  in  the  1920s,  when  Professor  E.   V.  Gordon   (my  father's
  co! league and close friend, who  died most  untimely in  the summer  of this
  same  year,  1938)  made  typescripts  for  the  use   of  students   in  the
  Department  of  English.  'His  sources',  in  my  father's words,  'were MSS
  of  my   own  verses   and  his...   with  many   additions  of   modern  and
  traditional  Icelandic  songs  taken  mostly  from  Icelandic  student  song-
  books.'                                                                      
    In  1935  or  1936  Dr.  A.  H.  Smith  of  London  University  (formerly a
  student at  Leeds) gave  one of  these typescripts  (uncorrected) to  a group
  of Honours students there for  them to  set up  on the  Elizabethan printing-
  press. The result was a booklet bearing the title                            
                                                                              
                           SONGS FOR THE PHILOLOGISTS.                         
                                                                              
                   By J. R. R. Tolkien, E. V. Gordon & Others.                 
                                                                              
                  Privately  Printed  in  the  Department  of                  
                  English at University College, London                        
                                   MCMXXXVI.                                   
                                                                              
    In November 1940 Winifred Husbands of University College wrote to           
  my father and explained that 'when the books were ready, Dr Smith            
  realised  that  he  had  never  asked  your permission  or that  of Professor

                                                                  
                                                                                      
 Gordon,  and  he  said  that  the  books  must  not  be  distributed  till  that  had
 been  done  -  but,  so  far  as  I  know,  he  has  never written  or spoken  to you
 on  the  subject,  though  I  spoke  of  it  to him  more than  once. The  sad result
 is  that  most  of  the  copies  printed, being  left undistributed  in our  rooms in
 Gower   Street,   have   perished   like  the   press  itself   in  the   fire  which
 destroyed   that   part   of  the   College  building.'   My  father   was  therefore
 asked  to  give  his   retrospective  permission.   At  that   time  there   were  13
 copies   known  to   her,  but   subsequently  she   found  more,   I  do   not  know
 how many; my father received two (p. 142).                                            
  There   are   30   Songs   for   the  Philologists,   in  Gothic,   Icelandic,  Old,
 Middle   and   Modern   English,   and  Latin,   and  some   poems  in   a  macaronic
 mixture   of   languages.   My   father   was  the   author  of   13  (6   in  Modern
 English,  6  in  Old  English,  i  in  Gothic),  and  E.  V.  Gordon  of  two.  Three
 of  my  father's   Old  English   poems,  and   the  one   in  Gothic,   are  printed
 with  translations  as  an   appendix  to   Professor  T.   A.  Shippey's   The  Road
 to Middle-earth (1982).*                                                               
                                                                                      
                              (ii) The Cat and the Fiddle.                             
                                                                                      
 'The Cat  and the  Fiddle', which  became Bingo's  song at  The Prancing              
 Pony, was published in 1923 in Yorkshire Poetry, Vol. II no. 19 (Leeds,              
 the Swan Press). I give here the  text as  it is  found in  the original              
 manuscript, written on Leeds University paper.                                        
                                                                                      
                                THE CAT AND THE FIDDLE,                                
                                          or                                           
                   A Nursery Rhyme Undone and its Scandalous Secret                    
                                       Unlocked.                                       
                                                                                      
                         They say there's a little crooked inn                         
                        Behind an old grey hill,                                       
                    Where they brew a beer so eery brown                               
                    The man in the moon himself comes down,                           
                        And sometimes drinks his fill.                                   
                                                                                      
(* This is a convenient place to cite my  father's explanation  of the  significance of
 the  Birch-tree  that appears  in two  of the  poems given  by Professor  Shippey (see
 his book pp. 206- 7); cf. also 'Birchyard' in the chorus to verse a of The Root of the
 Boot. In a note on one of his copies of Songs  for the  Philologists my  father wrote:
 'B, B,  Bee and  (because of  the runic  name of  B)  Birch all  symbolize mediaeval
 and  philological  studies  (including  Icelandic);  while  A,  and   Ac  (oak   =  F)
 denote  'modern literature'.  This more  pleasing heraldry  (and friendly  rivalry and
 raillery)  grew  out of  the grim  assertion in  the Syllabus  that studies  should be
 "divided  into  two  Schemes,  Scheme   A  and   Scheme  B".   A  was   mainly  modern
 and  B  mainly  mediaeval  and  philological.  Songs,  festivities and  other gaieties
 were however mainly confined to B.')                                                  

           And there the ostler has a cat                      
               That plays a five-stringed fiddle;               
           Mine host a little dog so clever                    
                    He laughs at any joke whatever,           
                      And sometimes in the middle.             
                                                              
           They also keep a homed cow,                         
              'Tis said, with golden hooves -                  
           But music turns her head like ole,                  
           And makes her wave her tufted tail,                
              And dance upon the rooves.                        
                                                              
           But O! the rows of silver dishes                     
                   And the store of silver spoons:             
           For Sunday there's a special pair,                  
           And these they polish up with care                  
              On Saturday afternoons.                          
                                                              
           The man in the moon had drunk too deep,             
              The ostler's cat was totty,*                    
         A dish made love to a Sunday spoon,                   
           The little dog saw all the jokes too soon,         
                     And the cow was dancing-dotty.           
                                                              
           The man in the moon had another mug                 
              And fell beneath his chair,                      
           And there he called for still more ale,             
           ?hough the stars mere fading thin and pale,         
              And the dawn was on the stair.                   
                                                              
           Then the ostler said to his tipsy cat:              
           'The white horses of the Moon,                      
           They neigh and champ their silver bits,            
           For their master's been and drowned his wits,       
           And the Sun 'll be rising soon -                    
                                                              
         Come play on your fiddle a hey-diddle-diddle,        
              A jig to wake the dead. '                       
         So the cat played a terrible drunken tune,            
         While the landlord shook the man in the moon:         
              "Tis after three, 'he said.                      
                                                              
                 They rolled him slowly up the hill            
                    And bundled him in the moon,               
                 And his horses galloped up in rear,           
                 And the cow came capering like a deer,       
                    And the dish embraced the spoon.           
                                                              
 (* totty: tottery, shaky, dizzy.)                               

                                                                    
                                                                      
     The cat then suddenly changed the tune,                           
     The dog began to mar,                                             
     The horses stood upon their heads,                               
     The guests all bounded from their beds,                            
     And danced upon the floor.                                          
                                                                      
             The cat broke all his fiddle-strings,                      
                The cow jumped over the moon,                          
            The little dog howled to see such fun,                     
     In the middle the Saturday dish did run                          
     Away with the Sunday spoon.                                       
                                                                      
     The mund moon rolled off down the hill,                             
     But only just in time,                                            
     For the Sun looked up with fiery head,                              
           And ordered everyone back to bed,                           
              And the ending of the rhyme.                             
                                                                      
 The two versions found in the  manuscript of  the present  chapter move
 progressively towards the final form, and with emendations made  to the
 second of them it is virtually attained (FR pp. 170 - 2).            

                                      IX.                                    
                          TROTTER AND THE JOURNEY TO                         
                                  WEATHERTOP.                                
                                                                            
 The  original  titleless  chapter  VII  continues  without  a  break through
 what  became  in  FR  Chapter  10  'Strider',  ending  part  way  through  FR
 Chapter r x 'A Knife in the Dark', but the first part of the narrative  to be
 given  now  exists  in two  structurally quite  distinct forms  (both written
 legibly in ink). These my father  marked 'Short'  and 'Alternative',  but for
 the  purposes  of  this chapter  I shall  call them  A ('Alternative')  and B
 ('Short'). The  relation between  the two  is a  textual conundrum,  though I
 think  it can  be explained,"  the question  is however  of no  great import-
 ance  for  the history  of the  narrative, since  the two  versions obviously
 belong to the same time. I give first the alternative A  (on which  my father
 subsequently wrote 'Use this version').                                     
                                                                            
  'There   now!'   said   the   landlord,  snapping   his  fingers.   'Half  a
 moment.  It's  come  back  to  me,  as  I  said  it  would.  Bless  me!  Four
 hobbits  and  five  ponies!  There's  been  some  enquiries  for  a  party of
 your  description  in  the  last  few  days;  and  perhaps  I  might  have  a
 word with you.'                                                             
  'Yes,  certainly!  '  said  Bingo  with  a sinking  feeling. 'But  not here.
 Won't you come to our room?'                                                
  'As  you  wish,'  said  the  landlord.  'I'll  be  coming  along to  bid you
 good  night  and  see  that  Nob  has  brought  all  you  need,  as  soon  as
 I've seen to a thing or two: we may have a word then.'                      
  Bingo,   Odo,   and   Frodo  made   their  way   back  to   their  parlour.(2)
 There  was  no  light.  Merry  was  not  there,  and  the  fire   had  burned
 low.  It  was  not  until  they  had  puffed  up  the  embers  into  a  blaze
 and  put  on  a   faggot  that   they  discovered   Trotter  had   come  with
 them. There he was calmly sitting in a chair in the corner.                 
  'Hullo!'said Odo. 'What do you want?'                                      
  'This  is  Trotter,'  said  Bingo  hastily.  'I  believe  he  wants  a  word
 with me too.'                                                               
  'I do and I don't,' said Trotter. 'That is: I have my price.'              
  'What do you mean?' asked Bingo, puzzled and alarmed.                      
  'Don't  be  frightened.  I  mean  just  this:  I  will   tell  you   what  I
 know,  and  give  you  what  I've  got,  and  what's  more  I'll   keep  your
 secret  under  my  hood   (which  is   closer  than   you  or   your  friends
 keep it) - but I shall want my reward.'                                     

                         
                                                                     
   'And  what  will  that  be,  pray?'  said  Bingo,  angrily;  he  not
 unnaturally  suspected  that  they had  met a  rascal, and  he thought
 uncomfortably  of  his  small  remaining  purse of  money.(3) All  of it
 would hardly satisfy a rascal, and he could not spare any of it.     
   'Not  much,'  answered  Trotter  with  an  amused grin.  'Just this:
 you must take me along with you, until I want to leave you! '        
   'Oh,  indeed!'  replied  Bingo,  surprised  but  not  much relieved.
 'But even if I was likely to  say yes,  I would  not promise  any such
 thing  until  I  knew  a  lot  more  about  you,  and  your  news,  Mr
 Trotter.'                                                            
   'Excellent!'  said  Trotter,  crossing  his  legs.  'You seem  to be
 coming to your senses again; and  that is  all to  the good.  You have
 not been half suspicious enough so far.  Very well  then: I  will tell
 you what I know, and leave the rest to you. That's fair enough.'     
   'Go on then! ' said Bingo. 'What do you know?'                    
   'Well, it's like this,' said Trotter, dropping his voice; he  got up
 and went to the door,  opened it  quickly, looked  out, and  then shut
 it  quietly  and  sat down  again. 'I  have quick  ears, and  though I
 can't disappear into thin air, I can take care no one sees me,  when I
 don't wish them to. I was behind a  hedge when  a party  of travellers
 was  halted  by the  Road not  far west  from here.  There was  a cart
 and horses and  ponies; a  whole pack  of dwarves,  one or  two elves,
 and  -  a  wizard.  Gandalf,  of  course;  there's  no  mistaking him,
 you'll  agree.  They  were talking  about a  certain Mr  Bingo Bolger-
 Baggins and  his three  friends, that  were supposed  to be  riding on
 the  Road  behind.  A  bit  incautious  of  Gandalf,  I must  say; but
 then,  he  was  speaking  low  and I  have quick  ears, and  was lying
 pretty close.                                                        
   'I  followed  him  and  his  party  here  to this  inn. There  was a
 fine  commotion  for  a  Sunday  morning,  I  can  tell  you,  and old
 Barnabas  was  running  round  in  rings;  but  they  kept  themselves
 to themselves and did  not talk  outside closed  doors. That  would be
 five  days  ago.(4) They  went  away  next  morning.  Now  up  comes  a
 hobbit and three friends out  of the  Shire, and  though he  gives out
 the  name  of  Hill, he  and his  friends seem  to know  a lot  of the
 doings  of  Gandalf  and  of  Mr  Bolger-Baggins  of Underhill.  I can
 put two and two  together. But  that need  not trouble  you: for  I am
 going  to  keep  the  answer  under  my  hood,  as  I  said.  Maybe Mr
 Bolger-Baggins  has  his  own  good  reasons  for  leaving   his  name
 behind. But if  so, I  should advise  him to  remember that  there are
 more folk than  Trotter that  can add  two and  two together;  and not
 all are to be trusted.'                                              

   'I  am obliged  to you,'  said Bingo,  feeling relieved,  for Trotter
 did not seem  to know  anything very  serious. 'I  have my  reasons for
 leaving  my  name behind,  as you  put it;  but I  can't quite  see how
 any  one  else  would  guess  my  real  name  from  what  has occurred,
 unless  he  had  your  skill  in  eavesdropping, in  - er  - collecting
 information.  Nor  what  use  my  real  name  would  be  to  anybody in
 Bree.'                                                                 
   'Can't  you?'  said  Trotter  rather  grimly; 'but  eavesdropping, as
 you  put  it, is  not unknown  in Bree,  and besides,  I have  not told
 you all yet.'                                                          
   But  at  that  moment  he  was interrupted  by a  knock on  the door.
 Mr  Barnabas  Butterbur  was  there, with  a tray  of candles,  and Nob
 behind  him  with  jugs  of  hot  water.  'Thinking  you might  wish to
 give  some  orders  before  you  went  to  bed,'  said   the  landlord,
 putting  the  candles  on  the  table, 'I've  come to  wish you  a good
 night. Nob!  Take the  water to  the rooms.'  He came  in and  shut the
 door.                                                                  
   'It's like this, Mr - er - Hill,' he said. 'I've been asked more than
 once to  look out  for a  party of  four hobbits  from the  Shire, four
 hobbits with five ponies. Hullo, Trotter, you here! '                  
   'It's all  right,' said  Bingo. 'Say  what you  want. Trotter  has my
 leave to stay.' Trotter grinned.                                       
   'Well,'  began Mr  Butterbur again,  'it's like  this. Five  days ago
 (yes, that's  right, it  would be  Sunday morning,  when all  was quiet
 and  peaceful)  up  rode  a  whole  pack  of  travellers.  Queer  folk,
 dwarves  and  what  not, with  a cart  and horses.  And old  Mr Gandalf
 was  with  them.  Now says  I to  myself, there's  been some  doings in
 the Shire; and they'll be returning from the Party.'                   
   'From the Party? ' said Bingo. 'What Party?'                         
   'Lor  bless  you,  yes,  sir!  From  the  party  your  Mr  Green  was
 telling  of.  Mr  Bolger-Baggins'  party.  A rare  lot of  traffic went
 westward  through   here  earlier   in  the   month.  Some   Men  there
 were too. Great  Big Folk.  There hasn't  been anything  like it  in my
 time.  Those  that would  say anything  gave out  that they  were going
 or taking stuff to  a Mr  Bolger-Baggins' birthday  party. It  seems he
 was  a  relation  of  that  Mr  Bilbo  Baggins  there was  once strange
 tales about. Indeed they are still told in Bree, sir; though  I daresay
 they are  forgotten in  the Shire.  But we  are slower-moving  in Bree,
 so to speak, and like to, hear old-tales again. Not that I  believe all
 these  stories,  mind  you.  Legends,  I  call 'em.  They may  be true,
 and  then  again  mayhap  they  ain't.  Now,  where  was  I?  Yes. Last
 Sunday  morning  in  came  old  Mr  Gandalf  and  his dwarves  and all.

 "Good  morning,"  said  I.  "And  where  may  you   be  going   to,  and
 where  may  you  be  coming  from?"  says  I   pleasant  like.   But  he
 winks at me, and  says nothing,  and neither  did any  of his  folk. But
 later  on  he  drew  me  aside, and  he said:  "Butterbur," said  he, "I
 have  some  friends  behind  that  will  be  passing  your   way  before
 long.  They  should  be here  by Tuesday,(5) if they  can follow  a plain
 road.  They are  hobbits: one  is a  round-bellied little  chap (begging
 your  pardon,  sir)  with  red  cheeks,  and   the  others   just  young
 hobbits. They'll  be riding  on ponies.  Just tell  them to  push along,
 will  you?  I'll  go  on  slow  from  here,  and  they  had  best  catch
 me  up,  if  they  can.  Now don't  go telling  anybody else,  and don't
 encourage  them  to  stop  here  for  a holiday.  Your beer's  good; but
 they must take what they can quick, and move on. See?"                 
   'Thankyou,'   said   Bingo,  thinking   Mr  Butterbur   had  finished;
 and  relieved  again  to  find  that there  seemed nothing  very serious
 behind the mystery.                                                    
   'Ah,  but  wait  a  minute,'  said  Barnabas  Butterbur,  dropping his
 voice.  'That  wasn't  the  end of  it. There  was others  that enquired
 after  four  hobbits;  and  that's  what  is  puzzling  me.   On  Monday
 evening there came riding in a big fellow  on a  great black  horse. All
 hooded  and  cloaked  he  was.  I  was  standing  by  my  door,  and  he
 spoke  to  me.  Very  strange  I  thought  his  voice, and  could hardly
 make out his talk at first. I did not like the looks of him at  all. But
 sure  enough  he  was  asking  for  news  of  four  hobbits   with  five
 ponies (6) that  were  riding out  of the  Shire. There's  something funny
 here,  thought  I;  but  remembering  what  old   Mr  Gandalf   said,  I
 gave  him  no satisfaction.  "I haven't  seen any  such party,"  I said.
 "What  may  you,be  wanting  with  them,  or  with   me?"  At   that  he
 whipped  up  his  horse  without  another  word,  and  rode   off  east-
 ward.  The  dogs  were  all  yammering,   and  the   geese  a-screaming,
 as he went through the village. I was  not sorry  to see  him go,  I can
 tell you. But I heard tell later that  three were  seen going  along the
 road  towards  Combe  behind  the  hill,  though  where  the  other  two
 sprang from no one could say.                                          
   'But  will you  believe me,  they came  back, or  some others  as like
 'em  as  night  and  dark  followed  after  them.  On  Tuesday  evening,
 there  was  a  bang  at  the  door,  and  my dog  in the  yard set  up a
 yelping  and  a  howling.  "It's another  of they  black Men,'  said Nob
 coming  to  fetch  me  with his  hair all  on end.  Sure enough  it was,
 when  I went  to the  door: not  one though,  but four  of 'em;  and one
 was  sitting  there  in  the  twilight  with  his   horse  nigh   on  my
 doorstep.  He  stooped  down  at  me, and  spoke in  a sort  of whisper.

 It  made  me  go  queer  down  me  back,  if you  understand me,  as if
 someone  had  poured  cold  water behind  me collar.(7) It was  the same
 story:  he  wanted  news  of  four  hobbits  with  five ponies.  But he
 seemed  more  pressing and  eager like.  Indeed to  tell you  the truth
 he offered me a tidy bit of gold and silver if I  would tell  him which
 way they had gone, or promise to watch out for them.                  
   '"There's  lots  of  hobbits  and  ponies  round  here  and   on  the
 Road,"  said  I  (thinking things  mighty curious,  and not  liking the
 sound of his voice). "But I  haven't seen  any party  of that  sort. If
 you  give  me a  name, maybe  I could  give a  message, if  they happen
 to call at my house." At that  he sat  silent for  a moment.  And then,
 sir,  he  says:  "The   name  is   Baggins,  Bolger-Baggins,"   and  he
 hissed out the end of it like a snake. "Any message?" says I, all  of a
 twitter. "Nay, just  tell him  that we  are seeking  him in  haste," he
 hissed;  "you may  see us  again, perhaps,"  and with  that he  and his
 fellows  rode  away,  and  disappeared  quick  in  the  darkness, being
 all wrapped up in black, like.                                        
   'Now  what  do  you  make  of  that,  Mr  Hill?  I  must say  that it
 comes  in  my  mind  to  wonder  if  that is  your right  name, begging
 your pardon. But I hope  I have  done right:  for it  seems to  me that
 those  black  fellows mean  no good  by Mr  Bolger-Baggins, if  that is
 who you are.'                                                         
   'Yes!  He  is Mr  Bolger-Baggins all  right,' said  Trotter suddenly.
 'And  he  ought to  be grateful  to you.  He has  only himself  and his
 friends to thank, if all the village knows his name by now.'          
   'I  am  grateful,'  said Bingo.  'I am  sorry I  cannot tell  you the
 whole  story,  Mr  Butterbur.  I  am  very  tired, and  rather worried.
 But to put it briefly,  these -  er -  black riders  are just  what I'm
 trying  to  escape.  I  should  be  very  grateful  (and  so  also will
 Gandalf  be,  and  I  expect  old Tom  Bombadil as  well) if  you would
 forget  that  anyone  but  Mr  Hill  passed  this  way;  though  I hope
 these abominable riders won't bother you any more.'                   
   'I hope not indeed! ' said Barnabas.                                
   'Well,  now  good  night!'  said  Bingo.  'Thank you again  for  your
 kindness.'                                                            
   'Good  night,  Mr  Hill.  Good  night,  Trotter!  '   said  Barnabas.
 'Good   night,   Mr   Brown,  sir,   and  Mr   Green.  Bless   me  now,
 where's Mr Rivers?'                                                   
   'I don't know,'  said Bingo;  'but I  expect he  is outside.  He said
 something  about going  out for  a breath  of air.  He'll be  in before
 long.'                                                                
   'Very well. I'll not go locking  him out,'  said the  landlord. 'Good

                                                          
                                                                     
 night to you all!' With that  he went  out, and  his feet  died away
 down the passage.                                                    
                                                                     
   'There  now!  '  said  Trotter,  before  Bingo  could  speak.  'Old
 Barnabas has told you a good deal of what I still had  to say.  I saw
 the  Riders  myself.  There are  seven at  least. That  rather alters
 things, doesn't it?'                                                 
   'Yes,' said Bingo, hiding his alarm as  well as  he could.  'But we
 knew  already that  they were  after us;  and they  did not  find out
 anything  new,  it  seems.  How  lucky  that  they  came   before  we
 arrived! '                                                           
   'I should not be sure,' said Trotter. 'I've still some more to add.
 [Added in  pencil: I  first saw  the Riders  last Saturday  away west
 of Bree,  before I  ran across  Gandalf. I  am not  at all  sure they
 were not following his trail, too. I  also saw  those that  called on
 Barnabas.  And] on  Tuesday night  I was  lying on  a bank  under the
 hedge of Bill Ferny's garden; and I heard Bill  Ferny talking.  He is
 a queer fellow, and his friends are  like him.  You may  have noticed
 him  among  the  company:  a   swarthy  fellow   with  a   scowl.  He
 slipped out just after the song and the 'accident'. I  wouldn't trust
 him.  He  would  sell  anything  to  anybody.  Do  you take  my mean-
 ing? I did not see  who Ferny  was talking  to, nor  did I  hear what
 was said: the voices were  hisses and  whispers. That  is the  end of
 my news. You must  do what  you like  about my  'reward'. But  as for
 my  coming  with you,  I will  say just  this: I  know all  the lands
 between  the  Shire  and  the  Mountains,  for  I've   wandered  over
 most of them  in the  course of  my life;  and I'm  older now  than I
 look. I might  prove useful.  For I  fancy you'll  have to  leave the
 open  Road  after  tonight's  accident.  I  don't think  somehow that
 you will be wanting to  meet any  of these  Black-riders, if  you can
 help  it.  They  give  me  the  creeps.' He  shuddered, and  they saw
 with surprise that  he had  drawn his  hood over  his face  which was
 buried in his hands. The  room seemed  very still  and quiet  and the
 lights dim.                                                          
   'There!  It has  passed!' he  said after  a moment,  throwing back
 his  hood and  pushing his  hair from  his face.  'Perhaps I  know or
 guess  more about  these Riders  then even  you do.  You do  not fear
 them enough  - yet.  But it  seems likely enough to  me that  news of
 you  will  reach  them  before the  night is  old. Tomorrow  you will
 have to go swiftly and secretly (if possible).  But Trotter  can take
 you by ways that are little trod. Will you have him?'                
   Bingo  made  no  answer.  He  looked  at  Trotter:  grim  and  wild

                                                                
                                                                         
 and  rough-clad.  It  was  hard  to  know what  to do.  He did  not doubt
 that most of his tale was true  (borne out  as it  was by  the landlord's
 account); but it was less easy to feel sure  of his  good intent.  He had
 a  dark look  - and  yet there  was something  in it,  and in  his speech
 which  often  strayed  from  the  rustic  manner   of  the   rangers  and
 Bree-folk,  that  seemed  friendly,  and   even  familiar.   The  silence
 grew, and still Bingo could not make up his mind.                        
      'Well, I'm  for Trotter,  if you  want any  help in  deciding,' said
 Frodo  at  last.  'In  any  case I  daresay he  could follow  us wherever
 we went, even if we refused.'                                            
      'Thank you!'  said  Trotter,  smiling  at  Frodo.  'I  could,  and  I
 should,  for I  should feel  it my  duty. But  here is  a letter  which I
 have for you - I daresay it will help you to make up your mind.'         
      To  Bingo's  amazement  he  took  from  a  pocket  a   small  sealed
 letter  and handed  it over.  On the  outside it  was inscribed:  'B from
                                                                         
 G X.                                                                     
      'Read it,' said Trotter.                                            
      Bingo  looked  carefully at  the seal  before he  broke it.  It seemed
 undoubtedly  to  be  Gandalf's,  as was  the writing  and the  Rune @.
 Inside was the following message. Bingo read it aloud.                   
                                                                         
      Monday  morning  Sept.  26.  Dear  B. Don't  stop long  in Bree  - not
      for the night, if  you can  help it.  Have learned  some news  on the
      way. Pursuit is getting close: there  are 7  at least,  perhaps more.
      On  no  account  use  It  again,  not even  for a  joke. Don't  move in
      dark  or  mist.  Push  along by  day! Try  and catch  me up.  I cannot
      wait here for you; but I shall go slow for a day or  two. Look  out for
      our camp on Weathertop Hill.(9) I shall wait  there as  long as  I dare.
      I am giving this to a ranger  (wild hobbit)  known as  Trotter:  he is
      dark,  long-haired,  has wooden  shoes! You  can trust  him. He  is an
      old  friend  of  mine  and  knows  a  great deal.  He mill  guide you
      to   Weathertop   and   further  if   necessary.  Push   along!  Yours
                                            Candalf X.(10)                
                                                                         
 Bingo  looked  at  the  trailing  handwriting  -  it  seemed  as  plainly
 genuine  as  the  seal. 'Well,  Trotter!' he  said, 'if  you had  told me
 right  away  that  you  had this  letter, it  would have  smoothed things
 out a lot, and  saved a  lot of  talk. But  why did  you invent  all that
 about eavesdropping?'                                                    
      'I did  not,' laughed  Trotter. 'I  gave old  Gandalf quite  a start
 when  I  popped  up  from  behind  the  hedge.  I told  him he  was lucky
 that it was an old friend. We  had a  long talk,  about various  things -
 Bilbo  and  Bingo  and the  [added in  pencil: Riders  and the]  Ring, if

        
                                                                   
 you want to know. He was  very pleased  to see  me, as  he was  in a
 hurry and yet anxious to get in touch with you.'                   
 'Well,  I  must  admit  I am  glad to  have a  word from  him,' said
 Bingo. 'And if you are a friend of  Gandalf's then  we are  lucky to
 meet you. I am sorry if I was unnecessarily suspicious.'           
 'You   weren't,'   said  Trotter.   'You  weren't   half  suspicious
 enough.  If  you  had  had  previous  experience  of   your  present
 enemy,  you  would not  trust your  own hands  without a  good look,
 once  you  knew  that he  was on  your track.  Now I  am suspicious:
 and I had to make  quite sure  that you  were genuine  first, before
 handing over  any letter.  I've heard  of shadow-parties  picking up
 messages  that  were  not  meant  for  them  - it  has been  done by
 enemies  before now.  Also, if  you want  to know,  it amused  me to
 see if  I could  induce you  to take  me on  - just  by my  gifts of
 persuasion.  It would  have been  nice (though  quite wrong)  if you
 had accepted me  for my  manners without  testimonial! But  there, I
 suppose my looks are against me! '                                 
 'They  are!  '  said  Odo  laughing.  'But  handsome is  as handsome
 does, we say in the Shire, and anyway  I daresay  we shall  all look
 much the same before long, after lying in hedges and ditches.'     
 'It will take more than  a few  days (or  weeks or  years) wandering
 in the world to make you look  like Trotter,'  he answered,  and Odo
 subsided.  'You  would  die first,  unless you  are made  of tougher
 stuff than you look to be.'                                        
 'What  are we  to do?'  said Bingo.  'I don't  altogether understand
 his letter. Gandalf said "don't stay in  Bree." Is  Barnabas Butter-
 bur all right?'                                                    
 'Perfectly!'  said Trotter.  'As sound  a hobbit  as you  would find
 between  the  West  Towers  and  Rivendell.  Faithful,  kind, shrewd
 enough in  his plain  business; but  not overcurious  about anything
 but  the  daily  events  among  the  simple  Bree-folk.  If anything
 strange happens he just invents an.explanation  or else  forgets it.
 "Queer,"  he  says, and  scratches his  head, and  goes back  to his
 larder, or his brewhouse. That is just as well for you! I  expect he
 has  now  convinced  himself  that  there  was  "some  mistake", and
 that the light  was tricky,  and that  all the  hobbits in  the room
 merely imagined that "Mr  Hill" disappeared.  The black  riders will
 become ordinary travellers looking for a friend, in a week or  two -
 if they don't come back.'                                          
 'Well, is it safe then  to stay  the night  here?' said  Bingo, with
 a  look  at  the  comfortable  fire and  the candle-light.  'I mean,
 Gandalf said: "push  along"; but  also: "don't  move in  the dark".'

  It is here that the alternative version B (see p. 148 and note x) joins or
  merges with version A just  given (though  before this  point, as  will be
  seen,  there are  substantial passages  in common).  The beginning  of the
  narrative is here quite different:                                        
                                                                           
    'There  now!'  said  the  landlord,  snapping   his  fingers.   'Half  a
  moment.  It's  come  back  to  me,  as  I  said it  would. Bless  me! Four
  hobbits and five ponies! I think I have a letter for your party.'         
    'A- letter! ' said Bingo, holding out his hand.                         
    'Well,'  said he,  hesitating; 'he  did say  that I  must be  careful to
  deliver  it  to  the  right  hands.  So  perhaps, if  you don't  mind, you
  would  be  so  good  as  to  tell  me,  who  you  might  expect  a message
  from.'                                                                    
    'Gandalf?'  said  Bingo.  'An  old  -  er  -  man'  (he  thought perhaps
  wizard was an inadvisable word) 'with a tall hat and a long beard?'       
    'Gandalf  it  was,'  said Butterbur;  'and old  he is,  but there  is no
  call  to  describe  him.  All  folk  know him.  A wizard  they say  he is;
  but  that's  as  may be.  But what  may your  first name  be, if  you will
  excuse my asking, sir?'                                                   
    'Bingo.'                                                                
    'Ah!  '  said  Barnabas."  'Well, that  seems all  right; though  he did
  say  that  you  should  be  here  by  Tuesday, not  Thursday, as  it is.(12)
  Here  is  the  letter.'   From  his   pocket  he   drew  a   small  sealed
  envelope,  on  which  was  written:  To  Bingo from  G. (X) by   the  hand
  of Mr B. Butterbur, landlord of the Prancing Pony, Bree.                  
    'Thank you   very   much,   Mr   Butterbur,'   said    Bingo,   pocketing
  the letter. 'Now,  if you  will excuse  me, I  will say  good night.  I am
  very tired.'                                                              
    'Good  night,  Mr  Hill!  I'll  be  sending  water  and candles  to your
  room  as  soon  as  may  be.'  He  trotted  off;  and  Bingo,  Frodo,  and
  Odo made their way back to their parlour.                                 
                                                                           
  Version B now  agrees with  version A  virtually word  for word  from here
  (p. 148) to  Trotter's words  'but eavesdropping,  as you  put it,  is not
  unknown in Bree, and besides, I have not told you all  yet' (p.  150), at
  which point in A he was interrupted by the arrival  of Mr  Butterbur; thus
  in B also, Trotter  tells them  of his  overhearing Gandalf  talking about
  Bingo  with  the  Dwarves  and  Elves  on  the  Road west  of Bree.  B now
  diverges again:                                                           
                                                                           
  ... Besides, I have not yet told you the most important part.             
  There were other folk enquiring after four hobbits.'                      
    Bingo's heart sank: he guessed what was coming. 'Go on,' he             
  said quietly.                                                             

   'On Monday evening  at the  west end  of the  village I  nearly ran
 into  a  horse  and  rider  going fast  in the  dusk: all  hooded and
 cloaked in black he was, and his horse was tall  and black.  I hailed
 him with a curse,  not liking  the looks  of him;  and he  halted and
 spoke. He had a strange voice, and I could hardly  make out  his talk
 at first. Sure enough, he was asking  for news  of four  hobbits with
 five ponies that were riding out of the Shire. I stood still  and did
 not  answer; and  he brought  his horse  step by  step nearer  to me.
 When  he  was quite  close he  stooped and  sniffed. Then  he hissed,
 and  rode  off  through  the  village,  eastward.  I  heard  the dogs
 yammering,  and  geese  screaming.  From  the  talk  in the  inn that
 night I gathered that three riders had  been seen  in the  dusk going
 along  the  Road  towards  Combe  behind  the  hill;  though  I don't
 know where the other two sprang from.                               
   'On  Tuesday  I  was  on  the  look-out  all  day. Sure  enough, as
 evening drew in, I saw the same riders again, or others as  like them
 as  night  is  to  darkness  -  coming  down the  Road from  the West
 again.  Four  this  time,  though,  not  three.  I  hailed  them from
 behind a  hedge as  they passed;  and they  all halted  suddenly, and
 turned  towards  my  voice.  One  of  them  -  he  seemed  larger and
 mounted on  a taller  horse -  came forward  in my  direction. "Where
 are you going, and what is your business?" I  said. The  rider leaned
 forward as if he was peering - or  smelling; and  then riding  to the
 hedge he spoke in a sort  of whisper.  I felt  cold shivers  run down
 my  back.  It  was the  same story:  he wanted  news of  four hobbits
 and  five  ponies.  But  he  seemed more  pressing and  eager. Indeed
 (and it is that that is worrying me at the moment) he offered  a deal
 of silver and gold, if I could tell him which way  they had  gone, or
 promise to watch out for them. "I have seen no  such party,"  I said,
 "and I am a wanderer myself,  and maybe  shall be  far West  'or East
 by  tomorrow.  But  if  you  give  me a  name, maybe  I could  give a
 message, if I happen to meet such  folk in  my way."  At that  he sat
 silent  for  a  while;  and  then  he  said  suddenly:  "The  name is
 Baggins, Bolger-Baggins,"  and he  hissed out  the end  of it  like a
 snake. "What message?"  I asked  all trembling.  "Just tell  him that
 we  are  seeking  him in  haste," he  hissed; and  with that  he rode
 away  with  his  companions,  and  their  black  robes  were  quickly
 swallowed  up  in  the dark.  What do  you think  of that?  It rather
 alters things, doesn't it?'                                         
   'Yes,' said Bingo, hiding his alarm as  well as  he could.  'But we
 knew already that they were after us; and  they do  not seem  to have
 found out anything new.'                                            

   'If you can trust me!' said Trotter, with a look at Bingo. 'But             
 even so, I should not be too sure. I've a little more to tell. On             
 Tuesday  night I  was lying  on a  bank under  the hedge  of Bill             
 Ferny's garden...                                                             
                                                                              
 Here version B returns again to the  other (p.  153), and  is almost  word for
 word the same as far  as 'The  silence grew,  and still  Bingo could  not make
 up his mind' (p. 154), the only difference  being that  after 'Bingo  did not
 doubt that most of his tale was true' the words '(borne out as  it was  by the
 landlord's  account)'  are  necessarily  absent,  since  in  this  version  Mr
 Butterbur has not encountered the Riders. Now follows in B:                   
                                                                              
   'I  should  take  a  look  at  that letter  of Gandalf's,  if I  were you,'
 said Trotter quietly. 'It might help you to make up your mind.'               
   Bingo  took  the  letter,  which  he  had  almost  forgotten,  out  of  his
 pocket.  He  looked  at   the  seal   carefully  before   he  broke   it.  It
 seemed  certainly  to  be  Gandalf's,  as  was  the  writing,  and  the runic
 @. He opened it, and read it aloud.                                           
                                                                              
 The letter is the same as in version A, except at the end, since in this story
 Gandalf gave the letter not to Trotter but to the landlord: (13)             
                                                                              
   ... If you meet a ranger (mild hobbit: dark,  long-haired, has              
   wooden shoes!) known as Trotter, stick to him. You  can trust              
   him. Old friend of mine: I have seen him, and told him to look              
   out for you. He knows a lot. He mill guide you  to Weathertop              
   and further if necessary. Push along! Yours                                 
                           Gandalf (X).                                        
                                                                              
   Bingo   looked   at  the   trailing  handwriting.   It  seemed   as  plainly
 genuine  as  the  seal.  'Well,  Trotter,'  he  said,  'if  you  had  told  me
 right  away  that  you  had  seen  Gandalf  to  speak  to,  and  that  he  had
 written  this  letter,  it  would  have  smoothed  things   out  a   lot,  and
 saved a lot of talk.'                                                         
   'As  for  the  letter,' said  Trotter, 'I  knew nothing  about it,  till old
 Barnabas  brought   it  out.   Gandalf  put   two  strings   to  his   bow.  I
 expect he was afraid I might miss you.'                                       
   'But why did you invent all that tale about eavesdropping?'                 
   'I  did  not  invent  it,'  laughed  Trotter.  'It  was  true.  I  gave  old
 Gandalf   quite   a  start   when  I   popped  up   from  behind   the  hedge.
                                                                              
 The two  texts coincide  again from  this point  (p. 154)  - except  of course
 that  Trotter  does  not say  here 'I  had to  make quite  sure that  you were
 genuine first, before  handing over  any letter',  but simply  'I had  to mate
 sure  that  you  were  genuine.'  But  when  Bingo  says  'I  don't altogether

  understand this letter. He says "don't stop in Bree" ' (p. 155), in version
  B he gets no further, for:                                                  
                                                                             
  At   that   moment  there   came  a   knock  on   the  door.   Mr  Butterbur
  was  there  again,  with  a  tray  of  candles,  and  Nob  behind  him  with
  jugs  of  hot  water.  'Here's  your  water  and lights,  if you  be wishing
  for  your  beds,'  said  he.  'But your  Mr Rivers  has not  come in  yet. I
  hope  he  will  not  be  long,  for  I've  a  mind  for  bed  myself,  but I
  won't  leave  the  locking-up  to  anyone  else  tonight;  not   with  these
  pestering black foreigners about.'                                          
    'Where  can  Merry  have   got  to?'   said  Frodo.   'I  hope   he's  all
  right.'                                                                     
    'Give  him  a  few  more  minutes,  Mr   Butterbur,' said  Bingo.   'I  am
  sorry  to  bother  you.'  'Very  good,'  he  said,  putting  the  candles on
  the  table.  'Nob,  take  the  water  to  the rooms!  Good night,  sirs.' He
  shut the door.                                                              
    'What   I   was   going   to  say,'   Bingo  went   on  quietly   after  a
  moment,  'was:  why  not  stop  in   Bree?  Is   Butterbur  all   right?  Of
  course, Tom Bombadil said so; but I'm learning to be suspicious.'           
    'Old  Barnabas!  '  said  Trotter.  'He's  perfectly  all right.  As sound
  a   hobbit   as   there   is   between  the   West  Towers   and  Rivendell.
  Gandalf   was   only   afraid   you   might   be   too   comfortable   here!
  Barney   is   faithful,   kind,  shrewd   in  plain   business  -   and  not
  overcurious  about   anything  but   the  daily   events  among   his  Bree-
  folk.  If  anything  strange  happens,  he  just  invents   an  explanation,
  or  puts it  out of  his mind  as soon  as possible.  "Queer," he  says, and
  scratches   his   head,  and   then  goes   back  to   his  larder   or  his
  brewhouse.'                                                                 
    'Well, is it safe to stay the  night here?'  said Bingo,  with a  look at
  the  comfortable  fire  and  the   candles.  'At   any  rate   Gandalf  said
  "Don't move in the dark".'                                                  
                                                                             
  At this  point the  two versions  finally merge.  It will  be seen  that the
  essential differences of B from A are these. In  B, Butterbur  has Gandalf's
  letter and gives it to Bingo at the outset  (though Bingo  does not  read it
  there and then).  Trotter not  only, as  in A,  'eavesdrops' on  Gandalf and
  his companions on the  Road west  of Bree,  but he,  not Butterbur,  has the
  encounter with the Riders, and  not of  course at  the inn  door but  on the
  road. The 'material' of the two  accounts is  closely similar,  allowing for
  the Butterburian quality of the one, and the difference of place.           
    In  version  A Trotter,  to help  him make  up his  mind, gives  Bingo the
  letter when Mr Butterbur has gone; in B, he  reminds Bingo  about it  (as in
  FR p. r Sr ). And in B, Butterbur only now comes into  the parlour,  so that
  the realisation that Merry has not come back is postponed.                  

    A  characteristic  combination  of,  or  selection from,  these divergent
  accounts is found in the relation between the final story in FR and the two
  original variants; for A is followed in  mating Mr  Butterbur enter  in the
  middle  of  the  conversation  between  the  hobbits and  Trotter/Strider -
  but  B in  mating it  Butterbur who  has Gandalf's letter. It  is extremely
  characteristic, again, that  Trotter's 'eavesdropping'  on Gandalf  and his
  companions  behind  the  hedge  on  the Road  west of  Bree survives  in FR
  (p. 176),  but  becomes  the  eavesdropping  of  Strider  on   the  hobbits
  themselves - for, of course in FR  Gandalf had  been in  Bree and  left the
  letter long before, at the end of  June, and  at the  time of  the Birthday
  Party  was  far  away.  But  while  the  relative  chronology,  as  between
  Gandalf's movements   and  those   of  the   hobbits,  would   be  entirely
  reconstructed, that of the latter was never changed.                       
                                                                            
  Thurs. Sept. 22.Birthday Party.                Gandalf and Merry, with     
                                                 Dwarves and Elves, left     
                                                 Hobbiton (after the         
                                                 fireworks).                 
                                                                            
  Fri. Sept. 23. Bingo, Frodo, and Odo                                        
                    left  Hobbiton  and slept                                
                    out.                                                     
                                                                            
  Sat. Sept. 24. The hobbits passed the                                  
                    night with Gildor and the                                
                    Elves.                                                    
                                                                            
  Sun. Sept. 25. The hobbits reached.             Gandalf and his.            
                    Buckland at night.           companions arrived at       
                                                 Bree in the morning.        
                                                                            
  Mon. Sept. 26. The hobbits in the Old.         Gandalf and his.            
                    Forest; first  night with.   companions left Bree,       
                    Tom Bombadil.                Gandalf leaving letter for
                                                 Bingo. Black Rider comes
                                                 to the inn (or encounters
                                                 Trotter on the Road).       
                                                                            
  Tues. Sept. 27. Second night with Tom.         Four  Riders  come   to  the.
                    Bombadil.                    inn  (or  Trotter encounters
                                                 them on the Road).          
                                                                            
  Wed. Sept. 28. Hobbits captured by                                          
                    Barrowight.                                              
                                                                            
  Thurs. Sept. 29.                     Hobbits arrive at Bree.               
                                                                            
    The same dates for the hobbits' movements appear in The Tale of          
  Years in LR Appendix B (p. 372). That the 22nd of September, the day       
  of the Birthday Party, was a Thursday first appears  in the  fourth version

 
                                                                           
 of 'A Long-expected Party' (FR  p. 34);  originally it  was a  Saturday (see
                                                                           
 PP. ax, 38).                                                               
   For the significance of  the additions  in pencil  on pp.  153-4, whereby
 Trotter is made to  have seen  the Riders  'away west  of Bree'  already on
 the  Saturday,  before  Gandalf  arrived  there,  and  to have  spoken with
 Gandalf about them when they met, see p. 217, note 11.                    
   From  the  point  where  the  two versions  join, the  text (in  ink over
 pencil) proceeds thus. I give it in full, since though much was retained in
 FR there are a very great many differences in detail.                      
                                                                           
   'You  mustn't,'  said  Trotter;  'and  so  you  can't  help  staying here
 tonight.  What  has  been  done  can't   be  helped;   and  we   must  hope
 that all will be well. I  don't think  anything will  get inside  this inn,
 once it is locked.  But, of  course, we  must get  off as  early as  may be
 in  the  morning.  I  shall  be  up  and  about  sooner  than  the  Sun and
 Ill  see  all  is  ready.  You  are  two  or three  days behind  - somehow.
 Perhaps  you  will  tell  me  as  we  go along  what you  have been  up to.
 Unless  you  start early,  and go  fast, I  doubt if  you'll find  any camp
 on Weathertop.'                                                            
   'In  that  case  let's  get  to  bed  now! '  said Odo  yawning. 'Where's
 that  silly  fellow  Merry?  It  would be  too much,  if we  had to  go out
 now and look for him.'                                                     
   At  that  very  moment  they  heard  a  door   slam,  and   feet  running
 in  the  passage.  Merry  came  in  with  a  rush,  shut the  door hastily,
 and  leaned  against  it.  He  was  out of  breath. They  stared at  him in
 alarm  for  a  moment;  then  he  gasped:  'I've  seen  one,   Bingo.  I've
 seen one! '                                                                
   'What?' they cried all together.                                         
   'A Black Rider! '                                                        
   'Where?'said Bingo.                                                      
   'Here.  In  the  village,'  he  answered.  'I  had   come  back   from  a
 stroll,  and  was  standing  just   outside  the   light  from   the  door,
 looking  at  the stars:  it is  a fine  night, but  dark. I  felt something
 coming  towards,  if  you  know  what  I  mean:  there was  a sort  of dark
 shadow;  and  then  I  saw  him  for   a  second,(14) just  as   he  passed
 through  the  beam  of  light  from  the  door.  He  was leading  his horse
 along  the  grass-edge  on  the  other  side  of   the  Road,   and  hardly
 made a sound.'                                                             
   'Which way did he go?' asked Trotter.                                   
   Merry  started,  noticing  the  stranger  for  the  first time.  'Go on,'
 said Bingo. 'This is a messenger from Gandalf. He will help us.'           
   'I  followed  him,'  said  Merry.  'He  went  through the  village, right
 to  the  east  end,  where  the  Road  turns  round the  foot of  the hill.

 Suddenly  he  stopped  under   a  dark   hedge;  and   I  thought   I  heard
 him   speaking,   or   whispering,  to   someone  on   the  other   side.  I
 wasn't  sure,  though  I  crept  as  near  as  I  dared.  But  I'm  afraid I
 came over all queer and trembling suddenly, and bolted back.'                   
    'What's to be done?' said Bingo, turning to Trotter.                         
    'Don't  go  to  your  rooms!  '  said  Trotter at  once. 'That  must have
 been  Bill Ferny  - for  his hole  is at  the east  end of  Bree; and  it is
 more  than  likely  that  he  will  have  found  out  which  rooms  you have
 got.  They  have   small  windows   looking  back   west  and   the  outside
 walls  are  not  very  thick.  We'll  all  stay  in here,  bar the  door and
 window,  and  take  turns  to  watch.'  But  first   we  had   better  fetch
 your baggage - and arrange the beds! '                                          
                                                                                
 At this point my father interrupted his original pencilled draft text to set
 down a sketch of the  story to  come, and  since he  did not  overwrite this
 part of the manuscript in ink it can be read - or could be,  if it  were not
 written in a scribble at the very limit of legibility and beyond.               
                                                                                
 That was done. Pillows put in beds. Nothing happens that night -               i
 but in the morning windows open, pillows on floor. The ponies                  1
 have all vanished. Timothy [i.e. Timothy Titus the landlord] in a               
 great state. They..... [?a bill]. He pays for ponies [?but there                
 are] no more to be had. Shortage in the village. They go on with                
 Trotter on foot. Trotter takes them to a wild hobbit hole, and                  
 [? gets his friend] to run on ahead and send a message to Weather-              
 top by pony? Trotter [?guides them by quiet paths off the....]                  
 road and going through the woods. Once far in distance on a hill                
 which looked down on to a piece of the road they thought they saw               
 a Black Rider sitting on his horse [?scanning] the road [?and the               
 country round].                                                                 
 ..... Weathertop [?about] 50 [written beside: 100] miles from                   
 Bree.                                                                           
    Commanding view all round.                                                   
    Gandalf had gone, but left a pile of stones - message. Waited                
 two days. Must go on. Push on for ford. Help will be easy from                  
 Rivendell, if I get there.                                                      
    They come to Troll Stones..... of Road. Here owing to River                  
 ahead they [?are obliged] to go back to Road. Black Riders                      
 evidently expect them to visit Troll-wood [> Trollshaw] and are                 
 waiting on road where path joined it.                                           
                                                                                
    At this stage, then, my father did not at all foresee the attack on the      
 hobbits at Weathertop, just as in the earlier sketch given on p. 126 he did
 not foresee the attack on the inn. The visit to the Troll Stones had already

                      
                                                                          
 been envisaged in that sketch (there described as 'foolish'), and there as
 here the Riders would only finally come upon them at the Ford.            
   This is the first  occurrence of  the name  Trollshaw, which  appears on
 the LR map (Trollshaws) but nowhere in the text.                          
   The text in ink continues:                                              
                                                                          
   Trotter  was  now  accepted  as  a  member  of  the  party,   indeed  as
 their  guide.  They  at  once  did  as  he  suggested;  and   creeping  to
 their   bedrooms   they  disordered   the  clothes,   and  put   a  pillow
 longwise  in  each  bed.  Odo  added  a  brown fur  mat, a  more realistic
 substitute  for  his head.  When they  were all  gathered in  the sitting-
 room  again, they  piled their  things on  the floor,  pushed a  low chair
 against  the  door,  and  shut  the  window.  Peeping  out  Bingo  saw  it
 was  still  a  clear night:  he then  closed and  barred the  heavy inside
 shutters,  drew  the  curtains,  and  blew  out  the candles.  The hobbits
 lay on their blankets with  their feet  towards the  fire. Trotter  lay in
 the  chair  against  the door.  They did  not talk  much, but  fell asleep
 one  by  one.(16) Nothing  happened   in  the   night  to   disturb  them.
 Both  Merry  and  Bingo  woke  up  once  in  the  early  and   still  dark
 hours,   fancying   they  had   heard  or   felt  something   moving;  but
 soon  they  fell  asleep  again. They  noticed that  Trotter seemed  to be
 sitting  awake  in  his  chair  with his  eyes open.  It was  also Trotter
 that  drew  the  curtains and  opened the  shutters and  let in  the early
 light. He  seemed to  be able  to do  with next  to no  sleep. As  soon as
 he   had   roused   them  they   tiptoed  along   the  passage   to  their
 bedrooms.                                                                 
   There   they   found   how   good   Trotter's   advice  had   been.  The
 windows  were  open  and  swinging,  and   the  curtains   were  flapping.
 The  beds  were  tossed  about,  and  the  pillows  flung  on the  floor -
 ripped open. Odo's mat was torn to pieces.                                 
   Trotter  promptly   went  in   search  of   Mr  Butterbur,   and  roused
 him  out  of  bed. What  exactly he  said to  him he  did not  tell Bingo;
 but   the   landlord   appeared   very   quickly,   and  he   seemed  very
 frightened, and very apologetic.                                          
   'Never  has  such  a  thing  happened  in  my time,  or my  dad's,' said
 he,  raising  his  hands  in  horror.  'Guests  unable  to sleep  in their
 beds,  and  all.  What  are  we  coming  to?  But  this  has been  a queer
 week,  and  no  mistake.'  He  did  not  seem  surprised  that  they  were
 anxious  to leave  as soon  as possible;  before folk  were up  and about;
 and  bustled  off  to  get  them some  breakfast at  once, and  have their
 ponies got ready.                                                         
   But   before   long   he   came   back   in   dismay.  The   ponies  had
 vanished!  The  stabledoors  had  been  broken  open  in  the  night,  and

 they  were  gone,  and  all the  other ponies  in the  place as  well. This
 was   crushing   news.   They   were   already   probably   too   late   to
 overtake  Gandalf.  On  foot  there  was  no hope  of it  - they  could not
 reach Weathertop for days, nor Rivendell for weeks.                        
   'What  can  we  do,  Mr  Butterbur?  '  asked  Bingo   desperately.  'Can
 we  borrow  any  more  ponies  in  the   village,  or   the  neighbourhood?
 Or hire them?' he added rather doubtfully.                                 
   'I  doubt  it,'  said Mr  Butterbur. 'I  doubt if  there be  four riding-
 ponies left in all  Bree; and  I don't  suppose one  of them  is for sale or
 hire.  Bill  Ferny  has  one,  a  poor  overworked  creature; but  he won't
 part with that  for less  than thrice  its worth,  not if  I know  him. But
 I'll  do  what  I  can.  I'll  rout  out  Bob  and  send  him  round  right
 away.'                                                                     
                                                                           
   In  the  end,  after  an  hour  and  more's  delay,  it  turned  out that
 only  one  pony  could  be  got  -  and  that  had  to  be  bought  for six
 silver  pennies  (a  high  price   for  those   parts).  But   Mr  Barnabas
 Butterbur  was  an  honest  hobbit,  and  a  generous  one  (not  but  what
 he  could  afford  to  be  both);  and  he  insisted  on  paying  Mr Rivers
 (that is Merry) for the  lost five  animals, 20  silver pennies,'  less the
 cost  of  their  food  and  lodging.  That  made  a very  valuable addition
 to  their  travelling  funds, since  silver pennies  were very  valuable in
 those  days;  but  it  was  not  at  the  moment  much  comfort  for  their
 loss  and  delay. It  must have  been rather  a serious  blow for  poor old
 Barnabas, even though he was comfortably off.*                             
   Of  course  all  this  bother  about  the  ponies  not  only  took  time,
 but  brought  the  hobbits  and  their  affairs   very  much   into  public
 notice.  There  was  no  chance  of  keeping  their  departure  secret  any
 longer  -  much  to  their  dismay,  and  to  Trotter's.  Indeed  they  did
 not  get  off until  after nine  o'clock, and  by that  time all  the Bree-
 folk  were  out  to   watch  them   go.  After   saying  farewell   to  Nob
 and  Rob,'  and   taking  leave   of  Mr   Butterbur,  they   tramped  off,
                                                                           
 (* Footnote. Still, I believe he came out on the right side in the end; for
 it turned out that the ponies, wild with terror, had escaped, and  having a
 great deal of sense eventually made their  way to  find old  Fatty Lumpkin.
 And  that  proved  useful.  For  Tom  Bombadil  saw  them,  and  was afraid
 that disaster had befallen the hobbits. So he went off to Bree to  find out
 what he could; and there he learned all that Barnabas  could tell  him (and
 a bit more). Also he bought the ponies  off Barnabas  (as they  belonged to
 him  now).  That  was  very  much  to  the  delight  of Fatty  Lumpkin, who
 now  had  friends  to  whom  he  could tell  tales, and  (as they  were his
 juniors) on to whom he could shift most of the little work there was to do.)

                                        
                                                                      
 anxious  and  downhearted.  Trotter  walked  in  front  leading  their
 only pony, which was  laden with  the greater  part of  their luggage.
 Trotter  was  chewing  an  apple:  he  seemed  to  have   a  pocketful
 of  them.  Apples  and  tobacco,  he  said,  were  the things  he most
 missed  when  he  could  not  get  them.  They took  no notice  of the
 many  inquisitive heads  poking out  of doors  or popping  over fences
 as  they passed  through the  village; but  as they  drew near  to the
 east  end, Bingo  saw-a squat  sullen-faced hobbit  (rather goblinish,
 he thought to  himself): he  was looking  over a  hedge. He  had black
 eyes,  a  large  mouth,  and  an  unpleasant leer,  and was  smoking a
 blackened  pipe. He  took the  pipe out  of his  mouth, and  spat back
 over his shoulder as they went by.                                    
   'Morning, Trotter!  ' he  said. 'Found  some new  friends?' Trotter
 nodded, but did not answer.                                           
   'Morning, gentles! ' he  said to  the hobbits.  'I suppose  you know
 who you are going with? That's dirty Trotter, that is; or so  he calls
 himself  -  though  I  have  heard  other  names  not  so  pretty. But
 maybe a ranger is good enough for you.'                               
   Trotter  turned  round  quickly.  'Bill Ferny!'  he said.  'You put
 your ugly face out of sight, or you'll get it broken. Not that that'll
 do it much harm.' With  a sudden  flick, quick  as lightning,  half an
 apple left his hand and hit  Bill square  on the  nose. He  ducked and
 vanished with a yowk;(19) and  they did  not listen  to the  curses that
 came from behind the hedge.                                           
   After  leaving  the  village  they  went  along  the  Road  for some
 miles. It wound to the right, round the south side  of Bree  hill, and
 then  began  to  run  downwards  into  wooded  country.(20) Away  north
 of the Road they could  see first  Archet on  some higher  ground like
 an island in the trees; and then down in  a deep  hollow, to  the east
 of  Archet,  wisps  of  rising  smoke  that  showed  where  Combe lay.
 After  the  Road  had run  down some  way and  left Bree  hill behind,
 they  came  on  a  narrow  track  that  ran  northward  away  from the
 Road. 'This is  where we  leave the  open, and  take to  cover!' said
 Trotter. 'Not a short cut, I hope,' said  Bingo. 'It  was a  short cut
 through  woods  that  made  us  two  days late  before.' 'Ah,  but you
 had  not got  me with  you,' said  Trotter. 'My  cuts, short  or long,
 don't go wrong.' His plan, as far  as they  could gather,  not knowing
 the country, was to  pass near  Combe '  and keep  under cover  of the
 woods while the Road was still near, and then to steer as  straight as
 they  could  over  the  wild  country to  Weathertop Hill.  They would
 in that way (if all went well) cut off a great loop of the Road, which
 further  on  bent  away  south  to   avoid  the   Flymarshes  [written

 above:  Midgewater].  Trotter  also  had  a  notion  that if  he came
 across any of his friends among the wild hobbits,  one that  he could
 trust,  they  might  send  him on  ahead on  the pony  to Weathertop.
 But the  others did  not think  well of  his plan,  as it  would mean
 carrying   heavy   packs,   and   thought  the   Flymarshes  [written
 above:   Midgewater]   would   prove   bad  enough   (from  Trotter's
 description)  without  that.(22) However,  in  the  meantime  walking
 was not unpleasant. Indeed,  if it  had not  been for  the disturbing
 events of the night before, they would have enjoyed this part  of the
 journey better than any up to that time. The  sun was  shining, clear
 but  not hot.  The woods  were still  leafy and  full of  colour, and
 seemed   peaceful,   clean,  and   wholesome.  Trotter   guided  them
 confidently  among  the  many  crossing  ways,  although   very  soon
 they themselves lost all sense of direction; but  as he  explained to
 them, they were not yet going in a straight line,  but making  a zig-
 zag course, to put off any pursuit.                                 
   'Bill  Ferny  will  have  watched  where  we  left  the  Road,  for
 certain,' he said; 'but I don't think he will follow us  far himself,
 though  he  knows  the  land  round  here well  enough. It's  what he
 tells other - people that  matters. If  they think  we have  made for
 Combe, so much  the better.'  Whether because  of Trotter's  skill or
 for  some other  reason, they  saw no  sign, and  heard no  sound, of
 any other living thing all that day,  and all  the next  day: neither
 two-footed   (save   birds),  nor   four-footed  (except   foxes  and
 rabbits).  On  the  third  day  out from  Bree they  came out  of the
 woodlands.  Their  way  had  trended  downwards  all  the  time,  and
 now they came to flatter and more difficult country.                
   They  were  on  the   borders  of   the  Midgewater   Marshes.  The
 ground  became  damper,  in places  boggy, and  here and  there there
 were pools, and wide stretches of  reeds and  rushes, full  of hidden
 warbling birds. They had  to pick  their way  carefully to  keep both
 dry-footed and on their line. At  first they  made fair  progress: in
 fact  they  were  probably  going quite  as quickly  on foot  as they
 could  have  done  mounted.  But  as  they went  on their  way became
 slower  and  more  dangerous.  The  marshes  were  wide  and  treach-
 erous,  and  across  them  there  was  only  a  winding ranger-trail,
 which it taxed Trotter's skill to find. The  flies became  a torment:
 particularly the clouds of tiny  midges that  crept up  their sleeves
 and breeches and under their hair.                                  
   'I'm being eaten  alive! '  said Odo.  'Midgewater! There  are more
 midges  than  water.  What  do  they  live  on,  when they  can't get
 hobbits? '                                                          

   They  were  two  miserable   days  in   this  lonely   and  unpleasant
 country.  Their  camping  places  were  damp  and  cold,  for  there was
 no  good  fuel.  Armfuls of  dry reeds  and rush  and grass  blazed away
 all  too  soon.  And  of  course the  biting things  would not  let them
 sleep.   There  were   also  some   abominable  over-grown   cousins  of
 the  cricket  that  squeaked  all  round, and  nearly drove  Bingo wild.
 He  hated  crickets,  even  when  he  was  not  kept  awake by  bites to
 listen to them. But  these crickets  were shriller  than any  cricket he
 had  met,  and  even  more  persistent.  They   were  more   than  glad,
 when  early  on  the  fifth  day  from  Bree  they  saw the  land before
 them slowly rising again,  sloping up  until in  the distance  it became
 a line of low hills.(23)                                                
   To the right of the line there was a tall conical hill with a slightly
 flattened  top.  'That  is  Weathertop,'  said  Trotter. 'The  old Road,
 which we have  left far  away on  our right,  runs to  the south  of it,
 and  passes  not  far  from  its  foot.  We  might  reach  it   by  noon
 tomorrow; and I suppose we had better make for it.'                     
   'What do you mean?' asked Bingo.                                      
   'I  mean:  when  we  do get  there, it  is not  certain what  we shall
 find. It is close to the Road.'                                         
   'But was not Gandalf going to camp there?'                            
   'Yes  -  but  what  with  one  thing  and  another,  you  are  already
 three  or  even  four  days  behind  the  time when  he expected  you to
 get there. You will be four or five days late by the  time we  reach the
 top.  I  wonder  very  much if  we shall  find him  there. On  the other
 hand,  if  certain  persons  were  warned  that  you  went  east  out of
 Bree,  and  have  failed  to  find us  in the  wilderness, they  may not
 unlikely   make   for   Weathertop  themselves.   It  commands   a  wide
 view  of  the  lands  all  round.  Indeed  there  are  many   birds  and
 beasts in this country  that could  see us  as we  stand here  from that
 hill-top.  There  are  even  some  of the  rangers that  on a  clear day
 could  spy  us from  there, if  we moved.  And not  all the  rangers are
 to be trusted, nor all the birds and beasts.'                           
   The  hobbits  looked  anxiously  at  the distant  hill. Odo  looked up
 in the pale sky, as if he feared to  see hawks  or eagles  hovering over
 them.  'You  make  me  feel  most  uncomfortable,'  said  Bingo;  'but I
 suppose it  is all  for our  good. We  ought to  realize what  danger we
 are in. What do you advise us to do?'                                   
   'I think,' answered  Trotter slowly  and as  if he  was for  the first
 time not quite  sure of  his plans,  'I think  the best  thing is  to go
 straight  forward,  or  as  straight  as  we can,  from this  point, and
 make for the line of hills.  There we  can strike  certain paths  that I

 know, and in  fact will  bring us  to Weathertop  from the  North, and
 less openly. Then we shall see what we shall see.'                    
                                                                      
   There  seemed  nothing  else  to  do.  In  any  case they  could not
 stop in  that comfortless  land, and  the line  of march  that Trotter
 proposed was more or less  in the  direction that  they must  take, if
 ever  they  were  to  get  to  Rivendell.  All  that day  they plodded
 along,  until  the  cold  and  early  evening  came  down.   The  land
 became  drier  and  more  barren;  but  mists  and vapours  lay behind
 them  on  the  wide  marshes.  A  few  melancholy  birds  were piping,
 until  the  round  red  sun  sank  slowly  into  the  western shadows.
 They  thought  how  its  soft  light  would  be  glancing  through the
 cheerful  windows  looking  on  to  the  garden  at Bag-end  far away.
 They  came  upon  a  stream  that  wandered  down  from  the  hills to
 lose itself in the stagnant  marshland, and  this they  followed while
 the  light  lasted.  It  was  already  nearly  dark  when  they camped
 under  some  stunted  alder-trees on  the stony  banks of  the stream;
 now  dark  before  them  loomed  the  bare side  of the  nearest hill,
 bleak and barren. They set  a watch  that night,  but those  that were
 not  watching  slept  uneasily.  The  moon  was  waxing,  and  in  the
 early night hours a grey cold light lay on the land.                  
   Next morning  they set  out again  soon after  sunrise. There  was a
 frost  in  the  air,  and the  sky was  a pale  clear blue.  They felt
 refreshed, as if they had had a night of good sleep, and were  glad to
 have  left  the  damp  heavy  air  of the  marshes. Already  they were
 getting used  to much  walking, and  to short  commons (or  shorter at
 any  rate than  they would  have thought  possible to  walk on  in the
 Shire).  Odo declared  that Bingo  was looking  twice the  hobbit that
 he was.                                                               
   'Very  odd,'  said  Bingo,  tightening  his belt,  'considering that
 there is actually a great deal less of me. I hope the thinning-process
 won't go on indefinitely, or I shall become a wraith.'                
   'Don't  speak  of  such  things!'  said  Trotter  quickly,  and with
 surprising earnestness.                                               
                                                                      
   Before  long  they reached  the feet  of the  hills; and  there they
 found, for the first time since they left the Road,  a track  plain to
 see.  This  they  took, turning  and following  it south-west.(24) It led
 them  up  and  down,  following a  line of  country that  contrived to
 keep  them  hidden  as  often  and  as  long  as  possible  from view,
 either from the hill-tops above,  or from  the flats  to the  West. It
 dived  into  dells,  and  hugged  steep  banks,  and  found  crossings
 over  the  streams,  and  ways  round  the  bogs  that  these  made in

                     
                                                                        
 hollow  places.  Where  it  crossed  a  flatter and  more open  space it
 often  had  lines  of  large  boulders  on  either  side,  screening the
 marchers almost like a hedge.                                           
  'I  wonder  who  made  this  path,  and  what  for?'  said   Frodo,  as
 they  passed  along  one  of  these  avenues,  where  the   stones  were
 unusually large and closely set. 'I am not sure I quite like it - it has
 a,  well,  rather  barrow-wightish   look?  Is   there  any   barrow  on
 Weathertop? '                                                           
  'No!'  said  Trotter.  'There  is  no  barrow  on  Weathertop   nor  on
 any of these hills. The Men  of the  West did  not live  here. I  do not
 know  who  made  this  path,  nor  how  long  ago,  but  it was  made to
 provide  a  way  to Weathertop  that could  be defended.  It is  told by
 some  that  Gilgalad  and  Valandil [later  > Elendil]  made a  fort and
 strong place here in the Ancient Days, when they marched East.'         
  'Who  was  Gilgalad?'  asked  Frodo;  but   Trotter  did   not  answer,
 and seemed to be lost in thought.(25)                                   
                                                                        
  It   was   already   mid-day   when  they   came  towards   the  south-
 eastern end  of the  line of  hills, and  saw before  them, in  the pale
 clear light of the October  sun, a  green-grey ridge  leading up  like a
 sagging  bridge  on  to  the northward  side of  the tall  conical hill.
 They decided  to make  for the  top at  once, while  the day  was broad.
 Concealment  was  no  longer  possible,  and  they  could only  hope for
 the best. Nothing could be seen moving on the hill.                     
  After  an  hour's  slow  plodding  climb,  Trotter  reached  the  crown
 of  the  hill.  Bingo  and  Merry  followed,  tired and  breathless. The
 last  slope  had  been  steep  and  stony.  Odo  and  Frodo   were  left
 below  with  the  baggage  and  the  pony, in  a sheltered  hollow under
 the western flank of the  hill. On  the top  they found  only a  pile of
 stones  -  a  cairn  of  long forgotten  meaning. There  was no  sign of
 Gandalf,  or  of  any  living  thing.  All  about and  below them  was a
 wide  view,  for  the  most  part  of  a   land  empty,   deserted,  and
 featureless  -  except  for  patches  of  woodland  away  to  the south,
 where  they  caught  also  the  occasional   glint  of   distant  water.
 Beneath  them,  on  the  southward  side,  ran  the  ribbon  of  the Old
 Road,  coming  out  of  the  West  and  winding  up  and  down  until it
 faded  behind  a  ridge  of dark  land in  the East.  It too  was empty.
 Nothing  was  moving  on  it.  Following its  line eastward  they beheld
 the  Mountains  -  now  plain  to  see, the  nearer foothills  brown and
 brooding,   with   taller   greyer  shapes   behind,  and   behind  them
 again the high white peaks glimmering out of clouds.                    
  'Well,  here  we  are!'  said  Merry.  'And  very  cheerless   and  un-

                   
                                                                             
 inviting  it  all  looks.  There  is  no  water,  and  no  shelter.  I  don't
 blame  Gandalf  for  not   waiting  here!   He  would   have  to   leave  the
 waggon,   and  horses,   and  most   of  his   companions,  too,   I  expect,
 down near the Road.'                                                         
    'I   wonder,'  said   Trotter  thoughtfully.   'He  must   certainly  have
 come  here,  since  he  said  he  would.  It  is  not  like  him to  leave no
 sign.  I  hope  nothing  has  happened  to  him -  though it  is not  easy to
 imagine  him  coming  to  grief.'  He  pushed  the  pile  of stones  with his
 foot,  and  the  topmost  stones   fell  down   with  a   clatter.  Something
 white, set free,  began to  flutter in  the wind.  It was  a piece  of paper.
 Trotter  seized  it  eagerly,  and  read  out  the  message  scrawled  on it:
                                                                             
    Waited three days. Must go. What has happened to you. Push on            
    for the Ford beyond Troll-shaw, as fast as you can. Help will            
    come  there from Rivendell,  as soon  as I  can manage  it. Be            
    watchful. G. (X)                                                         
                                                                             
    'Three  days!'  said   Trotter.  'Then   he  must   have  left   while  we
 were  still  in  the  marshes.  I  suppose  we  were  too  far  away  for any
 glimpse of our miserable fires.'                                             
    'How  far  is  the  Ford,   and  Rivendell?'   said  Bingo   wearily.  The
 world looked wild and wide from the hill-top.                                
    'Let  me  think!  '  said  Trotter.  'I don't  know if  the Road  has ever
 been  measured  beyond  the  Forsaken  Inn   -  a   day's  journey   east  of
 Bree.  But  the  stages,  in  days  taken  by  waggon,  pony,  or  horse,  or
 on  foot,  are  pretty  well  known,  of  course.  I  should  reckon   it  is
 about   120   long-miles   from   Bree   to  Weathertop   -  by   the  Road,
 which   loops   south   and   north.  We   have  come   a  shorter   but  not
 quicker  way:  between  So  and  go  miles  in  the  last  six  days.  It  is
 nearer  40  than  30  miles  from   Brandywine  Bridge   to  Bree.   I  don't
 know,  but  I  should  make  the  count   of  miles   from  your   Bridge  to
 the  Ford  under  the  Misty  Mountains  a  deal  over   300  miles.   So  it
 must  be  close  on  200  from  Weathertop  to  the  Ford.  I  have  heard it
 said  that  from  Bridge  to  Ford  can  be  done in  a fortnight  going hard
 with  fair  weather;  but  I   have  never   met  any   that  had   made  the
 journey  in  that  time.  Most  take  nigh  on  a  month,  and  poor  hobbit-
 folk on foot take more.                                                      
                                                                             
 This  passage,  from  'But  the  stages, in  days taken  by waggon,  pony, or
 horse, or on foot', was enclosed within  square brackets;  and against  it my
 father wrote: '? -Cut out - as this though it can be kept as a narrative time
 guide is too  cut and  dried and  spoils the  feeling. ?'  He then  wrote the
 following replacement on a slip (cf. FR p. 200):                              

                 
                                                                        
 Some say it is so  far, and  some say  otherwise. It  is a  queer Road,
 And folk are  glad to  reach their  journey's end,  be the  time longer
 or  shorter.  But  I  know  how  long  it  would  take  me,  with  fair
 weather  and  no  illfortune,  just  a  poor  ranger  on his  own feet:
 between  three   weeks  and   a  month   going  hard   from  Brandywine
 Bridge  to  the  Ford  under  the  Misty   Mountains.  More   than  two
 days  from  the  Bridge  to  Bree,  a  week  from  Bree  to Weathertop.
 We  have made  it in  that time,  but we  have come  by a  shorter way,
 for  the  Road bends  south and  north. Say  ten days.  Then we  have a
 fortnight before us, maybe less, but more likely more.'                 
                                                                        
  'A fortnight!'  said Bingo.  'A lot  may happen  in that  time.' They
 all fell silent. Bingo felt for the first time in that lonely place the
 full realization of his danger and  exile. He  wished that  his fortune
 had  left  him  in  the  quiet  and  beloved  Shire.  He stared  at the
 hateful'  Road  - leading  back westward  - to  his old  home. Suddenly
 he  was  aware  that  two black  specks were  moving along  the ribbon,
 going  westward,  and  looking  closer  he  saw  now that  several more
 were  crawling  slowly  eastward  to  meet  them.  He  gave  a  cry and
 clutched Trotter's arm. 'Look! ' he said, pointing.                     
  'Get  down!'  cried  Trotter,  pulling  Bingo   flat  on   the  ground
 beside  him.  Merry  flung himself  alongside. 'What  is it?'  he whis-
 pered. 'I  don't know,  but I  fear,' said  Trotter. They  wormed their
 way  to  the edge  of the  flat hilltop  and peered  out from  behind a
 stony outcrop.  The light  was not  bright, for  the clear  morning had
 faded,  and  clouds  crawled  slowly  out  of  the  East  and  had  now
 caught  the  sun, as  it began  to go  west. They  could see  the black
 specks,  but  neither  Bingo  nor  Merry  could  make  out  their shape
 for  certain.  Yet  something  told  them that  there below  were Black
 Riders  assembling on  the Road,  beyond the  hill's foot.  'Yes,' said
 Trotter,  whose  keener  sight  left  him  in no  doubt. 'The  enemy is
 here.'                                                                  
  Hastily  they  crawled  away,  and  slipped  down  the  north  side of
 the hill to find Odo and Frodo.                                         
                                                                        
 Here the original Chapter VII, which I have divided into two, ends.
                                                                        
                               NOTES.                                    
                                                                        
 1. Of the original pencilled draft, overwritten by  version B,  little can
    now be read; it was dashed down in  faint pencil,  and except  here and
    there the text in ink effectively obliterates it.  Enough can  be seen,
    however,  to  show  that  the  story was  that of  version B  (in which

  Gandalf's letter was given to  the landlord  of the  inn, not  to Trotter);
  and though this is less certain,  I suspect  that at  this stage  there was
  no   mention  of   Black  Riders   having  come   to  Bree   before  Bingo,
  Merry,  Frodo,  and  Odo  arrived.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is perfectly
  clear  that  when my  father wrote  out version  B on  top of  the original
  draft he had version A in front of him.                                    
       The explanation of this odd  situation can  be seen,  I think,  in the
  fact that version B  is much  longer than  the pencilled  draft and  not at
  all closely associated with it; some of it is  on slips  added in.  I think
  that my father wrote out version  A first,  on the  basis of  the pencilled
  draft,  but  changed  the story  as he  did so  (by giving Gandalf's letter
  to  Trotter,  and  introducing   Butterbur's  story   of  the   Riders  who
  came  to  the  inn);  he  then returned  to the  pencilled draft  and wrote
  version B on top of it, going back to the  story that  the letter  had been
  entrusted  to  Butterbur,  and  again  introducing the  story of  the Black
  Riders  at  Bree  but  ascribing  it  now   to  Trotter,   who  encountered
  them  on  the  Road.  For  this  text  he  used version  A and  followed it
  very  closely  so  far  as  the  changed  story  allowed. Thus  the textual
  history                                                                was:
  (1)  Original  pencilled   draft:  Gandalf's   letter  left   with  Butter-
  bur;   (probably)   no   story    as   yet    of   Black    Riders   having
  already come to Bree.
  (2)  Version   A:   the   story  changed:   Gandalf's  letter   left  with
  Trotter;   Butterbur   tells   of  the   coming  of   the  Riders   to  the
  inn.                                                                       
  (3) Version  B, written  over the  original draft,  but using  much of
  the    wording   of    A:   Gandalf's    letter   left    with   Butterbur;
  Trotter   tells  of   his  encounters   with  the   Riders  on   the  Road.
  Finally, some new phrases in B were written back into A.                   
                                                                            
 2.  It is with  this sentence  that Chapter  10 'Strider'  begins in  FR, but
     I  include  the  preceding  passage  here  since  it  forms  part  of the
     narrative which is treated in alternative ways (see p. 156).            
 3.  Cf. p. 141 note 7.  But even  though the  old idea  that Bingo  'had come
     to the end of his treasure'  (and that  a vague  object of  his 'Journey'
     was  that  it  might  bring  him  some  more,  p.  62)   disappeared,  it
     remained  in  FR  (p.  175)  that  'he  had brought  only a  little money
     with him.'                                                              
 4.  That  would  be five  days  ago:  see  the chronology  given on  p. 160.
     Gandalf  and  his  companions  arrived  at  the  inn  on  Sunday morning,
     and it was now Thursday night.                                          
 5.  They  should  be  here  by  Tuesday:  Gandalf   had  assumed   that  they
     would  follow  the  Road  from  the  Brandywine   Bridge  to   Bree,  and
     take two days over it. Cf. Trotter's calculations (pp. 170 - 1):  'It is
     nearer  40  than  30  miles from  Brandywine Bridge  to Bree',  and 'More
     than two days from the Bridge to Bree' (on foot).                       
 6.  How did the Black Riders know this? See p. 350, note 7.                 

                            
                                                                           
  7. Here  my  father  wrote:  'Now  he described  your party  very exactly,
     sir, more  exactly than  Mr Gandalf  did: colour  of your  ponies, look
     of your faces,' but struck it out as soon as written,  probably because
     it was not consistent with his conception of the  Black Riders:  he had
     already said  (p. 75)  that for  Ring-wraiths 'Everything  becomes very
     faint like grey ghost pictures  against the  black background  in which
     you live; but you can smell better than you can hear or see.'  It seems
     very likely that the  idea of  the 'wraith-world',  into which  in some
     sense the bearer of a Ring entered if he put it on  his finger,  and in
     which he then became fully visible to the denizens  of that  world, had
     already arisen; a hint of  this appears  in Gildor's  words (p.  64) 'I
     guess  that  the use  of the  ring helps  them more  than you',  and in
     Gandalf's letter in the present chapter he is urgent that  Bingo should
     never wear the Ring  for any  purpose -  now that  he has  learned that
     the Riders are in pursuit.                                             
  8. These  words are  at the  bottom of  a manuscript  page. At  the bottom
     my father scribbled in pencil:                                         
      Nov.  19  Motive  trailing  Gandalf.  Gandalf  drawing  them  off.  No
     camp at Weathertop or again Gandalf leads them off.                    
     With this cf. the pencilled addition on p. 153: 'I first saw the Riders
     last Saturday away  west of  Bree, before  I ran  across Gandalf.  I am
     not at all sure they were not following his trail too.'                
      'Nov.  19'  presumably  refers  to  the  date  of  the  note,  i.e. 19
     November 1938; by then my  father had  got well  beyond this  point in
     the narrative, judging by what he said in a letter to Stanley  Unwin of
     13  October  1938:  'I  have  worked  very  hard  for  a month...  on a
     sequel  to  The Hobbit.  It has  reached Chapter  XI (though  in rather
     an illegible state)...'                                                
  9. The first mention of Weathertop  Hill; the  actual first  occurrence of
     the name must be in the original pencilled  draft of  Gandalf's letter,
     which can be partly made out (note 13).                                
 10. The runes are the Old  English runes,  as in  The Hobbit.  Gandalf uses
     the  English  (Common  Germanic)  rune X for G  in writing  his name,
     but uses also as a  sign for  himself a  rune @.  In the  Angerthas (LR
     Appendix  E  pp.  401  -  4)  this  rune  meant  (in  the usage  of the
     Dwarves of Moria) [ng].                                                
 11. Oddly,  the  manuscript  in  ink  has here  Timothy, not  Barnabas; but
     it can only be a slip, returning momentarily to the landlord's original
     name (p. 140 note 3).                                                 
 12. Tuesday, not Thursday: see note 5.                                     
 13. The ending of the letter can be read in the pencilled draft:           
      Don't be out after dark or in mist. Push along. Am  so anxious  that I
     shall wait [?two] days  for you.....  Weathertop Hill.  If you  meet a
     ranger (wild hobbit) called Trotter, stick  to him. I have told  him to
     look out. He will  guide you  to Weathertop  and further  if necessary.
     Push along.                                                            

  14.  The  text  as  first  written  here  (in  ink:  the  pencilled  text  beneath is
       illegible)   had:   'I   felt   something   moving   behind   me,  and   when  I
       turned  I  saw  one  going  along  the   Road.'  -   For  'coming   towards'  in
       the     revised     sentence     perhaps     read    'coming     towards    me'.
  15.  bar  the  door  and  window   was  written   in  above   and  take   turns  to
       watch, which was not struck out. See note 16.                                   
  16.  The underlying pencilled text can be read here:                                 
          They   did   not   talk   much   but   fell  asleep   one  by   one.  Trotter
       watched  for  three  hours;  he  said  he  could  do  with  very  little  sleep.
       Next came Merry. Nothing happened...                                            
       A first version in ink reads:                                                   
          He  could  do  with  very  little  (he  said):  'give  me  three  hours,  and
       then  wake  me,  and  I  will   watch  for   the  rest   of  the   time.'  Bingo
       took  the  first  watch;  the  others  talked   for  a   while  and   then  fell
       asleep.                                                                         
       At  this  point  FR  Chapter  10  'Strider'  ends,  and  Chapter 11 'A Knife
       in  the  Dark'  begins  -  where  that  chapter  takes  up  the  story  at  Bree
       again:  of  the  attack  by  the  Black  Riders  on  the  house  at  Crickhollow
       with which it begins there is as yet no trace.                                  
  17.  20 (silver pennies) was later changed to 25.                                    
  18.  Rob:  at  previous  occurrences  (pp.  135,  164)  the name  of the  ostler at
       ?he     Prancing     Pony      is     certainly      Bob,     as      in     FR.
  19.  a  yowk:  the  verb  yowk  'howl,  bawl,  yelp'  is  given  in  Joseph Wright,
       The English Dialect Dictionary.                                                 
  20.  A   tiny   pencilled   sketch  in   the  body   of  the   manuscript,  belonging
       with  the  underlying  draft,  shows  the  Road,  after   it  has   curved  down
       round   the   south   side   of   Bree-hill,   bending   up   north   again  and
       continuing  the  same  line  east  of  Bree  as  it  had  to  the  west  of  the
       village.                                                                        
  21.  Combe changed in pencil to Archet (as in FR, p. 193).                           
  22.  These   two  sentences,   from Trotter   also  had   a  notion,   were  enclosed
       in  square  brackets,  probably  at  the  time  of  writing.  Cf.   the  outline
       (p.  162):  'Trotter  takes  them  to  a   wild  hobbit   hole,  and   gets  his
       friend  to  run  on  ahead  and  send  a  message   to  Weathertop   by  pony?'.
  23.  The  pencilled  text  beneath  the  ink  can  be   read  sufficiently   to  show
       that  the  passage  of  the  marshes  (unnamed)  was   described  in   a  couple
       of sentences.                                                                   
  24.  Since  at  the  end  of  the  next  sentence  my  father  wrote 'from  the flats
       to  the  East',  which  is  an  obvious  slip  and which  he later  corrected to
       'West',  it  seems  likely  that  the  'south-west'  course  of the  track along
       the feet of the hills is also a slip for 'south-east'; a little later it is said
       that  'they  came  towards  the  south-eastern  end  of  the  line   of  hills.'
  25.  For  the  story  of  Gil-galad  and  Elendil  and  the Last  Alliance as  it was
       at   this  time   see  the   second  version   of  The   Fall  of   Numenor  $14
       (V. 28-9)  and  pp.  215  -  16.  Though  Elendil  is present  in The  Fall of
       Numenor   my   father   does  not   seem  to   have  been   entirely  satisfied

  with  the name:  here he  wrote Valandil  first, and  in the  original draft
  of   the   next   chapter   he  changed   Elendil  temporarily   to  Orendil
  (p.  197  note  3).  In The  Lost Road  Valandil was  the name  of Elendil's
  father  (V.60,  69),  and  in  a  later  version  of  The  Fall  of  Numenor
  Valandil is Elendil's brother (V.33).                                        
                                                                              
 In  the  latter  part  of  this  chapter,  from the  point where  the variant
 versions join (pp. 159, 161), all  the essential  structure of  the immediate
 narrative in FR (pp. 185 - 201) is in place, though the larger  bearings and
 the  glimpses  of  ancient  history are  conspicuously absent.  The narrative
 runs in a narrower dimension in any  case, from  the fact  that there  are no
 Men  in  the  story:  Butterbur  is  a  hobbit, the  wild 'rangers',  of whom
 Trotter is one, are hobbits, Bill Ferny is a hobbit (p. 165)  - though  it is
 true  that  the  range  of  hobbit  character  is  greatly extended  by these
 'Outsiders' who live beyond the Shire's borders.                              
 A  few  specific  points  of  difference  may   be  briefly   mentioned.  The
 pony bought in Bree is not in fact  said to  be Ferny's  (p. 164),  though it
 seems  to be  implied; and  the subsequent  history of  the five  ponies from
 Buckland,  recorded  in the  footnote to  the text  (p. 164),  was afterwards
 largely  changed  (FR  p.  191).  The  encounter  of  Merry  with  the  Black
 Rider outside the inn at Bree does not end  with his  being attacked;  and it
 is Trotter who plays the later part of Sam  in having  a pocketful  of apples
 and discomfiting Bill Ferny with one on the nose.                             
 The  journey  from  Bree  to  Weathertop has  the same  structure as  that in
 FR (pp. 194-7), except at the end. The chronology is:                         
                                                                              
 Days out of Bree     Date                       Place                   
                                                                              
        1.        Fri. Sept. 30.       In the woods (Chetwood).                        
                                                                              
        2.        Sat. Oct. 1.         In the woods.                                     
                                                                              
        3.        Sun. Oct. 2.         First day and camp in the marshes.                
                                                                              
        4.        Mon. Oct. 3.         Second day and camp in the marshes.               
                                                                              
        5.        Tues. Oct. 4.        Camp by the stream under alders.                 
                                                                              
 But in FR  the hobbits  made another  night camp  at the  feet of  the western
 slopes  of  the  Weather  Hills  - and  that was  'the night  of the  fifth of
 October, and they were six  days out  from Bree'  (p. 197);  this camp  is not
 in  the  original  version,  and  thus  they  reached Weathertop  on Wednesday
 October  5.  Trotter  on  Weathertop  says  that  they  have  covered  between
 80 and go miles 'in the last six days'. he was including that day also, for it
 was already after noon.                                                       
 In  the  old  story  Gandalf  stayed  on  Weathertop  for  three days,  and he
 left there a note in a pile of stones, written on  paper. This  message ('Help

                                                                               
                                                                                
  will come there [i.e. to  the Ford]  from Rivendell,  as soon  as I  can manage
  it') gives the first clear indication in the story of what Gandalf's intentions
  were;  and  with  this  can  be  taken  the words  scribbled on  the manuscript
  that are given in note  8. Gandalf  was trying  to lure  the Riders  after him.
                                                                                
      Looking  back  over  the  whole  of  the  original  Chapter VII,  the story
  from the hobbits'  arrival in  Bree to  the sight  of the  Black Riders  on the
  Road  far  below  the  summit  of Weathertop,  there appears  again and  in the
  most  striking form  the characteristic  of my  father's writing  that elements
  emerge  suddenly  and  clearly   conceived,  but   with  their   'meaning'  and
  context  still  to  undergo   huge  further   development,  or   even  complete
  transformation, in the later narrative  (cf. p.  71). A  small example  here is
  the face that Bingo thought  'goblinish' as they walked out  of Bree  (p. 165)
  - which is here the face of Bill Ferny (a hobbit): in  FR (p.  193) it  will be
  that  of  'the  squint-eyed  southerner'  whom   Frodo  glimpsed   through  the
  window  of  Ferny's  house, and  thought that  he looked  'more than  half like
  a  goblin.'  In  a  'chrysalis'  state  are  the  'Rangers',  wanderers  in the
  wilderness,   and   Trotter  is   a  Ranger,   grim  and   weatherworn,  deeply
  learned  in the  lore of  the wild,  and in  many other  matters; but  they are
  hobbits, and of  any further  or larger  significance that  they might  have in
  the history  of Middle-earth  there is  no hint.  Trotter is  at once  so fully
  realized that his tone in this part of the narrative (indeed not  a few  of his
  actual words)  was never  changed afterwards;  yet such  little as  is glimpsed
  of his history at this stage bears no  relation whatsoever  to that  of Aragorn
  son  of  Arathorn.  He  is  a  hobbit,  marked  out  by  wearing  wooden  shoes
  (whence  his  name  Trotter);  there  seems  to  be  something  in  his history
  that  gives  him  a  special  knowledge  of,  and  horror of,  the Ring-wraiths
  (p.  153);  and  Bingo  finds  something  about  him  that   distinguishes  him
  from other 'Rangers', and  is in  a way  familiar (p.  154). These  things will
  be explained later, before they are finally swept away.                        

                                       X.                                     
                            THE ATTACK ON WEATHERTOP.                         
                                                                             
 This  chapter,  numbered  VIII,  and  titleless  as  usual  (though  later  my
 father pencilled in  'A Knife  in the  Dark'), begins  on the  same manuscript
 page  as  the  end  of the  last; it  was obviously  continuous work,  and the
 manuscript  proceeds  as  before,  in  ink,  rapid  but  always  legible, over
 pencilled drafts of which only  words or  phrases here  and there  are visible
 (see p. 188). The  text goes  on through  FR Chapter 12 'Flight to  the Ford'
 without any sort of break, but as with the original Chapter VII  I divide it
 into two (see the table on p. 133).                                          
                                                                             
  There   was   a   hollow   dell   beneath   the   north-west    shoulder   of
 Weathertop,  right  under  the  long  ridge  that  joined  it  to   the  hills
 behind.   There   Odo   and   Frodo   had   been  left   to  wait   for  them.
 They  had  found  the  signs  of  a  recent  camp  and  fire,  and,   a  great
 (and  most  unexpected)  boon,  behind  a  large  rock   was  piled   a  small
 store  of  fire-wood.  Better  still,  under  the  fuel  they  found  a wooden
 case  with  some  food  in  it.  It  was  mostly  cram-cakes,  but  there  was
 some bacon, and some dried fruits. There was also some tobacco!              
  Cram  was,  as  you  may   remember,  a   word  in   the  language   of  the
 men  of  Dale  and  the  Long-lake  -   to  describe   a  special   food  they
 made   for   long   journeys.  It   kept  good   indefinitely  and   was  very
 sustaining,  but  not  entertaining,  as  it  took  a lot  of chewing  and had
 no   particular  taste.   Bilbo  Baggins   brought  back   the  recipe   -  he
 used  cram  after  he  got   home  on   some  of   his  long   and  mysterious
 walks.  Gandalf  also  took  to  using  it  on  his  perpetual   journeys.  He
 said  he  liked  it  softened  in  water (but  that is  hard to  believe). But
 cram  was   not  to   be  despised   in  the   wilderness,  and   the  hobbits
 were   extremely   grateful   for   Gandalf's   thoughtfulness.    They   were
 still   more   grateful   when  the   three  others   came  down   with  their
 alarming  news,  and  they  all  realized  that  they   had  a   long  journey
 still   ahead,  before   they  could   expect  to   get  help.   They  immedi-
 ately  held  a  council,  and  found  it  hard to  decide what  to do.  It was
 the  presence  of  the  fire-wood  (of  which  they  could  not  have  carried
 much  away)  that  finally   decided  them   to  go   no  further   that  day,
 and  to  camp  for  that  night in  the dell.(1) It seemed  unsafe, not  to say
 desperate,  to  go  on  at  once,  or  until  they  found  out  whether  their

                                                                    
                                                                     
 arrival at the hill was known or  expected. For,  unless they  were to
 make  a  long  detour  back  north-west along  the hills,  and abandon
 the direction of Rivendell  altogether for  a while,  it would  not be
 easy  to  find  any  cover  or  concealment.   The  Road   itself  was
 impossible; but they must at least cross it, if they were to  get into
 the  more  broken  land, full  of bushy  thickets, immediately  to the
 south of it. To  the north  of the  Road, beyond  the hills,  the land
 was bare and flat for many miles.                                    
     'Can  the  -  er -  enemy see?'  asked Merry.  'I mean,  they seem
 usually to have smelt rather than seen, at least  in the  daytime. But
 you made us lie down flat.'                                          
     'I don't know,' said Trotter, 'how they  perceive what  they seek;
 but I fear them. And their horses can see.'(2)                       
     It was  now already  late afternoon.  They had  had no  food since
 breakfast.  In  spite  of their  fear and  uncertainty they  were very
 hungry. So down in the dell where all  was still  and quiet  they made
 a meal - as good a meal as they  dared take,  after they  had examined
 their  stores. But  for Gandalf's  present they  would not  have dared
 to have more than a  bite. They  had left  behind the  countries where
 inns or villages could  be found.  There were  Big People  (so Trotter
 said)  away  to  the  South  of them.  But North  and East  the neigh-
 bouring  lands were  empty of  all save  birds and  beasts, unfriendly
 places  deserted  by  all  the  races  of   the  world:   Elves,  Men,
 Dwarves,  or   Hobbits,  and   even  by   goblins.  The   more  adven-
 turous  Rangers  journeyed  occasionally   into  those   regions,  but
 they passed and did not  stay. Other  wanderers were  rare, and  of no
 good sort: Trolls might stray at times down out  of the  further hills
 and  Mountains.  Only  on  the  Road  would  travellers be  found, Big
 People  rarely  in  those  days, Elves  perhaps sometimes,  most often
 Dwarves  hurrying  along  on  business,  and  with  no  help  and  few
 words to spare for strangers.                                        
     So now  - since  Gandalf had  gone -  they had  to depend  on what
 they  carried  with  them  - probably  until they  found their  way at
 last to Rivendell. For  water they  were obliged  to trust  to chance.
 For food they  could perhaps  just have  managed to  go ten  or eleven
 days;  and  now  with  Gandalf's  additions  they  could  with economy
 probably  hold  out  for  more than  a fortnight.  It might  have been
 worse. But starving was not their only fear.                         
     It became very cold  as evening  fell. There  was some  mist again
 over the distant marshes;  but the  sky above  cleared again,  and the
 clouds were blown  away by  a chill  east wind.  Looking out  from the
 lip of the dale [read dell]  they could  see nothing  but a  grey land

 
                                                                              
 quickly   vanishing   in   shadows,   under   an   open  sky   filling  slowly
 with twinkling stars.                                                         
   They  lit  a  small  fire  down  at  the  lowest  point  in the  hollow, and
 sat   round   it   clothed   and   wrapped  in   every  garment   and  blanket
 they  possessed:  at  least  Bingo   and  his   companions  did   so.  Trotter
 seemed  content  with  a  single  blanket,  and  sat  some  little   way  from
 the  fire  puffing  his short  pipe. They  took it  in turns  to sit  on guard
 on  the  edge  of   the  dell,   at  a   point  where   the  steep   sides  of
 Weathertop  Hill,  and  the  gentler   slope  down   from  the   ridge,  could
 be seen - as far as anything could be seen in the gathering dusk.             
   As  the  evening  deepened  Trotter  began  to  tell  them  tales   to  keep
 their   minds    from   fear.    He   knew    much   lore    concerning   wild
 animals,  and  claimed  to  speak  some  of  their   languages;  and   he  had
 strange  stories  to  tell  of  their  lives and  little known  adventures. He
 knew   also   many   histories   and   legends   of   the  ancient   days,  of
 hobbits  when  the  Shire   was  still   wild,  and   of  things   beyond  the
 mists   of   memory   out   of   which   the   hobbits  came.   They  wondered
 where he had learned all his lore.                                            
   'Tell  us  of  Gil-galad!'  said  Frodo   -  'you   spoke  that   name  not
 long ago,(3) and it is still ringing in my ears. Who was he?'                   
   'Don't  you  know!'  said  Trotter.   'Gil-galad  was   the  last   of  the
 great  Elf-kings:   Gil-galad  is   Starlight  in   their  tongue.   He  over-
 threw  the  Enemy,  but  he  himself  perished.  But  I  will  not  tell  that
 tale  now;  though  you  will  hear  it,  I  think,  in  Rivendell,   when  we
 get  there. Elrond  should tell  it, for  he knows  it well.  But I  will tell
 you  the  tale  of Tinuviel  - in  brief, for  in full  it is  a long  tale of
 which  the  end  is  not  known,  and  there  is  no  one  that  remembers  it
 in full as it was  told of  old, unless  it be  Elrond. But  even in  brief it
 is  a  fair tale  - the  fairest that  has come  out of  the oldest  days.' He
 fell  silent  for  a  moment,  and  then  he  began  not  to  speak,   but  to
 chant softly:                                                                 
   Put  in  Light  on  Linden   Tree.  [sic]   emended.  Or   the  alliterative
 lines. Follow with brief Tinuviel story.                                      
                                                                              
   My father then went  straight on  in the  manuscript to  the beginning  of a
 prose  resume of the story  of Beren  and Luthien.  He had  not gone  far with
 this,  however,  when  he  abandoned  it,  and  returning  to  Trotter's words
 about the story changed the end of them to: 'It is a fair  tale, though  it is
 sad as are the tales of Middle-earth, and yet it may lift up the hearts of the
 enemies of the Enemy.' He then wrote:                                         
                                                                              
                       Lo Beren Gamlost the boldhearted (4)                   
 but struck this out also. He had suggested just above that 'the alliterative

                                                    
                                                                             
 lines' might be used. He was referring  to the  passage of  alliterative verse
 that  preceded  Light  as  Leaf  on  Lindentree  as  published  in The Gryphon
 (Leeds University) in 1925,(5) a passage itself closely related to lines  in the
 second version of  the alliterative  Lay of  the Children  of Hurin,  355 ff.,
 where  Halog,  one  of Turin's  guides on  the journey  to Doriath,  sang this
 song  'for  hearts'  uplifting' as  they wandered  in the  forest. But  he now
 decided  against  the  alliterative  lines for  this place,  and wrote  in the
 manuscript a new version  of Light  as Leaf  on Lindentree.  This text  of the
 poem  moves  it far  towards the  final version  in FR  pp. 204  - 5,  but has
 elements  surviving  from  the  old  poem  that  were  afterwards   lost,  and
 elements  common  to  neither.  There  are  many  later  emendations   to  the
 text,  and  many  alternative  readings  (mostly  taken  up  into   the  final
 version)  written at  the time  of composition;  but here  I give  the primary
 text without variants or later corrections.                                  
                                                                             
                   The leaves mere long, the grass was thin,                 
                The fall of many years lay thick,                             
             The tree-mots twisted out and in,                               
                          The rising moon was glimmering.                    
                Her feet ment lilting light and quick                         
                    To the silver flute oflleerin:(6)                           
                   Beneath the hemlock-umbels thick                           
                Tinuviel was shimmering.                                      
                                                                             
                   The noiseless moths their wings did fold,                 
                      The light was lost among the leaves,                    
                     As Beren there from mountains cold                       
                       Came wandering and sorrowing.                         
                    He peered between the hemlock leaves                      
                     And saw in wonder flowers of gold                        
             Upon her mantle and her sleeves,                                 
              And her hair like shadow following.                             
                                                                             
             Enchantment took his weary feet,                                
                That over stone mere doomed to mam,                           
             And forth he hastened, strong and fleet,                          
              And grasped at moonbeams glistening.                            
                      Through woven woods of Elvenhome                        
                     They fled on swiftly dancing feet,                       
            And left him lonely still to mam,                                 
             In the silent forest listening.                                  
                                                                             
                      He heard at times the flying sound                       
                     Of feet as light as linden leaves,                       
             Or music welling underground                                    

 In the hidden halls of Doriath.           
  But withered were the hemlock sheaves,
     And one by one with sighing sound     
      Whispering fell the beechen leaves
        In the wintry woods of Doriath.
                                          
 He sought her ever, wandering far         
 Where leaves of years mere thickly strewn,
   By light of moon and ray of star        
     In frosty heavens shivering.           
  Her mantle glistened in the moon,        
    As on a hill-top high and far          
 She danced, and at her feet was strewn
 A mist of silver quivering.               
                                          
 When minter passed she came again,        
 And her song released the sudden spring,
  Like rising lark, and falling rain,      
     And melting water bubbling.          
  There high and clear he heard her sing,
    And from him fell the minter's chain;
    No more he feared by her to spring     
        Upon the grass untroubling.        
                                          
   Again she fled, but clear he called:
 Tinuviel, Tinuviel.                       
 She halted by his voice enthralled        
     And stood before him shimmering.      
     Her doom at last there on her fell,
      As in the hills the echoes called;
 Tinuviel, Tinuviel,                       
 In the arms of Beren glimmering.          
                                          
 As Beren looked into her eyes             
      Within the shadows of her hair       
   The trembling starlight of the skies
 He saw there mirrored shimmering.        
 Tinuviel! O elven-fair!                   
       Immortal maiden elven-wise,        
     About him cast her shadowy hair       
 And white her arms were glimmering.     
                                          
 Long was the way that fate them bore
 O'er stony mountains cold and grey,       

               Through halls of iron and darkling door       
                 And woods of night-shade morrowless.     
               The Sundering Seas between them lay               
                 And yet at last they met once more,                
               And long ago they passed away                               
                 In the forest singing sorrowless.                           
                                                                           
  He  paused  before  he  spoke  again.  'That  is a  song,' he  said, 'that
 tells  of  the  meeting  of   Beren  the   mortal  and   Luthien  Tinuviel,
 which is but the beginning of the tale.                                    
  'Luthien  was  the  daughter   of  the   elven-king  Thingol   of  Doriath
 in  the  West  of  the  Middle-world,  when  the   earth  was   young.  Her
 mother  was  Melian,  who  was  not  of  the  Elf-race  but  came   out  of
 the  Far  West  from  the  land  of  the  Gods  and  the  Blessed  Realm of
 Valinor.  It  is  said  that  the daughter  of Thingol  and Melian  was the
 most  fair  maiden that  ever was  or shall  be among  all the  children of
 the  world.  No  limbs  so  fair  shall  again  run  upon the  green earth,
 no  face  so  beautiful  shall  look  upon  the  sky,  till all  things are
 changed.                                                                   
                                                                           
  The passage in  praise of  Luthien that  follows is  almost word  for word
 the same as that in the Quenta Silmarillion (1937), largely retained in the
 published work (p. 165, 'Blue was her raiment...').                        
                                                                           
  'But   Beren   was  son   of  Barahir   the  Bold.   In  those   days  the
 fathers  of  the  fathers  of  Men  came out  of the  East; and  some there
 were  that  journeyed  even  to  the  West   of  Middle-earth,   and  there
 they  met  the  Elves,  and  were   taught  by   them,  and   became  wise,
 but  they  were  mortal  and  shortlived,  for  such  is  their  fate.  Yet
 many  of  them  aided  the  Elves  in  their  wars.  For  in that  time the
 Elves  besieged  the  Enemy  in  his  dreadful   fortress  in   the  North.
 Angband  it  was  called,  the  Halls  of   Iron  beneath   the  thunderous
 towers of the black mountain Thangorodrim.                                 
  'But  he  broke  the  siege,  and   drove  Elves   and  Men   ever  south-
 ward;  and  Barahir  was  slain.  Ruin  came   upon  the   West-lands,  but
 Doriath   long   endured   because   of  the   power  and   enchantment  of
 Melian  the  Queen  that  fenced  it  about  so  that  no  evil  could come
 within.  In  the  song  it  is  told (7) how  Beren flying  southward through
 many   perils   came   at  last   into  the   hidden  kingdom   and  beheld
 Luthien.  Tinuviel  he  called  her,  which  is  Nightingale,  for  he  did
 not yet know her name.                                                     
  'But   Thingol   the   Elven-king   was   wroth,   despising   him   as  a
 mortal,  and  a  fugitive;  and  he sent  Beren upon  a hopeless  quest ere

           
                                                                   
 he  could win  Luthien. For  he commanded  him to  bring him  one of
 the three jewels from the crown of the King of  Angband, out  of the
 deeps  of  the  Iron Halls.  These were  the Silmarils  renowned in'
 song, filled with power and a holy light, for they had been  made by
 the  Elves  in the  Blessed Realm,  but the  Enemy had  stolen them,
 and  guarded them  with all  his strength.  Yet Beren  achieved that
 Quest, for Luthien fled from her father's  realm and  followed after
 him;  and  with  the  aid  of  Huan  hound  of  the  Gods,  who came
 out of Valinor, she found  him once  again; and  together thereafter
 they  passed  through  peril  and  darkness; and  they came  even to
 Angband  and  beguiled  the  Enemy,  and overthrew  him, and  took a
 Silmaril and fled.                                                 
  'But  the  wolf-warden  of  the dark  gate of  Angband bit  off the
 hand of Beren that held  the Silmaril,  and he  came near  to death.
 Yet  it  is  told  that  at  length  Luthien  and Beren  escaped and
 returned  to Doriath,  and the  king and  all his  people marvelled.
 But Thingol  reminded Beren  that he  had vowed  not to  return save
 with a Silmaril in his hand.                                       
  '"It is in my hand even now," he answered.                        
  '"Show it to me!" said the king.                                  
  '"That I cannot do," said  Beren, "for  my hand  is not  here," and
 he  held  up  his  maimed  arm.  And  from  that  hour he  was named
 Beren Erhamion the Onehanded.                                      
  'Then the tale of the Quest  was told  in the  king's hall  and his
 mood  was  softened,  and Luthien  laid her  hand in  Beren's before
 the throne of her father.                                          
  'But  soon  fear  came  upon  Doriath.  For  the  dread wolf-warden
 of  Angband,  being  maddened  by  the  fire  of  the  Silmaril that
 consumed  his  evil  flesh  within, roamed  through the  world, wild
 and terrible. And by fate and the power of the  jewel he  passed the
 guarded  borders  and  came  ravening  even  into  Doriath;  and all
 things fled before him. Thus  befell the  Wolf-hunt of  Doriath, and
 to  that  hunt  went  King  Thingol, and  Beren Erhamion,  and Beleg
 the   Bowman   and   Mablung   the   heavy-handed,   and   Huan  the
 hound.                                                             
  'And  the  great  wolf  leaped  upon  Beren  and  felled   him  and
 grievously  wounded  him;  and Huan  slew the  wolf but  himself was
 slain. And  Mablung cut  the Silmaril  from the  belly of  the wolf,
 and gave it to Beren, and Beren gave it to  Thingol. Then  they bore
 Beren back with Huan at  his side  to the  king's hall.  And Luthien
 bade him farewell  before the  gates, bidding  him await  her beyond
 the Great Seas; and he died in her arms.                           

   'But the spirit of Luthien fell  down into  darkness, for  such was
 the  doom  upon  the elven-maid  for her  love of  a mortal  man; and
 she  faded  slowly,  as  the  Elves do  under the  burden of  a grief
 unbearable. Her fair body lay like a flower that is suddenly  cut off
 and  lies  for  a  while  unwithered  on the  grass;4 but  her spirit
 journeyed over the Great Seas. And it  is said  that she  sang before
 the  Gods,  and  her  song  was  made  of  the  sorrows  of  the  two
 kindreds, of Elves and Men. So  fair was  she and  so moving  was her
 song  that  they  were  moved  to pity.  But they  had not  the power
 long to  withhold within  the confines  of the  world the  spirits of
 mortal men that  died; nor  to change  the sundered  fate of  the two
 kindreds.                                                           
   'Therefore  they  gave  this  choice  to  Luthien.  Because  of her
 sorrow and  of the  Silmaril that  was regained  from the  Enemy, and
 because  her  mother  Melian  came  from   Valinor,  she   should  be
 released from the Halls of  Waiting, and  return not  to the  woes of
 Middle-earth,  but  go  to  the  Blessed  Realm  and  dwell  with the
 Gods until the world's end, forgetting all sadness that her  life had
 known.  Thither  Beren  could   not  come.   The  other   choice  was
 this.  She  might  return to  earth, and  take with  her Beren  for a
 while, there to dwell with him again, but  without certitude  of life
 or  joy.  Then  she  would  become mortal  even as  he; and  ere long
 she  should  leave the  world for  ever, and  her beauty  become only
 a  memory  of  song,  until  that  too  faded.  This doom  she chose,
 forsaking  the  Blessed  Realm, and  thus they  met again,  Beren and
 Tinuviel, beyond the Great  Seas, as  she had  said; and  their paths
 led  together,  and  passed  long  ago  beyond  the  confines  of the
 world. So it was that  Luthien alone  of all  the Elven-kin  has died
 indeed.  But  by her  choice the  Two Kindreds  were joined,  and she
 is the fore-mother  of many  in whom  the Elves  see yet,  though the
 world  changeth,  the  likeness  of  Luthien  the  beloved  whom they
 have lost.'(9)                                                      
   As  Trotter was  speaking, the  darkness closed  in; night  fell on
 the world. They could see his queer eager face dimly lit in  the glow
 of the red wood-fire. Above him was  a black  starry sky.  Suddenly a
 pale  light  appeared  behind  the  crown  of Weathertop  behind him.
 The  moon,  now  nearly  half-full,  was  climbing  slowly  above the
 hill that overshadowed them. The stars above its top grew pale.     
   The  story  ended.  The  hobbits  moved  and   stretched.  'Look!'
 said  Merry.  'The  moon  is rising.  It must  be getting  late.' The
 others  looked  up.  Even  as they  did so  they saw  something small
 and dark on the  hill-top against  the glimmer  of the  moonlight. It

 was perhaps only a large stone or jutting  rock shown  up by  the pale
 light.                                                               
   At   that  moment   Odo,  who   had  been   on  guard   (being  less
 reluctant  than  the  others  to  miss  Trotter's  tale-telling)  came
 hurrying down to the fire. 'I don't know what it is,' he said,  'but I
 feel  that  something  is  creeping  up  the  hill.  And I  thought (I
 couldn't  be  sure)  that  away  there,  westwards,  where  the  moon-
 light is falling, there were two  or three  black shapes.  They seemed
 to be moving this way.'                                              
   'Keep  close  beside  the  fire,  with your  faces outwards!  ' said
 Trotter. 'Get some of these pine-wood sticks ready in your hands! '
   For a long while they sat there  silent and  alert with  their backs
 turned to the little  fire, which  was thus  almost.entirely screened.
 Nothing  happened.  There  was  no  sound   or  movement.   Bingo  was
 just about to  whisper a  question to  Trotter, who  sat next  to him,
 when Frodo gasped: 'What's that?' 'Sh,' said Trotter.               
   It was just as Odo  had said:  over the  lip of  the hollow,  on the
 side  away  from  the hill,  they felt  a shadow  rise, one  shadow or
 more  than  one.  They  strained  their eyes,  and the  shadows seemed
 to  grow.  Soon  there could  be no  doubt: three  or four  tall black
 figures  were  standing  there,  on  the   slope  above   them.  Bingo
 fancied  that  he heard  faintly a  sound like  breath being  drawn in
 with a hiss. Then the shapes advanced slowly.                        
   Terror  seized  Odo  and  Frodo,  and  they  threw  themselves  flat
 on  the  ground.  Merry  shrank  to  Bingo's side.  Bingo was  no less
 afraid; he was quaking  as if  he was  bitter cold.  But his  fear was
 swallowed up in  a sudden  temptation to  put on  the Ring.  It seized
 him,  and  he  could  think  of nothing  else. He  did not  forget the
 Barrow, nor the message  of Gandalf,  but he  felt a  desperate desire
 to  disregard  all  warnings.  Something   seemed  to   be  compelling
 him; he longed to yield. Not with the  hope of  escaping, or  of doing
 anything, good or  bad. He  simply felt  that he  must take  the Ring,
 and put  it on  his finger.  He could  not speak.  He struggled  for a
 while,  but  resistance  became  unbearable;  and  at  last  he slowly
 drew  out the  chain, unfastened  the Ring,  and put  it on  the fore-
 finger of his left hand.                                             
   Immediately  -  though  everything  else  remained  as  before,  dim
 and dark - the shapes  became terribly  clear. He  seemed able  to see
 beneath  their  black  wrapping.  There  were  three tall  figures: in
 their  white  faces  burned  keen  and  merciless  eyes;  under  their
 black  mantles  were  long  grey  robes,  upon  their  grey  hair were
 helms  of  silver;(10) in  their  haggard hands  were swords  of steel.

 Their  eyes  fell  upon  him  and  pierced  him,  as they  rushed towards
 him.  Desperate,  he  drew  his  own  sword;  and it  seemed to  him that
 it flickered redly as if it was a fire-brand. Two of the  figures halted.
 But  the  third  was  taller  than  the  others.  His  hair was  long and
 gleaming,  and  on  it  was  a  crown.  The  hand  that  held   the  long
 sword  glowed  with  a  pale  light.  He  sprang  forward  and  bore down
 upon Bingo.                                                              
   At  that  moment  Bingo   threw  himself   forward  onto   the  ground,
 and  he  heard  himself  crying  aloud  (though  he  did  not  know why):
 Elbereth!  Gilthoniel!  Gurth  i  Morthu.(11) At  the  same time  he struck
 at the feet of his enemy.  A shrill  cry rang  out in  the night;  and he
 felt  a  pain  like  a  dart  of  poisoned  ice  touch his  [added: left]
 shoulder.  Even  as  he  swooned  Bingo  caught  a  glimpse   of  Trotter
 leaping  out  of the  darkness with  a flaming  fire-brand in  each hand.
 With  a  last  effort he  slipped the  Ring from  his finger,  and closed
 his hand on it.                                                          
                                                                         
                                   NOTES.                                 
                                                                         
 1. This passage, from 'Better still, under the fuel they found a wooden
 case', is an insertion on a slip, certainly written at the same time as
 the main text, replacing the (ink) text as first written:
     Gandalf, it would seem, had taken thought for them. It was the
     presence of fuel that decided them to go no further that day, and
     to make their camp in the dell.
   With the passage here about cram, not found in FR, cf. The Hobbit,
   Chapter XIII 'Not at Home':
     If you want to know what cram is, I can only say that I don't know
     the recipe, but it is biscuitish, keeps good indefinitely, is sup-
     posed to be sustaining, and is certainly not entertaining, being in
     fact very uninteresting except as a chewing exercise. It was made
     by the Lake-men for long journeys.
   In the Etymologies (V.365) cram, defined as 'cake of compressed
   flour or meal (often containing honey and milk) used on long
   journeys', appears as a Noldorin word (stem KRAB- 'press'). - In FR
   the fire-wood, alone of the stores found on Weathertop, survived,
   but it had been left by Rangers, not by Gandalf.
2. Strider gives a much more elaborate and informed account of the
     perceptions of the Ring-wraiths in FR (p. 202). See p. 173, note 7.
3. See p. 169 and note 25.                                               
    Beren's  name  Camlost  or  Gamlost  ('Empty-handed')  occurs  in  the
4. Quenta  Silmarillion  (interrupted  at  the  end   of  1937);   for  the
  variation in the initial consonant see V.298, 301.                      

  5.  For the text and textual  history of  Light as  Leaf on  Lindentree see
      III.108 - 10, 120 - 3.                                                 
  6.  To the silver flute of Ilverin: in Light as Leaf on Lindentree (III. 108)
      Dairon  is named  here. The  name Ilverin  occurs in  The Book  of Lost
      Tales as one of  the many  names of  Littleheart, the  'Gong-warden' of
      Mar  Vanwa  Tyalieva  (I.46,  255), but  there seems  no basis  to seek
      any  kind  of  connection.  In  the  margin  my  father  at  some point
      pencilled  other  names:  Neldorin,  Elberin,  Diarin.  See note  g, at
      end.                                                                   
  7.  Trotter  has  mentioned  no  song,  but  it  is  of  course the  Lay of
      Leithian that is meant.                                                
  8.  Struck out at the time of writing:                                     
        But her spirit came to  the Halls  of Waiting,  where are  the places
        appointed  for  the  Elven-kin  beyond  the   Blessed  Realms   in  the
        West,  on the  confines of  the world.  And she  knelt before  the Lord
        [of the Halls of Waiting]                                              
  9.  This  concluding  paragraph  of  Trotter's  tale is  very close  to the
      account of  the Choices  of Luthien  that my  father had  written while
      the Quenta Silmarillion was  with the  publishers at  the end  of 1937,
      and  which  appears  in  the  published  Silmarillion  on  p.  187; see
      V.293, 303-4.                                                          
         There  are  other very  roughly written  texts giving  a resume of a
      part  of  'The  Silmarillion'  found  among the  papers at  this point.
      They attempt to  condense a  much greater  part of  the history  of the
      Elder Days than that  strictly concerned  with the  story of  Beren and
      Luthien,  and  have  interesting  features  which  must  be  mentioned,
      though  their  discussion  scarcely  falls  within  the history  of the
      writing  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings. Most  notable is  the following
      passage:                                                               
         For as it is told the Blessed Realms of the  West were  illumined by
      the  Two  Trees,  Galathilion  the   Silver  Cherry,   and  Galagloriel
      that  is  Golden  Rain.  But  Morgoth,  the  greatest  of  the  Powers,
      made  war  upon  the  Gods,  and  he  destroyed  the  Trees,  and fled.
      And  he  took  with  him the  immortal gems,  the Silmarils,  that were
      made  by  the  Elves  of the  light of  the Trees,  and in  which alone
      now  the  ancient  radiance  of  the  days  of  bliss remained.  In the
      north  of  the Middle-earth  he set  up his  throne Angband,  the Halls
      of  Iron   under  Thangorodrim   the  Mountain   of  Thunder;   and  he
      grew  in  strength  and  darkness; and  he brought  forth the  Orcs and
      goblins,  and  the  Balrogs,  demons  of  fire. But  the High  Elves of
      the  West  forsook  the land  of the  Gods and  returned to  the earth,
      and made war upon him to regain the jewels.                            
      The  names  Galathilion  and  Caladloriel  first  appear in  the Quenta
      Silmarillion  (V.209  -  10)  as  the  Gnomish  names  for  Silpion and
      Laurelin.  'Silver  Cherry'  and  'Golden  Rain'  are  not  the  actual
      meanings  of  the  names  (as  seems  to  be  implied  here):  see  the

 Etymologies  in  Vol.  V,  stems  GALAD-  (where   the  form   Galagloriel  is
 also  given),  LAWAR-,  THIL-.  That  the  blossom  of  Silpion was  like that
 of  a  cherry-tree,  and   the  flowers   of  Laurelin   like  those   of  the
 laburnum  ('Golden   Rain')  was   however  often   said  (see   e.g.  V.209).
 On  Morgoth  'the  greatest  of  the  Powers'   see  V.   157  and   note  4.
 Very  curious  is   the  statement   here  that   when  Morgoth   returned  to
 Middle-earth  after  the  destruction  of  the  Trees  'he  brought  forth the
 Orcs  and  goblins,  and  the  Balrogs, demons  of  fire.'  It  was  certainly
 my   father's   view  at   this  period   that  the   Orcs  were   then  first
 engendered  (see  V.  233, $62   and  commentary),   but  the   Balrogs  were
 far older  in their  beginning (V. 212,  $18), and  indeed came  to rescue
 Morgoth  from  Ungoliante  at  the  time  of  his  return:  'to his  aid there
 came  the  Balrogs  that  lived  yet  in  the  deepest  places of  his ancient
 fortress.'                                                                    
        The  term  'High  Elves' is  here used  to mean  the Elves  of Valinor,
 not,   as   in   the   Quenta   Silmarillion,   the  First   Kindred  (Lindar,
 Vanyar): see V. 214, $25 and commentary.                                      
        A very surprising point is the mention, a little later in this text, of
 Finrod  Inglor  the  fair  (see   p.  72).   In  the   first  edition   of  LR
 (Appendices)  Finrod  was  still  the  name  of  third  son  of  Finwe,  as in
 the   Quenta   Silmarillion,   and   his   son  was   Felagund  (in   QS  also
 named  Inglor);  it  was  not  till  the  second edition  of 1966  that Finrod
 son  of  Finwe   became  Finarfin,   and  his   son  Inglor   Felagund  became
 Finrod Felagund.                                                               
        In another of these  drafts the  minstrel of  Doriath is  named Iverin,
 not  Dairon; see note 6.
10. My  father  first  wrote  here:  'upon  their long  grey hair  were crowns
 and  helms  of  pale  gold'.  This  was  no  doubt   changed  at   once,  with
 the  emergence  immediately  below  of  the   tall  king,   a  crown   on  his
 long hair. See p. 198 note 6.                                                 
11. For Morthu see V.393, stem THUS-.                                          

                                 *
                                             
 My father's practice at this time  of overwriting  his first  pencilled drafts
 largely denies the possibility of seeing the earliest forms of  the narrative.
 In  this  chapter the  underlying text  can only  be made  out here  and there
 and  with  great difficulty;  but at  least it  can be  seen that  the opening
 passage  quickly  declined  into  an  abbreviated   outline  for   the  story.
 Trotter's  tales  were  only  to  be  concerned  with  animals  of  the  wild;
 and then follows  at once:  'Fight in  dell', with  a sketch  in a  few lines,
 scribbled  down  at   great  speed,   of  which   however  something   can  be
 disinterred:                                                                  
   Bingo  is  tempted  to  put  on  ring.  He  does so.  The riders  [?come] at
          him. He sees them plain - fell white faces..... He draws his sword

 and  it  shines  like  fire.  They  draw  back  but one  Rider with  long silver
 hair  and  a  [?  red  hand]  leaps  forward.  Bingo.....  hears  himself shout-
 ing  Elbereth  Gilthoniel.....  struck  at  the  leg  of  the  Rider.   He  felt
 ..... cold [? pain] in the shoulder. There was a flash.....                     
 The  attack  on  the  dell  entered before  the idea  that Trotter  should chant
 to them, and tell them a  tale of  ancient days;  and the  material of  his tale
 remains  in  this  manuscript  in  a  very  rough  state,  the primary  stage of
 composition,   obviously   demanding   the   compression   that   it  afterwards
 received.                                                                       
 More   developed   pencilled   drafting   takes   up   again   from   the  point
 where  Trotter  comes  to  an  end,  and  from what  can be  read it  seems that
 the  final  story  of  the  attack by  the Ring-wraiths  was now  fully present.
 Then,  apart  from  a few  details (as  that there  are three  Ring-wraiths, not
 five),  the  text  written  in ink  on top  of the  draft achieved  the finished
 story:  no  element  in  the  potent  scene,  the fearful  suspense on  the cold
 hillside  in  the  moonlight,  the  dark  shapes  looking  down  on  the hobbits
 huddled  round  the  fire,  the  irresistible  demand   on  the   Ringbearer  to
 reveal  himself,  and  the  final  revelation  of  what  lay  beneath  the black
 cloaks of the Riders, is absent - and all is  told virtually  in the  very words
 of  The  Fellowship of  the Ring.  The significance  of the  Ring, in  its power
 to reveal and to  be revealed,  its operation  as a  bridge between  two worlds,
 two modes of being, has been attained, once and for all.                        
 The   completeness,   and   the   resonance,   of   this  scene   on  Weathertop
 Hill  is  the  more  remarkable,  when  we  consider  that  (in relation  to The
 lard  of  the  Rings  as  it was  ultimately achieved)  all was  still extremely
 restricted in scope. If the nature of the Ring in its effect  on the  bearer was
 now fully conceived, there  is as  yet no  suggestion that  the fate  of Middle-
 earth lay within its tiny circle. It is indeed far from certain that the idea of
 the  Ruling  Ring had  yet arisen.  Of the  great lands  and histories  east and
 south   of   the   Misty   Mountains   -   of  Lothlorien,   Fangorn,  Isengard,
 Rohan,  the  Numenorean  kingdoms  -  there  is  no  shadow  of  a hint.  I very
 much  doubt  that  when  the  Ring-wraiths  rose  up  over the  lip of  the dell
 beneath  Weathertop  my  father  foresaw  any  more  of  the  Journey  than that
 the  Ring  must  pass  over  the  Mountains  and  find  its  end  in  the depths
 of  the  Fiery  Mountain  (p.  126).  In  October  1938  he  could still  say to
 Stanley  Unwin  (see  p. 173)  that he  had hopes  of being  able to  submit the
 new story early in the following year.                                          

                                       XI.                                    
                          FROM WEATHERTOP TO THE FORD.                        
                                                                             
 The  manuscript  of  the   original  Chapter   VIII  continues,   without  any
 break, in the same form, ink over pencil. While  in the  earlier part  of this
 chapter I have given the full original  text even  in the  concluding passage,
 where there  is scarcely  any material  difference from  FR (since  the attack
 of the Ring-wraiths is a scene of exceptional importance), in  this part  I do
 not  do  so throughout.  The narrative  is very  close to  that of  FR Chapter
 12,  'Flight  to  the  Ford'  (with  a  fair number  of minor  differences and
 some  less  minor),  and  for  much  of  its  length  the  wording  almost the
 same.  In  those  parts  where  the original  text is  not given,  however, it
 can be understood that all differences of any significance are remarked.     
   After it is told that the  hobbits (Sam  in FR)  heard Bingo's  voice crying
 out strange words, it is further said  that they  'had seen  a red  flash; and
 Trotter  came  dashing  up  with  flaming  wood.' So  also in  the fragmentary
 outline given on pp. r 88 - g 'There was a flash'; but this  is absent  in FR.
 Perhaps the reference is to Bingo's sword that 'flickered redly as if it was a
 firebrand' (p. 186), a detail preserved in  FR p. 208. Trotter's  first return
 to the dell is slightly differently told,  but this  is chiefly  because Sam's
 distrust of  Strider is  of course  absent, and  there is  nothing in  the old
 version  corresponding  to  Strider's  words to  Sam apart  (FR pp. 209-10).
 When  Trotter  lifted  the black  cloak from  the ground  he said  only: 'That
 was  the  stroke  of  your  sword.  What harm  it did  to the  Rider I  do not
 know. Fire is better.'                                                       
   Athelas is not  said to  have been  brought by  Men of  the West  to Middle-
 earth: 'it is  a healing  plant, known  only to  Elves, and  to some  of those
 who walk in the wild: athelas they  name it.'(1) A curious  detail is  that when
 athelas  was  applied to  Bingo's wound  he 'felt  the pain  and the  sense of
 frozen cold lessen in his right  side'; and  again later  in the  chapter 'his
 right  arm  was  lifeless'  (FR  p.  215).  Similarly,  when  Bingo  drew  his
 sword and faced the  Riders at  the Ford,  my father  first wrote:  'His sword
 he had hung at his right  side; with  his left  hand he  gripped the  hilt and
 drew  it',  though  this  he  struck  out.  He evidently  decided that  it was
 Bingo's  left  shoulder  that  was stabbed,  and therefore  wrote in  the word
 'left' in the description  of the  actual wounding  (p. 186);  but he  did not
 correct the occurrences of 'right' just mentioned.                           
   When   they   left  the   dell  beneath   Weathertop  they   took  Gandalf's
 firewood  with  them  ('For  Trotter  said  that  from  now  onwards fire-wood
 must always  be a  part of  their stores,  when they  were away  from trees').

  Nothing is said of the rejuvenation of Bill Ferny's pony  (if indeed  it was
  Bill Ferny's, p. 175). The distant cries  of Black  Riders which  they heard
  as they crossed the Road in FR (p. 211) are absent from the old version.
    The  description  of  the  eastward  journey from  Weathertop is  at first
  fairly close to that in FR, though the timing is slightly different; but the
  geography was to be significantly altered. I give the passage  following the
  words 'Even Trotter seemed tired and dejected' (FR p. 212) in full.         
                                                                             
    Before  the  first  day's  march  was  over  Bingo's  pain  began  to grow
  again, but for a long time he  did not  speak of  it. In  this way  three or
  four  days  passed  without  the   ground  or   the  scene   changing  much,
  except   that   behind   them   Weathertop    slowly   sank,    and   before
  them   the   distant  mountains   loomed  a   little  nearer.   The  weather
  remained  dry,  but   was  grey   with  cloud;   and  they   were  oppressed
  with  the  fear  of  pursuit.  But  of  this  there  was  no  sign  by  day;
  and   though   they   kept   watch   by   night   nothing   happened.   They
  dreaded  to  see  black  shapes  stalking  in  the  dim  grey   night  under
  the  waxing  moon  veiled  by  thin  cloud;  but   they  saw   nothing,  and
  heard   nothing,  but   the  sigh   of  withering   leaves  and   grass.  It
  seemed  that,  as  they  had  hardly  dared  to  hope, their  swift crossing
  of  the  Road  had  not   been  marked,   and  their   enemy  had   for  the
  moment lost their trail.                                                    
    At  the  end  of  the  fourth  day  the  ground  began  once more  to rise
  slowly  out  of  the  wide  shallow  valley  into   which  they   had  come.
  Trotter  now   bent  their   course  again   towards  the   north-east;  and
  before  long,  as  they  reached  the  top  of  a slow-climbing  slope, they
  saw  ahead  a  huddle  of  wooded  hills.  Late  on   the  fifth   day  they
  came  to  a  ridge  on which  a few  gaunt fir-trees  stood. A  little below
  them  the  Road  could  be  seen   curving  away   towards  a   small  river
  that  gleamed  pale in  a thin  ray of  sunshine, far  away on  their right.
  Next   day,   early   in  the   morning,  they   again  crossed   the  Road.
  Looking   anxiously   along   it,  westward   and  eastward,   they  hurried
  quickly across, and went towards the wooded hills.                          
    Trotter  was  still  leading them  in as  straight a  line as  the country
  allowed  towards  the  distant  Ford.  In  the  hills  their  path  would be
  more  uncertain,  but  they  could  no  longer  keep  to  the south  side of
  the  Road,  because  the  land  became   bare  and   stony  and   ahead  lay
  the  river.  'That  river,'  he  said,  'comes  down  out of  the Mountains,
  and  flows  through  Rivendell.(2) It  is  not  wide,  but  it  is  deep  and
  strong,  being  fed  by  the  many  small  torrents  that  come  out  of the
  wooded  hills.  Over  these  the  Road  goes  by  little  fords  or bridges;
  but  there  is  no  ford  or  bridge  over the  river until  we come  to the
  Ford  under  the  Mountains.'  The   hobbits  looked   at  the   dark  hills
                                          
                                                                              
 ahead, and though they were glad to leave the  cheerless lands                
 behind them, the land ahead seemed threatening and unfriendly.                
                                                                              
  In  the  developed  geography,   the  Road   traverses  two   rivers  between
 Weathertop  and  Rivendell:  the  Hoarwell  or  Mitheithel  that  flowed  down
 out  of  the  Ettenmoors, crossed  by the  Last Bridge,  and the  Loudwater or
 Bruinen, crossed by  the Ford  of Rivendell;  these rivers  joined a  long way
 to the south,  becoming the  Greyflood. In  the original  story, on  the other
 hand,  there  is  only  one  river,  not  named,  flowing down  through Riven-
 dell and crossed at the Ford.                                                 
  In  FR  the  travellers  came  down,  early  in  the  morning on  the seventh
 day  out  from  Weathertop,  to  the  Road  (i.e.  approaching  it   from  the
 south),  and  went  along  it  for a  mile or  two to  the Last  Bridge, where
 Strider  found  the  elf-stone  lying  in  the mud;  they crossed  the bridge,
 and after a further mile turned  off the  Road to  the left  and went  up into
 the hills. In the original story, they  came to  the Road  early on  the sixth
 day and crossed it,  going up  into the  hills; there  is no  river (Hoarwell)
 and  no  bridge.  Some  sort of  explanation is  given why  they had  to cross
 the Road here and stay no longer to  the south  of it:  'the land  became bare
 and stony and ahead lay the river.' But  the fact  of there  being no  ford or
 bridge over the  river except  that below  Rivendell only  meant that  that is
 where  they  would  have  to cross;  it does  not in  itself explain  why they
 could not stay south of the Road until  they got  there. Thus  it is  only the
 'bare and stony' nature of the land south of  the Road  that really  offers an
 explanation:  Trotter  sought  to  pass  through  country  that  provided more
 concealment?  The  'real'  explanation,  it  might be  said, why  they crossed
 the Road and  went up  into the  wooded hills  is quite  other: my  father had
 already  suggested,  when  sketching  out  the  story  from  the  Barrow-downs
 to Rivendell (p. 126), that the hobbits should 'foolishly turn aside to visit
 Troll Stones'.  On the  other hand,  Trotter was  taking the  straightest line
 to  the  Ford  that  he  could  (p.  191),  and  the sketches  on p. 201 show
 clearly  that  the  great  southward loop  of the  Road (already  mentioned in
 the original text, p. 199) must force him to cross it and go up into the hills
 to  the  north. -  On the  different chronology  in the  two versions  see the
 Note on Chronology, p. 219.                                                   
  When  they  came  into  the  hills,  the  conversation  with  Trotter arising
 from their sight of the  ruined towers  is somewhat  different from  that with
 Strider in FR (pp. 213 - 14):                                                
                                                                              
  'Who  lives  in  this  land?'  he  [Bingo]  asked;   'and  who   built  these
 towers? Is this troll-country?'                                               
  'No,'  said  Trotter;  'trolls  do  not  build.  No one  lives in  this land.
 Men   once   dwelt  here,   ages  ago.   But  none   now  remain.   They  were
 an  evil  people,  as  far  as  tales and  legends tell;  for they  came under
 the  sway  of  the  Dark  Lord.  It  is  said  that  they  were  overthrown by
 Elendil,   as   King   of  Western   Men,  who   aided  Gilgalad,   when  they

 made  war  on  the  Dark  Lord.(3) But that  was  so   long  ago   that  the
 hills have forgotten them, though a shadow still lies on the land.'          
    'Where  did  you  learn such  tales?' asked  Frodo, 'if  all the  land is
 empty  and  forgetful?  The  birds  and  beasts  do  not  tell tales  of that
 sort.                                                                        
    'Many things are remembered in Rivendell,' said Trotter.                  
    'Have you often been to Rivendell?' said Bingo.                           
    'I have,' said Trotter; 'many a time; and I wonder now that I             
 was ever so foolish as  to leave  it. But  it is  not my  fate to  sit quiet,
 even in the fair house of Elrond.'                                           
                                                                             
    The journey  in the  hills north  of the  Road had  lasted for  three days
 when the weather turned to rain, but  two in  FR (p.  214); thus  the shorter
 journey  from  Weathertop  till the  return to  the Road  is made  up, though
 there is still a difference of one day, since they  had reached  Weathertop a
 day earlier in the original story  (p. 175):  as I  understand it,  the first
 morning after the rain (FR p. 215)  was in  the old  version that  of October
 16, but in FR that of October  17. When  the rain  stopped, on  the eleventh
 day from  Weathertop, and  Trotter climbed  up to  see the  lie of  the land,
 he said when he came back:                                                   
                                                                             
    'We  have  got  too  far  to the  North; and  we must  find some  way to
 turn  southwards,  or  at least  sharp to  the East.  If we  keep on  as we
 are  going,  we  shall  get  into  impassable country  among the  skirts of
 the  Mountains.  Somehow   or  other   we  must   strike  the   Road  again
 before  it  reaches  the  Ford.  But   even  if   we  manage   that  fairly
 quickly,  we  still  cannot hope  to get  to Rivendell  for some  days yet,
 four or even five I fear.'                                                   
                                                                             
 In the night spent up on the ridge (FR pp. 215 - 16) Sam's  questioning of
 Strider  concerning  Frodo's  wound  is  given  to  Merry; and  Frodo's dream
 that  'endless  dark  wings were  sweeping over  him, and  that on  the wings
 rode pursuers seeking for him in all the hollows of the hills' is present. It
 is not said in the original  text that  'the trees  about him  seemed shadowy
 and  dim',  nor  on  the following  day that  'a mist  seemed to  obscure his
 sight'  (FR  pp.  215,  217);  but  later,  when Glorfindel  searched Bingo's
 wound with his finger (FR p. 223), 'he saw his  friends' faces  more clearly,
 though all day he had been troubled by the feeling  that a  shadow or  a mist
 was coming between him and them.'                                            
    When  they  came  to  the  old  trolls  turned  to stone,  'Trotter walked
 forward   unconcernedly.  "Hullo,   William!"  he   said,  and   slapped  the
 stooping  troll  soundly.'  And  he  said:  '"In  any  case  you  might  have
 noticed that Bert has got a bird's nest behind his ear."'  In FR  the trolls'
 names from The Hobbit were excluded.                                         
    After  'They rested  in the  clearing for  a while,  and had  their midday

                                          
                                                                                
 meal right under the shadow  of the  trolls' large  legs' the  original narrative
 goes  straight  on  with  'In  the  afternoon  they  went  on  down  through  the
 woods'; there  is  no  suggestion  that  the  Troll  Song  would  be  introduced
 here (see p.144). Their return to the Road is thus described:                   
                                                                                
 Eventually  they  came  out  upon  the  top   of  a   high  bank   above  the
 Road.   This   was   now   beginning   to   bend   rather   away   from   the
 river, and  clung to  the feet  of the  hills, some  way up  the side  of the
 narrow  valley  at  the  bottom  of  which  the  river  ran.  Not   far  from
 the  borders  of  the  Road  Trotter  pointed  out  a  stone  in  the  grass;
 on  it  roughly  cut  and  much  weathered  could  still  be  seen  two runic
 letters G B in a circle: (X B)                                                  
  'That,'  he  said,  'is  the  stone  that  once   marked  the   place  where
 Gandalf  and  Bilbo  hid  the  trolls'  gold.'  Bingo looked  at it  - rather
 sadly: Bilbo and he himself had long ago spent all that gold.                   
  The    Road,    bending    now    northward,    lay    quiet    under    the
 shadows  of  early  evening.  There  was  no  sign   of  any   other  travel-
 lers to be seen.                                                                
                                                                                
  Only  minor  differences  (except  in  one  matter)  are to  be recorded  in the
 encounter  with  Glorfindel:   the  whole   scene  was   present,  and   in  very
 much  the  same  words,  from  the  beginning.  The  sentence  in  FR   (p.  221)
 'To  Frodo  it  appeared  that  a  white  light  was  shining  through  the  form
 and raiment of  the rider,  as if  through a  thin veil'  is absent.(4) To Trotter
 Glorfindel  cried  out:  Ai  Padathir,   Padathir!  Mai   govannen!(5) But it is
 not  said  subsequently  that  he  spoke  to  Trotter  'in  the  elf-tongue'  (FR
 p.  224);  rather  he  spoke  'in  a low  tone.' The  drink that  Glorfindel gave
 them  instantly  reminded  the  hobbits  of  the   drink  in   Bombadil's  house,
 'for  the  drink  they  took was  refreshing like  spring-water, but  filled them
 also  with  a  sense  of   warm  vigour.'   'Cram-cake'  is   mentioned  together
 with the stale bread and dried fruit which is all they had to eat.              
  The  conversation  with  Glorfindel  on  the  road  is  different  from  that in
 FR  (p.  222),  for  the  number   of  the   Black  Riders   was  not   known  to
 anybody  at  this  stage  (not  even to  my father),  and in  FR Gandalf  had not
 yet   reached   Rivendell   when  Glorfindel   and  others   were  sent   out  by
 Elrond  nine  days  before  -  Elrond  having  heard  news  from  the  Elves  led
 by  Gildor  whom  the  hobbits  encountered   in  the   Shire.  The   element  of
 Glorfindel's  leaving  the  jewel on  the Last  Bridge is  also of  course absent
                                                                                
 (p.192)                                                                         
                                                                                
  'This is Glorfindel, one of  those that  dwell in  Rivendell,' said            
 Trotter. 'He has news for us.'                                                  
  'Hail and well met at last! ' said Glorfindel to Bingo. 'I was sent            
 from Rivendell  to look  on the  Road for  your coming.  Gandalf was            
 anxious  and  afraid, for  unless something  evil had  befallen you,            
 you should have come there days ago.'                                           

                       
                                                                          
   'We  have  not  been  on  the  Road  for  many,  many  days  until  this
 day,' said Bingo.                                                         
   'Well,  now  you  must  return  to  it,  and  go  with all  speed,' said
 Glorfindel.  'A  day's  swift  riding  back  westward  there is  a company
 of evil horsemen,  and they  are travelling  this way  with all  the haste
 that  frequent search  of the  land upon  either side  of the  Road allows
 them.  You  must   not  halt   here,  nor   anywhere  tonight,   but  must
 journey  on as  long and  far as  you are  able. For  when they  find your
 trail,  where  it  rejoined  the  Road,  they  will  search no  longer but
 ride  after  you  like  the  wind.  I  do  not think  they will  miss your
 footsteps  where   the  path   runs  down   from  Trolls-wood;   for  they
 have  a  dreadful  skill  in  hunting  by  scent,  and darkness  helps and
 does not hinder them.'                                                    
   'Then  why  must  we  go  on  now  by  night,  against  the  warning  of
 Gandalf?'asked Merry.                                                     
   'Do   not   fear   Gandalf's   warning   now,'    answered   Glorfindel.
 'Speed  is  your  chief  hope;  and  now  I  will  go with  you. And  I do
 not  think  that  there  is  any  peril  ahead;  but  the pursuit  is hard
 behind.'                                                                  
   'But  Bingo  is   wounded  and   sick  and   weary,'  said   Merry.  'He
 should not ride any more without rest! '                                  
   Glorfindel  shook  his  head  and  looked  grave,  when  he   heard  the
 account  of  the  attack  upon   the  dell   under  Weathertop,   and  the
 hurt  to  Bingo's  arm.  He  looked  at  the  knife-hilt that  Trotter had
 kept, and now drew out to show him. He shuddered.                         
   'There  are  evil  things  written  on  that  hilt,'  he  said,  'though
 maybe  they  are  not  for  your  eyes  to  see.  Keep it  till we  get to
 Rivendell,  Padathir,  but  be  wary,  and  handle  it  as  little  as you
 may.'                                                                     
                                                                          
   The chief structural difference in  the narrative  of this  chapter from
 that in FR appears in Glorfindel's words 'I do not think that there is any
 peril ahead'; contrast FR  (p. 222):  'There are  five behind  us... Where
 the other four may be, I do not know. I fear that we may find the  Ford is
 already held against us.'                                                 
   Only three Riders (at first) came out of  the tree-hung  cutting through
 which the Road passed before the flat mile to the Ford, not five as  in FR
 (p. 225). The story is the same that Bingo halted, feeling the  command of
 the  Riders  upon  him  to  wait, but filled with  sudden hatred  drew his
 sword;  and  that  Glorfindel cried  to his  horse, so  that it  sped away
 towards the Ford.  But all  the Riders  were behind;  there was  no ambush
 by four of them lying in wait at the Ford. The conclusion of the chapter I
 give in full.                                                             

                                   
                                                                       
  'Ride  on!   Ride  on!'   cried  Glorfindel   and  Trotter;   and  then
 Glorfindel  spoke  a  word  in  the  elf-tongue: nora-lim,  nora-lim. At
 once the white horse  sprang away  and sped  along the  last lap  of the
 Road.  At  the  same  moment  the  black  horses  of  the  Riders leaped
 down  in  pursuit;  and  others  following  came   flying  out   of  the
 wood.  Bingo   looking  back   over  his   shoulder  thought   he  could
 count  [as  many  as  twelve  )]  at  least  seven.  They seemed  to run
 like  the  wind,  and  to  grow  swiftly  larger  and  darker   as  they
 overtook  him  stride by  stride. He  could no  longer see  his friends.
 Through  them  and  over  them   the  Riders   must  now   be  hurtling.
 Bingo   turned  and   lay  forward,   encouraging  with   urgent  words.
 The  Ford  still  seemed  far  ahead.  Once  more  he  looked  back.  It
 seemed  to him  that the  Riders had  cast aside  their hoods  and black
 cloaks;  they  appeared  now  to  be  robed  in  white and  grey. Swords
 were  in  their  pale  hands,  helm  and  crown  were  on  their heads;(6)
 their cold eyes glittered from afar.                                   
  Fear  now  swallowed  up  Bingo's  mind.  He   thought  no   longer  of
 his  sword.  No  cry  came  from  him.  He  shut his  eyes and  clung to
 the  mane  of  the  horse.  The wind  whistled in  his ears,  and wildly
 the bells rang, clear and shrill. It seemed bitter cold.               
  Suddenly  he  heard  the  splash of  water. It  foamed about  his feet.
 He  felt the  stumbling scramble  of the  horse as  it struggled  up the
 stony  path,  climbing  the  steep  further  bank of  the river.  He was
 across the Ford! But the Riders were now hard behind.                  
  At  the  top  of  the  bank  the  horse  halted snorting.  Bingo turned
 about  and  opened   his  eyes.   [Struck  out   as  soon   as  written:
 Forgetting  that  the  horse  belonged  to  the  folk  of  Rivendell and
 knew  all  that land,  he determined  to face  his enemies,  thinking it
 useless to] He felt that it was useless to try to escape over  the long
 uncertain path  from the  Ford to  the lip  of Rivendell  - if  once the
 Riders  crossed.  Though  they  had  all  thought  of  the  Ford  as the
 goal of their flight and the end of peril, it  came to  him now  that he
 knew   of   nothing   that   would   prevent   the  dread   Riders  from
 crossing  as  easily  as  he.  In  any  case   he  felt   now  commanded
 urgently  to halt,  and though  again hatred  stirred in  him he  had no
 longer  the  strength  to  refuse.  He  saw  the  horse of  the foremost
 Rider check at the  water, and  rear up.  With a  great effort  he stood
 in his stirrups and brandished his sword.                              
  'Go  back! '  he cried.  'Go back  to the  Dark Lord  and follow  me no
 more.'  His  voice  sounded  shrill  in  his  ears.  The  Riders halted,
 but  Bingo  had  not  the  power  of  Tom  Bombadil.  They  laughed  - a
 harsh  chilling  laughter.  'Come back!  Come back!  ' they  called. 'To

 Mordor  we  will  take  you.'(9) 'Go  back,'   he  whispered.   'The  Ring,
 the  Ring,'  they  cried   with  deadly   voices,  and   immediately  their
 leader rode forward into the water, closely followed by two others.        
   'By  Elbereth  and   Luthien  the   fair,'(10) said   Bingo  with   a  last
 effort,  lifting  up  his  sword,  'you  shall  have  neither  me  nor it.'
 Then  the  leader,  who  was  now   half  across   the  river,   stood  up
 menacing  in  his  stirrup  and  raised  up  his  hand.  Bingo  grew  dumb;
 he  felt  his tongue  cleave to  his mouth,  and his  eyes grow  misty. His
 sword  broke  and  fell  out  of  his  shaking  hand.  The horse  under him
 reared  and  snorted,  as  the  foremost  of  the  black  horses  came near
 the shore.                                                                 
   Even  at  that  moment  there  came  a  roaring  and  a rushing:  a noise
 of  loud  waters  rolling  many  stones.  Dimly  he  saw  the  river  rise,
 and   come  galloping   down  along   its  course   in  a   plumed  cavalry
 of  waves.  The  three  Riders  that   were  still   upon  the   Ford  dis-
 appeared,   overwhelmed   and   buried   under   angry  foam.   Those  that
 were behind drew back in dismay.                                           
   With  his  last  failing  sense  Bingo  heard  cries,  and  it  seemed to
 him  that   behind  the   Riders  there   appeared  suddenly   one  shining
 white  figure  followed  by   other  smaller   and  more   shadowy  figures
 waving  flames.  Redly  they  flamed  in  the  white  mist  that  was  over
 all.  Two  of  the  Riders  turned  and  rode  wildly  away  to   the  left
 down  the  bank  of  the  river;  the  others   borne  by   their  plunging
 horses  were  driven  into  the  flood,  and   carried  away.   Then  Bingo
 heard a  roaring in  his ears  and felt  himself falling,  as if  the flood
 had   reached   up  to   the  high   bank,  and   engulfed  him   with  his
 enemies. He heard and saw no more.                                         
                                                                           
                                    NOTES.                                  
                                                                           
 1. In the Lay of Leithian my father wrote athelas against the passage      
    where                                                                   
                                                                           
                      Huan came and bore a leaf,                            
                   of all the herbs of healing chief,                       
                   that evergreen in woodland glade                         
                   there grew with broad and hoary blade                    
    for the allaying of Beren's wound (III.266, 269).                      
 2. That river... flows through Rivendell: see the note on Rivendell,       
                                                                           
    pp. 204-5.                                                              
 3. In the underlying pencilled text, which is here visible for a stretch,
    Trotter's  words  about  the  'Big  People'  who used  to live  in those
    regions  are  much  the  same,  but  he says  that they  were overthrown
    by  Elendil  Orendil  and  Gil-galad;  apparently  Orendil  was  substi-

      tuted for Elendil  in the  act of  writing. Both  names were  struck out,
      and then Elendil again written in. See p. 174 note 25.                   
  4.  The 'bit and bridle' of Glorfindel's  horse flickered  and flashed,  as in
      the  First  Edition,  where  the  Second  Edition  has  'headstall'.  Cf.
      Letters no. 211, p. 279 (14 October 1958):
      ...  bridle  was  casually  and  carelessly  used  for  what   I  suppose
      should  have  been  called  a  headstall.  Or   rather,  since   bit  was
      added  (I.221)  long  ago  (Chapter  I  12  was  written  very  early)  I
      had   not   considered   the   natural  ways   of  elves   with  animals.
      Glorfindel's  horse   would  have   an  ornamental   headstall,  carrying
      a  plume,  and  with  the  straps  studded with  jewels and  small bells;
      but  Glorfindel  would  certainly  not use  a bit.  I will  change bridle
      and bit to headstall.                                                    
  5.  The  pencilled text,  after various  forms struck  out, had  Ai Rimbedir;
      this was  then changed  to Ai  Padathir, etc.,  with a  translation 'Hail
      Trotter,                Trotter,                well                met.'
  6.  helm  and  crown were  on their  heads: in  the story  of the  attack on
      Weathertop  my  father  first  wrote  that  all  three  Ringwraiths  were
      crowned, but changed  the text  to say  that only  the leader  ('the pale
      king'  as Bingo  called him)  wore a  crown (pp.  185 - 6 and  note 10).
      Cf. the citation in note 8 below.                                        
  7.  The pencilled draft  has: 'Ride  back to  the Dark  Tower of  your lord.'
      For early references to the Dark Tower see p. 131 note 5.              
  8.  It is interesting to look back to the earliest sketch for the flight over
      the Ford (p. 126):                                                      
         One  day  at last  they halted  on a  rise and  looked forward  to the
      Ford.   Galloping   behind.   Seven   (3?   4?)   Black-riders  hastening
      along  the  Road.  They  have   gold  rings   and  crowns.   Flight  over
      Ford.  Bingo  flings  a  stone  and  imitates   Tom  Bombadil.   Go  back
      and  ride  away!  The Riders  halt as  if astonished,  and looking  up at
      the  hobbits  on  the  bank  the  hobbits  can  see  no  faces  in  their
      hoods.  Go  back  says  Bingo,  but  he  is  not  Tom  Bombadil,  and the
      riders ride into the ford.                                               
      At  that  stage  my  father  envisaged  the  hobbits  crossing  the  Ford
      together;  and  the  rising  of the  river does  not destroy  the Riders:
      they 'draw back just in time in dismay.'                                 
         The  words  in  the  present  text,  retained  in  FR,  'Bingo (Frodo)
      had  not  the  power  of  Tom  Bombadil',  must  now refer  to Bombadil's
      rout  of  the  Barrow-wight;  but  behind  them  surely  lies  the unused
      idea of his power to arrest the onset of the evil  beings by  raising his
      hand  in  authority:  cf.  the  outline  given  on  p. 112,  'two Barrow-
      wights  come  galloping  after  them,  but  stop  every  time   Tom  Bom-
      badil  turns and  looks at  them', and  the earlier  part of  the outline
      just  cited  (p.  125),  where  when  they  reach the  Road west  of Bree
      'Tom turns and holds up his hand. They fly back.'                        

 9. This is the first occurrence of the name Mordor in The Lord of       
       the Rings; see p. 131 note 5.                                     
 10. In the pencilled text visible beneath the ink, Bingo took the names of
       Gil-galad and Elendil, together with that of Luthien.              
                                                                         
   In this chapter it is made plain that the  commands of  the Ring-wraiths
 are  communicated  wordlessly to  the bearer  of the  Ring, and  that they
 have great power over his  will. Moreover  the idea  has now  entered that
 the wound of the  Ring-wraith's knife  produces, or  begins to  produce, a
 similar effect to that brought  about by  putting on  the Ring:  the world
 becomes shadowy and dim to Bingo, and  at the  end of  the chapter  he can
 see the Riders plain,  beneath the  black wrappings  that to  others cloak
 their invisibility.                                                      
                                                                         
      Note on the course of the Road between Weathertop and Rivendell     
                                                                         
 This  was an  element in  the geography  to which  my father  made various
 alterations in the Revised Edition of?he Lord of the  Rings (1966).  I set
 out  first  three  passages  from  the  chapter 'Flight  to the  Ford' for
 comparison.                                                              
                                                                         
 (1) Page 212.                                                            
     Original text:                                                     
         (the original text has no passage corresponding)                 
     First Edition: 'That is Loudwater, the Bruinen of Rivendell,'      
         answered Strider. 'The Road runs along it for many leagues to
         the Ford.'                                                       
     Second Edition: 'That is Loudwater, the Bruinen of Rivendell,'     
         answered Strider. 'The Road runs along the edge of the hills for
         many miles from the Bridge to the Ford of Bruinen.'              
                                                                         
 (2) Page 214.
     Original text: The hills now shut them in. The Road looped away
         southward, towards the river; but both were now lost to view.
     First Edition: The hills now began to shut them in. The Road bent
         back again southward towards the River, but both were now
         hidden from view.
     Second Edition: The hills now began to shut them in. The Road
         behind held on its way to the River Bruinen, but both were now
         hidden from view.
                                                                         
  (3) Page 200.
      Original text (p. 194): Eventually they came out upon the top of a
          high bank above the Road. This was now beginning to bend
          rather away from the river, and clung to the feet of the hills,

  some way up the side of the narrow valley at the bottom of                   
  which the river ran.                                                         
  First  Edition:  After  a few  miles they  came out  on the  top of  a high
  bank  above   the  Road.   At  this   point  the   Road  had   turned  away
  from  the  river  down  in  its   narrow  valley,   and  now   clung  close
  to  the  feet   of  the   hills,  rolling   and  winding   northward  among
  woods   and   heather-covered   slopes   towards    the   Ford    and   the
  Mountains.                                                                   
 Second  Edition:  After  a few  miles they  came out  on the  top of  a high
  bank   above   the   Road.   At   this   point  the   Road  had   left  the
  Hoarwell  far  behind   in  its   narrow  valley,   and  now   clung  close
  to   the  feet   of  the   hills,  rolling   and  winding   eastward  among
  woods (etc.)                                                                 
                                                                              
 Taking  first  citation  (2),  from  small-scale  and  large-scale  maps  made
 by  my  father  there  is no  question that  the Road  after passing  south of
 Weathertop  made  first  a  great  swing  or  loop to  the North-east:  cf. FR
 p. 211 - when they left Weathertop it  was Strider's  plan 'to  shorten their
 journey  by  cutting  across  another  great  loop  of  the Road:  east beyond
 Weathertop  it  changed  its  course and  took a  wide bend  northwards.' This
 goes  back  to  the  original  text.  The   Road  then   made  a   great  bend
 southwards,  round  the  feet  of the  Trollshaws, as  stated in  the original
 text and in the First Edition in citation (2). All my  father's maps  show the
 same  course  for  the  Road in  respect of  these two  great curves.  The two
 sketches  on  p.  201  are  redrawn  from  very  rough large-scale  maps which
 he made (the  second in  particular is  extremely hard  to interpret  owing to
 the multiplicity of lines made as he pondered different configurations).      
 In 1943 I made  an  elaborate  map  in  pencil  and  coloured chalks  for The
 Lord of  the Rings,  and a  similar map  of the  Shire (see  p. 107,  item V).
 These maps are referred to in Letters nos. 74  and 98  (pp. 86,  112).  On my
 LR  map  the  course  of  the  Road  from  Weathertop  to  the  Ford  is shown
 exactly  as  on  my  father's  maps,  with the  great northward  and southward
 swings.  On  the  map  that  I  made  in  1954  (published  in  the  first two
 volumes  of  The  Lard  of the  Rings), however,  the Road  has only  a feeble
 northward   curve   between   Weathertop   and   the   Hoarwell   Bridge,  and
 then  runs  in  a  straight  line  to  the  Ford.  This  was  obviously simply
 carelessness  due to  haste on  my part.  My father  doubtless observed  it at
 the time but felt that on so small a scale the error was not very grievous: in
 any  case  the  map  was made,  and it  had been  a matter  of urgency.  But I
 think that this error  was the  reason for  the change  in the  Second Edition
 given  in  citation  (2),  from 'the  Road bent  back again  southward towards
 the River' to  'the Road  behind held  on its  way to  the River  Bruinen'. my
 father  was  making  the  discrepancy  with  the map  less obvious.  A similar
 instance  has  been seen  already in  the change  that he  made in  the Second
 Edition  in  respect  of  the  direction  of  Bucklebury Ferry  from Woodhall,
 p.  107.  In his  letter to  Austin Olney  of Houghton  Mifflin, 28  July 1965

                                                          
                                                                                      
 (an  extract  from  which is  given in  Letters no.  274) he  said: I  have finally
 decided,  where  this  is  possible  and  does not  damage the  story, to  take the
 maps as "correct" and adjust the narrative.'                                          
  Barbara   Strachey   (who  apparently   used  the   First  Edition)   deduced  the
 course  of  the  Road  very  accurately  in  her  atlas, Journeys  of  Frodo (1981),
 map 13 'Weathertop and the Trollshaws'.                                              
                                                                                      
  Citation   (1)  from   the  First   Edition  is   perfectly  illustrated   in  the
 sketches  on  p.  201,  which  precisely  show  the  Road  running   alongside  the
 Loud  water  'for  many  leagues  to  the  Ford.'  My  father  made  various small-
 scale maps  covering a  greater or  lesser part  of the  lands in  The Lord  of the
 Rings,  on  three  of  which  this  region  appears;  and  on  two  of   these  the
 Road  is  shown  approaching  the  Loudwater  at  a  fairly  acute  angle,  but  by
 no  means  running  alongside  it.  On  the  third  (the  earliest)  the  Road runs
 close  to  the  river  for  a  long  distance  before  the Ford;  and this  is less
 because  the  course  of  the  Road  is  different  than  because  on this  map the
 river  flows  at  first  (after  the  Ford)  in a  more westerly  direction towards
 the  Hoarwell  (as  in  the  sketch-maps).*  On  my 1943   map  (see   above)  this
 is  also  and  very  markedly  the  case.  On  the  published  map,  on  the  other
 hand,   the  Road   approaches  the   river  at   a  wide   angle;  and   this  was
 another  error.  It is  clear, I  think, that  the changed  Second Edition  text in
 citation (1), with 'runs along the edge of the  hills' instead  of 'runs  along it
 [the Loudwater]', was again made to save the appearance of the map.                   
  Citation  (3)  in  the  First  Edition  seems  to  contradict  (1): the  Road runs
 along  the  Loudwater   for  many   leagues  to   the  Ford   (1),  but   when  the
 travellers  came  down  to  the  Road  out   of  the   Trollshaws  it   had  turned
 away  from  the  river  (3).  But  it  is  probably  less  a  contradiction  than a
 question  of  how  closely  'runs   along  the   Loudwater'  is   interpreted.  The
 second  sketch-map  seems  clear  at  least  to  this  extent,  that  it  shows the
 Road  approaching  the  river,  running  alongside  it  for  a  stretch,  and  then
                                                                                      
 (* Barbara Strachey  makes  the  Loudwater  bend  sharply   west  just   below  the
 Ford and  Row in  this direction  (before turning  south) much  further than  on my
 father's maps, so  that the  land between  the Hoarwell  and the  Loudwater (called
 'the Angle' in LR Appendix A, p. 320)  ceases to  be at  all triangular.  She makes
 this  assumption  because  from  the  high  ground  above   the  Last   Bridge  the
 travellers could see not only the Hoarwell but also the  Loud water,  whereas going
 by the published  map the  rivers 'would  have been  some 100  miles apart  and the
 hill [on which they  stood] would  have had  to have  been a  high mountain  for it
 [the Loudwater] to have been visible.' By bringing this river so far to the west on
 her map the distance from the hill above the Last  Bridge to  the nearest  point of
 the  Loudwater  is reduced  to about  27 miles.  On my  father's maps  the shortest
 distance  from  the  Bridge  to  the  Loudwater  varies between  (approximately) 45
 (on the earliest), 60, and 62 miles; on  the published  map it  is about  75 miles.
 Thus the objection that the Loudwater was too far away to be seen  is real;  but it
 cannot be resolved in this way.)                                                      
                                                                                      j

  bending  somewhat  away  and  'clinging  to  the  feet  of the  hills' before
  returning to it at the Ford.                                                 
    The  changed reading  of the  Second Edition  in (3)  - made  so as  not to
  alter the  amount of  text -  makes the  words 'narrow  valley' refer  to the
  Hoarwell,  and  there  is no  longer any  statement at  this point  about the
  course of the Road in  relation to  the Loudwater.  This was  clearly another
  accommodation  to  the  published  map   (and  is   not  an   entirely  happy
  solution), as also was 'northward' (cf. Sketch II) to 'eastward'.            
                                                                              
                           Note on the River Hoarwell.                         
                                                                              
 The absence of the River Hoarwell (p. 192), which had still not
 emerged in the next version of this part of the story (p. 360), is
 interesting. In the original story in Chapter II of The Hobbit, when
 Bilbo, Gandalf, and the Dwarves were approaching the hills crowned
 with old castles on an evening of heavy rain, they came to a river:
    ... it began to get dark. Wind got up, and the willows along the river-
    bank [no river has been mentioned] bent and sighed. I don't know
    what river it was, a rushing red one, swollen with the rains of the last
    few days, that came down from the hills and mountains in front of
    them.
     Soon it was nearly dark. The winds broke up the grey clouds...
 The river here ran alongside the road (described as 'a very muddy
 track'); they only crossed it finally by a ford, beyond which was the great
 slope up into the Mountains (beginning of Chapter III, 'A Short Rest').
 In the third edition (1966) the passage quoted was changed:
  ... it began to get dark as they went down into a deep valley with a
  river at the bottom. Wind got up, and willows along its banks bent and
  sighed. Fortunately the road went over an ancient stone bridge, for the
  river, swollen with the rains, came rushing down from the hills and
  mountains in the north.
     It  was  nearly  night when  they had  crossed over.  The wind  broke up
   the grey clouds...                                                           
  The  river  now  becomes  the  Hoarwell, over  which the  road passed  by the
  Last  Bridge  (and the  river which  they forded  before climbing  up towards
  Rivendell  becomes  distinct  (the  Loudwater),  by  changing   'they  forded
  the river' to 'they forded a  river'.) But  my father  did nothing  to change
  what  follows  in  the  original story.  There, the  company stopped  for the
  night  where  they did  because that  is where  they were  when it  got dart,
  and it was  beside a  river. From  that spot  the light  of the  Trolls' fire
  became visible. By the introduction of the  Last Bridge  at this  point into
  the  old  narrative,  while everything  else is  left untouched,  the company
  stops for the night as soon  as they  have crossed  it -  near enough  to the
  river for one of the ponies to break loose and dash into  the water,  so that
  most of the food was lost- and the Trolls' fire is therefore visible from the
  Bridge, or very near it. And at the end of the chapter the pots of  gold from

     
                                                                                  
 the Trolls'  lair are  still buried  'not far  from the  track by  the river'  - a
 phrase  unchanged  from  the  original   story,  when   the  river  flowed  along-
 side the track.                                                                   
   Karen   Fonstad   puts   the   matter  clearly   (The  Atlas   of  Middle-earth,
 1981,  p.  97),  noting  the  inconsistency  between  The  Hobbit  (as it  is now)
 and  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  as  to  the  distance  between  the river  and the
 Trolls' clearing:                                                                 
   The Trolls' fire was  so close  to the  river that  it could  be seen  'some way
 off',  and  it  probably  took  the  Dwarves  no  more  than  an  hour  to  reach;
 whereas  Strider  led  the  Hobbits  north  of  the  road  [turning  off   a  mile
 beyond  the   Bridge],  where   they  lost   their  way   and  spent   almost  six
 days  reaching  the  clearing  where  they  found   the  Stone-trolls.   Lost  or
 not,   it   seems   almost   impossible   that   the  time-pressed   ranger  would
 have  spent  six  days  reaching   a  point   the  Dwarves   found  in   an  hour.
 Earlier,  apparently  in   1960,  in   an  elaborate   rewriting  of   The  Hobbit
 Chapter  II   which  was   never  used,*  my  father   had  introduced   the  Last
 Bridge  at  the  same  point  in  the  narrative;  but  there  the passage  of the
 river  took  place  in  the  morning,  and the  camp from  which the  Trolls' fire
 was  seen  was  made  at  the  end of  the day  and many  miles further  east. The
 present  text  of  The  Hobbit,  deriving  from  corrections  made  in   1965  and
 first published  in  1966,  here  introduces  an  element from  The Lord  of the
 Rings  but  fails  to  harmonise  the  two  geographies.  This   highly  uncharac-
 teristic  lapse  is  no  doubt to  be attributed  simply to  the haste  with which
 my  father  worked  under   the  extreme   pressure  imposed   on  him   in  1965.
                                                                                  
                           Note on the river of Rivendell.                         
                                                                                  
 Trotter  says  expressly  that  the  river  which  the  Road  crosses at  the Ford
 flows  through  Rivendell   (p.  191).   In  the   corresponding  passage   in  FR
 (p.  212)  Strider  names  the  river:   'That  is   Loudwater,  the   Bruinen  of
 Rivendell.'  Later,  in  'Many  Meetings'  (FR p.  250), it  is said  that Bilbo's
 room  'opened  on  to  the  gardens  and  looked  south across  the ravine  of the
 Bruinen';  and  at  the  beginning  of  'The  Council  of  Elrond'  (FR   p.  252)
 Frodo  'walked  along  the   terraces  above   the  loud-flowing   Bruinen.'  This
 is  quite  unambiguous;  the  maps,  however,  are  not  in  this  point perfectly
 clear.                                                                            
   In   the   map   of   Wilderland   in   The   Hobbit  (endpaper),   the  unnamed
 river  receives,  some  way   north  of   the  Ford,   a  tributary   stream,  and
 Elrond's  house  is  placed  between  them,  near   the  confluence,   and  nearer
                                                                                  
 (* My  father  was  greatly  concerned  to  harmonise  Bilbo's  journey  with  the
 geography of The Lord of the Rings, especially in respect of the distance and time
 taken: in terms of The Lord of the Rings Gandalf, Bilbo, and the Dwarves  took far
 too long, seeing that they  were mounted  (see Karen  Fonstad's discussion  in The
 Atlas of Middle-earth, p.  97). But  he never  brought this  work to  a definitive
 solution.)                                                                        

  the  tributary  -  exactly  as  in Sketch  I on  p. 201.*  On one  of his  copies of
  The  Hobbit   my  father   pencilled  in   a  few   later  names   on  the   map  of
  Wilderland,   and   these   included   Bruinen  or   Loudwater  against   the  river
  north  of  the  house  (again as  in Sketch  I), and  Merrill against  the tributary
  flowing  just  to  the  south  of  it.  f  When  therefore  in The   Hobbit (Chapter
  III) the elf said to Gandalf:                                                       
    You  are  a  little out  of your  way: that  is, if  you are  making for  the only
  path  across  the  water  and  to  the  house  beyond.  We   will  set   you  right,
  but   you   had   best   get   on   foot,   until   you   are   over    the   bridge
  it  would  seem  to  be  the   Merrill  that   must  be   crossed  by   the  bridge.
  Barbara   Strachey  (Journeys   of   Frodo,   maps   15   -   16)  shows   very  un-
  ambiguously  the  ravine  of  Rivendell  as  the  ravine  of  the  tributary stream,
  Elrond's  house  being  some  mile  and  a  half  from   its  confluence   with  the
  Loudwater;   while   Karen   Fonstad   (The   Atlas   of   Middle-earth,   pp.   80,
  101,  etc.)  likewise  places  Rivendell  on  the  southerly  stream  -  calling it
  (p. 127) the Bruinen.                                                               
    The  lines  of  rivers  and  Road  in  Sketch  I  were  first  drawn  in  ink, and
  subsequently  coloured   over  in   blue  and   red  chalk.   When  my   father  did
  this  he  changed  the  course  of   the  'tributary   stream'  south   of  Elrond's
  house  by  bending  it  up   northwards  and   joining  it   to  the   Bruinen  some
  way  to  the  east;  thus  the  house at  Rivendell is  at the  western end  of land
  enclosed   between   two   streams   coming   down   from   the   Mountains,   part-
  ing,  and  then  joining   again.  It   might  therefore   be  supposed   that  both
  were   called   'Bruinen'   (discounting   the   name   'Merrill'  written   on  the
  Wilderland   map   in   The   Hobbit).   But   I   do   not   think   that  detailed
  conclusions can be drawn from this sketch-map.                                      
                                                                                     
                                Note on the Entish Lands.                             
                                                                                     
  The  name  Entish Lands  on  Sketch  I  needs  a  word   of  explanation.           
  Originally  the region  in which  the Hoarwell  rose was  called Dimrill-           
  dale(s) (p. 360), but when that name was displaced it was  briefly called           
  Hoardale (p. 432 note  3), and  then Entish  Dales, Entish  Lands. Entish           
  here was used in the Old English sense of ent, 'giant', the  Entish Lands           
  were the 'troll-lands' (cf. the later names Ettendales and Ettenmoors of           
  this region in FR, containing Old English eoten 'giant'),  and are  in no           
  way associated with the Ents of The Lord of the Rings.                              
                                                                                     
  (* In  two  of  my father's  small-scale maps  the tributary  stream is  not marked,
  and Rivendell is a  point on  or beside  the Bruinen;  the third  is too  rubbed and
  faint to be sure of, but  probably shows  the tributary,  and Rivendell  between the
  two  streams,  as in  the Hobbit  map, and  as my 1943 map  certainly does (and that
  published in The Lord of the Rings).                                                
   + This  name,  which  I  have  found  nowhere  else,  is  unfortunately  not quite
  clear, though Me- and -II are certain, and it is hard to read it in any other way. -
  Another  name  added  to  the  Wilderland  map was  Rhimdath 'Rushdown',  the river
  flowing from the Misty Mountains into Anduin north of the Carrock (see the        
  Index to Vol. V, p. 446).)                                                           

                                      XII.                                   
                                 AT RIVENDELL.                               
                                                                            
 Some  preliminary  ideas  for  this  chapter  (which  in   FR  is   Book  II,
 Chapter  x,  'Many  Meetings')  have  been  given  on  p.  126.  The original
 narrative draft is extant in a very rough manuscript, first  in ink,  then in
 pencil  and  petering  out.  It  was variously  emended and  added to,  but I
 give it here as my father seems to have set it down - granting that  there is
 often  no  clear  distinction  between  changes  made  at  once  and  changes
 made after (and probably no significant  distinction in  time, in  any case).
 This and the two following  drafts all  bear the  number 'IX'  without title.
                                                                            
   He  awoke  to  find  himself  lying  in  bed;  and  also  feeling  a  great
 deal  better.  'Where  am  I  and  what's  the  time?'   he  said   aloud  to
 the   ceiling.   Its   dark   carved   beams   were   touched   by  sunlight.
 Distantly he heard the sound of a waterfall.                                
   'In  Elrond's  house,  and  it  is   ten  o'clock   in  the   morning:  the
 morning of October 24th to be exact,' said a voice.                         
   'Gandalf!' said  Bingo  sitting  up.  There  was  the  wizard  sitting in
 a chair by the open window.                                                 
   'Yes,'  said  the wizard.  'I'm here  all tight  - and  you're lucky  to be
 here  too,  after  all  the  absurd  things  you  have  done  since  you left
 home.'                                                                      
   Bingo  felt  too  peaceful  and  comfortable   to  argue   -  and   in  any
 case  he  did  not  imagine  he  would  get  the  best  of the  argument: the
 memory  came  back  to  him  of   the  disastrous   short  cut   through  the
 Old  Forest,  of  his  own  stupidity  in the  inn, and  of his  nearly fatal
 madness in putting on the ring on Weathertop Hill.                          
   There   was   a   long   silence  broken   only  by   the  soft   puffs  of
 Gandalf's pipe as he blew smoke-rings out of the window.                    
   'What  happened  at  the  Ford?'  asked  Bingo  at  last.  'It  all seemed
 so dim somehow, and it still does.'                                         
   'Yes!'   answered   Gandalf.   'You   were   beginning   to   fade.   They
 would  have  made  a  wraith  of  you  before  long  -  certainly if  you had
 put on the Ring (2) again. How does the arm and side feel now?'                
   'I don't  know,' said  Bingo. 'It  does not  feel at  all, which  is better
 than  aching,  but'-  he made  an effort  - 'I  can move  it a  little again:
 yes: it feels as if it were  coming back  to life.  It is  not cold  now,' he
 added, touching his right hand with his left.(3)                            

   'Good! ' said  Gandalf. 'Elrond  bathed and  doctored it  for hours
 last night after you were brought in. He has  great power  and skill,
 but I was very  anxious, for  the craft  and malice  of the  Enemy is
 very great.'                                                        
   'Brought  in?'  said  Bingo. 'Of  course: the  last I  remember was
 the  rush  of water.  What happened?  Where are  the others?  Do tell
 me, Gandalf!'                                                       
   'What  happened -  as far  as I  can make  out from  Glorfindel and
 Trotter  (who  both have  some wits  in their  different ways)  - was
 this:  the  pursuers made  straight for  you (as  Glorfindel expected
 they  would).  The  others  might  have   been  trampled   down,  but
 Glorfindel  made  them  leap  out of  the way  off the  road. Nothing
 could save you if  the white  elf-horse could  not; so  they followed
 cautiously  behind  on foot,  keeping out  of sight  as much  as they
 could  behind bushes  and rocks.  When they  had got  as near  to the
 Ford as they dared go, they made a  fire hastily,  and rushed  out on
 the Riders with flaming  brands, just  at the  moment when  the flood
 came  down.  Between  the   fire  and   water  these   pursuers  were
 destroyed - if they can be wholly destroyed by such  means -  all but
 two that vanished into the wild.                                    
   'The rest of your party  and the  elf then  crossed the  ford, with
 some difficulty as it is too  deep for  hobbits and  deep even  for a
 horse.  But  Glorfindel  crossed  on  your  pony  and   regained  his
 horse. They found you lying on your face in the grass  at the  top of
 the slope: pale and cold. At first  they feared  you were  dead. They
 carried  you towards  Rivendell: a  slow business,  and I  don't know
 when  they  would have  arrived, if  Elrond had  not sent  some Elves
 out to help you, at the same time as the water was released.'       
   'Did Elrond make the flood then?' asked Bingo.                    
   'No, I did,'(4) said Gandalf. 'It is not very  difficult magic,  in a
 stream  that  comes  down  from  the  mountains.  The  sun  has  been
 fairly hot today.  But I  was surprised  to find  how well  the river
 responded. The roar and rush was tremendous.'                       
   'It was,' said Bingo. 'Did you also send Glorfindel?'             
   'Yes,' said Gandalf, ' - or rather, I asked Elrond  to lend  him to
 me. He is a wise and noble elf. Bilbo is - was - very fond of  him. I
 also sent Rimbedir (5) (as they call  him here)  - that  Trotter fellow.
 From what Merry tells me I gather he has been useful.'              
   'I should think he has,' said Bingo. 'I was very suspicious  of him
 at first - but  we should  never have  got here  without him.  I have
 grown very fond of him.  I wish  indeed that  he was  going to  go on
 wandering with  me as  long as  I must  wander. It  is an  odd thing,

 you  know,  but  I keep  on feeling  that I  have seen  him somewhere
 before.'                                                             
   'I daresay you do,' said Gandalf. 'I often  have that  feeling when
 I look at  a hobbit  - they  all seem  to remind  me of  one another,
 don't you know. Really they are extraordinarily alike! '             
   'Nonsense,'  said  Bingo.  'Trotter  is  most  peculiar.  However I
 feel extremely hobbit-like myself, and I  could wish  that I  was not
 doomed  to  wander.  I  have now  had more  than a  month of  it, and
 that is about 28 days too  much for  me.' He  fell silent  again, and
 began  to  doze.  'What  did  those  dreadful  pursuers  do to  me in
 Weathertop dell?' he said half to himself, on the edge of  a shadowy
 dream.                                                               
   'They  attempted  to  pierce  you  with  the  sword  of  the Necro-
 mancer,' said  Gandalf. 'But  by some  grace of  fortune, or  by your
 own  courage  (I  have  heard  an account  of the  fight) and  by the
 confusion  caused  by  the  elf-name  which  you  cried,   only  your
 shoulder  was  grazed.  But  that was  dangerous enough  - especially
 with the ring on. For while  the ring  was on,  you yourself  were in
 the  wraith-world,  and  subject  to their  weapons.(6) They  could see
 you, and you them.'                                                  
   'Why can we see their horses?'                                     
   'Because they are real horses. Just  as the  black robes  they wear
 to give shape to their nothingness are real robes.'                  
   'Then why,  when all  other animals  - dogs,  horses, ponies  - are
 filled with  terror of  them, do  these horses  endure them  on their
 backs?'                                                              
   'Because  they  are  born  and  bred  under the  power of  the evil
 Lord  in  the dark  kingdom. Not  all his  servants and  chattels are
 wraiths! '                                                           
   'It is all very threatening and confusing,' said Bingo sleepily.
   'Well, you are quite safe for the present,' said Gandalf,  'and are
 mending  rapidly.  I  should  not  worry  about  anything  now,  if I
 were you.'                                                           
   'All right,' said Bingo, and fell fast asleep.'                    
                                                                     
   Bingo  was  now  as  you  know  in  the Last  Homely House  west of
 the Mountains, on the edge  of the  wild, the  house of  Elrond: that
 house  was  (as  Bilbo  Baggins  had  long  ago reported)  'a perfect
 house, whether you like  food or  sleep or  work or  story-telling or
 singing, or just sitting and thinking, best, or a pleasant mixture of
 them all.' Merely to be there was a cure  for weariness  and sadness.
 As  evening  drew  on  Bingo  woke  up  and found  that he  no longer

 felt like sleep but had a mind  for food  and drink,  story-telling and
 singing.  So he  got up,  and found  his arm  already nearly  as useful
 as ever it had been. As soon as  he was  dressed he  went in  search of
 his friends. They were sitting  in the  porch of  the house  that faced
 west: shadows were fallen in the valley, but the  light was  still upon
 high eastern faces of the hills  far above,  and the  air was  warm. It
 was  seldom cold  in the  fair valley  of Rivendell.  The sound  of the
 waterfalls was loud in the stillness. There  was a  scent of  trees and
 flowers [?in harmony].                                                
   'Hullo,'  said  Merry,  'here is  our noble  uncle. Three  cheers for
 Bingo Lord of the Ring! '                                             
   'Hush! ' said Gandalf.  'Evil things  do not  come into  this valley,
 but  nonetheless  we  should  not  name  them.  The  Lord  of  the Ring
 is  not  Bingo,  but  the  Lord  of  the Dark  Tower of  Mordor,(8) whose
 power is growing again, and we are here sitting only  in a  fortress of
 peace. Outside it is getting dark.'                                   
   'Gandalf has been  saying lots  of cheerful  things like  that,' said
 Odo. 'Just to  keep us  in order:  but it  seems impossible  somehow to
 feel gloomy or depressed in Elrond's house. I feel I could sing -  if I
 knew  how:  only  I  never  was  any  good  at   making  up   words  or
 tunes.'                                                               
   'You  never  were,' said  Bingo, 'but  I daresay  even that  could be
 cured  in  time,  if  you  stayed  here  long enough.  I feel  much the
 same  myself.  Though   at  the   moment  I   feel  more   hungry  than
 anything else.'                                                       
   His  hunger  was  soon  cured.  For  before   long  they   were  sum-
 moned  to  the  evening  meal.  The  hall  was  filled with  many folk:
 elves  for  the  most  part,  though  there  were  a  few   guests  and
 travellers of various sort. Elrond sat in  the high  seat, and  next to
 him  sat  Gandalf.  Bingo  did  not  see  Trotter  or  Glorfindel: they
 were probably at one of  the other  halls among  their friends,  but to
 his  surprise  he  found  sitting  next  to  him  a dwarf  of venerable
 appearance and rich dress -  his beard  was white,  nearly as  white as
 the snow-white cloth of his garments; he wore  a belt  of silver  and a
 chain of silver and diamonds.                                         
   'Welcome  and  well  met,'  said  the   dwarf,  rising   and  bowing.
 'G1oin at your service!' and he bowed again.                         
   'Bingo   Bolger-Baggins   at   your   service  and   your  family's,'
 replied Bingo. 'Am I right  in imagining  that you  are the  G1oin, one
 of the twelve companions of the great Thorin?'                        
   'You are,' said he. 'And I need not  ask, since  I have  already been
 told  that  you  are  the  friend and  adopted son  of our  dear friend

                                    
                                                                            
 Bilbo   Baggins.   I   wonder  much   what  brings   four  hobbits   so  far
 from  their  homes.  Nothing  like   it  has   occurred  since   Bilbo  left
 Hobbiton.   But  perhaps   I  should   not  ask   this;  since   Elrond  and
 Gandalf do not seem disposed to tell?'                                      
  'I  think  we  will  not  speak  of  such  things, at  any rate  yet,' said
 Bingo  politely  -  he  wanted  to  forget  about   his  troubles   for  the
 moment.   'Though   I   am   equally   curious  to   know  what   brings  so
 important a dwarf so far from the Mountain.'                                
  Gloin  looked  at  him  and  laughed  -  indeed  he  actually   winked.  'I
 am  no spoil-sport,'  he said.  'So I  will not  tell you  - yet.  But there
 are many other things to tell.'                                             
  Throughout   the   meal   they   talked  together.   Bingo  told   news  of
 the  Shire,  but  he  listened  more  than  he  talked,  for Gloin  had much
 to   tell  of   the  Dwarf-kingdom   under  the   Mountain,  and   of  Dale.
 There  Dain  was  still  king  of   the  dwarfs,(9) and  was   now  ancient
 (some  zoo  years  old),  venerable,  and  fabulously   rich.  Of   the  ten
 companions   that   had  survived   the  battle,   seven  were   still  with
 him:  Dwalin,  Dori,   Nori,  Bifur   and  Bofur   and  Bombur.(10) But  the
 last  was  now  so  fat  that  he  could  not  move  himself from  his couch
 to  his chair,  and it  took four  young dwarves  to lift  him. In  Dale the
 grandson of Bard, Brand son of Bain, was lord.                              
                                                                            
 My  father  stopped  here, and  scribbled down  a few  notes before  at once
 beginning  the  chapter  anew.  The  notes  at  the end  of the  first draft
 include the following:                                                      
  What  of  Balin  etc.  They  went  to  colonize   (Ring  needed   to  found
 colony?) Bilbo must be seen. Who is Trotter?                                
  The second text  is a  clear manuscript,  but it  had proceeded  no farther
 than Gandalf's account  of the  flood in  the Bruinen  when my  father again
 stopped  and  started again.  This is  an intermediate  text much  nearer to
 the  third  than  to the  first, and  need not  be considered  more closely.
 The third text, the  last in  this phase  of the  work, but  again abandoned
 before its conclusion (going  in fact  scarcely any  farther than  the first
 draft), is very close to 'Many  Meetings' in  FR, but  there are  many minor
 differences (quite apart, of course, from  those that  are constant  at this
 stage,  as  Trotter/Strider-Aragorn and  the absence  of Sam).  The opening
 is now almost  identical to  that in  FR, but  the date  is October  26, and
 Gandalf adds, after 'You were beginning  to fade',  'Trotter noticed  it, to
 his great alarm - though of course he said nothing.' But after Gandalf s 'It
 is no small feat...' (FR p. 232) the old narrative goes on:               
                                                                            
 '...  But I  am delighted  to have  you all  here safe.  I am  really rather
 to  blame.  I  knew  there  were  some  risks  -  but  if  I had  known more
 before  I  left  the  Shire  I  should  have  arranged  matters differently.

 But  things  are  moving  fast,'  he  added  in  a  lower  voice  as  if  to
 himself, 'even  faster than  I feared.  I had  to get  here quickly.  But if
 I had known the Riders were already out!'                                   
   'Did not you know that?' asked Bingo.                                    
   'No  I  did  not  -  not  until  we  came  to  Bree.  It was  Trotter that
 told  me."  And   if  I   had  not   known  Trotter   and  trusted   him,  I
 should  have  waited  for  you  there.  And  as  it   has  turned   out,  he
 saved you and brought you through in the end.'                              
   'We  should  never  have  got  here  without  him,'  said  Bingo.  'I  was
 very  suspicious  of  him  at  first,  but I  have grown  very fond  of him.
 Though  he  is  rather  queer.  I  wish  that   he  was   going  to   go  on
 wandering  with  me  -  as  long  as  I  must  wander. It  is an  odd thing,
 you  know,  but  I  keep  on  feeling  that  I   have  seen   him  somewhere
 before  -  that,  that I  ought to  be able  to put  a name  to him,  a name
 different to Trotter.'                                                      
   'I  dare  say  you  do,'  laughed  Gandalf.  'I  often  have  that feeling
 when  I  look  at  a  hobbit: they  all seem  to remind  me of  one another,
 if you know what I mean. They are wonderfully alike! '                      
   'Nonsense!'  said  Bingo,  sitting  up  again  in  protest.   'Trotter  is
 most  peculiar.  And  he   has  shoes!   However,  I   am  feeling   a  very
 ordinary  hobbit  myself  at  the  moment.  I  wish  now  that  I  need  not
 go   any   further.   I  have   had  more   than  a   month  of   exile  and
 adventures,   and  that   is  about   four  weeks   more  than   enough  for
 me.'(12)                                                                    
                                                                            
   The text now becomes very close to that of FR pp. 233 -  4, but  there are
 several  differences.  As  in  FR,  Bingo  cannot understand  how he  can be
 out in his reckoning of the date, but in this version  Gandalf has  told him
 that it is the 26th of October (not as in  FR the  24th), and  he calculates
 that they must  have reached  the Ford  on the  23rd (the  20th in  FR). On
 this question  see the  Note on  Chronology on  p. 219.  In contrast  to the
 first  draft,  where Gandalf  says that  Bingo was  brought in  to Rivendell
 'last  night',  he  has been  unconscious for  a long  time, and  the mortal
 danger  of  his  wound  is  emphasized.  Gandalf calls  the weapon  that was
 used 'a deadly  blade, the  knife of  the Necromancer  which remains  in the
 wound',  not  'a Morgul-knife',  and he  explains to  Bingo that  'You would
 have  become  a  Ring-wraith  (the  only hobbit  Ring-wraith) and  you would
 have  been  under  the  dominion  of  the  Dark Lord.  Also they  would have
 got  possession  of  the  Ring.  And  the  Dark Lord  would have  found some
 way of tormenting you for trying to keep it from him, and of striking at all
 your  friends  and  kinsfolk through  you, if  he could.'  He says  that the
 Riders wear black robes 'to give shape to their  nothingness in  our world',
 and  he includes  among the  servants of  the Dark  Lord 'orcs  and goblins'
 and 'kings, warriors, and wizards.'                                         

   Gandalf's reply to  Bingo's question  'Is Rivendell  safe?' is  similar to
 that in FR (pp. 234 - 5), but has some notable features:                    
                                                                            
   'Yes,  I  hope  so.  He  has  seldom  overcome  any  of  the Elves  in the
 past;  and  all  Elves  now  are  his  enemies.   The  Elves   of  Rivendell
 are  indeed  descendants  of  his  chief  foes:   the  Gnomes,   the  Elven-
 wise   ones,   that  came   out  of   the  Far   West,  and   whom  Elbereth
 Gilthoniel  still  protects.(13) They fear  no  Ring-wraiths, for  they live
 at  once  in  both  worlds,  and  each  world  has  only  half   power  over
 them,  while  they  have  double  power  over  both.  But  such   places  as
 Rivendell  (or  the  Shire  in  its  own  way)  will  soon  become  besieged
 islands,  if  things  go  on  as  they are  going. The  Dark Lord  is moving
 again.  Dreadful  is  the  power  of  the  Necromancer.  Still,'   he  said,
 standing  suddenly  up   and  sticking   out  his   chin  while   his  beard
 stuck  out  like bristling  wire, 'the  Wise say  that he  is doomed  in the
 end.  We  will  keep  up  our   courage.  You   are  mending   rapidly,  and
 you need not worry about anything at the moment.'                           
                                                                            
   The  passage  in which  Gandalf looked  closely at  Frodo, and  then spoke
 to himself, is lacking; but his story of the events  at the  Ford is  in all
 essentials the same as in FR, with a  few features  still retained  from the
 first draft -  most important,  Gandalf still  says that  two of  the Riders
 escaped  into the  wild. The  difficult passage  of the  deep ford  is still
 described, as in the first draft, and Gandalf still says 'I was surprised to
 find how well the river responded to  a little  simple magic.'  But Elrond's
 power  over  the river,  and Gandalf's  waves like  white horses  with white
 riders,  now  enter.  The  end of  Bingo's talk  with Gandalf,  however, has
 differences:                                                                
                                                                            
 '...  I  thought  I  was  drowning  -  and  all   my  friends   and  enemies
 together.   It   is   wonderful   that  Elrond   and  Glorfindel   and  such
 great  people  should  take  all  this  trouble  over  me  - not  to mention
 Trotter.'                                                                   
   'Well  -  there  are  many  reasons  for  that.  I  am  one  good  reason.
 You  may  discover  others.'  For  one  thing  they  are   -  were   -  very
 fond of Bilbo Baggins.'                                                     
   'What do you mean - "are fond of Bilbo"?' said Bingo sleepily.            
   'Did  I  say  that?  Just  a  slip  of the  tongue,' answered  Gandalf. 'I
 thought I said "were".'                                                     
   'I  wish  old  Bilbo  could  have  been  here and  heard all  about this,'
 murmured    Bingo.    'I   could    have   made    him   laugh.    The   cow
 jumped  over  the  moon.  Hullo  William!'  he   said.  'Poor   old  troll!'
 and then he fell asleep.                                                    
                                                                            
   The next section of the narrative follows the first draft (p.208) pretty

                                                             
                                                                              
 closely,  but  Bingo's  discovery  of  green  garments  laid  out for  him now
 enters the story, with a further addition that  only survived  in part  in FR:
                                                                              
 He  put  on  his  own  best  waistcoat  with  the   gold  buttons   (which  he
 had  brought  in  his  luggage  as  his  only  remaining  treasure).   But  it
 seemed  very  loose.  Looking  in  a  little  mirror  he  was startled  to see
 a  very  much  thinner  reflection  of  Bingo  than  he  had  seen for  a long
 while.   It  looked   remarkably  like   the  young   nephew  of   Bilbo  that
 used  to  go  tramping  with  his  uncle  in the  Shire, though  it was  a bit
 pale  in the  face. 'And  I feel  like it,'  he said,  slapping his  chest and
 tightening   his   waistcoat   strap.   Then   he  went   in  search   of  his
 friends.                                                                      
                                                                              
 There is nothing corresponding to Sam's entering Frodo's room.                
   The  feast  in  Elrond's house  moves far  to the  final text.  The descrip-
 tions  of  Elrond,  Gandalf,  and  Glorfindel  now  appear (they  were written
 on an inserted slip, but it seems to belong to  the same  time) and  in almost
 the same words as in FR (p. 239)  - but  there is  mention of  Elrond's smile,
 'like  the  summer  sun',  and  his laughter.  There is  no mention  of Arwen.
 Bingo  'could  not  see  Trotter,  nor  his  nephews.  They  had  been  led to
 other tables.'                                                                
   The  conversation  with  Gloin  proceeds as  in the  first draft,  with some
 touches  and phrases  that move  it to  the final  text (FR  p.240).  Gloin is
 now described as 'a  dwarf of  solemn dignity  and rich  dress', but  he still
 winks (as he does not in FR).                                                 
   At the point where the  first draft  ends (p.  210) my  father only  added a
 further couple of lines before again stopping:                                
                                                                              
 In  Dale  the  grandson  of Bard  the Bowman  ruled, Brand  son of            
 Bain son of  Bard, and  he was  become a  strong king  whose realm            
 included Esgaroth, and much land to the south of the great falls."            
                                                                              
   On  the  reverse  of  the sheet  the conversation  continues in  a different
 script and a different ink:  Gloin gives  an account  of Balin's  history (his
 return to Moria)  - but  it is  Frodo, not  Bingo, that  he is  speaking with,
 and this side of the page belongs to a later phase in the writing of  the book
 (see pp. 369, 391).                                                            
                                                                              
   A  passage  on  a  detached  slip,  forming  part of  Gandalf's conversation
 with Bingo, seems to belong to the time of  the third  draft of  this chapter.
 There is no direction for its insertion into the text, and there is no echo of
 it in FR.                                                                     
                                                                              
 Things work out oddly. But for that 'short cut' you would not have            
 met old Bombadil, nor had the one kind of sword the  Riders fear."            
 Why did not I think of Bombadil before! If only he was not  so far            
 away,  I  would  go  straight back  now and  consult him.  We have            

                                               
                                                                             
 never had much to do with one another up till now. I  don't think            
 he  quite  approves of  me somehow.  He belongs  to a  much older            
 generation, and my ways are not his. He keeps himself  to himself            
 and does not believe in travel. But I fancy somehow that we shall            
 all need his help in the end - and that  he may  have to  take an            
 interest in things outside his own country.                                  
                                                                             
 Among  my  father's  earliest  ideas  for  this  part of  the story  (p. 126)
 appears:  'Gandalf   astonished  to   hear  about   Tom.'  -   Another  brief
 passage on the same slip  of paper  was struck  out at  the time  of writing:
                                                                             
 Not  to  mention  courage  - and  also swords  and a  strange and            
 ancient name. Later on I must be told about that curious sword of            
 yours, and how you knew the name of Elbereth.'                               
  'I thought you knew everything.'                                            
  'No,' said Gandalf. 'You                                                    
                                                                             
  Some  notes  that  were  scribbled  down at  Sidmouth in  Devon in  the late
 summer  of  1938  (see Carpenter,  Biography, p.  187) on  a page  of doodles
 evidently represent my father's thoughts for the next stages of the  story at
 this time:                                                                   
                                                                             
  Consultation. Over M[isty] M[ountains]. Down Great  River to                
 Mordor. Dark Tower. Beyond (?) which is the Fiery Hill.                      
  Story of Gilgalad told by Elrond? Who is Trotter? Glorfindel                
 tells of his ancestry in Gondolin.                                           
                                                                             
 'The  Quest  of  the Fiery  Mountain' (preceded  by 'Consultation  of hobbits
 with Elrond and Gandalf') was mentioned  in the  outline given  on p.  126,
 but here is  the first hint of  the journey  that was  to be  undertaken from
 Rivendell, and the first mention of  the Great  River in  the context  of The
 Lord of the Rings.                                                           
  My  father  had  already  asked  the  question  'Who  is  Trotter?'  and  he
 would ask it again. A hint of  one solution,  in the  end rejected,  has been
 met  already  in  Bingo's  words  to  Gandalf  in  this  chapter: 'I  keep on
 feeling  that  I  have  seen him  somewhere before  - that,  that I  ought to
 be  able to  put a  name to  him, a  name different  to Trotter';  and indeed
 earlier, in the inn at Bree (p. 154): 'He had a dark look - and yet there was
 something in it... that seemed friendly, and even familiar.'                 
  Also  very  notable  is  'Glorfindel  tells  of  his ancestry  in Gondolin.'
 Years later, long after the publication of The Lord of  the Rings,  my father
 gave a great deal of thought to the matter  of Glorfindel,  and at  that time
 he wrote: '[The use of Glorfindel] in The  Lord of  the Rings  is one  of the
 cases  of  the  somewhat  random  use  of  the  names  found  in   the  older
 legends,  now  referred  to  as The  Silmarillion, which  escaped reconsider-
 ation in the final published form of The Lord of the Rings.'  He came  to the
 conclusion  that  Glorfindel of  Gondolin, who  fell to  his death  in combat

                    
                                                                        
 with  a  Balrog after  the sack  of the  city (II.192  - 4,  IV.145), and
 Glorfindel  of  Rivendell were  one and  the same:  he was  released from
 Mandos and returned to Middle-earth in the Second Age.                  
  A single loose  page, which  has nothing  to connect  it with  any other
 writing, is perhaps the 'story of Gilgalad told  by Elrond'  mentioned in
 these notes, and I give it here. Other than the first, the  changes noted
 were  made  subsequently,  in pencil  on the  manuscript written  in ink.
                                                                        
  'Now   in   the   dark   days   Sauron   the  Magician   [first  written
 Necromancer,   then   Necromancer   written   again    above   Magician]
 had  been  very  powerful  in  the  Great  Lands,  and nearly  all living
 things  had  served  him  out  of  fear.  And he  pursued the  Elves that
 lived  on  this  side  of  the  Sundering Sea  with especial  hatred, for
 they  did  not  serve  him,  although  they were  afraid. And  there were
 some  Men  that  were  friends  of  the  Elves,  though  not many  in the
 darkest of days.'                                                       
  'And  how,'  said  Bingo,  'did   his  overthrow   come  about   [>  was
 his power made less]?'                                                  
  'It  was  in  this  way,'  said Elrond.  'The lands  and islands  in the
 North-west  of  the  Great  Lands  of  the  Old  World  were  called long
 ago  Beleriand.  Here  the  Elves  of  the  West  had  dwelt  for  a long
 while  until  [>  during]  the  wars  with  the  Power  of  darkness,  in
 which   the   Power  was   defeated  but   the  land   destroyed.  Sauron
 alone  of  his  chief  servants escaped.  But still  after the  Elves had
 mostly  departed  [)  Although   most  of   the  Elves   returned]  again
 into  the  West,  there  were  many  Elves  and  Elf-friends  that  dwelt
 [)  still dwelt  in after  days] in  that region.  And thither  came many
 of  the  Great  Men  of  old  out  of  the  Far  West  Island  which  was
 called  by  the  Elves  Numenor  (but  by  some  Avallon)  [) out  of the
 land  of  Westernesse  (that  they  called  Numenor)];  for   Sauron  had
 destroyed  their  island  [)  land],  and  they  were  exiles  and  hated
 him.  There  was  a  king  in  Beleriand  of   Numenorean  race   and  he
 was called  Elendil, that  is Elf-friend.  And he  made an  alliance with
 the  Elf-king  of  those  lands,  whose  name  is  Gilgalad  (Starlight),
 a   descendant   of   Feanor   the  renowned.   I  remember   well  their
 council - for it reminded me of  the great  days of  the ancient  war, so
 many  fair  princes  and  captains  were  there,  yet not  so many  or so
 fair as once had been.'                                                 
  'You  remember?' said   Bingo,  looking   astonished  at   Elrond.  'But
 I thought this tale was of days very long ago.'                         
  'So  it  is,'  said  Elrond  laughing.  'But  my  memory reaches  back a
 long  way  [>  to  long  ago].  My father  was Earendel  who was  born in
 Gondolin  seven  years  before  it  fell,  and   my  mother   was  Elwing

                              
                                                                           
 daughter  of  Luthien  daughter  of   King  Thingol   of  Doriath,   and  I
 have seen  many ages  in the  West of  the world.  I was  at the  council I
 speak  of,  for  I  was  the  minstrel  and  counsellor  of  Gilgalad.  The
 armies  of  Elves  and  Men  were   joined  once   more,  and   we  marched
 eastward,  and   crossed  the   Misty  Mountains,   and  passed   into  the
 inner   lands   far   from   the  memory   of  the   Sea.  And   we  became
 weary,  and  sickness  was  heavy  on  us,  made  by  the spells  of Sauron
 -  for  we  had  come  at  last  to  Mordor,   the  Black   Country,  where
 Sauron  had  rebuilt  his  fortress.  It is  on part  of that  dreary land
 that   the  Forest   of  Mirkwood   now  stands,(17) and  it   derives  its
 darkness  and  dread  from  the   ancient  evil   [added:  of   the  soil].
 Sauron  could  not  drive  us  away,  for  the  power of  the Elves  was in
 those  days  still  very  great,  though  waning;   and  we   besieged  his
 stronghold  for  7  [>  10]  years.  And  at  last   Sauron  came   out  in
 person,   and   wrestled   with   Gilgalad,   and   Elendil  came   to  his
 rescue,   and   both  were   mortally  wounded;   but  Sauron   was  thrown
 down,   and   his   bodily   shape   was   destroyed.  His   servants  were
 dispelled  and  the  host  of  Beleriand  broke  his  stronghold  and razed
 it  to  the  ground.  Gilgalad   and  Elendil   died.  But   Sauron's  evil
 spirit  fled  away  and  was  hidden  for  a long  while in  waste places.
 Yet  after  an  age  he  took  shape  again,  and  has  long  troubled  the
 northern world [added: but his power is less than of old].                 
                                                                           
    If this  extremely interesting  piece is  compared with  the end  of the
 second version of The Fall of  Numenor ('FN  II') in  V.28 -  9 it  will be
 seen that while  an important  new element  has entered  the two  texts are
 closely related and have closely similar phrases:.citing the form in FN II,
 'in  Beleriand  there  arose a  king, who  was of  Numenorean race,  and he
 was named Elendil, that is Elf-friend'; the hosts  of the  Alliance 'passed
 the mountains and came into inner lands far  from the  Sea', 'they  came at
 last even  to Mordor  the Black  Country, where  Sauron... had  rebuilt his
 fortresses';  'Thu was  thrown down,  and his  bodily shape  destroyed, and
 his  servants  were  dispelled,  and  the host  of Beleriand  destroyed his
 dwelling', 'Thu's spirit fled far away,  and was  hidden in  waste places.'
 Moreover  in  both  texts  Gil-galad  is  descended  from  Feanor.  The new
 element is the appearance of Elrond as the minstrel and counsellor  of Gil-
 galad (in FN II $2 Elrond was the first King of Numenor,  and a  mortal; a
 conception  now  of  course  abandoned,  with  the  emergence of  Elros his
 brother,  V.332,  $28).  There  is  no  suggestion  here  that any  sort of
 'Council' was in progress: it seems rather that  Elrond was  recounting the
 tale to Bingo, as Trotter had said on  Weathertop (p.  179): you  will hear
 it, I think, in Rivendell, when we get there. Elrond should tell it, for he
 knows  it  well.'  But an  element survived  into FR  (II) Chapter  2, 'The
 Council  of  Elrond':  Bingo's  amazement at  the vast  age of  Elrond, and

                                                                           
                                                                            
 Elrond's reply, naming his  lineage and  recollecting the  hosts of  the Last
 Alliance.(18)                                                               
                                                                            
                                      NOTES.                                 
                                                                            
  1. On   this   puzzling   date  see   the  Note   on  Chronology,   p.  219.
  2. the         Ring:         changed         from         that         ring.
  3. touching  his  right  hand  arith  his  left:  on  the wound  having been
     originally in Bingo's right shoulder see p. 190.                        
  4. 'No, I did'  changed from  'Yes'. Cf.  the original  sketch of  the story
     (p.  126):  'Gandalf  had  sent  the  water  down  with  Elrond's  per-
     mission.'                                                               
  5. Rimbedir  as  the  Elvish  name  for  Trotter  appears  in  the pencilled
     draft of the last chapter,  p. ig8  note 5  (Padathir in  the overwritten
     text in ink).  This shows  that the  present text  was written  before my
     father  had  rewritten  the  last  chapter,  or  at  least before  he had
     completed  it.  Later  he replaced  Rimbedir by  Padathir in  the present
     passage.  - By  'I also  sent Rimbedir'  Gandalf must  mean that  he sent
     Trotter to them at The Prancing Pony.                                   
  6. This  passage  was  changed  in  the  following  text to  the form  in FR
     (p.  234),  i.e.  'you  yourself  were  half  in  the  wraith-world,  and
     they  might  have  seized  you',  with  the words  'and subject  to their
     weapons' removed.                                                       
  7. From  this  point  the   manuscript  was   continued  in   rapid  pencil.
  8. the Dark Tower of Mordor: see note 17.                                
  9. On the plural form dwarfs see V.277.                                   
 10. Gloin  is  missed out  (so also  in the  third text,  where his  name was
     inserted  subsequently).  The   companions  of   Thorin  not   named  are
     (as in FR) Balin, Ori, and Oin.                                         
 11. It was Trotter that told me: Gandalf left  a letter  for Bingo  at Bree
     before  he  left on  Monday 26  September, and  in this  he said  that he
     had  'learned  some  news  on  the  may'  (from  Hobbiton):  'Pursuit  is
     getting close: there  are 7  at least,  perhaps more'  (p. 154).  When my
     father  wrote  this he  cannot have  had in  mind Trotter's  meeting with
     Gandalf   on  the   Road  on   the  Sunday   morning  (pp.   149,  154),
     because  the first  Black Rider  did not  come to  Bree until  the Monday
     evening  (pp.  151,  157).  It  was  no  doubt   when  he   decided  that
     Gandalf  learnt  about  the  Black  Riders  from  Trotter  that  he added
     the passages on p. 153, where Trotter says 'I first  saw the  Riders last
     Saturday  away  west  of  Bree,  before  I  ran  across Gandalf',  and on
     p. 154, where he says that their conversation also included  the Black
     Riders.                                                                  
 12. more than a month (as in the  first draft)  replaced 30  odd days  at the
     time of writing. See the Note on Chronology on p. 219.                 
 13. The Elves  of Rivendell  are indeed  descendants of  his chief  foes: the
     Gnomes, the Elvenwise ones: see p. 71.                                

                                                 
                                                                              
  14. My father added in pencil at the foot of  the page,  but it  is impossible
      to  say  when:  'The  Ring  is  another,  and  is  becoming more  and more
      important.'                                                              
  15. Cf. The Hobbit, Chapter X 'A Warm Welcome':                              
       At  the  southern  end  [of  the  Long  Lake)  the  doubled   waters  [of
      the  Running  River  and  the   Forest  River]   poured  out   again  over
      high  waterfalls  and  ran  away  hurriedly  to  unknown  lands.   In  the
      still evening air the noise of  the falls  could be  heard like  a distant
      roar.                                                                    
  16. An  isolated  note  says:  'What  of  the  sword  of   the  Barrow-wights?
      Why  did  the  Black  Riders  fear it?  - because  it belonged  to Western
      Men.' Cf. The Two Towers III. 1, p. 17.                                  
  17. Elrond's  statement  here  that  Mirkwood  is   itself  in   Mordor,  'the
      Black  Country',  and  that  the  forest  'derives  its darkness  from the
      ancient evil' of  the time  when Sauron  had his  fortress in  that region
      is  interesting.  Both  here  and  in  the  very  similar  passage  in the
      second  version  of  The Fall of Numenor  (V.29) Sauron  is said  to have
      'rebuilt'  his  fortress(es)  in  Mordor,  and  I take  this to  mean that
      it  was  in  Mordor  that  he  established  himself  after   the  downfall
      of   Morgoth   and  the   destruction  of   Angband.  That   fortress  was
      destroyed by the hosts of the Last Alliance; and in  the first  version of
      The   Eall   of   Numenor   (V.18)   when   Thu   was  defeated   and  his
      dwelling destroyed 'he fled to  a dark  forest, and  hid himself.'  In The
      Hobbit  the  'dark  tower'  of  the  Necromancer  was  in  southern  Mirk-
      wood. At the end of  The Hobbit  it is  told that  the white  wizards 'had
      at  last  driven  the  Necromancer  from  his  dark hold  in the  south of
      Mirkwood', but it is not said that it was destroyed. If 'it is on  part of
      that  dreary  land  [Mordor]  that  the  Forest  of Mirkwood  now stands',
      it might be argued that (at this stage  of the  development of  the story)
      Sauron  had  returned  there,  to  'the  Dark  Tower of  Mordor' -  in the
      south  of   Mirkwood.  (There   seems  no   positive  evidence   that  the
      geography  of  Middle-earth  had  yet  been  extended  south  and  east of
      the  map  of  Wilderland  in  The  Hobbit,  beyond  the conception  of the
      Fiery  Mountain,  whose  actual  placing  seems  to  be   entirely  vague;
      and  it  certainly  cannot  be  assumed  that my  father yet  conceived of
      the  mountain-defended  land  of  Mordor  far  away  in  the  South-east.)
      But  I  do  not  think  this  at all  probable. Not  long after  the point
      we  have  reached,  my  father  wrote  in  the  chapter  'Ancient History'
      (p.  253)  that  the  Necromancer  'had  flown  from Mirkwood  [i.e. after
      his  expulsion  by  the  white  wizards]  only  to  reoccupy  his  ancient
      stronghold in the South, near the  midst of  the world  in those  days, in
      the  Land  of  Mordor;  and  it  was  rumoured  that  the Black  Tower had
      been  raised   anew.'  'His   ancient  stronghold'   was  of   course  the
      fortress destroyed in the,War of the Last Alliance.                      
  18. For previous references  to  the  story  of Gil-galad  and Elendil  in the
      texts thus far see pp. 169, 179, 192.                                   

                             Note on the Chronology.                          
                                                                             
 In the first draft of this chapter  Gandalf tells  Bingo when  he wakes  up in
 Elrond's house that it is  the morning  of October  24; but  this seems  to be
 at variance with all the indications of  date that  have been  given. (October
 24 is the date in FR, p. 231, but this was differently achieved.)           
  At  Weathertop   there  is   one  day's   difference  between   the  original
 chronology  and  that  of  FR:  they  reached  it  on  October  5  in  the old
 version,  but  on  October 6  in FR  (see p.  175). The  hobbits came  back to
 the Road again  from the  lands to  the south,  and crossed  it, on  the sixth
 day  from  Weathertop (p.  192), i.e.  October i  x, whereas  in FR  they took
 an  extra  day  (contrast  'At  the  end of  the fourth  day the  ground began
 once more to rise' in the old version, p. 191, with  FR p.  212, 'At  the end
 of the  fifth day'):  thus there  is now  a lag  of two  days between  the two
 accounts,  and  in  FR  they  came  back  to  the  Road  and crossed  the Last
 Bridge on October 13. In the hills to  the north  of the  Road, on  the other
 hand,  they  took  a day  longer in  the old  version (see  p. 193),  and thus
 came  down  out  of  the  hills,  and met  Glorfindel, on  the evening  of the
 17th  (the  18th  in  FR).  There  are  no further  differences in  respect of
 chronology  in  this  chapter,  and  therefore  in  the  original  story  they
 reached  the  Ford  on  October  19 (October  20 in  FR). How  then can  it be
 the  24th  of  October when  Bingo wakes  in Rivendell,  if, as  Gandalf says,
 he was 'brought in last night'?                                              
  In the second and  third versions  of the  opening of  this chapter  the date
 on  which  Bingo  woke  up  in  Elrond's  house  becomes  October  26,  and he
 says that it ought to be the  24th: 'unless  I lost  count somewhere,  we must
 have  reached the  Ford on  the 23rd.'  Gandalf tells  him that  Elrond tended
 him for 'three nights and  two days,  to be  exact. The  Elves brought  you to
 Rivendell at  night on  the 23rd,  and that  is where  you lost  your count';
 and he refers to Bingo's having borne the  splinter of  the blade  for 'fifteen
 days  or  more'  (seventeen  in  FR).  This  does  not  help  at all  with the
 chronological puzzle, for  in all  the drafts  for the  opening of  Chapter IX
 my  father  was  assuming  that  the  hobbits  reached  the  Ford  on  October
 23, and not, as the actual narrative seems clearly  to show,  on October  r g.
 It  is  equally  odd  that  Gandalf  should  say  that  Bingo  had  borne  the
 splinter of the blade for 'fifteen days or more', if the crossing of  the Ford
 actually was on the 23rd  and Elrond  finally removed  the shard  'last night'
 (October 25): the  total should  be 20  (October 6  to 25);  in FR  the number
 is seventeen days (October 7 to 23).                                         

                                     XIII.                                   
                           'QUERIES AND ALTERATIONS'.                        
                                                                            
 In this  chapter I  give a  series of  notes which  my father  headed Queries
 and Alterations. I think that it  can be  shown clearly  that they  come from
 the time we have now reached.                                               
  He  had  abandoned  his  third  draft  for  Chapter IX  (later to  be called
 'Many  Meetings')  at  the  point where  Gloin was  telling Bingo  about King
 Brand  of  Dale;  this  is  at the  bottom of  a page  that bears  the number
 IX.8. I have already noticed  (p. 213) that  on the  reverse of  this page,
 numbered  IX.9,  the  conversation continues  - but  it is  obviously discon-
 tinuous with what precedes, being written  in different  ink and  a different
 script, and Gloin is now talking to 'Frodo', not 'Bingo'; and in  fact, after
 this point in the narrative of The Lord of the  Rings 'Bingo'  never appears
 again.                                                                      
  Now  the  first  of these  Queries and  Alterations is  concerned precisely
 with the conversation of Bingo  and Gloin,  and actually  refers to  the last
 page of  the 'Bingo'  part of  the chapter,  IX.8 (perhaps  it had  just been
 written).  In  another  of  these  notes  my  father was  for the  first time
 considering  the substitution  of 'Frodo'  for 'Bingo';  but he  here decided
 against it - and when he came to  write a  new version  of 'A  Long-expected
 Party' (a  question discussed  in these  same notes)  Bilbo's heir  was still
 'Bingo', not 'Frodo'.                                                       
  I  conclude,  therefore,  that it  was just  at the  time when  he abandoned
 Chapter  IX  that   he  wrote   Queries  and   Alterations;  that   when  he
 abandoned it he returned  again to  the beginning  of the  book; and  that it
 was  some  considerable  time  -  during  which  'Bingo'  became   'Frodo'  -
 before he took up again the conversation with Gloin at Rivendell.           
                                                                            
  There are two pages of  these notes,  mostly set  out in  ink in  an orderly
 and  legible  way; but  there are  also many  hasty pencilled  additions, and
 these  may  or  may  not,  in  particular  cases,  belong  to  the  same time
 (granting that  the intervals  of time  are not  likely to  be great:  but in
 attempting  to  trace  this  history  it  is 'layers'  and 'phases'  that are
 significant  rather  than  weeks   or  months).   Some  of   the  suggestions
 embodied in these notes han no  future, but others are of the utmost
 interest in showing the actual cmergence of new ideas.                      
  I set them out in what  seems to  be the  order in  which they  were written
 down, taking in the  additions as  convenient and  relevant, and  adding one
 or two other notes that belong to this time.                                

        
                                                                          
 (1) Dale  Men and  Dwarfs at  Party -  is this  good? Rather  spoils meet-
 ing  of  Bingo  and  Gloin  (IX.8).  Also  unwise to  bring Big  People to
 Hobbiton.   Simply   make   Gandalf   and   dwarfs   bring   things   from
 Dale.                                                                     
                                                                          
 For  the  'great  lumbering  tow-haired  Men'  who  went 'stumping  on the
 hobbit road like elephants' and drank all the beer in the inn  at Hobbiton
 see  p.  20  (the account  of them  had survived  without change  into the
 fourth version of 'A  Long-expected Party').  By 'Dale  Men and  Dwarfs at
 Party' my father meant 'in Hobbiton at that time', not of course that they
 were  present  at  the  Party.  The  Men  would be  abandoned in  the next
 version  of  'A  Long-expected Party',  but the  Dwarves remained  into FR
 (p.  33).  Perhaps my  father felt  that whereas  the Men  would certainly
 have  told  Bingo  the  news  from   Dale,  the   Dwarves  need   have  no
 particular connection with the Lonely Mountain.                           
                                                                          
 (2)  Too  many  hobbits.  Also  Bingo  Bolger-Baggins  a  bad   name.  Let
 Bingo  =  Frodo,  a  son  of  Primula  Brandybuck  but  of   father  Drogo
 Baggins  (Bilbo's  first  cousin).  So  Frodo (=  Bingo) is  Bilbo's first
 cousin  once  removed  both  on  Took  side  and   on  Baggins.   Also  he
 has as proper name Baggins.                                               
  [Frodo struck out] No - I am now too used to Bingo.                      
  Frodo  [i.e.  Took]  and  Odo  are  in  the  know  and  see Bingo  off at
 gate  after  the Party.  Would it  not be  well to  cancel sale,  and have
 Odo  as  heir  and  in  charge?  -  though  many  things  could  be  given
 away. The Sackville-Bagginses could quarrel with Odo?                     
  Frodo  (and  possibly  Odo)  go  on  the  first  stage  of  road (because
 Frodo's news about Black Riders is necessary) [see pp. 54 - 5].           
  But   Frodo   says   goodbye   at  Bucklebury.   Only  Merry   and  Bingo
 ride  on  into  exile  -  because  Merry  insists.  Bingo  originally  in-
 tended to go alone.                                                       
  Probably  best   would  be   to  have   only  Frodo   Took  -   who  sees
 Bingo  to  Bucklebury;  and  then   Merry.  Cut   out  Odo.   Even  better
 to  have  Frodo  and  Merry  at  the  gate:   Frodo  says   goodbye  then,
 and is left in charge  of the  Shire [i.e.  'in the  Shire', at  Bag End].
 Merry see Black Riders in North.                                          
                                                                          
 All of this, from 'No - I am now  too used  to Bingo',  was struck  out in
 pencil,  and  at  the  same  time  my  father  wrote  'Sam Gamgee'  in the
 margin, and  to 'Bingo  originally intended  to go  alone' he  added 'with
 Sam'. It may be that this is where he first set down Sam Gamgee's name.
 There is a first hint here, in 'Frodo says goodbye at Bucklebury',  of the
 hobbit  who   would  remain   behind  at   Crickhollow  when   the  others
 entered the Old Forest; while  'Too many  hobbits' and  'Cut out  Odo' are
 the first signs of what before long would  become a  major problem  and an
 almost impenetrable confusion.                                            
 The  genealogy  as  it  now  stood  in  the  fourth  version  of  'A Long-

                                     
                                                                                   
 expected  Party'  is  found on  p. 37.  Bingo was  already Bilbo's  first cousin
 once  removed  on  the  Took  side,  but  his  father  was  Rollo   Bolger  (and
 when  Bilbo  adopted  him   he  changed   his  name   from  Bolger   to  Bolger-
 Baggins).   With   the  appearance   of  Drogo   Baggins,  Bingo   would  become
 Bilbo's  first  cousin  once  removed  on  the  Baggins   side  also:   we  must
 suppose  that  Drogo's  father  was  to  be  brother  of  Bilbo's  father  Bungo
 Baggins.  In  the  later  genealogy  Drogo  became  Bilbo's  second  cousin,  as
 Gaffer  Gamgee  explained  to  his  audience  at  The Ivy  Bush: 'so  Mr. Frodo
 is  [Mr.  Bilbo's]  first and  second cousin,  once removed  either way,  as the
 saying is, if you follow me' (FR p. 3x).                                           
    An   abandoned   genealogy   on   one   of  these   pages  shows   my  father
 evolving   the   Baggins  pedigree.   This  little   table  begins   with  Inigo
 Baggins  (for  a  previous  holder  of  this  name  see  p.  17), whose  son was
 Mungo  Baggins,  father  of  Bungo:  Mungo,   first  appearing   here,  survived
 into  the  final  family  tree.  Bungo  has  a sister  Rosa, who  married 'Young
 Took';  Rosa  also  survived,  but  not  as  Bilbo's aunt  - she  became Bungo's
 first cousin, still  with a  Took husband  (Hildigrim). In  this table  Drogo is
 Bungo's brother, but it was at this point that the table was abandoned.            
    The reference in this note to the 'sale' is on the face of it  very puzzling.
 'A  Long-expected  Party'  was  still  in its  fourth version  - when  the Party
 was  given  by  Bingo  Bolger-Baggins,  and  the   major  revision   whereby  it
 reverted  to  Bilbo  had  not  yet   been  undertaken.   Then  what   'sale'  is
 referred  to?  There  has  been  no sale  of Bag  End: Bingo  'devised delivered
 and  made  over  by  free  gift  the  desirable  property'  to   the  Sackville-
 Bagginses  (p.  39).  The  sale  of  Bag  End  to  the  Sackville-Bagginses only
 arose  with  the  changed  story.  There  is  however  another reference  to the
 sale, in a scribbled  list of  the days  of the  hobbits' journey  from Hobbiton
 found  on  the  manuscript  of  the  Troll  Song  which  Bingo  was  to  sing at
 Bree (p. 142 note  11):  this list  begins 'Party  Thursday, Friday  "Sale" and
 departure  of  Odo,  Frodo,  and Bingo,'  etc. The  fact that  the word  is here
 enclosed  in  inverted  commas  may  suggest  that  my  father  merely   had  in
 mind  the  auction  of  Bag  End  to  which  Bilbo  returned at  the end  of The
 Hobbit:  the  earlier  clear-out of  Bilbo's home,  which was  a sale,  made the
 word  a  convenient  if  misleading  shorthand  for  the  clear-out  in  the new
 story, which was not a sale.                                                      
                                                                                   
    At the foot of  the page  the following  note was  hastily jotted  in pencil,
 and then struck out:                                                               
                                                                                   
          (3) Gandalf is against Bingo's telling anyone where he is off to. Bingo
          is to take Merry. Bingo is  reluctant to  give pain  to Odo  and Frodo.
          He  tells  them  -  suddenly  saying  goodbye,  and  Frodo  (Odo) meets
          what looks like a hobbit  on the  way up  hill. He  asks after  Bingo -
          and  Frodo  or  Odo  tells  him  he  is  off  to  Bucklebury.  So Black
          Riders know and ride after Bingo.                                         

                                                        
                                                                          
 This is the embryo of the final story, that a Rider came and spoke to     
 Gaffer Gamgee, who sent him on to Bucklebury (FR p. 85).                  
                                                                          
 (4) Sting. Did Bilbo take this?  What of  the armour?  Various possibili-
     ties:  (a)  Bingo  has  armour,  but  loses  it  in  Barrow;  (b) Gandalf
     urges  him  to  take  armour,  but  it  is  heavy  and  he  leaves  it at
     Bucklebury; (c)  he likes  it, and  it saves  him in  the Barrow,  but is
     stolen at Bree.                                                       
                                                                          
 The point is,  of course,  that he  cannot be  wearing armour  on Weather-
 top.  With  this note  compare the  mention in  the original  'scheme' for
 Chapter  IX  (p.  126)  of  'Ring-mail  of  Bingo  in  barrow' -  this was
 apparently  to  be  an  element  in 'some  explanations' when  the hobbits
 reached Rivendell.                                                        
  Another note, on another page, is almost  the same  as this,  but asserts
 that Bilbo did take Sting, and says that if Bingo's  armour was  stolen at
 Bree 'discovery  of the  burgled rooms  is before  night.' The  meaning of
 this is presumably that according to the existing story (pp. 162 -  3) the
 hobbits had  taken all  their belongings  out of  the bedrooms  into their
 parlour before the attack, and that this would have to be changed.        
  In FR (pp. 290  - 1)  Bilbo gave  Sting to  Frodo at  Rivendell, together
 with the coat of mithril.                                                 
                                                                          
 (5) Bree-folk are  not to  be hobbits.  Bring in  bit about  the upstairs
     windows.  As  a  result  of  the  hobbits not  liking it,  landlord gives
     them  rooms  on  side  of  the  house  where second  floor is  level with
     ground owing to hill-slope.                                           
                                                                          
 The 'bit  about the  upstairs windows'  is presumably  the passage  in the
 original Chapter III (pp. 92 -  3) where  the hobbits,  approaching Farmer
 Maggot's, discuss the inconveniences of living  on more  than one  Hoor. -
 In fact, in the original beginning of the Prancing  Pony chapter  (p. 132)
 the  people  of  Bree  were  primarily  Men  (with 'hobbits  about', 'some
 higher up on the slopes of  Bree-hill itself,  and many  in the  valley of
 Combe on the east side'); so that  this new  idea was,  to some  extent, a
 reversion. But a pencilled note on the same  page, added  in afterthought,
 asks: 'What is to happen at Bree now? What kind of talk  can give  away Mr
 Hill?' - and I take the implication of this to be that the  Bree-folk were
 now  to  be  exclusively  Men  (for they  would be  less curious  and less
 informed about the Shire). See p. 236.                                    
                                                                          
 (6) Rangers are best not as hobbits,  perhaps. But  either Trotter  (as a
     ranger)  must  be  not  a  hobbit,  or  someone  very  well  known:  e.g.
     Bilbo.  But the  latter is  awkward in  view of  'happily ever  after'. I
     thought  of  making  Trotter  into  Fosco  Took  (Bilbo's  first  cousin)
     who  vanished  when  a  lad,  owing  to  Gandalf.  Who  is   Trotter?  He
     must   have  had   some  bitter   acquaintance  with   Ring-wraiths  &c.

                                       
                                                                             
 This  note  on  Trotter  is  to  be  taken  with Bingo's  feeling that  he had
 met  Trotter  before,  and  should  be  able to  think of  his true  name (see
 p.  214).  Bilbo's  first  cousin Fosco  Took has  not been  mentioned before;
 possibly he was to be  the son  of Bilbo's  aunt Rosa  Baggins, who  married a
 Took, according to  the little  genealogical table  described above  (p. 222).
 The  ascription  of  Fosco  Took's  vanishing  to  Gandalf  looks back  to the
 beginning  of  The  Hobbit,  where  Bilbo says  to him.  "Not the  Gandalf who
 was responsible for so  many quiet  lads and  lasses going  off into  the Blue
 for mad adventures?'                                                         
  There  is  here  the first  suggestion that  my father,  in his  pondering of
 the mystery of Trotter, saw the  possibility of  his not  being a  hobbit. But
 this note, like several of the others, is elliptically expressed.  The meaning
 is,  I  think:  If  rangers  are  not  hobbits,  then Trotter  is not;  but if
 nonetheless he is both, he must be a hobbit very well known.                 
                                                                             
    (7) Bingo must NOT put on his Ring when Black Riders go by - in           
    view  of  later  developments. He  must think  of doing  so but           
    somehow  be  prevented.  Each  time  the  temptation  must grow           
    stronger.                                                                 
                                                                             
 This  refers  to the  original second  chapter, pp.  54, 58.  For the  ways in
 which  in  the  later  story  Frodo  was  prevented from  putting on  the Ring
 see FR pp.  84, 88.  'Later developments'  refers of  course to  the evolution
 of  the  concept of  the Ring  that had  by now  supervened: the  Riders could
 see  the Ringbearer,  as he  could see  them, when  he put  it on  his finger.
 The  temptation  to  do  so  arose  from  the  Ring-wraiths'  power   to  com-
 municate  their  command  to  the  Ringbearer  and  make  it  appear   to  him
 that  it  was  his  own  urgent  desire  (see p. 199); but  Bingo must  not be
 allowed to surrender to the temptation until  the disaster  in the  dell under
 Weathertop.                                                                  
                                                                             
    (8)  Some  reason  for  Gandalf's  uneasiness  and  the  flight   of  Bingo
    which   does   not   include   Black   Riders   must   be   found.  Gandalf
    knew  of  their  existence  (of  course),  but  had no  idea they  were out
    yet.  But  Gandalf  might  give  some  kind  of  warning  against   use  of
    Ring  (after  he  leaves  Shire?).  Perhaps  the  idea  of  suddenly  using
    Ring  at  party  as  a final  joke should  be a  Bingoism, and  contrary to
    Gandalf (not approved, as in my foreword).                                
                                                                             
 The 'foreword' referred to  here is  the text  given on  pp. 76  ff., earliest
 form  of  FR  Chapter  z  'The  Shadow of  the Past',  - where  indeed Gandalf
 does not merely 'approve' the idea, but actually suggests it (p. 84).        
  As regards the first  sentence of  this note,  in the  'foreword' there  is a
 reference to 'certain strange signs and  portents of  trouble brewing  after a
 long time of peace and quiet', but there is  no indication  of what  they were
 (p. 85 note 9). In  the same  text Gandalf  says that  'Gollum is  very likely
 the beginning of our present trouble', but  if 'our  present trouble'  was the
 fact  that  the  Dark  Lord  was  known  to  Gandalf  to  be seeking  the only

                                                                           
                                                                             
 missing Ring in the direction of the  Shire, it  is in  no way  explained how
 he knew this. This was  a very  serious problem  in the  narrative structure:
 Gandalf cannot  know of  the coming  of the  Ring-wraiths, for  if he  had he
 would  never have  allowed Bingo  and his  companions to  set off  alone. The
 solution  would  require  complex  restructuring  of  parts  of  the  opening
 narrative  as  it  now  stood,  in  respect  of  Gandalf's  movements  in the
 summer of that year (these in  turn involved  with the  changed story  of the
 Birthday Party); and would ultimately lead to Isengard.                      
                                                                             
       (9)  Why  was  Gandalf  hurrying? Because  Dark Lord  knew of  him and
       hated  him.  He  had to  get quick  to Rivendell,  and thought  he was
       drawing pursuit off Bingo.  Also he  knew there  was a  council called
       at  Rivendell  for  mid-September  (Gloin &c.  coming to  see Bilbo?).
       It  was  postponed  when  the  news  of   the  Black   Riders  reached
       Rivendell and was not held till Bingo arrived.                         
                                                                             
 For the  idea that  Gandalf was  attempting to  draw off  the pursuit  of the
 Black Riders see p. 173  note 8;  cf. also  his words  to Bingo  at Rivendell
 (p. 211): 'But things are moving fast, even faster than I  feared. I  had to
 get here quickly. But if I had known the Riders were already out!'          
   This is  probably the  point at  which the  idea of  the Council  of Elrond
 arose,  though there  have been  previous mentions  of a  'consultation' with
 Elrond when the hobbits reached Rivendell (pp. 126, 214).                    
                                                                             
 (10) Should  the Elves  have Necromancer-rings?  See note  about their
       'being  in  both  worlds'.  But  perhaps  only the  High Elves  of the
       West?  Also  perhaps  Elves  -   if  corrupted   -  would   use  rings
       differently: normally they were visible  in both  worlds all  the time
       and equally with a ring they could appear only in  one if  they chose.
                                                                             
 In the earliest statement about Elves and the Rings (p. 75)  it is  said that
 'the  Elves  had  many,  and  there  are  now many  elfwraiths in  the world,
 but  the  Ring-lord  cannot  rule  them';  this was  repeated exactly  in the
 'foreword' (p.  78), but  without the  words 'but  the Ring-lord  cannot rule
 them.' I have found no 'note'  about the  Elves 'being  in both  worlds', but
 my father may  have been  referring to  Gandalf's words  in the  last chapter
 (p. 212): '[The Elves of Rivendell] fear  no Ring-wraiths,  for they  live at
 ence in both worlds,  and each  world has  only half  power over  them, while
 they  have  double  power  over  both.'  With  his  remark here  'But perhaps
 only the High Elves of the West [are in both worlds]? ' cf. the final form of
 this same passage in  FR (p.  235): 'They  do not  fear the  Ringwraiths, for
 those who  have dwelt  in the  Blessed Realm  live at  once in  both worlds,
 and against both the Seen and the Unseen they have great power.'             
                                                                             
 (11) At Rivendell Bilbo must be seen by Bingo &c.                            
 Sleeping - in retirement?                                                    
 Shadows gathering in the South. Lord of Dale is suspected of                 
 being secretly corrupted. Strange men are seen in Dale?                      

                                                       
                                                                                
 What  happened  to  Balin,   Ori,  and   Oin?  They   went  out   to  colonize
 -  being  told  of  rich hills  in the  South. But  after a  time no  word was
 heard   of   them.   Dain   feared   the   Dark   Lord   -   rumour   of   his
 movements   reached   him.   (One   idea   was  that   dwarves  need   a  Ring
 as  foundation   of  their   hoard,  and   either  Balin   or  Dain   sent  to
 Bilbo  to  discover  what   had  become   of  it.   The  dwarves   might  have
 received   threatening   messages   from   Mordor   -   for   the   Lord  sus-
 pected that the One Ring was in their hoards.)                                  
                                                                                
 The  thought  that  Trotter  was  really  Bilbo is  obviously not  present here;
 and cf. the early outline given on p. 126: 'At Rivendell sleeping Bilbo'.       
 An  isolated  note  elsewhere * says:  'Gloin  has  come  to  see   Bilbo.  News
 of the  world. Loss  of the  colony of  Balin &c.'  But the  'rich hills  in the
 South' in note (11)  are probably  the first appearance of  the idea  of Moria,
 deriving  from  The  Hobbit  -  though  the  absence  of  the  name  here  might
 suggest that the identification had not  yet been  made. Cf.  also the  notes at
 the end of the abandoned  first draft  of the  last chapter  (p. 210):  'What of
 Balin  etc.  They  went  to  colonize  (Ring  needed to  found colony?)'  In the
 earliest  account  of  the  Rings  (p.  75)  it  was   said  that   the  Dwarves
 probably  had  none  ('some  say  the  rings don't  work on  them: they  are too
 solid'); but in  the 'foreword'  (p. 78)  Gandalf tells  Bingo that  the Dwarves
 were  said  to  have  had  seven,  'but  nothing could  make them  invisible. In
 them  it  only  kindled  to flames  the fire  of  greed,  and the  foundation of
 each of the seven hoards of the Dwarves of old was a golden ring.'              
 Above  the  words  One  Ring  at  the  end  of  note  (11)  my   father  wrote
 missing.  He  may  therefore  have  meant  only  'the  one  missing  Ring',  but
 the fact that he used capital  letters suggests  its great  importance -  and in
 the  'foreword'  the  missing  Ring  is  the  'most precious  and potent  of his
 Rings' (pp. 81, 87).                                                           
                                                                                
 (12) Bilbo's ring proved to be the one missing Ring - all others had            
 come back to Mordor: but this one had been lost.                                
 Make  it taken  from the  Lord himself  when Gilgalad  wrestled with            
 him, and taken by a flying Elf. It  was more  powerful than  all the            
 other rings. Why did the Dark Lord desire it so?                                
                                                                                
 That  Bilbo's  Ring  was  the  one  missing  Ring,  and  that  it  was  the most
 potent of them all, is  (as just  noted) stated  in the  'foreword' -  the first
 sentence of note (12) is the restatement of an  existing idea.  What is  new is
 the  linking  up  of  its  earlier  history  to  Gil-galad's wrestling  with the
 Necromancer  (see  p.  216);  in  the  'foreword'  (p.  78)  Gollum's  Ring  had
 fallen 'from the hand  of an  elf as  he swam  across a  river; and  it betrayed
 him, for he  was flying  from pursuit  in the  old wars,  and he  became visible
                                                                                
 (* This note was in fact written in ink across the faint pencilled outline for the
 story of the Barrow-wight (p. 125), and is presumably a thought that came  to my
 father while he was thinking about the story of the  arrival in  Rivendell which
 comes at the end of this outline (p.126).)                                      

 
                                                                                   
 to  his  enemies,  and  the  goblins  slew  him.'  This  is  where the  story of
 Isildur  began;  but  now  the  Elf  (later  to  become Isildur  the Numenorean)
 has  it  from  Gil-galad,  who  took  it from  the Dark  Lord. And  the question
 is  asked:  'Why  did the  Dark Lord  desire it  so?' Which  means, since  it is
 already  conceived  to  be  the  most potent  of the  Rings and  therefore self-
 evidently  a  chief  object  of  the  Dark  Lord's  desire,  'In  what  did  its
 potency consist?'*                                                                 
   Subsequently   my   father  pencilled   rapid  additions   to  the   note.  He
 marked  the  words  'all  others  had come  back to  Mordor' for  rejection; and
 to the words 'It was more powerful than all the other rings' he added:             
                                                                                   
   though  its  power  depended  on  the  user  -  and  its  danger:  the simpler
   the  user  and the  less he  used it.  To Gollum  it just  helped him  to hunt
   (but  made   him  wretched).   To  Bilbo   it  was   useful,  but   drove  him
   wandering  again.  To  Bingo  as  Bilbo.  Gandalf   could  have   trebled  his
   power - but he dare  not use  it (not  after he  found out  all about  it). An
   Elf  would  have  grown  nearly  as  mighty  as  the  Lord,  but   would  have
   become dark.                                                                     
                                                                                   
 At  this  time  also  he  underlined  the words  'Why did  the Dark  Lord desire
 it so?', put an exclamation mark against them, and wrote:                          
                                                                                   
   Because  if  he  had it  he could  see where  all the  others were,  and would
   be  master  of  their  masters  -  control  all  the  dwarf-hoards,   and  the
   dragons,  and know  the secrets  of the  Elf-kings, and  the secret  [? plans]
   of evil men.                                                                     
                                                                                   
 Here  the  central  idea of  the Ruling  Ring is  clearly present  at last,  and it
 may  be  that  it was  here that  it first  emerged. But  the note  in ink  and the
 pencilled  addition  (a  faint  scribble  now  only  just  legible)  were obviously
 written at different times.                                                        
                                                                                   
   On  the  reverse  of  the  second  page  of  these notes  is the  following in
 pencil:                                                                            
                                                                                   
 (13) Simpler Story.                                                                
      Bilbo disappears on his 100th [written above: 111] Birthday                
                                                                                   
 (* Humphrey Carpenter (Biography, p. 188) cites this note, but interprets it to     
  be the moment at which the idea of the Ruling Ring emerged:     
  There was also the problem of why the Ring seemed so important to     
  everyone - this had not yet been established clearly. Suddenly an idea     
  occurred to him, and he wrote: 'Bilbo's ring proved to be the one ruling     
  Ring - all others had come back to Mordor: but this one had been lost.' The     
  one ruling ring that controlled all the others...     
 But the note in question most certainly says 'Bilbo's ring proved to be the one
 missing Ring' (as the following words show in any case), not 'the one ruling Ring'.
  There would be no need to ask 'Why did the Dark Lord desire it so?' if the     
  conception of the Ruling Ring emerged here.)    

                                                                  
                                                                            
 party. Bingo is his heir - much to the annoyance of the Sackville-          
    Bagginses.                                                               
 ['If   you  want   to  know   what  lay   behind  these   mysterious  events
 we  must  go  back  a   month  or   two.'  Then   have  a   conversation  of
 Bilbo and Gandalf.j                                                         
    The   talk   dies   down;   and   Gandalf   is   seldom  seen   again  in
 Hobbiton.                                                                   
    Next  chapter  begins  with  Bingo's  life.  Gandalf's   furtive  visits.
 Conversation.   Bingo   is   bored   by   Shire   (ring-restlessness?):  and
 makes  up  his  mind  to  go  and  look   for  Bilbo.   Also  he   has  been
 rather  reckless  and  the  money  is   running  out.   So  he   sells  Bag-
 end  to  the  Sackville-Bagginses  who  thus  get  it  go  years  too  late,
 pockets  the   money,  and   goes  off   when  72  (144) -  same  tendency
 to   longevity   as   Bilbo   had   had.   Gandalf   encourages    him   for
 reasons  of  his  own.  But  warns  him   not  to   use  the   Ring  outside
 the Shire - if he  can help  it [cf.  note (8)].  Bilbo used  it for  a last
 big  jest,  but  you  had  better   not.  (Bingo   does  not   tell  Gandalf
 that looking for Bilbo was his motive).                                     
                                                                            
 All this  was subsequently  struck through;  and the  passage which  is here
 enclosed in square brackets was struck out separately,  perhaps at  the time
 of writing.                                                                 
 The narrative structure in its principal relations is now that of  the final
 story:                                                                      
 Bilbo disappears (putting on the Ring) at his 111th birthday  party, and
 leaves Bingo as his heir.                                                   
 Years  after,  Gandalf  talks  to  Bingo  at  Bag End;  Bingo is  anxious to
 leave  for  his  own  reasons,  and  Gandalf  encourages  him  to   go  (but
 apparently  without  telling  him   much,  though   he  warns   him  against
 using the Ring).                                                            
 Although  the  Party  now  reverts  to  Bilbo,  and  is  held  on  his 111th
 birthday  -  his  age  when he  departed out  of the  Shire in  the existing
 version of 'A Long-expected Party' (p. 40), Bingo still leaves at the age of
 72 - his age when it  was he  who gave  the Party.  The bracketed  figure 144
 is presumably Bilbo's  age at  the time,  as in  the existing  version, from
 which it follows that at the time of  Bilbo's Farewell  Party Bingo  was 39;
 the total of their  two ages  was 150.  But what  my father  had in  mind on
 this point cannot be said, for he never wrote the story in this form.       
 The  bracketed  passage  suggests  that some  account would  be given,  in a
 conversation between  Bilbo and  Gandalf a  month or  two before  the party,
 of what had led up to Bilbo's decision to leave the Shire  in this  way; and
 this account would follow the opening  chapter describing  the festivity.
 What  this  conversation  would  be  about  is  suggested by  another note,
 doubtless written at the same time:                                         
 Place  'Gollum'  chapter after  'Long-expected party':  with a  heading: 'If

 you  want  to  know  what  lay behind  these mysterious  events, we  must go
 back a month or two.'                                                       
 This  presumably  means  that  my   father  was   thinking  of   making  the
 conversation  between  Bilbo  and  Gandalf  before  the Party  (but standing
 in the  narrative after  it) cover  the story  of Gollum  and the  Ring. The
 'Gollum chapter' would thus be in its final place,  though the  context here
 suggested for it would be entirely changed.                                 
 Lastly, a scribbled note reads:                                             
 (14) Bilbo carries off 'memoirs' to Rivendell.                              

