 THE SECOND PHASE.

                                     XIV.                                  
                             RETURN TO HOBBITON.                           
                                                                          
 My father now settled at last for the 'simpler story' which he  had roughed
 out in the Queries and Alterations (note 13); and  so the  Birthday Party
 at Bag End returns again  to Bilbo,  with whom  it had  begun (pp.  13, 19,
 40).  The  following  rough  outline  no  doubt  immediately  preceded  the
 rewriting of the  opening chapter:  the fifth  version, and  an exceedingly
 complicated document.                                                     
                                                                          
 Bilbo   disappears  on   his  111th  birthday.   'Long-expected  Party'
 chapter'   suitably   altered   up  to   point  where   Gandalf  disappears
 into   Bag-End.   Then   a   short   conversation   between   Gandalf   and
 Bilbo inside.                                                             
  Bilbo   says   it   is   becoming  wearisome   -  stretched   feeling.  He
 must  get  rid  of  it.  Also he  is tired  of Hobbiton,  he feels  a great
 desire  to  go  away.   Dragon  gold   curse?  or   Ring.  Where   are  you
 going?  I  don't  know.  Take  care!  I  don't  care.  He  gets  Gandalf to
 promise  to  hand  on  Ring  to  his  heir  Bingo.  He leaves  it to  him -
 but  I  don't  want  him to  worry or  to try  and follow:  not yet.  So he
 does  not  even  tell  Bingo  of  the joke.  At end  of chapter  make Bilbo
 say  goodbye  to  Gandalf  at  gate,  hand  him   a  package   (with  Ring)
 for Bingo, and disappear.                                                 
  Chapter   11   is  then   Bingo.  Furtive   visits  of   Gandalf.  Gandalf
 urges him to go  off -  for reasons  of his  own. Bingo  on his  side never
 tells  Gandalf  that  looking  for  Bilbo  is  his  great  desire.  Gandalf
 does  not  [?  tell?  talk]  of  the  Ring. The  Gollum business  must come
 in  later  (at  Rivendell)  -  after  Bingo  has  met  Bilbo;  and  Gandalf
 has  now  found  out  much  more.   It  will   probably  be   necessary  to
 run  this  Chapter  I I  on to  head of  present II  'Two's company  - and
 three's more'.(2)                                                         
                                                                          
  The  fourth  version  of  'A  Long-expected  Party'  had  in  fact reached
 quite an advanced stage in most respects - in  some respects  virtually the
 final form; but the Party  was Bingo's  on his 72nd birthday,  Bilbo having
 quietly disappeared out of the  Shire for  good thirty-three  years before,
 when  he  was  111  and  Bingo  was  39,  and  apart  from  providing  the
 fireworks Gandalf played no part in the chapter at all.                   
  The outline just given  says that  the chapter  must be  'suitably altered
 up  to  the point  where Gandalf  disappears into  Bag-End', and  the story


                                     
                                                                           
 now  begins:  'When  Bilbo  Baggins  of  the  well-known   Hobbiton  family
 prepared  to  celebrate  his  one-hundred-and-eleventh  (or eleventy-first)
 birthday, there  was some  talk in  the neighbourhood,'  etc. (see  pp. 28,
 36). The fourth version is then followed (3) as far as 'And if he was  in, you
 never knew who you would  find with  him: hobbits  of quite  poor families,
 or folk from distant villages, dwarves, and even sometimes elves'  (p. 36);
 here a new passage concerning Gandalf and Bilbo was introduced.            
                                                                           
  Gandalf  the  wizard,  too,  was  sometimes  seen   going  up   the  hill.
 People  said  Gandalf  'encouraged'  him,  and  accused  him  in   turn  of
 'encouraging'   some   of   his   more   lively   nephews    (and   removed
 cousins),  especially  on  the  Took  side;  but  what  exactly  they meant
 was  not  clear.   They  may   have  been   referring  to   the  mysterious
 absences   from   home,   and   to   the  strange   habit  Bilbo   and  his
 encouraged  young  friends   had  of   walking  all   over  the   Shire  in
 untidy clothes.                                                            
  As  time  wore  on  the  prolonged  vigour,   not  to   say  youthfulness,
 of   Mr   Bilbo   Baggins   also   became  the   subject  of   comment.  At
 ninety  he  seemed  much  the  same  as  ever  he  had  been.  At  99  they
 began   to   call   him  'well-preserved';   but  'unchanged'   would  have
 been  nearer  the  mark.  Nevertheless  he  surprised  them  all  that year
 by  making  a  considerable  change  in  his  habits:  he  adopted  as  his
 heir   his   favourite   and    most   completely    'encouraged'   nephew,
 Bingo.  Bingo  Baggins  was  then  a  mere  lad  of 27,(4) and was strictly
 speaking  not  Bilbo's  nephew  (a  title  he  used  rather  loosely),  but
 both  his  first  and  his  second  cousin,  once  removed  in  each case,(5)
 but   he   happened   to  have   the  same   birthday,  September   22,  as
 Bilbo,  which  seemed  an  additional  link  between  them.(6) He  was  the
 son  of  poor  Primula  Brandybuck  and   [>  who   married  late   and  as
 last   resort]  Drogo   Baggins  (Bilbo's   second  cousin   but  otherwise
 quite unimportant).                                                        
                                                                           
  In Queries and Alterations, note a, my father  had said  that he  was 'too
 used to Bingo' to change his name  to Frodo,  but he  was now  following up
 the suggestions in that note that Bolger-Baggins ('a  bad name')  should be
 got rid of, and that  Bingo should  be a  Baggins in  his own  right. Later
 in  this  passage Drogo  takes over  the rumoured  boating accident  on the
 Brandywine  from  Rollo  Bolger  (see   p.  37):   some  said   that  Drogo
 Baggins  had died  of over-eating  while staying  with the  old gormandizer
 Gorboduc; others said that it was his weight that had sunk the boat.' It is
 now told that Bingo was twelve years old at the time, and that he          
                                                                           
 afterwards lived mostly with his grandfather [Gorboduc Brandy-             
 buck, p. 37] and his mother's hundred and one relatives in the             
 Great Hole of Bucklebury,(7) the ancestral and  very overcrowded             

 residence  of  the  gregarious  Brandybucks.  But  his  visits  to 'Uncle'
 Bilbo  became  more  and  more  frequent,  until  at  last,  as  has  been
 said, Bilbo adopted him, when he was a lad of 27.                         
   But  all  that  was  old  history.  People  had  become  in the  last 12
 years  used  to  having  Bingo   about.  Neither   Bilbo  nor   Bingo  did
 anything   outrageous.   Their   parties  were   sometimes  a   bit  noisy
 (and  not  too  select),  perhaps;  but  hobbits don't  mind that  kind of
 noise  now  and  again.  Bilbo  -   now  in   his  turn   'encouraged'  by
 Bingo  -  spent  his  money  freely,  and  his   wealth  became   a  local
 legend.  It  was  popularly believed  that most  of the  Hill was  full of
 tunnels  stuffed  with  gold  and  silver.  Now  it  was   suddenly  given
 out  that  Bilbo,  perhaps  struck  with  the  curiosity  of   the  number
 x  x  x,  was  planning  to  give something  quite unusual  in the  way of
 birthday-parties.  111  was  a  respectable  age  even   for  hobbits.(8)
 Naturally   tongues   wagged,   and   old   memories  were   stirred,  and
 new   expectations   aroused.   Bilbo's   wealth  was   guessed  afresh...
 (etc. as before, see p. 30) .                                             
                                                                          
   In the account of the  comings and  goings at  Bag End  there are  a few
 slight changes.  The Men  and the  waggon painted  with a  D (pp.  20, 30)
 have been removed, as proposed in  Queries and  Alterations (note  1), but
 Elves as well as  Dwarves are  still mentioned.  The bundles  of fireworks
 were labelled  not only  with a  big red  G but  also with (X)-  'That was
 Gandalf's mark' (the same rune appears in his  letter at  Bree and  in his
 note  left  on Weathertop).  The disappointed  children given  pennies but
 no fireworks are introduced (FR p. 33); and now at last appears the 'short
 conversation between  Gandalf and  Bilbo inside  Bag-End' sketched  in the
 outline on p. 233.                                                        
                                                                          
   Inside   Bag-End   Bilbo   and   Gandalf  were   sitting  at   the  open
 window  of  the  sitting-room  looking  west  onto  the  garden.  The late
 afternoon   was   bright   and   peaceful;  the   flowers  were   red  and
 golden;  snapdragons,  and  sunflowers,   and  nasturtians   trailing  all
 over the turf walls and peeping in at the windows.                        
   'How bright your garden is! ' said Gandalf.                             
   'Yes,' said Bilbo. 'I am very fond  indeed of  it, and  of all  the dear
 old Shire; but I think the time has come.'                                
   'You mean to go on with your plan then?' asked Gandalf.                 
   'Yes,  I  do,'  Bilbo  answered.  'I  have made  up my  mind at  last. I
 really  must  get  rid  of  It.(9) "Well-preserved"  indeed!'  he  snorted.
 'Why,  I feel  all thin  - sort  of stretched,  if you  know what  I mean:
 like a string  that won't  quite go  round the  parcel, or  - or  - butter
 that is scraped over too much bread. And that can't be right.'            
   'No!'  said  Gandalf  thoughtfully.  'No.  I daresay  your plan  is the

 best,  at  any rate  for you.  At least  at present  I know  nothing against
 it, and can think of nothing better.'                                       
    'Yes,  I  suppose  it  may  seem  a  bit  hard  on  Bingo,'  said  Bilbo.
 'But  what  can  I do?  I can't  destroy it,  and after  what you  have told
 me  I  am  not  going  to throw  it away;  but I  don't want  it, in  fact I
 can't  abide  it  any  more.  But  you  did  promise  me,  didn't   you,  to
 keep  an   eye  on   him,  and   help  him   if  he   needs  it   later  on?
 Otherwise, of course, I should have to.'                                    
    'I  will do  what I  can for  him,' said  Gandalf. 'But  I hope  you will
 take care of yourself.'                                                     
    'Take  care!  I  don't  care!'  said  Bilbo,  and  then   going  suddenly
 into  verse  (as  was  becoming  his  habit  more  and  more)  he   went  on
 in  a  low  voice looking  out of  the window  with a  far-away look  in his
 eyes:                                                                       
                           The Road etc. as II .5.                          
                                                                            
 (This is a reference to the typescript of 'Three's Company', p. 53).  All of
 this new passage, from the words 'I really must get rid  of It',  was struck
 out in pencil and marked 'Later' (see pp. 237 and 239 - 40).                
    The text continues: 'More carts rolled up  the Hill  next day,  and still
 more  carts.   There  might   have  been   some  grumbling   about  "dealing
 locally",' etc. (p. 20). From this point in the fourth  version (essentially
 the same  as the  third and  second, pp.  31, 28,  and as  FR) the  fifth of
 course very largely follows the old drafts, 'Bingo' being changed to 'Bilbo'
 where necessary. To  the guests  at the  select dinner  party are  now added
 members  of  the  families  of  Gawkroger (10) (Goodbody  in  FR) and Brock-
 house: the latter 'did not live  in the  Shire at  all, but  in Combe-under-
 Bree,  a  village  on  the  Eastern  Road   beyond  Brandywine.   They  were
 supposed to  be remotely  connected with  the Tooks,  but were  also friends
 Bilbo  had  made in  the course  of his  travels.' On  this see  Queries and
 Alterations note 5,  and my  comment on  it; cf.  also the  original Chapter
 VII (p. 137), of the hobbits  at The  Prancing Pony:  'there were  also some
 (to  hobbits)  natural  names  like  Banks,  Longholes,  Brockhouse... which
 were not unknown among the more rustic inhabitants of the Shire.'           
    A curious point is  that at  this stage  there were  'eight score  or one
 hundred and sixty'  guests at  the dinner  party in  the pavilion  under the
 tree, not 144; and in his speech Bilbo said: 'For  it is  of course  also the
 birthday  of  my  heir  and  nephew,  Bingo. Together  we score  one hundred
 and  sixty.  Your  numbers  were  chosen  to  fit  this  remarkable  total.'
 Emendations to the preceding  part of  the chapter  relate to  this: Bingo's
 age  at his  adoption was  changed from  27 to  37, so  that when  Bilbo was
 111 (twelve years later)  Bingo was  49 -  totalling 160.  My father  had of
 course  decided  -  the party  being Bilbo's,  and both  he and  Bingo being
 present - that the significance of the  number of  guests must  now relate,
 not as previously to the elder  hobbit's years,  but to  the total  of their

  combined  ages;  but why  he did  not stick  to 144 and reduce  Bingo's age
  accordingly to 144 minus 111 I cannot say.                                
    Bilbo now refers to its being the anniversary of his arrival by barrel at
  Lake-town; but there is still no flash when he stepped down and vanished.
    This part of the  text was  soon revised  - indeed  before the  story had
  gone  much  further,(11) and in a  rewritten version  of Bilbo's  speech the
  number of guests reverts to 144,  Bingo becomes  33 (which  is the  year of
  his  'coming  of age'),  and there  is a  blinding flash  of light  when he
  vanishes. Emendation to the earlier part  of the  text now  changed Bingo's
  age at adoption once more, and finally, to 21.                             
    In the hubbub that followed Bilbo's disappearance                        
                                                                            
  there  was  one  person  harder  hit  than  all  the  rest:  and  that  was
  Bingo.  He  sat  for  some  time  quite  silent  in  his  seat  beside  the
  empty  chair  of  his  uncle,  ignoring  all  remarks  and  questions;  and
  then  abandoning  the  party to  look after  itself he  slipped out  of the
  pavilion unnoticed.'                                                       
    'What   do   we   do   now?'   This   question   became  more   and  more
  popular,   and   louder   and   louder.   Suddenly  old   Rory  Brandybuck,
  whose  wits  neither  old  age,  nor  surprise,  nor  an  enormous  dinner,
  had  quite  clouded  was  heard  to  shout:  'I  never  saw  him  go. Where
  is  he  now,  anyway?   Where  is   Bilbo  -   and  Bingo,   too,  confound
  him?' There was no sign of their hosts, anywhere.                          
    As  a  matter  of  fact,  Bilbo  Baggins,  even while  he was  making his
  speech,  had  been  fingering  a  small  ring  in  his  pocket:  his  magic
  ring,  that  he  had  kept  secret  for  so  many  years.  As   he  stepped
  down he slipped it on - and was never seen in Hobbiton again.              
                                                                            
    There  now  enters  a wholly  new element  in the  narrative, and  it was
  clearly  at  this  time that  the passage  of conversation  between Gandalf
  and  Bilbo  inside  Bag End  before the  party was  largely struck  out and
  marked 'Later' (pp. 235 - 6); at this time also that that  conversation was
  re-extended from the point  where Bilbo  says 'Yes,  I do.  I have  made up
  my mind at last', as follows (cf. FR pp. 33 - 4):                         
                                                                            
           'Very well,' said Gandalf. 'I can see you mean to have your own
  way. I hope it will turn out all right - for all of us.'                   
    'I  hope  so,'  said   Bilbo.  'Anyway   I  mean   to  enjoy   myself  on
  Thursday, and have my little joke in my own way.'                          
    'Well,  I hope  you will  still be  laughing this  time next  year,' said
  Gandalf.                                                                   
    'And I hope you will, too,' retorted Bilbo.                              
                                                                            
    The  new  version  continues  (from 'and  he was  never seen  in Hobbiton
  again'):                                                                   

    He  walked  briskly  back  to  his  hole, and  stood listening  with a
 smile  for  a  moment  to  the   sounds  of   merrymaking  going   on  in
 various  parts  of the  field. Then  he went  in. He  took off  his party
 clothes,  folded  up  and  wrapped  in   tissue  paper   his  embroidered
 waistcoat  with  the  silk  [)  gold] buttons  and put  it away.  Then he
 put  on  some  old  and  untidy  garments,(13) and from  a  locked bottom
 drawer  (reeking  of  mothballs)  he  got  out  an old  cloak and  an old
 hood  that  seemed to  have been  laid up  as carefully  as if  they were
 very   precious,   though   they  were   so  weatherstained   and  mended
 that  their  original  colour  (probably  dark  green)  could  hardly  be
 guessed.  They  were  rather  too  big  for  him.  He  put a  large bulky
 envelope on the mantelpiece, on which was written BINGO.                   
    He  chose  his favourite  thick stick  from the  hall stand,  and then
 whistled.   Several   dwarves   appeared   from   various   rooms   where
 they had been busy.                                                        
    'Is   everything   ready?'   Bilbo   asked.   'Everything   packed  up
 [added: and labelled]?'                                                    
    'Everything,' they said.                                                
    'Well, let's start  then. Lofar,  you are  stopping behind,  of course
 [added:  for  Gandalf]:  please  make  sure  that  Bingo gets  the letter
 on  the  dining  room  mantelpiece  as soon  as he  comes in.  Nar, Anar,
 Hannar, are you ready?(14) Right. Off we go.'                               
    He stepped  out of  the front  door. It  was a  fine clear  night, and
 the black sky was full of stars. He  looked up,  sniffing the  air. 'What
 fun!'  he  said.  'What  fun  to  be  off  again  -  on  the   Road  with
 dwarves:  this  is what  I have  really been  longing-for for  years.' He
 waved  his  hand  to  the  door:  'Goodbye,'  he  said.  He  turned  away
 from  the lights  and voices  in the  field and  the tents,  and followed
 by  his  three  companions  went  round to  the garden  on the  west side
 of   Bag-End,   and   trotted   down   the   long   sloping   path.  They
 jumped  the  low  place  in  the  hedge  at  the bottom  and took  to the
 meadows, passing like a rustle in the grasses.                            
    At  the  bottom  of  the  Hill they  came to  a gate  opening on  to a
 narrow lane.  As they  climbed over,  a dark  figure in  a tall  hat rose
 up from under the hedge.                                                   
    'Hullo,  Gandalf!'  cried  Bilbo.  'I  wondered  if  you   would  turn
 up.                                                                        
    'And  I  wondered  if  you  would,'  replied  the  wizard; 'or  if you
 would  think  better  of  it.'  I  suppose you  feel that  everything has
 gone off splendidly, and just as you intended?'                              
    'Yes,'  said  Bilbo.  'Though  that  flash  was  surprising:  it quite

 startled  me,  let  alone  the  others.  A  little  addition of  yours, I
 suppose? '                                                              
   'It  was,'  answered  Gandalf.   'You  have   wisely  kept   that  Ring
 secret  all  these  years; and  it seemed  to me  necessary to  give them
 all  some  reason  to  explain  their  not  noticing your  sudden vanish-
 ment  [>  to  give  them  all  something   they  would   think  explained
 your sudden vanishment].'                                               
   'You  are  an  interfering  old  busybody,'   laughed  Bilbo;   'but  I
 expect you know best, as usual.'                                        
   'I  do,'  said  Gandalf,  'when  I  know  anything. But  I do  not feel
 too sure about the  whole affair.  Still, it  has now  come to  the final
 point.   You   have   had   your  joke,   and  successfully   alarmed  or
 offended  all  your  friends  and  relations, and  given the  whole Shire
 something  to  talk  about for  nine days  (or ninety-nine  more likely).
 Are you going to go any further? '                                      
   'Yes,  I  am,'  answered  Bilbo.(16) 'I  really  must  get  rid  of  It,
 Gandalf.  Well-preserved,  indeed,'  he  snorted. 'Why,  I feel  all thin
 - sort of stretched,  if you  know what  I mean:  like string  that won't
 quite  go  round  a  parcel,  or,  or,  butter that  is scraped  over too
 much bread. And that can't be right.'                                   
   'No,'  said  Gandalf  thoughtfully.  'No.  I was  afraid it  might come
 to that. I dare say your plan is the best, at any rate for you.  At least
 at  present  I  do  not  feel  I  know  enough  to say  anything definite
 against it.'                                                            
   'What  else  can  I  do?  I  can't  destroy the  thing, and  after what
 you  have  told  me  I  am not  going to  throw it  away. Oddly  enough I
 find  that  impossible  to  make  up  my  mind to  do -  I simply  put it
 back  in  my  pocket.  I  find  it very  hard even  to leave  behind! And
 yet  I don't  want it,  indeed I  can't abide  it any  more. But  you did
 promise  to keep  an eye  on Bingo,  didn't you,  and to  help him  if he
 needs it, later  on? Otherwise,  of course,  I should  hardly be  able to
 go. I should have to stop and put up with it.'                          
   'I  will  do  what  I  can  for  him,'  said  Gandalf.  'What  have you
 done with it meanwhile? '                                               
   'It  is  in  the  envelope  with  my  will and  other papers.  Lofar is
 giving it to Bingo as soon as he comes in.'                             
   'My   dear   Bilbo!   And   with   Otho  Sackville-Baggins   about  the
 place, and that Lobelia  wife of  his! Really  you are  getting reckless.
 And I suppose you left the door unlocked as usual?'                     
   'Yes, I am afraid  I did.  I rather  fancy Bingo  will be  creeping off
 home before anyone else.'                                               

   'Fancy  is  not  safe  enough!  But  you  may  be  right.  He  knows
 about it, of course?'                                                
   'He knows that I  have, or  had, the  Ring: he  has read  my private
 memoirs,(17) for one  thing;  and  he  also  has some  idea [>  he may
 have an  inkling] that  it has  some other  - er  - effects  than just
 making  you invisible  on occasion.  But he  doesn't, or  didn't, know
 quite what I was  beginning to  feel about  it. But  after all,  as it
 cannot  be  destroyed, and  can only  be handed  on -  it had  best be
 handed on to him: I chose him as  the best  in all  the Shire:  and he
 is my heir. He knows that I am leaving that to him with all  the rest.
 I don't suppose he would ask  to be  excused this  responsibility, and
 take only the money.'                                                
   'He will miss you pretty badly, you know? '                        
   'Yes, I found it very hard to make  up my  mind. It  is hard  on him
 - but not too  hard, I  think. The  time has  come for  him to  be his
 own master.  After all,  if things  had been  more -  er -  normal, he
 would  have  been  losing  me  soon  anyway,  if  he  had  not already
 done so. I am sorry to cheat all my dear people of  a grand  funeral -
 how they all did enjoy Old Took's - but there it is.'                
   'Does he know where you are going?'                                
   'No! I am not sure myself, really. And I think that is just  as well
 for everybody. He might want to follow me.'                          
   'So might I. I hope you will take care of yourself! '              
   'Take  care!  I  don't care.  And don't  be unhappy  about me:  I am
 as happy as ever I have been, and that is saying a  lot. But  the time
 has  come.  I  am  being swept  off my  feet,' he  added mysteriously,
 and  then  in  a low  voice as  if to  himself he  sang softly  in the
 darkness.                                                            
                                                                     
                The Road goes ever on and on                          
                  Down from the Door where it began.                
                Now far ahead the Road has gone,                    
                 And I must follow if I can,                         
               Pursuing it arith weary feet,                         
                   Until it joins some larger may,                    
                   Where many paths and errands meet.                 
                   And whither then? I cannot say.(18)                
                                                                     
 He  stopped  silent  a  moment.  Then 'Goodbye,  Gandalf! '  he cried,
 and  made  off  into  the  night.  Nar,  Anar,  and   Hannar  followed
 him.(19) Gandalf  remained by  the gate  for a  little, and  then sprang
 over it and made his way up the Hill.(20)                               

                                                 
                                                                              
  It  will  be  seen  that  in  this  passage,  far  different  from  that which
 occupies  the  same  narrative  place  in  FR  pp.  40  - 4,  my   father  was
 thinking  about  the  effect  of the  Ring on  its possessor  on very  much the
 same  lines  as  in  the  chapter  on  Gollum  (the 'foreword'),  pp. 79  - 80.
 Moreover  in  FR  the  conversation  -   and  quarrel   -  between   Bilbo  and
 Gandalf  takes  place  in  Bag  End,  so  that  the  elements  in  the  present
 version  of  Gandalf's   anxiety  about   the  Ring,   left  unguarded   in  an
 envelope  at  Bag  End,  and  his  going  up  the  Hill to  find Bingo,  do not
 arise; Gandalf was sitting there waiting for him when he came in.             
  The  clearing  up  of the  party follows  the earlier  version, of  course (FR
 p. 45); but  the end  of the  chapter exists  in two  variant forms,  marked as
 such.  One  of  the variants,  very much  longer than  the other  and preceding
 it, is itself heavily modified. To  look at  this first:  the list  of presents
 remains  the  same,  with  some  further  changes  in  the  names.(21) With 'Of
 course,  this  was  only a  selection of  the presents'  the new  text advances
 very  close  to  the  form  in  FR  (pp.  46-7),  with  the reflections  on the
 cluttered  nature   of  hobbit-holes   (on  which   Bingo  had   remarked:  'We
 soon shan't be able to sit down for stools or tell the time for clocks  in Bag-
 End'),  and  the  gifts  to Gaffer  Gamgee (but  Bilbo's collection  of magical
 toys, pp.  33, 38,  still remains);  the dozen  bottles of  Old Winyards  go to
 Rory  Brandybuck,  and  are  said  to  come  from  'the  south Shire',  not yet
 the Southfarthing.                                                            
  From  'not  a  penny piece  or a  brass farthing  was given  away' there  is a
 rejected  text  and a  replacement, differing  from each  other chiefly  in the
 arrangement  of  the  elements.  As  written  first,   the  Sackville-Bagginses
 are  introduced immediately,  demanding to  see the  will -  which is  given at
 length;(22) then follows  the  rumour  that  the  entire  contents  of  Bag  End
 were  being  distributed,  and  'in the  middle of  the commotion'  Bingo finds
 Lobelia investigating, ejects the  three young  hobbits, and  has a  fight with
 Sancho  Proudfoot;(23) and  the  passage  concludes  with   'The  fact   is  that
 Bilbo's money had become a legend...' (FR p. 48).                             
  In  the  replacement  text  the  structure  in FR  (pp.47-8) is  reached, with
 the  sole  important  difference  that  Merry's  role  is  taken  by  the dwarf
 Lofar,  who  had  stayed  behind  after  Bilbo's  departure  (p. 238);  and the
 only  minor  differences from  FR are  that Otho  Sackville-Baggins is  still a
 lawyer, the  date of  Bingo's entry  into his  inheritance is  stated (midnight
 on 22  September), the  witnessing of  the will  was by  three hobbits  of more
 than  33  years  old,  according  to  the  custom, and  the Sackville-Bagginses
 'more  than  hinted  that  he  or  the wizard  (or the  pair of  them together)
 were  at  the  bottom  of  the  whole  business.'  The  exchange  between Frodo
 and  Merry  on  the  subject  of  Lobelia's  calling Frodo  a Brandybuck  is of
 course  not  present  -  Bingo  merely  'shut  the  door  behind  her   with  a
 grimace.'                                                                     
  The  short  variant  is  very  short,  and  was not  adopted. The  large crowd
 who  arrived  at  Bag End  on the  morning after  the party  does no  more than
 go  away  again  when  they  see  a  notice  on  the  gate  saying:  'Mr  Bilbo

                                      
                                                                           
 Baggins has gone away. There  is no  further news.  Unless your  business is
 urgent,  please  do  not  knock  or  ring.  Bingo  Baggins.'  The Sackville-
 Bagginses  'thought  that  their  business  was  urgent.  They  knocked  and
 rang  several  times.' Admitted  by Lofar  the Dwarf,  the remainder  of the
 passage is the same as in the (revised) long variant and FR -  the interview
 between  Bingo  and  the  Sackville-Bagginses  in  the  study,  ending  with
 Bingo's telling Lofar not  to open  the front  door even  against battering-
 rams  (and  omitting  the  mopping-up  operations  against  the  three young
 hobbits  and  Sancho  Proudfoot).  Thus  the entire  'business' of  the pre-
 sents, and the invasion  of Bag  End, was  in this  variant removed.  For my
 father's intention here see p.276.                                         
  The  reappearance  of  Gandalf  at  Bag  End  now  enters  the  story,  and
 begins pretty well exactly  as in  FR (p.48),  but soon  significant differ-
 ences enter the conversation,  from the  point where  Gandalf says  to Bingo
 'What do you know already?' (FR p.49):                                     
                                                                           
  'Only Bilbo's tale of how he got it,(24) from that Gollum creature,         
 and how he used it afterwards, on his journey I mean. I don't think        
 he used it much after he came home; though he used to disappear            
 (or not be findable) rather mysteriously sometimes, if things were         
 a bit inconvenient. We saw the Sackville-Bagginses coming when             
 we were out walking one day, and he disappeared, and came out              
 from behind a hedge after they had gone by.(25) Being invisible has            
 its advantages.'                                                           
  'But it also has its disadvantages. It does not do much harm as a         
 joke, nor even to avoid "inconveniences" - but even these things .         
 have to be paid for. Also making you invisible, when you wish, is          
 not the only property of the Ring.'                                        
  'I know what you mean,' said Bingo; 'Bilbo did not seem to                
 change much. They called him well-preserved. But I must say                
 that also seems to me to have its advantages. I cannot make out            
 why the dear old thing left the Ring behind.'                              
  'No, I expect you cannot yet. But you may find out the                    
 disadvantages of that as well, in time. For instance, Bilbo seemed         
 a bit restless of late years, didn't he?'                                  
  'Yes, for quite a long time,'                                             
  'Well, I think that was a symptom too. I don't want to alarm              
 you, but I want you to be careful. Take care of the Ring, and take         
 care of yourself, and watch yourself. Don't use the Ring,(26) or let it       
 get any more, er, power over you than you can help. Keep it secret,        
 and let me know, if you hear, see, or feel anything at all odd.'           
  'All right. But what is all this about?'                                  
  'I am not quite sure. I begin to guess, and I don't like the              
 guesses. But I am now going off to find out as much as I can.              

                                       
                                                                        
 Before  I  have  done so,  I am  not going  to say  any more,  except to
 warn you, and to promise you what help I can give.'                     
  'But you say you are going off?'                                       
  'Yes, for a bit. But you'll be safe  for a  year or  two, in  any case.
 Don't  worry.  I  shall  come  and  see  you again  as soon  as I  can -
 quietly, you know. I don't think I  shall be  visiting the  Shire openly
 again  very  much.  I  find  I  have become  rather unpopular:  they say
 I  am  a nuisance  and a  disturber of  the peace;  and some  people are
 accusing  me of  spiriting Bilbo  away. It  is supposed  to be  a little
 plot between me and you (if you want to know).'                         
  'That  sounds  like  Otho   and  Lobelia.(27) How outrageous!   I  only
 wish  I  knew  why  and  where  old  Bilbo  has  gone.  Do  you?  Do you
 think  I  could  catch  him up  or find  him if  I went  off at  once? I
 would  give  Bag-end  and  everything in  it to  the Sackville-Bagginses
 if I could do that.'                                                    
  'I don't think  I should  try. Let  poor Bilbo  get rid  of the  Ring -
 which he could only  do (reluctantly)  by handing  it on  to you,  for a
 bit.(28) Do what he wished and hoped you would.'                           
  'What is that?'                                                        
  'Live on here; keep up Bag-end; guard the Ring - and wait.'            
  'All right - I will  try; but  I should  prefer to  go after Bilbo.(29) I
 don't know if that is a symptom, as  you call  it -  though I  have only
 had the Ring a day or less?'                                            
  'No,  not  yet.  It  merely  means  you  were  fond  of Bilbo.  He knew
 it  was hard  on you.  He hated  leaving you.  But there  it is.  We may
 all  understand  this better  before the  end. I  must say  goodbye now.
 Look  out  for  me  -  at  any  time, especially  unlikely ones.  If you
 really  need  me  send a  message to  the nearest  dwarves: I  shall try
 and give them some knowledge of where I am.(30) Goodbye!'                  
  Bingo  saw  him  off.  The  dwarf  Lofar  went  with  him   carrying  a
 large  bag.  They  walked  away  down  the  path  to   the  gate   at  a
 surprising  pace,(31) but  Bingo  thought   the  wizard   looked  rather
 bent,  almost  as  if  bowed  under  a  heavy  burden.  The  evening was
 closing  in,  and  he  soon vanished  into the  twilight. Bingo  did not
 see him again for a long time.                                          
                                                                        
  About  this  time my  father wrote  a new  experimental opening  to the
 chapter, in which the facts and assertions about the family history were
 communicated  through  the  talk  of  Gaffer  Gamgee,  Old  Noakes,  and
 Sandyman  the  miller  in The  Ivy Bush.  The mention  of Sam  Gamgee as
 the Bag End gardener shows that it was in fact written after  the second
 chapter, 'Ancient History', which now follows; for if this text had been
 already in existence my father would  not have  given an  explanation of

                                     
                                                                          
 who  Sam  Gamgee  was  when  he  appears  in  'Ancient History'  (p. 253).
 But it is convenient to notice it here.                                   
  This version of the conversation had  still a  good way  to go  before it
 reached the form in FR (pp. 30 - 2). The  opening of  the chapter  was now
 to be greatly compressed:                                                  
                                                                          
  When    Mr    Bilbo   Baggins    of   Bag-end,    Under-hill,   announced
 that  he  would  shortly  be   celebrating  his   eleventy-first  birthday
 with  a  party  of  special   magnificence,  there   was  much   talk  and
 excitement  in  Hobbiton.  Before  long  rumour   of  the   event  travel-
 led  all  over  the Shire,  and the  history and  character of  Mr Baggins
 became  once   again  the   most  popular   topic  of   conversation.  The
 older   folk   who   remembered  something   of  the   strange  happenings
 sixty  years  before  found  their   reminiscences  suddenly   in  demand,
 and  rose  to   the  gratifying   occasion  with   entertaining  invention
 when mere facts failed them.                                              
  No   one   had   a  more   attentive  audience   than  old   Ham  Gamgee,
 commonly  known  as  the  Gaffer.  He  held  forth  at the Ivy Bush,(32) a
 small  inn  on  the  Bywater  Road;  and  he  spoke  with  some authority,
 for  he  had  tended  the  garden  at  Bag-end  for  half  a  century, and
 had  helped  his  father  in the  same job  before that.  Now that  he was
 grown  old  and  creaky in  the joints  he had  passed the  job on  to one
 of his own sons, Sam Gamgee.                                              
                                                                          
 The subject of Bingo is treated thus:                                     
                                                                          
  'And  what  about   this  Mr   Bingo  Baggins   that  lives   with  him?'
 asked  old  Noakes  of  Bywater.(33) 'I hear  he  is coming  of age  on the
 same day.'                                                                
  'That's  right,'  said  the  Gaffer.  'He  has  the  same birthday  as Mr
 Bilbo,  September  the  twenty-second.  It  is  a  sort  of  link  between
 them,  as  you  might  say.  Not  but  what they  get on  remarkably well,
 and  have  done  all  the  last  twelve  years,  since  Mr  Bingo  came to
 Bag-end.  Very  much  alike  in  every  way,   they  are,   being  closely
 related.  Though  Mr   Bingo  is   half  a   Brandybuck  by   rights,  and
 that's  a queer  breed, as  I've heard  tell. They  fool about  with boats
 and  water,  and  that  isn't  natural.  Small  wonder  that  trouble came
 of it, I say.'                                                            
                                                                          
  For  the  rest,  Mr  Twofoot  of  Bagshot Row  does not  appear; Gorboduc
 Brandybuck is called by the  Gaffer 'the  head of  the family,  and mighty
 important down in Buckland, I'm told';  the miller  does not  suggest that
 there was  anything more  sinister in  the drowning  of Drogo  Baggins and
 his wife than Drogo's weight; the hobbit who introduces  the topic  of the
 tunnels packed with treasure inside the Hill is not 'a visitor from Michel

                  
                                                                             
 Delving' but 'one of the Bywater hobbits', and there are many differences
 of phrasing.                                                                 
                                                                             
                                     NOTES.                                    
                                                                             
 1.  My  father  actually  wrote  '"Unex[pected]P[arty]"  chapter'   -  think-
     ing of the first chapter  of The  Hobbit. Cf.  my suggestion  about his
     use of the word 'sale' in Queries and Alterations, note z.               
 2.  The  actual  title  of  Chapter  II  was  'Three's  Company  and  Four's
     More'  (p.  49).  -  A  pencilled  note  on the  same page  says: 'Should
     Bingo spend all  his money?  Is it  not better  he should  be sacrificing
     something? Though he must give out that he has spent it.'                
 3.  The  passage  about  Bilbo's  book  and  the  reception  accorded  to it,
     which  had  survived  unchanged  from  the  second  version (p.  19), was
     at  first  repeated  here,  but subsequently  replaced by  the following:
     He  told  many  tales  of  his  adventures, of   course,  to   those  who
     would  listen.  But  most  of  the hobbits  soon got  tired of  them, and
     only  one or  two of  his younger  friends ever  took them  seriously. It
     is  no  good  telling  ordinary  hobbits   about  dragons:   they  either
     disbelieve  you  or  want  to  disbelieve  you, and  in either  case stop
     listening.  As  he grew  older Bilbo  wrote his  adventures in  a private
     book  of  memoirs,  in  which  he  recounted  some  things  that  he  had
     never  spoken  about  (such  as  the  magic  ring);  but  that  book  was
     never  published  in  the  Shire,  and  he  never  showed  it  to anyone,
     except his favourite 'nephew' Bingo.                                     
 4.  This was Bingo's age at the time of  his adoption  in the  fourth version
     (p. 36), but it was changed in the course of the  writing of  the present
     text (see p. 236).                                                       
 5.  In  Queries  and  Alterations  (note  2)  the  suggestion was  that Drogo
     Baggins should be Bilbo's first cousin.                                  
 6.  This  remark  about  Bilbo  and  Bingo  having  the  same birthday  was a
     pencilled  addition,  but  the  idea  goes  back  to  the  third  version
     (p. 29),when Bingo was Bilbo's son.                                      
 7.  The  Great  Hole  of  Bucklebury:   Brandy  Hall   has  been   named  and
     described  in  the  original  version  of  'A  Short  Cut  to  Mushrooms'
                                                                             
     (p. 99).                                                                   
                                                                             
 8.  Added in pencil:
     and the  Old Took  himself had  only reached  the age  of 125 (though
     the title Old was bestowed  on him,  it is  true, not  so much  for his
     age  as  for  his oddity,  and because  of the  enormous number  of the
     young, younger, and youngest Tooks).                                     
 9.  This  was  to  be  the  first,  intentionally  obscure,   reference  to
     the  Ring  in the  story. With  the shortening  and alteration  of this
     initial  converation  between  Gandalf  and  Bilbo  before   the  Party
     (p. 237) this reference was  removed, and  it is  then first  spoken of
     only after Bilbo's vanishment.                                           

                                                                           
                                                                               
  10.   Gawkroger is   an   English   (Yorkshire)   surname,    meaning   'clumsy
        Roger'.                                                                 
        The textual situation is in fact of fearful complexity in this  part, the
        manuscript  being  constituted  from  two  'layers',  and the  earlier of
        the  two  being  constituted  partly  from  new  manuscript   and  partly
        from  the  typescript of  the fourth  version. With  the actual  texts in
        front of  one it  can be  worked out  how my  father was  proceeding, but
        to  present  the  detail  in  a  printed  book  is  neither  possible nor
        necessary.  It  is  demonstrable  that the  second 'layer',  with revised
        dating  of  Bingo's  life  and  the   flash  which   accompanied  Bilbo's
        vanishing,   entered   in   the   course  of   the  composition   of  the
        chapter.                                                                
  12.   This perhaps suggests that  Bingo had  not been  told of  Bilbo's 'joke',
        cf. the outline on p. 233: 'So he does not even tell Bingo of  the joke.'
        A  pencilled  correction  and  addition   changed  the   passage  towards
        that in FR (p. 39).                                                     
          The  only  one  who  said  nothing  was  Bingo,  the   most  concerned.
        His  feelings  were  mixed.  On  the  one  hand  he appreciated  the joke
        (if  no  one  else  did).  It  was quite  after his  own heart:  he would
        have  liked  to  laugh and  dance with  mirth; and  was grateful  that he
        had  been allowed  to get  the full  and delicious  suspense, for  on the
        other  hand  he  would  have  liked  to  weep.  He  was   immensely  fond
        of  Bilbo,  and  the  blow  was  crushing.  Was  he  really never  to see
        him  again  -  not  even  to  take  another  farewell?  He  sat  for some
        time quite silent in his seat...                                        
  13.   Added                                                              later:
        and  fastened  on a  leather belt  round his  waist. On  it hung  a short
        sword in an old black leather scabbard.                                 
        Cf. Queries and Alterations, note 4, on the subject of Sting.           
  14.   My  father  took  all  these  four  Dwarf-names from  the same  source in
        the Old Norse Elder Edda as those in The Hobbit.                        
  15.   Added later:                                                            
          But  I  want  just  a  final  word  with  you.  Now,  my  good dwarves,
        just  walk  on  down  the  lane  a  bit.  I  shan't  keep  you  long!' He
        turned back to Bilbo. 'Well,' he said in a lowered voice.               
  16.   From  this  point the  earlier, rejected  conversation between  Bilbo and
        Gandalf before the Party (pp.  235 -  6, there  marked 'Later')  is taken
        up again, though not in the same form, and much extended.               
  17.   A  pencilled  addition  here  probably  says: '(the  only one  who has)',
        see note 3.                                                             
  18.   This  verse  came  into  existence in  the original  form of  the chapter
        'Three  is  Company'  (pp.  47,  53),   where  it   will  now   become  a
        recollection of Bilbo's  verse from  years before.  The two  versions are
        the same, except that in lines 4 and 8 Bilbo's form here  has I  for toe.
        In  FR  (pp. 44,  82)  both  versions have  I, not  toe; but  Bilbo's has
        eager  in the  5th line  where Frodo's  has weary.  In the  present text

     eager is written above weary, and with  this change  the final  form is
     reached in this instance (see p. 284 note 10).                         
 19. This sentence was struck out when the addition given in note x g was
                                                                 made.
 20. The remainder of this part of the text is in very rough pencilled
     form, with alteration of the last passage in ink preceding it:
     'Goodbye, Gandalf!' he cried, and made off into the night.
     Gandalf remained by the gate for a moment, staring into the dark
     after him. 'Adieu, my dear Bilbo,' he said, ' - or au revoir.' [This
     was marked with an X: Gandalf would not use French, however
     useful the distinction.] And then he jumped over the low gate and
     made his way quickly up the Hill. 'If I find Lobelia sneaking
     round,' he muttered, 'I'll turn her into a weasel! '
       But he need not have worried. At Bag-End he found Bingo
     sitting on a chair in the hall with the envelope in his hand. He
     refused to have any more to do with the party.
  21. The umbrella now goes, not to Mungo Took, but to Uffo Took
     (Adelard Took in FR). Semolina Baggins becomes Drogo's sister,
     aged 92 (in FR she is Dora Baggins, aged 99). The feather-bed goes
     now not to Fosco Bolger (who had been Bingo's uncle when he was
     still a Bolger), but to Rollo Bolger (an equally suitable recipient),
     'from his friend', Rollo Bolger has survived his displacement from
     Primula Brandybuck's husband and death by drowning in the
     Brandywine. The 'rather florid' dinner-service goes to Primo (not
     Inigo) Grubb; and the Hornblower who received the barometer
     now changes from Cosimo (by way of Carambo) to Colombo.
     Caramella Chubb, Orlando Burrows (so spelt), Angelica Baggins,
     Hugo Bracegirdle, and of course Lobelia Sackville-Baggins, re-
     main, and their gifts. For the earlier lists see pp. 15, 32 - 3, 38.
  22. 'This is how the will ran:
     Bilbo (son of Bungo son of Mungo son of Inigo) Baggins hereinafter
     called the testator, now departing being the rightful owner of all
     properties and goods hereinafter named hereby devises, makes
     over, and bequeathes the property and messuage or dwelling-hole
     known as Bag-End Underhill near Hobbiton with all lands thereto
     belonging and annexed to his cousin and adopted heir Bingo (son
     of Drogo son of Togo son of Bingo son of Inigo) Baggins hereinafter
     called the heir, for him to have hold possess occupy let on lease sell
     or otherwise dispose of at his pleasure as from midnight of the
     twenty-second day of September in the one hundred and eleventh
     or eleventy-first year of the aforesaid Bilbo Baggins. Moreover the
     aforesaid testator devises and bequeathes to the aforesaid heir all
     monies in gold silver copper brass or tin and all trinkets, armours,
     weapons, uncoined metals, gems, jewels, or precious stones and
     all furniture appurtenances goods perishable or imperishable and
     chattels movable and immovable belonging to the testator and

       after  his  departure  found  housed  kept stored  or secreted  in any
       part  of  the  said  hole  and residence  of Bag-end  or of  the lands
       thereto  annexed,  save  only such  goods or  movable chattels  as are
       contained   in  the   subjoined  schedule   which  are   selected  and
       directed as parting gifts to the friends of the testator and which the
       heir  shall dispatch  deliver or  hand over  according to  his conven-
       ience. The testator hereby relinquishes all rights or claims  to all
       these properties lands monies goods  or chattels  and wishes  all his
       friends farewell. Signed Bilbo Baggins.                               
                                                                            
      Otho,  who was  a lawyer,  read this  document carefully,  and snorted.
      It was  apparently correct  and incontestable,  according to  the legal
      notions of hobbits. "Foiled again!" he said to his wife...' (etc. as in
      FR p. 47).                                                             
  23. 'Old  Proudfoot's son' (in  FR 'old Odo Proudfoot's grandson',   p.  48).
  24. This sentence was extended in pencil as follows:                       
        'Just  what  Bilbo's parting  letter said:  "Here's the  Ring. Please
      accept it. Take  care of  it, and  yourself. Ask  Gandalf, if  you want
      to know more." And  of course  I have  read and  heard Bilbo's  tale of
      how he got it...'                                                      
  25. This  mention  of  Bilbo's  disappearance  when  he saw  the Sackville-
      Bagginses  approaching was  struck out  in pencil,  with the  note 'Put
      in later'. See p. 300.                                                 
  26. 'Don't use the Ring' was struck  out in  pencil, with  'If you  take my
      advice you will not  use the  Ring' substituted;  and before  the words
      'Keep it secret' in the next  sentence was  added 'But  have it  by you
      always.'                                                               
  27. In this version, Otho and Lobelia have as  good as  said this  to Bingo
      (p. 241) - a passage not in FR.                                        
  28. This was rewritten  in pencil:  'I don't  think I  should try.  I don't
      think it would please or  help Bilbo.  Let him  get rid  of the  Ring -
      which he can only do, if you will accept it, for a bit.'               
  29. This was rewritten in pencil: 'All right - I  will try.  But I  want to
      follow Bilbo. I think I shall in the end, anyway, if it is not then too
      late ever to find him again.'                                          
  30. This sentence ('If you really need me...') was  bracketed (in  ink) for
      probable exclusion.                                                    
  31. This was rewritten in pencil:                                          
        Bingo  saw  Gandalf  to  the   door.  There   the  dwarf   Lofar  was
      waiting.  He  popped  up  when  the  door  was  opened,  and  picked up
      a  large  bag  that  was standing  in the  porch. 'Goodbye,  Bingo,' he
      said,  bowing  low.  'I  am  going   with  Gandalf.'   'Goodbye,'  said
      Bingo.  Gandalf  gave  a final  wave of  his hand,  and with  the dwarf
      at his side walked off down the path at a surprising pace...           
      At  the  end  of the  chapter my  father wrote:  'Perhaps alter  this -
      Gandalf  has  ring.  Meeting  at  gate  prearranged:  ring  handed over
      there. Gandalf's last visit is to give it to Bingo?' He struck this out

 and wrote 'No' against it. This had in fact been his idea when he                
 wrote the outline given on p. 233, where Bilbo is to 'say goodbye                
 to Gandalf at gate, hand him a package (with Ring) for Bingo, and                
 disappear.'                                                                      
32. Ivy  Bush:  changed  at  the time  of writing  from Creen  Dragon. See       
 note 33.                                                                         
33. old  Noakes  of  Bywater:  changed  at  the time  of writing  from Ted       
 Sandyman,  the  miller's  son.  This  is  a  further indication  that this       
 version  of  the  opening  of  'A  Long-expected Party'  followed 'Ancient       
 History',  where  the  miller's  son  was  named  Tom  until the  very end       
 of  it  (p.  269,  note  9).  The  conversation  between  Sam  Gamgee  and       
 Ted  Sandyman  in   'Ancient  History'   was  in   The  Green   Dragon  at       
 Bywater,  and  my  father  probably  changed  the  rendezvous   of  Gaffer       
 Gamgee's  cronies  to  The  Ivy  Bush  (note  32) for  the same  reason as       
 he replaced the miller's son by Old Noakes.                                      
                                                                                 
 I  give here  as much  of the  genealogy of  Bilbo and  Bingo as  is established
 from  the  text  at  this  time. The  Baggins ancestry  is derived  from Bilbo's
 will (note  22); the  names in  brackets are  those that  differ in  LR Appendix
 C, Baggins of Hobbiton.                                                          
 The  Old  Took  was  evidently  already   known  to   have  had   many  children
 beside his 'three remarkable daughters' (see note 8).                            
                                                                                 
                                     Old Took.                                    
                                                                                 
   Bungo.                               Gorboduc.                           
           = Belladonna.    Mirabella.=             (third daughter).                 
   Baggins.                             Brandybuck.                          
                                                                                 
                                     Primula.      Drogo.                               
         Bilbo.                              =                                    
                                   Brandybuck.     Baggins.                            
                                                                                 
                                             Bingo.                        
                                                                                 
                         Inigo Baggins (Balbo).                                   
                                                                                 
                        Mungo.          Bingo (Largo).                               
                                                                
                        Bungo.          Togo (Fosco).                             
                                                                                 
                                                                                 
                                                                                 
                       Bilbo.    Drogo.   Semolina (Dora).                           
                                                                                 
                                                                                 
                                   Bingo.                                         

                                       XV.                                     
                                 ANCIENT HISTORY.                              
                                                                              
 A  chapter  titled  'II:  Ancient History',  precursor of  'The Shadow  of the
 Past'  in  FR,  was now  introduced to  follow 'A  Long-expected Party'.  It is
 of central importance in the evolution of  The Lord  of the  Rings: for  it was
 here  that there  emerged in  the actual  narrative the  concept of  the Ruling
 Ring,  and  Sam  Gamgee  as  the  companion  of  Bingo  (Frodo)  on  his  great
 journey.  There  is  no  trace of  earlier drafting,  save for  a few  notes so
 scrappy  and  disjointed  that  they can  scarcely be  reproduced. In  these my
 father  scribbled  down  salient features  of Bingo's  life after  Bilbo's dis-
 appearance, and  first devised  the story  of Bingo's  own departure  17 years
 later,  celebrated  by  a  dinner  party  for  Merry,  Frodo,  and   Odo  (here
 apparently  said  to  have  been  given  on  the  proceeds of  the sale  of Bag
 End).  Against  these   notes  my   father  wrote:   'Sam  Gamgee   to  replace
 Odo' (cf. Queries and Alterations, p. 221).                                   
   The  manuscript  is  rough,  and  in  places very  rough indeed,  but legible
 virtually  throughout.  There  is  some  emendation  from  a later  phase, here
 ignored,  and  a  good  deal  of  pencilled change  that can  in some  cases be
 seen  to  have been  made while  the chapter  was in  progress. These  latter I
 adopt into the text, but in some cases refer in the notes to the text  as first
 written.                                                                      
                                                                              
 The talk did  not die  down in  nine or  even ninety-nine  days. The          
 second and  final disappearance  of Mr  Bilbo Baggins  was discussed          
 in Hobbiton and Bywater, and indeed all over the  Shire, for  a year          
 and  a  day, and  was remembered  much longer  than that.  It became          
 a fireside story for young hobbits; and eventually (a century  or so          
 later) Mad Baggins, who used to disappear  with a  bang and  a flash          
 and  reappear  with  bags  of  gold and  jewels, became  a favourite          
 character of legend and lived on long after all the true events were          
 forgotten.                                                                    
   But  in  the  meantime  sober grown-ups  gradually settled  to the          
 opinion that Bilbo had at last (after long  showing symptoms  of its          
 coming  on)  gone  suddenly  mad,  and  had run  off into  the blue;          
 where he had inevitably fallen into a pit or a pool,  and come  to a          
 tragic  but  hardly  untimely end.  There was  one Baggins  the less          
 and that was that.' In face of the evidence that  this disappearance          
 had  been timed  and arranged  by Bilbo  himself, Bingo  was eventu-          
 ally relieved of suspicion. It was also plain that the  departure of          

                                                 
                                                                      
 Bilbo was a  grief to  him -  more than  to any  other even  of Bilbo's
 closest friends. But Gandalf  was held  finally responsible  for incit-
 ing  and  encouraging  'poor  old  Mr  Bilbo',  for  dark  and  unknown
 ends of his own.                                                      
  'If  only  that  wizard  will  leave  young  Bingo  alone,  perhaps he
 will settle down and  grow some  hobbit-sense,' they  said. And  to all
 appearances  the  wizard  did  leave  Bingo  alone,  and he  did settle
 down,  though  the  growth  of  hobbit-sense  was  not  so  noticeable.
 Indeed  Bingo at  once carried  on his  uncle's reputation  for oddity.
 He refused  to go  into mourning;  and the  next year  he gave  a party
 in honour of Bilbo's 112th  birthday, which  he called  the Hundred-
 weight  Party;  although  only  a  few  friends  were invited  and they
 hardly   ate  a   hundredweight  between   them.  People   were  rather
 pained;  but  he  kept  up  the  custom  of  giving  'Bilbo's  birthday
 party' year after year, until they got used to it. He  said he  did not
 think  Bilbo  was  dead.  When  they  asked:  'Where  is he,  then?' he
 shrugged  his  shoulders.(2) He  lived  alone,  but  he  went   about  a
 lot  with  certain  younger  hobbits  that  Bilbo  had  been  fond  of,
 and  continued   to  'encourage'   them.  The   chief  of   these  were
 Meriadoc   Brandybuck   (usually   called   Merry),  Frodo   Took,  and
 Odo  Bolger.(3) Merry  was  the  son  of  Caradoc   Brandybuck  (Bingo's
 cousin)  and  Yolanda  Took,  and  so  the  cousin  of  Frodo,  son  of
 Folco  (whose  sister  was  Yolanda).  Frodo,  or  Frodo   the  Second,
 was  the  great-great-grandson  of  Frodo  the  First  (otherwise known
 as  the  Old  Took),  and  the heir  and rather  desperate hope  of the
 Hole  of  Took, as  the clan  was called.  Odo also  had a  Took mother
 and  was  a  third  cousin  of  the  other two.(4) With these  Bingo went
 about  (often  in untidy  clothes) and  walked all  over the  Shire. He
 was  often  away  from  home.  But  he  continued  to  spend  his money
 lavishly,  indeed  more  lavishly  than  Bilbo  had.  And  there  still
 seemed  to  be  plenty  of  it,  so naturally  his oddities  were over-
 looked, as far as possible. As time went on it is true that  they began
 to  notice  that  Bingo  also  showed  signs  of  good  'preservation':
 outwardly  he  retained  the appearance  of a  strong and  rather large
 and well-built hobbit just out of his 'tweens'.  'Some people  have all
 the  luck,'  they  said,  meaning  this  enviable  combination  of cash
 and  preservation;  but they  did not  attach any  particular signific-
 ance  to  it,  not even  when Bingo  began to  approach the  more sober
 age of 50.                                                            
                                                                      
  Bingo  himself,  after  the  first  shock of  loss and  change, rather
 enjoyed  being  his  own  master,  and  the  Mr  Baggins   of  Bag-end.

       
                                                                     
 For a while,  indeed several  years, he  was very  happy, and  did not
 think  much  about  the future.  He knew,  of course,  if no  one else
 did,  that the  money was  not unlimited,  and was  fast disappearing.
 Money  went  a  prodigious  long  way  in  those  days, and  one could
 also get  many things  without it;  but Bilbo  had made  great inroads
 on his inheritance and his acquired treasures in  the course  of sixty
 years, and had blown at least 500 pieces of gold on that last Party.
 So  an  end  would  come  sooner or  later. But  Bingo did  not worry:
 down  inside  though  suppressed  there still  remained his  desire to
 follow Bilbo, or at all events to leave the Shire and go off  into the
 Blue, or wherever chance took him.                                   
   One  day,  he  thought,  he would  do it.  As he  approached 50  - a
 number  he  somehow  felt  was  significant  (or  ominous), it  was at
 any rate at that age that  adventure had  first come  upon Bilbo  - he
 began to think  more seriously  of it.  He felt  restless. He  used to
 look at maps  and wonder  what it  was like  beyond the  edges: hobbit
 maps made in the Shire did not  extend very  far east  or west  of its
 borders. And he began to feel, sometimes, a sort  of thin  feeling, as
 if he  was being  stretched out  over a  lot of  days, and  weeks, and
 months,  but  was  not  fully  there,  somehow.  He could  not explain
 any  better  than  that  to  Gandalf,  though  he  tried  to.  Gandalf
 nodded thoughtfully.                                                 
   Gandalf had taken  to slipping  in to  see him  again -  quietly and
 secretly,  and  usually  when  no  one  was  about.  He  would  tap an
 'agreed signal on the window or door, and  be let  in: it  was usually
 dark when he arrived, and while he  was there  he did  not go  out. He
 went  off  again, often  without warning,  either at  night or  in the
 very  early  morning  before  sunrise. The  only people  besides Bingo
 who  knew  of  these  visits  were  Frodo and  Merry; though  no doubt
 folk  out in  the country  caught sight  of him  going along  the road
 or  over  the  fields,  and  scratched  their  heads either  trying to
 remember who he was, or wondering what he was doing.                 
   Gandalf  turned  up  again  first  about  three years  after Bilbo's
 departure, took a look at  Bingo, listened  to the  small news  of the
 Shire, and  went off  again soon,  seeing that  Bingo was  still quite
 settled. But  he returned  once or  twice every  year (except  for one
 other  long  gap  of  nearly  two  years)  until the  fourteenth year.
 Bingo  was  then  47.  After  that  he  came  frequently   and  stayed
 longer.(6) He began to  be worried  about Bingo;  and also  odd things
 were  happening.  Rumour  of  them  had  begun  to  reach the  ears of
 even  the  deafest  and  most  parochial  hobbits.  Bingo had  heard a
 good deal more than any other hobbit of  the Shire,  for of  course he

 continued  Bilbo's  habit  of  welcoming  dwarves  and  odd strangers,
 and even occasionally of visiting elves. It was believed by  his close
 friends Merry and Frodo at any rate  that elves  were friendly  to him
 [bracketed at the  time of  writing: and  that he  knew some  of their
 few haunts. This was in fact quite  true. Bilbo  had taught  Bingo all
 that  he knew,  and had  even instructed  him in  what he  had learned
 of  the  two  elf-languages  used in  those times  and places  (by the
 elves  among  themselves).  There  were  very  few  elves  actually in
 the  Shire,  and  they  were  very  seldom seen  by anyone  but Bilbo,
 and Bingo. This was replaced at the  time of  writing by:]  and that
 he  knew  something  of  their  secret  languages  -  learned probably
 from Bilbo. And they were quite right.                               
   Both  elves  and  dwarves  were  troubled,  especially   those  that
 occasionally  arrived  or  passed  by  coming  from  a  distance, from
 East  or  South.  They  would  seldom,  however,  say   anything  very
 definite.  But  they  constantly  mentioned  the  Necromancer,  or the
 [Dark  Lord  >]  Enemy;  and  sometimes  referred   to  the   Land  of
 Mor-dor  and  the  Black  Tower.  It   seemed  that   the  Necromancer
 was  moving  again,  and  that  Gandalf's  confidence  that  the North
 would  be freed  from him  for many  an age  had not  been justified.(7)
 He  had  flown  from  Mirkwood  only to  reoccupy his  ancient strong-
 hold in the South, near the midst of the world in  those days,  in the
 Land  of  Mordor;  and  it  was  rumoured  that  the  Black  Tower had
 been  raised  anew.  Already  his  power  was  creeping  out  over the
 lands  again  and  the   mountains  and   woods  were   darkened.  Men
 were  restless  and  moving  North  and  West,  and  many  seemed  now
 to  be  partly  or  wholly  under  the  dominion  of  the  Dark  Lord.
 There  were  wars,  and  there   was  much   burning  and   ruin.  The
 dwarves  were  growing  afraid.  Goblins  were  multiplying  again and
 reappearing.  Trolls  of  a   new  and   most  malevolent   kind  were
 abroad;  giants  were  spoken  of,  a  Big  Folk  only far  bigger and
 stronger  than  Men  the  [?ordinary]  Big  Folk,  and   no  stupider,
 indeed  often  full  of  cunning  and wizardry.  And there  were vague
 hints of things or creatures  more terrible  than goblins,  trolls, or
 giants. Elves were vanishing, or wandering steadily westward.       
   In Hobbiton there  began to  be some  talk about  the odd  folk that
 were  abroad,  and  often  strayed  over  the  borders.  The following
 report  of  a  conversation  in  the  Green  Dragon  at   Bywater  one
 evening [about  this time  >] in  the spring  of Bingo's  49th? 50th?
 [sic] year (8) will give some idea of the feeling in the air.            
   Sam   Gamgee   (old   Gaffer  Gamgee's   (eldest  >]   youngest  and
 a  good  jobbing  gardener)  was sitting  in one  corner by  the fire,

 
                                                                            
 and  opposite  him  was  Ted  Sandyman (9) the  miller's  son from            
 Hobbiton; and there were various other rustic hobbits listening.            
   'Queer things you do hear these days, to  be sure,  Ted,' said            
 Sam.                                                                        
                                                                            
   There  follows  in  the  manuscript  the  original  draft,   written  very
 roughly  and  rapidly,  of  the conversation  at The  Green Dragon  found in
 FR, pp. 53 - 5 and it was scarcely altered afterwards save in little details
 of  phrasing.  The  hobbit  who  saw  the  Tree-man  beyond the  North Moors
 (in  FR  Sam's  cousin  Halfast  Gamgee,  who  worked   for  Mr   Boffin  at
 Overhill)  is  here  'Jo  Button,  him  that works  for the  Gawkrogers [see
 p.  236]  and  goes up  North for  the hunting.'  Sam's reference  to 'queer
 folk' being  turned back  by the  Bounders on  the Shire-borders  is absent;
 he  speaks of  the Elves  journeying to  the harbours  'out away  West, away
 beyond the Towers',' but the reference to the Grey Havens is lacking.       
   Most interesting  is the  reference to  the Tree-men.  As my  father first
 wrote Sam's words, he  said: 'But  what about  these what  do you  call 'em-
 giants? They do say as one nigh as big as a  tower or  leastways a  tree was
 seen  up  away  beyond  the  North Moors  not long  back.' This  was changed
 at the time of  writing to:  'But what  about these  Tree-Men, these  here -
 giants? They do say one nigh as big  as a  tower was  seen,' etc.  (Was this
 passage (preserved in  FR, p.  53) the  first premonition  of the  Ents? But
 long before  my father  had referred  to 'Tree-men'  in connection  with the
 voyages of Earendel: II.254, 261).                                          
   Sam's  words  about  the  Bagginses  at  the end  of the  conversation are
 different  (and  explain  why  the  egregious  Ted  Sandyman  used  the word
 'cracked' in FR):                                                           
                                                                            
   'Well, I dunno. But that Mr Baggins of Bag-End, he thinks it is           
 true; he told me and  my dad  so; and  both he  and old  Mr Bilbo           
 know a bit about Elves, or so my dad says and  he ought  to know.           
 He's known the Bag-End folk since he was a lad, and he  worked in           
 their gardens till his joints cracked too much for bending, and I           
 took on.'                                                                   
   'And they're both cracked...'                                             
                                                                            
   After Ted Sandyman's last words,                                          
                                                                            
   Sam sat silent and said no more. He was due for a job of work in          
 Bingo's garden next day, and was thinking he  might have  a chance          
 of a word with Bingo, to whom he had transferred the  reverence of          
 his dad for old Bilbo. It was April and the sky was high and clear          
 after  much rain.  The sun  was gone,  and a  cool pallid  sky was          
 fading  slowly.  He  went home  through Hobbiton  and up  the hill          
 whistling softly and thoughtfully.                                          

  About the same time Gandalf was quietly slipping in through               
 the half-open front door of Bag-End.                                       
                                                                           
  Next   morning   after   breakfast   two   people,   Gandalf   and  Bingo,
 were  sitting   near  the   open  window.   A  bright   fire  was   on  the
 hearth;   but   the   sun   was   warm,   and   the  wind   was  southerly:
 everything  looked  fresh,  and  the   new  green   of  Spring   was  shim-
 mering  in  the  fields  and  on the  tips of  the trees'  fingers. Gandalf
 was  thinking  of  a  spring  nearly  80  years  before,  when   Bilbo  had
 run   out   of  Bag-end   without  a   handkerchief.  Gandalf's   hair  was
 perhaps  whiter  than  it  had  been  then,  and  his  beard  and  eyebrows
 were  perhaps  longer  and  face  wiser;   but  his   eyes  were   no  less
 bright  and  powerful,  and  he  smoked  and   blew  smoke-rings   with  as
 great  vigour  and  delight  as  ever.  He  was  smoking  now  in  silence,
 for  they  had  been  talking  about  Bilbo  (as   they  often   did),  and
 [other things >] the Necromancer and the Ring.                             
  'It  is  all  most  disturbing,  and  in  fact  terrifying,'  said  Bingo.
 Gandalf  grunted:  the  sound   apparently  meant   'I  quite   agree,  but
 your  remark  is  not  helpful.'  There  was  another  silence.  The  sound
 of Sam Gamgee giving the lawn its first cut came from the garden.          
  'How  long  have  you  known  all  this?  '  asked  Bingo at  length. 'And
 did you tell Bilbo?'                                                      
  'I    guessed    a    good    deal    immediately,'    answered    Gandalf
 slowly...                                                                  
                                                                           
 My father had now returned to the text given on pp.  76 ff,  the 'foreword'
 as he called it (see p. 224), which I have discussed on pp. 86 - 7, and in
 which  of  course  the story  was present  that Bingo  gave the  Party: the
 conversation with Gandalf  took place  a few  weeks before  it, and  it was
 indeed Gandalf's own idea. But  my father  followed parts  of the  old text
 closely, while extending it in certain very important ways.                
  In Gandalf's reply to Bingo's question (original text p. 77) he says:     
                                                                           
 'I guessed much, but at first I said little.  I thought  that all  was well
 with  Bilbo,  and  that  he  was  safe  enough,  for  that  kind  of  power
 was  powerless  over  him.  So  I  thought,  and  I  was  right  in  a way;
 but  not  quite  right. I  kept a.  eye on  him, of  course, but  perhaps I
 was  not  careful  enough.  I  did  not  then  know   which  of   the  many
 Rings  this  one  was.  Had  I  known  I  might  have  done  differently  -
 but  perhaps  not.  But  I  know  now.'  His  voice  faded  to  a  whisper.
 'For I went back to the land of the Necromancer - twice.'"                 
  'I  am  sure  you  have   done  everything   you  could,'   said  Bingo...
                                                                           
 Gandalf says  rather more  about Bilbo:  'I was  not greatly  worried about
 Bilbo - his education was  nearly complete,  and I  no longer  felt respon-

 sible for him. He had to follow his own mind,  when he  had made  it up.'
 And he speaks of the hobbits  of the  Shire being  'enslaved' (as  in FR,
 p. 58), not 'becoming Wraiths.'                                          
   But with Gandalf's reply to Bingo's 'I do not quite understand what all
 this has got to do with me  and Bilbo  and the  Ring' my  father departed
 altogether from the original text.                                       
                                                                         
   'To  tell  you  the  truth,'  answered  Gandalf,  'I  believe   he  has
 hitherto,  hitherto  mind  you,  entirely  overlooked  the  existence  of
 hobbits   -   as   Smaug   the  dragon   had.  For   which  you   may  be
 thankful.  And  I  don't  think  even  now  that  he  particularly  wants
 them:  they  would  be  obedient  (perhaps),  but  not   terribly  useful
 servants.  But  there  is  such  a  thing as  malice and  revenge. Miser-
 able  hobbits  would  please  him  more  than  happy  ones.  As  for what
 it  has  to  do  with you  and the  Ring: I  think I  can explain  that -
 partly at any rate.  I do  not yet  know quite  all. Give  me the  Ring a
 minute.'                                                                 
   Bingo  took  it  from  his  trouser pocket  where it  was clasped  on a
 chain  that went  round him  like a  belt. 'Good,'  said Gandalf.  'I see
 you  keep  it always  on you.  Go on  doing so.'  Bingo unclasped  it and
 handed it to Gandalf. It felt heavy, as if either it,  or Bingo,  were in
 some  curious way  reluctant for  Gandalf to  touch it.  It looked  to be
 made  of  pure  and  solid  gold,   thick,  flattened,   and  unjointed.(12)
 Gandalf held it up.                                                      
   'Can you see any markings on it?' he said. 'No! '  said Bingo.  'It is
 quite  plain,  and  does  not  even  show  any  scratches  or   signs  of
 wear.'                                                                   
   'Well  then,  look,'   said  Gandalf,   and  to   Bingo's  astonishment
 and  distress  the wizard  threw it  into the  middle of  a hot  patch in
 the  fire.  Bingo  gave  a  cry  and  groped for  the poker;  but Gandalf
 held  him  back.  'Wait!  '  he  said in  commanding tones,  giving Bingo
 a quick look from under his eyebrows.                                    
   No  apparent  change  came  over  the  Ring.  After  a   while  Gandalf
 got  up,  closed  the  shutters  outside  the  round  window,   and  drew
 the  curtain.  The  room  became  dark  and  silent.  The clack  of Sam's
 shears,  now   nearer  the   hole,  could   be  heard   outside.  Gandalf
 stood  for  a  moment  looking  at   the  fire;   then  he   stooped  and
 removed  the  Ring  with  the  tongs,  and  at once  picked it  up. Bingo
 gasped.                                                                  
   'It is quite cold,' said Gandalf. 'Take it! '                          
   Bingo  received  it  on  his  shrinking  palm:  it  seemed  colder  and
 even  heavier  than  before.  'Hold  it  up!'  said  Gandalf,  'and  look
 inside.' As Bingo did so he  saw fine  lines, more  fine than  the finest

  The original description of the writing on the Ring.

 pen strokes, running along the inside of the Ring - lines of  fire that
 seemed  to  form  the  letters  of  a  strange  alphabet.   They  shone
 bright, piercingly bright, and yet it seemed remotely, as  if out  of a
 great depth.                                                          
   'I cannot read the fiery letters,' said Bingo  in a  quavering voice.
 'No,' said Gandalf; 'but I can - now. The writing says:               
                                                                      
      One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them,                  
      One Ring to bring them all, and in the darkness bind them.(13)   
                                                                      
 That is part of a verse that I know now in full.                      
                                                                      
      Three rings for the Elven-kings under the sky,                   
      Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone,               
      Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die,                               
      One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne                         
           In the Land of Mor-dor where the shadows lie.              
          One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them,              
      One Ring to bring them all, and in the darkness bind them,       
        In the land of Nor-dor where the shadows lie.(14)             
                                                                      
 'This,'  said  Gandalf,  'is  the  Master-ring:  the  One Ring  to Rule
 them all! This is the One  Ring that  he lost  many ages  ago -  to the
 great weakening of his power; and that he still so greatly desires.'
 But he must not get it!'                                              
   Bingo  sat  silent  and  motionless.  Fear  seemed  to stretch  out a
 vast hand like a  dark cloud,  rising out  of the  East and  looming up
 to  engulf  him.  'This  Ring?'  he  stammered.  'How  on earth  did it
 come to me?'                                                          
   'I  can  tell  you  the  part  of  the story  that I  know,' answered
 Gandalf.   'In   ancient   days   the   Necromancer,   the   Dark  Lord
 Sauron,(16) made  many  magic  rings  of  various  properties  that gave
 various  powers to  their possessors.  He dealt  them out  lavishly and
 sowed  them  abroad  to ensnare  all peoples,  but specially  Elves and
 Men. For those that  used the  rings, according  to their  strength and
 will and hearts, fell quicker or slower under the  power of  the rings,
 and  the  dominion  of  their  maker."  Three,  Seven,  Nine   and  One
 he  made  of  special potency."  for their  possessors became  not only
 invisible to all in this world, if they wished, but could see  both the
 world  under  the  sun  and the  other side  in which  invisible things
 move.'  And  they   had  (what   is  called)   good  luck,   and  (what
 seemed)  endless  life.  Though,  as  I  say,  what  power   the  Rings
 conferred  on  each  possessor  depended  on  what  use  they  made  of
 them  -  on  what  they  were  themselves,   and  what   they  desired.

  The Ring-verse, and the emergence of the Ruling Ring in the narrative.

   'But  the  Rings  were  under  the  command  of  the maker  and were
 always  drawing  the  possessors  back  to  him.  For he  retained the
 ruling  Ring,  which,  when he  wore it,  enabled him  to see  all the
 others,  and  to  see  even  the  thoughts  of  those  that  possessed
 them.(20) But  he lost  this Ring,  and consequently  lost control  of all
 the  others.  Slowly  through  the  years he  has been  gathering them
 and seeking them out  - hoping  to find  the lost  One. But  the Elves
 resist his power more than all other races; and the high-elves  of the
 West,  of  whom  some  still  remain  in  the  middle-world,  perceive
 and dwell at  once both  [in] this  world and  the other  side without
 the  aid  of  rings.(21) And  they  having  suffered  and  fought  long
 against  Sauron  are  not  easily drawn  into his  net, or  deluded by
 him. What  has become  of the  Three Rings  of earth,  air, and  sky I
 do  not know.(22) Some say  they have  been carried  far over  the sea.
 Others  say that  hidden Elf-kings  still keep  them. The  dwarves too
 proved  tough  and  intractable: for  they do  not lightly  endure any
 obedience  or  domination  (even  of  their  own  kind). Nor  are they
 easily made  into shadows.  With the  dwarves the  chief power  of the
 Rings was to kindle in  their hearts  the fire  of greed  (whence evil
 has  come  that  has  aided Sauron).  It is  said that  the foundation
 of  each  of  the  Seven  Great  Hoards of  the dwarves  of old  was a
 golden Ring. But it is said that  those hoards  are plundered  and the
 dragons  have  devoured  them,  and  the  Rings  have  perished molten
 in their fire; yet it is also said that not all  the hoards  have been
 broken, and that still some of the Seven Rings are guarded.          
   'But  all  the  Nine  Rings  of Men  have gone  back to  Sauron, and
 borne  with  them their  possessors, kings,  warriors, and  wizards of
 old,(23) who became  Ring-wraiths  and  served  the  maker,   and  were
 his  most  terrible  servants.  Men  indeed   have  most   often  been
 under  his  dominion,  and  are  now  again  throughout   the  middle-
 earth (24) falling under his  power, especially  in the  East and  South of
 the world, where the Elves are few.'                                 
   'Ring-wraiths! ' exclaimed Bingo. 'What are they?'                
   'We will not speak of  them now,'  said Gandalf.  'Let us  not speak
 of  horrible things  without need.  They belong  to the  ancient days,
 and let us hope that they will  never again  arise. At  least Gilgalad
 accomplished that.'(25)                                              
   'Who was Gilgalad?' asked Bingo.                                   
   'The  one  who  bereft  the  Dark  Lord of  the One  Ring,' answered
 Gandalf. 'He was the last in  middle-earth of  the great  Elf-kings of
 the high  western race,  and he  made alliance  with Orendil (26) King of
 the Island who  came back  to the  middle-world in  those days.  But I

 will  not  tell  all  that  tale  now.  One  day  perhaps  you may  hear it
 from  one  who  knows  it  truly.  It is  enough to  say that  they marched
 against  Sauron  and  besieged  him  in  his  tower;  and  he   came  forth
 and  wrestled  with  Gilgalad   and  Orendil,   and  was   overthrown.  But
 he  forsook  his  bodily  shape  and  fled  like  a  ghost to  waste places
 until  he  rested  in  Mirkwood  and  took  shape  again  in  the darkness.
 Gilgalad  and  Orendil  were  both  mortally  hurt  and  perished   in  the
 land  of  Mordor;  but  Isildor  son  of  Orendil  cut  the  One  Ring from
 the finger of Sauron and took it for his own.(27)                          
   'But   when   he   marched   back   from   Mordor,  Isildor's   host  was
 overwhelmed   by   Goblins   that   swarmed   down   out   of   the   moun-
 tains.  And  it is  told that  Isildor put  on the  Ring and  vanished from
 their  sight,  but  they  trailed  him  by  slot and  scent, until  he came
 to  the  banks  of  a  wide  river.  Then  Isildor  plunged  in   and  swam
 across,  but  the   Ring  betrayed   him, (28) and slipped  from   his  hand,
 and  he  became  visible  to  his  enemies;  and   they  killed   him  with
 their  arrows.(29) But a fish  took  the  Ring  and   was  filled   with  a
 madness,   and  swam   up  stream   leaping  over   rocks  and   up  water-
 falls  until  it  cast  itself  upon  a  bank,  and spat  out the  Ring and
 died.'  Gandalf  paused.  'And  there,'  he  said,  'the  Ring  passed  out
 of  knowledge  and  legend;  and  even  so  much  of   the  story   is  now
 known and remembered by few. Yet I can now add to it, I think.             
   'Long  after,  but still  very long  ago, there  lived by  the bank  of a
 stream  on  the  edge  of  Wilderland  a  wise  clever-handed   and  quiet-
 footed little family....                                                   
                                                                           
   For  Gollum's  earlier  history  my  father  followed  the  original text
 (pp. 78 - 9) very closely indeed, only introducing a slight change of word-
 ing here and there: thus Digol is still Gollum himself, and not his friend.
 At the end of the passage the words 'and  even the  Master lost  it' become
 'and  even  the  maker,  when  his  power  had  grown  again,  could  learn
 nothing of it', and the  following sentence,  about the  Necromancer count-
 ing his rings and always finding one missing, is of course removed.        
   Gandalf's  discussion  of  Gollum's  mind  and  motives  at  the  time of
 Bilbo's encounter with him (still of course based on the original  story in
 The Hobbit,  see p.  86) also  remains very  close to  the old  version (pp.
 79 - 80). There are  indeed many  small improvements  in the  phrasing; but
 only  two  changes  need be  noticed. Gandalf's  words about  the longevity
 afforded  to  the  possessor  of the  Ring (p.  79) are  thus interestingly
 extended:                                                                  
                                                                           
 ...  Frightfully  wearisome,  Bingo,  in  fact  finally   tormenting  (even
 if  you  do  not  become  a  Wraith).  Only  Elves can  stand it,  and even
 they fade.                                                                 

   And when Gandalf speaks of 'the  unexpected arrival  of Bilbo'  (p. 80)
 he now goes on:                                                          
                                                                         
 ...You  remember  how   surprised  he   was,  and   how  soon   he  began
 talking  of a  present, though  he gave  himself a  chance of  keeping it
 if luck went  that way.  Even so  I dare  say his  old habits  might have
 beaten  him in  the end,  and he  might have  tried to  eat Bilbo,  if it
 had  been  easy.  But I  am not  sure: I  guess he  was using  the Riddle
 Game  (at  which  even  a  Gollum  dare  hardly  cheat,  as it  is sacred
 and  of  immense  antiquity)  as  a kind  of toss-up  to decide  for him.
 And  anyway  Bilbo  had  the  sword  Sting,  if you  remember, so  it was
 not easy.                                                                
                                                                         
   But from the point  where Bingo  objects that  Gollum never  gave Bilbo
 the Ring, for Bilbo had it already,  Gandalf's story  takes a  great step
 forward,  with  his  announcement that  he himself  had found  Gollum (in
 the  original  text  there  is  no  explanation of  how he  knew Gollum's
 history). I give the next part of the chapter, much of which is in a very
 rough state, in full.                                                    
                                                                         
   'I  know,'  said  Gandalf.  'And  that  is  why  I  said  that Gollum's
 ancestry   only   partly   explained  events.   There  was,   of  course,
 something   much   more   mysterious   behind   the   whole    affair   -
 something  probably  quite  beyond  the  design  of   the  Lord   of  the
 Rings  himself,  peculiar  to  Bilbo  and  his  private Adventure.  I can
 put it no clearer  than by  saying that  Bilbo was  'meant' to  have the
 Ring,  and that  he perhaps  got involved  in the  Quest of  the treasure
 mainly  for  that  reason.  In  which  case  you were  meant to  have it.
 Which  may  (or  may  not)  be  a  comforting  thought.  And   there  has
 also  always  been  a queer  fate over  the Rings  on their  own account.
 They  get  lost,  and  turn  up in  strange places.  The One  had already
 slipped  once  from  its  owner  and betrayed  him to  death. It  had now
 slipped  away  from  Gollum.  But  the  evil   they  work   according  to
 their  maker's  design  turns  often  to  good  that  he did  not intend,
 and  even  to his  loss and  defeat.(30) And  that too  may be  a comforting
 thought, or not.'                                                        
   'I  don't  find  either  of  your  thoughts  very   encouraging,'  said
 Bingo;  'though  I  don't  really  understand  what  you  mean.  But  how
 do you come to know or guess so much about Gollum?'                      
   'As  for  the  guessing,  or  the  putting  of  one  and  one  and  one
 together,  much  of  that  has  not been  very difficult,'  said Gandalf.
 'The  Ring  that  you  had  of  Bilbo,  and  Bilbo  had  of   Gollum,  is
 shown  by  the  fire-writing  to  be  the One  Ring. And  concerning that
 the tale of Gilgalad  and Isildor  is known  - to  the wise.  The filling

 in of the tale of Gollum  and fitting  it into  the gap  presents no
 special  difficulty: to  one who  knows much  about the  history and
 the minds and ways  of the  creatures of  middle-earth that  he does
 not  tell  you.  What  was  the  first riddle  Gollum asked:  do you
 remember? '                                                         
   'Yes,' said Bingo, thinking.                                      
                                                                    
                   What has mots that nobody sees,                   
                  Is higher than trees,                              
                  Up, up it goes,                                    
                  And yet neveer grows?                              
                                                                    
   'More or less right! ' said Gandalf. 'Roots and mountains!  But as
 a matter of fact, I have not had to do much  guessing from  hints of
 that kind.(31) I know. I know because I found Gollum.'                 
   'You found Gollum!' said Bingo astonished.                       
   'The obvious thing to try to do, surely,' said Gandalf.           
   'Then what happened after Bilbo left? Do you know that?'          
   'Not so clearly. What I have told you Gollum was willing  to tell;
 though not of course in the way I have reported it  - he  thought he
 was  misunderstood and  ill-treated, and  he was  full of  tears for
 himself, and hatred of all other things. But  after the  Riddle Game
 he  was  unwilling  to  say  anything,  except  in  dark  hints. One
 gathered  that  somehow or  other Gollum  was going  to get  his own
 back, and that people would see if he could  be kicked  and despised
 and stuck in a hole,  and starved  and robbed.  They might  get worse
 coming  their  way; for  Gollum now  had friends,  powerful friends.
 You  can imagine  the spiteful  stuff. He  had found  out eventually
 that Bilbo had in some way got "his" Ring, and what his name was.'
   'How?' asked Bingo.                                               
   'I  asked  him,  but  he  only  leered  and  chuckled,   and  said
 "Gollum issn't deaf iss  he, no  Gollum, and  he hass  eyes, hassn't
 he, yes my preciouss,  yes Gollum."  But (32) one can imagine various
 ways  in  which  that  might  happen. He  could, for  instance, have
 overheard the goblins  talking about  the escape  of Bilbo  from the
 gate. And the news  of the  later events  went all  over Wilderland,
 and  would  give  Gollum  plenty  to  think  about.  Anyway,  after
 having  been  "robbed  and  cheated",  as  he  put  it, he  left the
 Mountains:  the  goblins  there  became  few  and  wary   after  the
 Battle; hunting was poor, and the  deep places  were more  than ever
 dark and lonely. Also the power  of the  Ring had  left him:  he was
 no longer bound by it. He was feeling old, very old, but less timid,
 though he did not become less malicious.                            

   'One  might  have  expected  wind  and  even  the  mere   shadow  of
 sunlight to  kill him  pretty quickly.  But he  was cunning.  He could
 hide  from daylight  or moonlight,  and travel  softly and  swiftly by
 night  with  his  long  pale  eyes  - and  catch small  frightened and
 unwary  things.  Indeed he  grew for  a while  stronger with  new food
 and new air. He crept into Mirkwood, which is not surprising.'        
   'Did you find him there?'                                           
   'Yes - I followed him there: he had left a trail of horrible stories
 behind  him,  among  the  beasts  and  birds and  even the  Woodmen of
 Wilderland.  He  had  developed  a  skill  in  climbing trees  to find
 nests, and  creeping into  houses to  find cradles.  He boasted  of it
 to me.                                                                
   'But his trail also ran away south,  far south  of where  I actually
 came  upon  him  -  with  the  help  finally  of  the  Wood-elves.  He
 would  not  explain  that.  He  just  grinned  and  leered,  and  said
 Gollum,  rubbing  his horrible  hands together  gleefully. But  I have
 a suspicion - it is  now much  more than  a suspicion  - that  he made
 his  slow sneaking  way bit  by bit  long ago  down to  the land  of -
 Mordor,'  said  Gandalf  almost  in  a  whisper.  'Such  creatures  go
 naturally  that  way;  and  in  that  land he  would soon  learn much,
 and  soon himself  be discovered,  and examined.  I think  indeed that
 Gollum is  the beginning  of our  present troubles;(33) for if I guess
 right,  through  him  the  Necromancer   discovered  what   became  of
 the One Ring he had lost. He  has even,  one may  fear, at  last heard
 of the existence  of hobbits,  and may  now be  seeking the  Shire, if
 he has not already found out where it is.  Indeed I  fear that  he may
 even  have  heard (34) of the humble  and long  unnoticeable name of-
 Baggins.'                                                             
   'But this is terrible!'  cried Bingo.  'Far worse  than I  feared! 0
 Gandalf, what am I to  do, for  now I  am really  afraid? What  a pity
 that Bilbo didn't stab the beastly creature, when he said goodbye! '
   'What  nonsense  you  do  talk  sometimes,  Bingo!'   said  Gandalf.
 'Pity!  It  was  pity  that  prevented him.  And he  could not  do so,
 without doing wrong.  It was  against the  Rules. If  he had  done so,
 he  would not  have had  the Ring  - the  Ring would  have had  him at
 once. He would have been enslaved under the Necromancer.'             
   'Of course, of course,' said Bingo. 'What a thing  to say  of Bilbo!
 Dear old  Bilbo! But  I am  frightened -  and I  cannot feel  any pity
 for that vile Gollum.  Do you  mean to  say that  you, and  the Elves,
 let him live on, after all those horrible stories? Now at any  rate he
 is worse than a goblin, and just an enemy.'                           
   'Yes, he deserved to die,' said Gandalf; 'but we  did not  kill him.

 He   is   very   old,   and   very   wretched.  The   Wood-elves  have   him  in
 prison,  and  treat  [him]  with  such  kindness  as  they  can  find  in  their
 wise  hearts.  They  feed  him  on  clean  food.  But  I   do  not   think  much
 can  be  done   to  cure   him:  yet   even  Gollum   might  prove   useful  for
 good before the end.'(35)                                                       
   'Well  anyway,'  said  Bingo.  'if  Gollum  could  not   be  killed,   I  wish
 you  had  not  let  Bilbo  keep  the  Ring.  Why  did  he?   Why  did   you  let
 him? Did you tell him all this?'                                                
   'Yes,  I  let  him,'  said  Gandalf.  'But  at  first  of  course  I  did  not
 even  imagine  that  it  was  [one]  of   the  nineteen (36) Rings  of   Power:  I
 thought  he   had  got   nothing  more   dangerous  than   one  of   the  lesser
 magic   rings   that   were   once   more   common   -   and   were   used   (as
 their   maker   intended)   chiefly   by   minor   rogues   and   villains,  for
 mean   wickednesses.   I   was   not   frightened   of   Bilbo   being  affected
 by  their  power.   But  when   I  began   to  suspect   that  the   matter  was
 more   serious   than   that,   I   told   him   as   much   as   my  suspicions
 warranted.   He   knew   that   it   came   in   the    long   run    from   the
 Necromancer.   But   you   must   remember   there    was   the    Ring   itself
 to   reckon   with.  Even   Bilbo  could   not  wholly   escape  the   power  of
 the  Ruling  Ring.  He  developed   -  a   sentiment.  He   would  keep   it  as
 a   memento.   Frankly  -   he  became   rather  proud   of  his   Great  Adven-
 ture,   and   used   to  look   at  the   Ring  now   and  again   (and  oftener
 as   time   went   on)   to   warm  his   memory:  it   made  him   feel  rather
 heroic, though he never lost his power of laughing at the feeling.              
   'But   in  the   end  it   got  a   hold  of   him  in   that  way.   He  knew
 eventually  that  it  was  giving  him  "long  life",   and  thinning   him.  He
 grew  weary  of  it  -  "I can't  abide it  any longer",  he said  - but  to get
 rid  of  it  was  not  so easy.  He found  it hard  to bring  himself to  it. If
 you  think  for  a  moment:  it  is  not  really  very  easy to  get rid  of the
 Ring once you have got it.'(37)                                                   
                                                                                
   From this point the text  again follows  the old  (pp. 81  - 2)  very closely.
 Bingo  now  of  course  draws  the  Ring out  of his  pocket 'again',  and means
 to throw it 'back  again' into  the fire;  and Gandalf  says (as  in FR,  p. 70)
 that  'This  Ring at  any rate  has already  passed through  your fire  and come
 out   unscathed,   and   even   unheated.'   Adam   Hornblower    the   Hobbiton
 smith  remains.  Gandalf  says  here that  'you would  have to  find one  of the
 Cracks  of Earth  in the  depth of  the Fiery  Mountain, and  drop it  in there,
 if you really did wish to destroy it - or to place it out of all reach until the
 End.'  Against  'Cracks of  Earth' (the  name in  the original  text, p.  82) my
 father  wrote  in  the margin,  at the  same time,  '? Cracks  of Doom',  at the
 second  occurrence   of  the   name  he   wrote  'Cracks   of  Doom',   but  put
 'Earth' above 'Doom'.                                                           

 The original text is developed and extended from the point where            
 Bingo says 'I really do wish to destroy it' (p. 82):                        
                                                                            
 ...  I  cannot think  how Bilbo  put up  with it  for so  long. And  also, I
 must  say,  I  cannot  help   wondering  why   he  passed   it  on   to  me.
 I  knew,  of  course,  that  he  had  it  - though  I was  the only  one who
 did  or  does  know;  but  he  spoke  of it  jokingly, and  on the  only two
 or  three  occasions  when  I  ever  caught  him  using it  he used  it more
 or less as a joke - especially the last time.'                              
 'Bilbo   would:   and   when   your   fate   has   bestowed   on   you  such
 perilous  treasures  it is  not a  bad way  to take  them -  as long  as you
 can do so.  But as  for passing  it on  to you:  he did  so only  because he
 thought  you  were  safe: safe  not to  misuse it;  safe not  to let  it get
 into  evil  hands;  safe  from  its  power,  for  a while;  and safe,  as an
 unknown   and   unimportant   hobbit  in   the  heart   of  the   quiet  and
 easily  overlooked  little  Shire,  from  the  -  enemy.  I   promised  him,
 too,  to  help and  advise you,  if any  difficulty arose.  Also, I  may say
 that I did not discover the letters  of fire,  or guess  that this  ring was
 the  One  Ring,  until  he  had  already  decided  to  go  away   and  leave
 it.(38) And I  did  not  tell  him,  for  then  he  would  not  have burdened
 you,  or  gone  away.  But  for  his own  sake, I  knew he  ought to  go. He
 had  had  that  Ring  for  60  years,  and  it  was  telling on  him, Bingo.
 You  have  tried  before  now  to  describe  to  me your  own feeling  - the
 stretched   feeling.(39) His was much  stronger.   The  Ring   would  have
 worn  him  down  in  the  end.  Yet  the  only  sure way  of ridding  him of
 it  was  to  let  someone  else  take  on  the  burden, for  a while.  He is
 free.  But  you  are  his  heir.  And  now  that  I  have (since  that time)
 discovered  much  more,  I  know   that  you   have  a   heavy  inheritance.
 I  wish  it could  be otherwise.  But do  not blame  Bilbo -  or me,  if you
 can  help  it.  Let  us  bear  what  is  laid upon  us (if  we can).  But we
 must do something soon. The enemy is moving.'                               
 There  was  a  long  silence.  Gandalf  puffed  at  his  pipe   in  apparent
 content...                                                                  
                                                                            
 The  new  version then  develops the  old text  (p. 83)  almost to  the form
 in FR (pp. 71 - 2), with Bingo's saying that he had  often thought  of going
 off, but imagined it as a kind of holiday, and his sudden strong desire, not
 communicated  to  Gandalf,  to  follow Bilbo  and perhaps  to find  him, and
 to run out of Bag End there and then. The new text continues:               
                                                                            
 'My   dear   Bingo!'   said   Gandalf.   'Bilbo    made   no    mistake   in
 choosing  you  as  his  heir.  Yes, I  think you  will have  to go  - before
 long,  though  not at  once or  without a  little thought  and care.  And I
 am  not  sure  you  need  go  alone:  not   if  you   know  of   anyone  you

 could trust, and who would  be willing  to go  by your  side -  and who     
 you  would  be willing  to take  into unknown  dangers. But  be careful     
 in choosing, and  in what  you say  even to  your closest  friends. The     
 enemy  has  many  spies,  and  many  ways  of  hearing.'   Suddenly  he     
 stopped as if listening.                                                    
                                                                            
   The  remainder  of  the  chapter  (the  surprising  of  Sam   outside  the
 window,  and  Gandalf's  decision  that  he  should  be Bingo's  companion -
 cf. Queries and Alterations  note 2,  p. 221)  is almost  word for  word the
 final  form (FR  pp. 72  - 3),  which was  reached almost  at a  stroke> and
 never changed.                                                              
                                                                            
                                    NOTES.                                   
                                                                            
 1. This  passage  goes  back to  the original  version of  'A Long-expected
  Party' (p. 17).
 2. This  passage  goes  back  to the  fourth version  of 'A  Long-expected
  Party'  (p.  37),  and  indeed in  part to  the third  (p. 29),  when Bilbo
  was Bingo's father.                                                        
 3. Odo  Bolger:  hitherto Odo  has been  Odo Took  - or,  at least,  he was
  still  Odo  Took  when  his  surname  was  last  mentioned,  which  was  in
  the  original  text  of  the  'Bree'  chapter  (p.  141,  note  5).  At the
  beginning,  Odo  Took  could tell  Bingo not  to be 'Bolger-like'  (p. 49);
  but  perhaps  my  father  felt  that  Odo   had  developed   strong  Bolger
  traits  as  the  story  proceeded.  He  retains,  however,  a  Took mother.
  This   passage,   from  'Merry   was  the   son  of   Caradoc  Brandybuck',
  was  placed  within  square brackets,  apparently at  the time  of writing.
  The  genealogy  (part  of  which  has  appeared  before,  p.  100)   is  of
  course  very  different  from  the  final form,  but when  it is  seen that
  Frodo  Took  occupies  the  place  in  the   'tree'  afterwards   taken  by
  Peregrin  Took  (Pippin)   it  becomes   at  once   much  closer.   In  the
  following   table   the   names   in   LR  (Appendix   C,  Took   of  Creat
  Smials) are given in brackets.                                             
                                                                            
                               Frodo Took I, 'the Old Took' (Gerontius).     
                                                                            
        Caradoc Brandybuck. =   Yolanda Took.             Folco Took (Paladin).     
          (Saradoc.)   (Esmeralda.)                                             
                                                                            
                  Meriadoc Brandybuck.              Frodo Took II (Per@grin).
                                                                            
    Since   Caradoc   Brandybuck,   Merry's   father,  is   here  said   to  be
    Bingo's  cousin,  it  can  be  presumed  that  the  genealogy given  in the
    family  tree  of  the  Brandybucks   in  LR   was  already   present,  i.e.
    Caradoc  was  the  son  of  Old  Rory,  the   brother  of   Bingo's  mother
    Primula.  That  Rory  Brandybuck  was  Bingo's  uncle  is   never  actually

      said in LR, though of course it appears in the family  tree, but  it does
      appear  in  rejected  versions  of  the Farmer  Maggot episode  (pp. 289,
      296), and again later (pp. 385 - 6).                                      
          Merry  Brandybuck  and  Frodo  Took  are   the  great-great-grandsons
      of the Old Took, as are Merry and Pippin in LR.                          
  5.   This  passage  goes  back  to  the  third  version  of  'A Long-expected
      Party'  (p.  34).  '500  pieces  of  gold'  was  later  changed  to  '500
      double-dragons  (gold pieces  of the  highest value  in the  Shire)', but
      this was not taken up into the next  version of 'Ancient  History', which
      returns  to '500  gold pieces'.  sixty years:  111 less  51 (see  p. 31).
  6.  Gandalf's  visits  to  Hobbiton.  In The  Tale of  Years (LR  Appendix B)
      Bilbo's  Farewell  Party  took place  in 3001;  Gandalf visited  Frodo in
      the years 3004  - 8,  the last  visit being  in the  autumn of  3008; and
      returned finally in April 3018 (after g and a half years): Frodo's 50th
      birthday  was  in  September  of  that year,  when he  left Bag  End. Cf.
      FR p. 55.                                                                
          In the present text there was likewise a gap of three years after the
      Party  before  Gandalf  came  again;  but  then  he  came  once  or twice
      every year,  with one  gap of  two years,  till the  14th year  after the
      Party,  when  Bingo  was  47,  and after  that 'frequently'.  The passage
      was subsequently rewritten to read:
      ...seeing  that Bingo  was still  quite settled.  After that  he returned
      several   times,   until   he  suddenly   disappeared.  Bingo   heard  no
      news  of  him  between  the 7th  and  14th  years  after  Bilbo's  depar-
      ture,   when   Gandalf   suddenly   reappeared   one    winter's   night.
      After that the wizard came frequently and stayed longer.                 
          For  the year  in which  the conversation  in 'Ancient  History' took
      place (it was in the month of April, p. 254) see note 8.                 
  7.  This  is  a  reference  to  The  Hobbit,  Chapter  XIX 'The  Last Stage':
      ...  they  had  at  last  driven the  Necromancer from  his dark  hold in
      the south of Mirkwood.                                                   
            'Ere  long  now,'  Gandalf  was  saying,  'the  Forest   will  grow
      somewhat  more   wholesome.  The   North  is   freed  from   that  horror
      for many an age.                                                         
       On  his  copy  of  the  sixth  impression   (1954)  my   father  changed
      Gandalf's  words  to  read:  The North  will be  freed from  that horror
      for many long years,  I hope.  This is  the text  from the  third edition
      (1966).                                                                  
          The following passage is the first clear, if very  general, statement
      of  where  the  Land  of  Mordor  lay;  see  p.  218,  note 17.  Cf. also
      Gandalf's  account  of  Gollum's journey  (p. 264):  'his trail  also ran
      away  south,  far  south  of  where  I  actually  came  upon  him' (which
      was in Mirkwood).
  8.  in the spring of Bingo's 49th? 50th? year. At the beginning of  the next
      chapter in this 'phase' it is said that  Bingo decided  to leave  Bag End
      on September 22nd 'in this (his 50th) year.'                             

 9.   My  father  first made  the miller's  son Tom  Tunnelly, changing  it as
      he  wrote  to  Tom  Sandyman;  Tom  was  changed   to  Ted   in  pencil,
      before the chapter was finished, for Ted appears,  as first  written, at
      the end of it. See p. 249, note 33.                                     
 10.  It is a very old conception that appears here; see II.323 and  note 44.
      -  Bingo  describes  the  Elf-towers to  his companions  on the  walk to
      Farmer  Maggot's:  he  says  that  he  saw them  once, shining  white in
      the light  of the  Moon (p.  93). Trotter  at Bree  calls them  the West
      Towers (pp. 155, 159).                                                  
 11.  On  Gandalf's  visits  to  the  land  of  the  Necromancer  see  p.  85,
      note 12.                                                                
      Here my father wrote: 'Bingo had  never seen  it on  any finger  but his
      own forefinger', but at once struck it out.                             
 13.  My father first wrote 'One  ring to  bind them',  changing it  in pencil
      to 'and in the darkness bind them', which  is the  form as  written from
      the first in the whole verse that immediately follows.                  
 14.  The text of the verse of the  Rings. My  father's original  workings for
      this verse are extant. The first complete form reads:                   
                                                                             
           Nine for the Elven-kings under moon and star,                      
           Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone,                 
           Three for Mortal Men that wander far,                             
              One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne                        
             In  the  Land  of  Mor-dor  cohere the  shadows are.             
           One Ring to  rule them  all, One  Ring to  find them,              
           One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them           
             In the Land of Mor-dor where the shadwos are.                    
                                                                             
      He was at this time still uncertain as  to the  disposition of  the Rings
      among  the  different  peoples.  The  verse  in the  text of  the present
      chapter as first written also had  'Nine rings  for the  Elven-kings' and
      'Three  for Mortal  Men' (in  the original  text, p.  78, 'the  Elves had
      many',  and  'Men  had  three rings',  but 'others  they found  in secret
      places cast away by the  elf-wraiths'). But  he wrote  in the  margin (in
      ink and at the same time as the verse itself) '3' against 'Nine'  and 'g'
      against 'Three',  subsequently changing  the words  in the  verse itself:
      see note 22.                                                            
        Another preliminary version of the verse has:                         
                                                                             
           Twelve for Mortal Men doomed to die,                              
           Nine for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone,                  
           Three for the Elven-kings of earth, sea, and sky,                  
               One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne.                      
                                                                             
      'Twelve'  and  'Nine'  were  then  changed  to  'Nine'  and  'Seven'.  On
      there being at one time twelve Black Riders see  p. 196.  In the  text of
      the chapter (p.  260) the  Three Rings  are called  the Rings  'of earth,
      air, and sky'.                                                          

  15.  The text as first  written here  was 'and  now that  he knows  or guesses
       where it is he desires so greatly.'                                      
  16.  My  father  wrote  here:  'In  ancient days  the Necromancer  [servant of
       ???]  the  Dark Lord  Sauron.' The brackets  and queries  were put  in at
       the time of writing or very soon after. I  can only  explain this  on the
       assumption  that  he  was   momentarily  thinking   of  Morgoth   as  the
       Dark  Lord,  before  he  wrote the  name Sauron;  but it  is odd  that he
       did not simply strike out the words 'servant of'.                        
  17.  Against  this  passage  my  father  wrote  in  the  margin: 'Ring-wraiths
       later' (see p. 260). In the original text (p.  78, and  cf. the  draft on
       which  that  was  based,  p.  75)  the  Wraiths  are  mentioned  at  this
       point.                                                                   
  18.  My  father  wrote  'Nine,  Seven,  Three,  and  One',   reversing  'Nine'
       and 'Three' in pencil. - Here appears explicitly for  the first  time the
       distinction between the lesser Rings and the Rings of Power.             
  19.  The  text  as  written,  but  probably  changed  immediately,  was:  'but
       could  see  both  the  world  under  the  sun  and  the phantom  world [>
       the  world  of  shadow]  in  which  the invisible  creatures of  the Lord
       moved.'                                                                  
  20.  With  this  account of  the relation  of the  power of  the Rings  to the
       innate  qualities  of  those  who  bore  them,  and  of  the  potency  of
       the  One  Ring  in   the  hand   of  its   maker,  compare   Queries  and
       Alterations, note 12 (p. 227), where the  idea of  the Ruling  Ring first
       explicitly appears.                                                      
  21.  Cf. p. 212, and Queries and Alterations, note 10 (p. 225).               
  22.  Here the Three Rings of the  Elves appear  in the  text as  first written
       (and  the  Nine Rings  of Men  in the  next paragraph):  see note  14. In
       the  draft  of  the  Ring-verse given  at the  end of  note 14  the Three
       Rings are 'of earth, sea, and sky', whereas here they are 'of earth, air,
       and                                                                 sky.'
  23.  wizards:  cf.  p.  211,  where  Gandalf  at Rivendell  likewise includes
       'wizards'     among     the     servants     of     the     Dark    Lord.
  24.  the  middle-earth  was  changed  from  the  middle-world, which  is used
       earlier in this passage and again subsequently.                          
  25.  The meaning  appears to  be that  after the  loss of  the Ruling  Ring to
       the  Necromancer,  the  Ring-wraiths  could  no  longer  function  as his
       servants;  they  were  not  definitively  destroyed,  but  they   had  no
       effective  existence.  Gandalf  was  soon  to  be  proved  wrong  in this
       opinion, of course; and it may be that  my father  introduced it  here to
       explain Gandalf's failure to take  them into  account. In  FR he  is less
       confident:  'It is  many a  year since  the Nine  walked abroad.  Yet who
       knows?  As  the  Shadow  grows  once  more,  they  too  may  walk again.'
  26.  The  name  of  the King  of Men  was first  written Valandil;  above this
       my  father  wrote  Eand  Orendil. The  next part  of Gandalf's  story was
       constantly  changed  in  the  act  of  composition,  and   at  subsequent
       occurrences   the   name   of   the  King   varies  between   Valandil  >

                                                  
                                                                                 
        Orendil/Elendil,  Elendil  >  Orendil,  and   then  Orendil   unchanged;  I
        read  Orendil  throughout.  For  previous  hesitation  over  the  name  see
        p. 174 note 25 and p. 197 note 3.                                         
  27.   Here my father first  wrote. "but  ere he  fell Gilgalad  cut the  One Ring
        from the hand finger  of Sauron,  and gave  it to  Ithildor that  stood by,
        but  Ithildor  took  it  for  his  own.' This  was changed  at the  time of
        writing  to  the  text  given.  hand  finger  was  left  thus;  I read finger
        because  that  is  the  word  used  in  the  next text  of this  chapter. -
        Ithildor  was  changed  to  Isildor at  each occurrence  until the  last in
        this  passage,  where  Isildor  was the  form first  written. See  note 29.
  28.   The  original  reading  here  was:  'but  the  Ring  [or  >]  and  his fate
        betrayed him'.                                                            
  29.   The  story  of  the  One  Ring  now  moves  further.  In the  original text
        (p. 78) it was simply that the Ring 'fell  from the  hand of  an elf  as he
        swam  across  a  river;  and  it  betrayed  him,  for  he  was  Hying  from
        pursuit  in  the  old  wars,  and  he  became visible  to his  enemies, and
        the  goblins  slew  him.' In  Queries and  Alterations note  12 (p.  226) a
        new  element  was  proposed:  that  the  Ring  was  'taken  from  the  Lord
        himself  when  Gilgalad  wrestled  with him,  and taken  by a  flying Elf';
        the implication clearly being that Gilgalad took  it (as  said at  first in
        the  present  text,  see  note  27).  Now  the Elf  becomes Isildor  son of
        Orendil (Flendil: note 26).                                               
  30.   This  passage,  from  'And  there  has  also  always  been  a  queer fate',
        was  enclosed  in  brackets  with  a  query;  and  the last  sentence, 'But
        the  evil  they   work...',  additionally   enclosed  in   double  brackets
        with    a    double    query.    The   sentences    immediately   following
        (Gandalf's  'And  that  too  may  be  a  comforting  thought, or  not', and
        the first part of Bingo's reply) are a  pencilled addition.  But it  is not
        clear  to  me  why  Bingo  should  be  discouraged  by the  suggestion that
        the  evil  wrought  by  the  Rings  could  turn  to  good  and  against the
        design of their maker.                                                    
  31.   Bingo's  version  has  slight  deviations from  the text  in The  Hobbit. -
        It  is  not  very  evident  what  Gandalf had  deduced from  Gollum's first
        riddle.                                                                   
  32.   In place of  this passage,  from 'He  had found  out eventually',  the text
        as first written had (much as in the original version, p. So): 'I  think it
        is  certain  that  Gollum  knew after  a time  that Bilbo  had in  some way
        got "his" Ring. One can imagine...'                                       
           With   the   pencilled   extension   Gandalf's   explanation    of   how
        Gollum  knew  that  the  hobbit  had  got  the  Ring  is extended  to cover
        the  fact  that  Gollum  also  found  out what  his name  was. But  this is
        odd,  since  in  the  original  story  in  The  Hobbit  as  in  the revised
        version  Bilbo  told  Gollum  his  name:  '"What  iss  he,   my  precious?"
        whisperered  Gollum.  "I  am  Mr  Bilbo   Baggins..."'  See   further  note
        34 (and cf. FR p. 66).                                                    
  33.   This   phrase  of   Gandalf's,  'I   think  indeed   that  Gollum   is  the

       beginning of our present troubles',  is repeated  from the  original text
       (p. 81), and  here as  there seems  to refer  to the  fact that  the Dark
       Lord  was  known  to  Gandalf  to be  seeking the  Ring in  the direction
       of the Shire. But it is still not really explained what kind of searching
       could lead  Gandalf to  describe it  as 'our  present trouble',  since he
       knew  nothing  of  the  Black  Riders  (see  Queries and  Alterations, p.
       224). He can hardly  be referring  to those  things mentioned  earlier in
       the  chapter  (p.  253):  Men  moving  North  and  West,  goblins  multi-
       plying,  new  kinds  of  trolls;  for  these  were surely  large manifes-
       tations  of  the  growing  power  of the  Dark Lord,  rather than  of the
       search for the Ring.                                                     
  34.  Here follows: '(for his ears are keen and his  spies legion)',  marked in
       pencil  for  deletion.  This  change  perhaps  goes  with   the  puzzling
       addition  referred  to  in note  32, where  Gandalf suggests  that Gollum
       had  eventually  found  out  Bilbo's name;  for in  that case,  if Gollum
       had  indeed  been  to  Mordor,  he  himself  could  have told  the Necro-
       mancer that 'Baggins' had taken the Ring.                                
  35.  From this point the text is written in faint pencil.                     
  36.  Above 'nineteen' is pencilled '20'. This is the  first occurrence  of the
       term 'Rings of Power'.                                                   
  37.  From this point the  text is  again in  ink, a  good clear  manuscript to
       the end of the chapter.                                                  
  38.  The   meaning   must  surely   be  that   Gandalf  had   'discovered  the
       letters  of  fire'  on  the  Ring  before Bilbo  left Hobbiton;  which is
       curious, since Gandalf also says that he did  not tell  Bilbo, and  it is
       hard  to  imagine  him  conducting  the  test  without  Bilbo  knowing of
       it.  In  FR  (p.  65),  when  Frodo  asked  him  when  he  discovered the
       fire-writing,  he  replied:  'Just  now in  this room,  of course.  But I
       expected  to  find  it.  I  have come  back from  dark journeys  and long
       search  to make  that final  test.' Gandalf's  words on  p. 256  could be
       taken to mean  that he  did not  know for  certain until  now: 'I  do not
       yet  know  quite  all.  Give  me  the  Ring  a  minute.' But  they cannot
       mean this; and he refers (p. 262) to the fire-writing on  the Ring  as if
       it had been one of the main pieces of  evidence in  his deduction  of the
       story which he now told to Bingo.                                        
          My father later pencilled an 'X' in the margin of  the text  here, and
       scribbled 'did not know until recently'.                                 
  39.  See p. 252.                                                              
  40.  The original drafting  for the  episode is  extant, scribbled  faintly at
       the end of the manuscript  of the  original version  of the  chapter, and
       is naturally less finished; but already in this draft  the final  text is
       fully present except in details of expression.                           

                                     XVI.                                   
                             DELAYS ARE DANGEROUS.                          
                                                                           
 From  'Ancient  History'  my  father  proceeded  to  the  revision   of  the
 original  second  chapter,  which  had  been given  the title  'Three's Com-
 pany  and  Four's  More'  (p.  49);  this new  version becomes  Chapter III,
 but was given  no title.  Later, he  scribbled in  at the  head of  the text
 'Delays  are  Dangerous'  (which  is the  title ab  initio of  the following
 version of the chapter), and it is convenient to adopt this here.          
  Some  exceedingly  rough  and  fluid  notes  -  the  continuation  of those
 mentioned at the beginning of the last chapter, p. 250 - are all  that exist
 by way  of preparatory  writing for  this revision.  I have  already noticed
 (p.  250)  that the  story of  Bingo's dinner-party  for Merry,  Frodo Took,
 and  Odo  Bolger  on  the  eve  of  departure  was  devised  here,  and that
 against  this  my  father  wrote 'Sam  Gamgee to  replace Odo'  (these notes
 preceded  the  writing  of  'Ancient  History',   where  Sam   Gamgee  first
 emerged). But Odo could not be  got rid  of so  easily. The  notes continue:
 Gandalf was  supposed to  come to  party but  did not  turn up.  Bingo waits
 till  Friday  [September  23]  but  foolishly  did not  wait any  longer, as
 Sackville-Bagginses  threaten  to  turn  him  out:  but  sets off  on Friday
 night.  Gives  out  he  is  going  to  stay  with  Merry  and return  to his
 Brandybuck relations.                                                      
 A  rejected  suggestion  that  Odo  remained  at Hobbiton  'to give  news to
 Gandalf'  shows my  father already  pondering this  question, which  after a
 long  history of  change would  ultimately lead  to Fredegar  Bolger remain-
 ing  at  Crickhollow (FR  p. 118). In  these notes  a Brandybuck  with the
 Arthurian  name of  Lanorac (changed  from Bercilak),  a cousin  of Merry's,
 'has been ordered to have all ready' in Buckland; and there is  a suggestion
 for the story after they  leave Buckland  and enter  the Old  Forest: 'Frodo
 wants to come but is told no: to give  news to  Gandalf. Merry  says nothing
 -  but  does come:  locks door  and throws  key over  hedge.' With  this cf.
 Queries  and  Alterations,  note  2   (p.  221):   Frodo  says   goodbye  at
 Bucklebury.  Only  Merry  and  Bingo  ride  on  into  exile  - because Merry
 insists. Bingo originally  intended to  go alone'  (this was  written before
 Sam Gamgee entered).                                                       
  The  text  of  the  new  version of  this chapter  is the  most complicated
 document yet  encountered. It  begins as  manuscript, in  which part  of the
 narrative  is in  two variant  forms, and  then turns  back to  the original
 typescript (given in full on pp. 49 -  65), which  was heavily  corrected in
 two forms (with different  inks to  cover different  versions): some  of the
 more  extensive  changes  are  on  inserted  slips.  At  the  end  my father

  abandoned  the  old   typescript  and   concluded  the   chapter  in   a  new
  manuscript - the first part of  it in  three versions.  To present  the whole
  complex in this book is obviously impossible, and is  in any  case in  no way
  necessary for the understanding of the development of the narrative.         
    The initial portion in manuscript extends as  far as  the beginning  of the
  hobbits' walk on the first  night ('They  went very  quietly over  fields and
  along hedgerows and the borders of coppices, until night  fell', p.  50), and
  the  opening  of  the  chapter  presents an  entirely new  narrative. Leaving
  aside for the  moment the  passage existing  in variant  forms, the  new text
  while very rough reaches in all essentials the final form in FR, pp. 74 - 80.
  There are  many differences  still in  wording, and  the chapter  begins with
  the local  gossip about  the sale  of Bag  End and  then proceeds  to Bingo's
  discussion  with  Gandalf  about  his  departure, rather  than the  other way
  about,"  but  differences  of  substance  are  few  and  mostly  slight. More
  emphasis is placed on the fact that  the 22nd  of September  was in  that year
  again a Thursday (as it was in FR,  p. 77):  that seemed  to [Bingo  s] fancy
  to  mark  the  date  as  the  proper one  for setting  out to  follow Bilbo.'
  Gandalf's tone  to Bingo  is a  bit grimmer,  and has  more asperity;  and he
  does not refer to the possibility that it may, or may not, be Bingo's task to
  find  the  Cracks  of  Doom.  His  parting  words  to  him  are significantly
  different from what he says in FR; and Bingo's state  of mind  on the  eve of
  his own departure is given a  different emphasis.  I give  here a  portion of
  the text, taking it up from the point where Gandalf  says that  the direction
  which  Bingo  takes  when  he  leaves  Hobbiton  should  not  be   known  (FR
  p. 74, at bottom).                                                           
                                                                              
    'Well  now,'  said  Bingo,  'do  you  know  I  have  mostly   thought  just
  about  going,  and   have  never   decided  on   the  direction!   For  where
  shall  I  go,  and  by  what  shall  I  steer, and  what is  to be  my quest?
  This  will  indeed  be  the  opposite  of  Bilbo's  adventure:   setting  out
  without  any  known  destination,  and  to  get  rid  of  a treasure,  not to
  find one.'                                                                   
    'And  to  go  there  but  not  come  back  again,  likely   enough,'  added
  Gandalf grimly.                                                              
    'That  I  know,'  said  Bingo,  pretending  not   to  be   impressed.  'But
  seriously, in what direction shall I start?'                                 
    'Towards   danger,   but  not   too  rashly,   nor  too   straight  towards
  it,'  answered  Gandalf.  'Make  first for  Rivendell, if  you will  at least
  take  that  much  advice.  After  that  we  shall  see  -  if  you  ever  get
  there: the Road is not as easy as it was.'                                   
    'Rivendell!'  said   Bingo.  'Very   good.  That   will  please   Sam.'  He
  did  not  add  that  it  pleased  him  too;  and  that  though  he   had  not
  decided,  he  had  often  thought  of  making  for   the  house   of  Elrond;
  if  only  because  he  thought  that  perhaps  Bilbo,  after  he  had  become
  free again, had chosen that way too.                                         

                                      
                                                                           
   The  decision  to  go   Eastwards  directed   Bingo's  later   plans.  It
 was  for  this  reason  that  he  gave   out  that   he  was   removing  to
 Buckland,   and   actually   did   ask   his   Brandybuck   cousins,  Merry
 and  Lanorac  and  the rest,  to look  out for  a little  place for  him to
 live  in.(2) In the  meantime   he  went   on  much   as  usual,   and  the
 summer  passed.  Gandalf  had  gone  off  again.  But  he  was  invited  to
 the  farewell  party,  and  had  promised  to  arrive  on  the  day before,
 or at latest on the  22nd itself.  'Don't go  till you  see me,  Bingo,' he
 said,  as  he  took his  leave one  wet dark  evening in  May. 'I  may have
 news,  and  useful  information  about  the  Road.  And   I  may   want  to
 come with you.'(3)                                                         
                                                                           
   The   autumn   came   on.    No   news    came   from    Gandalf.   There
 began  to  be  signs  of  activity  at  Bag-End.  Two  covered  carts  went
 off  laden.  They  were  understood  to  be  conveying  such  furniture  as
 Mr  Baggins  had   not  sold   to  the   Sackville-Bagginses  to   his  new
 house  in  Buckland  by  way   of  the   Brandywine  Bridge.   Odo  Bolger,
 Merry   Brandybuck,   and    Frodo   Took    were   staying    there   with
 Bingo.  The  four  of  them  seemed  to  be  busy  packing  and   the  hole
 was   all   upside-down.   On   Wednesday   September   21    Bingo   began
 to  look  out  anxiously  for  Gandalf,  but  there  was  no  sign  of him.
 His  birthday  morning  September  22  dawned,  as  fair  and  clear  as it
 had for  Bilbo's party  long ago  (as it  now seemed  to Bingo).  But still
 Gandalf  did  not  appear.  In   the  evening   Bingo  gave   his  farewell
 party.  The  absence  of  Gandalf  rather  worried   Bingo  and   a  little
 damped  his  spirits,  which  had  been  steadily  rising  - as  every cool
 and  misty  autumn  morning  brought  him   closer  to   the  day   of  his
 going.  The  only  wrench  now   was  parting   from  his   young  friends.
 The  danger  did  not  seem  so  threatening.  He  wanted  to  be off  - at
 once.  Everyone  had  been  told  that  he   was  leaving   for  Bucklebury
 as  soon  as  possible  after  his  birthday.  The  Sackville-Bagginses got
 possession  after  midnight  on  the  23rd.  All  the  same,  he  wanted to
 see  Gandalf  first.  But  his  three  friends  were  in   high  spirits...
                                                                           
   From  the  end  of  Bingo's  birthday  dinner  to  the  beginning  of the
 hobbits'  night  walk  the  new  text  is  almost  the same  as that  in FR
 (pp. 77-80), apart from the  different hobbits  present (and  still leaving
 aside the part existing  in variant  forms). The  third cart,  bearing 'the
 remaining and more valuable things', went off as  in FR  on the  morning of
 the 23rd; at first Odo Bolger was said to be in charge of this, but he was
 changed,  apparently  at  once,  to  Merry  Brandybuck.  (In  FR  Merry was
 accompanied  by  Fredegar  Bolger,  and  my  father  queried in  the margin
 here:  'Merry  and  Odo?').  Now  enters the  story of  Bingo's overhearing
 Gaffer Gamgee talking (in almost the  same words  as in  FR) to  a stranger

                                  
                                                                                   
 at  the  end  of  Bagshot Row:  the first  germ of  this has  been seen  in Queries
 and  Alterations,  note  3  (p.  222).  The only  real difference  is that  the old
 discussion  among  the  hobbits  (p.  49)  whether  to  walk  far  or not  is still
 present,  Odo  disagreeing  with  Frodo  and   Bingo;  but   there  are   now  four
 of them, and Bingo asks Sam for his opinion:                                       
                                                                                   
    'Well, sir,' he answered, taking off his hat and looking up at the              
 sky,  'I  do  guess  that  it  may  be  pretty  warm   tomorrow.  And              
 walking in the sun, even at this time o'  year, with  a load  on your              
 back,  can be  wearisome, like.  I votes  with Mr  Frodo, if  you ask              
 me.'                                                                               
                                                                                   
    The   variant   section   was   written   continuously   with    the   preceding
 narrative - that is to say, it is the story as my father first intended to tell it,
 and  the  other  version  was  written  subsequently, at  first as  an alternative.
 The   divergence   begins   after   Merry's  departure   for  Buckland   on  Friday
 September 23, Bingo's last day at' Bag End.                                        
                                                                                   
    After lunch people began to arrive - some by invitation, others                 
 brought  by  rumour  and  curiosity.  They  found  the  door open,                 
 and Bingo on the mat in the hall waiting to greet them. Inside the                 
 hall was piled an  assortment of  packages, bric-a-brac  and small                 
 articles of furniture. On every package and item there was a label                 
 tied....                                                                           
                                                                                   
    On  the  manuscript  my  father  wrote  later   that  'this   variant  depending
 on  shortening  in  Chapter  I  and  the  transference  of  parting  gifts  etc. to
 I I  I' was  now rejected.  The shortening  of Chapter  I proposed  is in  fact the
 short  variant  of  the  story of  the aftermath  of Bilbo's  party which  has been
 described  on  pp. 241  -  2:  as  I  noted  there, 'the  entire "business"  of the
 presents,  and  the  invasion  of Bag  End, was  in this  variant removed',  for it
 was  now  to  be  transferred  to  Bingo's departure  - orat  least, was  under the
 option  of  being  so  transferred.  Thus  a   further  twist   is  given   to  the
 serpentine  history  of  this  element  in  ?he  Lard  of  the  Rings: for  what is
 involved is not of course a simple  reversion to  the story  as it  was at  the end
 of  the  'first  phase'  of  'A  Long-expected  Party', where  also the  gifts were
 Bingo's,  not  Bilbo's.  The  new idea  was that  the gifts,(4) the invasion  of Bag
 End,  the  ejection  of  the  hobbits  excavating  in  the  pantry,  and  the fight
 with   Sancho   Proudfoot   (his   adversary    here   being    Cosimo   Sackville-
 Baggins,(5) supported  by   his  mother,   who  broke   her  umbrella   on  Sancho's
 head)  -  that  all  this  took  place not  after the  great Birthday  Party (which
 was  now  Bilbo's),  but  after  Bingo's  own  discreet  birthday party  before his
 departure.                                                                         
    It is  possible and  even probable  that my  father's intention  in this  was to
 reduce  the  element  of  Hobbiton  comedy  that  confronts   the  reader   at  the
 outset,   and   introduce   sooner,   in   'Ancient   History',   the   very   much

  weightier  matters   that  had   come  into   being  since   'A  Long-expected
  Party' was first written.                                                     
    In this version the  story of  Bingo's walking  a little  way from  Bag End,
  and  so  hearing  Gaffer  Gamgee  talking  to  the  Black  Rider, was  not yet
  present;  and  when  he  has  sent  Sam  off with  the key  to his  father, he
  leaves  by  himself.  There  is  no  mention  of  Odo  Bolger  and  Frodo Toot
  before  the  variant  text  ends,  with  Bingo  going  down  the  garden path,
  jumping  the fence  at the  bottom, and  passing into  the twilight.  I cannot
  say for certain whether this is significant or not. It seems unlikely to  be a
  mere casual oversight; but if it is not,  it means  presumably that  my father
  was  contemplating  a  wholly  new  course  for  the  story:  Bingo   and  Sam
  journeying   through   the   Shire  alone.   He  had   certainly  contemplated
  something  of  the  sort earlier.  However this  may be,  nothing came  of it;
  and he passed on at once to the second version of this  part of  the narrative
  (the  form  in  FR),  where  Bingo  after listening  to Gaffer  Gamgee talking
  to  the  stranger  returns  to  Bag  End and  finds Odo  and Frodo  (Pippin in
  FR) sitting on their packs in the porch.                                      
                                                                               
    Effectively,  then, the  third chapter  of FR,  as far  as the  departure of
  Bingo  (Frodo)  from  Bag  End,  was  now  achieved.  My  father  here,  as  I
  have  said,  turned  back  to  the  original  typescript, and  used it  as the
  physical  basis  for  his  new  text  until near  the end  of the  chapter. He
  emended  it  in  different  inks,  and  added  this  note  on  the typescript:
  Corrections in black are for any  version. Those  in red  are for  the revised
  version  (with  Bilbo  as  party-giver  and  including   Sam).(6) In the  new
  material,  corrections   and  additions,   he  distinguished   very  carefully
  between  the  two  types  of  change: in  one case  he wrote  'red emendation'
  against the first part of a new  passage, and  'black emendation'  against the
  next part, continuous with the first (the passage is  given in  note x  x, and
  the reason for the distinction is very clear). It is hard to see why he should
  have gone to all this trouble, unless at this stage  he was  still (remarkably
  enough)  uncertain  about  the  new  story,  with  'Bilbo  as  party-giver and
  including Sam', and saw the possibility of returning to the old.              
    As I have said, the presentation of the  results of  this procedure  here is
  impossible,(7) and  unnecessary  even  if  possible.  The  effect  of  all  the
  emendations is to bring the  original version  very close  indeed to  the form
  in FR (pp.  80 ff.).  In places  the new  version is  a halfway  house between
  the two, and in the latter part  the corrections  are less  thoroughgoing, but
  only here and there is  there anything  of narrative  importance to  note; and
  in what follows it can  be assumed  unless the  contrary is  said that  the FR
  text  was  already  present  in  all  particulars  other  than  the  choice of
  phrasing.   But   the   hobbits  are   now  four:   Bingo,  Frodo   Toot,  Odo
  Bolger,  and  Sam  Gamgee,  so  that  there  is  in   this  respect   also  an
  intervening  stage here  between the  original story  (where there  are three,
  Bingo,  Frodo  Took,  and  Odo  Took)  and  FR  (where  there  are  again only
  three,  but  a  different  three,  Frodo  Baggins,  Peregrin  Took,   and  Sam

                  
                                                                            
  Gamgee),  and  some  variation between  the versions  in the  attribution of
  remarks to different characters (on this matter see p. 70). But  things said
  by Sam in FR are said by him in this text also.(8)                         
                                                                            
     At the beginning of this part of the chapter, where the old text  (p. 50)
  had:  'They  were  now  in  Tookland;  and  they  began  to  climb  into the
  Green  Hill  Country  south  of  Hobbiton',  the new  reads: 'They  were now
  in  Tookland  and  going  southwards;  but  a  mile or  two further  on they
  crossed  the  main  road  from  Much  Hemlock  (in  the  Hornblower country)
  to  Bywater   and  Brandywine   Bridge.  Then   they  struck   eastward  and
  began  to climb...' (9) Beside this  my father  wrote: '? Michel  Delving (the
  chief town of the Shire back west on the  White Downs).'  This is  the first
  appearance  of  Michel  Delving,  and  of  the  White  Downs  (see  p. 295).
  'Much  Hemlock'  echoes  the   name  Much   Wenlock  in   Shropshire  (Much
  'Great', as Michel).                                                       
     The Woody End is not called  'a wild  corner of  the Eastfarthing'  - the
  'Farthings' had not yet been devised -  but it  is added  that 'Not  many of
  them [hobbits] lived in that part.'                                        
     The  verse  The  Road  goes ever  on and  on, now  ascribed to  Bingo and
  not to Frodo Took, is still as in the original version (p. 53).(10)        
                                                                            
       A slight difference from FR is present at the first appearance of the
  Black Rider on the road (old version p. 54):                               
                                                                            
     Odo and Frodo ran quickly to the left, and  down into  a little         
  hollow not far from the road. There they lay flat. Bingo hesitated         
  for a second: curiosity or some other impulse was  struggling with         
  his desire to hide. Sam waited for his master  to move.  The sound         
  of hoofs drew nearer. 'Get down, Sam!' said  Bingo, just  in time.         
  They threw themselves flat in a patch of long grass behind  a tree         
  that overshadowed the road."                                               
                                                                            
     In the discussion that followed the  departure of  the first  Black Rider
  my father retained at  this time  the old  version (p.  54), in  which Frodo
  Took told of his encounter with a  Black Rider  in the  north of  the Shire:
                                                                            
  ... I haven't seen one of that Kind in our Shire for years.'               
     'There are Men about, all the same,' said  Bingo; 'and  I have          
  heard many reports  of strange  folk on  our borders,  and within          
  them, of late. Down in the south Shire they have had some trouble          
  with Big People, I am told. But I have heard of nothing like this          
  rider.'                                                                    
     'I  have  though,' said  Frodo, who  had listened  intently to          
  Bingo's description  of the  Black Rider.  'I remember  now some-          
  thing I had quite forgotten. I was walking away  up in  the North          
  Moor - you know, right up on the northern borders of the  Shire -          

                                               
                                                                          
 this  very  summer,  when  a  tall  black-cloaked  rider  met  me.  He was
 riding  south,  and  he  stopped  and  spoke,  though  he  did   not  seem
 able  to  speak  our  language  very  well;  he  asked   me  if   I  knew
 whether  there  were   any  folk   called  Baggins   in  those   parts.  I
 thought  it  very  queer  at  the time;  and I  had a  queer uncomfortable
 feeling, too. I could not  see any  face under  his hood.  I said  no, not
 liking the look of  him. As  far as  I heard,  he never  found his  way to
 Hobbiton and the Baggins country.'                                        
   'Begging  your  pardon,'  put  in  Sam  suddenly,  'but  he   found  his
 way  to  Hobbiton  all  right,  him  or  another  like  him.  Anyway  it's
 from  Hobbiton  as  this  here  Black  Rider  comes  -  and  I  know where
 he's going to.'                                                           
   'What  do  you  mean?'   said  Bingo,   turning  sharply.   'Why  didn't
 you speak up before?'                                                     
                                                                          
 Sam's report  of the  Gaffer's account  to him  of the  Rider who  came to
 Hobbiton is exactly as in FR, p. 85. Then follows:                        
                                                                          
   'Your  father  can't  be  blamed  anyway,'  said  Bingo.  'But  I should
 have  taken more  care on  the road,  if you  had told  me this  before. I
 wish  I  had  waited  for  Gandalf,'  he   muttered;  'but   perhaps  that
 would have only made matters worse.'                                      
   'Then   you   know   or   guess   something   about  the   rider?'  said
 Frodo, who had caught the muttered words. 'What is he?'                   
   'I  don't  know,  and  I  would rather  not guess,'  said Bingo.  'But I
 don't believe either this  rider (or  yours, or  Sam's -  if they  are all
 different)  was  really  one of  the Big  People, not  an ordinary  Man, I
 mean.  I  wish  Gandalf  was  here;  but  now  the  most  we  can  hope is
 that   he   will   come   quick   to   Bucklebury.   Whoever   would  have
 expected  a  quiet  walk  from  Hobbiton  to  Buckland  to  turn   out  so
 queer.  I  had  no  idea  that  I  was  letting you  folk in  for anything
 dangerous.'                                                               
   'Dangerous?'  said  Frodo.  'So  you  think  it  is dangerous,  do you?
 You  are  rather  close,  aren't  you,  Uncle  Bingo?  Never  mind   -  we
 shall  get  your secret  out of  you some  time. But  if it  is dangerous,
 then I am glad we are with you.'                                          
   'Hear,  hear!'  said  Odo. 'But  what is  the next  thing to  do? Shall
 we go on at once, or stay here and have some food?...                     
                                                                          
   My father still retained the development (see pp. 55 - 6  and note  x x)
 that a Black Rider came past, and briefly stopped beside, the great hollow
 tree in which the hobbits sat, and only changed this story at its end:
                                                                          
 ...  We  are  probably  making  a  fuss  about  nothing [said  Odo]. This

 second rider, at any rate, was very likely only a wandering stranger           
 who has got lost; and if he met us, he would just ask us the  way to           
 Buckland or Brandywine Bridge, and ride on.'                                   
   'What if  he stops  us and  asks if  we know  where Mr  Baggins of           
 Bag-end is?' said Frodo.                                                       
   'Give  him  a  true  answer,'  said  Bingo.  'Either say:  Back in           
 Hobbiton,  where  there  are  hundreds;  or  say  Nowhere.  For  Mr           
 Bingo  Baggins  has  left  Bag-end,  and  not  yet  found  any other           
 home.  Indeed I  think he  has vanished;  here and  now I  become Mr           
 Hill of Faraway.'                                                              
                                                                               
   An alternative version is provided:                                          
                                                                               
   'What  if  he stops  us and  asks if  we know  where Mr  Baggins of          
 Bag-end is? ' said Frodo.                                                      
   'Tell him that he has vanished! ' said Odo. 'After all  one Baggins          
 of Bag-end has vanished, and how should we  know that  it is  not old          
 Bilbo  that  he  wants  to  pay a  belated call  on? Bilbo  made some          
 queer friends in his travels, by his own account.'                             
   Bingo looked quickly at Odo.  'That is  an idea,'  he said.  'But I          
 hope we shall not be asked that  question; and  if we  are, I  have a          
 feeling that silence will be the best answer. Now let us get on. I am          
 glad the road is winding.'                                                     
                                                                               
   This entire element was removed in FR (p. 86).                               
        When the singing of the Elves is heard (old version p. 58) Bingo still
 attributes  to  Bilbo  his  knowledge that  there were  sometimes Elves  in the
 Woody  End  (cf.  the  passage  in  'Ancient  History',  p.  253), and  he says
 that  they  wander  into  the  Shire  in spring  and autumn  'out of  their own
 lands  far  beyond  the  river',  in FR  (p. 88)  Frodo knows  independently of
 Bilbo  that  Elves  may  be  met  with  in the  Woody End,  and says  that they
 come   'out   of  their   own  lands   away  beyond   the  Tower   Hills.'  The
 conception of Elvish lands west of  the Shire  was of  course fully  present at
 this  time:  cf.  Sam's  words  about Elves  'going to  the harbours,  out away
 West,  away  beyond  the  Towers'  (p.  254).  The  hymn  to  Elbereth  has the
 last emendation needed  to bring  it to  the final  form (see  p. 59):  cold to
 bright in the second line of the second verse. It is still said to be  sung 'in
 the secret elf-tongue'. At its end,  Bingo speaks  of the  High Elves  as Frodo
 does  in  FR  (p.  89),  though  without  saying  'They   spoke  the   name  of
 Elbereth! ' - thus it is not explained how he knows they are High Elves.(12)   
   Odo's  unfortunate  remark  ('I  suppose  we  shall  get  a  really  good bed
 and  supper?')  is  retained,  and  Bingo's  greeting  that  Bilbo  had  taught
 him,  'The  stars  shine  on  the  hour  of  our  meeting',  remains   only  in
 translation. Gildor in his reply refers to Bingo's being 'a scholar in the elf-
 tongue',  changed  from  'the  elf-latin' (p.  60), where  FR has  'the Ancient

              
                                                                          
 Tongue'. It is still the Moon, and not the autumn stars,  that is  seen in
 the sky; and the different recollections by the hobbits of the  meal eaten
 with the Elves are retained from the old  text, with  the addition  of the
 passage about Sam (FR p. 90).                                             
                                                                          
  From  this  point  my  father  abandoned the  old typescript,  and though
 returning to it  just at  the end  continued the  text in  manuscript. The
 beginning of Bingo's conversation with  Gildor is  extant in  three forms.
 All three begin  as in  FR, p.  92 ('They  spoke of  many things,  old and
 new'), but in the first Gildor goes on from 'The secret will not reach the
 Enemy from us' with 'But why did  you not  go before?'  - the  first thing
 that he says to Bingo in the original  version ('Why  did you  choose this
 moment to set out?', p. 62). Bingo replies with a very brief  reference to
 his divided mind about  leaving the  Shire, and  then Gildor  explains him
 to himself:                                                               
                                                                          
  'That  I  can  understand,'  said  Gildor.  'Half  your  heart  wished to
 go, but the  other half  held you  back; for  its home  was in  the Shire,
 and  its  delight  in  bed and  board and  the voices  of friends,  and in
 the  changing  of  the  gentle  seasons  among the  fields and  trees. But
 since  you are  a hobbit  that half  is the  stronger, as  it was  even in
 Bilbo. What has made it surrender?'                                       
  'Yes,  I  am  an  ordinary  hobbit,  and   so  I   always  shall   be,  I
 imagine,'  said  Bingo.  'But  a  most  un-hobbitlike  fate has  been laid
 upon me.'                                                                 
  'Then  you  are  not  an  ordinary  hobbit,'  said  Gildor,  'for  other-
 wise  that  could  not  be  so.  But the  half that  is plain  hobbit will
 suffer  much  I  fear from  being forced  to follow  the other  half which
 is  worthy  of  the strange  fate, until  it too  becomes worthy  (and yet
 remains  hobbit).  For  that  must  be the  purpose of  your fate,  or the
 purpose  of  that  part  of  your  fate which  concerns you  yourself. The
 hobbit half that loves the Shire is not to be  despised but  it has  to be
 trained,  and   to  rediscover   the  changing   seasons  and   voices  of
 friends when they have been lost.'                                        
                                                                          
 Here the text ends. The second of  these abandoned  versions is  nearer to
 FR, but  has Gildor  speak severely  about Bingo's  lateness on  the road:
                                                                          
   'Has Gandalf told you nothing?'                                         
   'Nothing about such creatures.'                                         
   'Is it not by his advice, then, that you have left your home? Did       
 he not even urge you to make haste? '                                     
   'Yes. He wished me to go sooner in the year. He said that delay         
 might prove dangerous; and I begin to fear that it has.'                  
   'Why did you not go before?'                                            

  Bingo  then  speaks  about  his  two  'halves',  though  without  comment,
  moves into an explanation of why he  lingered till  autumn, and  speaks of
  his dismay at the danger that is already threatening.                     
    The third text is very close to and quite largely word for word the same
  as the final form until near the end of the conversation, where the matter
  though  essentially the  same is  somewhat differently  arranged. Gildor's
  advice about taking companions  is more  explicit than  in FR  ('Take such
  friends as are trusty and willing', p. 94): here he says 'If there are any
  whom you can wholly trust, and who are willing to  share your  peril, take
  them with  you.' He  is referring  to Bingo's  present companions;  for he
  goes on (much as in the old  version, p.  64): 'They  will protect  you. I
  think it  likely that  your three  companions have  already helped  you to
  escape:  the  Riders  did  not  know that  they were  with you,  and their
  presence has for the time being confused the scent.' But  at the  very end
  there occurs this passage:                                                
                                                                           
  ...  In   this  meeting   there  may   be  more   than  chance;   but  the
  purpose is not clear to me, and  I fear  to say  too much.  But' -  and he
  paused  and  looked  intently  at  Bingo  -  'have  you   perhaps  Bilbo's
  ring with you?'                                                           
    'Yes, I have,' said Bingo, taken aback.                                 
    'Then  I  will  add this  last word.  If a  Rider approaches  or pursues
  you  hard  -  do  not  use the  ring to  escape from  his search.  I guess
  that the ring will help him more than you.'                               
    'More  mysteries!'  said  Bingo.  'How   can  a   ring  that   makes  me
  invisible help a Black Rider to find me?'                                 
    'I  will  answer  only  this,'  said  Gildor:  'the  ring  came  in  the
  beginning   from   the   Enemy,   and   was   not   made  to   delude  his
  servants.'                                                                
    'But   Bilbo  used   his  ring   to  escape   from  goblins,   and  evil
  creatures,' said Bingo.                                                   
    'Black  Riders  are  not goblins,'  said the  Elf. 'Ask  no more  of me.
  But  my  heart  forebodes  that  ere  all  is  ended  you  Bingo   son  of
  Drogo  will  know  more  of  these  fell  things  than  Gildor  Inglorion.
  May Elbereth protect you! '                                               
    'You  are  far  worse  than  Gandalf,'  cried  Bingo;  'and  I  am  now
  more  completely  terrified  than  I  have  ever  been in  my life.  But I
  am deeply grateful to you.'                                               
                                                                           
    The end of the chapter is  virtually the  same in  the old  version, the
  present text, and FR; but  now Gildor  adds the  salutation: 'and  may the
  stars shine upon the end of your road.'                                   

                                NOTES.                                         
                                                                              
  1. The  different  arrangement  of  the  opening  of  the  chapter  introduces
     Bingo's  intention  to go  and live  in Buckland  before it  actually arose
     as a result of  his conversation  with Gandalf.  It may  be that  my father
     afterwards  reversed  the  order of  these narrative  elements in  order to
     avoid this.                                                               
  2. This  passage,  from  'and  actually  did  ask  his   Brandybuck  cousins',
     was struck out in pencil and replaced by the following:                   
        With   the  help   of  his   Brandybuck  cousin   Merry  he   chose  and
     bought  a  little  house  [added  subsequently:  at  Crickhollow]   in  the
     country  behind  Bucklebury,  and   began  to   make  preparations   for  a
     removal.                                                                  
  3. Gandalf's words were changed in pencil thus:                              
        'I shall want to see  you before  you set  out, Bingo,'  he said,  as he
     took  his  leave  one  wet  dark  evening  in  May. 'I  may have  news, and
     useful  information  about  the   Road.'  Bingo   was  not   clear  whether
     Gandalf intended to go with him to Rivendell or not.                      
  4. There  is no  new list  of presents  in this  variant: my  father contented
     himself  with  a  reference  to  the  latest  version  of  'A Long-expected
     party', which was to be 'suitably emended' (p. 247, note 21).             
  5. The  Sackville-Bagginses'  son  now  first  appears.  It  is  said  in both
     variants  that  Lobelia  'and  her  pimply  son   Cosimo  (and   his  over-
     shadowed  wife  Miranda)  lived  at  Bag-end  for   a  long   while  after-
     wards /  for many  a year  after.' Lobelia  was in  both versions  92 years
     old  at  this time,  and had  had to  wait seventy-seven  years (as  in FR)
     for  Bag-end,  which   makes  her   a  grasping   fifteen  year   old  when
     Bilbo  came  back  at  the  end  of The  Hobbit to  find her  measuring his
     rooms;  in  FR  she  was  a  hundred  years  old,  and  in  the  second  of
     these  variant  versions  '92'  is  changed  to  '102'.  In  FR her  son is
     'sandy-haired Lotho', and no wife is named.                               
  6. The corrections  are in  fact in  blue, black,  and red  inks. I  have said
     earlier (p. 48 and note 1) that those in black ink belong to a  very early
     stage  of  revision.  Those  in  blue  and  red  were  made at  the present
     stage;  but  in  his  note  on  the  subject  my father  no doubt  meant by
     'corrections in black' to include all those that were not in red.         
  7. I  give  an  example,  however,  to  show  the  nature  of   the  procedure
     (original version p. 51):                                                 
          'The  wind's  in  the  West,'  said  Odo.  'If  we  go down  the other
     side of this  hill we  are climbing,  we ought  to find  a spot  fairly dry
     and sheltered.'                                                           
     The  red  ink corrections  are given  here in  italics; other  changes from
     the original text are in black (actually blue, see note 6) ink.           
          'The  wind's  in  the  West,'  said  Sam.  'If  we  go down  the other
     side  of  this  hill  we  are  climbing,  we  shall  find  a  spot  that is
     sheltered   and  snug   enough,  sir.   There  is   a  dry   fir-wood  just

  ahead, if I remember rightly.' Sam knew the land well within
  about twenty miles of Hobbiton, but that was the limit of his
  geography.
 See also note 11.
 8. The text is actually rendered still more complicated by a layer of
  later emendation arising from my father's intention to get rid of Odo
  altogether, leaving Bingo, Frodo Took, and Sam, but this is here
  ignored.
 9. In the original texts the crossing of the East Road had been omitted
    (see pp. 46 - 7, 50). - With 'Michel Delving' for 'Much Hemlock (in
  the Hornblower country)' and 'south-east' for 'eastward', this is the
  reading of FR - in the first edition of LR. In the second edition
  (1966) the text was changed to read:
    A mile or two further south they hastily crossed the great road
   from the Brandywine Bridge; they were now in the Tookland and
   bending south-eastwards they made for the Green Hill Country.
   As they began to climb its first slopes they looked back and saw
   the lamps in Hobbiton far off twinkling...
   Robert Foster, in The Complete Guide to Middle-earth, entry
  Hornblower, says that 'all or most' of the Hornblowers 'dwelt in the
  Southfarthing'; this seems to be based only on the statement in the
  Prologue to LR that Tobold Hornblower, first grower of pipeweed,
  lived at Longbottom in the Southfarthing, but may well be a legiti-
  mate deduction. A few hobbit 'family territories' are marked on my
  father's map of the Shire (p. 107, item I), but the Hornblowers are
  not among them. (The Bracegirdles are placed west of Girdley
  Island in the Brandywine; the Bolgers south of the East Road and
  north of the Woody End; the Boffins north of Hobbiton Hill - cf.
  Mr Boffin of Overhill, FR p. 53; and the Tooks in Tookland, south
  of Hobbiton.) See p. 304, note 1.
 10. See p. 246, note 18. The verse is now a repetition, for Bilbo had
   sung it before he left Bag End (p. 240); but whereas in FR
   (pp. 82-3) the only difference between the two recitations is that
  Bilbo says 'eager feet' in the 5th line and Frodo 'weary feet', here
  Bingo has also 'we' for 'I' in the 4th and 8th lines (retained from the
  original text, p. 53).
 11. This passage interestingly exemplifies the 'two-tier' system of
   emendation which my father employed in this text (see p. 277). The
   new passage in which Bingo wonders if it is Gandalf coming after
   them and proposes to surprise him, though feeling certain that it is
   not him - exactly as in FR pp. 83 - 4 - is a 'red' emendation: because
   according to the new story Gandalf might well be expected to have
   just missed them at Hobbiton and be following on their heels,
   whereas according to the old story - in which the Birthday Party was
   Bingo's - Gandalf left immediately after the fireworks and went east
   (see p. 101 and note 12).

  The  remainder  of  the  new  passage  (cited  in  the  text),  describing
  Bingo's  conflicting  desires  to  hide  and  not  to  hide, is  a 'black'
  emendation  (i.e.  covering  both  'old' and  'new' stories)  - as  is the
  addition   almost  immediately   following,  in   which  Bingo   feels  an
  urgent  desire  to  put  on  the  Ring,  but  does not:  because, whatever
  version  is  followed,  the  nature  of  the  Ring  demands  these changes
  (cf.  Queries  and  Alterations,  note  7p  (p. 224):  'Bingo must  NOT put
  on  his  Ring  when  Black  Riders  go  by  -  in  view of  later develop-
  ments.  He  must   think  of   doing  so   but  somehow   be  prevented.')
12. The text of FR here, 'I did not know that any of that fairest folk were
  ever seen in the  Shire', was  emended in  the second  edition to  'Few of
  that fairest folk are ever seen  in the  Shire.'- For  previous references
  to  the  High  Elves  (which  means   now  the   Elves  of   Valinor)  see
  pp 187, 225, 260.                                                         

                                      XVII.                                    
                            A SHORT CUT TO MUSHROOMS.                          
                                                                              
 The  third  of  the  original  chapters  (pp.  88   ff.)  was   now  rewritten,
 numbered  'IV',  and  given  a  title,  'A  Short  Cut  to Mushrooms'.  This is
 a readily legible but much  altered manuscript,  with a  great deal  of variant
 and  rejected  material.  The  final  result, however,  as achieved  already at
 this time (if a long variant  version of  the Farmer  Maggot interlude,  not at
 once  rejected,  is  ignored for  the moment),  is virtually  Chapter 5  in The
 Fellowship of the Ring, to  a very  great extent  word for  word, and  there is
 not much that needs to be said about it.                                      
  The  chief  difference from  FR lies  of course  in the  fact that  there were
 still  Frodo  Took  and  Odo  Bolger  and  not  simply  Pippin.  Pippin's  part
 and  all  the  things he  says in  FR are  present in  almost exactly  the same
 form;  but  where  in  FR  it is  Pippin who  is familiar  with the  region and
 who  knows  Farmer  Maggot,  in  the  present  text  (as  also in  the original
 version)  this  is Frodo  Took's part,  and once  they have  got down  into the
 flat country Odo is in the background.                                        
  A  good  deal  of  new  geography  enters  with  the  discussion   whether  to
 take  a  short  cut  or  not  (FR  p.  97).  While  the  wet low-lying  land is
 described in the original story  (pp. 91  - 2),  it is  now called  the Marish,
 and  the  northward  curve  of the  road (p.  89) is  explained: 'to  get round
 the  north  of  the  Marish.'  The  way  south   from  Brandywine   Bridge  now
 appears - first called 'the  raised road',  then 'the  banked road',  then 'the
 causeway':  'the  causeway  that  runs  from  the  Bridge  through   Stock  and
 past  the  Ferry  down  along  the River  to Deephallow.'  Here the  village of
 Stock  is  first  named  (and  its  inn  the Golden  Perch, where  according to
 Odo  there  used  to  be  the  best  beer  in  'the  East  Shire'),   and  also
 Deephallow,  which  though  marked  on  my  father's  map  of  the   Shire  and
 on the map in FR  is never  mentioned in  the text  of The  Lord of  the Rings.
 (In  the  original  version  of  this  chapter  there is  no suggestion  of the
 causeway  road,  and  the  hobbits  leaving Maggot's  lane came  out on  to the
 road they had left, shortly before it  reached the  Ferry: see  p. 97  and note
 8.  Stock  had  not  then  been devised.  Later in  the old  version Marmaduke,
 arguing  for  going through  the Old  Forest, says  that it  would be  silly of
 them to start their journey by 'jogging along a dull river-side road -  in full
 view  of  all  the  numerous  hobbits  of  Buckland',  but  he  is  speaking of
 the  road  within  Buckland,  on  the  east  side  of  the Brandywine:  p. 106,
 note 18).                                                                     
  The   argument   about   which   way  to   go  is   mainly  between   Odo  and
 Frodo,  and  is  somewhat  different  from  the  final  form. Odo,  not knowing

 
                                                                             
 the country, argued that there would be  'all kinds  of obstacles'  when they
 got  down  into  the  Marish, to  which Frodo  replied that  he did  know it,
 and  that  the Marish  was now  'all tamed  and drained'  (in FR  Pippin, who
 takes  Frodo  Took's part  in that  he does  know the  country, but  Odo's in
 that he has his eye on  the Golden  Perch, argues  with Frodo  (Baggins) that
 in the Marish 'there are bogs and all kinds of difficulties').'              
  The  stream  that  barred  their  passage  is now  identified as  the Stock-
 brook.  The  only  other  feature   to  mention   before  coming   to  Farmer
 Maggot is a rejected passage that  was to  take the  place of  the mysterious
 sniffing that interrupted Odo's song in praise of the bottle in  the original
 version (p. 91). There, a  pencilled note  on the  manuscript (p.  105, note
 3) said: 'Sound of hoofs going by not far off.'                              
                                                                             
  Ho!  ho!  ho!  they  began  again  louder.  'Hush!  ' said  Sam. 'I  think I
 can  hear   something.'  They   stopped  short.   Bingo  sat   up.  Listening
 he  caught  or  thought  he  caught  the  sound  of  hoofs,  some   way  off,
 going  at  a  trot.  They  sat  silent  for  some while  after the  sound had
 died  away;  but  at  last  Frodo   spoke.  'That's   very  odd,'   he  said.
 'There  is  not  any  road  that  I  know  of  anywhere  near, yet  the hoofs
 were  not  going  on  turf  or leaves  - if  they were  hoofs.' 'But  if they
 were,  it  does  not  follow that  it was  the sound  of a  Black Rider,'said
 Odo.   'The   land   is  not   quite  uninhabited   round  here:   there  are
 farms and villages.'                                                         
                                                                             
  This  was  replaced  by  the  terrible  signal  cries,  exactly  as   in  FR
 (pp. 99 - 100). From a rejected page a little later, when they came  into the
 'tame and well-ordered lands',  it is  clear that  the hoof-beats  they heard
 were  not in  fact so  mysterious: 'They  were just  beginning to  think that
 they  had  imagined the  sound of  hoofs, when  they came  to a  gate: beyond
 it a rutted lane wound away towards a  distant clump  of trees'  (i.e. Farmer
 Maggot's)  The  horseman  they  heard  was  the  Black  Rider  who   came  to
 Maggot's door.                                                               
                                                                             
  When  my  father  came  in  this  version  to  Farmer  Maggot,  he  followed
 the old story in this: Bingo put on the Ring  in the  lane outside  the farm,
 then  entered  the  house  invisibly,  and  drank  Farmer  Maggot's  beer, so
 that  the  departure  of  the  others  was  highly embarrassing  and unhappy.
 Considering  all  that  had  now  been  said  concerning  the  Ring  this  is
 remarkable; but I think that my father was reluctant  to lose  this interlude
 (see also note 13), and although at this time he also wrote the story of the
 visit to Maggot's in exactly the form it has in FR,  he retained  this first,
 entirely  different  account  of   what  happened   in  Maggot's   house  and
 marked it as a variant.                                                      
  In  it,  Maggot  becomes  a  violent  and  intransigeant  character,  with a
 black hatred of all Bagginses - a  development clearly  arising, as  I think,
 from  the  need  to explain  the intensity  of Bingo's  alarm when  he learns

  who is  the owner  of the  farm, an  alarm great  enough (coupled  with the
  ferocious dogs) to explain in  turn how  he could  put the  Ring on  in the
  face of all counsel. In the original  version Bingo  put on  the Ring  as a
  matter  of  course,  as  he  put  it  on  when  the  Black Riders  came by.
  Moreover, as the story  stood then  Frodo and  Odo were  perfectly familiar
  with his possession of a magic ring that conferred invisibility,  and after
  they  left  Farmer  Maggot's  Odo  addressed  Bingo  while  he   was  still
  invisible, calling his behaviour 'a silly trick' (p. 97). But now they were
  not (cf. p.245, note 3: Bilbo  wrote his  adventures in  a private  book of
  memoirs,  in  which  he  recounted  some  things that  he had  never spoken
  about {such as the magic ring); but that  book was  never published  in the
  Shire, and  he never  showed it  to anyone,  except his  favourite "nephew"
  Bingo.') The great  problem now  with this  story, my  father noted  in the
  margin  of  the  manuscript,  was  that  it  would necessitate  making Odo,
  Frodo, and Sam all aware of Bingo's ring - 'which is a  pity'; or  else, he
  added,  'making  the  others  equally  astonished  with  Farmer   Maggot  -
  which is difficult.'  He was  even prepared,  however, as  he noted  in the
  same place, to consider altering the structure to the extent of getting rid
  of Odo and Frodo  from this  episode by  making them  the advance  party to
  Buckland,  while  Bingo's  walk  from  Hobbiton  would  be  with  Merry and
  Sam - which seems to imply that Merry had been let into  the secret  of the
  Ring.  Sam  might  be  supposed  to have  known of  it from  his eavesdrop-
  ping  under  the  window  of Bag  End at  the end  of the  chapter 'Ancient
  History', and my father also revised the text here and  there in  pencil in
  order to 'allow this version to stand if Bingo's ring is unknown to any but
  Sam.' A point he did not make here  is the  distinction between  the others
  knowing  about  the  Ring  and  Bingo's  knowing that  they knew;  and when
  he reached the conversation in the house in Buckland  (not much  later, for
  the  text  of  the two  chapters is  continuous in  the manuscript)  he had
  decided  that  they  did  know, but  had kept  the knowledge  to themselves
  (as in FR, p. 114).                                                       
    I give now the greater part of this first variant version.               
                                                                            
    They  came  to  a  gate,  beyond   which  a   rutted  lane   ran  between
  low  hedges  towards  a  distant   clump  of   trees.  Frodo   stopped.  'I
  know  these  fields!'  he  said.  'They  are part  of old  Farmer Maggot's
  land.(2) That must be his farm away there in the trees.'                     
    'One  trouble  after  another!  '  said  Bingo,  looking  nearly  as much
  alarmed as if  Frodo had  declared the  lane to  be the  slot leading  to a
  dragon's lair. The others looked at him in astonishment.                   
    'What's wrong with old Maggot?' asked Frodo.(3)                          
    'I  don't  like  him,  and he  doesn't like  me,' said  Bingo. 'If  I had
  thought  my  short  cut  would  bring  me  near  his  farm  today,  I would
  have  gone  by  the  long  road.  I  haven't  been  near  it for  years and
  years.'                                                                    

                                                     
                                                                           
  'Why ever not? ' said  Frodo. 'He's  all right,  if you  get on  the right
 side  of  him.  I  thought  he  was  friendly to  all the  Brandybuck clan.
 Though  he   is  a   terror  to   trespassers,  and   he  does   keep  some
 ferocious-looking  dogs.  But  after  all  we  are  near  the  borders here
 and folk have to be more on their guard.'                                  
  'That's just  it,' said  Bingo. 'I  used to  trespass on  his land  when I
 was  a  youngster  at  Bucklebury.  His  fields  used  to  grow   the  best
 mushrooms.(4) I  killed  one  of  his  dogs once.  I broke  its head  with a
 heavy  stone.  A  lucky  shot,  for  I  was  terrified,  and  I  believe it
 would  have  mauled  me.  He  beat  me,  and  told  me  he  would  kill  me
 next  time  I  put  a  foot  over his  boundaries. "I'd  kill you  now," he
 said,  "if  you  were  not  Mr   Rory's  nephew,(5) more's  the   pity  and
 shame to the Brandybucks."'                                                
  'But   that's   long   ago,'  said   Frodo.  'He   won't  kill   Mr  Bingo
 Baggins,  late  of  Bag-end,  because  of  his  misdeeds  when  he  was one
 of  the  many  young  rascals  of  Brandy  Hall.   Even  if   he  remembers
 about it.'                                                                 
  'I  don't  fancy  Maggot  is  a good  forgetter,' said  Bingo, 'especially
 not  where  his  dogs  are  concerned.  They  used  to  say  he  loved  his
 dogs  more  than  his  children.  And  Bilbo told  me (only  a year  or two
 before  he  left  the  Shire) that  he was  once down  this way  and called
 at  the  farm  to  get  a  bite  and  drink.  When  he  gave  his  name old
 Maggot  ordered  him  off.  "I'll  have  no   Baggins  over   my  doorstep.
 A   lot   of   thievish  murderous   rascals.  You   get  back   where  you
 belong,"  he  said,  and  threatened  him  with  a  stick. He's  shaken his
 fist at me, if we passed on the road, many a time since.'(6)               
  'Well  I'm  blest,'  said  Odo.  'So  now  I  suppose  we  shall  all  get
 beaten or bitten, if we are seen with the marauding Bingo.'                
  'Nonsense!  '  said  Frodo.  'Get  into  the  lane,  and  then  you  won't
 be  trespassing.  Maggot  used  to  be  quite   friendly  with   Merry  and
 me. I'll talk to him.'                                                     
  They  went  along  the  lane,  until  they  saw  the  thatched roofs  of a
 large   house   and   farm-buildings   peeping   out   among    the   trees
 ahead.  The  Maggots  and  the  Puddifoots  of  Stock   and  most   of  the
 folk of the Marish were house-dwellers...                                  
                                                                           
 At  this  point a  long digression  was introduced  (following that  in the
 original version, p. 92) on the subject  of hobbits  living in  houses; see
                                                                           
 pp.294-5.                                                                  
                                                                           
 ...  and this  farm was  stoutly built  of brick  and had  a high  wall all
 round  it.  There  was  a  strong  wooden gate  in the  wall opening  on to
 the  lane.  Bingo   lagged  behind.   Suddenly  as   they  drew   nearer  a

 terrific baying and barking broke out, and a loud voice  was heard            
 shouting: 'Grip! Fang! Wolf! Go on, lads! Go on! '                            
   This  was  too  much  for  Bingo.  He slipped  on the  Ring, and            
 vanished. 'It can't do any harm this once,' he thought. 'I am sure            
 Bilbo would have done the same.'                                              
   He was only just in time. The  gate opened  and three  huge dogs            
 came pelting out into the lane, and dashed towards the travellers.            
 Odo  and  Sam  shrank  against  the  wall,  while  two  large grey            
 wolvish-looking dogs sniffed at  them. The  third dog  halted near            
 Bingo  sniffing and  growling with  the hair  rising on  its neck,            
 and a puzzled look in its eyes. Frodo  walked on  a few  paces un-            
 molested.                                                                     
   Through the gate came a broad thickset hobbit  with a  round red            
 face (7) and a  soft high-crowned  hat. 'Hullo!  hullo! And  who may            
 you be, and what may you be doing?' he asked.                                 
   'Good afternoon, Farmer Maggot! ' said Frodo.                               
   The farmer looked at him closely. 'Well now,'  he said.  'Let me            
 see  -  you'll  be  Mr Frodo  Took, Mr  Folco's son,  if I  am not            
 mistook. I seldom am, I've a rare memory for faces. It's some time            
 since I saw you round here, with Mr Merry Brandybuck...                       
                                                                              
   The opening encounter with Maggot is then exactly as in the other           
 variant of the episode, which is to say exactly as in FR p. 102, as far as 'to
 the great relief of Odo  and Sam  the dogs  let them  go free.'  Then follows:
                                                                              
 Odo and Frodo at once went through the gate, but Sam hesitated.               
 So did the third dog. He remained standing growling and bristl-               
 ing.                                                                          
                                                                              
   This was altered in pencil to read:                                         
                                                                              
 Odo joined Frodo at the gate, but Sam hesitated in the  lane. Frodo           
 looked  back  to  beckon  Bingo,  and  wondered  how  to  introduce           
 him, whether to give  his name,  or hope  that Maggot's  memory was           
 less good than he boasted, and say nothing; but  there was  no sign           
 of Bingo to be seen. Sam was watching one of the dogs. It was still           
 standing growling and bristling. It all seemed rather queer.                  
                                                                              
   This was one of the changes made 'to allow this version to stand if
 Bingo's ring is unknown to any but Sam' (p. 288).                             
                                                                              
   'Here, Wolf!' cried Farmer Maggot, looking back.  'Dang it,                 
 what's come to the dog. Heel, Wolf! '                                         
   The dog obeyed reluctantly, and at the gate turned back and                 
 barked.                                                                       

   'What's  the  matter  with  you?'  said  the farmer.  'This is  a queer
 day,  and  no  mistake.  Wolf  went near  off his  head when  that fellow
 came  riding   up,  and   now  you'd   think  he   could  see   or  smell
 something that ain't there.'                                            
   They   went  into   the  farmer's   kitchen,  and   sat  by   the  wide
 fireplace.   The   dogs   were   shut   up,  as   neither  Odo   nor  Sam
 concealed   their  uneasiness   while  they   were  about.   'They  won't
 harm  you,' said  the farmer,  'not unless  I tell  them to.'  Mrs Maggot
 brought  out  beer  and  filled  four  large earthenware  mugs. It  was a
 good  brew,  and  Odo  found  himself   fully  compensated   for  missing
 the  Golden  Perch.  Sam  would  have enjoyed  it better,  if he  had not
 been anxious about his master.                                          
   'And   where   might   you   be   coming   from   and   going   to,  Mr
 Frodo?'   asked   Farmer   Maggot   with   a   shrewd  look.   'Were  you
 coming  to  visit  me?  For  if  so  you  had gone  past my  gate without
 my seeing you.'                                                         
   'Well, no,' said  Frodo. 'To  tell you  the truth  (since you  guess it
 already)  we  had  been on  your fields.  But it  was quite  by accident.
 We  lost  our  way  back  near  Woodhall trying  to take  a short  cut to
 the  causeway  near  the  Ferry. We  are in  rather a  hurry to  get over
 into Buckland.'                                                         
   'Then  the  road  would  have  served  you  better,'  said  the farmer.
 'But  you  and  Mr  Merry  have  my  leave to  walk on  my land,  as long
 as  you  do  no  damage.  Not  like  those  thievish  folk from  way back
 West  -  begging  your  pardon,  I  was  forgetting  you  were a  Took by
 name,  and  only  half   a  Brandybuck   as  you   might  say.   But  you
 aren't  a  Baggins  or  you'd  not   be  inside   here.  That   Mr  Bingo
 Baggins  he  killed  one  of  my  dogs once,  he did.  It's more  than 30
 years ago, but I haven't forgotten it, and  I'll remind  him of  it sharp
 too  if  ever  he  dares  to  come  round here.  I hear  tell that  he is
 coming  back to  live in  Buckland. More's  the pity.  I can't  think why
 the Brandybucks allow it.'                                              
   'But  Mr  Bingo's  half  a  Brandybuck  too,'   said  Odo   (trying  to
 keep  from  smiling).  'He's  quite  a nice  fellow when  you get  on the
 right  side  of  him; though  he will  go walking  across country  and he
 is fond of mushrooms.'                                                  
   There  seemed  to  be  a  breath,  the  ghost  of  an  exclamation, not
 far from Odo's ear, though he could not be quite sure.(9)               
   'That's  just it,'  said the  farmer. 'He  used to  take mine  though I
 beat him for it. And I'll beat him again, if I catch him at it.  But that
 reminds  me:  what  do  you   think  that   funny  customer   asked  me?'

  Farmer  Maggot then  turns to  his account  of the  funny customer,  and his
  report, though briefer, goes pretty well as in the other variant version and
  in FR,(10) with this difference:                                              
                                                                             
  '...  I  had  a  sort  of shiver  down my  back. But  that question  was too
  much  for  me.  "Be  off,"  I  said.  "There  are  no  Bagginses  here,  and
  won't be while  I am  on my  legs. If  you are  a friend  of theirs  you are
  not welcome. I give you one minute before I call my dogs."                  
                                                                             
    From  '"I  don't  know  what  to  think,"  said Frodo'  the story  in this
  version moves in the direction of farce.                                    
                                                                             
    'Then  I'll  tell  you  what  to  think,'  said  Maggot.  'This  Mr  Bingo
  Baggins  has  got  into  some  trouble.  I  hear  tell that  he has  lost or
  wasted  most  of  the  money  he  got  from  old  Bilbo  Baggins.  And  that
  was  got  in  some  queer  fashion,  in  foreign   parts,  too,   they  say.
  Mark  my  words,  this  all  comes  of  some  of  those  doings  of  old  Mr
  Bilbo's.  Maybe  there  is  some  that   want  to   know  what   has  become
  of the gold and what not that he left behind. Mark my words.'               
    'I  certainly  will,'  said  Frodo,  rather  taken  aback by  old Maggot's
  guessing."                                                                  
    'And  if  you'll  take  my advice,  too,' said  the farmer,  'you'll steer
  clear  of  Mr  Bingo,  or  you'll  be  getting  into  more  trouble yourself
  than you bargain for.'                                                      
    There  was  no   mistaking  the   breath  and   the  suppressed   gasp  by
  Frodo's ear on this occasion.'                                              
    'I'll   remember  the   advice,'  said   Frodo.  'But   now  we   must  be
  getting  to   Bucklebury.  Mr   Merry  Brandybuck   is  expecting   us  this
  evening.'                                                                   
    'Now that's a pity,' said  the farmer.  'I was  going to  ask if  you and
  your  friends  would  stay  and  have  a  bite  and  sup  with  me   and  my
  wife.'                                                                      
    'It  is  very  kind  of  you,' said  Frodo; 'but  I am  afraid we  must be
  off now - we want to get to the Ferry before dark.'                         
    'Well   then,   one   more  drink!'   said  the   farmer,  and   his  wife
  poured  out  some  beer.  'Here's  your  health  and good  luck! '  he said,
  reaching  for  his  mug.  But  at  that  moment  the  mug  left  the  table,
  rose, tilted in the air, and then returned empty to its place.              
    'Help  us  and  save  us!  '  cried  the  farmer  jumping  up  and gaping.
  'This  day  is  bewitched.  First  the  dog  and  then  me:   seeing  things
  that ain't.'                                                                
    'But  I  saw  the  mug  get  up  too,'  said  Odo  indiscreetly,  and  not
  fully hiding a grin.                                                        

  This last sentence was struck out in pencil, as being unwanted 'if Bingo's
  ring  is  unknown  to  any  but Sam.'  The remainder  of this  version was
  written on that basis.                                                    
                                                                           
    Odo   and  Frodo   sat  and   stared.  Sam   looked  anxious   and  wor-
  ried.  'You  did  not  ask  me  to have  a bite  or a  sup,' said  a voice
  coming   apparently   from  the   middle  of   the  room.   Farmer  Maggot
  backed  towards  the  fire-place;  his  wife   screamed.  'And   that's  a
  pity,'  went  on  the  voice,   which  Frodo   to  his   bewilderment  now
  recognized  as  Bingo's,  'because  I  like  your  beer.  But  don't boast
  again  that  no  Baggins  will  ever  come  inside  your   house.  There's
  one  inside  now.  A  thievish  Baggins.  A  very  angry  Baggins.'  There
  was  a  pause.  'In  fact  BINGO!'  the  voice  suddenly  yelled  just  by
  the  farmer's  ear.  At  the  same  time  something  gave  him  a  push in
  the  waistcoat,  and  he  fell  over  with a  crash among  the fire-irons.
  He sat up again just in time to  see his  own hat  leave the  settle where
  he  had  thrown  it  down,  and  sail  out  of the  door, which  opened to
  let it pass.                                                              
    'Hi!  here!'  yelled  the  farmer,  leaping  to  his feet.  'Hey, Grip,
  Fang,  Wolf! '  At that  the hat  went off  at a  great speed  towards the
  gate; but as the farmer ran  after it,  it came  sailing back  through the
  air and fell at his feet. He picked it up  gingerly, and  looked at  it in
  astonishment.   The   dogs   released   by   Mrs   Maggot   came  bounding
  up;   but   the   farmer   gave   them   no   command.   He   stood  still
  scratching  his  head  and  turning  his  hat  over  and  over,  as  if he
  expected to find it had grown wings.(13)                                  
    Odo and Frodo followed by Sam came out of the house.                    
    'Well,  if  that  ain't  the  queerest  thing that  ever happened  in my
  house!  '  said  the  farmer. 'Talk  about ghosts!  I suppose  you haven't
  been   playing  any   tricks  on   me,  have   you?'  he   said  suddenly,
  looking hard at them in turn.                                             
    'We?'  said  Frodo.  'Why,  we  were as  startled as  you were.  I can't
  make mugs drain themselves, or hats walk out of the house.'               
    'Well,  it  is  mighty  queer,'  said  the  farmer,  not  seeming  quite
  satisfied.  'First  this rider  asks for  Mr Baggins.  Then you  folk come
  along;  and  while  you  are  in  the  house  Mr  Baggins'   voice  starts
  playing  tricks.  And you  are friends  of his,  seemingly. "Quite  a nice
  fellow,"  you  said.  If  there  ain't  some  connexion between  all these
  bewitchments,  I'll  eat  this  very  hat.  You  can tell  him from  me to
  keep his  voice at  home, or  I'll come  and gag  him, if  I have  to swim
  the  River  and   hunt  him   all  through   Bucklebury.  And   now  you'd
  best  be  going  back  to  your  friends,  and  leave  me  in  peace. Good
  day to you.'                                                              

   He  watched  them  with  a  thoughtful  scowl  on   his  face   until  they
 turned a corner of the lane and passed out of his sight.                     
   'What  do  you  make  of  that?  '  asked  Odo  as  they  went  along. 'And
 where on earth is Bingo?'                                                    
   'What  I  make  of  it,'  answered   Frodo,  'is   that  Uncle   Bingo  has
 taken  leave  of  his  senses;  and I  fancy we  shall run  into him  in this
 lane before long.'                                                           
   'You   won't  run   into  me   because  I'm   just  behind,'   said  Bingo.
 There he was by Sam Gamgee's side.                                           
                                                                             
   This  version  of  the  episode  ends  here, with  the note:  'This variant
 would proceed much as in older typed Chapter III' - i.e. in respect  of the
 hobbits  getting  from  Farmer  Maggot's  to  the  Ferry,  if  they  are  not
 driven there in Maggot's cart (see pp. 97 - g).                              
   Apart  from   any  other   considerations  (which   there  may   well  have
 been), I think that it was primarily the difficulty with the Ring that killed
 this version. In the next chapter  it turns  out that  the other  hobbits had
 known  about  the  Ring,  but that  Bingo had  not known  that they  knew. So
 the  ferocious  Farmer Maggot,  prone to  ill-will, had  already disappeared,
 and with him the last (more  or less)  light-hearted use  of the  Ring.(14) The
 second  version  of  the   Maggot  episode   in  this   manuscript  evidently
 followed quite closely on  the first,  and this,  as I  have said,  is (names
 apart)  identical  save  for  a word  here and  there with  the story  in FR.
                                                                             
   There  remains  to  notice  the  passage  about  hobbit  architecture  men-
 tioned  above  (p.  289).  Against  it  my father  wrote 'Put  in Foreword',"
 and  in  the  second  version  of  the Maggot  story it  is not  included. It
 was  somewhat  developed  from  that  in  the  original  form of  the chapter
 (p. 92), but has less detail than that in the Prologue to FR (pp. 15 - 16, in
 the first edition 16 -  17). The  division of  hobbits into  Harfoots, Fallo-
 hides, and Stoors had not yet arisen, and the  fact that  some of  the people
 in  the  Marish  were  'rather large,  and heavy-legged,  and a  few actually
 had a little down under their chins' is ascribed to their  not being  of pure
 hobbit-breed. In  this account  the art  of house-building  still originated,
 or  was  thought  to  have  originated,  among  the hobbits  themselves, down
 in the riverside regions (in the Prologue it is suggested that it was derived
 from the Dunedain, or even from  the Elves);  but it  'had long  been altered
 (and  perhaps  improved)  by  taking  wrinkles  from  dwarves  and  elves and
 even Big Folk, and other people outside the Shire.'                          
   The  passage  in  the  Prologue  concerning  the  presence  of   houses  in
 many  hobbit  villages  is present,  and here  Tuckborough first  appears. As
 this passage was first drafted it read:                                      
                                                                             
   Even   in  Hobbiton   and  Bywater,   and  in   Tuckborough  away   in  Took-
   land,  and  on the  chalky Indowns  in the  centre of  the Shire  where there
   was a large population                                                     

 
                                                                                
 My  father  then  struck  out  Indowns,  presumably  meaning  to   include  on
 the  chalky  as  well,   and  substituted   [Much  )]   Micheldelving,  before
 abandoning   the   sentence  and   starting  again.   Michel  Delving   on  the
 White  Downs  has  appeared  in  the  last  chapter  (p. 278),  replacing 'Much
 Hemlock  (in  the  Hornblower  country)'.  He  was  probably  going   to  write
 'Much  Hemlock'  here  too.  It  seems  that  up  till now  he had  not decided
 that the chief town was in  the west  of the  Shire, if  indeed there  were any
 chief  town;  but he  at once  rewrote the  passage, and  it was  very probably
 at   this   point  that   Michel  Delving   on  the   White  Downs   came  into
 existence  (and  was  then  written  into 'Delays  are Dangerous').  As finally
 written, the sentence reads:                                                    
                                                                                
   In  Hobbiton, in  Tuckborough away  in Tookland,  and even  in the            
   most populous [village >] town of the Shire, Micheldelving, on the            
   White Downs in the West, there were many houses of stone  and wood            
   and brick.                                                                    
                                                                                
 The name Indowns does not occur again; cf. the Inlands (Mittalmar),            
 the central region of Numenor, Unfinished Tales p. 165.                         
                                                                                
   The  text  of  this  chapter,  following  the  arrangement  of  the  original
 version,   continues   straight   on   without   break  from   'Suddenly  Bingo
 laughed:  from  the  covered  basket  he  held  the  scent  of   mushrooms  was
 rising',  which  ends  Chapter  4  in  FR,  to  '"Now  we'd  better   get  home
 ourselves,  said  Merry,  which in  FR begins  Chapter 5.,  but not  long after
 my  father  broke the  text at  this point,  inserting the  number 'V'  and the
 title  'A  Conspiracy  is  Unmasked',  and  I  follow  this  arrangement  here.
                                                                                
                                      NOTES.                                     
                                                                                
 1.  This  passage  of  discussion  was  much  rewritten.  In  rejected  versions
  Odo  proposes  that  they  split  up:  'Why   all  go   the  same   way?  Those
  who  vote  for  short  cuts,  cut.  Those  who  don't,  go  round  -  and  they
  (mark   you)  will   reach  the   Golden  Perch   at  Stock   before  sundown',
  and   Frodo  argues   for  going   across  country   by  saying   'Merry  won't
  worry  if  we  are  late.'  In  another,  Odo  says:  'Then  I  must   fall  in
  behind,   or   go   alone.   Well,  I   don't  think   Black  Riders   will  do
  anything  to  me.  It's  you,  Bingo,  they  are  sniffing  for.  If  they  ask
  after  you,  I  shall  say:  I  have  quarrelled  with  Mr  Baggins   and  left
  him. He lodged with the Elves last night - ask them.'                          
       A   minute  point   in  connection   with  the   geography  may   be  men-
  tioned  here.  In  'the  woods  that clustered  along the  eastern side  of the
  hill', FR p. 98 line 5, 'hill' should be 'hills', as it is in the present text.
 2.  At  this  first mention  of the  farmer in  this text,  he is  called Farmer
  Puddifoot,  but  this  was  changed  at  once  to  Maggot,  and  Maggot  is his
  name   subsequently   throughout.   At   the   same   place  in   the  original

     typescript, and only at that place, Maggot was changed to Puddifoot
     (p. 105, note 4).
  3. Frodo continued: 'Of course these people down in the Marish are a
     bit queer and unfriendly, but the Brandybucks get on all right with
     them', but this was struck out as soon as written.
  4. This is where the mushrooms entered the story: there is no mention
     of mushrooms in the original version.
  5. On Bingo's being the nephew of Rory Brandybuck (Merry's grand-
     father) see p. 267, note 4.
  6. Another version of Bingo's account makes it Bilbo and Bingo who
     had the encounter with Maggot, and the farmer a real ogre:
        'That's just it,' said Bingo. 'I got on the wrong side of him, and
     of his hedge. We were trespassing, as he called it. We had been in
     the Shirebourn valley, and were making a cross-country line
     towards Stock - rather like today - when we got on to his land. It
     was getting dark, and a white fog came on, and we got lost. We
     climbed through a hedge and found ourselves in a garden; and
     Maggot found us. He set a great dog on us, more like a wolf. I fell
     down with the dog over me, and Bilbo broke its head with that
     thick stick of his. Maggot was violent. He is a strong fellow, and
     while Bilbo ws trying to explain who we were and how we came
     there he picked him up and flung him over the hedge into a ditch.
     Then he picked me up and had a good look at me. He recognized
     me as one of the Brandybuck clan, though I had not been to his
     farm since I was a youngster. "I was going to break your neck," he
     said, "and I will yet, whether you be Mr Rory's nephew or not, if I
     catch you round here again. Get out before I do you an injury!"
     He dropped me over the hedge on top of Bilbo.
     'Bilbo got up and said: "I shall come around next time with
     something sharper than a stick. Neither you nor your dogs would
     be any loss to the countryside." Maggot laughed. "I have a
     weapon or two myself," he said; 'and next time you kill one of my
     dogs, I'll kill you. Be off now, or I'll kill you tonight." That'll be
     20 years ago. But I don't imagine Maggot is a good forgetter. Ours
     would not be a friendly meeting.'
     Frodo Took's reception of this story was strangely mild. 'How very
     unfortunate!' [he said.] 'Nobody seems to have been much to
     blame. After all, Bingo, you must remember that this is near the
     Borders, and people round here are a deal more suspicious than up
     in the Baggins country.'
          Like Deephallow (p. 286), the Shirebourn, mentioned in this
     passage, is never named in LR, though marked both on my father's
     map of the Shire and on that published in FR (both are mentioned
     in The Adventures of Tom Bombadil, p. g).
  7. Farmer Maggot is again unambiguously a hobbit: see p. 122 and
     note 7.

 8.    There has in  fact been  no indication  that Frodo  Took's mother  was a
       Brandybuck,  as  is  seen  to  be  the case  from Maggot's  remark here,
       supported  also  by  Frodo's  knowledge  of  the  Marish   and  Maggot's
       familiarity  with  him  as  a  companion  of  Merry  Brandybuck.  In  LR
       the mother of  Peregrin (who  is related  to Meriadoc  as Frodo  Took is
       at this stage, see p. 267, note 4) was Eglantine Banks.                 
  9.   This sentence is marked in pencil for deletion.                         
 10.   In  this  version the  Black Rider  does not  say anything  beyond 'Have
       you  seen  Mist-er  Bagg-ins?'  In  the  second  version  his  words are
       almost as in FR, though he still calls him 'Mister Baggins'.            
 11.   In the second version, as in  FR (p.  104) 'the  shrewd guesses  of the
       farmer   were  rather   disconcerting'  to   Bingo  (Frodo);   but  here
       Maggot's   guesses   disconcert   Frodo   Took,   which   would  suggest
       that he knew what the Black Riders were after.                          
 12.   This sentence is marked in pencil for deletion; cf. note g.             
 13.   Pencilled changes in  this passage  substitute the  beer jug  for Farmer
       Maggot's  hat:  'He sat  up again  just in  time to  see the  jug (still
       holding  some  beer)  leave the  table where  he had  lain it  down, and
       sail  out of  the door...  At that  the jug  went off  at a  great speed
       towards  the gate,  spilling beer  in the  yard; but  as the  farmer ran
       after  it,  it  suddenly  stopped and  came to  rest on  the gatepost...
       He  stood  still  scratching  his  head  and turning  the jug  round and
       round...' (and 'jug' for 'hat' subsequently).                           
          In  the  margin  of  the  manuscript  my  father  wrote: 'Christopher
       queries  -  why  was  not hat  invisible if  Bingo's clothes  were?' The
       story  must  have  been that  Bingo was  actually wearing  Maggot's hat,
       for  otherwise  the  objection  seems  easily answered  (the hat  was an
       object external to the  wearer of  the Ring  just as  much as  the beer-
       jug, or as anything  else would  be, whatever  its purpose).  Clearly, a
       subtle question arises if the Ring is put  to such  uses, a  question my
       father sidestepped by substituting the  jug. -  I was  greatly delighted
       by  the  story  of  Bingo's  turning  the tables  on Farmer  Maggot, and
       while  I  retain  now  only  a  dim  half-memory  I  believe I  was much
       opposed to its  loss: which  may perhaps  explain my  father's retaining
       it after it had become apparent that it introduced serious difficulties.
 14.   Unless  the  episode  in  Tom  Bombadil's  house  (FR p. 144) can  be so
       described.                                                              
 15.   The passage in the 'Foreword' is given on pp. 312 - 13.                 

                                     XVIII.                                   
                             AGAIN FROM BUCKLAND TO                           
                                THE WITHYWINDLE.                              
                                                                             
                                      (i)                                     
                            A Conspiracy is Unmasked.                         
                                                                             
 The  text  of  'A  Short  Cut  to  Mushrooms',  as  I  have   said,  continues
 without break, but  my father  added in  (not much  later, see  p. 302)  a new
 chapter  number  'V'  and  the  title  'A  Conspiracy  is Unmasked'.  The text
 now  becomes  very close  indeed to  FR Chapter  5 (apart  of course  from the
 number of  and names  of the  hobbits), and  there are  only a  few particular
 points to notice in it. For the earliest form see pp.99 ff.                  
  The   history   of   the   Brandybucks   does   not   yet    know   Gorhendad
 Oldbuck as the founder  (FR p.  108).  As the  manuscript was  first written,
 the   village   was   called   Bucklebury-beyond-the-River,   and  (developing
 the  original text,  p. 100)  'the authority  of the  head of  the Brandybucks
 was  still acknowledged  by the  farmers as  far west  as Woodhall  (which was
 reckoned to be in the  Boffin-country)'," this  was changed  to 'still acknow-
 ledged  by  the  farmers  between  Stock and  Rushey,' as  in FR.  Rushey here
 first appears.(2)                                                            
  It  was  in this  passage that  the Four  Farthings of  the Shire  were first
 devised, as  the  wording  shows:  'They  were  not  very  different  from the
 other  hobbits  of  the  Four  Farthings  (North, West,  South, and  East), as
 the quarters of the Shire were called.' Here too occur for the first  time the
 names  Buck  Hill  and  the  High  Hay  -  but  Haysend   goes  back   to  the
 original  version,  p. 100.  The great  hedge is  still 'something  over forty
 miles  from end  to end.'(3) In answer  to Bingo's  question 'Can  horses cross
 the  river?'  Merry  answers:  'They  can  go  fifteen  miles   to  Brandywine
 Bridge', with '20?'  pencilled over  'fifteen'. In  FR the  High Hay  is 'well
 over  twenty  miles from  end to  end', yet  Merry still  says: 'They  can go
 twenty  miles  north   to  Brandywine   Bridge.'  Barbara   Strachey (Journeys
 of  Frodo,  Map  6)  points  out  this  difficulty,  and  assumes  that  Merry
 'meant 20 miles in all - 10 miles north to the Bridge and 10 miles  south on
 the  other  side'; but  this is  to strain  the language:  Merry did  not mean
 that.  It  is  in  fact  an  error which  my father  never observed:  when the
 length  of  Buckland  from  north to  south was  reduced, Merry's  estimate of
 the  distance  from  the  Bridge  to  the  Ferry  should  have   been  changed
 commensurately.'                                                             
  The  main  road  within  Buckland  is  described  (on  a rejected  page only)
 as  running  'from  the  Bridge to  Standelf and  Haysend.' Standelf  is never

  mentioned  in  the  text  of LR,  though marked  on my  father's map  of the
  Shire and on both of mine; on all three the  road stops  there and  does not
  continue  to  Haysend,  which  is  not  shown as  a village  or any  sort of
  habitation.(5)                                                              
    At  the  first two  occurrences of  Crickhollow in  this chapter  the name
  was first Ringhay, changed to Crickhollow (in  the passage  cited in  note a
  on p. 283 the name is a later addition to the text). At the third occurrence
  here Crickhollow was the name first  written. Ringhay  refers to  the 'wide
  circle of lawn surrounded by a belt of trees inside the outer hedge.'(6)    
    The  most  important  development  in  this  chapter  is  that  after  the
  words 'the far shore  seemed to  be shrouded  in mist  and nothing  could be
  seen' (FR p. 109)  my father  interrupted the  narrative with  the following
  note before proceeding:                                                     
                                                                             
  From  here  onwards  Odo  is  presumed  to  have gone  with Merry           
  ahead. The  preliminary journey  was Frodo,  Bingo and  Sam only.           
  Frodo has a character a little more like Odo once had. Odo is now           
  rather silent (and greedy).                                                 
                                                                             
  Against  this  my  father  wrote:  'Christopher  wants Odo  kept.' Unhappily
  I  have  now  only  a very  shadowy recollection  of those  conversations of
  half a century ago; and it is not clear to me what the issue really  was. On
  the face of it, my 'wanting Odo  kept' should  mean that  I wanted  him kept
  as a member of  the party  that walked  from Hobbiton,  since my  father had
  not  proposed  that  Odo  be dropped  absolutely; on  the other  hand, since
  he had in mind the blending of 'Odo'  elements into  the character  of Frodo
  Took,  it  may very  well be  that he  was planning  to cut  him out  of the
  expedition after the  hobbits left  Crickhollow. Perhaps  the idea  that Odo
  should remain on at Crickhollow was  already present  as a  possibility, and
  'Christopher  wants Odo  kept' was  a plea  for his  survival in  the larger
  narrative,  as  a  member  of  the major  expedition. This  is no  more than
  guesswork,  but  if  there is  anything in  it, it  seems that  my objection
  temporarily  won  the day,  since at  the end  of the  chapter Odo  is fully
  re-established, and prepared to go with the others into  the Old  Forest- as
  indeed he does, in the revision of that chapter in this 'phase'.            
    The situation in the text that follows  this note  on Odo  is in  any case
  extraordinarily difficult to interpret. As first written, Merry says that he
  will ride on and tell Olo that they are  coming; when  Bingo knocked  on the
  door  of  (Ringhay)  Crickhollow  it  was  opened by  Olo Bolger,  and Merry
  refers to 'Olo and I' having got to  Crickhollow with  the last  cartload on
  the day before;  Merry and  Olo prepared  the supper  in the  kitchen. 'Olo'
  here plays the part of Fatty (Fredegar) Bolger in FR (pp. 110  - 11), but
  after  these  mentions  he  disappears  from  the  text  (and  never appears
  again). In red ink my father noted: 'If Odo is kept alter in red,' and for a
  short  distance  some  red  ink  alterations were  made, changing  'You'll be
  last either way, Frodo' (concerning  the order  of entry  into the  bath) to

                                                   
                                                                             
 'Odo', changing 'three tubs' to 'four tubs', and  cutting out  the references
 to 'Olo'.(7)                                                                 
  The  best  explanation  seems  to  be  that  when  Odo  was  to  be  removed
 from  the  walking  party  and  attached  to  Merry  his   name  was   to  be
 changed  also.  Some  alterations  were  made  to  preserve  the   option  of
 retaining  the received  story. But  from the  moment when  they sat  down to
 supper  Odo  reappears  in the  text as  first written,  not merely  as being
 present  (which  would  only  show  that  Olo  had  been  rejected   and  Odo
 restored)  but  as  having  walked  from  Hobbiton (though  in this  case his
 name  was  bracketed).  But  Frodo  Took   now  makes   'Odo-Pippin'  remarks
 (as 'Oh! That was poetry! ' FR p. 116  - he  would hardly  have said  such a
 thing previously). See further pp. 323 - 4.                                  
  The  bath-song  (here  sung  by  Frodo  in  his  new Odoesque  character) is
 all  but  identical  to  that  which Pippin  sings in  FR; but  in a  red ink
 addition to the text (one of the optional  additions made  to bring  Odo back
 in his original role) specimens of the 'competing songs' (FR p.  r x  x) sung
 by  Bingo  and Odo  are given:  the first  verse of  the bath-song  which Odo
 sang  as  they  walked  from  Farmer Maggot's  to the  Ferry in  the original
 version (p. 98) and which is thus  no longer  used, and  the first  two lines
 of  the  bath-chant  sung  by  Odo  when   they  reached   their  destination
 (p. 102), these last being struck out.                                      
                                                                             
  The revelation of  the conspiracy  is almost  exactly as  in FR,  the burden
 of its  exposition being  taken here  as there  by Merry  (Pippin's interven-
 tion  'You do  not understand!...'  being given  here to  Frodo Took).  As in
 FR,  Merry  recounts  the  story  of  how  he  discovered  the  existence  of
 Bilbo's ring,  which was  previously set  in a  quite different  context (see
 p. 242 and note 25), and  tells that  he had  had a  rapid glance  at Bilbo's
 'memoirs' ('secret book' in FR).                                             
  The  report  of  what  Gildor  had said,  here referred  to by  Merry rather
 than  by  Sam  himself,  on   the  subject   of  Bingo's   taking  companions
 reflects the text of that episode at this time (see p. 282): 'I know you have
 been advised to take us. Gildor told you to, and you can't deny it! '        
  The  song  that  Merry  and Pippin  sang in  FR (p.  116)  is here  sung by
 Merry, Frodo Took, and Odo,(9) and is very different:                          
                                                                             
                   Farewell! farewell, now hearth and hall!                  
            Though wind may blow and rain may fall,                          
            We must away ere break of day                                     
            Far over wood and mountain tall.                                 
                                                                             
            The hunt is up! Across the land                                   
            The Shadow stretches forth its hand.                              
            We must away ere break of day                                     
            To where the Towers of Darkness stand.                           

        With foes behind and foes ahead,                                   
        Beneath the sky shall be our bed,                                  
        Until at last the Ring is cast                                     
        In Fire beneath the Mountain Red.                                  
                                                                          
        We must away, me must away,                                        
        We ride before the break of day.                                   
                                                                          
  In  a  rejected  version  of  his  answer to  Bingo's question  whether it
 would be safe to wait one day at Crickhollow  for Gandalf  (FR p.  117), a
 passage rewritten several times,  Merry refers  to the  gate-guards getting
 a message through to 'my  father the  Master of  the Hall.'  Merry's father
 was  Caradoc  Brandybuck  (Saradoc  'Scattergold'  in LR);  see p.  251 and
 note 4.                                                                   
  When Bingo raises  the question  of going  through the  Old Forest,  it is
 Odo who, filled with horror at the thought, voices the objections  given in
 FR to Fatty Bolger (who is going to stay behind).                         
  The end of the chapter is different from  that in  FR, and  belongs rather
 with the original  version (p.  104). (Merry  does not  mention, incident-
 ally, that Bingo had ever been into the Forest).                          
                                                                          
 '... I have  often been  in -  only in  the daylight,  of course,  when the
 trees  are  fairly  quiet  and  sleepy.  Still,  I  have  some  some  know-
 ledge of it, and I will try and guide you.'                               
  Odo  was  not  convinced,  and   was  plainly   far  less   frightened  of
 meeting  a  troop  of  Riders  on  the  open  road  than of  venturing into
 the dubious Forest. Even Frodo was against the plan.                      
  'I  hate  the  idea,'  said  Odo.  'I  would rather  risk pursuers  on the
 Road,  where  there  is  a  chance  of  meeting  ordinary   honest  travel-
 lers  as  well.  I  don't  like  woods,  and  the  stories  about  the  Old
 Forest  have  always  terrified  me.  I  am  sure  Black  Riders   will  be
 very  much  more  at  home  in  that  gloomy  place  than  we  shall.' Even
 Frodo on this occasion sided with Odo.                                    
  'But  we  shall probably  be out  of it  again before  they ever  find out
 or guess that  we have  gone in,'  said Bingo.  'In any  case, if  you wish
 to  come  with  me,  it  is  no  good  taking fright  at the  first danger:
 there  are  almost  certainly  far  worse  things   than  the   Old  Forest
 ahead  of  you.  Do  you  follow  Captain   Bingo,  or   do  you   stay  at
 home?'                                                                    
  'We follow Captain Bingo,' they said at once.                            
  'Well,  that's  settled!'  said  Merry.  'Now  we  must  tidy up  and put
 the  finishing  touches  to  the  packing. And  then to  bed. I  shall call
 you all well before the break of day.'                                    
  When  at  last  he  got  to  bed  Bingo  could  not  sleep for  some time.

 His legs ached. He was glad that he was riding in the morning. At           
 last he fell into a vague dream: in which he seemed to be looking           
 out of a  window over  a dark  sea of  tangled trees.  Down below           
 among  the  roots  there was  a sound  of something  crawling and           
 snuffling.                                                                  
                                                                            
   A note on the manuscript earlier  says 'Pencillings  = Odo  stays behind.'
 These pencillings  are in  fact confined  to the  section just  given. 'Even
 Frodo  on  this  occasion  sided  with  Odo'  is  bracketed and  replaced by
 further words of Odo's: 'Also I feel  certain it  is wrong  not to  wait for
 Gandalf.'  And  after  '"We  follow Captain  Bingo," they  said at  once' is
 inserted:                                                                   
                                                                            
   'I  will  follow  Captain  Bingo,'  said  Merry,  and  Frodo,   and  Sam.
 Odo  was  silent.  'Look  here!'  he said,  after a  pause. 'I  don't mind
 admitting  I  am  frightened  of  the Forest,  but I  also think  you ought
 to  try  and  get  in  touch  with  Gandalf.  I will  stay behind  here and
 keep  off  inquisitive  folk.  When  Gandalf  comes  as  he  is  sure  to I
 will  tell  him  what you  have done,  and I  will come  on after  you with
 him,  if  he  will  bring  me.'  Merry  and  Frodo agreed  that that  was a
 good plan.                                                                  
                                                                            
       This would be an important development, though ultimately rejected.
 These alterations derive, however, from a somewhat later stage.             
                                                                            
                                    (ii)                                     
                                                                            
                               The Old Forest.                               
                                                                            
 Having  completed  'A  Conspiracy  is  Unmasked',  my  father  continued his
 revision into the next chapter, afterwards called 'The Old Forest'.  In this
 case  he  did  not make  a new  manuscript, but  merely made  corrections to
 the original text (described on pp. 112  - 14),  which as  I have  said had
 reached  with  only the  most minor  differences the  form of  the published
 narrative.  The  chapter  was  at  this  time  renumbered,  from  IV  to VI,
 showing  that  Chapter  V  'A  Conspiracy  is  Unmasked' had  been separated
 off  from  'A  Short  Cut  to  Mushrooms'.  Extensive  emendations,  made in
 red ink to the original manuscript, bring  the text  still closer  in detail
 of  wording  to that  of FR  (but the  topographical differences  noticed on
 pp.  113  -  14 remain).  The parts  played in  the Willow-man  episode are
 changed  by  the  presence  of  Sam  Gamgee  in  the  party.  Bingo  and Odo
 are still the two who are caught in the cracks of the  tree, and  Frodo Took
 is still the one pushed into the river; but whereas in the original story it
 was  Marmaduke  (i.e.  Merry)  who  rounded  up   the  ponies   and  rescued
 Frodo  Took  from  the  water,  Sam  now takes  over this  part (as  in FR),
 while Merry 'lay like a log.'                                               

                                      (iii)                                    
                                  Tom Bombadil.                                
                                                                              
   The   manuscript   of   the   Tom  Bombadil   chapter,  the   number  changed
 from  V  to   VII  but   still  title-less,   underwent  (with   one  important
 exception)  minimal  revision  at  this  stage (there  were indeed  few changes
 ever  made  to  it):  scarcely  more  than  a  mention  of  Sam  sleeping, with
 Merry, like a  log, and  the changing  of the  number of  hobbits from  four to
 five. The points of-difference noticed on pp. 120 - 3 werc nearly all  left as
 they   were;   but   Bombadil's   remark   about   Farmer   Maggot   ('We   are
 kinsfolk, he and I...') was marked with an X, probably at this time.          
   The  one  substantial  change  made  is  of  great  interest.  On  the  manu-
 script  my   father  marked   'Insert'  before   the  passage   concerning  the
 hobbits'  dreams  on  the first  night in  Tom Bombadil's  house; and  that the
 insertion belongs to  this phase  is made  clear by  the fact  that Crickhollow
 was empty (i.e. Odo had gone with the others into the Old Forest).            
                                                                              
   As they slept there  in the  house of  Tom Bombadil,  darkness lay          
 on  Buckland.  Mist  strayed  in  the  hollow  places. The  house at          
 Crickhollow stood silent and  lonely: deserted  so soon  after being          
 made ready for a new master.                                                  
   The gate in  the hedge  opened, and  up the  path, quietly  but in          
 haste,  a  grey  man  came,  wrapped  in  a  great cloak.  He halted          
 looking  at  the  dark  house. He  knocked softly  on the  door, and          
 waited;  and  then  passed  from  window  to  window,   and  finally          
 disappeared round  the corner  of the  house-end. There  was silence          
 again. After a long  time a  sound of  hoofs was  heard in  the lane          
 approaching  swiftly.  Horses  were  coming.  Outside the  gate they          
 stopped;  and  then  swiftly  up  the  path  there  came  three more          
 figures,  hooded,  swathed in  black, and  stooping low  towards the          
 ground. One went to the door, one  to the  corners of  the house-end          
 at either side; and there they stood silent as the shadows  of black          
 yew-trees, while time went slowly on,  and the  house and  the trees          
 about it seemed to be waiting breathlessly.                                   
   Suddenly there  was a  movement. It  was dark,  and hardly  a star          
 was shining, but the blade that  was drawn  gleamed suddenly,  as if          
 it  brought  with it  a chill  light, keen  and menacing.  There was          
 a  blow,  soft  but  heavy,  and  the door  shuddered. 'Open  to the          
 servants of the Lord!' said  a voice,  thin, cold,  and clear.  At a          
 second blow the door yielded and fell back, its lock broken.                  
   At that moment there rang  out behind  the house  a horn.  It rent          
 the  night  like fire  on a  hill-top. Loud  and brazen  it shouted,          
 echoing over field and hill: Awake, awake, fear, fire, foe! Awake!          
   Round  the  corner  of  the  house  came the  grey man.  His cloak          

 and  hat  were  cast  aside.  His  beard  streamed  wide.  In  one  hand was
 a  horn,  in  the  other a  wand. A  splendour of  light flashed  out before
 him.  There  was  a  wail  and  cry  as  of  fell  hunting  beasts  that are
 smitten suddenly, and turn to fly in wrath and anguish.                     
    In  the  lane  the  sound  of  hoofs  broke  out,  and  gathering rapidly
 to   a  gallop   raced  madly   into  the   darkness.  Far   away  answering
 horns   were  heard.   Distant  sounds   of  waking   and  alarm   rose  up.
 Along   the   roads   folk   were   riding   and   running   northward.  But
 before  them  all  there  galloped  a  white  horse.  On it  sat an  old man
 with  long  silver  hair  and  flowing  beard.  His  horn sounded  over hill
 and  dale.  In  his  hand  his  wand flared  and flickered  like a  sheaf of
 lightning.  Gandalf  was  riding  to  the  North  Gate  with  the  speed  of
 thunder.                                                                    
                                                                            
    Against the end of this inserted text  my father  wrote in  pencil: 'This
 will require  altering if  Odo is  left behind',  see the  pencilled passage
 added at the end of the last chapter (p. 302). And at the  end of  the text,
 after the words 'a sheaf of lightning', he added in:  'Behind clung  a small
 figure with flying cloak', and the name 'Odo'. The significance of this will
 become clear later.                                                         
                                                                            
                                    NOTES.                                   
                                                                            
1.  On  my  father's  map  of  the  Shire  the  Boffins  are placed  north of
 Hobbiton,  and  the  Bolgers  north  of  the  Woody  End  (p. 284,  note g),
 but this was  an alteration  of what  he first  wrote: the  underlying names
 can     be     seen     to     be     in     the      reverse     positions.
2. The  spelling  Rushy  on  the  published map  of the  Shire is  an error,
 made  first  on  my   elaborate  early   map  (p.   107,  item   V)  through
 misreading  of  my  father's.  The   second  element   is  Old   English  ey
 'island'.                                                                   
3. On my  father's original  map it  can be  roughly calculated  (since Bingo
 estimated that they had eighteen miles  to go  in a  straight line  from the
 place  where  they   passed  the   night  with   the  Elves   to  Bucklebury
 Ferry)  that  the  High  Hay  was  about  43  miles  measured in  a straight
 line from its northern to its southern end.                                 
4. On my father's  later maps  (see p.  107) measurement  can only  be very
 approximate,  but  on  the  same  basis  as  the calculation  in note  3 the
 High  Hay  cannot  in  these  be  much  more  than 20  miles (in  a straight
 line between its ends).                                                     
5. Standelf  means  'stone-quarry'  (Old  English  stan-(ge)delf,  surviving
 in the place-name Stonydelph in Warwickshire).                              
6. Just  as  in  FR,  the  hobbits leaving  the Ferry  passed Buck  Hill and
 Brandy  Hall  on  their  left,  struck  the  main  road of  Buckland, turned

      north along it for half a  mile, and  then took  the lane  to Crickhollow.
      On  my  original  map of  the Shire,  made in  1943 (p.  107), the  text -
      which  was  never  changed  here  -   was  already   wrongly  represented,
      since  the  main  road  is  shown  as  passing   between  the   River  and
      Brandy Hall (and  the lane  to Crickhollow  leaves the  road south  of the
      hall, so that the hobbits would in fact, according to this map, still pass
      it  on  their left).  This must  have been  a simple  misinterpretation of
      the text which my father did not notice (cf. p. 108); and  it reappeared
      on my map published  in the  first edition  of FR.  My father  referred to
      the  error in  his letter  to Austin  Olney of  Houghton Mifflin,  28 July
      1965 (Letters no.  274); and  it was  corrected, after  a fashion,  on the
      map  as  published  in  the second  edition. Karen  Fonstad (The  Atlas of
      Middle-earth,   p.   121)  and   Barbara  Strachey  (Journeys of Frodo, Map
      7) show the correct topography clearly.                                   
  7.  These  alterations  to  bring  Odo  back  were  made at  the same  time as
      the  notes  on  the  retention  of  the  story  that Bingo  entered Farmer
      Maggot's house invisibly (p. 288); cf. p. 297, note 13.                   
  8.  In this text  Merry says  'I was  only in  my tweens',  whereas in  FR he
      says  'teens'.  In  LR  (Appendix C)  Merry was  born in  (1382 =) 2982,
      and so in the year before the Farewell Party he  was 13. Here,  Merry is
      conceived  to  be  somewhat  older.  - To  Merry's question  about Bilbo's
      book ('Have you  got it,  Bingo?') Bingo  replies: 'No!  He took  it away,
      or so it seems.' Cf. the last note in Queries  and Alterations  (p. 229):
      'Bilbo carries off "memoirs" to Rivendell.'                               
  9.  Changed from 'Merry and Frodo'.                                           
