 THE THIRD PHASE.

                                      XIX.                                    
                             THE THIRD PHASE (1):                             
                              THE JOURNEY TO BREE.                            
                                                                             
 It  seems  to  me  extremely  probable  that  the  'second phase'  of writing,
 beginning  with  the  fifth  version  of   'A  Long-expected   Party'  (Chapter
 XI V  in this  book) now  petered out,  and once  again a  new start  was made
 on the  whole work.  This 'third  phase' is  constituted by  a long  series of
 homogeneous  manuscripts  carrying  the  story  from  a  sixth  version  of 'A
 Long-expected  Party'   right  through   to  Rivendell.   Though  subsequently
 overwritten,  interleaved,  struck  through, or  'cannibalised' to  form parts
 of later texts,  these manuscripts  were at  first clear  and neat,  and their
 rather  distinctive,  regular  script  makes it  possible to  reconstitute the
 series  quite  precisely  despite  the  punishment  they  received  later, and
 despite  the fact  that some  parts remained  in England  when others  went to
 Marquette  University.  They  were  indeed  fair  copies  of  the  now chaotic
 existing  texts,  and  few  important  narrative  changes  were  made.  But in
 these new texts 'Bingo'  is finally  supplanted by  'Frodo', and  'Frodo Took'
 becomes  in  turn  'Folco  Took',  taking  over  what  had  been  his father's
 name  (see  pp.  251,  290).  In  describing  these  third  phase  versions  I
 restrict  myself  here  almost  exclusively to  the form  they had  when first
 written, and ignore the fearsome complexities of their later treatment.      
  There  are  three  pieces  of  evidence  available  for the  determination of
 the 'external' date. One is my father's letter of 13  October 1938,  in which
 he  said  that  the  book  'has  reached  Chapter  XI  (though  in  rather  an
 illegible state') (Letters no. 34). Another is his letter of a  February 1939,
 in which he recorded that  although he  had not  been able  to touch  it since
 the  previous  December,  it  had  by  then  'reached  Chapter  12   (and  had
 been  re-written several  times), running  to over  300 MS  pages of  the size
 of this paper and written generally as closely.' The third is a set  of notes,
 plot-outlines and brief narrative drafts all bearing  the date  'August 1939'.
 from these, as will be seen later,  it is  apparent that  the third  phase was
 already in being.                                                            
  My  guess  -  it  can hardly  be more  - is  that in  October 1938  the third
 phase  had  not  been  begun, or  had not  proceeded far,  since the  boot was
 'in rather an illegible state', while when my  father wrote  of having  had to
 set the work aside in December  1938 it  was to  the third  phase that  he was
 referring:  hence  he  said  that  it  had  been  're-written  several  times'
 (moreover 'Chapter XI I' of this phase is the arrival at Rivendell, and  it is
 here - as I think - that the new version was interrupted).                   

    The third phase can  be described  quite rapidly,  as far  as the  end of
  'Fog on the Barrow-downs', but first there is an interesting new text to be
  given. This my father called a Foreword (precursor of  the Prologue  in the
  published work). There is no preparatory material for it extant, but  for a
  section of it he took up  the passage  concerning hobbit  architecture from
  the second version  of 'A  Short Cut  to Mushrooms',  against which  he had
  directed 'Put in Foreword' (see  pp. 294  - 5).  This was  scarcely changed
  for its place in the Foreword, but there was now added  a reference  to the
  'Elf-towers', which goes back to  the earliest  form of  the 'architecture'
  passage in the original version of the chapter  (pp. 92  - 3),  where Bingo
  says that he had once seen the towers himself.                             
    A  number  of  changes  were  made  to  the  manuscript of  the Foreword,
  but apart from those that seem clearly to belong to the  time of  writing I
  ignore them here and print the text as it was first written.               
                                                                            
                                   FOREWORD.                                 
                                                                            
                              Concerning Hobbits.                            
                                                                            
  This  book  is  largely  concerned  with  hobbits,  and  it is  possible to
  find  out  from  it  what  they  are  (or  were),  and  whether   they  are
  worth  hearing  about  or  not.  But  finding  out  things  as  you  trudge
  along a road or plod  through a  story is  rather tiring,  even when  it is
  (as  occasionally  happens)  interesting  or   exciting.  Those   who  wish
  to  have  things   clear  from   the  beginning   will  find   some  useful
  information   in   the   brief   account   of   Mr  Bilbo   Baggins'  great
  Adventure,   which   led  to   the  even   more  difficult   and  dangerous
  adventures   recorded   in  this   book.  This   account  was   called  The
  Hobbit  or  There  and  Back  again,  because  it  was   chiefly  concerned
  with  the  most  famous  of  all  the  old  legendary  hobbits,  Bilbo; and
  because  he  went  to  the  Lonely   Mountain  and   came  back   again  to
  his  own  home.  But  one  story  may well  be all  that readers  have time
  or  taste  for.  So  I  will  put  down  some  items of  useful information
  here.                                                                      
    Hobbits   are   a   very   ancient   people,  once   upon  a   time  more
  numerous,  alas!  than  they  are  to-day,  when  (or  so  I hear  it sadly
  rumoured)  they  are  vanishing  rapidly;  for  they  are  fond   of  peace
  and  quiet,  and  good  tilled  earth:   a  well-ordered   and  well-farmed
  countryside  is  their  natural   haunt.  They   are  quite   useless  with
  machines   more   complicated   than   a    bellows   or    a   water-mill;
  though  they  are  fairly  handy  with  tools.  They  were   always  rather
  shy  of  the Big  People (as  they call  us), and  now they  are positively
  scared of us.                                                              

                                       
                                                                      
  And yet plainly  they must  be relatives  of ours:  nearer to  us than
 elves  are,  or  even  dwarves.  For  one  thing,  they  spoke  a  very
 similar  language  (or  languages),  and  liked  or  disliked  much the
 same  things  as we  used to.  What exactly  the relationship  is would
 be  difficult  to  say.  To  answer  that  question  one would  have to
 re-discover a great deal  of the  now wholly  lost history  and legends
 of the Earliest Days,(1) and that is not likely to  happen, for  only the
 Elves  preserve  any  traditions  about  the  Earliest Days,  and their
 traditions  are  mostly  about  themselves   -  not   unnaturally:  the
 Elves  were  much  the  most  important  people  of  those  times.  But
 even  their  traditions  are  incomplete:  Men  only  come  in  to them
 occasionally,   and   Hobbits   are   not   mentioned.   Elves"Dwarves,
 Men,  and  other  creatures  only  became aware  of Hobbits  after they
 had actually existed, jogging  along in  their uneventful  fashion, for
 many ages. And  they continued,  as a  rule, to  jog along,  keeping to
 themselves  and  keeping  out  of stories.  In the  days of  Bilbo (and
 Frodo  his heir)  they became  for a  time very  important, by  what is
 called  accident,  and  the  great  persons  of  the  world,  even  the
 Necromancer,  were  obliged  to  take  them  into  account,   as  these
 stories  show.  Though  Hobbits  had  then already  had a  long history
 (of a quiet  kind), those  days are  now very  long ago,  and geography
 (and many  other things)  were then  very different.  But the  lands in
 which  they  lived,  changed  though  they  now  are,  must  have  been
 more  or  less  in  the same  place as  the lands  in which  they still
 linger: the North-west of the old world.                              
  They  are  (or  were)  a  small  people,  smaller  than  dwarves: less
 stout  and  stocky,  that  is,  even when  they were  not in  fact much
 shorter. Their height was,  like the  height of  us Big  People, rather
 variable,  ranging  between  two  and  four   feet  (of   our  length):
 three  feet  was more  or less  an average.  Very few  hobbits, outside
 their  own  more  fantastic  legends,  touched  three  foot  six.  Only
 Bandobras  Took,  son  of  Isengrim  the  First,  known usually  as the
 Bullroarer, of all the hobbits of  history exceeded  four feet.  He was
 four foot five and rode a horse.(2)                                   
  There  is,  and  always  has  been, very  little magic  about hobbits.
 Of  course  they  possess   the  power   which  we   sometimes  confuse
 with real magic - it is really only a kind of professional  skill, that
 has  become  uncanny  through  long  practice,  aided by  close friend-
 ship  with  the earth  and all  things that  grow on  it: the  power of
 disappearing  quietly  and  quickly  when  large  stupid  folk  like us
 come  blundering  along,  making  noises  like  elephants,  which  they
 can hear a mile  off. Even  long ago  their great  desire was  to avoid

 trouble;  and  they  were  quick  in  hearing, and  sharpsighted. And
 they  were  neat  and  deft  in  their  movements,  though  they were
 inclined to be fat in the stomach, and did not hurry unnecessarily.
   They dressed in bright  colours, being  particularly fond  of green
 and  yellow;  but  they  wore  no  shoes,  because  their  feet  grew
 natural  leathery soles  and thick  warm brown  hair, curly  like the
 brown  hair  of  their  heads.  The  only  trade  unknown  among them
 was  consequently  shoemaking;  but  they   had  long   clever  brown
 fingers  and  could  make many  other useful  things. They  had good-
 natured faces, being as a  rule good-natured;  and they  laughed long
 and deeply, being fond of simple jests at  all times,  but especially
 after dinner (which they had twice a  day, when  they could  get it).
 They  were  fond  of  presents,  and  gave  them  away   freely,  and
 accepted them readily.                                               
   All hobbits had originally lived in holes in the ground, or so they
 believed; although actually already in Bilbo's time it was as  a rule
 only  the  richest and  the poorest  hobbits that  still did  so. The
 poorest  hobbits  went  on  living  in holes  of the  most antiquated
 kind - in fact just holes, with only  one window,  or even  none. The
 most  important  families  continued  to  live  (when they  could) in
 luxurious  versions  of the  simple excavations  of olden  times. But
 suitable sites for these large and ramifying tunnels  were not  to be
 found   everywhere.   In  Hobbiton,   in  Tuckborough   in  Tookland,
 and even  in the  one really  populous town  of their  Shire, Michel-
 Delving  on  the  White  Downs,  there  were  many  houses  of  stone
 and wood and  brick. These  were specially  favoured by  the millers,
 blacksmiths, wheelwrights,  and people  of that  sort: for  even when
 they had holes to live in hobbits used to put up sheds and  barns for
 workshops and storehouses.                                           
   The  custom  of   building  farms   and  dwelling-houses   was  be-
 lieved  to  have  begun  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  river-side
 regions  (especially  the  Marish  down  by  the  Brandywine),  where
 the land was flat  and wet;  and where  perhaps the  hobbit-breed was
 not  quite  pure.  Some of  the hobbits  of the  Marish in  the East-
 farthing  at  any  rate  were  rather large  and heavy-legged;  a few
 actually had a  little down  under their  chins (no  pure-bred hobbit
 had a beard); and one or two even wore boots in muddy weather.       
   It  is possible  that the  idea of  building, as  of so  many other
 things, came originally from the Elves. There  were still  in Bilbo's
 time  three  Elf-towers  just  beyond  the  western  borders  of  the
 Shire.  They  shone  in  the  moonlight.  The  tallest  was  furthest
 away,  standing  alone  on a  hill. The  hobbits of  the Westfarthing

                            
                                                                    
 said that you could see the Sea from the  top of  that tower:  but no
 hobbit had ever been known to  climb it.  But even  if the  notion of
 building  came  originally  from the  Elves, the  hobbits used  it in
 their  own  fashion.  They  did  not  go  in  much for  towers. Their
 houses  were  usually  long  and  low,  and  comfortable.  The oldest
 kind  were  really  artificial  holes  of mud  (and later  of brick),
 thatched with dry grass or straw, or roofed with turf; and  the walls
 were slightly bulged.  But, of  course, that  stage belonged  to very
 ancient  history.   Hobbit-building  had   long  been   altered  (and
 perhaps  improved)  by  the  taking  of  wrinkles  from  dwarves  and
 even Big People, and other folk outside the  Shire. A  preference for
 round  windows,  and also  (but to  a less  extent) for  round doors,
 was the chief remaining characteristic of hobbit-architecture.      
  Both the  houses and  the holes  of hobbits  were usually  large and
 inhabited by large families. (Bilbo  and Frodo  Baggins were  in this
 point, as in many others, rather exceptional.)  Sometimes, as  in the
 case  of  the  Brandybucks  of  Brandy  Hall,  many   generations  of
 relations  lived  in  (comparative) peace  together in  one ancestral
 and  ramifying  mansion.  All  hobbits were,  in any  case, clannish,
 and  reckoned  up  their  relationships  with  great care.  They drew
 long  and  elaborate  family-trees  with  many  branches.  In dealing
 with  hobbits  it is  most important  to remember  who is  related to
 whom, and how, and why.                                             
  It would be impossible to set out  in this  book a  family-tree that
 included  even  the  more  important  members  of  the  more  import-
 ant families of the Shire at the time we  speak of.  It would  take a
 whole book, and  everyone but  hobbits would  find it  dull. (Hobbits
 would love it, if it was accurate: they  like to  have books  full of
 things they already know set out fair and  square with  no contradic-
 tions.) The Shire was  their own  name for  the very  pleasant little
 corner  of  the  world  in  which  the  most  numerous, thoroughbred,
 and representative kind of hobbits lived in Bilbo's time. It  was the
 only  part  of  the world,  indeed, at  that time  in which  the two-
 legged  inhabitants  were  all  Hobbits,  and  in which  Dwarves, Big
 People  (and  even  Elves)  were  merely  strangers   and  occasional
 visitors. The Shire was divided into four  quarters, called  the Four
 Farthings,  the  North,  South,  East  and  West Farthings;  and also
 into a number of  folklands, which  bore the  names of  the important
 families,  although by  this time  these names  were no  longer found
 only  in  their  proper folklands.  Nearly all  Tooks still  lived in
 Tookland,  but  that  was  not so  true of  other families,  like the
 Bagginses or the Boffins. A map of the  Shire will  be found  in this

 book,  in  the  hope  that  it  will  be  useful   (and  be   approved  as
 reasonably correct by those hobbits that go in for hobbit-history).       
   To   complete   the   information   some  (abridged)   family-trees  are
 also   given,   which   will   show   in   what  way   the  hobbit-persons
 mentioned  are  related  to  one  another,  and  what  their  various ages
 were  at  the  time  when  the  story opens.  This will  at any  rate make
 clear   the   connexions   between   Bilbo   and   Frodo,    and   between
 Folco   Took   and   Meriadoc  Brandybuck   (usually  called   Merry)  and
 the other chief characters.(3)                                             
   Frodo  Baggins  became  Bilbo's  heir  by  adoption:  heir  not  only to
 what  was  left  of  Bilbo's  considerable  wealth, but  also to  his most
 mysterious  treasure:  a  magic  ring.  This  ring  came  from  a  cave in
 the  Misty  Mountains,  far  away  in  the  East.  It  had  belonged  to a
 sad  and   rather  loathsome   creature  called   Gollum,  of   whom  more
 will  be  heard  in  this  story,  though I  hope some  will find  time to
 read   the   account  of   his  riddle-competition   with  Bilbo   in  The
 Hobbit.  It is  important to  this tale,  as the  wizard Gandalf  tried to
 explain  to  Frodo.  The  ring  had  the  power   of  making   its  wearer
 invisible.  It  had  also  other  powers,  which  Bilbo  did  not discover
 until  long  after  he  had  come  back  and settled  down at  home again.
 Consequently  they  are  not  spoken  of  in  the  story  of  his journey.
 But  this  later  story  is  concerned chiefly  with the  ring, and  so no
 more need be said about them here.                                        
   Bilbo  it  is  told  'remained very  happy to  the end  of his  days and
 those  were   extraordinarily  long.'   They  were.   How  extraordinarily
 long  you  may  now  discover,  and  you  may  also  learn  that remaining
 happy  did  not  mean  continuing  to  live  for  ever  at  Bag-end. Bilbo
 returned  home  on  June  22nd  in  his  fifty-second  year,  and  nothing
 very  notable  occurred  in  the  Shire  for  another  sixty  years,  when
 Bilbo   began   to   make   preparations  for   the  celebration   of  his
 hundred  and  eleventh  birthday.  At  which  point  the  present  tale of
 the Ring begins.                                                          
                                                                          
                     Chapter I: 'A Lang-expected Party'.                   
                                                                          
 At  the  beginning of  this sixth  embodiment of  the opening  chapter the
 revised  passage  about Bilbo's  book (p.  245, note  3) was  now removed,
 and replaced by: 'He was supposed to be writing a book, containing  a full
 account of his year's mysterious adventures, which no  one was  allowed to
 see.'                                                                     
   The  conversation  at  The  Ivy Bush  is taken  up from  the preliminary
 version described on pp. 244- 5, and now reaches virtually the form it has

                                                                         
                                                                           
 in FR; but at this stage the Gaffer's instruction on  the subject  of Bilbo
 and  Frodo  and their  antecedents was  still recounted  in advance  by the
 narrator also.(4)                                                          
   The  'odd-looking  waggons  laden  with  odd-looking   packages',  driven
 by  'elves  or  heavily  hooded  dwarves,'  which  had  survived  from  the
 second  version  of  the  chapter  (p. 20),  were now  reduced to  a single
 waggon,  driven  by  dwarves,  and  no  elves  appear  (see  p.  235);  but
 Gandalf's mark on the fireworks, here called 'runic', still remains, and he
 is still 'a little old man'. The guests still  included the  Gaukrogers (so
 spelt),  but  the  remark  that  the  Brockhouses had  come in  from Combe-
 under-Bree  (p.  236)  is  dropped.  The  young  Took  who  danced  on  the
 table  changes  his  name  from  Prospero to  Everard (as  in FR),  but his
 partner remains Melissa Brandybuck (Melilot in FR).                        
   The pencilled addition to the fifth version (p. 246,  note 12), showing
 that Bingo/Frodo was fully aware of what  Bilbo intended  to do,  was taken
 up (but as in FR Frodo stays on long enough at the dinner-table  to satisfy
 Rory  Brandybuck's  thirst:  'Hey,  Frodo,  just  send that  decanter round
 again!');  as  also was  the passage  about Bilbo's  taking Sting  with him
 (p.246, note 13). Bilbo now (as  in FR)  takes a  leather-bound manuscript
 from a  strong-box (though  not the  'bundle wrapped  in old  cloths'), but
 gives the bulky envelope, which  he addresses  to Frodo  and into  which he
 puts the Ring, to the dwarf Lofar, asking him to put it in Frodo's room.
   Gandalf still meets Bilbo at the bottom of the Hill after he has left Bag
 End  with  the  Dwarves  (still  named  Nar, Anar,  and Hannar),  and their
 conversation  remains as  it was  (pp. 238  - 40):  in answer  to Gandalf's
 question  'He  [Frodo]  knows  about  it,  of  course?' Bilbo  replies: 'He
 knows that I have a Ring. He has read my  private memoirs  (the only  one I
 have  ever  allowed  to  read  them).'  Gandalf's return  to Bag  End after
 saying good-bye to Bilbo is incorporated from  the very  rough form  in the
 fifth version (p. 247, note 20), the  only difference  being that  Frodo is
 now actually reading Bilbo's letter as he sits in the hall.                
   The list of Bilbo's parting  presents (p.  247, note  21) is  now further
 changed  by  the  loss of  Caramella Chubb  and her  clock and  Primo Grubb
 and  his dinner-service  (survivors from  the original  draft, p.  15, when
 they   were   Caramella   Took   and   Inigo  Grubb-Took);   Colombo  Horn-
 blower and  the barometer  also disappear.  Lofar still  plays the  role of
 Merry  Brandybuck  on  the  day  following  the  Party,  and  Gandalf's con-
 versation  with  Frodo on  that day  remains the  same, with  various later
 additions and omissions made  to the fifth version  (p. 248,  notes 24 - 6,
 28 - 30) incorporated: thus Bingo's reference to Bilbo's use of the Ring to
 escape from the Sackville-Bagginses is of  course removed,  in view  of its
 use in  'A Conspiracy  is Unmasked'  (p. 300),  as is  Gandalf's suggestion
 that Bingo might be  able to  get in  touch with  him if  necessary through
 'the nearest dwarves'.                                                     

                            Genealogy of the Tooks.                          
                                                                            
  On  the  reverse  of  one  of  the  pages  of  this  manuscript of  'A Long-
 expected  Party'  is the  most substantial  genealogy of  the Tooks  that has
 yet appeared.                                                               
  The  figures  attached  to  the  names  are at  first glance  very puzzling:
 they  are  obviously  neither  dates  according  to an  independent calendar,
 nor  ages  at death.  The key  is provided  by 'Bilbo  Baggins III',  and by
 the  statement  in  the  Foreword (p.  314) that  the family-trees  (of which
 this is the only one  that survives,  or was  made at  this time)  would show
 'what their various ages were at the time  when the  story opens.'  The basis
 is the year of the Party, which is zero; and the figures are the ages  of the
 persons  relative  to the  Party. As  between any  two figures,  the relative
 ages  of  the  persons  are  given.  Thus  311  against  Ferumbras   and  266
 against  Fortinbras  means  that  Ferumbras  was  born  45  years  before his
 son;  Isengrim  the  First  was  born  374  years before  Meriadoc Brandybuck
 eight  generations  later;  Drogo Baggins  was 23  years younger  than Bilbo,
 and  if  he  had not  been drowned  in the  Brandywine and  had been  able to
 come  to the  Party would  have been  88; and  so on.  The daggers  of course
 show persons who were dead at the time of the Party.                        
  A  few  of  the figures  were changed  on the  manuscript, the  earlier ones
 being:  Isengrim   II  172,   Isambard  160,   Flambard  167,   Rosa  Baggins
 151,  Bungo  Baggins   155,  Yolanda   60,  Folco   Took  23,   Meriadoc  25,
 Odo 24.                                                                     
  It will be seen  that while  there is  no external  chronological structure,
 the internal or relative structure is not so very different from that  of the
 family  tree  of  Took  of  Great  Smials in  LR Appendix  C. In  LR Meriadoc
 was born 362  years after  Isengrim II  (= Isengrim  I in  the old  tree) and
 eight generations later.                                                    
  Bandobras  the Bullroarer  (see p.  311  and note  2) is  here the  son of
 Isengrim,  first of  the Took  line in  the tree;  and in  the Prologue to LR
 (p. 11)  he is  likewise the  son of  that Isengrim  (the Second).  This was
 overlooked  when  the  final  Took  tree  was  made,  for Bandobras  is there
 moved  down  by  a  generation,  becoming  the  son  (not  the   brother)  of
 Isengrim's son Isumbras (III).(5)                                           
  The  Old  Took  now  acquires  the  name  Gerontius,  as  in LR  (earlier he
 was 'Frodo the First',  p. 251). Four  sons are  named here;  in LR  he had
 nine.  Rosa Baggins,  wife of  one of  them (Flambard),  has appeared  in the
 little genealogy  found in  Queries and  Alterations (p.  222): there  she is
 the  sister  of  Bungo  Baggins,  and  she  married  'Young  Took'.  The tree
 given  on p.  267 is  maintained here  in respect  of Merry's  parents; Frodo
 Took  has  become  Folco  Took,  and his  father Folcard  (see p.  309). Odo,
 here with a double-barrelled name Took-Bolger,  was said  earlier (p.  251)
 to  have  a  Took  mother  and  to  be  a  third  cousin  of Merry  and Frodo
 (Folco), as is shown in this tree.                                          
  Donnamira  Took,  second  of  the  Old  Took's  daughters,  is   now  named,


                         (奈턍?)


 and is the wife of Hugo Boffin, as in LR, where however no issue is           
 recorded in the tree: on this see p. 386.                                     
   Lastly, five further children (six in LR)  of Mirabella  Took and           
 Gorboduc Brandybuck are given in addition to  Primula, one  of them           
 being Rory Brandybuck (see p. 267, note 4), whose true name is here           
 Roderick  (Rorimac  in LR);  the other  sons have  Visigothic names           
 altogether different from those in the Brandybuck tree in LR.                 
                                                                              
                          Chapter II: 'Ancient History'.                        
                                                                              
 The earlier forms of this chapter  are found  on pp.  76 ff.  and pp.  250 ff.
 The version in the third phase is in places difficult to interpret, for it was
 a  good  deal  changed  in  the act  of composition  and very  heavily altered
 afterwards,  and  it is  not easy  to distinguish  the 'layers',  moreover, it
 became  divided  up,  with  some  of  its  pages  remaining  in   England  and
 some going to Marquette University.                                           
   In  general,  the  substance of  the narrative  remains remarkably  close to
 that  of the  preceding version;  my father  had that  before him,  of course,
 and he was largely content merely  to alter  the expression  as he  went along
 - ubiquitously, but leaving the existing story little affected.               
   Of  the  younger  hobbits  that  Frodo went  about with,  the chief  are now
 Meriadoc  Brandybuck,  Folco  Took,  and  Odo  Bolger  (or.  Folco  for  Frodo
 see  p.  309);  genealogical  information  about  them  is  not  provided (cf.
 p.  251).  Frodo no  longer 'walked  all over  the Shire,'  nor was  he 'often
 away from home'; rather, 'he did not go far afield, and  after Bilbo  left his
 walks  gradually  grew  shorter  and  circled  more  and  more  round  his own
 hole.'  When  he  thought  of  leaving  the  Shire,  and  wondered   what  lay
 beyond  its  borders,  'half  of  him  was  now  unwilling,  and  began  to be
 afraid of walks abroad, lest the mud on his  feet should  carry him  off.' The
 'thin  feeling' mentioned  in the  previous version  (p. 252),  'as if  he was
 being  stretched  out  over  a lot  of days,  and weeks,  and months,  but was
 not fully there', is no longer referred to, and Gandalf does  not do  so later
 in the chapter (cf. p. 266).                                                  
   In  the  account  of  Gandalf's  visits  to  Hobbiton,  the  passage  in the
 previous  version  describing his  secret comings  and taps  on the  window is
 moved,  so that  it refers  to the  earlier time  when he  came often  (cf. FR
 p.  55),  before  his  long  absence  of  seven  years (p.  268, note  6). The
 wizard  reappeared  'about  fifteen  years   after  Bilbo's   departure',  and
 'during  the  last  year  he  had  often  come  and stayed  a long  time.' The
 conversation  at The  Green  Dragon  took  place  in  'the  spring  of Frodo's
 forty-ninth year' (at the beginning of the  next chapter  in this  phase Frodo
 decides  to leave  Bag End  in September  of 'this  (his fiftieth)  year': see
 p. 253 and note 8).                                                           
   In  the  passage  concerning  the  rumours  of  trouble  and  the migrations
 in  the  wide  world  the  site of  Sauron's ancient  stronghold in  the South
 'near  the  midst  of  the world  in those  days' (p.  253) becomes  'near the

                                            
                                                                           
 middle  of  the  Great  Land', but  this was  at once  struck out;  and the
 passage concerning giants  becomes: 'Trolls  and giants  were abroad,  of a
 new and more malevolent  kind, no  longer dull-witted  but full  of cunning
 and wizardry.' In the talk at the inn,  the passage  about the  Grey Havens
 now appears, and  the whole  conversation moves  almost to  the form  in FR
 (p. 54); but it is still Jo Button who saw the 'Tree-men' beyond  the North
 Moors,  though he  works now  for 'Mr  Fosco Boffin'  - with  'of Northope'
 added later, and then changed to 'at Overhill'. Fosco Boffin, Bilbo's first
 cousin once removed, appears in the Took genealogy  given on  p. 3  17; see
 p. 386.                                                                    
   The  opening  of  the  conversation  between  Gandalf  and  Frodo  at Bag
 End was changed, probably at or very  soon after  the time  of composition,
 from a form very close to that of the preceding version (p. 255)  and still
 including Gandalf's mention of his  two visits  to the  land of  the Necro-
 mancer. The new form reads:                                                
                                                                           
   'You   say   the   ring  is   dangerous,  far   more  dangerous   than  I
 guess,'  said  Frodo  at  length.  'How  long  have  you  known  that?  And
 did Bilbo know? I wish you would tell me more now.'                        
   'At  first  I  knew  very  little,'  answered   Gandalf  slowly,   as  if
 searching  back  in   memory.  Already   the  days   of  the   journey  and
 the  Dragon  and  the  Battle  of  Five  Armies  began  to  seem   dim  and
 far-off. Perhaps even he  was at  last beginning  to feel  his age;  and in
 any   case   many   dark   and   strange   adventures   had   befallen  him
 since.  'Then   after  I   came  back   from  the   South  and   the  White
 Council,  I  began  to  wonder  what  kind  of  magic  ring  he  possessed;
 but  I  said  nothing  to  Bilbo.  All   seemed  well   with  him,   and  I
 thought   that   that   kind   of   power  was   powerless  over   him.  So
 I  thought;  and  I  was  right  in  a way;  but not  quite right.  I ought
 perhaps  to  have  found  out  more,  sooner  than  I   did,  and   then  I
 should  have  warned  him  earlier.  But  before  he left  I told  him what
 I  could  - by  that time  I had  begun to  suspect the  truth, but  I knew
 very little for certain.'                                                  
   'I  am  sure  you  did  all  you  could,'  said Frodo.  'You have  been a
 good  friend,  and  a  wise  counsellor  to  us.  But it  must have  been a
 great blow to you when Bilbo disappeared.'                                 
                                                                           
   In  Gandalf's  account  of  the  Rings  (p.  260)  he  now  says: 'Slowly
 through the years  he has  been seeking  for them,  hoping to  recall their
 power into  his own  hands, and  hoping always  to find  the One';  and his
 words concerning  the Three  Rings were  early changed  from their  form in
 the second version (p. 260, but with 'earth, sea, and sky' for 'earth, air,
 and sky'):                                                                 
                                                                           
 What use they made of the Three Rings of Earth, Sea, and Sky, I            

                                   
                                                                             
 do not know; nor do I  know what  has now  become of  them. Some             
 say that hidden Elf-kings still keep them in fast places  of the             
 Middle-earth; but I believe they have long been carried far over             
 the Great Sea.                                                               
                                                                             
  Gandalf,   again   by  early   or  immediate   change,  now   concludes  his
 remarks  about  the  Seven  Rings  of  the  Dwarves,  which  some   say  have
 perished  in the  fire of  the dragons,  with the  words: 'Yet  that account,
 maybe, is not wholly true'; he does  not now  refer to  the belief  that some
 of the Seven Rings  are preserved,  though no  doubt he  implies it  (cf. the
 first draft for the Council of Elrond, p. 398).                              
  As  my father  first wrote  here the  passage about  Gil-galad, he  began by
 following  the  former  text  almost  exactly,  with  'Valandil, King  of the
 Island' (see p. 260 and note 26), but he changed it in the act of writing to:
 'and  he  made  an  alliance  with  Valandil,  King  of  the men  of Numenor,
 who  came  back  over  the   sea  from   Westernesse  into   Middle-earth  in
 those  days.'  Valandil  was  then  changed   to  Elendil,   probably  almost
 immediately,  and  also at  the subsequent  occurrences of  the name  in this
 passage. Isildor of the second text  is now  written Isildur.  Isildur's host
 was overwhelmed by 'Orcs', not 'Goblins' (see p. 437, note 35).              
  To  Gandalf's  story  of  Gollum  nothing  is  added  or  altered  from  the
 preceding version  (see p.  261), save  that 'his  grandmother who  ruled all
 the family turned him out of her hole.'                                      
  The   purport   of   Gandalf's   discussion   of   Gollum's   character  and
 motives  in  respect  of  the   Ring  remains   unchanged  from   the  second
 version,  though  of  course  with  continual  slight development  in expres-
 sion,  and  in  some   passages  with   considerable  expansion.   The  words
 'Only Elves  can stand  it, and  even they  fade' (p.  261) are  now omitted.
 Gandalf's  meaning  in  his  reply  to  Frodo's  objection that  Gollum never
 gave Bilbo the Ring is now made clearer:                                     
                                                                             
  'But  he  never  gave  Bilbo  the Ring,'  said Frodo.  'Bilbo had           
 already found it lying on the floor.'                                        
  'I  know,  answered  Gandalf,  'and  I  have always  thought that           
 that was one of the strangest things about Bilbo's adventure. That           
 is why I said that  Gollum's ancestry  only partly  explained what           
 happened...'                                                                 
                                                                             
  It  is  still  Gandalf  himself  who  found  Gollum,  though  Frodo's excla-
 mation  'You  found  Gollum!  '  (p.  263) was  subsequently changed  to 'You
 have  seen  Gollum!',  and  Gandalf's  reply  to  Frodo's  question  'Did you
 find him there [in Mirkwood]?' (p.  264) was  changed to  'I saw  him there,
 but it  was friends  of mine  who actually  tracked him  down, with  the help
 of the Wood-elves.' Cf. the first version of  the Council  of Elrond,  p. 401
 and  note  20.  -  Gandalf's  account  of  Gollum's  own  story  is  expanded
 thus:                                                                        

 What  I  have  told  you,  Gollum  was  willing  to  tell  - though  not, of
 course,  in  the  way  I  have  reported  it.  Gollum  is  a  liar,  and you
 have  to  sift  his  words.  For   instance,  you   may  remember   that  he
 told  Bilbo  he  had  the  Ring  as  a  birthday-present.  Very  unlikely on
 the  face  of  it:  incredible  when  one  suspects  what  kind  of  ring it
 really was. It  was said  merely to  make Bilbo  willing to  accept it  as a
 harmless  kind  of  toy  -   one  of   Gollum's  hobbit-like   thoughts.  He
 repeated  this  nonsense  to  me,  but  I  laughed  at  him.  He  then  told
 me  the  truer  story,   with  a   lot  of   snivelling  and   snarling.  He
 thought he was misunderstood and ill-treated...                           
                                                                            
    Gandalf  still says,  oddly, that  Gollum 'had  found out  eventually, of
 course, that Bilbo had in  some way  got his  Ring, and  what his  name was,
 and  where he  came from'  (see p.  263 and  note 32);  indeed the  point is
 now made more  emphatically: 'And  the news  of later  events went  all over
 Wilderland, and Bilbo's name was spoken far and wide.'                     
    When  Gandalf  pauses after  saying 'he  made his  slow sneaking  way bit
 by  bit,  years  ago,  down  to  the  Land  of  Mordor'  the  heavy  silence
 mentioned  in  FR  p.  68  falls,  and  'there  was  now  no sound  of Sam's
 shears.' The phrase  'I think  indeed that  Gollum is  the beginning  of our
 present troubles' is retained: see p. 271, note 33.                         
    From '"Well  anyway," said  Frodo, "if  Gollum could  not be  killed"' my
 father at first followed the  earlier text  (p.265)  very closely,  but then
 rewrote it in a changed form.                                               
                                                                            
    'Well  anyway,'  said  Frodo,  'if  Gollum  could not  be killed,  I wish
 Bilbo had not kept the Ring. Why did he?'                                   
    'Is  not  that  clear  from  what  you  have   now  heard?   '  answered
 Gandalf.  'I  remember  you  saying,  when  it  first came  to you,  that it
 had   its   advantages,   and  that   you  wondered   why  Bilbo   went  off
 without  it  [see  p.  242].  He  had possessed  it a  long while  before we
 knew  that  it  was  specially  important.  After  that  it  was  too  late:
 there  was  the  Ring  itself   to  reckon   with.  It   has  a   power  and
 purpose  of  its  own  that  clouds  wise  counsel.  Even  Bilbo  could  not
 altogether   escape   its   influence.  He   developed  a   sentiment.  Even
 when   he   knew   that  it   came  ultimately   from  the   Necromancer  he
 wished to keep it as a memento...'                                          
                                                                            
    Lastly, the passage beginning 'I really do wish to destroy it!' (p. 266)
 was changed and amplified:                                                  
                                                                            
    'I  really  do  wish  to destroy  it! '  cried Frodo.  'But I  wish more
 that the Ring need never have come to me. Why was I chosen?'                
    'Bilbo  passed  it  on  to  you  to save  himself from  destruction; and
 because  he  could  find  no  one   else.  He   did  so   reluctantly,  but

 believing   that,   when   you    knew   more,    you   would    accept   the
 burden  for  a  while  out  of  love  for  him.  He  thought  you  were safe:
 safe  not  to misuse  it or  to let  it get  into evil  hands; safe  from its
 power  for  a  time;  and  safe  in  the  quiet  Shire  of  the  hobbits from
 the  knowledge  of  its  maker.  And  I   promised  him   to  help   you.  He
 relied  on  that.  Indeed  for  your  sake  and  for  his  I have  taken many
 perilous journeys.                                                           
   'Also  I may  say that  I did  not discover  the letters  of fire  or their
 meaning  or  know  for  certain  that  this  was  the  Ruling  Ring  until he
 had  already  decided  to  go.  I did  not tell  him, for  then he  would not
 have  burdened  you.  I  let  him  go.  He  had  had   the  Ring   for  sixty
 years,  and  it  was  telling  on  him,  Frodo.  It   would  have   worn  him
 down   in   the   end,  and   I  dare   not  guess   what  might   then  have
 happened.                                                                    
   'But   now,   alas!   I   know   more.   I   have   seen  Gollum.   I  have
 journeyed  even  to  the  Land  of  Mordor.   I  fear   that  the   Enemy  is
 searching.  You  are  in  a  far  graver  peril than  ever Bilbo  dreamed of.
 So do not blame him.'                                                        
   'But  I  am  not  strong  enough!  '   said  Frodo.   'You  are   wise  and
 powerful. Will you not take the Ring?'                                       
   'No!'   said   Gandalf   springing  to   his  feet.   'With  that   Ring  I
 should  have  power  too   great  and   terrible.  And   over  me   it  would
 gain  a  power  still  greater  and  more  deadly.'  His  eyes   flashed  and
 his  face  was  lit as  by a  fire within.  'Do not  tempt me!  For I  do not
 wish  to  become  like  the   Dark  Lord   himself.  Yet   the  way   of  the
 Ring  to  my  heart  is  by  pity  for  weakness and  the desire  of strength
 to do good. Do not tempt me! '                                               
   He  went  to  the  window  and  drew  aside   the  curtain   and  shutters.
 Sunlight  streamed  back  again  into   the  room.   Sam  passed   along  the
 path  outside,   whistling.  'In   any  case,'   said  the   wizard,  turning
 back  to  Frodo,  'it  is  now  too late.  You would  hate me  and call  me a
 thief;  and  our  friendship  would  cease.   Such  is   the  power   of  the
 Ring.  But  together  we  will  shoulder  the  burden  that  is laid  on us.'
 He  came  and  laid  his  hand  on   Frodo's  shoulder.   'But  we   must  do
 something soon,' he said. 'The Enemy is moving.'                             
                                                                             
   The same curious idea  is still  present here  that Gandalf  discovered the
 letters of fire on Bilbo's ring, and knew that it was the Ruling Ring, before
 Bilbo  left  but  without telling  him (i.e.  without Bilbo's  knowledge that
 this  test  had  been  made):  see  p. 266  and note  38. -  Gandalf's remark
 (p.  321)  'I  think  indeed  that  Gollum  is the  beginning of  our present
 troubles',  retained  from  the  second  version,  now  perhaps  becomes less

  obscure (see p. 271, note 33): 'I have been to the Land of Mordor. I fear
  that the Enemy is searching.'                                            
                                                                          
                     Chapter III: 'Delays are Dangerous'.                    
                                                                          
  The new text of the third chapter, now given this  title (which  had been
  scribbled in on the second version), was  another fine  clear manuscript,
  replacing its appallingly difficult predecessor (pp. 273 ff.).           
                                                                          
   The chapter still begins with the gossip in The Ivy Bush and The Creen
  Dragon (p. 274 and  note 1)  before turning  to the  conversation between
  Gandalf and Frodo. In  that conversation  Gandalf does  now refer,  as in
  FR, to the possibility that it may be Frodo's task to find the  Cracks of
  Doom - indeed he goes further:                                           
                                                                          
    'And to go there but not come back again,' added Gandalf               
  grimly. 'For in the end I think you must come to the Fiery               
  Mountain, though you are not yet ready to make that your goal.'          
                                                                          
    That  with  Merry's help (6) Frodo had  chosen a  little house  at Crick-
  hollow (see p. 299)  is now  taken up  from the  pencilled change  to the
  previous version (p. 283, note 2). Gandalf still leaves Hobbiton 'one wet
  dark evening in May'.                                                    
    But a major change enters the story  with the  departure of  Odo Bolger
  (not Took-Bolger, as in the family  tree, p.  317) with  Merry Brandybuck
  in the  third cart  from Hobbiton.  My father  had proposed  this earlier
  (p. 299): 'From here onwards [i.e. after the arrival in Buckland]  Odo is
  presumed  to  have  gone with  Merry ahead.  The preliminary  journey was
  Frodo [Took], Bingo and Sam  only. Frodo  has a  character a  little more
  like Odo once had. Odo is now rather silent (and  greedy).' But  the text
  that followed this  direction was  obscure and  contradictory, apparently
  on account of my opposition to the proposal  (see p.  299). Now  the deed
  was done properly.                                                       
    In the earlier versions of the chapter the young hobbits Frodo  and Odo
  had  distinct  characters  (see  p.  70).  The  removal  of Odo  from the
  expedition  does  not mean,  however, that  Odo's character  was removed;
  because my father always worked on the basis of  preceding drafts,  and a
  great  deal of  the original  material of  this chapter  survived. Though
  Frodo   Took,   now   renamed   Folco  Took   (since  Bingo   had  become
  Frodo),  was  the  one  who  remained  in  the new  narrative, he  had to
  become the speaker of the things that the  absent Odo  had said  - unless
  my father was to rewrite what he had written  in a  far more  drastic way
  than he wished to. Despite  the early  note 'Sam  Gamgee to  replace Odo'
  (p. 250), Sam was too particularly conceived from the outset to be at all
  suitable to take up Odo's nonchalance. Moreover, in  this version  of the

  chapter the  original contribution  of Folco  (Frodo) Took  was in  any case
  further  reduced.  The  verse  The  Road goes  ever on  and on  had already
  been given  to Bingo  in the  second version  (p. 278);  now his  account of
  meeting  a  Black  Rider  up  on  the  North  Moors  was  dropped,  and  his
  exclamation of  delight when  the singing  of the  Elves was  heard ('Elves!
  How wonderful!  I have  always wished  to hear  elves singing  under stars')
  was cut out apparently in the act of  writing and  replaced by  Sam's hoarse
  whisper: 'Elves! ' So Folco Took, with a diminished part  of 'his  own', and
  acquiring  much  of  'Odo's',   becomes  'Odo'   more  completely   than  my
  father  apparently  foresaw when  he said  'Frodo [Took]  has a  character a
  little more like Odo once had.'(7)                                         
    Yet  Folco's  genealogical  place  remains;  for  Odo  himself  (once sur-
  named  Took  but  now a  Bolger with  a Took  mother) has  gone on  ahead to
  Buckland,  where  a  separate  and distinct  adventure (already  glimpsed in
  advance, pp. 302,304) will  overtake him,  while into  Folco's place  in the
  family tree of  the Tooks,  as first  cousin of  Merry Brandybuck  (pp. 267,
  3 I 7), will later step Peregrin Took (Pippin).                             
                                                                             
    Cosimo   Sackville-Baggins'   'overshadowed   wife   Miranda'   disappears
  again, together with  the remark  that he  and his  mother Lobelia  lived at
  Bag End 'for many a year  after' (p.  283, note  5). -  The Road  goes ever on
  and  on  now  attains  the  final form  (p. 284,  note 10).  - At  the first
  appearance of the Black Rider on the road, in the passage  cited on  p. 278,
  'Odo  and Frodo'  become 'Folco  and Sam',  and the  text of  FR (p.  84) is
  reached.                                                                    
    As  already  noticed, Frodo  Took's account  of his  meeting with  a Black
  Rider on the  North Moors  of the  Shire (p.  278) is  now dropped,  and the
  conversation  between  Bingo  and  Frodo Took  on the  subject of  the Black
  Riders (p. 279) that  follows Sam's  revelation moves  on to  precisely the
  form in FR (p. 85), with of course Folco for Pippin. The  brief halt  of the
  Rider  by  the  decayed  tree  in  which  the  hobbits  ate their  supper is
  however  retained in  this version,  and in  the ensuing  conversation Frodo
  still says, as did Bingo, that he will take the name of Mr Hill of Faraway.
    When the singing of the Elves is heard Frodo says,  as in  FR p.  88: 'One
  can meet them  sometimes in  the Woody  End', but  he still  says as  in the
  preceding  version (p.  280) that  they come  in spring  and autumn  'out of
  their own lands far beyond the River'.  As in  FR, the  hymn to  Elbereth is
  now said to be sung 'in the fair Elven-tongue', and at the  end of  it Frodo
  says: 'These are High-elves! They speak the name of Elbereth! '             
    Odo's  indiscreet  remark about  their good  luck in  landing unexpectedly
  good food and  lodging disappears  and is  not handed  on to  Folco. Frodo's
  'The stars shine on the hour of our meeting'  was at  first given  as before
  (p. 280) only in translation, but my father changed this, clearly in the act
  of  writing  the  manuscript,  by the  introduction of  the Elvish  words as
  well, Eleni silir lumesse omentiemman, and  then again  to Elen  sile..., 'A

  star shines...' At  this Gildor  says, as  in FR,  'Here is  a scholar  in the
  Ancient Tongue.'                                                             
    It is still the Moon that rouses  the Elves  to song;  but the  old wording
  ('The  yellow  moon  rose;  springing  swiftly  out of  the shadow,  and then
  climbing  round  and  slow  into  the  sky')  surviving  from   the  original
  version  of the  chapter (p.  61), was  changed, apparently  at or  very near
  the time of writing, to: 'Above the mists away  in the  East the  thin silver
  rind  of  the  New  Moon  appeared,  and rising  swift and  clear out  of the
  shadow  it  swung  gleaming  in  the  sky.'  My  father  no  doubt  made this
  change  on  account  of  what  he  had  said  elsewhere  about the  Moon; for
  there  was  a  waxing  moon  as  the  hobbits  approached Weathertop,  and it
  was 'nearly half-full' on the night of the attack (pp. 168, 184):  the attack
  was on 5 October  (p. 175),  and there  could not  be a  full or  nearly full
  Moon  on  24  September,  the  night  passed  with  the  Elves  in  the Woody
  End  (see  p.  16o).  On  that  night  it  must  have  been almost  New Moon.
  The  dates  of  the phases  of the  Moon in  the autumn  and early  winter of
  that  year  cited  on  p.  434,  note  19,  in  fact  give  New  Moon  on  25
  September,  the  First Quarter  (half-full) on  z October,  and Full  Moon on
  10  October.  But  it  is  an  odd  and  uncharacteristic aberration  that my
  father envisaged a  New Moon  rising late  at night  in the  East.(8) In FR, of
  course,  there  is  no  mention  of  the Moon  in this  passage: it  was 'the
  Swordsman  of  the Sky,  Menelvagor with  his shining  belt' that  caused the
  Elves to burst into song.                                                    
    In  the  passage  describing  the  memories  of  the  meal  eaten  with the
  Elves the text of FR is  reached, with  Folco retaining  those of  Frodo Took
  together with Odo's recollection of the bread.                               
    Gildor's  advice  to  Bingo  (Frodo)  that  he  should  take   trusty  com-
  panions,  and  his  opinion   that  his   present  companions   have  already
  confused the Riders, is retained (see p. 282); but  at the  end there  is now
  no mention of the Ring, and their talk ends as in FR (p. 94).                
                                                                              
                     Chapter IV: 'A Short Cut to Mushrooms'.                   
                                                                              
  In this new version of the chapter there is only to notice the curious result
  of  the  exclusion  of  Odo  Bolger:  with  Folco Took  adding Odo's  part to
  that which he  retained from  Frodo Took's  in the  former narrative.  In the
  previous  version  Odo  argued  against  taking  a  short  cut to  the Ferry,
  because,  while  he  did  not  know  the  country,  he  did  know  The Golden
  Perch  at Stock,  and Frodo  Took argued  for it  - because  he did  know the
  country.(9) Now,  the  Frodo-element  in  Folco,  retaining  a   knowledge  of
  the country, uses it  to support  the desire  of the  Odo-element in  him for
  the  beer at  Stock, and  his opponent  in the  argument is  Frodo (Baggins);
  thus  Folco  is  here, and  throughout the  chapter, Pippin  in all  but name
  (see pp. 286 - 7).                                                           
    Deephallow now disappears from the text (see p. 286).                      

                      Chapter V: 'A Conspiracy Unmasked'.                    
                                                                            
 This  chapter  had  already reached  in the  second version  (pp. 298  ff.) a
 form  very  close  to  that  in  FR,  but there  remained the  confusion over
 whether  Odo  had  been  on  the  walk  from  Hobbiton  or  whether   he  had
 gone  on  ahead  to Buckland  with Merry  (see pp.  299, 323).  Following the
 new  version  of Chapter  III, this  is now  resolved, of  course: Odo  is at
 Crickhollow,  opens  the door  when they  arrive, and  cooks the  supper with
 Merry  -  in  fact,  until the  end of  the chapter,  he has  become Fredegar
 (Fatty)  Bolger. The  text now  reaches, until  the end  of the  chapter, the
 form  in  FR,  down  to the  smallest particulars  of expression,  with these
 differences  only:  the  passage  about  Gorhendad   Oldbuck  is   still  not
 present (p. 298); the Hedge is  still forty  miles from  end to  end (ibid.);
 and the 'dwarf-song' Farewell. farewell, now hearth and hall!  still retains
 the form in the previous version (pp. 300 - 1).(10)                         
  The  end  of  the  chapter  still  differs  altogether  from  that   in  FR,
 however.  The  form   in  the   second  version   was  preserved,   with  the
 pencilled  additions  incorporated  (p. 302).  Odo says  'But me  shan't have
 any luck  in the  Old Forest'  (whereas in  FR Fredegar  says 'But  you won't
 have any luck'),  because he  is still  potentially a  member of  the further
 expedition, even though  my father  had in  fact decided  that he  would stay
 at  Crickhollow  till  Gandalf  came.  I give  the text  from 'Do  you follow
 Captain Frodo, or do you stay at home?'                                     
                                                                            
  'We  follow  Captain   Frodo,'  said   Merry  and   Folco  (and   of  course
 Sam).  Odo  was  silent.  'Look  here!'  he  said  after  a pause.  'I don't
 mind  admitting   that  I   am  more   terrified  of   the  Forest   than  of
 anything  I  know  about.  I  dislike  woods  of  any  kind, but  the stories
 about  the  Old  Forest  are  a  nightmare.  But  I   also  think   that  you
 ought  to  try  and  keep  in  touch   with  Gandalf,   who  I   guess  knows
 more  about  the  Black  Riders  than  you  do.  I  will  stay   behind  here
 and  keep  off  inquisitive  folk.  When  Gandalf  comes,  as  I think  he is
 sure  to,  I will  tell him  what you  have done,  and I  will come  on after
 you with him, if he will bring me.'                                         
  The   others   agreed   that  this   seemed  on   the  whole   an  excellent
 plan;  and  Frodo  at  once  wrote  a brief  letter to  Gandalf, and  gave it
 to Odo.                                                                     
  'Well, that's settled,' said Merry.                                        
                                                                            
 The rest of the chapter is as in the previous version.                      
  A curious trace of this stage survives  in the  published text.  Since Odo's
 staying  behind  had  not  formed  part  of   the  'conspiracy',   Merry  had
 prepared  six ponies,  five for  the five  hobbits and  one for  the baggage.
 When  the  story  changed,  and  Fredegar  Bolger's  task  'according  to the
 original  plans  of  the  conspirators'  (FR  p. 118)  was expressly  to stay

 behind, this detail was overlooked, and the six ponies remained at this       
 point (FR p. 117).                                                           
                                                                              
                         Chapter VI: 'The Old Forest'.                         
                                                                              
 The chapter  now at  last receives  its title.  Odo now  said farewell  to the
 others  at  the  entrance  to  the  tunnel  under  the  Hedge in  these words:
                                                                              
 'I  wish  you  were  not going  into the  Forest. I  don't believe  you will
 get  safely  through;  and  I  think  it  is  very  necessary  that  someone
 should  warn  Gandalf  that  you  have  gone  in.  I'm  sure  you  will need
 rescuing  before  to-day  is  out.  Still  I  wish  you  luck  and  I  hope,
 perhaps, I shall catch you up again one day.'                                 
                                                                              
   The hill rising out of the forest  was still  crowned with  a knot  of trees
 (p.  113),  but  this  was changed  to the  'bald head'  of FR  in the  act of
 writing  this  manuscript.  The  gully  which  the  hobbits  were   forced  to
 follow  downwards  because  they  could  not  climb  out of  it still  ends as
 before (ibid.):                                                               
                                                                              
 Suddenly   the   woodland   trees   came   to   an   end,   and   the  gully
 became  deep  and  sheer-sided;   its  bottom   was  almost   wholly  filled
 by  the  noisy  hurrying  water.  It  ran  down  finally  to a  narrow shelf
 at the  top of  a rocky  bank, over  which the  stream dived  and fell  in a
 series  of  small  waterfalls.  Looking  down  they  saw  that   below  them
 was a wide space of grass and reeds...                                        
                                                                              
 The  old  story  of  the  descent  down  the  thirty-foot  bank is  thus still
 present, with Folco falling the last fifteen feet.                            
   In the  original form  of the  story of  the encounter  with Old  Man Willow
 (p. 113) Bingo and  Odo were  trapped in  the tree,  and Merry  (then called
 Marmaduke)  was  the  one  who  rounded  up  the  ponies  and   rescued  Frodo
 Took  from the  river. In  the next  stage (p.  302) this  was changed  to the
 extent that Sam took over Merry's  part, and  Merry simply  'lay like  a log'.
 Now,  with  Frodo Took  and Odo  'reduced' to  Folco Took,  it is  still Frodo
 Baggins  and  Folco  who  are  imprisoned in  the tree,  but Merry  steps into
 Frodo Took's role as the one pushed into the river.                           
   In  the  oldest  version   the  path   beside  the   Withywindle  puzzlingly
 turned  sharply  to  the  left  below  Tom  Bombadil's house  and went  over a
 little bridge; and in later revision this was retained, with, later again, the
 word 'left'  changed to  'right', implying  that Bombadil's  house was  on the
 south side of the Withywindle (see p. 114).  The present  text read  at first
 here:                                                                         
 [The path] turned sharply to the right, and took them over a                  
 chattering down.                                                              

  This retains the turn in the path and the  bridge, but  the bridge  being over
  a  tributary  stream  Bombadil's  house  is on  the north  side of  the Withy-
  windle.  My  father  struck  the  passage  out,  however,  apparently   as  he
  wrote.                                                                        
                                                                               
                   Chapter VII: 'In the House of Tom Bombadil'.                 
                                                                               
  Like the last, this chapter now receives its title. The episode of  the attack
  on Crickhollow (pp. 303  - 4)  is now  a part  of the  text, and  was repeated
  from  the  earlier  form  with  scarcely  any  significant  change  and almost
  word  for  word.  The  'grey  man'  came up  the path  leading a  white horse,
  but that Gandalf had a white horse appears  later in  the first  version. More
  important,  my  father  at  first  repeated  the words  'Suddenly there  was a
  movement',  but struck  them out  and substituted:  'A curtain  in one  of the
  windows  stirred.  Then  suddenly  the  figure  by  the  door  moved  swiftly'
  (this  change  clearly  belongs  with  the  writing  of  the  manuscript). Odo
  was in the house, of course. To the words pencilled  at the  end of  the first
  version of the episode, 'Behind clung a  small figure  with Hying  cloak', and
  'Odo',  there is  nothing corresponding  in the  next, and  I think  that they
  had not, in fact, yet been written in on the former; at this stage,  it seems,
  my father had no  further plans  for Odo.  But there  is a  pencilled addition
  to  the  second text  of which,  though it  was erased,  Mr Taum  Santoski has
  been  able  to  make  out  the  following:  'Behind  him  ran   Odo...  and...
  wind. Cf. IX.22.' On this question see p. 336.                                
    The  dreams.  The  content  of  Frodo's  dream  remains  the   same,  almost
  word  for  word,  as Bingo's  in the  original version  (p. 118),  except that
  after  the  words  'hoofs  thudding  and  wind  blowing'  there  follows  'and
  faint  and  far  the  echo  of  a  horn':  this  obviously   echoes  Gandalf's
  blowing  of  the  horn  at  Crickhollow,  which   in  this   text  immediately
  precedes Frodo's dream. But whereas in the story  as told  in the  first phase
  'Bingo woke' and then 'fell asleep  again' (on  the reality  of the  sounds he
  heard see p. 119), in this version Frodo 'lay in a dream without light': this
  is as in FR, but nothing is said here to  suggest that  he woke  (contrast FR:
  '"Black  Riders!"  thought  Frodo  as  he  wakened.')  On  the other  hand the
  passage in the present text ends as in FR: 'at last he turned and  fell asleep
  again  or  wandered  into  some  other   unremembered  dream.'   Folco  dreams
  what  was  originally  Odo's  dream,  and   like  Pippin   in  FR   'woke,  or
  thought  he  had  waked', and  then 'went  to sleep  again.' Merry  takes over
  Frodo Took's dream  of water,  with the  words 'falling  into his  quiet sleep
  and  slowly  waking him'  retained from  the old  version, though  struck out,
  probably at once; this  passage ends,  as in  FR, 'He  breathed deep  and fell
  asleep  again.' Sam  'slept through  the night  in deep  content, if  logs are
  contented.'                                                                   
    In  Tom's  talk  with  the  hobbits  on  the  second  day,  the  old  phrase
  'A  dark shadow  came up  out of  the middle  of the  world' is  retained (see
  p.  121);  and  Tom's  reply  to Frodo's  question 'Who  are you,  Master?' is

  almost exactly as in the old version (p.  121): he  says 'I  am Ab-Origine,
  that's what I am,' and the words 'He saw the Sun rise in  the West  and the
  Moon following, before the new order of  days was  made' are  retained (see
  my discussion of this passage, pp. 121 - 2).                             
    In all the other minor differences mentioned on pp. 122 - 3  the present
  text reaches the final form.                                               
                                                                            
                    Chapter VIII: 'Fog on the Barrow-downs'.                  
                                                                            
  There is little that need be said about this chapter, which followed on the
  original text (pp. 127 - 30), and which  now received  its title.  The 'arm
  walking on its fingers' in the barrow crept towards  Folco, and  Frodo fell
  forward  upon  him  (p.  127).  Merry's  words  when  he  woke  remain  un-
  changed  (p.  128);  and nothing  more is  said of  the bronze  swords that
  Tom  Bombadil  chose  for  the  hobbits  from  the  treasures of  the mound
  than the words added to the original text:  Tom said  that 'they  were made
  many ages ago by men out of the West: they were foes of the dark Lord.'
    The  conclusion of  the chapter  moves some  way to  the final  form, but
  features of the original version are retained (pp. 129  - 30).  Thus Frodo,
  riding down onto the Road, still says: 'I hope we shall be able to stick to
  the beaten track after this,' to which Bombadil  replies: 'That's  what you
  ought to do, as long as you are able: hold to the beaten way, but ride fast
  and wary.' In his parting advice he still says: 'Barnabas Butterbur  is the
  worthy  keeper:  he  knows  Tom   Bombadil,  and   Tom's  name   will  help
  you. Say "Tom sent us here", and he will  treat you  kindly.' After  he has
  gone  there  is  no  conversation  among  the  hobbits  recorded,  and  the
  chapter ends much as in the original text.  Sam rode  with Frodo  in front,
  Merry and Folco behind, leading the spare pony; and Bree is still 'a little
  village'.                                                                  
                                                                            
                                     NOTES.                                  
                                                                            
 1.  Earliest  Days,  occurring  twice  in  this  passage, was  changed later
   to  Elder  Days.  The  latter   expression  occurs   once  in   the  Quenta
   Silmarillion, where it is not capitalised  (V. 259);  cf. also  Elder Years
   (V.90), eldest days (V.245).
 2. Bandobras  the  Bullroarer  reappears  from  The  Hobbit   (Chapter  I);
   see further pp. 316 - 17.                                                 
 3. Only  one  such  tree  is  known  to me,  perhaps the  only one  made by
   my father at this time; see pp. 316 - 18.                                
 4.   Thus whereas in  the preliminary  version of  the talk  in The  Ivy Bush
   (p. 244)  the  narrator's  opening  was  to  be  reduced  to a  brief para-
   graph,  my  father  was  now  both  retaining the  account of  past history
   from  earlier  versions  of  the  chapter and  also adding  Gaffer Gamgee's

      own  characteristic  mode  of  retailing  it.  In  FR the  Gaffer becomes
      the sole source.                                                        
 5.   In  The  Hobbit  Bandobras  is  called  Bilbo's   great-grand-uncle,  but
      Bilbo himself calls him his great-great-great-grand-uncle -  as he  is in
      the present tree.                                                       
 6.   His cousin Lanorac Brandybuck (p. 275) has disappeared.                 
 7.   The discussion whether to walk far or not  on the  first night  was still
      present  (see  p.  276),  but Folco  does not  take on  Odo's reluctance;
      the result is  that all  three of  them agree,  and the  discussion being
      now rather pointless my father  struck it  out and  replaced it  with the
      words of FR (p. 80): 'Well, we  all like  walking in  the dark,  so let's
      put some miles behind us before bed.'                                   
 8.   It  is  indeed  so  extraordinary,  in  view  of  his  deep  and constant
      awareness  of  all  such  modes and  appearances, that  one seeks  for an
      explanation:  can  he  have  intended  'the  Old  Moon' but  have written
      'the  New  Moon'   because  he   was  thinking   of  the   crescent  form
      (characteristically  'the  New  Moon')  rather   than  the   phase?  This
      seems unlikely; and in any case an 'old Moon' as a 'thin silver  rind' is
      not  seen  till  near dawn,  for the  Moon to  have this  appearance must
      be very near to the Sun.                                                
 9.   In  the  earlier,  abandoned  variant  of  the  Farmer Maggot  episode in
      the  previous  version  of  the chapter  Maggot says  that Frodo  Took is
      'half a Brandybuck' (p.  291). This  was already  omitted in  the second
      variant;  but  he  was  Merry  Brandybuck's  first  cousin, and  he tells
      Bingo  that  Maggot 'is  a friend  of Merry's,  and I  used to  come here
      with him a good deal at one time'  - just  as Pippin  tells Frodo  in FR,
                                                                             
      p. 101.                                                                 
                                                                             
 10.  My father first wrote  that it  was sung  by Merry,  Folco, and  Odo, but
      Odo's  name was  no doubt  due to  its presence  in the  previous version
      (p. 300), and he struck it out at once.                                 

                                      XX                                     
                             THE THIRD PHASE (2):                            
                              AT THE SIGN OF THE                             
                                 PRANCING PONY.                              
                                                                            
 With Chapter IX, now  given the  title 'At  the Sign  of the  Prancing Pony',
 the  narrative  of  this  phase  underwent a  much more  substantial develop-
 ment,  but not  at all  in the  direction of  the final  story in  FR. Before
 coming to this, however, there is  a curious  feature in  the opening  of the
 chapter to be considered.                                                   
  The   opening   now   advanced   far   from   the   early  forms   given  on
 pp. 132 - 4:  an initial  account in  which Bree  was a  village of  Men, but
 where  'there  were  hobbits  about', changed  to the  story that  there were
 only  hobbits  in  Bree,  and  Mr  Butterbur  was himself  a hobbit.  A later
 note (p. 233) said however that 'Bree-folk are  not to  be hobbits.'  Now my
 father resolved  the question  by returning,  more or  less, to  the original
 idea: Men and Hobbits lived together in Bree.  But he  found it  difficult to
 achieve a form of the opening  with which  he could  be satisfied,  and there
 is version after version soon tailing off, to  be replaced  by the  next. All
 these drafts are very similar, differing in the ordering of the  material and
 in the admission  or omission  of detail;  all obviously  belong to  the same
 time;  and  there  is  no  need  to  look  at  them  closely,  except  in one
 particular. All  the drafts  contain the  passage in  FR (p.  161) concerning
 the  origin  of  the  Men  of  Bree  -  one  of  them  adding that  they were
 'descendants  of the  sons of  Beor' -  and the  return of  the Kings  of Men
 over  the  Great  Seas.' The  passage that  follows, as  in FR,  concerns the
 Rangers, and is a)most the same in all the draft forms of it:               
                                                                            
 No  other  Men  lived  now  so  far  West,  nor  so  near  the  Shire   by  a
 hundred  leagues  and   more.  No   settled  people,   that  is:   for  there
 were   the   Rangers,   mysterious   wanderers   that   the   Men   of   Bree
 regarded  with  deep  respect  (and  a  little  fear),  since they  were said
 to  be  the  last  remnant  of  the  kingly  people  from  beyond  the  Seas.
 But  the  Rangers  were  few  and  seldom  seen,  and   roamed  at   will  in
 the wild lands eastward, even as far as the Misty Mountains.                
                                                                            
 The  curious  thing  is  that  in the  form of  the chapter-opening  that was
 allowed to stand  the account  of the  Rangers is  quite different,  and does
 not  follow  on  from  the  words 'No  other Men  lived at  that time  so far
 West,  nor  so  near  by  a  hundred  leagues  to the  Shire', but  is placed

 further  on  (after 'There  was Bree-blood  in the  Brandybuck family  by all
 accounts', FR p. 162). This version reads:                                   
                                                                             
 In the wild lands east of Bree there roamed a few unsettled folk             
 (men  and  hobbits). These  the people  of the  Bree-land called             
 Rangers.  Some  of  them  were  well-known  in Bree,  which they             
 visited fairly frequently, and were welcome as bringers  of news             
 and tellers of strange tales.                                                
                                                                             
 Later  in  the  chapter,  Butterbur  answers  Frodo's question  about Trotter
 thus:                                                                        
                                                                             
 I don't rightly know. He is one  of the  wandering folk  - Rangers,          
 we call them. Not that he really is a Ranger, if you understand me,          
 though he behaves like one. He seems to be a  hobbit of  some kind.          
 He  has  been  coming  in  pretty  often  during  the  past  twelve          
 months, especially since last spring; but he seldom talks.                   
                                                                             
   In the original version at this place (p. 137) Butterbur says: '0!  that is
 one of the wild folk - rangers we  call 'em.'  And Gandalf  in his  letter to
 Frodo still refers in the third phase text, as in the old version, to Trotter
 as 'a ranger... dark rather lean hobbit, wears wooden shoes' (p. 352).       
   With  these  extracts  compare   the  note   in  Queries   and  Alterations
 (p. 223): Rangers are best not as hobbits, perhaps.                          
   It is difficult to interpret this. In the third phase we find the statement
 (in draft versions) that Rangers are 'the last remnant  of the  kingly people
 from  beyond  the  Seas',  and  also  the  statements  that Rangers  are both
 men  and  hobbits,  that  one  particular  hobbit is  a Ranger  (so Gandalf),
 and that this same hobbit is  'not really  a Ranger,  though he  behaves like
 one'  (so  Butterbur).  The  simplest  explanation  is  to  suppose  that the
 Numenorean  origin  of  the  Rangers  was   an  idea   that  my   father  was
 considering in the drafts, but which he set aside when he  wrote the  text of
 the  chapter  and  the subsequent  narrative (see  further p.  393). Whatever
 the explanation, it is clear that the finished conception of the  Rangers had
 a difficult emergence; and it is characteristic  that even  when the  idea of
 the Rangers  as the  last descendants  of the  Numenorean exiles  had arisen,
 and a place thus prepared, as it were, for Trotter, he did  not at  once move
 into that place.                                                             
   The village of Staddle now reappears (see p. 132), on  the other  side of
 the hill; and Combe  is set  'in a  deep valley  a little  further eastward',
 Archet 'on the  edge of  Chetwood'-all as  in FR  p. 161.  That Bree  stood at
 an  old  meeting  of  the  ways,  the  East  Road  and  the  Greenway running
 north and south, now appears. In the only one  of the  draft versions  of the
 opening to reach the actual narrative, the hobbits                           
                                                                             
 passed one or two detached houses before they  came to  the inn,             
 and Sam and Folco stared at these in wonder. Sam was filled with             

 deep  suspicion,  and  doubted  the   wisdom  of   seeking  any   lodging  in
 such  an  outlandish  place.  'Fancy  having   to  climb   up  a   ladder  to
 bed!' he said. 'What do they do it for? They aren't birds.'                   
   'It's  airier,'  said  Frodo,  'and  safer  too  in  wilder  country. There
 is no fence around Bree that I can see.'                                       
                                                                               
   Here  my  father  stopped;  probably at  that moment  he decided  that this
 was  improbable.  In  the  completed  text  of the  chapter dike,  hedge, and
 gate appear.                                                                   
                                                                               
   Frodo    and    his   companions    came   at    last   to    the   Greenway-
 crossing   and   drew   near   the   village.   They   found   that    it   was
 surrounded  by  a   deep  ditch   with  a   hedge  and   fence  on   the  inner
 side.  Over  this  the  Road  ran,  but  it  was  closed  (as  was  the  custom
 after  nightfall)  by  a  great  gate of  loose bars  laid across  strong posts
 on either side.                                                                
                                                                               
 A little sketch-map, reproduced on  p. 335,  very likely  belongs to  just this
 time. Written beside the line marking  the outer  circuit of  Bree is  'ditch R
 f', i.e. 'fence'. (For an earlier, very simple sketch-plan of Bree see p. 174,
 note 20).                                                                      
   The text continues:                                                          
                                                                               
 There was a house just beyond the  barrier, and  a man  was sitting            
 at the door. He jumped up and  fetched a  lantern, and  looked down            
 over the gate at them in surprise.                                             
   'We are making for the  inn here,'  said Frodo  in answer  to his            
 questions. 'We are journeying east, and cannot go further tonight.'            
   'Hobbits! ' said the  man. 'And  what's more,  Shire-hobbits from            
 the sound of your talk! Well, if that is  not a  wonder: Shire-folk            
 riding by night and journeying east! '                                         
   He  removed  the  bars  slowly  and let  them ride  through. 'And            
 what makes it stranger,' he went  on: 'there's  been more  than one            
 traveller in the last few days  going the  same way,  and enquiring            
 after a party of four hobbits on ponies. But I laughed at  them and            
 said there had been no such party and was never  likely to  be. And            
 here you are! But if you  go on  to old  Butterbur's I  don't doubt            
 you'll find a welcome, and more news of your friends, maybe.'                  
   They  wished  him  goodnight;  but  Frodo  made  no   comment  on            
 his talk, though he could see in the lantern-light that the man was            
 eyeing them  curiously. He  was glad  to hear  the bars  dropped in            
 their places behind them as they rode forward.  One Black  Rider at            
 least  was  now  ahead of  them, or  so he  guessed from  the man's            
 words, but it was likely enough that others were still  behind. And            

 what about Gandalf? Had he, too, passed through, trying to catch            
 them up while they were delayed in the Forest and Downs?                    
   The hobbits rode on up a gentle slope, passing a  few detached            
 houses, and drew up outside the inn....                                     
                                                                            
   The  account  of Sam's  dismay at  the sight  of the  tall houses,  of the
 structure of the inn, and of their arrival, is almost word for word as in FR
 p.  164;  and  Barnabas  Butterbur  is  now  a  man, not  a hobbit.  But the
 passage  in  the  original  version  in  which Bingo  (Frodo) refers  to Tom
 Bombadil's  recommendation   of  The   Prancing  Pony   and  is   then  made
 welcome by the  landlord (pp.  134 -  5) is  retained. Frodo  now introduces
 them  by  their  correct names,  except that  he calls  himself 'Mr  Hill of
 Faraway' (see pp. 280, 324). Butterbur replies  much as  in the  old version
 (p. 135),  but his  remarks there  about the  Tooks are  now applied  to the
 Brandybucks, and not merely  in the  general context  of the  Shire-folk but
 because  Merry  has   been  introduced   as  Mr   Brandybuck;  and   he  now
 mentions  the  strangers  who  had come  up the  Greenway the  night before.
 The  passage  about  their  supply  of  money  (see  p. 136  and note  7) is
 retained,  though  the  urgency  is  made  less  ('Frodo  had  brought  some
 money  with  him,  of  course, as  much as  was safe  or convenient;  but it
 would not cover the expenses of good inns indefinitely.')                   
   From  'The  landlord hovered  round for  a little,  and then  prepared (2) to
 leave them' the new chapter reaches the final form for  a long  stretch with
 only  minor  differences  and  for  the  most  part in  the same  words. The
 people  in  the common-room  of the  inn (including  the strangers  from the
 South, who 'stared  curiously') are  as in  FR (and  the botanical  names of
 the  Men  of  Bree,  see  p.  137  and  note  8);  but  'among  the  company
 [Frodo] noticed the gate-keeper, and wondered  vaguely if  it was  his night
 off duty.' The  'squint-eyed ill-favoured  fellow' who  in FR  foretold that
 many  more  people  would  be  coming  north  in  the  near  future  is here
 simply  'one  of  the  travellers'  who  had  come  up  the  Greenway. Folco
 Took is  now of  course 'the  ridiculous young  Took'; but  he does  not yet
 tell  the  tale  of the  collapse of  the roof  of the  Town Hole  in Michel
 Delving.  Frodo  'heard  someone  ask  what  part  the  Hills  lived  in and
 where Faraway was; and he hoped Sam and Folco would be careful.'            
   As  already noticed,  Trotter remains  a hobbit;(3) and the  description of
 him in fact follows  the original  version (p.  137) closely,  including the
 wooden  shoes;  his  pipe was  changed from  'broken' to  'short-stemmed' in
 the act of writing, and he had 'an enormous mug (large even  for a  man)' in
 front of him. In Frodo's first conversation  with Trotter,  and in  all that
 follows to the end of  Chapter g  in FR,  the present  text moves  almost to
 the final form (which has in any case been virtually attained, in the latter
 part, already in the original version, see p.140). Frodo's feeling  that the
 suggestion  that  he  put  on  the  Ring  came  to  him 'from  outside, from
 someone  or something  in the  room' is  present. At  first my  father wrote
 simply that the 'swarthy-faced fellow'  (Bill Ferney) (4) 'slipped out  of the

                                      
                                                                               
  door,  followed  by one  of the  southerners: not  a well-favoured  pair', but
  by a change that seems little later than  the writing  of the  manuscript this
  became:                                                                       
                                                                               
  Very  soon  he  slipped  out  of  the door,  followed by  Harry the           
  gate-keeper,  and by  one of  the southerners:  the three  had been           
  whispering  together  in  a  corner  most  of  the  evening.  For a           
  moment he wondered if the Ring itself had not played him a  trick -           
  or perhaps obeyed orders other than his  own. He  did not  like the           
  looks of the three men that had gone out, especially not the [dark-           
  eyed >] squint-eyed southerner.                                               
                                                                               
  In  this  text  it  has  already  been  mentioned  that  the  gate-keeper  was
  present at the inn; this is not in FR, though it is said that he went out just
  behind the other two. - The  text of  The Cat  and the  Fiddle is  now exactly
  in the final form.                                                            
     In the original version I  divided the  text for  convenience at  the point
  where  Chapter  g ends  in FR,  though there  is no  break in  the manuscript.
  The present version also continues without  a break,  and in  this case  it is
  more convenient to treat the old chapter as a whole.                          
     The next part of the story follows  the original  form (pp.  148 -  9) very
  closely  to  the  point where  Trotter tells  Bingo about  his 'eavesdropping'
  on  the  Road.  There,  Trotter   had  overheard   Gandalf  and   the  Dwarves
  and  Elves  (returning  from  Hobbiton  after  Bingo   Bolger-Baggins'  'long-
  expected  party'  and  disappearance)  talking  about   Bingo  and   his  com-
  panions  who  were  supposed  to  be  on the  Road behind  them: the  date was
  Sunday  morning,   September  25th   (p.  160).   The  present   version  here
  introduces  a  major  alteration  into  the  narrative  structure,  but  by no
  means  to the  story in  FR, where  Strider overhears  the hobbits  talking to
  Bombadil  when  he  left  them  on  the East  Road (and  hears Frodo  say that
  he must be known as Underhill, not Baggins).                                  
     It seems likely  that the  new story,  in which  the further  adventures of
  Odo  Bolger  first  appear  in  formed  narrative, arose  when my  father came
  to this chapter in his writing  of the  third phase  manuscripts, and  that it
  was  at  this  stage  that  he  pencilled  in  the  notes  about  Odo  leaving
  Crickhollow  with  Gandalf (5) after  the   rout  of   the  Black   Riders  (see
  p.  328):  that  is  why, in  the note  to the  second text  of the  attack on
  Crickhollow, he gave the reference 'IX.22'. IX.22  is the  manuscript page
  in  which  Trotter's  story of  his eavesdropping  on Gandalf  and Odo  on the
  East Road appears in the present chapter.                                     
     It will be seen that version 'A' of the original story is used: see pp. 148
  and 171 note 1.                                                               
     The  opening  of this  section of  the story  is duplicated,  both versions
  appearing to belong  to the  same time  of writing,  and neither  being struck
  out; but the second form given here was preferred. The one reads:             

 ...  I  was  behind  a  hedge,  when  a  man  on  a  horse  halted  on  the
 Road  not  far  [west of  Bree >  (at time  of writing)]  east of  Bree. To
 my  surprise  there  was   a  hobbit   riding  behind   him  on   the  same
 horse!  They  got  off  to  take a  meal, and  started talking.  Now, oddly
 enough,   they   were   discussing   a  certain   Frodo  Baggins   and  his
 three  companions.   I  gathered   that  these   four  strange   folk  were
 hobbits  that  had  bolted  out  of  the  Shire  (by  a  back-door,  as you
 might  say)  last  Monday,  and  ought  to  be   on  the   Road  somewhere.
 The   travellers   were   very   worried   about   Mr  Baggins,   and  won-
 dered  whether  he  was  on  the  Road  or  off  it,  in  front of  them or
 behind. They wanted to find him and warn him.                             
   'A  bit  incautious,  I  must  say,  of  Gandalf  -  there  now!  Gandalf
 it  was,  of  course:  there's  no  mistaking  him,  you'll  agree -  to go
 talking  like  that  by  the  Road-side.  But  actually  he   was  speaking
 low,   and   I   happened   to  be   lying  very   close.  That   would  be
 yesterday noon: Wednesday.                                                 
                                                                           
   The other reads:                                                         
                                                                           
 ...  I  was  hiding  under  a  hedge,  by  the  Road   some  way   west  of
 Bree,  trying  to  shelter  from  the  rain,  when   a  man   on  horseback
 halted  close  by.  To  my  surprise  there  was  a  hobbit  riding  behind
 him  on the  same horse!  They got  off to  rest, and  take a  little food,
 and  they  started  talking.  If  you  want  to  know,  they  were  discus-
 sing  a  certain  Frodo  Baggins  and  his  three  companions.  I  gathered
 that these were four hobbits that  had left  the Shire  in a  great hurry
 the  previous  day.  The  horseman  was  trying  to  catch  them   up,  but
 he  was  not  sure  if  they  were  on  the  Road  or off  it, in  front or
 behind.  He  seemed  very  worried,  but  hoped  to  find  them   at  Bree.
 I thought it very  strange, for  it is  not often  that Gandalf's  plans go
 wrong.'                                                                    
   Frodo  stirred  suddenly  at  the  mention  of  the  name,   and  Trotter
 smiled.  'Yes,  Gandalf!'  he  said.  'I  know  what  he  looks  like, and
 once  seen  never  forgotten,  you'll  agree.  He  was  speaking  very low,
 but  he  had  no  idea  that  old  Trotter  was  so  close.  That   was  on
 Tuesday evening, just as the light was failing.                            
                                                                           
   The hobbits left Crickhollow early in the morning of Monday 26           
 September,  and  arrived  in  Bree  at nightfall  on Thursday  29 September
 (p- 160). The first of these variants makes Trotter see Gandalf  and Odo
 on the road east of Bree on the Wednesday, i.e. after passing through the
 village; the second places  the encounter  a day  earlier, on  the Tuesday
 evening, before  they reached  Bree. Therefore  Frodo calculates,  in the
 passage that now follows, that Gandalf had  reached Crickhollow  'on the

                           
                                                                        
  Monday, after they had left,'  since Bree  was a  day's riding  from the
  Brandywine  Bridge.  The  rain  on  the Tuesday  from which  Trotter was
  sheltering was the rain that fell during the hobbits' second day  in the
  house of Tom Bombadil. The text continues:                             
                                                                        
  Now  up  comes  a  hobbit  and  three  friends  out  of  the  Shire, and
  though  he  gives  out the  name of  Hill, his  friends call  him Frodo,
  and  they  all seem  to know  a good  deal about  the doings  of Gandalf
  and  the  Bagginses  of  Hobbiton.  I  can  put  two  and  two together,
  when it is as easy as that. But don't let it trouble  you: I  shall keep
  the   answer  to   myself.  Maybe,   Mr  Baggins   has  a   good  honest
  reason  for leaving  his name  behind. But  if so,  I should  advise him
  to  remember  that there  are others  besides Trotter  that can  do such
  easy sums - and not all are to be trusted.'                            
     'I am  obliged to  you,' said  Frodo, greatly  relieved. Here  at any
  rate  was  news  of  Gandalf;  and  of  Odo  too,   apparently.  Gandalf
  must  have  turned  up  at  Crickhollow  on   the  Monday,   after  they
  had  left.  But  Frodo  was  still  suspicious   of  Trotter,   and  was
  determined  to pretend  that the  affair was  of no  special importance.
  'I have not left my name behind,  as you  put it,'  he said  stiffly. 'I
  called  myself  Hill  at  this  inn  merely  to  avoid  idle  questions.
  Mr  Butterbur  has  quite  enough to  say as  it is.  I don't  quite see
  how  anyone  would  guess  my   real  name   from  what   has  occurred,
  unless he  had your  skill in  eavesdropping. And  I don't  see, either,
  what  special interest  my name  has for  anybody in  Bree, or  for you,
  for that matter.'                                                      
     Trotter  laughed  at  him.   'Don't  you?'   he  said   grimly.  'But
  eavesdropping,   as  you   put  it,   is  not   unknown  in   Bree.  And
  besides, I have not told you all about myself yet.'                    
     At  that  moment  he  was  interrupted  by  a knock  on the  door. Mr
  Butterbur  was  there  with  a  tray  of  candles,  and  Nob  behind him
  with cans  of hot  water. 'I've  come to  wish you  a good  night,' said
  the  landlord,  putting  the  candles  on  the  table.  'Nob!  Take  the
  water to the rooms.'  He came  in and  shut the  door. 'It's  like this,
  Mr Hill,' he began:  'I've been  asked more  than once  to look  out for
  a party of four hobbits and five ponies. Hullo, Trotter! You here?'
     'It's all  right,' said  Frodo. 'Say  what you  wish! Trotter  has my
  leave to stay.' Trotter grinned.                                       
     'Well,' began Mr Butterbur again, 'it's like this:  a couple  of days
  ago, yes, it would be  late on  Tuesday night,  just as  I was  going to
  lock  up, there  came a  ring at  the bell  in the  yard. Who  should be
  standing  at  the door  but old  Gandalf, if  you know  who I  mean! All
  wet  through  he  was:  it  had  been  raining  heavens  hard  all  day.

                                                                
                                                                    
 There was a hobbit  with him,  and a  white horse  - very  tired the
 poor beast  was; for  it had  carried both  of them  a long  way, it
 seemed. "Bless me, Gandalf!" says  I. "  What are  you doing  out in
 this weather at this time of night? And  who's your  little friend?"
 But  he  winked  at  me,  and  didn't  answer  my   questions.  "Hot
 drinks   and   warm  beds!"   he  croaked,   and  stumbled   up  the
 steps.                                                              
   'Later on he sent for me. "Butterbur," says  he. "I'm  looking for
 some friends:  four hobbits.  One is  a round-bellied  little fellow
 with  red  cheeks"  -  begging your  pardon -  "and the  others just
 young  hobbits.  They  should  have  five  ponies  and  a  good deal
 of  baggage.  Have  you  seen  them?  They  ought  to   have  passed
 through Bree some time today,(6) unless they have stopped here."      
   'He seemed very put  out, when  I said  no such  party was  at The
 Pony,  and  none  had  passed  through,  to  my  certain knowledge.
 "That's bad news!" he said, tugging at his beard.  "Will you  do two
 things for me? If this party turns  up, give  them a  message: Hurry
 on! Gandalf is ahead. Just that. Don't forget, because  it's import-
 ant!  And  if  anyone  -  anyone,  mind   you,  however   strange  -
 enquires after a hobbit called Baggins, tell  them Baggins  has gone
 east with Gandalf. Don't forget that either, and I shall be grateful
 to you."' The landlord paused, looking hard at Frodo.               
   'Thank you very  much!' said  Frodo,  thinking Mr  Butterbur had
 finished, and relieved to find that his story was  much the  same as
 Trotter's,  and  no  more alarming.  All the  same he  was extremely
 puzzled  by  Gandalf's  mysterious  words  about  Baggins.  He  won-
 dered if Butterbur had got it all wrong.                            
   'Ah! But wait a minute!'  said the  landlord, lowering  his voice.
 'That  wasn't the  end of  it. And  that's what  is puzzling  me. On
 Monday  a  big  black  fellow  went  through Bree  on a  great black
 horse, and all the folk  were talking  about it.  The dogs  were all
 yammering  and  the  geese   screaming  as   he  rode   through  the
 village. I heard later that three of these riders  were seen  on the
 Road  by  Combe;  though  where  the  other  two  had sprung  from I
 couldn't say.                                                       
   'Gandalf and his little friend Baggins  went off  yesterday, after
 sleeping late, about the middle of the morning. In the evening, just
 before the road-gate was shut, in rode the  black fellows  again, or
 others as like them as  night and  dark. "There's  the Black  Man at
 the door!" shouted Nob, running  to fetch  me with  his hair  all on
 end. Sure enough, it was:  not one  nor three,  though, but  four of
 them! One was sitting there in the twilight with his big black horse

 almost  on  my  door-step.  All  hooded  and  cloaked  he was.  He bent
 down  and  spoke  to me,  and very  cold I  thought his  voice sounded.
 And  what  do  you  think?  He  was  asking  for  news of  four hobbits
 riding east out of the Shire! (7)                                      
   'I didn't like the  sound or  the looks  of him,  and I  answered him
 short, "I haven't seen any  such party,"  I said,  "and I'm  not likely
 to, either. What may you be wanting with them, or with me?'            
   'At  that  he  sent  out  a breath  that set  me shivering.  "We want
 news  of  them.  We  are  seeking  Baggins," he  said, hissing  out the
 name like a snake. "Baggins is with them.  If he  comes, you  will tell
 us, and we will repay you with gold.  If you  do not  tell us,  we will
 repay you - otherwise."                                                
   '"Baggins!" said I. "He ain't  with them.  If you  are looking  for a
 hobbit of that name, he went off east this morning with Gandalf."      
   'At that  name he  drew in  his breath  and sat  up. Then  he stooped
 at me again. "Is that truth?"  he said,  very hard  and quiet.  "Do not
 lie to us!"                                                            
   'I was all of a twitter, I can tell you, but I answered up as bold as
 I could: "Of course  it's the  truth! I  know Gandalf,  and he  and his
 friend were here last  night, I  tell you."  At that  the four  of them
 turned  their horses  and rode  off into  the darkness  without another
 word.                                                                  
   'Now,  Mr  Hill,  what  do you  make of  all that?  I hope  I've done
 right. If it hadn't  been for  Gandalf's orders,  I'd never  have given
 them  news  of  Baggins,  nor  of  anyone  else.  For  these  Black Men
 mean no good to anyone, I'll be bound.'                                
   'You've done quite right, as  far as  I can  see,' said  Frodo. 'From
 what I know of Gandalf, it is usually best to do what he asks.'        
   'Yes,'  said  the  landlord,  'but  I  am puzzled  all the  same. How
 came  these  Black  Men  to  think  Baggins  was  one  of  your  party?
 And  I  must  say,  from  what I've  heard and  seen tonight,  I wonder
 if  maybe they  aren't right.  But Baggins  or no,  you are  welcome to
 any help I can give to a friend of old Tom, and of Gandalf.'           
   'I'm very grateful,' said Frodo.  'I am  sorry I  can't tell  you the
 whole  story,  Mr Butterbur.  I am  very tired,  and very  worried. But
 if  you  want  to  know,  I  am  Frodo  Baggins.  I  have no  idea what
 Gandalf  meant  by  saying  that Baggins  had gone  east with  him; for
 I think the hobbit's name was  Bolger. But  these -  er -  Black Riders
 are hunting  us, and  we are  in danger.  I am  very grateful  for your
 help;  but  I  hope  you  won't get  into any  trouble yourself  on our
 account. I hope these abominable Riders won't come here again.'        
   'I hope not indeed! ' said Butterbur with a shiver.                  

   'If they do, you must not risk their  anger for  my sake.  They are
 dangerous.  Once  we  have  got  clear  away,  you  can do  us little
 harm,  if  you  tell them  that a  party of  four hobbits  has passed
 through  Bree.  Good   night,  Mr   Butterbur!  Thank you  again  for
 your kindness. One day perhaps Gandalf will tell you  what it  is all
 about.'                                                              
   'Good  night,  Mr  Baggins  - Mr  Hill, I  should say!  Good night,
 Mr Took! Bless me! Where's Mr Brandybuck?'                           
   'I don't know,' said  Folco; 'but  I expect  he's outside.  He said
 something about going out  for a  breath of  air. He  ought to  be in
 before long.'                                                        
   'Very good!' said Mr  Butterbur. 'I'll  see that  he is  not locked
 out. Good night to you all! ' With a puzzled look  at Trotter,  and a
 shake of his head, he went  out and  his footsteps  died away  in the
 passage.                                                             
                                                                     
   'There  you  go  again!'  said Trotter  before Frodo  could speak.
 'Too  trusting  still!  Why tell  old Barnabas  all that  about being
 hunted; and why tell him the other hobbit was a Bolger?'            
   'Isn't  he  safe?'  asked  Frodo.  'Tom Bombadil  said he  was, and
 Gandalf seems to have trusted him.'                                  
   'Is  he safe?'  cried Trotter,  throwing up  his hands.  'Yes, he's
 safe,  safer  than  houses.  But  why  give  him  any more  to puzzle
 about  than  is  necessary?  And  why  interfere with  Gandalf's plan?
 You're not very quick, or it  would have  been plain  at once  to you
 that  Gandalf  wanted  it  believed  that  the  hobbit  with  him was
 Baggins - precisely so that you would  have a  better chance,  if you
 were still behind.  And what  about me?  Am I  safe? You're  not sure
 (I  know  that),  and  yet  you  talk  to Butterbur  in front  of me!
 However, I know now all that he had to say; and at least it  will cut
 short what I still had to  tell you  - which  was mostly  about those
 Black  Riders, as  you call  them. I  saw them  myself. I  should say
 that  seven  all  told  have  passed through  Bree since  Monday. You
 won't pretend any longer that  you can't  imagine what  interest your
 real  name  might  have.  There is  a reward  offered for  anyone who
 can  report  that  four hobbits  are here,  and that  one of  them is
 probably a Baggins after all.'                                       
   'Yes, yes,' said Frodo. 'I see all  that. But  I knew  already that
 They were after me; and so far  at any  rate they  seem to  have been
 sent off on a false scent.'                                          
   'I should not be too sure that they have all gone right away,' said
 Trotter;  'or  that  they  are all  ahead of  you, and  chasing after

 Gandalf. They are cunning, and they divide their  forces. I  can still
 tell you a few things you have not heard from  Butterbur. I  first saw
 a Rider on Monday night, east of Bree as I  was coming  in out  of the
 wilds. I nearly ran into him, going fast along the  Road in  the dark.
 I hailed him  with a  curse, for  he had  almost run  over me;  and he
 pulled up  and came  back. I  stood still  and made  no sound,  but he
 brought  his  horse  step  by  step  towards  me.  When  he  was quite
 close he stooped and  sniffed. Then  he hissed,  and turned  his horse
 and rode off.(8) Yesterday I saw the four that called  at this  inn. Last
 night I was on the look-out. I  was lying  on a  bank under  the hedge
 of Bill Ferney's  garden; and  I heard  Bill Ferney  talking. He  is a
 surly fellow, and  has a  bad name  in the  Bree-land, and  queer folk
 are  known  to  call  at his  house sometimes.  You must  have noticed
 him  among  the  company:  a  swarthy  man  with   a  scowl.   He  was
 very  close  tonight  with  Harry  Goatleaf,  the west-gate  keeper (a
 mean  old  curmudgeon);  and  with  one  of  the  southern  strangers.
 They  slipped  out  together  just  after  your  song and  accident. I
 don't  trust  Ferney.  He  would  sell  anything  to  anybody,  if you
 understand me.'                                                      
   'I don't understand you,' said Frodo.                              
   'Well,  I'm  not going  to say  it plainer,'  said Trotter.  'I just
 wonder  whether  this  unusual  arrival of  strange travellers  up the
 Greenway,   and   the   appearance  of   the  hunting   horsemen  come
 together  by  mere  chance.  Both  might  be  looking  for   the  same
 thing - or person. Anyway, I heard Bill Ferney  talking last  night. I
 know his voice,  though I  could not  catch what  was said.  The other
 voice was whispering, or hissing. And that's all I  have to  tell you.
 You  must  do  as  you  like  about my  reward. But  as for  my coming
 with you, I will  say this:  I know  all the  lands between  the Shire
 and  the   Misty  Mountains,   for  I've   wandered  over   them  many
 times in the course of my  life -  and I'm  older now  than I  look. I
 might  prove  useful.  You'll  have  to  leave  the  open  Road  after
 tonight;  for  if  you  ask  me, I  should say  that these  Riders are
 patrolling it - and still looking for your party.  I don't  fancy that
 you  wish  to  meet  them.  I  don't!  They give  me the  creeps!' he
 ended suddenly with a shudder.                                       
   The others looked at him  and saw  with surprise  that his  face was
 buried  in  his  hands,  and  his  hood  was  drawn  right  down.  The
 room was very  quiet and  still and  the lights  seemed to  have grown
 dim.                                                                 
   'There! ' he cried after a moment, throwing back his hood and      
 pushing the hair from his face. 'Perhaps I know more about these     

 pursuers  than  you  do.  You  do  not fear  them enough  - yet.  It seems
 to  me  only  too  likely  that  news  of  you  will  reach  them   before  this
 night  is  over.  Tomorrow  you  will  have  to  go  swiftly,  and   secretly  -
 if   you   can.   But  Trotter   can  take   you  by   paths  that   are  seldom
 trodden. Will you have him?'                                                   
      Frodo   made   no   answer.   He   looked   at   Trotter:  grim   and  wild
 and  rough-clad.  It  was  hard  to  know  what   to  do.   He  did   not  doubt
 that  most of  his tale  was true;  but it  was less  easy to  feel sure  of his
 good  will.  Why  was  he  so  interested?  He  had  a  dark  look  -   and  yet
 there   was  something   in  it   that  seemed   friendly  and   even  curiously
 attractive.   And   his   speech   had   changed   as   he   talked,   from  the
 unfamiliar   tones   of    the   Outsiders    to   something    more   familiar,
 something    that    seemed    to    remind    Frodo    of     somebody.(9)  The
 silence grew, and still he could not make up his mind.                          
      'Well,  I'm  for  Trotter,  if  you  want  any  help  in   deciding,'  said
 Folco   suddenly.   'In   any   case,   I   daresay    he   could    follow   us
 wherever we went, even if we refused.'                                          
      'Than kyou!'   said   Trotter   smiling   at  Folco.   'I  could   and  I
 should;  for  I  should  feel  it  was my  duty. But  here is  a letter  which I
 have   for   you   -   that  ought   to  make   up  your   mind  for   you.'  To
 Frodo's   amazement   he   took   from   his  pocket   a  small   sealed  letter
 and   handed   it   over.   On   the  outside   was  written:   F.  from  G. (X)
 'Read it! ' said Trotter.                                                       
                                                                                
    Here the chapter ends. It will be seen  that in  this narrative,  despite the
    radical  differences  in  what  Trotter   and  Butterbur   communicated,  the
    original form of the story (in the  'A' version,  but see  note 8)  was still
    closely followed.                                                            
      The   manuscript   of   this   chapter  subsequently   underwent  immensely
    intricate alteration, with long insertions and deletions, for my  father used
    the  original  text  for  two  distinct  developments,  both  involving major
    structural  change.  The  one  he called  the 'red'  version, marked  out and
    paginated in red, the other the  'blue'; thus  a rider  on an  inserted' slip
    bears  the  number  'rider  to  IX.3(g)  =  red  IX.9   =  blue   IX.4'!  The
    relations  can in  fact be  worked out  perfectly satisfactorily.  The 'blue'
    version is the later, and peters out towards the end; this represents a later
    plot,  in  which  all  reference  to  the  visit  of Gandalf  and Odo  to The
    Prancing Pony is cut  out. The  'red' version,  on the  other hand,  may well
    be  contemporary  or  nearly  contemporary  with  the  primary  text;  it  is
    carefully  written  (the  alterations constituting  the 'blue'  version being
    much rougher), and it tells the same  story of  Gandalf and  Odo -  but tells
    it quite differently. It takes up from the  end of  the description  of Bree,
    and  begins  with Gandalf's  arrival there  with Odo,  now told  directly and
    not in Butterburian narrative.                                               

   The  Tuesday  had  been  a  day  of  heavy  rain.  Night  had fallen
 some hours ago, and it was  still pouring  down. It  was so  dark that
 nothing could be heard but  the seething  noise of  the rain,  and the
 ripple  of  flood-rivers  running  down the  hill -  and the  sound of
 hoofs  splashing  on  the  Road. A  horse was  slowly climbing  up the
 long slope towards the village of Bree.                              
   Suddenly  a  great  gate loomed  up: it  stretched right  across the
 Road  from one  strong post  to another,  and it  was shut.  There was
 a small house  beyond it,  dark and  grey. The  horse halted  with its
 nose  over  the  top  bar  of  the gate,  and the  rider, an  old man,
 dismounted  stiffly,  and  lifted down  a small  figure that  had been
 riding on a pillion  behind him.  The old  man beat  on the  gate, and
 was  just  beginning  to climb  over it,  when the  door of  the house
 opened   and  a   man  came   out  with   a  lantern,   muttering  and
 grumbling.                                                           
   'A  fine  night  to come  hammering on  the gate  and getting  a man
 out of his bed! ' he said.                                           
   'And a fine night to be out  in, wet  through and  cold, and  on the
 wrong side of a gate! ' replied the  rider. 'Come  on now,  Harry! Get
 it open quick! '                                                     
   'Bless  me!  '  cried  the  gate-keeper,  holding  up  the  lantern.
 'Gandalf  it  is  -  and  I might  have guessed  it. There's  never no
 knowing  when  you'll  turn  up  next.'  He  opened  the  gate slowly,
 peering in surprise at the small bedraggled figure at Gandalf's side.
   'Thank you!' said Gandalf, leading  his horse  forward. 'This  is a
 friend of mine, a  hobbit out  of the  Shire. Have  you seen  any more
 on  the  Road?  There  ought  to  be four  of them  ahead, a  party on
 ponies.'                                                             
   'There  hasn't  been  any  such  party  through,  while   I've  been
 about,'  said  Harry.  'There  might have  been up  to mid-day,  for I
 was  away  in  Staddle, and  my brother  was here.  But I've  heard no
 talk  of  it.  Not that  we watch  the Road  much between  sunrise and
 nightfall,  while  the  gate's  open.  But  we shall  have to  be more
 heedful, I'm thinking.'                                              
   'Why?' asked Gandalf. 'Have any strange folk been about?'          
   'I should say  so! Mighty  queer folk.  Black men  on horses;  and a
 lot  of foreigners  out of  the South  came up  the Greenway  at dusk.
 But if you're going  to The  Pony, I  should get  on before  they lock
 up. You'll hear all the news there. I'll  be getting  back to  my bed,
 and wish you good night.' He shut the gate and went in.              
   'Good  night!'  said  Gandalf,  and  walked  on  into  the  village,
 leading his horse. The hobbit stumbled along beside him.             

 
                                                                       
   There was a  lamp still  shining over  the entrance  to the  inn, but
 the door was closed.  Gandalf rang  the bell  in the  yard, and  after a
 little delay a large fat man, in his shirt sleeves and with slippers on
 his feet, opened the door a crack and peered out.                      
   'Good  evening,  Butterbur!'  said  the  wizard.  'Any  room  for  an
 old friend?'                                                           
   'Heavens  above,  if  they  aren't  all  washed  away!  '  cried  the
 landlord.  'Gandalf!  And  what  are  you  doing  out  in  this weather
 and at this time of night? And who's your little friend?'             
   Gandalf  winked  at  him.  'Hot  drinks  and   warm  beds   -  that's
 what  we  want,  and  not  too  many questions,'  he said,  and stumped
 up the steps.                                                          
   'What about the horse?' asked the landlord.                         
   'Give  him  the  best  you've got!  ' answered  Gandalf. 'And  if Bob
 grumbles  at  being  got  up  again at  this hour,  tell him  the beast
 deserves it: Narothal (10) has carried us both, fast  and far  today. I'll
 repay  Bob  in  the  morning  according  as my  horse reports  of him!'
                                                                       
   A  little  later  the wizard  and his  companion were  sitting before
 the  hot  embers  of a  fire in  Mr Butterbur's  own room,  warming and
 drying  themselves  and  drinking  mulled  ale.  The  landlord  came in
 to say that a room was ready for them.                                 
   'Don't  you  hurry  yourselves! '  said he,  'but when  you're ready,
 I'll  be  going  to  my  own  bed.  There's  been  an  unusual  lot  of
 travellers  in  here today,  more than  I remember  for years,  and I'm
 tired.'                                                                
   'Any   hobbits  among   them?'  asked   Gandalf.  'I'm   looking  for
 four  of  them  -  a  friend  of  mine  out  of  the  Shire  and  three
 companions.'  He  described  Frodo  carefully,  but  did  not  give his
 name.  'They  should  have  five  ponies  and  a  fair  amoung  of bag-
 gage;  and  they  ought  to  have  reached  Bree  today.  Harry  hasn't
 seen  them;  but  I  hoped  they  might  have   come  in   without  his
 noticing them.'                                                        
   'Nay,'  said  the  landlord,  'a  party  like  that  would  have been
 heard  of  even  by Harry,  dull old  grumbler though  he be.  We don't
 get  many  Outsiders  from  the Shire  to Bree  these days.  There's no
 such  party  at  The  Pony,  and there's  been none  along the  Road to
 my certain knowledge.'                                                 
   'That's bad news! '  said Gandalf,  tugging at  his beard.  'I wonder
 where they have got  to! '"  He was  silent for  a moment.  'Look here,
 Butterbur!' he went  on. 'You  and I  are old  friends. You  have eyes
 and ears in  your head,  and though  you say  a lot,  you know  what to

 leave  unsaid. I  want to  be private  while I'm  here, and  if I  see no
 one  but  you  and Bob  I'll be  pleased. Don't  tell everyone  that I've
 asked after this party!  But keep  your eyes  open, and  if they  turn up
 after   I've   gone,  give   them  this   message:  Hurry   on! Gandalf's
 ahead.  Just  that.  Don't  forget,  because   it's  important.   And  if
 anyone  -  anyone,  mind  you,  however  strange   -  enquires   after  a
 hobbit   called   Baggins,  tell   them  Baggins   has  gone   east  with
 Gandalf.  Don't  forget  that,  either,  and  I  shall  be   grateful  to
 you! '                                                                   
   'Right  you  are!'  said  Mr  Butterbur.  'I  hope  I'll   not  forget,
 though  one  thing  drives  out  another,  when I'm  busy with  guests in
 the  house.  Baggins,  you  say?  Let  me  see  -  I remember  that name.
 Wasn't  there  a  Bilbo  Baggins  that  they  told  some   strange  tales
 about  over in  the Shire?  My dad  told me  that he  had stayed  in this
 house   more   than   once.   But  your   friend  won't   be  him   -  he
 disappeared   in   some   funny   way   nigh   on   twenty   years  back:
 vanished  with  a  bang  while  he  was  talking, or  so I've  heard. Not
 that I believe all the tales that come out of the West.'                 
   'No  need  to,'  said  Gandalf,  laughing.  'Anyway  my   young  friend
 here is not old Bilbo Baggins. Just a relation.'                         
   'That's right! ' said the hobbit. 'Just a relation - a cousin in fact.'
   'I see,' said  the landlord.  'Well, it  does you  credit. Bilbo  was a
 fine little fellow, and rich as  a king  into the  bargain, if  half I've
 heard  is  true.  I'll  give   your  messages,   if  the   chance  comes,
 Gandalf;  and  I'll  ask  no questions,  strange though  it all  seems to
 me.  But  you  know  your  own   business  best,   and  you've   done  me
 many a good turn.'                                                       
   'Thank you  Barnabas!   '   said   Gandalf.  'And   now  I'll   do  you
 another  -  let  you go  to your  bed at  once.' He  drained his  mug and
 stood  up.  The  landlord put  out the  lights, and  holding a  candle in
 each hand led them to their room.                                        
                                                                         
   In   the   morning   Gandalf  and   his  friend   got  up   late.  They
 breakfasted  in   a  private   room,  and   spoke  to   no  one   but  Mr
 Barnabas  Butterbur.  It  was  close  on  eleven  before  Gandalf  called
 for his reckoning, and for his horse.                                    
   'Tell  Bob  to  take  him  up  the  lane  and  wait  for  me  near  the
 Greenway,'  he  said.  'I'm  not  going  along  the Road  to be  gaped at
 this morning.'                                                           
   He  took  his  leave  of  the  landlord  at  a side-door.  'Goodbye, my
 friend,'  he said.  'Don't forget  the messages!  One day,  perhaps, I'll
 tell  you  the whole  story, and  repay you,  too, with  something better

 even than good news - that is, I will,  if the  whole story  does not
 come to a bad end. Goodbye! '                                        
   He  walked off  with the  hobbit up  a narrow  lane that  ran north
 from the inn  over the  ditch round  the village  and on  towards the
 Greenway.(12) Bob the ostler  was waiting  outside the  village bound-
 ary.  The  white  horse  was  glossy  and  well-groomed,  and  seemed
 thoroughly  rested  and  eager  for  another  day's  journey. Gandalf
 called  to  him  by  name,  and Narothal (13) whinnied, tossing  up his
 head,  and  trotting  back to  his master,  and nuzzling  against his
 face.                                                                
   'A good report,  Bob!' said  Gandalf, giving  the ostler  a silver
 piece.  He mounted;  and Bob  helped the  hobbit up  on to  a cushion
 behind  the wizard,  then he  stood back  with his  cap in  his hand,
 grinning broadly.                                                    
   'That's right, my lad! ' laughed  Gandalf. 'We  look a  funny pair,
 I  daresay.  But  we're not  as funny  as we  look. When  we've gone,
 remember  that  we've gone  east, but  forget that  we set  out along
 this lane. See? Goodbye! ' He rode  off and  left Bob  scratching his
 head.                                                                
   'Curry me! if these aren't queer days!' he said to himself. 'Black
 men  riding  out  of  nowhere,  and  folk  on  the Greenway,  and old
 Gandalf with a hobbit on a pillion and all!  Things are  beginning to
 move  in  Bree!  But you  watch yourself,  Bob my  lad -  old Gandalf
 can hand out something hotter than silver.'                          
                                                                     
   The  fair  morning that  had followed  the rain  gave way  later to
 cloud  and  mist.  Nothing  more  happened  in  Bree  that  day until
 dusk  was  falling. Then  out of  the fog  four horsemen  rode though
 the  gate.  Harry  peered  through  a  window,  and   then  hurriedly
 withdrew.  He  had  been  thinking  of  going  out  and  shutting the
 gate, but  he  changed  his  mind.  The  horsemen  were all  clad and
 muffled  in  black,  and  rode high  black horses.  Some of  the same
 sort had been  seen in  Bree two  days before  and wild  stories were
 going  about.  Some  said  they  were  not human,  and even  the dogs
 were  afeared  of  them.  Harry  locked  the  door and  stood quaking
 behind it.                                                           
   But  the  riders  halted,  and  one dismounted  and came  and smote
 on the door. 'What do you want?' called Harry from inside.           
   'We want news! ' hissed a cold voice through the keyhole.          
   'What of?' he answered, shaking in his boots.                      
   'News of four hobbits,(14) riding on  ponies out  of the  Shire. Have
 they passed?'                                                        

   Harry wished they  had, for  it might  have satisfied  these riders,
 if he  could have  said yes.  There was  a threat  and urgency  in the
 cold voice: but he dared not risk a yes that was not true. 'No  sir! '
 he  said  in a  quavering voice.  'There's been  no hobbits  on ponies
 through  Bree,  and  there isn't  likely to  be any.  But there  was a
 hobbit riding behind an old  man on  a white  horse, last  night. They
 went to The Pony.'                                                   
   'Do you know their names?' said the voice.                        
   'The old man was Gandalf,' said Harry.                             
   A  hiss  came  through   the  keyhole,   and  Harry   started  back,
 feeling  as  if  something  icy cold  had touched  him. 'You  have our
 thanks', said the voice.  'You will  keep watch  for four  hobbits, if
 you still wish to please us. We will return.'                        
   Harry  heard  the  sound  of  hoofs going  off towards  the village.
 He unlocked the door  stealthily, and  then crept  out, and  peered up
 the road. It was too foggy and already too  dark to  see much.  But he
 heard the hoofs halt at the bend  of the  Road by  the inn.  He waited
 a  while,  and  then quietly  shut and  locked the  gate. He  was just
 returning to his house, when in the misty  air he  heard the  sound of
 hoofs  again,  starting  up  by  the  inn  and  dying  away  round the
 corner  and  down  the  Road eastward.  It was  turning very  cold, he
 thought.  He  shivered and  hurried indoors,  bolting and  barring the
 door.                                                                
                                                                     
   The  next  morning,  Thursday,  was  clear  again,  with a  warm sun
 and  the   wind  turning   towards  the   South.  Towards   evening  a
 dozen  dwarves  came  walking  out of  the East  into Bree  with heavy
 packs  on  their  backs.  They  were  sullen  and  had  few  words for
 anybody.  But  no  traveller  came  past  the  western gate  all day.
 Night  fell  and Harry  shut the  gate, but  he kept  on going  to his
 door. He was afraid of the threat in the cold voice, if he  missed any
 strange hobbits.                                                     
   It  was  dark  and  white  stars  were  shining  when Frodo  and his
 companions  came  at  last  to  the  Greenway-crossing  and  drew near
 the  village.  They  found  that  it  was surrounded  by a  deep ditch
 with  a  hedge  and fence  on the  inner side.  Over and  through this
 the Road ran, but it  was now  barred by  the great  gate. They  saw a
 house on the other  side, and  a man  sitting at  the door.  He jumped
 up and fetched a lantern, and  looked down  over the  gate at  them in
 surprise.                                                            
   'What  do  you  want  and  where  do  you   come  from?'   he  asked
 gruffly.                                                             

    'We  are making  for the  inn here,'  answered Frodo.  'We are           
 journeying east and cannot go further tonight.'                              
    'Hobbits!  Four  hobbits!  And  what's more,  out of  the Shire           
 from the sound of their talk,' said  the gate-keeper,  quietly and           
 almost as if he was speaking to himself. He stared at  them darkly           
 for a moment, and then slowly opened  the gate  and let  them ride           
 through.                                                                     
    'We don't often see Shire-folk riding on the Road by night,' he           
 went on, as they halted for a moment by  his door.  'You'll pardon           
 ' me wondering what business takes you away east of Bree.'                   
    'I do,' said Frodo, 'though it does not seem very  wonderful to           
 us. But this does not seem a good place to talk of our business.'            
    'Ah well, your business is your own, no doubt,' said  the gate-           
 keeper. 'But you'll find maybe that there are  more folk  than old           
 Harry at the gate that will  ask questions.  Are you  expecting to           
 meet any friends here? '                                                     
    'What do you mean?' asked Frodo in surprise. 'Why should we? '           
    'And why not? Many folk meet at Bree even in these days. If you           
 go on to The Pony, you may find you are not the only guests.'                
    Frodo  wished  him  good  night  and  made  no  further answer,           
 though he could see in the  lantern-light that  the man  was still           
 eyeing  them  curiously. He  was glad  to hear  the gate  clang to           
 behind  them,  as  they  rode  forward. He  wondered what  the man           
 had  meant  by 'meeting  friends'. Could  anyone have  been asking           
 for  news  of  four  hobbits?  Gandalf,  perhaps?  He  might  have           
 passed  through, while  they were  delayed in  the Forest  and the           
 Downs.  But a  Black Rider  was more  likely. There  was something           
 in  the  look and  tone of  the gate-keeper  that filled  him with           
 suspicion.                                                                   
    Harry stared after them for a moment, and then  he went  to his           
 door. 'Ned! ' he called. 'I've business up at The Pony, and it may           
 keep me a while. You must be on the gate, till I come back.'                 
                                                                             
    From this point the 'red version' is only different from the first text in
 that Butterbur's story of Gandalf's visit is of  course very  greatly reduced
 from the form given on pp. 338 - 9.                                          
                                                                             
                                    NOTES.                                    
                                                                             
  1. The drafts have 'Few had survived the turmoils of the Earliest           
      Days', an expression used in the Foreword (p. 329, note i), where       
      FR  has  'Elder  Days', the  earliest form  of the  passage has:  'Few had

      survived the turmoils of those old  and forgotten  days, and  the wars
      of the  Elves   and Goblins'.
  2.  prepared: FR has 'proposed to leave them',  but this  is an  error that
      arose at the typescript stage.                                        
  3.  My  father  wrote  'a  queer-looking  brown-faced hobbit',  struck out
      'hobbit', and then wrote 'hobbit' again.                              
  4.  In this phase Ferney is spelt thus; Ferny in the original  version and
      in FR.                                                                
  5.  The word ran in the erased note to the  second text  of the  attack on
      Crickhollow ('Behind him  ran Odo...',  p. 328) is  rather surprising,
      since  it  seems  pointless:  if  Odo was  to accompany  Gandalf there
      seems no reason why he should not ride pillion from the first - and in
      any case he would have been quickly left far behind.                  
  6.  It  is perhaps  surprising that  Gandalf should  expect Frodo  and his
      companions  to  have  passed  through  Bree on  the Tuesday,  since he
      knew  from  Odo  that  they  left  the  house  at  Crickhollow  on the
      Monday  morning  and  had  gone  into  the   Old  Forest.   When  they
      would  get  to  Bree  was presumably  now far  more uncertain  than if
      they had taken the Road (hostile  interventions apart).  Possibly this
      survives from the old  form of  the story  - 'They  should be  here by
      Tuesday, if they can follow a plain road', p. 151 - when Gandalf had
      no  reason to  think that  they had  not simply  ridden the  East Road
      from the Brandywine Bridge. See note x x.                             
  7.  How dick the Riders know  that there  were four  hobbits? (In  the old
      variant versions, pp. 152, 157, they knew even  that the  four hobbits
      had five ponies). Presumably they  surmised it:  they knew  that three
      had  come  to  Bucklebury  Ferry  and  been  met  there   by  another.
      Beyond  that  they  had  no  knowledge  (on  the Wednesday  night when
      they came to the inn) of  Frodo and  his companions.  - At  some point
      my father struck out the word four; see note 14.                      
  8.  This episode derives from the old 'B' version, p.  157; but  there the
      Rider  questioned  Trotter,   who  did   not  answer.   The  relations
      between the versions here are:                                        
      Old version 'A'(p. 151):                                               
        (Monday) One Rider questions Butterbur at the inn-door              
        (Tuesday)  Four  Riders  come  to  the  inn-door, and  one questions
      Butterbur                                                             
      Old version'B'(p. 157):                                               
        (Monday) One Rider questions Trotter on the Road                    
        (Tuesday)  Four   riders  meet   Trotter  on   the  Road,   and  one
      questions him                                                         
      The present version:                                                  
        (Monday)  One  Rider  goes   through  Bree   (p.  339),   and  meets
      Trotter on the Road east of Bree without speech (p.342)               
        (Wednesday)  Four  Riders  come  to  the  inn-door,  and  one  ques-
      tions  Butterbur (pp.  339 -  40); they  are seen  by Trotter  (p.342)

 9. The change in Trotter's speech remarked by Frodo, deriving from
   the original form of the story (p. 154), survived in FR (p. 178),
   though the significance is there quite different: 'I think you are not
   really as you choose to look. You began to talk to me like the Bree-
   folk, but your voice has changed.'
 10. Narothal ('Firefoot'), the first name given to Gandalf's white horse,
   was replaced later in pencil by the suggestions: 'Fairfax, Snowfax',
   and pencilled in the margin is 'Firefoot Arod?  Aragorn', but these
   latter were struck out. Arod became in LR the name of a horse of
   Rohan.
 11. A pencilled note on the manuscript says: 'Since he has been to
   Crickhollow he must know of Old Forest' - i.e. Gandalf must know
   from Odo that the other hobbits went into the Old Forest. At the
   same time my father pencilled into the text at this point: 'I trusted
   Tom Bombadil to keep them out of trouble.'
 12. This lane is marked on the sketch-map of Bree given on p. 335.
 13. 'Narothal' changed in pencil to 'Fairfax'; see note 10.
    four hobbits: see note 7. Subsequently my father struck out four, and
    wrote instead: hobbits, three or more.

                                   XXI.                                   
                           THE THIRD PHASE (3):                          
                       TO WEATHERTOP AND RIVENDELL.                      
                                                                        
 The next chapter, numbered X and with the title  'Wild Ways  to Weather-
 top', belongs with the base-form of 'At the Sign  of the  Prancing Pony'
 and is continuous with it; but it begins by repeating almost exactly the
 end of that chapter, from  'Frodo made  no answer'  to '"Read  it!" said
 Trotter' (p. 343). Then follows:                                        
                                                                        
  Frodo  looked  carefully  at  the seal  before he  broke it.  It seemed
 certainly to be  Gandalf's, as  did the  writing also,  and the  runic G
 @.  Inside  was  the  following   message.  Frodo   read  it   and  then
 repeated it aloud for the benefit of Folco and Sam.                     
                                                                        
  The   Prancing   Pony,   Wednesday,   Sept.   28.   Dear  F.   Where  on
  earth are you?  Not still in the Forest,  I hope!  Could not  help being
  late,  but  explanations  must  wait.  If  you ever  get this  letter, I
  shall   be  ahead   of  you.   Hurry  on,   and  don't   stop  anywhere!
  Things  are worse  than I  thought and  pursuit is  close. Look  out for
  horsemen   in   black,  and   avoid  them.   They  are   perilous:  your
  worst  enemies.  Don't  use  It  again,  not   on  any   account.  Don't
  move  in  the  dark. Try  and catch  me up.  I dare  not wait  here, but
  I  shall halt  at a  place known  to the  bearer, and  look out  for you
  there.  I  am  giving this  to a  ranger known  as Trotter:  dark rather
  lean  hobbit,  wears  wooden  shoes.  He  is  an  old  friend  of  mine,
  and  knows  a  great  deal.  You  can trust  him. He  mill guide  you to
  appointed  place  through  wild  country.  N.B.  Odo  Baggins  is with
  me. Hurry on! Yours ................  (X).                             
                                                                        
   Frodo  looked  at  the  trailing  handwriting:  it  seemed  as plainly
 genuine  as  the  seal.  'It is  dated Wednesday  and from  this house,'
 he said. 'How did you come by it?'                                      
   'I  met  Gandalf  by  appointment  near  Archet,'   answered  Trotter.
 'He  did  not  leave  Bree  by the  Road, but  went up  a side  lane and
 round the hill the other way.'                                          
   'Well,  Trotter,'  said  Frodo  after  a  pause,  'it would  have made
 things easier and saved  a lot  of time  and talk,  if you  had produced

 this  letter  at  once.  Why  did  you  invent  all  that tale  about eaves-
 dropping? '                                                                 
   'I  didn't  invent  it,'  laughed  Trotter.  'I gave  old Gandalf  quite a
 shock  when  I  popped  up  from  behind   the  hedge.   But  he   was  very
 glad  when  he  saw who  I was.  He said  it was  the first  bit of  luck he
 had  had  for  some  while.  It  was  then that  we arranged  that I  was to
 wait  about  here  in  case  you  were  behind,  while  he  pushed   on  and
 tried  to  draw  the  Riders  after  him.  I  know  all about  your troubles
 including the Ring, I may say.'                                           
   'Then  there's  nothing  more  for  me  to   say,'  said   Frodo,  'except
 that  I  am  glad  we  have  found  you.  I   am  sorry   if  I   have  been
 unnecessarily suspicious.'                                                  
                                                                            
   The conversation proceeds very much as in  the original  story (p.  155),
 as  far  as the  'subsidence' of  Folco (Odo)  beneath Trotter's  opinion of
 him.' Then follows:                                                         
                                                                            
   'We  shall  all  perish,  tough  or  not,  unless  we  have  strange  good
 luck,  as  far  as  I can  see,' said  Frodo. 'I  cannot understand  why you
 want to be mixed up in our troubles, Trotter.'                              
   'One  reason  is  that  Gandalf  asked  me  to   help  you,'   he  replied
 quietly.                                                                    
   'What  do  you  advise  then?'   asked  Frodo.   'I  don't   quite  under-
 stand  this  letter:  don't stop  anywhere it  says, and  yet don't  move in
 the  dark.  Is it  safe to  stop here  till morning?'  Frodo looked  at the
 comfortable fire and the soft candlelight in the room, and sighed.          
   'No,  it  probably  isn't  safe  -  but  it  would  be far  more dangerous
 to  start  off  by night.  So we  must wait  for daylight  and hope  for the
 best. But we had better start early - it is a long way to Weathertop.'      
 'Weathertop? ' said Folco. 'Where and what is that?'                     
 'The  appointed  place   mentioned  in   the  letter,'   Trotter  replied.
 'It  is  a  hill,  just  north  of  the  Road,  somewhere  about  halfway to
 Rivendell   from  here.(2) It  commands   a  very   wide  view   all  round.
 But  you  will  start  nearly  two  days  behind  Gandalf,  and  you'll have
 to go fast or you won't find him there.'                                    
   'In  that  case let's  get to  bed now,  while there  is still  some night
 left!'  said   Folco  yawning.   'Where's  that   silly  fellow   Merry?  It
 would  be  too  much,  if  we  had  to  go  out  now  and  look   for  him.'
                                                                            
   Merry's  story  of  the  Black  Rider  whom  he  saw  outside the  inn and
 followed differs in this, that whereas in the original version (pp. 161 - 2)
 the Rider went through the village  from west  to east  and stopped  at Bill
 Ferny's house (hole), here                                                  
                                                                            
  'He was coming from the east,' Merry went on. 'I followed him

                                                                              
                                                                          
                                                                              
  down  the  Road  almost  to  the  gate.  He  stopped  there  at  the keeper's
  house,  and  I  thought  I  heard  him  talking  to   someone.  I   tried  to
  creep near,  but I  did not  dare to  get very  close. In  fact, I  am afraid
  I suddenly began to shiver and shake, and bolted back here.'                 
       'What's to be done?' said Frodo, turning to Trotter.                    
       'Don't go  to your  rooms! '  he answered  at once.  'I don't  like this
  at  all.  Harry  Goatleaf   was  here   tonight  and   went  off   with  Bill
  Ferney.  It's  quite  likely  that  they  have  found  out  which  rooms  you
  have got.                                                                    
                                                                              
       While in the remainder of the chapter  there are  advances in  detail to
  the text of FR (from p. 186, the end of Chapter 10 'Strider', to p.  201, in
  the course of Chapter 11 'A Knife in the Dark'), the narrative of this third
  phase  version follows  the original  (pp. 162  - 71)  closely in  almost all
  points where that differed from FR, and ends at the same point.              
       It is now Trotter who imitated Frodo's head in the bed  with a  mat. The
  pony is expressly said  to be  Bill Ferney's,  and is  described as  'a bony,
  underfed,  and  rather  dispirited  animal.'  There  were  two   men  looking
  over  the  hedge  round  Ferney's  house: Ferney  himself, and  'a southerner
  with a  sallow face,  and a  sly and  almost goblinish  look in  his slanting
  eyes.' This latter is not  identified with  the 'squint-eyed  southerner' who
  left the inn the night before with Ferney  and the  gate-keeper (p.  336). In
  the old story (p. 165) it  was Bill  Ferny standing  there alone,  whom Bingo
  thought 'goblinish'. It is still  Trotter who  has the  apples, and  who hits
  Ferney  on the  nose with  one. Archet,  Combe, and  Staddle are  referred to
  as in FR (p. 193), in keeping with what is  said of  them in  the description
  of  the  Bree-land  at  the  opening of  Chapter IX  (p. 332),  and Trotter's
  plan is now  to make  for Archet  and pass  it on  the east  (cf. p.  165 and
  note 21).                                                                    
       The lights in the eastern  sky seen  by the  travellers from  the Midge-
  water  Marshes  do  not  appear  until  the  whole  story of  Gandalf's move-
  ments at  this time  had been  changed. Trotter  replies to  Frodo's question
  'But  surely we  were hoping  to find  Gandalf there?'  (FR p.  195, original
  version p. 167) thus:                                                        
                                                                              
       'Yes  - but  my hope  is rather  faint. It  is four  days since  we left
  Bree,   and   if   Gandalf  has   managed  to   get  to   Weathertop  himself
  without  being  too  hotly  pursued,  he  must  have  arrived  at  least  two
  days  ago.  I  doubt  if  he  has  dared  to  wait   so  long,.on   the  mere
  chance  of  your  following  him:  he   does  not   know  for   certain  that
  you are behind or have got his messages...'                                  
                                                                              
  He  still says:  'There are  even some  of the  Rangers that  on a  clear day
  could spy us from  there, if  we moved.  And not  all the  Rangers are  to be
  trusted...'                                                                  

 The chronology is thus (cf. p. 175):                                           
                                                                               
  Wed. Sept. 28.          Gandalf and Odo left Bree.                            
                                                                               
  Thurs. Sept. 29.        Frodo and companions reached Bree.                    
                                                                               
  Fri. Sept. 30.          Trotter, Frodo and companions left Bree; night        
                          in Chetwood.                                          
                                                                               
  Sat. Oct.               Night in Chetwood.                                    
                                                                               
  Sun. Oct.               First day and camp in marshes.                        
                                                                               
  Mon. Oct.               Second day and camp in marshes.                       
                                                                               
  Tues. Oct.              Leaving the marshes. Camp by stream under             
                          alders.                                               
                                                                               
       On this day Trotter calculated that Gandalf, if he reached Weathertop,
 must have arrived there 'at least two days ago', i.e. on Sunday 2 October,
 which  allows  as  much  as  four  days and  nights for  the journey  from Bree
 on horseback.                                                                  
  In   the   original   version   they   reached   Weathertop   on   5  October,
 whereas in FR they camped at the feet  of the  hills that  night (see  p. 175).
 In  the present  text my  father retained  the former  story, but  then changed
 it to that of FR:                                                              
                                                                               
 By night they had reached the feet of the  hills, and  there they              
 camped. It was the night of October the fifth, and they  were six              
 days out from Bree. In the morning they found, for the first time              
 since they left the Bree-land [> Chetwood], a track plain to see.              
                                                                               
 It  will  be seen  shortly that  this change  was made  before the  chapter was
 finished.                                                                      
 The   passage   following   Folco's   question   'Is   there   any   barrow  on
 Weathertop? ' (FR p. 197) remains exactly as in the original text  (p. 169),
 with  Elendil  for  Valandil; and  when they  reach the  summit all  remains as
 before,  with  only  the  necessary change  of Merry's  'I don't  blame Gandalf
 for  not  waiting here!  He would  have to  leave the  waggon, and  horses, and
 most  of  his  companions,  too,  I  expect, down  near the  Road' to  'I don't
 blame Gandalf for  not waiting  long -  if he  ever came  here.' But  the paper
 that flutters from the cairn bears a different message (see p. 170):           
                                                                               
 Wednesday  Oct.  5. Bad  news. We  arrived late  Monday. Odo                  
 vanished last night. I must go at once to Rivendell. Make for                  
 Ford beyond Trollshaw with all speed, but look out. Enemies                  
 may attempt to guard it. G (X). (3).                                           
                                                                               
  'Odo!' cried Merry. 'Does that mean that the Riders have got                 
 him? How horrible!'                                                            

   'Our   missing   Gandalf   has   turned    out   disastrous,'    said   Frodo.
 'Poor  Odo!  I  expect  this  is  the  result  of pretending  to be  Baggins. If
 only we could all have been together! '                                         
   'Monday!  '  said  Trotter.   'Then  they   arrived  when   we  were   in  the
 marshes,  and   Gandalf  did   not  leave   till  we   were  already   close  to
 the   hills.   They   cannot   have   caught  any   glimpse  of   our  miserable
 little   fires   on   Monday,   or   on   Tuesday.   I   wonder   what  happened
 here  that  night.  Still  it  is  no  good  guessing: there  is nothing  we can
 do but make for Rivendell as best we may.'(4)                                   
   'How   far   is    Rivendell?'   asked    Frodo,   looking    round   wearily.
 The world looked wild and wide from Weathertop.                                 
                                                                                
   From here the text follows the old version (pp. 170  - 1  ) almost  exactly -
 with  the  revised  form  of  Trotter's  answer   concerning  the   distance  to
 Rivendell,  p.  171  -  to  the  end of  the chapter,  with Trotter,  Frodo, and
 Merry  slipping  down  from   the  summit   of  Weathertop   to  find   Sam  and
 Folco in the dell (where the original Chapter Vl I also ended).                 
   Since  Gandalf   and  Odo   left  Bree   on  the   morning  of   Wednesday  28
 September  but  did  not  reach  Weathertop  till  late  on  Monday  3  October,
 they  took  longer  even  than  Trotter  had  calculated  (p.  355):  nearly six
 days on horseback, whereas Trotter says (in this text as in the old, p. 171)
 that  it  would  take  'a ranger  on his  own feet'  about a  week from  Bree to
 Weathertop  (in  the  rejected passage  of the  old text,  p. 170,  Trotter said
 that  he  reckoned  it  was  'about  120  long-miles'  by the  Road). Trotter's
 words '  I wonder  what happened  here that  night', referring  to the  night on
 which  Odo  vanished  (Tuesday  4  October),  show  that   the  night   camp  at
 the foot of the hills on 5 October had entered  the narrative,  and that  it was
 now  Thursday  6  October,  for  he  would  not  say  'that  night' if  he meant
 'last  night'.  The  chronology  given  on  p.  355  can therefore  be completed
 for this stage of the development of the narrative thus:                        
                                                                                
   Mon. Oct. 3. Second day and camp in the marshes                                
                Gandalf and Odo reach Weathertop late.                     
                                                                                
   Tues. Oct. 4. Leaving the marshes. Camp by stream under alders                 
                       Odo disappears from Weathertop at night.                  
                                                                                
   Wed. Oct. 5. Camp at feet of hills                                             
                    Gandalf leaves Weathertop.                                
                                                                                
   Thurs. Oct. 6. Trotter, Frodo and companions reach Weathertop.         
                                                                                
                                        *                                        
                                                                                
 The next chapter, numbered XI but without title,(5) begins  with an              
 account of what Sam and Folco had been doing (FR p. 201), which is              

 where the corresponding chapter VIII in the original version began             
  (p 177).                                                                      
                                                                               
    Sam  and  Folco  had   not  been   idle.  They   had  explored   the  small
 dell  and   the  surrounding   valley.  Not   far  away   they  had   found  a
 spring  of  clear  water,  and  near  it  footprints  not more  than a  day or
 two  old.  In  the dell  itself they  had found  recent traces  of a  fire and
 other   signs   of  a   small  camp.   But  the   most  unexpected   and  most
 welcome   discovery    was   made    by   Sam.    There   were    some   large
 fallen  rocks  at  the  edge  of  the  dell nearest  to the  hill-side. Behind
 them   Sam   came   upon   a   small  store   of  fire-wood   neatly  stacked;
 and  under  the  wood  was  a  bag  containing  food.  It  was   mostly  cakes
 of  cram  packed  in  two   small  wooden   boxes,  but   there  was   also  a
 little bacon, and some dried fruits.                                           
    'Old   Gandalf  has   been  here,   then,'  said   Sam  to   Folco.  'These
 packets  of  cram  show  that.  I  never  heard  tell  of  anyone but  the two
 Bagginses   and  the   wizard  using   that  stuff.   Better  than   dying  of
 hunger, they say, but not much better.'                                        
    'I  wonder  if  it  was  left  for  us,  or  if  Gandalf  is   still  about
 somewhere   near,'   said   Folco.   'I   wish   Frodo   and  the   other  two
 would come back.'                                                              
    Sam  was  more  grateful  for  the  cram  when   the  others   did  return,
 hurrying  back  to  the   dell  with   their  alarming   news.  There   was  a
 long  journey  ahead  of  them  before   they  could   expect  to   get  help;
 and  it  seemed  plain  that  Gandalf  had  left  what  food  he  could  spare
 in case their own supplies were short.                                         
    'It   is   probably  some   that  he   did  not   need  after   poor  Odo's
 disappearance,' said Frodo. 'But what about the wood?'                         
    'I   think   they   must   have   collected  it   on  the   Tuesday,'  said
 Trotter,  'and  were  preparing  to  wait   here  in   camp  for   some  time.
 They  would  have  to  go  some  distance  for  it,  as  there  are  no  trees
 close at hand.'                                                                
    It   was  already   late  afternoon,   and  the   sun  was   sinking.  They
 debated  for  some  while  what  they  ought  to  do.  It  was  the  store  of
 fuel that finally decided them to go no further that day, and to             
 camp for the night in the dell.                                                
                                                                               
   The  text  now  follows  the old  version (pp.  177 -  9) fairly  closely. To
 Merry's  question  'Can  the   enemies  see?'   Trotter  now   replies:  'Their
 horses  can  see.  They do  not themselves  see the  world of  light as  we do;
 but they are not blind, and in the dark they  are most  to be  feared.' Trotter
 no  longer  says  that  there  were  Men  dwelling  in  the  lands away  to the
 South of them; nor is it told that they took it in turns to sit on guard at the

  edge of the dell. The passage describing Trotter's tales is a characteristic
  blending  of  the  old  version  (p.  179)  with  new elements  that would
  survive into FR (p. 203):                                                   
                                                                             
    As night  fell and  the light  of the  fire began  to shine  out brightly,
  Trotter  began  to  tell  them  tales  to  keep  their  minds from  fear. He
  knew   much   lore   concerning   wild   animals,   and   understood   some-
  thing  of  their  languages;  and  he  had  strange tales  to tell  of their
  hidden   lives   and   little   known   adventures.   He   knew   also  many
  histories  and  legends   of  the   ancient  days,   of  hobbits   when  the
  Shire   was  still   unexplored,  and   of  things   beyond  the   mists  of
  memory   out   of   which   the   hobbits  came.   They  wondered   how  old
  he was, and where he had learned all this lore.                             
    'Tell  us  of  Gilgalad,'  said   Merry  suddenly,   when  he   paused  at
  the  end  of  a  story  of  the  Elf-kingdoms.  'You  spoke  that  name  not
  long  ago,  and  it  is  still  ringing  in  my  ears.  I  seem  to remember
  hearing it before, but I cannot remember anything else about it.'           
    'You  should  ask  the  possessor  of  the  Ring   about  that   name,'
  answered   Trotter   in   a   low   voice.   Merry   and  Folco   looked  at
  Frodo, who was staring into the fire.                                       
                                                                             
    From this point  the manuscript  is defective,  two sheets  being missing;
  but a rejected page carries the story a little  further before  tailing off:
                                                                             
    'I  know  only  the  little  that  Gandalf  told  me,' he  said. 'Gilgalad
  was  the  last  of  the  great  elf-kings.  Gilgalad  is Starlight  in their
  tongue.  With  the  aid  of  King  Elendil,  the  Elf-friend,  he  overthrew
  the  Enemy,  but  they  both  perished.  And  I   would  gladly   hear  more
  if Trotter will tell us.  It was  the son  of Elendil  that carried  off the
  Ring. But I cannot tell that tale. Tell us more, Trotter, if you will.'     
    'No,' said  Trotter. 'I  will not  tell that  tale now,  in this  time and
  place  with  the  servants  of  the  Enemy  at  hand.  Perhaps in  the house
  of Elrond you will hear it. For Elrond knows it in full.'                   
    'Then tell us some other tale of old,' said Merry...                      
                                                                             
  Trotter's  song,  and  his  story  of  Beren and  Luthien, are  thus missing
  here; and the manuscript takes  up again  at 'As  Trotter was  speaking they
  watched his strange eager face...' From this point  the text  of FR,  as far
  as  the  end  of  Chapter  ir  'A  Knife  in  the  Dark' was  achieved, with
  scarcely  any difference  even of  wording, except  for these  points: Folco
  stands for Pippin; there were still three Riders, not five, in the attack on
  the dell; and Frodo as he threw himself  on the  ground cried  out Elbereth!
  Elbereth!                                                                   
                                                                             
    At this point Chapter 12 'Flight to the Ford' begins in FR,  but as  in the
  original text (p. 190) the present  version continues  without break  to the

 Ford  of  Rivendell.  The relations  of chapter-structure  between the
 present phase and FR can be shown thus (and cf. the table on  p. 133):

             The present 'phase'.          
                                         
IX. At the Sign of the Pranring Pony.     
 Ends with Trotter giving Frodo the       
 letter from Gandalf.                     
                                         
X. Wild Ways to Weathertop. Conclus-        
 ion of conversation with Trotter.        
   Attack on the inn, departure           
 from Bree; ends with sight of the        
 Riders below Weathertop.                 
                                         
XI. No title. Attack on Weathertop.
 Journey from Weathertop to the           
 Ford.                                    

                   FR.                   
                                       
9. At  the  Sign  of the  Prancing Pony.
 Ends   with   Frodo,  Pippin   and  Sam
 returning  to  their  room at  the inn.
                                       
10. Strider. Conversations with Strider
   and Butterbur.                       
                                       
11. A Knife in the Dark. Attack  on the
 inn,  departure  from  Bree;  ends with
 the attack on Weathertop.              
                                       
12. Flight to the Ford.                 

    As  is  characteristic  of these  third phase  chapters, the  present text
  advances  largely  towards  the  form  in  FR  in  detail  of   wording  and
  description, but retains  many features  of the  original version;  thus the
  'red flash' seen  at the  moment of  the attack  on Weathertop  survives, of
  the slash in the black robe Trotter still says only 'What harm it did to the
  Black Rider I do not  know', and  the distant  cries of  the Riders  as they
  crossed the Road are not heard, while on  the other  hand the  firewood left
  by  Gandalf  is  no  longer  said  to  have  been taken  with them,  and the
  rejuvenation  of  Bill  Ferney's pony  is described  (for these  elements in
  the narrative see pp. 190 - 1). Trotter now  speaks aside  to Sam,  but what
  he says is different:                                                       
                                                                             
    'I  think  I  understand  things  better  now,'  he said  in a  low voice.
  'Our  enemies  knew   the  Ring   was  here;   perhaps  because   they  have
  captured  Odo,   and  certainly   because  they   can  feel   its  presence.
  They   are  no   longer  pursuing   Gandalf.  But   they  have   now  drawn
  off  from  us  for  the  time,  because  we  are  many  and  more  bold than
  they  expected,  but  especially  because  they  think  they  have  slain or
  mortally  wounded  your  master  -   so  that   the  Ring   will  inevitably
  come soon into their power.'                                                
                                                                             
    The rest of his words to Sam are as in FR  (p. 210).  - In  the discussion
  of what it were best to do now (FR p. 211) the present version reads:      
                                                                             
    The others were discussing this very question. They  decided to           
  leave  Weathertop  as  soon  as possible.  It was  already Friday           
  morning, and the two days  that Gandalf's  message had  asked for           
  would soon be up. In any case it was no good remaining in so bare           
  and indefensible a place, now that  their enemies  had discovered           

 them, and knew also that Frodo had the Ring. As soon as the                    
 daylight was full they had some hurried food and packed.                       
                                                                               
  For  'the  two  days  that  Gandalf's  message  had  asked  for'  see  notes 3
 and 4.                                                                         
  The  chronology  of  the  journey  remains  as  in  the  original   text  (see
 pp. 192 - 3, 219): they still recrossed the Road on the morning of the sixth
 day  from  Weathertop  (the  seventh  in  FR),  and  spent  three  days  in the
 hills before the weather turned to rain (two  in FR).  But the  lag of  one day
 that  remained  between  the  original  text  and  FR  (owing to  their earlier
 arrival  on  Weathertop),  so that  they reached  the Ford  of Rivendell  on 19
 October, is no longer present (see p. 356).                                    
  The  rain  that  Trotter  judged  had  fallen  some  two  days  before  at the
 place  where  they  crossed  the  Road  again  (FR  p.  213) is  now mentioned,
 but  the  River  Hoarwell  (Mitheithel)  and  the  Last  Bridge have  still not
 emerged.  The  river  which  they  could see  in the  distance, unnamed  in the
 first  version  (p. 191),  is now  given a  name: 'the  Riven River,  that came
 down  out  of  the  Mountains  and  flowed  through  Rivendell'  (later  in the
 chapter it is called 'the Rivendell River').                                   
  The  conversation  between  Trotter,   Folco  and   Frodo  arising   from  the
 ruined towers in the hills remains as in the first  version (pp.  192 -  3; FR
                                                                               
 p.214).                                                                         
  When the rain stopped, and  Trotter climbed  up to  see the  lie of  the land,
 he observed in the first version (p. 193) that 'if we keep on as we  are going,
 we  shall  get  into  impassable country  among the  skirts of  the Mountains.'
 This  now  becomes:  'we  shall  get  up  into  the [Dimrill-lands  >] Dimrill-
 dales   far  north   of  Rivendell.'(7) He  continues,   approaching  Strider's
 words in FR:                                                                   
                                                                               
 'It is a troll-country, I have heard, though I have not been there.            
 We  could  perhaps  find  our  way  through   and  come   round  to            
 Rivendell from  the north;  but it  would take  long, and  our food            
 would not last. Anyway we  ought to  follow Gandalf's  last message            
 and  make  for  the  Rivendell Ford.  So somehow  or other  we must            
 strike the Road again.'                                                        
                                                                               
  The  encounter  with  the  Stone  Trolls  follows  the first  version: Trotter
 slapped the  stooping troll,  called him  William, and  pointed out  the bird's
 nest  behind Bert's  ear. There  is still  no suggestion  of Sam's  Troll Song;
 and  when   Frodo  saw   the  memorial   stone  he   'wished  that   Bilbo  had
 brought  home  no  treasure  more  perilous  than  stolen  money  rescued  from
 trolls.'  The  description  of  the  Road  here  is  nearly  that of  the First
 Edition  of FR  (see p.  zoo): 'At  this point  the Road  had turned  away from
 the river, leaving it at  the bottom  of a  narrow valley,  and clung  close to
 the  feet  of  the  hills,  rolling  and  winding  northward  among  woods  and
 heather-covered slopes towards the Ford and the Mountains.'                    

   Glorfindel  now  calls  Trotter  not  Padathir  (p.  194)  but  Du-finnion,
 calling  out  Ai,  Du-finnion!  Mai  govannen!   The  passage   beginning  with
 Trotter's signalling  to Frodo  and the  others to  come down  to the  road is
 found  in  two  forms,  the  second  to  all appearance  immediately replacing
 the first. The first runs:                                                 
                                                                             
 Hail  and  well  met  at  last!  '  said  Glorfindel  to  Frodo. 'I  was sent
 from  Rivendell   to   look  for   your  coming.   Gandalf  feared   that  you
 might follow the Road.'                                                   
   'Gandalf   has   arrived   at   Rivendell  then?'   cried  Merry.   'Has  he
 found Odo? '                                                                 
   'Certainly   there   is   a   hobbit   of   that   name   with   him,'  said
 Glorfindel;  'but  I  did  not  hear  that  he  had  been  lost.   He  rode
 behind Gandalf from the north out of Dimrildale.'                         
   'Out of Dimrildale?' exclaimed Frodo.                                      
   'Yes,'  said  the  elf;  'and  we  thought  that  you  also  might  go  that
 way  to avoid  the peril  of the  Road. Some  have been  sent to  seek for
 you  in  that  country.  But  come!  There  is  no  time  now for  news or
 debate,  until  we  halt.  We must  go on  with all  speed, and  save our
 breath.  Hardly   a  day's   ride  back   westward  there   are  horsemen,
 searching  for  your  trail  along  the Road  and in  the lands  on either
 side...                                                                   
                                                                             
       Glorfindel continues as in the first version (p. 195). The replacement
 passage  differs  mostly  in  small  points:  Glorfindel does  not say  of Odo
 'but I did  not hear  that he  had been  lost', Dimrilldale  is so  spelt (cf.
 p. 360), in place of Dimrildale in the rejected text; and  the interjections
 of Merry and Frodo are reversed. The important difference lies in          
 Glorfindel's words:                                                          
                                                                             
 'There are horsemen back westward searching for your trail along             
 the  Road,  and when  they find  the place  where you  came down             
 from the hills, they will  ride after  us like  the wind.  But they  are not
 all: there are others, who may be before us now, or upon either              
 hand.  Unless  we  go  with  all  speed  and  good  fortune, we  shall find
 the Ford guarded against us by the enemy.'                                 
                                                                             
   From Frodo's faintness and Sam's objection to Glorfindel's urging the      
 text of FR to the end of the chapter is achieved almost to the last word.(8)
 Yet  there  remain  certain  differences. Only  three Riders  came out  of the
 tree-hung cutting behind the fugitives; and 'out from  the trees  and rocks
 away  on  the  left  other  Riders  came  flying.  Three  rode  towards Frodo;
 three galloped  madly towards  the Ford  to cut  off his  escape.' And  at the
 very end 'Three of the Riders turned and rode wildly away to the left
 down the bank of the River; the others, borne by their terrified and

 plunging  horses,  were  driven  into  the  Rood  and  carried away.'  This is
 derived  from  the  first  version  (p.  197), where  however there  were only
 two  Riders  that  escaped  the  flood.  The  manuscript  was  changed  to the
 reading  of  the  final  paragraph  of  the  chapter  in  FR, where  no Riders
 escaped, and this  was done  before or  in the  course of  the writing  of the
 next chapter (see p. 364).                                                    
                                   *
                                           
   The  first  part  of  the  next  chapter,  numbered   XII,  is   the  direct
 development  of the  original title-less  chapter IX,  extant in  three texts,
 none  of  which  goes  further  than  the   conversation  between   Bingo  and
 Gloin at the feast in Rivendell (pp.  206 ff.,  210 ff.).  The new  version is
 given  the  title  'The  Council  of  Elrond';  see  pp.  399-400.  Here,  for
 reasons  that  will  appear  presently, I  describe only  that portion  of the
 chapter  which derives  from Chapter  IX of  the 'first  phase'. In  this, the
 text  of  FR  Book  II,  Chapter  x,  'Many  Meetings'  is  achieved  for long
 stretches with only  the most  minor differences  of wording,  if any;  on the
 other  hand there  is still  much preserved  from the  original text.  In what
 follows  it  can  be  understood that  where no  comment is  made the  FR text
 was present at this time either exactly or in a close approximation.          
   The  date  of  Frodo's  awakening  in  the  house of  Elrond is  now October
 24th, and all the details of date are precisely as in FR (see pp. 219, 360).
 The  references  to  Sam  in  the FR  text are  none of  them present  in this
 version  as  written  until  the  feast  itself,  but  were  added  in  to the
 manuscript probably after no very long interval.                              
   Gandalf  now  adds,  after  'You  were  beginning  to  fade'  (p.   210,  FR
 p. 231), 'Glorfindel noticed it, though he did not speak of it to  anyone but
 Trotter'; and  he still  says (see  p. 206)  'You would  have become  a wraith
 before long -  certainly, if  you had  put on  the Ring  again after  you were
 wounded.' Following his words 'It is no  small feat  to have  come so  far and
 through  such  dangers,  still  bearing  the  Ring'  (FR  p. 232)  the conver-
 sation  is developed  from the  earlier text  (p. 210)  in a  very interesting
 way, naturally still far from the form in FR:                                 
                                                                              
 '... You ought never to have left the Shire without me.'                      
   'I know - but you never came to  my party,  as was  arranged; and           
 I did not know what to do.'                                                   
   'I was delayed,' said Gandalf, 'and that nearly proved our ruin -           
 as was intended. Still after all it has turned out better  than any           
 plan I should have dared to make,  and we  have defeated  the black           
 horsemen.'                                                                    
   'I wish you would tell me what happened! '                                  
   'All in good time! You are not  supposed to  talk or  worry about           
 anything today, by Elrond's orders.'                                          

 
                                                                       
  'But  talking  would  stop  me  thinking  and  wondering,  which are
 quite  as  tiring,'  said  Frodo. 'I  am wide  awake now,  and remember
 so  many  things  that  want  explaining.  Why  were  you  delayed? You
 ought to tell me that, at least.'                                      
  'You  will  soon  hear  all  you  wish  to  know,'  said  Gandalf. 'We
 shall  have  a  Council,  as  soon  as  you  are  well  enough.  At the
 moment I will only say that I was held captive.'                       
  'You!'cried Frodo.                                                    
  'Yes!'  laughed  Gandalf.  'There  are   many  powers   greater  than
 mine, for good and  evil, in  the world.  I was  caught in  Fangorn and
 spent  many  weary  days  as  a  prisoner  of  the Giant  Treebeard. It
 was  a  desperately  anxious  time,  for  I  was  hurrying back  to the
 Shire  to  help  you. I  had just  learned that  the horsemen  had been
 sent out.                                                              
  'Then you did not know of the Black Riders before.'                   
  'Yes,  I knew  of them.  I spoke  of them  once to  you: for  what you
 call  the  Black  Riders  are  the Ring-wraiths,  the Nine  Servants of
 the  Lord  of  the  Ring.  But  I  did  not know  that they  had arisen
 again,  and  were  let  loose  on  the world  once more  - until  I saw
 them. I  have tried  to find  you ever  since -  but if  I had  not met
 Trotter,  I don't  suppose I  ever should  have done  so. He  has saved
 us all.'                                                               
  'We  should  never  have  got here  without him,'  said Frodo.  'I was
 suspicious of  him at  first, but  now I  am very  fond of  him, though
 he is rather mysterious. It is an odd thing,  you know,  but I  keep on
 feeling that I  have seen  him somewhere  before; that  - that  I ought
 to be able to put a name to him, a name different to Trotter.'         
  'I  daresay  you  do,'  laughed  Gandalf. 'I  often have  that feeling
 myself, when I look at a  hobbit: they  all remind  me of  one another,
 if you know what I mean.'                                              
  'Nonsense!'  said  Frodo, sitting  up again  in protest.  'Trotter is
 most peculiar. And he wears shoes! But  I see  you are  in one  of your
 tiresome  moods.'  He  lay  down again.  'I shall  have to  be patient.
 And it is rather pleasant resting, after all. To be perfectly  honest I
 wish  I  need  go  no further  than Rivendell.  I have  had a  month of
 exile  and  adventures,  and  that  is  nearly  four  weeks  more  than
 enough for me.'                                                        
  He fell silent and shut his eyes.                                     
                                                                       
  For the remainder of Frodo's  conversation with  Gandalf this  text is
 mostly very close  indeed to  FR, and  only a  few differences  need be
 noticed.                                                               
  The 'Morgul-knife' (FR p. 234) is still the 'knife of the Necromancer'

 (p. 211), and Gandalf says  here: 'You  would have  become a  wraith, and
 under the dominion of the Dark Lord.  But you  would have  had no  ring of
 your own, as the Nine  have; for  your Ring  is the  Ruling Ring,  and the
 Necromancer  would  have  taken  that,  and would  have tormented  you for
 trying to keep it - if any  torment greater  than being  robbed of  it was
 possible.'                                                                   
   Among the servants of the Dark Lord  Gandalf still  includes, as  in the
 previous version, 'orcs and  goblins' and  'kings, warriors,  and wizards'
 (p. 211)..                                                                   
   Gandalf's reply to Frodo's  question 'Is  Rivendell safe?'  derives from
 the former text, but moves also towards that of FR:                          
                                                                             
   'Yes,  I  hope  so.  He  has  less  power  over  Elves  than   over  any
 other  creature:  they  have  suffered  too  much  in   the  past   to  be
 deceived  or  cowed  by  him  now.   And  the   Elves  of   Rivendell  are
 descendants  of  his  chief   foes:  the   Gnomes,  the   Elvenwise,  that
 came  out  of  the  West;  and  the  Queen  Elbereth  Gilthoniel,  Lady of
 the  Stars,  still  protects them.  They fear  no Ring-wraiths,  for those
 that  have  dwelt  in  the  Blessed  Realm  beyond the  Seas live  at once
 in  both  worlds;  and  each  world  has  only   half  power   over  them,
 while they have double power over both.'(9)                                  
   'I  thought  I  saw  a  white  figure that  shone and  did not  grow dim
 like the others. Was that Glorfindel then?'                                  
   'Yes,  you  saw  him for  a moment  as he  is upon  the other  side: one
 of  the  mighty  of  the  Elder  Race.  He is  an elf-lord  of a  house of
 princes.'                                                                    
   'Then  there  are  still  some  powers  left  that  can   withstand  the
 Lord of Mordor,' said Frodo.                                                 
   'Yes,  there  is  power  in  Rivendell,'  answered  Gandalf,  'and there
 is a power, too, of another kind in the Shire....                            
                                                                             
   At the end of this passage Gandalf still says: 'the Wise say that  he is
 doomed in the End, though that is far away' (see p. 212).                   
   In Gandalf's  story of  what happened  at the  Ford he  says, as  in FR,
 'Three were carried off by the first assault of the flood; the others were
 now  hurled  into  the  water by  their horses  and overwhelmed.'  It thus  
 appears that the rewriting of the end  of the  preceding chapter  (p. 362)
 had already been carried out.                                                
   At  the  end  of his  conversation with  Gandalf the  story of  Odo re-
 appears:                                                                     
                                                                             
   'Yes,  it  all  comes  back  to  me  now,'  said Frodo:  'the tremendous
 roaring.  I  thought  I  was  drowning,  together  with  my   friends  and
 enemies.   But   now  we   are  all   safe!  And   Odo,  too.   At  least,
 Glorfindel said so. How did you find him again?'                             

                                                                                
                                                                                  
       Gandalf  looked  [oddly  )]  quickly  at   Frodo,  but   he  had   shut  his
    eyes.  'Yes,  Odo  is  safe,'  the  wizard  said.  'You  will  see   him  soon,
    and   hear   his   account.  There   will  be   feasting  and   merrymaking  to
    celebrate  the  victory  of  the  Ford,  and you  will all  be there  in places
    of honour.'                                                                    
                                                                                  
       Gandalf's 'odd' or 'quick' look  at Frodo  can only  relate to  his question
    about  Odo,  but  since  the  story  of  Odo's  vanishing  from  Weathertop and
    his  subsequent  reappearance  (rescue!)  was  never told  it is  impossible to
    know  what  lay  behind  it.  There is  a suggestion  that there  was something
    odd  about  the  story  of  his  disappearance.  Gandalf's  tone,   when  taken
    with his 'look' at Frodo, seems to  have a  slightly quizzical  air. Glorfindel
    says (p. 361): Certainly there is a hobbit of that  name with  him., but  I did
    not hear that he had been  lost'. yet  surely the  capture of  a hobbit  by the
    Black  Riders  and  his  subsequent  recovery  was  a  matter  of   the  utmost
    interest  to  those  concerned   with  the   Ring-wraiths?  But   whatever  the
    story  was,  it  seems  to  be  something  that will  never be  known. -  It is
    curious  that  the  wizard's sudden  quick look  at Frodo  was preserved  in FR
    (p.  236),  when  the  Odo-story  had  of   course  disappeared,   and  Frodo's
    words that gave rise to the look were 'But now we are safe! '                  
       Gandalf's  slip  of  the  tongue  ('The  people of  Rivendell are  very fond
    of  Bilbo')  and  Frodo's  noticing  it  are  retained  from the  first version
    (p. 212), as is Frodo's recollection of Trotter's words to the troll as he fell
    asleep.                                                                        
       When  Frodo  goes  down  to  find  his  friends  in  a  porch of  the house'
    the  conversation   is  retained   almost  exactly   from  the   original  form
    (p.  209).  Odo takes  over from  Merry 'Three  cheers for  Frodo, lord  of the
    Ring!'  and  further  says,  as  does  Pippin  in  FR,  'You  have  shown  your
    usual  cunning  in  getting  up just  in time  for a  meal', but  despite Odo's
    increased  prominence  in  Frodo's  reception  (in  FR  given to  Pippin) there
    is  no  reference  to  his  adventures.  Frodo  might  surely  be  expected  to
    make   some   remark   about   Odo's   extremely   perilous    and   altogether
    unlooked-for  experiences  since  he  had last  seen him  at the  entrance into
    the  Old  Forest,  especially  since  Gandalf  had  refrained from  telling him
    what had happened on Weathertop and after.                                     
       The  description  of  Elrond,  Gandalf,  and   Glorfindel  at   the  banquet
    had  already  appeared  in  almost  the  final  form in  the earlier  text. The
    mention  of  Elrond's  smile  and  laughter  (p.  213) was  at this  time still
    retained; and there is of course  still no  hint of  Arwen. In  the description
    of  the  seating,  the  statement  in  the  former  version (ibid,)  that Bingo
    'could  not  see  Trotter,  nor  his  nephews.  They  had  been  led  to  other
    tables' was  retained; but  when Frodo  'began to  look about  him' he  did see
    them, though not Trotter (the latter passage surviving into FR):               
                                                                                  
       The feast was merry and all that his hunger could desire. He                
    could not see Trotter, or the other hobbits, and supposed they                 

 were  at  one  of the  side tables.  It was  some time  before he  began to
 look  about  him.  Sam  had   begged  to   be  allowed   to  wait   on  his
 master,  but  was  told  that  he  was for  this night  a guest  of honour.
 Frodo  could  see  him   sitting  with   Odo,  Folco   and  Merry   at  the
 upper  end of  one of  the side  tables, close  to the  dais. He  could not
 see Trotter.                                                               
                                                                           
   Frodo's  conversation  with Gloin  proceeds exactly  as in  FR as  far as
 'But I am equally curious to know what brings so important  a dwarf  so far
 from  the  Lonely  Mountain.'  In  the  original texts  Gloin said  that he
 wondered  much  what  could  have  brought  four  hobbits  on  so   long  a
 journey  (Bingo,  Frodo  Took,  Odo,  Merry;   Trotter  being   excluded  -
 presumably  as  being  so  altogether  distinct,  and not  a hobbit  of the
 Shire).  The  number  is  four  in  FR  (Frodo,  Sam,  Pippin,  Merry); but
 four  is  also  found  in the  present text,  where the  hobbits (excluding
 Trotter)  were  now  five:  Frodo,  Sam, Folco,  Odo, Merry.  Either 'four'
 was a slip, or Gloin excluded Odo since he  knew that  Odo had  not arrived
 at Rivendell with  the others.  Gloin's reply  to Frodo's  question remains
 less grave than in FR:                                                     
                                                                           
   Gloin   looked   at  him,   and  laughed,   indeed  he   winked.  'You'll
 soon find  out,' he  said; 'but  I am  not allowed  to tell  you -  yet. So
 we  will  not speak  of that  either! But  there are  many other  things to
 hear and tell.'                                                            
                                                                           
   The conversation (so  far as  it goes  in the  portion of  the manuscript
 dealt with here) remains almost exactly as it was, with the short extension
 at the end of the third of the early  texts (p.  213), the  only difference
 of  any  substance  being  that  Dain  had  now,  as  in  FR,  'passed his
 two-hundred-and-fiftieth-year'.                                            
                                                                           
   It  will  be  seen that  from the  series of  once fine  manuscripts that
 constitute the  'third phase'  of the  writing of The Lord  of the  Rings a
 wholly coherent story emerges. The following are  essential points  in that
 story in respect of the intricate later evolution:                         
                                                                           
      Gandalf  did  not  return  to Hobbiton  in time  for Frodo's  small final
      party.                                                                
    Merry and Odo Bolger went off to Buckland in advance.                   
    Frodo, Sam, and Folco Took walked from Hobbiton to Buckland.            
    At  Buckland,  Odo  decided  not  to  go  with  the  others  into  the  Old
      Forest,  but  to  stay  behind  at  Crickhollow and  wait for  Gandalf to
      come.                                                                 
    Gandalf  came  to  Crickhollow  at  night  on  the day  that Frodo  and his
      companions   left   (Monday   26  September),   drove  off   the  Riders,
      and rode after them with Odo on his horse.                            
      Gandalf  and  Odo  (whose  name  was  given  out   to  be   Odo  Baggins)

 spent  the  night  of  Tuesday 27  September at  Bree. Near  Bree they
 encountered Trotter.                                                   
 - Gandalf and Odo left Bree on Wednesday 28 September, meeting
 Trotter near Archet, as had been arranged.                             
 - Frodo, Sam, Merry and Folco arrived at Bree on Thursday 29
 September, and met Trotter, who gave Frodo Gandalf's letter.           
 - Trotter  was  a  hobbit;  Frodo  found  him curiously  familiar without
 being able to say why,  but there  is no  hint of  who he  might really
 be.                                                                    
 - Gandalf  reached  Weathertop  on  Monday  3  October,  and  left  on  5
 October.                                                               
 - Trotter,  Frodo  and   the  others   reached  Weathertop   on  Thursday
 6  October  and  found  Gandalf's  note  telling  that  Odo   had  dis-
 appeared.                                                              
 - They  learned  from  Glorfindel  that  Gandalf  had  reached Rivendell,
 with  Odo,  coming  down  from  the  north  by  way  of  'Dimrilldale'.
 - At  Rivendell,  Gandalf  explained  that  he  had  been delayed  in his
 return  to  Hobbiton  (having  learned   that  the   Ring-wraiths  were
 abroad)  through  having  been  held  prisoner  in  Fangorn   by  Giant
 Treebeard.                                                             
 - The  Shire  hobbits  at  Rivendell  are Frodo,  Sam, Merry,  Folco, and
 Odo.                                                                   
                                                                       
                            NOTES.                                       
                                                                       
 1. After 'I had to make quite sure that you were genuine first, before I
    handed over the letter. I've heard of shadow-parties picking up
    messages that weren't meant for them...' Trotter now adds:
   'Gandalf's letter was worded carefully in case of accidents, but I
    didn't know that.' Thus Gandalf no longer names Weathertop in the
    letter, but calls it the 'appointed place'.
 2. Barbara Strachey, in Journeys of Frodo (Map i x) says:
   At this point I must note what I believe to be a real discrepancy in
     the text itself. In Bree... Aragorn tells Sam that Weathertop is
   halfway to Rivendell. I am sure that this was a slip of the tongue
   and that he meant halfway to The Last Bridge. Everything falls
   into place on this assumption, since the travellers took 7 days
   between Bree and Weathertop (involving a detour to the north)
   and 7 days from Weathertop to the Bridge (with Frodo in a
   wounded condition and unable to hurry) while there was a further
   stretch of 7 days from the Bridge to Rivendell. Aragorn was well
   aware of the distance, as he said later (A Knife in the Dark;
   Bk. I), when they reached Weathertop, that it would then take
   them 14 days to the Ford of Bruinen although it normally took
   him only 12.

      But  it  is  now  seen that  Aragorn's words  'about halfway  from here
      (Bree) to Rivendell' in FR go back to Trotter's here; and at this stage
      the River Hoarwell and the Last  Bridge on  the East  Road did  not yet
      exist  (p.  360).  I  think  that Trotter  (Aragorn) was  merely giving
      Folco  (Sam)  a  rough  but  sufficient  idea  of the  distances before
      them. - The relative  distances go  back to  the original  version (see
      pp. 170- 1 ): about 120 miles from Bree to Weathertop, close  on zoo
      from Weathertop to the Ford.                                           
  3.  A  draft  for  Gandalf's  message  has:   'Last  night   Odo  vanished:
      suspect capture by horsemen.'                                          
         The message was changed in pencil to read:                          
         Wednesday  morning  Oct.  5.  Bad  news.  We  arrived  late Monday.
      Baggins  vanished last  night. I  must go  and look  for him.  Wait for
      me here for [a day or two >] two days. I shall  return if  possible. If
      not go to Rivendell by the Ford on the Road.                           
      Merry then  says: 'Baggins!  Does that  mean that  the Riders  have got
      Odo?'                                                                 
         Gandalf's message that  he would  return to  Weathertop if  he could
      may  have  been  intended  as  an  explanation of  why they  decided to
      stay there; see note 4.  This pencilled  revision preceded  the writing
      of the next chapter; see p. 359.                                       
  4.  This       was       changed       in       pencil       to       read:
      there  is  nothing  we  can  do  but]  wait  at  least  until tomorrow,
      which  will be  two days  since Gandalf  wrote the  note [see  note 3].
      After  that  if he  does not  turn up  we must  [make for  Rivendell as
      best we may.                                                           
  5.  The title 'A Knife in the Dark' was pencilled in later, as also  on the
      original chapter, VIII (p. 177).                                       
  6.  The  passage about  cram was  retained in  this text,  but placed  in a
      footnote.                                                              
  7.  On Dimrill-dale see pp. 432 - 3, notes 3, 13.                          
  8.  It  may  be  noted  that the  name Asfaloth  of Glorfindel's  horse now
      appears.                                                               
 9.   On the conclusion of this passage see p. 225.                          
 10.  The porch still faced west (p. 209),  not east  as in  FR, and  the odd
      statement that  the evening  light shone  on the  eastern faces  of the
      hills far above was repeated, though  struck out,  probably in  the act
      of writing.                                                            

                                      XXII.                                   
                             NEW UNCERTAINTIES AND                            
                                NEW PROJECTIONS.                              
                                                                             
 The first  phase or  original wave  of composition  of The  Lord of  the Rings
 carried the story to Rivendell, and broke off  in the  middle of  the original
 Chapter  IX,  at  Gloin's  account  to  Bingo Bolger-Baggins  of the  realm of
 Dale (p. 213):                                                               
  In  Dale  the  grandson  of  Bard  the  Bowman  ruled,  Brand  son   of  Bain
 son  of  Bard,  and  he  was  become  a  strong  king  whose   realm  included
 Esgaroth, and much land to the south of the great falls.                     
 This  sentence  ended  a manuscript  page; on  the reverse  side, as  noted on
 p. 213, the text  was continued,  but in  a different  script and  a different
 ink, and it begins:                                                          
  'And what has become of Balin and Ori and Oin?' asked Frodo.                
 Since  in  the second  phase Bingo  was still  the name  of Bilbo's  heir, and
 since 'Bingo'  never appears  in any  narrative writing  falling later  in the
 story than the feast at Rivendell, it is certain that there was  a significant
 gap between 'much land to  the south  of the  great falls'  and 'And  what has
 become of Balin and Ori and Oin?'                                            
  It is therefore very curious that in Chapter  XII of  the third  phase there
 is  a  marked  change  of  script at  precisely the  same point.  Though still
 neatly  and  carefully  written,  it is  immediately obvious  to the  eye that
 '"And  what  has  become  of  Balin  and Ori  and Oin?"  asked Frodo'  and the
 subsequent  text  was  not  continuous  with  what  preceded.   Moreover,  the
 latter part of this Chapter XI I is not coherent  with what  precedes, either:
 for Bilbo says - as my father first wrote out the manuscript  - 'I  shall have
 to get that fellow Aragorn to help me' (cf. FR p.  243: 'I  shall have  to get
 my friend the Dunadan to help me.')                                          
  I  do  not  think  that  it  can  possibly  be a  mere coincidence  that both
 versions  halt at  precisely the  same point;  and I  conclude that  the third
 phase,  in the  sense of  a fine  continuous manuscript  series, ended  at the
 same place as the first phase had  done -  and did  so precisely  because that
 is where the first phase ended. For  this reason  I stopped  at this  point in
 the  previous  chapter.  I  have  suggested  earlier  (p.  309)  that  when my
 father  said  (in  February  1939)  that  by  December  1938  The Lord  of the
 Rings  had reached  Chapter XI  I 'and  has been  rewritten several  times' it
 was to the third phase that he was referring.                                
  The  textual-chronological  questions   that  now   arise  are   of  peculiar
 difficulty,  and  I  doubt  whether  a  solution  demonstrably correct  at all
 points  could  be  reached.  There  is  no  external  evidence for  many months

                                                                  
                                                                                
   after  February  1939,   and  nothing   to  show   what  my   father  achieved
   during  that time;  but we  get at  last an  unambiguous date,  'August 1939',
   written  (most  unusually)  on  every  page  of a  collection of  rough papers
   containing  plot-outlines,  questionings,  and  portions  of text.  These show
   my father at a halt, even at a loss, to the point of a  lack of  confidence in
   radical components  of the  narrative structure  that had  been built  up with
   such pains. The only external evidence that I know  of to  cast light  on this
   is  a  letter,  dispirited  in tone,  which he  wrote to  Stanley Unwin  on 15
   September  1939,  twelve  days  after  the  entry  of  England  into  war with
   Germany,  apologising  for  his  'silence  about  the  state  of  the proposed
   sequel to the Hobbit,  which you  enquired about  as long  ago as  June 21st.'
   'I do not suppose,' he said, 'this any longer interests  you greatly  - though
   I still hope to finish it eventually. It is only about 3/1 written. I have not
   had  much  time,  quite  apart  from  the gloom  of approaching  disaster, and
   have  been  unwell  most  of  this year...'  There is  nothing in  the 'August
   1939'  papers  themselves  to  show  why  he  should  have  thought  that  the
   existing structure of the story was in need of such radical transformation.
        Proposals made at this time for new  articulations of  the plot  were set
   down in such  haste and  so elliptically  expressed that  it is  sometimes not
   easy  to  understand  their  bearings  (here  and  there  one  may  suspect  a
   confusion  between  what  had  been  written  in  the  latest  wave  of compo-
   sition and  what had  been written  earlier); and  determination of  the order
   in  which  these  notes  and  outlines were  set down  is impossible.  To take
   first the most drastic proposals:                                             
                                                                                
        (1). New Plot.  Bilbo is  the hero  all through.  Merry and  Frodo his
            companions.   This   helps  with   Gollum  (though   Gollum  probably
            gets new ring in Mordor). Or Bilbo just takes a 'holiday' - and never
            returns,  and  the surprise  party [i.e.  the party  that ended  in a
            surprise] is Frodo's. In which case Gandalf is not present to let off
            fireworks.                                                           
                                                                                
   The  astonishing  suggestion  in  the  first  part  of  this note  ignores the
   problem  of  'lived happily  ever after',  which had  bulked so  large earlier
   (see pp. 108 - 9). For a brief while, at any rate, my  father was  prepared to
   envisage  the  demolition  of  the  entire  Bilbo-Frodo  structure  -  the now
   established and essential idea that Bilbo vanished 'with a  bang and  a flash'
   at  the  end  of  his  hundred-and-eleventh  birthday  party  and  that  Frodo
   followed  him  out  of  the  Shire,  more  discreetly, seventeen  years later.
   Happily,  he did  not spend  long on  this -  though he  did go  so far  as to
   begin a new text, headed:                                                     
                                                                                
                    New version - with Bilbo as hero. Aug. 1939.                 
                                                                                
                               The Lord of the Rings.                            
                                                                                
   This begins: '"It is all most disturbing  and in  fact rather  alarming," said
   Bilbo Baggins,' and the  matter is  the same  as in  'Ancient History'  - with

                                      
                                                                                 
 Sam's  shears  audible  outside  -   altered  only   as  was   necessary  since
 Gandalf  was here  speaking to  Bilbo, not  Frodo; but  this text  peters out
 after a couple of sides.                                                       
     The second part of this note is little less drastic: a return to the story as
 it was  at the  end of  the first  phase of  wort on  this chapter,  where Bilbo
 merely  disappeared  quietly  from   the  Shire   shortly  before   his  IIIth
 birthday,  and  the  party  was  given  by  Bingo  (Bolger-Baggins);  see  p. 40.
 : This idea is developed in the following outline:                               
                                                                                 
         Go  back  to  original  idea.  Make  Frodo  (or  Bingo)  a   more  comic
         character.                                                               
           Bilbo is  not overcome  by Ring  - he  very seldom  used it.  He lived
         long and then said  goodbye, put  on his  old clothes  and rode  off. He
         would not  say where  he was  going -  except that  he was  going across
         the  River.  He  had 2  favourite 'nephews',  Peregrin Boffin  and Frodo
         [written  above:  Folco]  Baggins.  Peregrin  was  the  elder. Peregrin
         went  off  and  Bilbo was  blamed, and  after that  the young  folk were
         kept away from him - only Folco remained faithful.                       
           Bilbo  left  all  his possessions  to Folco  (who thus  inherited with
         interest all the dislike of the Sackville-Bagginses).                    
           Bilbo lived long, x x x - he tells  Gandalf he  is feeling  tired, and
         discusses  what  to  do.  He  is  worried  about  the  Ring. Says  he is
         reluctant to leave it and thinks of taking it. Gandalf looks at him.     
           In  the  end  he  leaves it  behind, but  puts on  Sting and  his elf-
         armour  under  his  old  patched green  cloak. He  also takes  his book.
         Last  whimsical  saying  was 'I  think I  shall look  for a  place where
         there is more peace and quiet, and I can finish my book.'                
           'Nobody will read it!'                                                 
           '0, they may - in years to come.'                                      
                                                                                 
           Ring  begins  to  have  an  effect  on  Folco.  He gets  restless. And
         plans  to  go  off  'following Bilbo'.  His friends  are Odo  Bolger and
         Merry Brandybuck.                                                        
           Conversation with Gandalf as in Tale.                                  
           Folco   gives   the   unexpected   [read  long-expected]'   party  and
         vanishes as in original draft of the Tale.(2) But bring in Black Riders.
           Cut  out  whole  part  of  Gandalf  being   supposed  to   come.  Make
         Gandalf  pursue  the  fugitives  since  he  has  found  out  about Black
         Riders  (the  scene   at  Crickhollow   will  do   -  but   without  Odo
         complication).                                                           
           Make Gandalf  looking for  Folco (in  that case  Gandalf will  not be
         at final party) - and send Trotter.                                      
                                                                                 
           Find  Bilbo  at Rivendell.  There Bilbo  offers to  take up  burden of
         the  Ring  (reluctantly)  but  Gandalf  supports  Folco  in  offering to
         carry it on.                                                             
           Trotter turns out to be Peregrin, who had been to Mordor.              

  Not  the  least  curious  feature  of  these  notes  is  the  renewed uncertainty
  about  names:  thus  we  have  'Frodo  (or  Bingo)',  then  'Frodo'   changed  to
  'Folco'  (and  at  one  of the  occurrences of  'Folco' my  father first  wrote a
  'B'); see also $$5 and 9. For long  I assumed  that it  was at  the very  time of
  the  writing  of  these  notes  that  'Bingo'  became  'Frodo',  and   that  they
  therefore   preceded   the   third  phase   of  the   wort.  Those   third  phase
  manuscripts  were  so  orderly  and   so  suggestive   of  secure   purpose  that
  it   seemed  hard   to  imagine   that  such   radical  uncertainty   could  have
  succeeded  them:  rather  they  seemed  lite  a  confident  new  start  when  the
  doubts  had  been  dissipated.  But  this  cannot  possibly  be  so. This  is the
  first mention of Bilbo's  taking his  'elf-armour' (cf.  p. 223,  $4), and  it is
  only  by  later  revision  to  the  third  phase   version  of   'A  Long-expected
  party' that  the story  that Bilbo  took it  with him  enters the  narrative (see
  p. 3 I 5; in FR, p.  40, he  packed it  in his  bag, the  'bundle wrapped  in old
  cloths'  which  he  took  from  the strong-box).  Similarly, Bilbo's  saying that
  he  wanted  to  find  peace   in  which   to  finish   his  book   and  Gandalf's
  rejoinder  'Nobody  will read  it! '  only appear  in the  revision of  the third
  phase version  of the  first chapter  (surviving into  FR p.  41). Or  again, the
  reference  to  'the  scene  at  Crickhollow  -  but  without   Odo  complication'
  shows  that  the  third  phase  was  in  being  (see  p.  336).   Other  evidence
  elsewhere  in  these  'August 1939' papers  is equally  clear. It  must therefore
  be  concluded  that  the  temporary   confusion  and   loss  of   direction  from
  which   my  father   suffered  at   this  time   extended  even   to  established
  names: 'Bingo' might be brought back, or 'Frodo' changed to 'Folco'.             
    The  words  'But  bring  in  Black  Riders'  are  puzzling,  since   the  Black
  Riders  were  of  course  very  much  present  'in  the  original  draft  of  the
  Tale'; but I  suspect that  my father  meant 'But  bring in  Black Rider'  in the
  singular,  i.e.   the  Rider   who  came   to  Hobbiton   and  spoke   to  Gaffer
  Gamgee.  The  changed  story  which  my  father  was  so   elliptically  discuss-
  ing in these notes can presumably be shown in essentials thus:                   
                                                                                  
  (I) Fourth version of 'A.   Bilbo departs quietly from Hobbiton at                  
  Long-expected Party',.       the age  of III.                  
  last in the 'first.          Bingo gives  the party  33 years  later and                  
  phase', see p. 40.           vanishes at the end of it.                        
                                      Gandalf leaves Hobbiton after the fire-      
                                      works  at  the  Party  and  goes  ahead      
                                      towards Rivendell.                           
                                                                                  
  (II) The existing state of.        Bilbo gives the Party at the age of 111 and.
        the story.                    vanishes at the end of it.                   
                                    Frodo    departs   quietly    from   Hobbiton
                                      with his friends 17 years later.            
                                    Gandalf   fails  to   come  as   he  promised
                                      before Frodo leaves.                         
                                    A  Black  Rider  comes  to  Hobbiton  on  the
                                      last evening.                                

                                  Gandalf arrives at Crickhollow after the        
                                  hobbits have left.                              
                                                                                 
  (III) Projected plot.       Bilbo departs quietly from Hobbiton at           
                                 the age of r x x.                                
                                 Frodo ('Folco') gives the Party and van-         
                                 ishes at the end of it.                          
                                Gandalf is not present at the Party.              
                                A Black Rider comes to Hobbiton.                  
                                Gandalf arrives at Crickhollow after the          
                                 hobbits have left.                               
                                                                                 
  If  I  am  right  in  my  interpretation  of  'But bring  in Black  Riders', the
  point is that while in  a fundamental  feature of  its structure  (III) would
  return  to  (I),  the coming  of the  Rider would  be retained  - so  that he
  would  arrive  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Party.  And  unlike  (I), Gandalf
  would no  longer come  to the  Party (so  that, as  mentioned in  $1, there
  would be no fireworks, or at  least not  of the  Gandalfian kind),  but would
  follow hard on the hobbits ('the fugitives'), 'since he  has found  out about
  the Black Riders'.                                                         
      Here  again,  and  again  happily,  my  father  did not  in the  event allow
  himself  to be  diverted to  yet another  restructuring (and  consequent very
  tricky  rewriting  at  many  points)  of  the narrative  that had  been achieved.
  Most  interesting  are  the  statements  that   Trotter  was   Peregrin  Boffin,
  standing in the same sort of relationship to Bilbo as did Frodo,  but older
  than  Frodo,  and  that  running off  into the  wide world  he had  found his
  way to  Mordor. Earlier  (p. zan,  )6) my  father had  noted: 'I  thought of
  making  Trotter   into  Fosco   Took  (Bilbo's   first  cousin)   who  vanished
  when  a  lad,  owing  to  Gandalf.  He  must have  had some  bitter acquaint-
  ance with Ring-wraiths &c.' See further pp. 385 - 6.                        
                                                                                 
  (3) In some points it is still harder to feel sure of the meaning of another
  outline  dated 'August  1939'. This  begins with  a proposal  to 'alter names'.
                                                                                 
      Frodo > ? Peregrin Faramond.                                                
      Odo > Fredegar Hamilcar Bolger.                                             
                                                                                 
  My father subsequently added (but struck out): 'Too many hobbits.
  Sam,   Merry,  and   Faramond  (=   Frodo)  are   quite  enough.'   He  was
  evidently  dissatisfied  with  the name  'Frodo' for  his central  character. In
  $2 he  changed 'Frodo'  to 'Folco',  in $2,  $5, and  $9 'Bingo'  reappears, and
  here  he  considers  the  possibility  of  'Faramond'.  - This  seems to  be the
  first occurrence of either name, Fredegar or Hamilcar.                          
      The  text that  follows on  the same  page, seeming  quite at  variance with
  these notes on names, reads thus:                                               
                                                                                 
      Alterations of Plot.                                                        
      (1) Less emphasis on longevity caused by the Ring, until the story has      
      progressed.                                                                 

  (2)  Important.  (a)  Neither  Bilbo  nor  Gandalf   must  know   much  about
  the  Ring,  when  Bilbo  departs.  Bilbo's  motive  is  simply  tiredness, an
  unexplained  restlessness  (and  longing  to  see  Rivendell again,  but this
  is   not   said   -   finding  him   at  Rivendell   must  be   a  surprise).
  (b)  Gandalf  does  not  tell  Frodo  to leave  Shire -  only mere  hint that
  Lord  may  look  for  Shire.  The  plan  for  leaving  was  entirely Frodo's.
  Dreams   or   some   other   cause  [added:   restlessness]  have   made  him
  decide  to  go  journeying  (to find  Cracks of  Doom? after  seeking counsel
  of  Elrond).  Gandalf  simply  vanishes  for  years. They  are not  trying to
  catch  up  Gandalf.  Gandalf  is  simply  trying  to   find  them,   and  is
  desperately  upset   when  he   discovers  Frodo   has  left   Hobbiton.  Odo
  must  be  cut  out  or  altered  (blended  with Folco),  and go  with F[rodo]
  on his ride. Only Meriadoc goes ahead.                                      
     In that case alteration of plot at  Bree. Who  is Trotter?  A Ranger  or a
  Hobbit?  Peregrin?  If  Gandalf  is  only  looking  for  Frodo,  Trotter will
  have  to  be  an old  associate.(3) Thus  if a  Hobbit, mate  him one  who went
  off under Gandalf's influence (cf. introduction to Hobbit).(4) E.g. -         
     After  Bilbo's  little  escapade  Gandalf  was little  seen, and  only one
  disappearance  was  recorded  during  many  years.   This  was   the  curious
  case of Peregrin Boffin -                                                   
     Since he was a close relation of  Bilbo's, Bilbo  was blamed  'for putting
  notions into the boy's head with his silly fairy-stories;  and visits  of the
  young  to  Bag-End  were  discouraged  by  many  of  the  elders in  spite of
  Bilbo's  generosity.  But  he  had  several   faithful  young   friends.  The
  chief of these was Frodo (Bilbo's cousin).                                  
                                                                             
 As  regards  (1)  and  (2)  (a),  these  ideas  were  taken  up. In  'A Long-
 expected  Party'  as  it was  at this  time (see  p. 239:  preserved without
 significant change in the third phase version)  the Ring  is the  only motive
 that Bilbo refers to in explanation of his decision to  leave the  Shire; and
 he clearly associates his longevity with possession of it: 'I really must get
 rid of It, Gandalf. Well-preserved, indeed. Why, I  feel all  thin -  sort of
 stretched,  if  you  know  what I  mean.' Revisions  made to  the third phase
 version brought the text  in these  respects to  the form  in FR  (pp. 41-3),
 where it is clear that the Ring is not consciously a  motive in  Bilbo's mind
 (however strongly the reader is made aware of the  sinister influence  it was
 in fact exerting): he speaks of his need for 'a holiday, a very long holiday'
 (cf. $1 above: 'Bilbo just takes a "holiday"'), and his wish 'to see the wild
 country  again  before  I  die,  and  the  Mountains.'  He still  says 'Well-
 preserved, indeed! Why I feel all  thin, sort  of stretched,  if you  know what
 I mean', but his sense of great age  is now  not in  any way  associated with
 possession of the Ring; and so later, in revision to the third  phase version
 of 'Ancient  History', Gandalf  says to  Frodo: 'He  certainly did  not begin
 to connect his  long life  and outward  youthfulness with  the ring'  (cf. FR
 p. 56: 'But as for his long life, Bilbo never connected it  with the  ring at
 all. He took all the credit for that to himself, and was very proud  of it.')

    The  notes  under  (2)  (b)  outline  a  new  idea  in  respect  of Gandalfs
  movements:  for  many  years  before  Frodo  left  he had  never come  back at
  all  to  Hobbiton,  and  Frodo's  leaving  was  entirely  independent  of  the
  wizard,  Learning  (we  may  suppose)  that  the  Ring-wraiths   were  abroad,
  Gandalf hastened  back at  last to  the Shire,  where he  heard to  his horror
  that  Frodo  had gone.  This idea  was not  taken up,  of course  (and against
  it my father wrote: 'But in  this case  the Sam  chapter is  spoilt' -  he was
  referring  to  the  end  of  'Ancient  History',  where  Sam is  discovered by
  Gandalf eavesdropping outside the window of Bag End).                         
    The  words  'They  are  not  trying to  catch up  Gandalf' are  difficult to
  understand.  It  seems incredible  that my  father would  be referring  now to
  the first phase version  of the  story, in  which Gandalf  had left  the Party
  (given  by  Bingo)  after  letting  off  the  fireworks, and  was known  to be
  ahead of Frodo and  his friends  on the  journey east;  yet in  the subsequent
  versions  all  that  is  known  of  him is  that he  did not  come, as  he had
  promised, to  the small  farewell party  given by  Bingo/Frodo before  he left
  Bag  End,  and  was  supposed  (rightly)  to  be   behind  them   rather  than
  ahead.                                                                        
    Still  more  baffling  is  the  passage  concerning  Odo  ('Odo must  be cut
  out or altered (blended with Folco) and  go with  F [rodo]  on his  ride. Only
  Meriadoc  goes  ahead').  If  the  meaning of  this is  that the  entire 'Odo-
  story'  of  the  third  phase  (his  journey  with  Gandalf  from  Crickhollow
  through   Bree,   the   pseudonym   of   'Baggins',  his   disappearance  from
  Weathertop,  and  his  unexplained  arrival  with  Gandalf  at  Rivendell) was
  to  be  abandoned,  how  (one  may  ask)  can  he  be.  'blended  with Folco',
  since 'Folco' is already a blend  of the  original 'Frodo  and Odo',  with the
  advantage  heavily  to  'Odo'?  It must  be remembered  that these  notes were
  in  no way  the logical  expression of  an ordered  programme, but  are rather
  the  vestiges  of  rapidly-changing thoughts.  The withdrawal  of Odo,  in the
  third  phase,  from  the  adventures  of  the other  hobbits had  caused Folco
  (formerly  Frodo)  Took  to  take  over  Odo's  part  and  character   in  the
  narrative  of  those  adventures,  since that  narrative already  existed from
  the  earlier  phases,  and  Odo  had  played  a  large  part  in  the hobbits'
  conversation  (see  pp.  323  -  4).  But the  retention of  Odo in  the back-
  ground,  with  adventures  of   his  own,   would  mean   that  when   he  re-
  emerged  into  the  foreground  again at  Rivendell there  would be  two 'Odo'
  characters - the rather ironic result of getting rid of him!                  
    The  proposal  here  is  presumably  that  'Odo  Bolger'  and  'Folco  Took'
  should  now  be  definitively  joined  together  as  one character,  under the
  latter  name.  'Folco'  seems  indeed  now  too much  'Odo' for  'blending' to
  have  much  meaning;  but  my  father  may  not  have  felt this  (nor perhaps
  did he have so clear a picture of the intricate evolutions of his story as can
  be  attained  from  long study  of the  manuscripts). In  'go with  F[rodo] on
  his ride', 'ride' is perhaps a mere slip  for 'walk':  the meaning  being that
  the  resultant  'blend'  accompanies  Frodo  and  does  not  'go  ahead'  with
  Merry  to  Buckland.  This  is  all  very  fine-spun,  but  it   reflects  the

                                                                    
                                                                            
  extraordinarily intricate nature of my father's changing construction.     
       With 'Who is Trotter? A Ranger or a Hobbit?'cf. pp. 33 I-2.  The story
  that Trotter was Peregrin Boffin is now definitively  present and  would be
  fully developed in revision  to the  third phase  text of  'A Long-expected
  Party' (pp. 384-6).                                                        
                                                                            
  (4)  The  remaining  papers  in  this  'August  1939  collection  that  are
  concerned with the opening part of the story  perhaps followed  the others.
  These pages of  very rough  narrative drafting  are headed  Conversation of
  Bilbo and Frodo - a relationship  never otherwise  seen at  close quarters,
  before  they  met  long afterwards  at Rivendell.  The conversation  takes
  place at Bag End before Bilbo's Farewell Party; he speaks  to Frodo  of the
  Ring for the  first time,  only to  discover to  his genuine  amazement and
  mock  indignation,  that Frodo  knew about  it already,  and had  looked at
  Bilbo's secret book. This is a different story to that in  'A Long-expected
  Party',  where  Frodo  had  read  Bilbo's   memoirs  with   his  permission
  (pp.240,315).                                                               
                                                                            
                        Conversation of Bilbo and Frodo.                       
                                                                            
       'Well, my lad, we have got on very  well -  and I  am sorry  to leave,
  in a way. But I  am going  on a  holiday, a  very long  holiday. In  fact I
  have  no  intention  of  coming  back.  I  am  tired. I  am going  to cross
  the  Rivers.'  So  be  prepared  for  surprises  at this  party. I  may say
  that  I  am  leaving everything,  practically, to  you -  all except  a few
  oddments.'                                                                 
                                       *                                     
                                                                            
       Mr   Bilbo   Baggins,   of    Bag-end,   Underhill    (Hobbiton)   was
  sitting in his west sitting-room one summer afternoon.                     
       'Well,  that's my  little plan,  Frodo,' said  Bilbo Baggins.  'It's a
  dead  secret,  mind  you!  I've  kept   it  from   everyone  but   you  and
  Gandalf.  I  needed   Gandalf's  help;   and  I've   told  you   because  I
  hope you'll enjoy  the joke  all the  better for  being in  the know  - and
  of course you're closely concerned.'                                       
       'I  don't  like  it  at all,'  said the  other hobbit,  looking rather
  puzzled  and  downcast.   'But  I've   known  you   long  enough   to  know
  that it's no good trying to talk you out of your little plans.'            
                                                                            
                                       *                                     
                                                                            
          'Well, the time has come to say goodbye, my dear lad,' said        
  Bilbo.                                                                     
       'I suppose so,' said Frodo sadly. 'Though I don't at all under-       

 stand  why.  [But  I  know  you too  well to  think of  trying to  talk you
 out of your little plans - especially after they have gone so far.]'       
     'I can't explain it  any clearer,'  answered Bilbo,  'because I  am not
 quite  clear myself.  But I  hope this  is clear:  I am  leaving everything
 (except  a  few  oddments)  to  you.  My  bit  of   money  will   keep  you
 nicely as it did me  in the  old days;  and besides  there is  a bit  of my
 treasure  left  -  you  know  where.  Not  so  much   now,  but   a  pretty
 nest-egg still. And there's one thing more, There's a ring.'               
     'The magic ring?' asked Frodo incautiously.                            
     'Eh, what? ' said Bilbo. 'Who said magic ring?'                       
     'I  did,'  said  Frodo  blushing.  'My  dear  old  hobbit,   you  don't
 allow for the inquisitiveness of young nephews.'                           
     'I do allow for it,' said Bilbo, 'or I thought I had.  And in  any case
 don't call me a dear old hobbit.'                                          
     'I have known about the existence of your Ring for years.'             
     'Have  you  indeed?'  said  Bilbo.  'How,  I   should  like   to  know!
 Come  on,  then:  you  had  better  make  a  clean  breast  of it  before I
 go.                                                                        
     'Well, it was like this. It was the Sackville-Bagginses that were      
 your undoing.'                                                             
     'They would be,' grunted Bilbo.                                        
                                                                           
     Frodo then tells the story of his observing Bilbo's escape, by becoming
 invisible, from the Sackville-Bagginses  while out  walking one  day. This,
 in very brief form, had been used in the fifth version of 'A Long-expected.
 Party' (p. 242), when Bingo told  it to  Gandalf after  the Party  - there,
 merely  as  an  example  of  how Bilbo  had used  the Ring  for small-scale
 disappearances to avoid  boredom and  inconvenience (for  of course  in the
 'received'  story  Bingo knew  about the  Ring because  Bilbo had  told him
 about  it).  It was  then, in  more elaborate  form, given  to Merry  in 'A
 Conspiracy  is  Unmasked'  (p.  300) as  an explanation  of how  Merry knew
 of the existence of the Ring (and so was dropped from the sixth  version of
 A  Long-expected  Party,  p.  315).  Now,  in the  present text,  my father
 simply lifted the story  word for  word from  'A Conspiracy  (is) Unmasked'
 and gave it to Frodo, as his explanation to  Bilbo of  how he  learnt about
 the  Ring;  and  Frodo  continues here,  again almost  word for  word, with
 Merry's account of how he got a sight of Bilbo's book:                     
                                                                           
     'That doesn't explain it all,'  said Bilbo,  with a  gleam in  his eye.
 'Come on, out with it, whatever it is! '                                   
     'Well,  after  that  I kept  my eyes  open,' stammered  Frodo. 'I  - er
 -  in  fact  I  rather  kept  a watch  on you.  But you  must admit  it was
 very  intriguing  -  and  I  was  only  in my  early tweens.  So one  day I
 came across your book.'                                                    

   'My  book!'  said  Bilbo.   'Good  heavens   above.  Is   nothing  safe!'
   'Not  too  safe,'  said  Frodo.  'But I  only got  one rapid  glance. You
 never  left  the  book  about,  except  just  that  once:  you  were called
 out  of  the  study,  and  I  came  in and  found it  lying open.  I should
 like  a  rather longer  look, Bilbo.  I suppose  you are  leaving it  to me
 now?'                                                                       
   'No  I am  not! '  said Bilbo  decisively. 'It  isn't finished.  Why, one
 of  my  chief  reasons  for  leaving  is to  go somewhere  where I  can get
 on  with  it  in  peace  without  a  parcel  of  rascally   nephews  prying
 round  the  place,  and  a  string  of  confounded  visitors hanging  on to
 the bell.'                                                                  
   'You  shouldn't  be  so  kind  to  everyone,'  said  Frodo.  'I  am  sure
 you needn't go away.                                                        
   'Well,  I  am  going,'  said  Bilbo. 'And  about that  Ring: I  suppose I
 needn't  describe  it  now, or  how I  got it.  I thought  of giving  it to
 you.'                                                                     
                                                                            
   At this point my father interrupted the text and  wrote across  the page:
 'This won't do because of the use of the Ring at the party!' -  i.e., Bilbo
 could not have the intention to give it  to Frodo  then, before  the Party.
 But  without changing  anything that  he had  written he  went on  with the
 story thus:                                                                 
                                                                            
   He  fumbled   in  his   pocket  and   drew  out   a  small   golden  ring
 attached by another ring  to a  fine chain.  He unfastened  it, laid  it in
 the palm of his hand, and looked long at it.                                
   'Here it is! ' he said with sigh.                                         
   Frodo  held  out  his  hand.  But  Bilbo  put the  ring straight  back in
 his  pocket.  [A  puzzled  look  )]  An  odd  look  came  over   his  face.
 'Er, well,' he  stammered, 'I'll  give it  you I  expect last  thing before
 I go - or leave it in my locked drawer or something.'                       
   Frodo looked puzzled and stared at him, but said nothing.                 
                                                                            
 The last lines of the text come after the Party:                            
                                                                            
   Bilbo.... goes and dresses as in the older version  (but with             
 armour under his cloak)(6) and says goodbye. 'The - er - ring,' he             
 said, 'is in the drawer' - and vanished into [the] darkness.                
                                                                            
   I think that this new version is to be associated with the  opening notes
 under 'Alterations  of Plot'  in $3  above: it  represents a  movement away
 from the  idea that  Bilbo was  troubled about  the Ring,  that it  was his
 prime motive for leaving (rather, his tiredness, his  desire for  peace, is
 mentioned).  He has  never even  spoken to  Frodo about  it. It  seems that
 my father's intention had been that Bilbo  should simply  hand it  to Frodo

  there  and  then,  without  any  suggestion  of inner  struggle; but  he only
  realised, as he wrote, that 'This won't  do'- because  Bilbo must  retain the
  Ring  till  the  actual  moment of  his departure.  The gift  would therefore
  have to be postponed  from the  present occasion;  and it  was only  now that
  he took up the suggestion  in 'A  Long-expected Party',  where Bilbo  said to
  Gandalf: 'I am not going to throw it away. In any case  I find  it impossible
  to make myself do that - I simply  put it  back in  my pocket.'(7) The curious
  result is that the scene actually ends now with  a demonstration,  in Bilbo's
  embarrassed  and  ambiguous  behaviour,  precisely  of  the  sinister  effect
  that the Ring  has in  fact had  on its  owner; and  this would  be developed
  into the quarrel with Gandalf in FR, pp. 41 - 3.                             
                                                                              
  (5)  Turning  now  to  those  papers  dated  August  1939 that  are concerned
  with larger projections of the story to come after the sojourn  in Rivendell,
  there is first a suggestion that a Dragon should come to  the Shire  and that
  by  its  coming  the hobbits  should be  led to  show that  they are  made of
  'sterner  stuff', and  that 'Frodo  (Bingo)' should  'actually come  near the
  end of his money - now it was dragon gold.  He is "lured"?'  There is  here a
  reference to 'Bilbo remarks on old sheet  of notes'  - obviously  those given
  on  pp.  41  -  2  (where  the  same  suggestion  of   a  Dragon   coming  to
  Hobbiton was made).                                                          
                                                                              
  (6) Following  these notes  on the  same page  is a  brief list  of narrative
  elements that might enter much further on:                                   
                                                                              
       Island in sea. Take Frodo there in end.                                 
       Radagast ? (8)                                                         
       Battle is raging far off between armies of Elves and Men v[ersus        
    the] Lord.                                                                 
       Adventures .. Stone-Men.                                                
                                                                              
  With  the first  of these  cf. the  note given  on p.  41: 'Elrond  tells him
  [Bilbo) of an island',  etc. The  reference to  the 'battle  raging' probably
  belongs  to  the  end of  the story,  when the  Ring goes  into the  Crack of
  Doom.                                                                        
    Most interesting is the  last item  here. A  note by  my father  found with
  the  LR  papers  states  that  he  looked  through (some,  at least,  of) the
  material in 1964; and  it was  very probably  at that  time that  he scrawled
  against the words 'Adventures .. Stone-Men':                                 
                                                                              
    Thought  of  as  just  an  'adventure'. The  whole of  the matter  of Gondor
    (Stone-land) grew from  this note.  (Aragorn, still  called Trotter,  had no
    connexion with it then, and was  at first  conceived as  one of  the hobbits
    that had wanderlust.)                                                      
                                                                              
  (7)  This  is a  convenient place  to give  a page  of pencilled  notes which
  bears no date and in which 'Bingo'  appears. At  the head  of the  page stand
  the  words:  'City of  Stone and  civilized men'.  Then follows  an extremely
  abbreviated outline of the end of the story.                                 

 At end                                                                        
 When Bingo [written above: Frodo] at last reaches Crack and Fiery             
 Mountain he cannot make himself throw the Ring away. ? He hears               
 Necromancer's voice offering him great reward - to share power with           
 him, if he will keep it.                                                      
   At that moment Gollum - who had seemed to reform and had                    
 guided them by secret ways through Mordor - comes up and treach-              
 erously tries to take Ring. They wrestle and Gollum takes Ring and            
 falls into the Crack.                                                         
   The mountain begins to rumble.                                              
   Bingo flies away [i.e. flees away].                                         
   Eruption.                                                                   
   Mordor vanishes like a dark cloud. Elves are seen riding like lights        
 rolling away a dark cloud.                                                    
   The City of Stone is covered in ashes.                                      
   Journey back to Rivendell.                                                  
   What of Shire? Sackville-Baggins.......  Bingo makes peace, and settles down in a little hut on the high green
 quarters.                                        ... lands........ the four
                                                                              
 ridge - until one day he goes with the Elves west beyond the towers.          
   Better-  no  land  was  tilled,  all  the hobbits  were busy  making swords.
                                                                              
 The  illegible  words  might  just possibly  be interpreted  thus: 'Sackville-
 Baggins  [and]  his  friends  hurt  [the]  lands.  There  was war  between the
 four quarters.'                                                               
 Since  there  is here  a reference  to 'the  City of  Stone', while  my father
 said  in  1964 that  the  whole  idea of  Gondor arose  from the  reference to
 'Stone-Men'  in  a  note  dated  August 1939,  it would  have to  be concluded
 on a strict interpretation that this outline  comes from  that time  or later;
 on the other hand, the hero is still 'Bingo', so that this outline  would seem
 to  be  the  earlier. I  think, however,  that the  contradiction may  be only
 apparent, since in other notes dated  August 1939 my  father seems  still to
 have  been  hesitant about  the name  'Bingo', and  I would  therefore ascribe
 the outline just given to much the same time as the rest of these notes.      
 It  obviously  leaves  out  some  things  that  my  father  must  already have
 known  (more  or  less):  such  as  how  Gollum  reappeared.  But  it  is most
 remarkable to find here - when there is  no suggestion  of the  vast structure
 still to be built - that the corruption of the Shire, and the crucial presence
 of  Gollum  on  the Fiery  Mountain, were  very early  elements in  the whole.
                                                                              
 (8)  On  the  reverse  of  the page  bearing this  outline is  the following:
                                                                              
 'The  ring  is  destroyed,'  said  Bilbo,  'and  I   am  feeling   sleepy.  We
 must  say  goodbye,  Bingo  [written  above:  Frodo]  -  but  it  is   a  good
 place   to   say  goodbye,   in  the   House  of   Elrond,  where   memory  is
 long  and  kind.  I  am  leaving  the  book  of  my  small  deeds   here.  And
 I don't think I  shall go  to rest  till I  have written  down your  tale too.

 Elrond will keep it - no doubt after all hobbits have  gone their               
 ways into the past. Well, Bingo my lad, you and I were very small               
 creatures, but we've played our part. We've  played our  part. An               
 odd fate we have shared, to be sure.'                                           
                                                                                
          It seems then that at this time my father foresaw that Bilbo died in
 Rivendell.                                                                      
                                                                                
 (9)  There  is  one  further  page  dated 'August  1939', and  this is  of great
 interest. It is a series of pencilled notes like the others, and is headed 'Plot
 from XII on'.                                                                  
                                                                                
    Have to wait till Spring? Or have to go at once.                             
    They  go  south  along  the  Mountains.  Later or  early? Snowstorm  in the
    Red Pass. Journey down the R. Redway.                                        
   Adventure with Giant Tree Beard in Forest.                                    
   Mines of Moria. These again deserted - except for Goblins.                    
   Land of Ond. Siege of the City.                                               
   They draw near the borders of Mordor.                                         
   In  dark  Gollum  comes  up.  He  feigns  reform?   Or  tries   to  throttle
    Frodo?  -  but  Gollum  has  now  a  magic  ring  given  by  Lord   and  is
    invisible. Frodo dare not use his own.                                       
   Cavalcade of evil led by seven Black Riders.                                  
   See  Dark  Tower  on  the  horizon.  Horrible  feeling  of an  Eye searching
    for him.                                                                     
   Fiery Mountain.                                                               
   Eruption of Fiery Mountain causes destruction of Tower.                       
                                                                                
 A  pencilled  marginal  note   asks  whether   'Bingo'  (with   'Frodo'  written
 beside)  should  be  captured  by  the   Dark  Lord   and  questioned,   but  be
 saved 'by Sam?'.                                                                
   Subsequently  my  father  emended  these  notes  in  ink.  In the  first line,
 against 'Or have to  go at  once', he  wrote 'at once',  he directed  that 'Mines
 of   Moria...'   should   precede   'Adventure   with   Giant   Tree   Beard  in
 Forest'   and  come   between  'Snowstorm   in  the   Red  Pass'   and  'Journey
 down  the  R.  Redway',   and  after   'These  again   deserted  -   except  for
 Goblins' he added 'Loss of Gandalf'.                                            
   Some   features   of  this   outline  have   occurred  already;   the  feigned
 reform  of  Gollum,  his  attack  on  Frodo,  and  the  eruption  of  the  Fiery
 Mountain,  in  $7;  the  acquisition  of  a  ring  by  Gollum  in Mordor  in $1.
 But  we  meet  here  for the  first time  other major  ingredients in  the later
 work.  The  Ring  crosses  the  Misty  Mountains  by   'the  Red   Pass',  which
 will  survive  in  the  Redhorn  Pass,  or  Redhorn  Gate.  The  Mines  of Moria
 now  first  reappear  from The   Hobbit  -   at  any   rate  under   that  name:
 the  mention  in  Queries  and  Alterations  note  11 (p.  226) of  the colony
 founded  by  the  Dwarves  Balin,  Ori,  and  Oin   from  the   Lonely  Mountain
 in 'rich hills in  the South'  does not  show that  the identification  had been

  made.  The  actual  link  lay  no  doubt  in  Elrond's  words in  The Hobbit
  (Chapter III, 'A Short Rest'): 'I have heard that there are  still forgotten
  treasures to be found in the deserted caverns of the  mines of  Moria, since
  the  dwarf  and  goblin war',  and the  words here  'These again  deserted -
  except for Goblins',  taken with  those in  Queries and  Alterations (ibid.)
  'But after a time no word was  heard of  them', clearly  imply the  story in
  The Lard of the Rings. The land of the Stone-Men (see $6)  is the  'Land of
  Ond', and the 'City of Stone' ($7) will be besieged. Here also there  is the
  first  hint of  the story  of the  capture of  Frodo and  his rescue  by Sam
  Gamgee  from  the  tower  of  Cirith  Ungol;  and   most  notable   of  all,
  perhaps, the first mention of the Searching Eye in the Dark Tower.          
    These  are  references  to  narrative 'moments'  which my  father foresaw:
  they  do  not  constitute  an  articulated narrative  scheme. They  may very
  well not be in  the succession  that he  even then  perceived. Thus  in this
  outline  Gollum's  treachery  is brought  in long  before Frodo  reaches the
  Fiery Mountain, which in view of what  is said  in $7  can hardly  have been
  his meaning;  and the  Mines of  Moria are  named after  the passage  of the
  Misty  Mountains.  This  was corrected  later in  ink, but  it may  not have
  been his conception when  he wrote  these notes:  for in  none of  the (six)
  mentions of the Mines  of Moria  in The  Hobbit is  there any  suggestion of
  where they  were (cf.  his letter  to W.  H. Auden  in 1955: 'The  Mines of
  Moria had been a mere name', Letters no. 163).                              
                                                                             
 (10)  Something  must  be  said here  of 'Giant  Treebeard', for  he emerged
  into  a  scrap  of actual  narrative at  this time  (and had  been mentioned
  by  Gandalf  to  Frodo  in  Rivendell.  p.  363:  I  was  caught  in Fangorn
  and  spent  many  weary  days  as  a  prisoner  of  the  Giant  Treebeard').
  There exists a single sheet  of manuscript,  which began  as a  letter dated
  'July 27 - 29th 1939, but which my father covered on  both sides  with fine
  ornamental  script (one  side of  the sheet  is reproduced  opposite). Among
  the  writings  on  the  page  are  the  words  'July Summer  Diversions' and
  lines from Chaucer's Reeve 's Tale - for these 'Diversions' were a series of
  public  entertainments  held at  Oxford in  the course  of which  my father,
  attired as Chaucer,  recited that  Tale. But  the page  is chiefly  taken up
  with a text on which he afterwards pencilled Tree Beard.                    
                                                                             
    When   Frodo   heard  the   voice  he   looked  up,   but  he   could  see
  nothing  through  the  thick   entangled  branches.   Suddenly  he   felt  a
  quiver  in  the  gnarled  tree-trunk  against  which  he  was  leaning,  and
  before   he  could   spring  away   he  was   pushed,  or   kicked,  forward
  onto  his  knees.  Picking  himself  up  he  looked  at  the tree,  and even
  as  he  looked,  it  took  a  stride towards  him. He  scrambled out  of the
  way, and a deep rumbling chuckle came down out of the tree-top.             
    'Where are you,  little beetle?'  said the  voice. 'If  you don't  let me
  know  where  you  are,  you  can't  blame  me  for  treading  on   you.  And
  please, don't tickle my leg! '                                              

 The emergence of Treebeard.

   'I  can't  see  any  leg,'  said  Frodo.  'And  where are  you?''You must     
 be  blind,'  said  the  voice.  'I  am   here.'  'Who   are  you?'   'I  am     
 Treebeard,'   the   voice   answered.   'If   you   haven't  heard   of  me     
 before,   you   ought   to   have   done;   and  anyway   you  are   in  my     
 garden.'                                                                        
   'I  can't   see  any   garden,'  said   Frodo.  'Do   you  know   what  a     
 garden  looks  like?'  'I  have  one  of  my  own:  there  are  flowers and     
 plants  in it,  and a  fence round  it; but  there is  nothing of  the kind     
 here.'  '0  yes!  there  is.  Only  you  have  walked  through   the  fence     
 without  noticing  it;  and  you  can't  see  the  plants, because  you are     
 down underneath them by their roots.'                                           
   It  was  only  then  when  Frodo  looked  closer  that  he saw  that what     
 he  had  taken  for  smooth   tree-stems  were   the  stalks   of  gigantic     
 flowers  -  and  what  he  had  thought  was  the   stem  of   a  monstrous     
 oaktree  was  really  a thick  gnarled leg  with a  rootlike foot  and many     
 branching toes.                                                                 
                                                                                
   This is the first image of  Treebeard: seeming  in its  air to  come rather
 from the  old Hobbit  than the  new. Six  lines in  Elvish tengwar  are also
 written here, which transliterated read:                                        
                                                                                
   Fragment from The Lord of the Rings, sequel to The Hobbit.                    
   Frodo  meets  Giant  Treebeard  in  the  Forest  of  Neldoreth   while  seek-
   ing for his lost  companions: he  is deceived  by the  giant who  pretends to
   be friendly, but is really in league with the Enemy.                          
                                                                                
   The  forest  of  Neldoreth,  forming  the northern  part of  Doriath, had     
 appeared  in the  later Annals  of Beleriand  (V. 126,  148); the  name from
 the old legends (like that of Glorfindel, see p. 214) was to be re-used.        
   Six months earlier, in  a letter  of 2  February 1939,  my father  had said
 that  'though there  is no  dragon (so  far) there  is going  to be  a Giant'
 (Letters no.  35,  footnote  to  the  text).  If  my  suggested  analysis  of
 the  chronology  is  correct  (see  p.  309)  'Giant  Treebeard'  had already
 appeared,  as  Gandalf's  captor, at  the end  of the  third phase  (p. 363).
 (11) There remains  one further  text (extant  in two  versions) to  be given
 in this chapter; this  is the  story of  Peregrin Boffin  (see under  $$2, 3
 above). One form of it  is found  as part  of a  rather roughly  written two-
 page  manuscript  that  begins  as  a  new text  of 'A  Long-expected Party':
 very closely related to the sixth or third phase version of that chapter, but
 certainly following it. I  take it  up from  the point  'At ninety  he seemed
 much the same as ever' (FR p. 29).                                              
                                                                                
 At  ninety-nine they  began to  call him  well-preserved, though                 
 unchanged would have been nearer the mark.  Some were  heard to                 
 say that it was too much of a good  thing, this  combination of                 
 apparently perpetual youth with seemingly inexhaustible wealth.                 
                                                                                
                                                                                j

   'It will have  to be  paid for,'  they said.  'It isn't  natural, and
 trouble will come of it! '                                            
   But  trouble  had  not  yet  come,  and  Mr  Baggins   was  extremely
 generous  with  his  money,   so  most   people  (and   especially  the
 poorer  and  less  important  hobbits)  pardoned  his  oddities.  In  a
 way  the  inhabitants  of  Hobbiton  were  (secretly)  rather  proud of
 him:  the  wealth  that  he had  brought back  from his  travels became
 a  local  legend, and  it was  widely believed,  whatever the  old folk
 might  say, that  most of  the Hill  was full  of tunnels  stuffed with
 treasure.                                                             
   'He  may  be  peculiar,  but  he  does  no  harm,'  said  the younger
 folk. But not all  of his  more important  relatives agreed.  They were
 suspicious of his influence on their children, and especially  of their
 sons  meeting  Gandalf  at  his  house.  Their  suspicions   were  much
 increased by the unfortunate affair of Peregrin Boffin.               
   Peregrin  was  the  grandson  of   Bilbo's  mother's   second  sister
 Donnamira  Took.  He  was  a  mere  babe,  five  years old,  when Bilbo
 came  back from  his journey;  but he  grew up  a dark-haired  and (for
 a  hobbit)  lanky  lad,  very much  more of  a Took  than a  Boffin. He
 was  always  trotting  round  to  Hobbiton,  for  his  father,  Paladin
 Boffin,  lived  at  Northope,  only  a  mile  or  two behind  the Hill.
 When  Peregrin  began  to  talk  about   mountains  and   dwarves,  and
 forests  and  wolves,  Paladin  became  alarmed,  and  finally  forbade
 his son to go near Bag-end, and shut his door on Bilbo.               
   Bilbo took  this to  heart, for  he was  extremely fond  of Peregrin,
 but  he  did  nothing  to  encourage  him  to  visit  Bag-end secretly.
 Peregrin   then   ran   away   from  home   and  was   found  wandering
 about  half-starved  up  on  the moors  of the  Northfarthing. Finally,
 the  day  after  he came  of age  (in the  spring of  Bilbo's eightieth
 year)' he disappeared, and was  never found  in spite  of a  search all
 over the Shire.                                                       
   In  former  times  Gandalf  had  always  been  held  responsible  for
 the occasional regrettable accidents of  this kind;  but now  Bilbo got
 a large share  of the  blame, and  after Peregrin's  disappearance most
 of  his  younger  relations  were kept  away from  him. Though  in fact
 Bilbo  was  probably more  troubled by  the loss  of Peregrin  than all
 the Boffins put together.                                             
   He  had,  however,  other  young  friends,  who  for  one  reason  or
 another  were  not  kept  away  from  him.  His  favourite  soon became
 Frodo  Baggins,  grandson  of  Mirabella  the third  of the  Old Took's
 remarkable  daughters,  and  son  of  Drogo  (one  of   Bilbo's  second
 cousins).  Just  about  the  time  of  Peregrin's  disappearance  Frodo

 was left an orphan, when only a child of twelve, and so he had no                  
 anxious parents to keep him out of bad company. He lived with his                  
 uncle Rory Brandybuck, and his mother's hundred and one                            
 relatives in the Great Hole of Bucklebury: Brandy Hall.                            
                                                                                   
   Here  this  new  opening ends.  A slightly  shorter version  is found  as a      
 rider to the manuscript of  the third  phase version  itself: there  are some      
 differences of wording  but none  of substance.  Bilbo is  here said  to have      
 taken  the  delinquent  back to  Northope and  apologised to  Paladin Boffin,      
 when  Peregrin 'sneaked  round to  him secretly',  and Bilbo  'stoutly denied      
 having anything to do with the events.'                                            
   The village  of Northope  later became  Overhill, and  was so  corrected on      
 the second of these texts.' - Paladin  is already  fixed as  the name  of the      
 father of Peregrin: these Boffins are - as names - the origin of Paladin and      
 Peregrin   Took   in   LR.  Donnamira   Took,  second   of  the   Old  Took's      
 daughters, appears in the family tree of the Tooks given on p.  3 I  7, where      
 she  is  the  wife  of  Hugo  Boffin (as  in LR,  but there  without recorded      
 issue):  their son  was Jago  Boffin, and  his son  was Fosco,  Bilbo's first      
 cousin (once removed), who was  54 at  the time  of the  Party. In  the third   
 phase version of 'Ancient History' (p. 319) Jo  Button, who  saw the 'Tree-      
 men' beyond  the North  Moors, is  said to  have worked  for Fosco  Boffin of      
 Northope,  and this  is presumably  the same  person as  the Fosco  Boffin of      
 the  family  tree,  grandson  of  Donnamira.  In  this  case  Peregrin Boffin      
 (Trotter) - who was  64 at  the time  of the  Party (see  note g),  though of   
 course  he had  then long  since disappeared  from the  Shire -  has stepped      
 into Fosco's genealogical place, and his  father Paladin  into that  of Jago.      
 But  only  into  the  genealogical  place:  the Boffin  of Northope  for whom   
 Jo  Button  was  working  has  obviously  nothing  to  do  with  the renegade      
 Peregrin.                                                                          
   It  will  be  seen  that  in  this  account Frodo  and Trotter  were second      
 cousins, and both were first cousins once removed of Bilbo.(11)                    
                                                                                   
                                     NOTES.                                         
                                                                                   
 1. With 'unexpected party' for 'long-expected party' cf. p. 245, note 1.        
 2. Actually, the third and  fourth drafts  of the  first phase:  by 'original      
  draft  of  the  Tale'  my  father  meant  the   form  of   'A  Long-expected      
  Party'  as  it  stood  when  submitted  to  Allen  and  Unwin  (see  p. 40).      
 3. I do not understand the force of this sentence.                                 
 4. The reference to The Hobbit is to Chapter I 'An Unexpected Party',                
  a passage already cited (p. 224).                                                 
 5. the Rivers: the plural form is clear.                                             
 6. That Bilbo wore his 'elf-armour' under his cloak when he went is            
  said in $2; see pp. 371 - 2.                                                      
  This is the wording of the sixth (third phase) version, little changed        
  from that of the fifth (p. 239).                                                  
                                                                                   
                                                                                

  8.    Radagast  had   occurred  in   The  Hobbit:   in  Chapter   VII  'Queer
        Lodgings'  Gandalf  spoke  to  Beorn  of 'my  good cousin  Radagast who
        lives near the Southern borders of Mirkwood.'                          
  9.    Peregrin  Boffin  was  five  years  old  when  Bilbo returned  from his
        great  adventure.  The calculation  is: 51  to 79  ('the spring  of his
        eightieth year') =  28, plus  5 =  33 ('coming  of age').  According to
        this  story  Peregrin/Trotter  was  Sr  years  old  when Frodo  and his
        companions  met  him  at  Bree  (Bilbo  finally  departed  when  he was
        x r x; Peregrin/Trotter was then 64, and Frodo left the Shire  17 years
        later). As he said at Bree, 'I'm older now than I look' (pp. 153, 342);
        Aragorn was 87 when he said the same thing (FR p. 177).                
 10.    Northope  >  Overhill  also  on  p.  319. -  The name  Northope appears
        here on my father's original map of the Shire (p. 107, item I), but it
        was struck out  and replaced,  not by  Overhill, but  by The Yale. This
        is a convenient place to notice the history of  this name.  Long after,
        my father wrote in The Yale on the  Shire map  in a  copy of  the First
        Edition of FR,  placing it  south of  Whitfurrows in  the Eastfarthing,
        in such a way as to show that he intended a region, like  'The Marish',
        not a particular place of settlement  (the road  to Stock  runs through
        it); and at the same time, on the same  copy, he  expanded the  text in
        FR p. 86, introducing the  name: 'the  lowlands of  the Yale'  (for the
        reason  for  this change  of text,  which was  published in  the Second
        Edition,  see p.  66, note  10). The  Shire map  in the  Second Edition
        has The Yale added here, but in relation to a small black square, as if
        it  were  the  name  of a  farm or  small hamlet;  this must  have been
        a  misunderstanding.  I  cannot  explain  the  meaning  of   The  Yale.
        Northope  contains  a  place-name  element hope  that usually  means 'a
        small enclosed valley'.                                                
        My  father's  earlier  suggestion  concerning  Trotter  (p.  223)  also
        made him Bilbo's first cousin (Fosco Took).                            
