  THE STORY
  CONTINUED.

                                    XXIII.                                  
                            IN THE HOUSE OF ELROND.                         
                                                                           
 In the next stage of the work it is  difficult to  deduce the  chronology of
 composition, or  to relate  it to  important further  revisions made  to the
 'third  phase'  of  the  story  as  far as  Rivendell. Determination  of the
 chronology  depends  on  the  form  taken  by certain  key elements,  and if
 these happen to be absent certainty becomes impossible.                    
  At  any  rate,  after  'Bingo'  had  become  'Frodo'  my  father  continued
 Frodo's interrupted conversation with  Gloin at  the feast  in the  house of
 Elrond (see p. 369). This continuation is in two  forms, the  second closely
 following the first, and already in the first form the latter part  of 'Many
 Meetings' in FR is  quite closely  approached; but  there are  certain major
 differences. I give here the second form (in part).'                       
                                                                           
  'And what has become of Balin and Ori and Oin?' asked Frodo.             
  A shadow passed over Gloin's face. 'Balin took  to travelling             
 again,'  he  answered.  'You  may  have  heard  that  he  visited  Bilbo  in
 Hobbiton  many  years  ago:  well,  not  very  long   after  that   he  went
 away  for  two  or   three  years.   Then  he   returned  to   the  Mountain
 with   a   great   number   of   dwarves   that   he   discovered  wandering
 masterless  in  the  South  and  East.  He  wanted  Dain  to  go   back  to
 Moria  -  or  at  least  to allow  him to  found a  colony there  and reopen
 the  great  mines.   As  you   probably  know,   Moria  was   the  ancestral
 home  of  the  dwarves  of  the  race  of  Durin,  and  the  forefathers  of
 Thorin  and  Dain  dwelt  there,  until  they  were  driven  by  the  goblin
 invasions  far  into  the  North.   Now  Balin   reported  that   Moria  was
 again  wholly  deserted,  since  the great  defeat of  the goblins,  but the
 mines  were  still  rich,  especially in  silver. Dain  was not  willing to
 leave  the  Mountain  and  the  tomb  of  Thorin,   but  he   allowed  Balin
 to  go,  and  he  took  with  him  many  of  the  folk  of  the  Mountain as
 well  as  his  own  following;  and  Ori  and  Oin   went  with   him.  For
 many   years  things   went  well,   and  the   colony  throve;   there  was
 traffic   once   more   between   Moria   and   the   Mountain,   and   many
 gifts   of   silver   were  sent   to  Dain.   Then  fortune   changed.  Our
 messengers   were   attacked   and   robbed   by   cruel   Men,  well-armed.
 No   messengers  came   from  Moria;   but  rumour   reached  us   that  the
 mines  and  dwarf-city  were  again   deserted.  For   long  we   could  not
 learn  what  had  become  of  Balin  and  his  people  -  but  now  we  have

 news,  and  it  is  evil. It  is to  tell these  tidings and  to ask  for the
 counsel  of  -  of  those  that  dwell  in  Rivendell that  I have  come. But
 to-night let us speak of merrier things! '                                   
                                                                             
   At  the head  of the  page my  father wrote  the words  that stand  in this
 place in FR  (p. 241):  '"We do  not know,"  he answered.  "It is  largely on
 his account that I have come to ask for the counsel of - of those  that dwell
 in Rivendell. But for to-night let us speak  of merrier  things."' In  FR the
 story  of  Balin  was  taken  up  into  'The Council  of Elrond'  and greatly
 enlarged.                                                                    
   Gloin's  account  of  the  works  of  the  Dwarves  in  Dale and  under the
 Lonely Mountain (FR pp.  241 -  2) is  present in  the old  version.(3) At the
 end,  when Gloin  said: 'You  were very  fond of  Bilbo, weren't  you?' Frodo
 replied  simply  'Yes',  and  then  'they  went  on  to  talk  about  the old
 adventures  of  Bilbo  with  the   dwarves,  in   Mirkwood,  and   among  the
 Wood-elves, and in the caverns of the Mountain.'                             
   The  entrance  into the  Hall of  Fire, and  the discovery  and recognition
 of Bilbo, are already  very close  to FR  (for early  references to  Bilbo at
 Rivendell see pp. 126, 225). The Hall of  Fire is  said in  both texts  to be
 nearly as large as the 'Hall of Feasting' or 'Great Hall', in the second this
 hall  'appeared  to  have  no  windows'; and  in both  there were  many fires
 burning: Bilbo  sat beside  the furthest,  with his  cup and  bread on  a low
 table beside him (in FR there were no tables).                               
   Bilbo says  'I shall  have to  get that  fellow Peregrin  to help  me' (cf.
 p. 369) and  Elrond replies  that he  will have  Ethelion (4) found  (in Chapter
 XI  of  the  'third  phase'  Glorfindel  calls  Trotter  Du-finnion,  p. 361).
 'Messengers were sent to find Bilbo's friend. It  was said  that he  had been
 in the kitchens, for his help was as  much esteemed  by the  cooks as  by the
 poets.' It had been said in the  earlier part  of the  chapter (p.  365) that
 Frodo  could not  see Trotter  at the  feast, and  his absence  survived into
 FR (p. 243), but with a very different reason for it.                        
   Whatever  Bilbo  may have  had to  say of  himself is  not reported  in the
 original story. The entire passage (FR pp. 243 - 4) in  which Bilbo  tells of
 his journey to Dale, of his life in Rivendell, and his interest in the Ring -
 and the distressing incident when he asks to see it - is absent.             
                                                                             
 They were so deep in the  doings of  the Shire  that they  did not           
 notice the arrival of another hobbit. For several minutes he stood           
 by them, looking at them with  a smile.  Suddenly they  looked up.           
 'Ah, there you are, Peregrin!' said Bilbo. 'Trotter!' said Frodo.            
   'Both right! ' laughed Trotter.                                            
   'Well, that is tiresome of Gandalf! '  exclaimed Frodo.  'I knew           
 you reminded me of some  one, and  he laughed  at me.(5) Of course,           
 you remind me of yourself,  and of  Folco, and  of all  the Tooks.           
 You  came once  to Buckland  when I  was very  small, but  I never           

 quite  forgot  it,  because  you  talked  to  Old  Rory about  lands outside
 the  Shire,  and  about  Bilbo  who  you  were  not allowed  to see.  I have
 wondered  what  became  of   you.  But   I  was   puzzled  by   your  shoes.
 Why do you wear them? '                                                     
   'I shall not tell you the reason now,' said Trotter quietly.              
   'No,   Frodo,   don't   ask   that  yet,'   said  Bilbo,   looking  rather
 unhappy.  'Come  on,  Perry!   I  want   your  help.   This  song   of  mine
 has got to be finished this evening.'                                       
                                                                            
   At this point, while in the middle of writing the  second text,  my father
 wrote across it: '?? Trotter  had better  not be  a hobbit  - but  a Ranger,
 remainder  of  Western  Men,  as  originally  planned.'  Of  course, looking
 back over the texts from Trotter's first appearance, there is no possibility
 that  my  father had  'originally planned'  to make  Trotter anything  but a
 hobbit. The first suggestion that  he might  not be  appears in  Queries and
 Alterations (p. 223, $6). But by  'originally planned'  my father  may well
 have been thinking no further back  than to  the drafts  for the  opening of
 the 'Bree' chapter in  the third  phase (p.  331), where  the idea  that the
 Rangers  were  Men,  'the  last  remnant  of the  kingly people  from beyond
 the Seas', first emerged, though this  was not  taken up  in the  chapter as
 actually written at that time.  It may  be that  he had  felt for  some time
 that Trotter should not be a hobbit, but (as  he said  of the  name 'Bingo',
 p. 221) he was now too used to the idea to change it. Even now, he did not
 follow up his directive, and Trotter remains Peregrin Boffin.               
   As in FR, Frodo  sits alone  and falls  asleep during  the music;  but the
 song  Earendil  was  a  mariner  is  not  present  (though the  word '? Mes-
 senger' written at the top of the page is a hint of it).(6)                 
                                                                            
   He  woke  to  the  sound  of  ringing  laughter.   There  was   no  longer
 any  music,  but  on  the  edge  of  his  waking  sense  was  the echo  of a
 voice  that  had  just  stopped  singing.  He  looked,  and  saw  that Bilbo
 was  seated  on  his  stool,  set  now  near  to  the  middle  fire,  in the
 centre of a circle of listeners.                                            
   'Come  now,  tell  us,  Bilbo!'  said  one  of the  Elves, 'which  is the
 line which Peregrin put in?'                                               
   'No!  '  laughed  Bilbo.  'I  leave you  to guess  - you  pride yourselves
 on your judgement of words.'                                                
   'But  it  is  difficult  to  discriminate   between  two   hobbits,'  they
 laughed.                                                                    
   'Nonsense!'   said   Bilbo.   'But   I   won't   argue  the   matter.  I'm
 sleepy,  after  so  much  sound  and  song!'  He  got   up  and   bowed  and
 came back beside Frodo.                                                     
   'Well, that's that,'  he said.  'It went  off better  than I  expected. As
 a matter of fact, quite a lot of it was Peregrin's.'                        

   'I  am  sorry  I  did  not  hear  it,'  said  Frodo.  'I heard  the Elves
 laughing as I woke up.'                                                    
   'Never mind,'  said Bilbo.  'You'll hear  it again,  very likely.  Just a
 lot  of  nonsense,  anyway.  But  it  is  difficult  to  keep  awake  here,
 until  you  get  used  to it  - not  that hobbits  ever acquire  the Elves'
 appetite  for  song  and  poetry  and  tales  of  all  sorts. They  will be
 going on for a long while yet.                                             
                                                                           
   The  words  of  the  chant  to  Elbereth (identical  in both  texts) are
 different from the form in FR:                                             
                                                                           
               Elbereth Gilthoniel sir evrin pennar oriel                   
               dir avos-eithen miriel                                       
               bel daurion sel aurinon                                      
               pennaros evrin eriol.                                        
                                                                           
 The  sweet  syllables  fell  like   clear  jewels   of  mingled   word  and
 sound, and he halted for a moment looking back.                            
   'That  is  the  opening  of  the  chant to  Elbereth,' said  Bilbo. 'They
 will  sing  that  and  other  songs  of  the   Blessed  Realm   many  times
 tonight.'                                                                  
   Bilbo  led  Frodo  back  to  his  upper  room.  There  they sat  for some
 while,  looking  at  the  bright  stars  through  the  window,  and talking
 softly.  They  spoke  no  longer  of  the  small  and  happy  news  of  the
 Shire  far  away,  but  of  the  Elves,  and  of  the  wide world,  and its
 perils, and of the burden and mystery of the Ring.                         
                                                                           
   When  Sam  came  to the  door (at  the end  of the  chapter in  FR) Bilbo
 said:                                                                      
                                                                           
   'Quite right, Sam! Though I never expected to live long enough           
 to be ordered about by  Ham Gamgee's  boy. Bless  me, I  am near           
 150 and old enough to be your great-grandfather.'                         
   'No sir, and I never expected to be doing it.'                           
   'It is Gandalf's fault,  said Frodo.  'He chose  Sam to  be my           
 companion in adventure, and Sam takes his task seriously.'                 
                                                                           
   This was replaced at the time of writing by the ending  in FR.  Bilbo was
 in fact 128.                                                              
                                                                           
   Both  texts  continue  on  briefly  into  what  became  'The  Council  of
 Elrond' in FR (the title that my father had given to the 'third phase' text
 Chapter  XII,  p.  362,   afterwards  called   'Many  Meetings',   when  he
 anticipated  that  it  would  contain  the  Council  as  well as  the 'many
 meetings' that preceded it).                                               

         Frodo awoke early next day, feeling refreshed and well. Sam
  brought him breakfast, and would not allow him to get up till he
  had eaten it. Then Bilbo  and Gandalf  carne and  talked for  a while.
  Suddenly a single bell rang out. [All the remainder of the text from
  this point was struck out; see p. 399.]                             
    'Bless me! ' said Gandalf. 'The council is in half an hour. That is
  the warning. I must be off.  Bilbo will  bring you  to the  place, as
  soon as you are ready. Sam had better come with you.'                
                                                                      
         The council was held in a high glade among the trees on the
 valley-side far above the house. A falling stream ran at the side of
     : the meeting place, and with the trickling and bubbling of the
        water was mingled the sound of many birds. There were twelve
 ?seats of carved stone in a wide circle; and  behind them  many other
 :- smaller seats  of wood.  The ground  was strewn  with many  red and
 yellow  leaves, but  the trees  above were  still clothed  with fading
 green;  a clear  sky of  pale blue  hung high  above, filled  with the
  light of morning.                                                  
    When  Bilbo,  Frodo  and  Sam arrived  Elrond was  already seated,
  and  beside  him,  as  at  the feast,  were Gandalf  and Glorfindel.
  Gloin  was  there  also  with  [an  attendant  >]  a  younger dwarf,
  whom  Frodo later  discovered was  Burin son  of Balin.'  A strange
  elf,  a  messenger  from  the  king   of  the   Wood-elves...  Eastern
  Mirkwood  was  seated  beside  Burin.  Trotter  (as   Frodo  continued
  to call him  instead of  Peregrin or  the Elvish  equivalent Ethelion)
  was there, and all the  rest of  the hobbit  party, Merry,  Folco, and
  Odo.  There  were  besides  three   other  counsellors   attendant  on
  Elrond,  one  an  Elf  named  Erestor,  and   two  other   kinsmen  of
  Elrond,  of   that  half-elvish   folk  whom   the  Elves   named  the
  children  of  Luthien.(9) And  seated  alone  and silent  was a  Man of
  noble face, but dark and sad.                                        
    'This  is  Boromir,'  said  Elrond. 'He  arrived only  yesterday, in
  the evening. He  comes from  far away  in the  South, and  his tidings
  may be of use to us.'                                                
                                                                      
    It would take long to tell of all that was  spoken in  that council
 under the fair trees of  Rivendell. The  sun climbed  to noon  and was
 turning  westward  before  all  the   tidings  were   recounted.  Then
 Elves  brought  food and  drink for  the company.  The sun  had fallen
 low and its slanting light was  red in  the valley  before an  end was
 made  of the  debate and  they rose  and returned  down the  long path
 to the house.                                                         

    Both texts end at this  point. At  the end  of the  second my  father wrote:
  '(The  Council  must  be  behind closed  doors. Frodo  invited to  presence of
  Elrond. Tidings of the world. They decide Ring must be destroyed.)'           
    While  Trotter  is  Peregrin  Boffin,  and  the  long-awaited  'recognition'
  between  Trotter  and  Frodo takes  place, Odo  is still  present: but  in the
  papers  dated   August  1939,   where  the   identification  of   Trotter  with
  Peregrin  Boffin  first  appears,   Odo  appears   to  be   emphatically  aban-
  doned.  Once  again,  Odo  seems  to  have  proved  unsinkable,  even  though,
  as discussed on  p. 375,  Folco had  effectively assumed  his character.  - Of
  course,  these  'Rivendell'  manuscripts  may  very  well  belong to  the same
  time,  and  a  step-by-step reconstruction  cannot be  expected. In  any case,
  the  removal  of  Odo   and  (much   more)  the   identity  of   Trotter  were
  questions  long  revolved,  and such  notes as  'Trotter had  better not  be a
  hobbit'  or 'Odo  must be  cut out'  are rather  the traces  of a  long debate
  than a series of clear-cut, successive decisions.                             
    The  text  just given  was continued  in a  further manuscript  of different
  form,  in  which  appears  the  first  complete  version  of  the  Council  of
  Elrond; but  before going  on to  this, two  sides of  a single  isolated page
  seem  undoubtedly  to  represent  my  father's first  expressed ideas  for the
  Council.  It  was  written  in  pencil  so faint  and rapid  that it  would be
  largely  illegible  had my  father not  gone over  it in  ink; and  he himself
  could  not  be  sure  in  places  of  what  he  had written,  but had  to make
  guesses  at   words,  marking   them  with   queries.  In   representing  this
  extraordinarily interesting text I give these guessed words  of his  in italic
  within brackets. At the head of  the page  is an  isolated direction  that the
  'Weathertop  business'  must  be  'simplified'.  It  would  be  interesting to
  know what he had  in mind:  the only  'complication' that  was, in  the event,
  removed was the  disappearance of  Odo, and  it may  be that  this is  what he
  was referring to. It is clear from the first line of this text that the 'third
  phase' story of Odo was present.                                              
                                                                               
    Ring Wraiths. They will get (no P new?) horses (in time ?). Odo's          
  capturing explained.                                                          
    Ring offered to Elrond. He refuses. 'It is a peril to  all posses-          
  sors: more to myself than all others.  It is  fate that  the hobbits          
  should rid the world of it.'                                                  
    'What will then become of the other rings?' 'They will  lose their          
  power. But  we must  sacrifice that  power in  order to  destroy the          
  Lord. As long as anyone  in the  world holds  the Ruling  Ring there          
  is a chance for him to get it back  again. Two  things can  be done.          
  We can send it West, or we can destroy it.  If we  had sent  it West          
  long ago that  would have  been well  enough. But  now the  power of          
  the Lord is grown too great, and he is fully awake. It would  be too          

                                                                      
 perilous - and his war would come over the Shire and destroy the
 Havens.'(10) [In the margin is written Radagast.]
   They decide that the Ring must be taken to the Fiery Mountain.
 How? - it can hardly be reached except by passing over the
 borders of the Land of Mordor. Bilbo? No - 'It would kill me now.
 My years are stretched, and I shall live some time yet. But I have
 no longer strength for the Ring.'
   Frodo volunteers to go.
   Who shall go with him? Gandalf. Trotter. Sam. Odo. Folco.
 Merry. (7) Glorfindel and Frar [written beneath: Burin] son
 of Balin.
   South along mountains. Over the Red Pass down the Red way to
 the Great River.
   'Beware!' said Gandalf 'of the Giant Treebeard, who haunts
 the Forest between the River and the South Mts.' Fangorn?
   After a time of rest they set out. Bilbo bids farewell; gives him
 Sting and his armour. The others are armed.
   Snow storm.
   The reverse of the page, while not continuous with the first side, was
 certainly written at the same time, and is again in ink over faint pencil:
                                                                          
   First he was asked to give as complete an account of the journey
 as possible. The story of their dealings with Tom Bombadil
 seemed to interest Elrond and Gandalf most.
   Much that was said was now known already to Frodo. Gandalf
 spoke long, making clear to all the history of the Ring, and the
 reason why the Dark Lord so greatly desired it. 'For not only does
 he desire to discover and control the lost rings, those of the Elves
 and dwarves - but without the Ring he is still shorn of much
 power. He put into that Ring much of his own power, and without
 it is weaker than of old [and obliged to lean more on servants]. Of
 old he could guess or half see what were the hidden purposes of the
 Elflords, but now he is blind as far as they are concerned. He
 cannot make rings until he has regained the master ring. And also
 his mind is moved by revenge and hatred of the Elves and Men
 that (disputed him?).
   'Now is the time for true speaking. Tell me, Elrond, if the Three
 Rings still are? And tell me, Gloin, if you know it, whether any of
 the Seven remain?'
    'Yes, the Three still are,' said Elrond, 'and it would be ill indeed
 if Sauron should discover where they be, or have power over their

 rulers;  for  then  perhaps  his  shadow  would   stretch  even   to  the
 Blessed Realm.'                                                          
   'Yes!  Some  of  the  Seven  remain,'  said  Gloin.  'I  do   not  know
 whether  I  have  the  right to  reveal this,  for Dain  did not  give me
 orders  concerning  it.  But  Thrain  of  old  had  one   that  descended
 from  his  sires.  We  do  not  now  know where  it is.  We think  it was
 taken  from  him,  ere  you  found  him  in  the  dungeons  long  ago [or
 maybe  it  was  lost  in  Moria].' Yet  of late  we have  received secret
 messages  from  Mordor   demanding  all   such  rings   as  we   have  or
 know of. But there are  others still  in our  power. Dain  has one  - and
 on that his  fortune is  founded: his  age, his  wealth, and  (....... ?)
 future.  Yet  of  late  we  have  received  secret  messages  from Mordor
 bidding  us yield  up the  rings to  the Master,  and threatening  us and
 all our allies of Dale with war.(13) It is on  this account  that I  am now
 come  to  Rivendell.  For  the  messages  have  asked   often  concerning
 one  Bilbo,  and  offered  us  peace   if  we   would  obtain   from  him
 (willing or  unwilling) his  ring. That  they said  they would  accept in
 lieu  of all.  I now  understand why.  But our  hearts are  troubled, for
 we  guess  that  King Brand's  heart is  afraid, and  that the  Dark Lord
 will  (move?)  eastern  men  to  some  evil.  Already  there is  war upon
 the  (southern?)  borders.  And  (of  course  that  matter   whereof?)  I
 seek  counsel,  the  disappearance  of  Balin  and  his  people,  is  now
 (revealed?) as part of the same evil.'                                   
   Boromir  the  (lord?  Land?)  of  Ond.  These   men  are   besieged  by
 wild  men  out  of the  East. They  send to  the (F..... ?) of  Balin of
 Moria. He promised assistance.                                           
                                                                         
   Here this text ends. Against the passage beginning  '"Yes! Some  of the
 Seven  remain,"  said  Gloin'  my  father  wrote:  'No!  This won't  do -
 otherwise the dwarves would have been more suspicious of Bilbo.'         
   In this text, again, there is an apparent contradiction of  the 'August
 1939 papers:  Bilbo gives  his mailcoat  to Frodo  at Rivendell,  and had
 therefore taken it with him when he  left Bag  End -  a story  that first
 appears under the  date August  1939' (p.  371, $2),  whereas it  is also
 proposed  there  that  the  'Odo-story' be  abandoned -  a story  that is
 expressly present here. - The Fellowship of the Ring is to consist of five
 'Shire  hobbits',  Frodo,  Sam,  Merry,  Folco,  and  Odo,  with Trotter,
 Gandalf, Glorfindel, and the dwarf Frar (> Burin).                       
   Whatever the relative age of these texts, and they can scarcely  be far
 apart, there have now appeared the  younger Dwarf,  Balin's son,  who had
 come with Gloin -  precursor of  Gimli Gloin's  son in  LR; the  Elf from
 Mirkwood,  precursor  of  Legolas;  Erestor,  counsellor  of  Elrond; two
 kinsmen  of  Elrond;  and  Boromir  -  so  named unhesitatingly  from the
 start (14) - from the  Land of  Ond far  in the  South. The  Land of Ond is

  named  in  an  outline dated  August 1939  (p. 381).  Treebeard is  no longer
  placed in 'the  Forest of  Neldoreth' (p.  384), but  in 'the  Forest between
  the  [Great]  River  and  the  South Mountains'  - the  first mention  of the
  mountains  that   would  afterwards   be  Ered   Nimrais,  the   White  Moun-
  tains;  and Gandalf  warns against  him (as  well he  might, having  been his
  captive, 'in Fangorn', p. 363).                                              
    The  passage  concerning  the  Three  Rings  of  the  Elves  and  the Seven
  Rings of the Dwarves is  to be  compared with  a passage  in the  third phase
  version of 'Ancient History', p.  320, where  Gandalf says  that he  does not
  know  what  has  become  of 'the  Three Rings  of Earth,  Sea, and  Sky', but
  believes that 'they have long been carried far  over the  Great Sea'  - which
  is to be associated no doubt  with Elrond's  words in  the present  text: 'it
  would  be  ill  indeed  if  Sauron  should  discover where  they be,  or have
  power  over  their rulers;  for then  perhaps his  shadow would  stretch even
  to  the  Blessed Realm.'  In the  same passage  of 'Ancient  History' Gandalf
  says that  'the foundation  of each  of the  Seven Hoards  of the  dwarves of
  old was a golden ring', and that it is said that all the Seven Rings perished
  in the fire of the dragons: 'Yet that account, maybe, is not wholly true.'
    With  the  menacing  messages  to  King  Dain  out  of  Mordor   here  cf.
  Queries and Alterations (p. 226, $ 11 ): 'The  dwarves might  have received
  threatening  messages  from  Mordor  - for  the Lord  suspected that  the One
  Ring was in their hoards.' In the same note it is said that 'after a  time no
  word  was  heard  of  them  [Balin  and  his  companions].  Dain  feared  the
  Dark Lord'; so  also Gloin  says here  that 'the  disappearance of  Balin and
  his people is now revealed as part of the same evil.' At this time  the story
  was  that  Sauron  demanded  the  return  of  the  Rings  which  the  Dwarves
  still possessed - or Bilbo's Ring 'in lieu of all'; in FR (p. 254)  they were
  offered the  return of  three of  the ancient  Rings of  the Dwarves  if they
  could obtain Bilbo's Ring.                                                   
    The  reference  to  Thrain,  father  of  Thorin  Oakenshield,  in  the dun-
  geons  of  the  Necromancer,  where  Gandalf  found  him,  goes  back  to The
  Hobbit  (Chapter  I);  but  the  story  emerges  here  that he  possessed one
  of  the  Rings  of  the  Dwarves,  and  that  it  was  taken  from  him after
  his  capture  (see  FR pp.  281 -  2, and  LR Appendix  A III,  pp. 353  - 4,
  357 - 8).                                                                    
                                                                              
    The  'Many  Meetings'  text  (extant  in two  forms) given  on pp.  391 ff.
  continued into the beginning of  an account  of the  Council of  Elrond, held
  in the open  in a  glade above  the house;  but from  the words  '"Bless me!"
  said Gandalf. "The council is in  half an  hour"' (p.  395) my  father struck
  it through, and added the note at  the end  saying that  the Council  must be
  held  'behind  closed  doors'  (p.  396).  A   new  manuscript   now  begins,
  taking up  at '"Bless  me!" said  Gandalf', and  in this  is found  the first
  complete  narrative of  the deliberations  of the  Council. This  was origin-
  ally  paginated  'XII'  with  page-numbers   consecutive  from   'Suddenly  a
  single bell rang out' (p. 395). As noticed  before, my  father at  this stage

  saw all the meetings and discussions at Rivendell as constituting a single
  chapter,  and  had  given  the  number  and  title  'XII.  The  Council of
  Elrond' to the third phase chapter which  begins with  Frodo waking  up at
  Rivendell (p. 362).                                                       
    The manuscript is partly in ink and  partly in  pencil, but  though very
  rough is legible throughout. Being in the first stage of composition it is
  full of alterations, phrases or whole passages constantly rewritten in the
  act of composition;  and many  other corrections,  made to  passages which
  at the time of writing had been allowed to stand, are probably pretty well
  contemporary. In general I give the text in its final form, but  with more
  important changes indicated.                                              
                                                                           
    'Bless  me!'  said  Gandalf.  'That   is  the   warning  bell   for  the
  council. We had better make our way there at once.'                       
    Bilbo   and   Frodo   (and   Sam   [added:   uninvited])   followed  him
  down  many  stairs  and  passages   towards  the   western  wing   of  the
  house,  until  they  came  to  the  porch  where   Frodo  had   found  his
  friends  the  evening  before.  But  now  the  light  of  a  clear  autumn
  morning  was  glowing  in  the  valley.   The  sky   was  high   and  cool
  above  the hill-tops;  and in  the bright  air below  a few  golden leaves
  were  fluttering  from  the  trees.  The  noise  of  bubbling  waters came
  up  from  the  foaming  river-bed.  Birds  were   singing  and   a  whole-
  some  peace  lay  on  the  land,  and  to Frodo  his dangerous  flight and
  the   rumours  of   the  dark   shadow  growing   in  the   world  outside
  seemed now only like memories of a troubled dream.                        
    But  the  faces  that  were  turned  to  meet  him  were  grave.' Elrond
  was  there  and  several  others   were  already   seated  about   him  in
  silence.  Frodo  saw  Glorfindel  and  Gloin,  and  Trotter (sitting  in a
  corner).                                                                  
    Elrond  welcomed  Frodo  and  drew  him  to  a  seat  at  his  knee  and
  presented  him  to  the  company,   saying:  'Here   my  friends   is  the
  hobbit   who   by   fortune   and   courage  has   brought  the   Ring  to
  Rivendell.  This  is  Frodo  son  of  Drogo.'  He  then  pointed  out  and
  named   those   whom   Frodo   had   not   seen   before.   There   was  a
  younger  dwarf  at  Gloin's  side,  [Burin  the  son of  Balin )]  his son
  Gimli.(16) There  were  three  counsellors   of  Elrond's   own  household:
  Erestor  his  kinsman  (a  man   of  the   same  half-elvish   folk  known
  as  the  children  of  Luthien),  "  and  beside   him  two   elflords  of
  Rivendell.   There  was   a  strange   elf  clad   in  green   and  brown,
  Galdor,  a  messenger  from  the  King  of   the  Wood-elves   in  Eastern
  Mirkwood.(18) And  seated  a little  apart was  a tall  man of  noble face,
  but dark and sad.                                                         
    'Here,'  said  Elrond,  turning  to  Gandalf,   'is  Boromir   from  the

 Land of Ond, far in the South. He arrived in  the night,  and brings
 tidings that must be considered.'                                   
                                                                    
   It would take  long to  tell of  all the  things that  were spoken
 in  that  council.  Many  of  them  were  known  already  to  Frodo.
 Gandalf  spoke  long,  making  clear  to those  who did  not already
 know  the tale  in full  the ancient  history of  the Ring,  and the
 reasons why the Dark  Lord so  greatly desired  it. Bilbo  then gave
 an account  of the  finding of  the Ring  in the  cave of  the Misty
 Mountains,  and  Trotter  described  his search  for Gollum  that he
 had made with Gandalf's help,  and told  of his  perilous adventures
 in  Mordor.  Thus  it  was  that  Frodo  learned  how   Trotter  had
 tracked   Gollum   as  he   wandered  southwards,   through  Fangorn
 Forest,  and  past  the Dead  Marshes,(19) until  he had  himself been
 caught and  imprisoned by  the Dark  Lord. 'Ever  since I  have worn
 shoes,' said  Trotter with  a shudder,  and though  he said  no more
 Frodo  knew that  he had  been tortured  and his  feet hurt  in some
 way. But he had been rescued by Gandalf and saved from death.(20)      
   In  this  way  the  tale  was  brought slowly  down to  the spring
 morning  when  Gandalf  had  revealed  the history  of the  Ring to
 Frodo.  Then  Frodo  was  summoned  to  take  up  the  tale,  and he
 gave a full account of  all his  adventures from  the moment  of his
 flight  from  Hobbiton.  Step  by  step  they  questioned  him,  and
 every  detail that  he could  tell concerning  the Black  Riders was
 examined.(21)                                                       
   Elrond was also deeply interested in the events in the  Old Forest
 and  on  the  Barrow-downs.  'The  Barrow-wights  I  knew   of,'  he
 said, 'for they are closely akin to the Riders; and I marvel at your
 escape  from  them.  But  never  before  have I  heard tell  of this
 strange  Bombadil.  I  would  like  to  know  more  of him.  Did you
 know of him, Gandalf?'                                              
   'Yes,' answered  the wizard.  'And I  sought him  out at  once, as
 soon  as I  found that  the hobbits  had disappeared  from Buckland.
 When  I  had chased  the Riders  from Crickhollow  I turned  back to
 visit him. I daresay he would have kept the travellers longer in his
 home, if he had known that I was near. But I am not  sure of  it: he
 is a strange creature, and follows his own  counsels, which  few can
 fathom.'(23)                                                        
   'Could  we  not  even  now  send  messages to  him and  obtain his
 help?' asked Erestor. 'It seems that he  has a  power even  over the
 Ring.'                                                              
   'That is not quite the way of it,' said Gandalf. 'The Ring  has no

 power over him or for him: it can neither  harm nor  serve him:  he is
 his own  master. But  he has  no power  over it,  and he  cannot alter
 the Ring itself, not break  its power  over others.  And I  think that
 the  mastery  of  Tom  Bombadil  is  seen  only  on  his own  ground -
 from which he has never stepped within my memory.'(24)              
   'But  on  his  own  ground  nothing  seems  to  dismay   him,'  said
 Erestor. 'Would he not perhaps  take the  Ring and  keep it  there for
 ever harmless?'                                                      
   'He would, perhaps, if all  the free  folk of  the world  begged him
 to do so,' said Gandalf. 'But  he would  not do  so willingly.  For it
 would  only  postpone  the  evil  day. In  time the  Lord of  the Ring
 would  find out  its hiding-place,  and in  the end  he would  come in
 person.(25) I  doubt   whether   Tom   Bombadil,   even  on   his  own
 ground,  could  withstand that  power; but  I am  sure that  we should
 not leave  him to  face it.  Besides, he  lives too  far away  and the
 Ring  has  come  from his  land only  at great  hazard. It  would have
 to  pass  through  greater  danger  to  return.  If  the  Ring  is  to
 be hidden - surely it is  here in  Rivendell that  it should  be kept:
 if  Elrond has  might to  withstand the  coming of  Sauron in  all his
 power?'                                                             
   'I have not,' said Elrond.                                         
   'In that case,' said Erestor,(26) 'there are but two  things for  us to
 attempt:  we  may  send  the Ring  West over  the Sea,  or we  may try
 to destroy it. If the Ring had gone to  the West  long ago  that would
 have  perhaps  been  well.  But  now the  power of  the Lord  is grown
 great again, and he  is awake,  and he  knows where  the Ring  is. The
 journey to the Havens  would be  fraught with  the greatest  peril. On
 the other hand  we cannot  by our  own skill  or strength  destroy the
 Ring;  and  the  journey  to  the  Fiery  Mountain  would  seem  still
 more  perilous,  leading  as  it  does towards  the stronghold  of the
 Enemy. Who can read this riddle for us?'                             
   'None  here can  do so,'  said Elrond  gravely.(27) 'None  can foretell
 which  road  leads to  safety, if  that is  what you  mean. But  I can
 choose which road it is right to take, as it seems to me -  and indeed
 the choice is clear. The Ring must be sent to the  Fire. The  peril is
 greater on the western road; for my heart  tells me  that is  the road
 which  Sauron  will  expect  us  to  take  when  he  hears   what  has
 befallen. And if  we take  it he  will pursue  us swiftly  and surely,
 since  we  must  make  for  the  Havens  beyond  the Towers.  Those he
 would certainly  destroy, even  if he  found us  not, and  there would
 be  thereafter  no  way  of escape  for the  Elves from  the darkening
 world.'                                                              

   'And  the  Shire  too  would be  destroyed,' said  Trotter in  a low
 voice, looking towards Bilbo and Frodo.                              
   'But on  the other  road,' said  Elrond, 'with  speed and  skill the
 travellers might go far unmarked.  I do  not say  there is  great hope
 in  the  quest;  but  only  in  this  way  could  any lasting  good be
 achieved.  In  the  Ring  is  hidden  much  of  the  ancient  power  of
 Sauron. Even though he does  not hold  it that  power still  lives and
 works for  him and  towards him.  As long  as the  Ring lives  on land
 or sea he will not be  overcome. While  the Ring  lasts he  will grow,
 and have hope, and the fear  lest the  Ring come  into his  hand again
 will ever weigh on the  world. War  will never  cease while  that fear
 lives, and all Men will be turned to him.'                           
   'I  do not  understand this,'  said Boromir.  'Why should  the Elves
 and  their friends  not use  the Great  Ring to  defeat Sauron?  And I
 say  that  all  men  will  not  join him:  the men  of Ond  will never
 submit.'                                                             
   'Never  is  a  long  word,  O  Boromir,'  said  Elrond. 'The  men of
 Ond are valiant and still  faithful amid  a host  of foes;  but valour
 alone  cannot  withstand  Sauron for  ever. Many  of his  servants are
 as valiant. But as for the Ruling Ring - it belongs  to Sauron  and is
 filled with his  spirit. Its  might is  too great  for those  of lesser
 strength,  as  Bilbo  and Frodo  have found,  and in  the end  it must
 lead them captive to him if  they keep  it. For  those who  have power
 of  their own,  its danger  is far  greater. With  it they  might per-
 chance  overthrow  the  Dark  Lord,  but  they  would  set  themselves
 in his throne. Then they would  become as  evil as  he, or  worse. For
 nothing  is evil  in the  beginning. Even  Sauron was  not so.  I dare
 not take the Ring to wield it.'                                      
   'Nor I,' said Gandalf.                                             
   'But is it not true, as I have heard said, 0 Elrond,'  said Boromir,
 'that the Elves  keep yet  and wield  Three Rings,  and yet  these too
 came  from  Sauron  in  the ancient  days? And  the dwarves,  too, had
 rings, it is said. Tell me, Gloin, if you know it, whether any  of the
 Seven Rings remain?'                                                 
   'I do not  know,' said  Gloin. 'It  was said  in secret  that Thrain
 (father  of  Thror  father  of  Thorin (28) who  fell in  battle) possessed
 one that had  descended from  his sires.  Some said  it was  the last.
 But  where  it is  no dwarf  now knows.  We think  maybe it  was taken
 from  him,  ere  Gandalf  found  him  in the  dungeons of  Mordor long
 ago (29) - or maybe it was lost  in Moria.  Yet of  late we  have received
 secret messages from  Mordor offering  us rings  again. It  was partly
 on  this  account that  I came  to Rivendell;  for the  messages asked

 concerning   one   Bilbo,   and   commanded   us   to   obtain    from   him
 (willing  or  unwilling)  the  ring  that  he  possessed.  For this  ring we
 were  offered  [seven  >]  three  such  as  our  fathers  had  of  old. Even
 for  news  of  where  he  might   be  found   we  were   offered  friendship
 for   ever   and   great   wealth.>   Our  hearts   are  troubled,   for  we
 perceive  that  King  Brand  in  Dale  is afraid,  and if  we do  not answer
 Sauron  will  move  other  men  to  evil  against  him.  Already  there  are
 threats of war upon the south.'                                             
   'It  would  seem  that  the  Seven  Rings  are  lost  or have  returned to
 their Lord,' said Boromir. 'What of the Three?'                             
   'The   Three   Rings  remain   still,'  said   Elrond.  'They   have  con-
 ferred  great  power  on  the  Elves,  but  they  have  never   yet  availed
 them   in   their   strife   with   Sauron.  For   they  came   from  Sauron
 himself,  and  can  give  no  skill  or  knowledge that  he did  not already
 possess  at  their  making.  And  to  each  race  the  rings  of   the  Lord
 bring  such  powers  as  each  desires  and  is  capable  of  wielding.  The
 Elves  desired  not  strength  or  domination  or  riches,  but  subtlety of
 craft  and  lore,  and  knowledge  of  the  secrets  of  the  world's being.
 These  things  they  have  gained,  yet  with  sorrow.  But  they  will turn
 to evil  if Sauron  regains the  Ruling Ring;  for then  all that  the Elves
 have  devised  or  learned  with  the  power  of   the  rings   will  become
 his, as was his purpose.'                                                   
                                                                            
   Against  this  passage  concerning  the  Three  Rings  of  the   Elves  my
 father wrote later;  'Elfrings made  by Elves  for themselves.  The 7  and 9
 were  made  by  Sauron  -  to  cheat  men   and  dwarves.   They  originally
 accepted  them  because  they  believed  they  were  elfrings.' And  he also
 wrote,  separately  but  against  the  same passage:  'Alter this:  make the
 Elfrings  their  own  and  Sauron's  made  in  answer.'  This  is  the first
 appearance of  this central  idea concerning  the origin  and nature  of the
 Rings; but since it does not emerge in  actual narrative  until considerably
 later  these  notes cannot  be contemporary  with the  text. -  In FR  it is
 Gloin,  not  Boromir,  who raises  the question  of the  Three Rings  of the
 Elves; but he also, like Boromir in the present text, asserts that they were
 made by the Dark Lord.  Elrond corrects  Gloin's error;  yet earlier  in the
 Council  (FR  p.  255)  Elrond  has  expressly  said  that  Celebrimbor made
 the Three, and that  Sauron forged  the One  in secret  to be  their master.
 Gloin's assertion (FR p.282)  is thus  not appropriate,  and is  probably an
 echo of my father's original conception  of the  Rings. The  text continues:
                                                                            
               'What then would happen, if the Ruling Ring were destroyed?'
 asked Boromir.                                                              
   'The Elves would not lose what they have already won,'                    

 answered   Elrond;   'but  the   Three  Rings   would  lose   all  power
 thereafter.'                                                           
   'Yet that loss,' said Glorfindel, 'all Elves  would gladly  suffer, if
 by it the power of Sauron might be broken.'                            
   'Thus  we  return  again  to  the  point  whence  we   started,'  said
 Erestor.  'The  Ring  should  be  destroyed; but  we cannot  destroy it,
 save  by  the perilous  journey to  the Fire.  What strength  or cunning
 have we for that task?'                                                
   'In  this task  it is  plain that  great power  will not  avail,' said
 Elrond.  'It  must  be  attempted  by  the  weak.  Such  is  the  way of
 things. In  this great  matter fate  seems already  to have  pointed the
 way for us.'                                                           
   'Very  well,  very  well,  Master  Elrond!'  said   Bilbo  suddenly.(31)
 'Say no more! It is plain at least what you are  pointing at.  Bilbo the
 hobbit started this affair, and Bilbo had better finish it,  or himself.
 I  was  very  comfortable  here,  and getting  on with  my book.  If you
 want to know,  I am  just writing  an ending  for it.  I had  thought of
 putting  "and  he  lived  happily  ever  afterward  to  the  end  of his
 days":  which  is  a good  ending, and  none the  worse for  having been
 used before. Now I shall  have to  alter that  - it  does not  look like
 being   true,  and   anyway  there   will  have   to  be   several  more
 chapters,  even  if  I  don't  write  them  myself.  It  is  a frightful
 nuisance! When ought I to start? '                                     
   Elrond  smiled,  and  Gandalf  laughed   loudly.  'Of   course,'  said
 the wizard, 'if you had really started  the affair,  my dear  Bilbo, you
 would be expected to finish it. But starting  is a  strong word.  I have
 often tried to suggest to you that  you only  came in  (accidentally, as
 you might say)  in the  middle of  a long  story, that  was not  made up
 for your sake only. That is, of course,  true enough  of all  heroes and
 all  adventures,  but  never  mind  that now.  As for  you, if  you want
 my  opinion  once  more,  I  should  say  that your  part is  finished -
 except  as  a  recorder.  Finish  your  book and  leave the  ending! But
 get ready to write a sequel, when they come back.'                     
   Bilbo  laughed  in  his  turn.  'I  have  never  known  you   to  give
 pleasant advice before, Gandalf,' he said, 'or to tell me  to do  what I
 really  wanted  to  do.  Since  all your  unpleasant advice  has usually
 been good, I wonder if this is not  bad. Yet  it is  true that  my years
 are  stretched and  getting thin,  and I  do not  think I  have strength
 for the Ring. But tell me: who do you mean by "they"?'                 
   'The adventurers who are sent with the Ring.'                        
   'Exactly,  and  who  are  they  to  be?  That  seems  to  me precisely
 what this council now has to decide.'                                  

                                                                            
                                                                            
      There  was  a  long  silence.  Frodo  glanced round  at all  the faces,
  but  no  one  looked  at  him  -  except  Sam;  in whose  eyes there  was a
  strange  mixture  of  hope  and  fear.  All the  others sat  as if  in deep
  thought  with  their  eyes  closed  or  upon  the  ground.  A  great  dread
  fell  on  Frodo,  and  he  felt  an  overmastering  longing  to  remain  at
  peace by Bilbo's side in Rivendell.                                        
                                                                            
      These words stand at the foot of a page. The  next page,  beginning 'At
  last with an effort he spoke', continues only a brief way, and was replaced
  by another beginning with the same words. I give both forms.               
                                                                            
      At last with an effort he spoke. 'If this task is fated to fall  to the
  weak,'  he said,  'I will  attempt it.  But I  shall need  the help  of the
  strong and the wise.'                                                      
      'I  think,  Frodo,'  said  Elrond,  looking keenly  at him,  'that this
  task  is  appointed for  you. But  it is  very well  that you  should offer
  yourself  unbidden.  All   the  help   that  we   can  contrive   shall  be
  yours.'                                                                    
      'But you won't send him alone, surely, master!' cried Sam.            
      'No indeed,' said  Elrond, turning  to him.  'You at  least shall  go -
  since  you  are  here  although  I  do  not  think  you  were  summoned. It
  seems difficult to separate you from your master Frodo.'                   
      Sam  subsided,  but  whispered  to  Frodo:  'How  far  is   this  Moun-
  tain? A nice pickle we have landed ourselves in, Mr. Frodo!'(31)           
      'Taking  care  of  hobbits  is not  a task  that everyone  would like,'
  said  Gandalf,  'but  I  am  used  to  it.  I  suggest  Frodo and  his Sam,
  Merry,  Faramond,  and  myself.  That  is  five.  And  Glorfindel,   if  he
  will  come  and  lend  us  the  wisdom  of  the  Elves:  we shall  need it.
  That is six.'                                                              
      'And  Trotter!'  said  Peregrin  from  the  corner.  'That  is  seven,
  and  a   fitting  number.   The  Ring-bearer   will  have   good  company.'
                                                                            
      Here this  version of  the passage  ends. Pencilled  beneath is  an un-
  finished sentence: 'The choice is good,' said Elrond. 'Though              
      Other very rough pencillings read: 'Alter this. Hobbits only, including
  Trotter. Gandalf as [?guide] in early stages. Gandalf says  he will  go all
  way?  No  Glorfindel.'  And  below  these notes,  the single  isolated name
  Boromir. - On the back of this  page is  a remarkable  sketch of  events to
  come; for this see p. 410.                                                 
      The  replacement  page  treats  the  selection  of  the  Company  quite
  differently:                                                               
                                                                            
          At last with an effort he spoke. 'I will take the Ring,' he said.
  'Though I don't know the way.'                                             
      Elrond  looked keenly  at him.  'If I  understand all  the tale  that I

 have heard,' he said, 'I think that  this task  is appointed  for you,
 Frodo, and that if you do not find the way, no other will.'           
    'But  you  won't  send him  off alone  surely, master!'  cried Sam,
 unable to contain himself.                                            
    'No  indeed!'  said  Elrond,  turning  towards  him with  a smile.
 'You  at  least  shall go  with him,  since it  is hardly  possible to
 separate  you  from  him  -  even  when  he  is  summoned to  a secret
 council and you are not.'                                             
    Sam  subsided,  but  whispered  to  Frodo: 'How  far is  this Moun-
 tain? A nice pickle we have landed ourselves in, Mr. Frodo!'          
    'When shall I start?' asked Frodo.                                 
    'First you shall rest and recover full strength,'  answered Elrond,
 guessing his mind. 'Rivendell is a fair  place, and  we will  not send
 . you away, until you know it better. And meanwhile we will make      
  plans for your guidance.'                                            
                                                                      
    Later in the afternoon of the  council Frodo  was strolling  in the
 woods   with   his   friends.  Merry   and  Faramond   were  indignant
 when  they  heard  that  Sam  had  crept  into  the council,  and been
 chosen  as  Frodo's  companion.  'Not  the only  one!' said  Merry. 'I
 have  come  so  far  and  I  am  not  going  to  be  left  behind now.
 Someone with intelligence ought to be in the party.'                  
    'I don't see that your inclusion will help much in that  way,' said
 Faramond.  'But,  of  course,  you  must  go,  and  I  must   too.  We
 hobbits  must  stick  together.   We  seem   to  have   become  mighty
 important  these days.  It would  be a  bit of  an eye-opener  for the
 people back in the Shire! '                                           
    'I doubt  it!' said  Frodo. 'Hardly  any of  them would  believe a
 word  of  it.  I  wish  I  was  one  of  them,  and back  in Hobbiton.
 Anyone who wants can have all my importance.'                         
    'Quite accidental!  Quite accidental,  as I  keep on  telling you,'
 said  a  voice  behind  them.  They  turned  to  see  Gandalf hurrying
 round a bend in the path. 'Hobbit voices carry a  long way,'  he said.
 'All  right in  Rivendell (or  I hope  so); but  I should  not discuss
 matters  so  loud outside  the house.  Your importance  is accidental,
 Frodo  -  by  which  I  mean,  someone  else  might  have  been chosen
 and done as well - but it is real. No one else can have it now.  So be
 careful - you can't be too careful! As for you two, if I let you come,
 you'll have  to do  just what  you are  told. And  I shall  make other
 arrangements for the supply of intelligence.'                         
    'Ah,  now  we  know  who  really  is  important,'   laughed  Merry.
 'Gandalf is never in doubt about that,  and does  not let  anyone else

 doubt  it.  So  you  are  making  all  the  arrangements  already, are
 you? '                                                               
   'Of  course!'  said  Gandalf.  'But  if  you  hobbits wish  to stick
 together I  shall raise  no objection.  You two  and Sam  can go  - if
 you  are  really  willing.  Trotter  would  also be  useful (33) - he has
 journeyed   South  before.   Boromir  may   well  join   the  company,
 since your road  leads through  his own  land. That  will be  about as
 large a party as will be at all safe.'                               
   'Who is to be the  brains of  the party?'  asked Frodo.  'Trotter, I
 suppose. Boromir is only  one of  the Big  Folk, and  they are  not as
 wise as hobbits.'                                                    
   'Boromir   has   more   than   strength   and    valour,'   answered
 Gandalf. 'He comes of an  ancient race  that the  people of  the Shire
 have  not  seen, at  least not  since days  that they  have forgotten.
 And  Trotter  has  learned  many  things  in  his wanderings  that are
 not  known  in  the  Shire.(34) They  both know  something of  the road:
 but  more  than that  will be  needed. I  think I  shall have  to come
 with you! '                                                          
   So  great  was  the  delight  of  the  hobbits at  this announcement
 that Gandalf took off his hat  and bowed.  'I am  used to  taking care
 of hobbits,' he said,  'when they  wait for  me and  don't run  off on
 their own. But I only said: I think I shall have to come. It  may only
 be for  part of  the way.  We have  not made  any definite  plans yet.
 Very likely we shan't be able to make any.'                          
   'How soon do you think we shall start?' asked Frodo.               
   'I don't know.  It depends  on what  news we  get. Scouts  will have
 to go out and  find out  what they  can -  especially about  the Black
 Riders.'                                                             
   'I thought they were all destroyed in the flood!' said Merry.     
   'You  cannot  destroy  the  Ringwraiths  so  easily,'  said Gandalf.
 'The power  of their  master is  in them,  and they  stand or  fall by
 him.  They  were  unhorsed,  and  unmasked,  and  will  be  less dan-
 gerous for a while; yet it would be well to  find out  if we  can what
 they are doing. In time they will get new  steeds and  fresh disguise.
 But  for  the  present  you  should  put  all  troubles  out  of  your
 thoughts, if you can.'                                               
   The  hobbits  did  not  find  this  easy  to  do. They  continued to
 think and talk mainly of  the journey  and the  perils ahead  of them.
 Yet  such  was the  virtue of  the land  of Elrond  that in  all their
 thoughts  there  came  no  shadow of  fear. Hope  and courage  grew in
 their hearts,  and strength  in their  bodies. In  every meal,  and in
 every word  and song  they found  delight. The  very breathing  of the

             
                                                                              
 air  became  a  joy  no  less  sweet  because  the  time  of  their  stay  was
 short.                                                                        
  The   days   slipped   by,   though   autumn  was   fast  waning,   and  each
 morning  dawned  bright   and  fair.   But  slowly   the  golden   light  grew
 silver,  and  the  leaves  fell  from  the  trees.  The  winds blew  cold from
 the   Misty   Mountains   in   the   East.  The   Hunters'  Moon   grew  round
 in  the  evening  sky,  putting  to  flight the  lesser stars,  and glittering
 in  the  falls  and  pools  of  the  River.  But  low  in  the South  one star
 shone  red.  Every  night  as  the  moon  waned   again  it   shone  brighter.
 Frodo  could   see  it   through  his   window  deep   in  the   sky,  burning
 like a wrathful eye watching, and waiting for him to set out.                 
                                                                              
  At  the  end  of  the  text  my  father  wrote: 'New  Moon Oct.  24. Hunters'
 Moon Full Nov. 8'. See p. 434, note 19.                                       
  The  manuscript  is   interrupted  here   by  a   heading,  'The   Ring  Goes
 South',  but  without  new  chapter  number,  and  what  follows  was  written
 continuously with what precedes.                                              
  It will be seen  that by  far the  greater part  of the  content of  the 'The
 Council of Elrond' in FR is  absent; but  while the  past and  present texture
 of  the  world is  so much  thinner in  the original  form, the  discussion of
 what to  do with  the Ring  is in  its essential  pattern of  argument already
 present.                                                                      
  Gandalf   says   that   the  road   to  the   Fiery  Mountain   lies  through
 Boromir's  land.  It  may  well be  that at  this stage  the geography  of the
 . lands south and east of the Misty Mountains was  still fairly  sketchy, even
 though  Fangorn  Forest,  the  Dead  Marshes,  the   Land  of   Ond  (Gondor),
 and  'the  South  Mountains'  have  appeared  in  name  (pp.  397  -  8, 401).
 Further aspects of this question appear in the next chapter.                  
  It  is  curious  that  although  Elrond  says  at  the  outset  that  Boromir
 brings tidings that must be  considered, we  are not  told what  these tidings
 were. In the original draft for the Council (p. 398) it is  said that  the men
 of Ond  'are besieged  by wild  men out  of the  East'; and  in the  text just
 given (p. 403) Elrond says that they are 'still faithful amid a host of foes'.
 Odo  Bolger  has  at  long  last  disappeared  (at  least  by that  name); and
 Folco   has   been   renamed  Faramond.   That  name   has  appeared   in  the
 papers  dated  August  1939,  but  there  it  was  proposed for  Frodo himself
 (p.  373).  The Fellowship  of the  Ring now  changes again,  and not  for the
 last  time:  as  may  readily  be  supposed,  the  achievement  of  the  final
 composition  of  the  'Nine  Walkers'  caused my  father great  difficulty. In
 the first draft for the Council of Elrond (p. 397) there were to be:         
  Gandalf.  Trotter.  Frodo.   Sam.  Merry.   Folco.  Odo.   Glorfindel.  Burin
 son of Balin. (9)                                                             
 In the  rejected page  of the  text just  given (p. 406) the  Company becomes:
 Gandalf.   Trotter.   Frodo.   Sam.    Merry.   Faramond.    Glorfindel.   (7)
 A  note  to  this  page  proposes that  the Company  consist only  of hobbits,

                                                                           
                                                                            
  with Gandalf at least at first, but without Glorfindel. In  the replacement
  text (p.408) Gandalf suggests:                                             
       Gandalf.   Trotter.   Frodo.  Sam.   Merry.  Faramond.   Boromir.  (p)
  - and this  was indeed  the composition  in the  original narrative  of the
  southward journey as far as Moria.                                         
                                                                            
       The continuation of the story  in the  original manuscript  ('The Ring
  Goes South')  is given  in the  next chapter;  but before  concluding this,
  there must be given the remarkable outline  of future  events found  on the
  back of a rejected page of the text of the Council of  Elrond (see  p.406).
  This clearly belongs in time with the manuscript in  which it  is included,
  In  the  outline  of  the  further course  of the  story dated  August 1939
  (p. 381, $9) there is no suggestion  of the  reappearance of  Gollum before
  Mordor is reached; and the  reference in  this one  to Frodo's  hearing the
  patter of Gollum's feet in the Mines shows that it preceded the first draft
  of the Moria chapter.                                                      
                                                                            
  Gollum must reappear at or after Moria. Frodo hears patter.                
       Fangorn  Forest.  In  some  way  -  hears  voice,  or  sees  something
  off  path,  or?  alarmed  by  Gollum  -  Frodo  must  get   separated  from
  the rest.                                                                  
       Fangorn  is  an  evergreen  (oak  holly?)   forest.  Trees   of  vast
  height.   (Beleghir   [pencilled   above:   Anduin]  Great   River  divides
  into  many  channels.)  Say  500  -  1000  feet.  It runs  right up  to the
  [Blue  >]  Black  Mountains,   which  are   not  very   high  (run   NEN  -
  SWW  [i.e.  North-east  by  North   -  South-west   by  West])   but  very
  steep on N. side.                                                          
       If Treebeard comes in  at all  - let  him be  kindly and  rather good?
  About  50  feet  high  with  barky  skin.  Hair   and  beard   rather  like
  twigs.  Clothed in  dark green  like a  mail of  short shining  leaves. He
  has   a   castle   in   the   Black   Mountains   and   many   thanes   and
  followers. They look like young trees [? when] they stand.                 
       Make  Frodo  be  terrified  of  Gollum  after   a  meeting   in  which
  Gollum  pretended  to  make  friends,  but  tried  to  strangle   Frodo  in
  his  sleep  and  steal  the  Ring.  Treebeard  finds  him lost  and carries
  him  up  into  the  Black  Mountains.  It  is  only  here that  Frodo finds
  he is friendly.                                                            
       Treebeard  brings  him  on  the  way  to Ond.  His scouts  report that
  Ond  is  besieged,  and  that   Trotter  and   four  [written   above:  3?]
  others  have  been  captured.  Where  is   Sam?  (Sam   is  found   in  the
  Forest.  He  had  refused  to  go  on  without   Frodo  and   had  remained
  looking for him.)                                                          
       The  tree-giants  assail  the  besiegers  and  rescue Trotter  &c. and
  raise siege.                                                               

   (If this plot is used  it will  be better  to have  no Boromir  in party.
 Substitute  Gimli?  son  of  Gloin  -   who  was   killed  in   Moria.  But
 Frodo  can  bear  messages  from  Boromir  to  his  father  the  K[ing]  of
 Ond.)                                                                      
   Next  stage  -  they  set  out  for  the  Fire  Mountain.  They  have  to
 skirt Mordor on its west edge.                                             
                                                                           
   In this brief sketch we see the very  starting-point, in  written expres-
 sion,  of  two  fundamental 'moments'  in the  narrative of  The Lord of the
 Rings:  the  separation  of  Frodo  from  the  Company   (subsequently  re-
 joined by Sam),  and the  assault by  the 'tree-giants'  of Fangorn  on the
 enemies of Gondor; but such  narrative frame  as they  were given  here was
 entirely  ephemeral.  We meet  also a  further early  image of  Giant Tree-
 beard: still of vast height, as in the text given on pp. 382 - 4, where his
 voice came down to Frodo 'out of the tree-top', but no longer  hostile, the
 captor of Gandalf (p. 363), 'pretending to be friendly but really in league
 with the enemy' (p. 384). Boromir is now  said to  be the  son of  the King
 of Ond; but the death of Gimli in Moria  was an  idea never  further devel-
 oped. Here is the first  appearance of  an Elvish  name, Beleghir,  of the
 Great  River,  which  flowed  through  Fangorn  Forest  (see  p.  410). The
 Forest 'runs right up to the [Blue >] Black Mountains'; cf. the outline for
 the Council of  Elrond (p.  397), in  which Gandalf  says that  Giant Tree-
 beard  'haunts  the  Forest  between  the River  and the  South Mountains'.
 But of Lothlorien and Rohan there is as yet not a hint.                    
                                                                           
                                    NOTES.                                  
                                                                           
  1. The  last  sheet  of  the  original  chapter  (see p.  213) had  ended with
    the  words  'a  strong  king  whose  realm  included  Esgaroth,   and  much
    land to the south of the great  falls' at  the foot  of the  page (numbered
    'IX.8'),  and  the  reverse  was  left  blank.  The  first  version  of the
    continuation  was  written  out  (in  a  rapid  scribble  in  ink) indepen-
    dently of  the old  text; the  second, also  very rough  and nearly  all in
    pencil,  starts  on  the  unused  verso  side of  'IX.8', on  which however
    my  father  wrote  in  preparation  'IX.9',  although at  that time  he did
    not  use the  page. When  he returned  to it  later he  did not  change the
    chapter-number   but   continued   the   numeration   'IX.10'   etc.;  this
    however   was   mere   absentmindedness,  since   the  chapter   could  not
    possibly at this time still be numbered 'IX'.                           
  2. The reference is to the end of The Hobbit; cf. p. 15 and note 3.      
  3. In the first version Gloin does  not admit  to any  falling short  of the
    skill of the forefathers: 'He  began to  speak of  new inventions  and of
    the  great  works  at   which  the   folk  of   the  Mountain   were  now
    labouring;  of  armour   of  surpassing   strength  and   beauty,  swords
    more   keen   and   strong...  -   The  sentence   You  should   see  the

        waterways  of  Dale,  Frodo,  and  the fountains  and the  pools!' goes
        back to the first  draft; in  FR (p.  242) the  word 'mountains'  is an
        obvious error which has never been corrected.                          
  4.    This name is found only in the first of the two  texts, but  it appears
        later on in the second (p. 395).                                       
  5.    Cf. pp. 211, 214, 363. - Peregrin  disappeared out  of the  Shire when
        he was 33, at which  time Frodo  was only  two years  old (see  p. 387,
        note g).                                                               
  6.    When my father wrote this passage he  evidently had  in mind,  at least
        as one possibility, a comic song, received with the  'ringing laughter'
        that wakened Frodo; for at the top of  the page  he wrote  'Troll Song'
        - a passing idea before it was given far more appositely to Sam  in the
        Trollshaws.  But he  also wrote  'Let B[ilbo]  sing Tinuviel',  and the
        word  '?  Messenger'.  This  is  a  reference  to  the   poem  Errantry
        (published  in  The  Oxford   Magazine  9   November  1933,   and  with
        many further  changes in  The Adventures  of Tom  Bombadil ( 1962)).
        Bilbo's  song  Earendil  was  a  mariner  derived  (in  a  sense)  from
        Errantry, and the earliest text of it still begins:                    
        There   was  a   merry   messenger,
        a  passenger,     a   mariner,
        he  built  a  boat  and  gilded   her
        and silver oars he fashion d her...                                    
  7.    In the first text the dwarf with Gloin is named Frar; in the  margin is
        pencilled Burin son of Balin. Frar appears also in the outline  for the
        Council of Elrond on p. 397, again replaced by Burin.                  
  8.    The  presence  of  an Elf  of Mirkwood  was an  addition to  the second
        text.                                                                  
  9.    As written, the first text read here: 'two of Elrond's own kinsfolk the
        Pereldar or  halfelven folk...'  Pereldar was  struck out,  probably at
        once. In the Quenta Silmarillion the Pereldar  or 'Half-eldar'  are the
        Danas   (Green-elves):  V.215.   The  Danas   were  also   called  'the
        Lovers  of  Luthien'  (ibid.).  In  LR  (Appendix  A  I (i))  Elros and
        Elrond are called Peredhil 'Half-elven'; an earlier name for  them was
        Peringol, Peringiul (V.152).                                           
  10.   The  Grey  Havens  are  first  named  in  the  third  phase  version of
        'Ancient History', p. 319.                                             
        The square brackets are in the original.                               
  12.   As note r r.                                                           
  13.   The  text  stands  thus,  with  two  passages  both  beginning  'Yet of
        late  we  have  received  secret  messages  from  Mordor',  but neither
        rejected.                                                              
  14.   The name Boromir of  the second  son of  Bor, killed  in the  Battle of
        Unnumbered  Tears,  had  appeared  in  the  later  Annals  of Beleriand
        and  in  the  Quenta  Silmarillion   (V.  I34,   287,  310).   For  the
        etymology of the name see V.353, 373.                                  

   15.   This sentence is a subsequent correction  of 'But  the faces  of those
         that were seated in the room were grave.' In a rejected opening of the
         text  Gandalf  says:  'We  had  better  make   our  way   to  Elrond's
         chamber at once', and in the western wing  of the  house he  knocks at
         a door and  enters 'a  small room,  the western  side of  which opened
         onto  a  porch  beyond  which  the  ground fell  sheer to  the foaming
         river.' In the revised opening as printed the Council of  Elrond takes
         place in the porch (as in FR, p. 252), though  it was  still described
         here as a 'room', until this correction was made.                     
   16.   This first appearance of  Gimli son  of Gloin  was a  pencilled alter-
         ation, but not from much later.                                       
   17.   In the previous account of those present at the  Council (p.  395) the
         three counsellors of Rivendell are Erestor, called 'an Elf',  and 'two
         other  kinsmen  of  Elrond, of  that half-elvish  folk whom  the Elves
         named  the  children  of  Luthien'  -  which  seems  however  to imply
         that Erestor also was Elrond's kinsman.                               
   18.   In FR (p. 253) Galdor, here the precursor of Legolas,  is the  name of
         the  Elf  from  the  Grey  Havens  who  bore  the  errand  of  Cirdan.
         Galdor had not at this time  become the  name of  the father  of Hurin
         and Huor; in the Quenta Silmarillion he was still named Gumlin.       
   19.   The first reference to the Dead Marshes.                              
         My father bracketed the passage from  'Ever since  I have  worn shoes'
         to 'hurt in some way', and wrote in the margin (with a query)  that it
         should be revealed later that Trotter had wooden feet.  - This  is the
         first appearance of the story that  it was  Trotter who  found Gollum
         (in  the  version of  'Ancient History'  in the  third phase  (p. 320)
         Gandalf  still  told  Frodo  that  he  had  himself  found  Gollum, in
         Mirkwood);  and   Trotter's  experience   of  Mordor,   several  times
         mentioned or hinted at (see pp. 223,  371), is  explained at  the same
         time.                                                                 
   21.   Written in the margin against  this paragraph:  'Gandalf's captivity'.
   22.   See pp. 118 - 20.                                                      
    23.  An earlier  form of  this passage  makes Gandalf  reply to  Elrond: 'I
         knew of him. But I  had quite  forgotten him.  I must  go and  see him
         as soon as  there is  a chance.'  This was  changed -  at the  time of
         writing - to the passage given, in which Gandalf says that he actually
         visited  Tom  Bombadil  after the  attack on  Crickhollow -  the first
         appearance of an idea that will be  met again,  though the  meeting of
         Gandalf and Bombadil never  (alas!) reached  narrative form.  Cf. the
         isolated  passage  given  on  pp.  213  -  14,  where Gandalf  says at
         Rivendell: 'Why did I not  think of  Bombadil before!  If only  he was
         not so far away, I would go straight  back now  and consult  him.' Cf.
         also p. 345 and note i r. - Gandalf does not mention Odo here,  and it
         becomes clear at  the end  of this  chapter that  he had  been removed
         from Rivendell (see pp. 407, 409).                                    

  24.  In the third phase version of 'At the Sign of the Prancing Pony'  it is
       still apparent that Tom Bombadil  was known  to visit  the inn  at Bree
                                                                             
       (p. 334).                                                              
                                                                             
  25.  In rough drafting of this passage my father wrote: 'and  in the  end he
       would  come  in  person;  and  the  Barrow-wights would',  striking out
       these last words as he wrote  and changing  them to:  'and even  on his
       own  ground  Tom  Bombadil  alone  could   not  withstand   that  onset
       unscathed.' - 'Lord of the Ring' was first written 'Lord of the Rings',
       but changed immediately.                                               
  26.  Erestor  changed  from  Clorfindel,  which  was  changed   from  Elrond.
                                                                             
       Cf. P. 396.                                                            
                                                                             
  27.  This  reply  to  Erestor  was  first  given  to  Gandalf,  for  Erestor
       addressed his question to him:  'Can you  solve this  riddle, Gandalf?'
       To which Gandalf  answered: 'No!  I cannot.  But I  can choose,  if you
       wish  me  to  choose.'  The  passage was  then changed  at once  to the
       form given.                                                            
  28.  In The Hobbit Thrain was not  the father  of Thror,  but his  son. This
       is a complex question which will be discussed in Vol. VII.             
  29.  In the dungeons of Dol Guldur in Mirkwood in FR (p. 282).              
  30.  As this passage was first written,  Gloin says  that the  messages from
       Mordor  offered  the  Dwarves  'a  ring';  and  that they  were offered
       peace and friendship if they could  obtain Bilbo's  ring, or  even tell
       where  he  was  to  be  found.  As  altered  subsequently,   his  words
       approach what he tells in FR (p. 254); and the story in the first draft
       for the  Council (p.  398), that  the Dwarves  still possessed  some of
       their  ancient  Rings,  that  Dain  had  one,   and  that   Sauron  was
       demanding them back, has already been abandoned.                       
  31.  Cf. p. 371, at the end of the outline $2.                              
  32.  The chapter 'The Council of Elrond' in FR (II.2) ends here.            
  33.  'Trotter would also be  useful' was  changed to  'Trotter will  also be
       essential',  and  probably  at  the same  time my  father wrote  in the
       margin:  'Trotter  is connected  with the  Ring.' This  alteration thus
       comes  from  somewhat  later, when  he was  reaching the  conception of
       Aragorn and his ancestry. See note 34.                                 
  34.  Trotter was of course still  a hobbit.  In the  margin my  father wrote
       against this passage: 'Correct this. Only Trotter  is of  ancient race'
       (i.e. Trotter is a Numenorean, but Boromir is not).                    

                                      XXIV.                                   
                              THE RING GOES SOUTH.                            
                                                                             
 As I  have said,  this next  stage in  the story  was written  continuously on
 from the first version of 'The Council  of Elrond'.  After the  description of
 the red star in  the South  (FR p.  287) there  is a  heading 'The  Ring Goes
 South',  but  no  new  chapter-number,  and   the  pagination   is  continuous
 with what precedes.                                                          
    I give  now the  text of  this earliest  version of  'The Ring  Goes South'
 (which  extends  somewhat into  the next  chapter in  FR, II.4 'A  Journey in
 the Dark'). This is an  outstandingly difficult  manuscript, and  difficult to
 represent.  I  think  that  it  was  not  based  on  any preliminary  notes or
 sketches, except in one passage,' that my father wrote it ab initio as  a full
 narrative;  and  this  being  so  it  is  remarkable how  much of  its wording
 survived into the  final form,  despite the  radical differences  that Trotter
 was still the  hobbit Peregrin  and that  neither Dwarf  nor Elf  was present.
 The  company,  as  already  noticed,  consisted   of  Gandalf,   Boromir,  and
 five hobbits  - even  though one  of them,  to be  sure, was  no inexperienced
 hobbit of the Shire.                                                         
    My  father  wrote nearly  all of  it in  ink, but  he wrote  extremely fast
 (though with patience - and  some aid  from the  text of  FR -  all but  a few
 words can be puzzled out), so fast that  he often  left to  stand what  he had
 written  but  rejected,  while  racing on  to a  new phrasing  or formulation;
 and  the  expression  is  often  rough  and  unfinished. Subsequently  he went
 over  it  in pencil,  but the  great majority  of these  pencilled alterations
 belong, I feel sure, to a time very close  to the  original writing,  and some
 of  them  demonstrably  so.  A   few  are   certainly  later,   and  introduce
 references  to  Gimli and  Legolas that  are chronologically  and structurally
 irrelevant.  There  are  also  some  alterations  in red  ink, but  these only
 concern certain place-names.                                                 
    In  the  text  as  printed here,  I adopt  pencilled alterations  that seem
 certainly  'early'. few  affect the  narrative in  any important  respect, and
 where they do the original text is given in the notes. The notes are  here an
 integral part of the representation of the manuscript.                       
                                                                             
                              The Ring goes South.                            
                                                                             
 When Frodo had been about a fortnight  in Rivendell  and Novem-            
 ber was already a week old or more' the scouts began to return.            
 Some had been northwards as far as  the Dimrill-dales,(3) and some            
 had gone southwards almost as far as the River Redway. A few

  had  passed  the  mountains  both  by  the  High  Pass  and  Goblin  Gate
  (Annerchin),  and  by  the  passage  at  the  sources  of   the  Gladden.
  These   were  the   last  to   return,  for   they  had   descended  into
  Wilderland  as  far  as the  Gladden Fields,(4) and that  was a  great way
  from  Rivendell  even  for  the  swiftest  Elves.  But  neither  they nor
  those  who  had  received  the  aid  of  the  Eagles  near  Goblin Gate (5)
  had  discovered  any  news  -   except  that   the  wild   wolves  called
  wargs  were  gathering  again   and  were   hunting  once   more  between
  the  Mountains  and   Mirkwood.  No   sign  of   the  Black   Riders  had
  been  found  - except  on the  rocks below  the Ford  the bodies  of four
  [written  above:  several]  drowned  horses,   and  [?one]   long  black
  cloak slashed and tattered.                                              
    'One  can  never  tell,'  said  Gandalf, 'but  it does  look as  if the
  Riders  were  dispersed  -  and  have  had  to  make  their  way  as best
  they  could  back to  Mordor. In  that case  there will  still be  a long
  while  before  the  hunt  begins  again. And  it will  have to  come back
  here to pick up the trail  - if  we are  lucky and  careful, and  they do
  not  get  news  of  us  on  the way.  We had  better get  off as  soon as
  possible now - and as quietly.'                                          
    Elrond  agreed,  and  warned  them  to  journey  by  dusk  and  dark as
  often  as  might  be,  and  to  lie  hid  when  they  could in  the broad
  daylight.  'When  the  news  reaches  Sauron,'  he  said,  'of  the  dis-
  comfiture  of the  Nine Riders,  he will  be filled  with a  great anger.
  When  the  hunt  begins  again,  it   will  be   far  greater   and  more
  ravenous.'                                                               
    'Are there still more Black Riders then?' asked Frodo.                 
    'No!   There   are   but   Nine   Ringwraiths.   But  when   they  come
  forth again, I fear they will bring a host of evil things in their train,
  and  set  their spies  wide over  the lands.  Even of  the sky  above you
  must beware as you go your way.'                                         
                                                                          
    There  came  a  cold  grey  day  in  mid   November.(6) The   East  wind
  was  streaming  through  the  bare  branches  of  the  trees,  and seeth-
  ing  in  the  firtrees on  the hills.  The hurrying  clouds were  low and
  sunless.  As  the  cheerless  shadows  of  the  early  evening  began  to
  fall,  the  adventurers  made ready  to depart.  Their farewells  had all
  been said  by the  fire in  the great  hall, and  they were  waiting only
  for  Gandalf, who  was still  in the  house speaking  some last  words in
  private   with   Elrond.  Their   spare  food   and  clothes   and  other
  necessaries  were  laden  on  two  sure-footed  ponies.   The  travellers
  themselves  were  to  go  on  foot;  for  their  course  was  set through
  lands   where   there   were  few   roads  and   paths  were   rough  and

            
                                                                      
 difficult. Sooner or  later they  would have  to cross  the Mountains.
 Also they were going to journey for the  most part  by dusk  or dark.(7)
 Sam  was  standing  by  the  two  pack-ponies  sucking  his  teeth and
 staring moodily at the house - his desire for adventure  was at  a low
 ebb. But in that  hour none  of the  hobbits had  any heart  for their
 journey - a chill was in their hearts, and a cold wind in their faces.
 A gleam of firelight  came from  the open  doors; lights  were glowing
 in  many  windows,  and  the  world  outside  seemed  empty  and cold.
 Bilbo  huddled  in  his  cloak  stood  silent  on the  doorstep beside
 Frodo. Trotter sat with his head bowed to his knees.(8)               
  At  last  Elrond  came out  with Gandalf.  'Farewell now!'  he said.
 'May the blessing of  Elves and  Men and  all free  folk go  with you.
 And may white stars shine on your journey! '                          
  'Good...  good  luck!'  said  Bilbo,  stuttering  a little  (from the
 cold perhaps). 'I  don't suppose  you will  be able  to keep  a diary,
 Frodo my lad, but I shall  expect a  full account  when you  get back.
 And don't be too long: I have  lived longer  than I  expected already.
 Farewell! '                                                           
  Many  others  of  Elrond's  household  stood   in  the   shadows  and
 watched  them  go,  bidding  them  farewell  with  soft  voices. There
 was  no  laughter,  and  no  songs  or  music.  Silently at  last they
 turned  away, and  leading their  ponies they  faded swiftly  into the
 gathering dusk.                                                       
                                                                      
  They  crossed  the  bridge  and  wound  slowly  up  the   long  steep
 paths out of the cloven vale of Rivendell, and came  at length  to the
 high  moors,  grey  and  formless  under  misty  stars. Then  with one
 last  look down  at the  lights of  the Last  Homely House  below they
 strode on, far on into the night.                                     
  At  the Ford  they left  the west  road that  crossed the  River; and
 turning  left  went  on  by  narrow  paths  among  the  folded  lands.
 They  were  going South.  Their purpose  was to  hold this  course for
 many  miles  and  days  on the  western side  of the  Misty Mountains.
 The  country  was much  wilder and  rougher than  in the  green valley
 of the Great  River in  Wilderland on  the eastern  side of  the range
 and  their going  would be  much slower;  but they  hoped in  this way
 to escape  the notice  of enemies.  The spies  of Sauron  had hitherto
 seldom been seen in  the western  regions; and  the paths  were little
 known  except  to  the people  of Rivendell.  Gandalf walked  in front
 and  with  him  went  Trotter  who  knew  this  country  even  in  the
 dark. Boromir as rearguard walked behind.                             
  The first  part of  their journey  was cheerless  and grim  and Frodo

 remembered little of it, except the cold wind. It  blew icy  from the
 eastern  mountains  for  many  sunless  days  and  no  garment seemed
 able to  keep  out  its searching  fingers. They  had been  well fur-
 nished with warm  clothes in  Rivendell, and  had jackets  and cloaks
 lined with fur as well as many  blankets, but  they seldom  felt warm
 either moving or at rest. They  slept uneasily  during the  middle of
 the day, in  some hollow  of the  land, or  hidden under  the tangled
 thorn-bushes that grew in great thickets in those parts. In  the late
 afternoon they were roused, and  had their  chief meal:  usually cold
 and  cheerless  and  with  little  talk, for  they seldom  risked the
 lighting of a fire. In the evening they went on again, as  nearly due
 south as they could find a way.                                     
   At first  it seemed  to the  hobbits that  they were  creeping like
 snails and  getting nowhere;  for each  day the  land looked  much as
 it had done the day  before. Yet  all the  while the  Mountains which
 south  of  Rivendell  bent  westward  were  drawing nearer.  More and
 more  often  they  found  no  paths  and  had  to  make   wide  turns
 to  avoid  either steep  places, or  thickets, or  sullen treacherous
 swamps.  The  land  was  tumbled  in  barren  hills and  deep valleys
 filled with turbulent waters.                                       
   But  when they  had been  about ten  days on  the road  the weather
 grew  better.  The   wind  suddenly   veered  southward.   The  swift
 flowing clouds lifted and melted away, and the sun came out.        
   There  came a  dawn at  the end  of a  long stumbling  night march.
 The  travellers  reached  a  low  ridge  crowned  with  ancient holly
 trees, whose pale fluted  trunks seemed  to have  been formed  out of
 the very stone of the hills. Their berries shone red in the  light of
 the  rising  sun.  Far  away  south  Frodo  saw  the  dim  shapes  of
 mountains, that seemed now to lie across their path.  To the  left of
 this distant range a tall peak stood up like a  tooth: it  was tipped
 with  snow  but  its  bare  western  shoulder  glowed  redly  in  the
 growing light.                                                      
   Gandalf  stood  by  Frodo's  side  and looked  out under  his hand.
 'We have done well,' he  said. 'We  have reached  the borders  of the
 country called Hollin: many Elves  lived here  once in  happier days.
 Eighty leagues we have come,(9) if  we have  come a  mile, and  we have
 marched  quicker   than  winter   from  the   North.  The   land  and
 weather will be milder now - but perhaps all the more dangerous.'
   'Danger  or not,  a real  sunrise is  mighty welcome,'  said Frodo,
 throwing back  his hood  and letting  the morning  light play  on his
 face.                                                               

 eastward.'                                                              
    'No, it is the mountains that have turned,' said, Gandalf.(10)       
 'Don't you remember Elrond's map in Rivendell?'                         
    'No, I  did not  look very  carefully at  it,' said  Faramond. 'Frodo
 has a better head for things of that sort.'                             
    'Well,  anyone  who  did  look  at  the  map,'  said  Gandalf, 'would
 see  that  away  there  stands  Taragaer  or  Ruddyhorn,(11) - that  moun-
 tain  with  the  red  side.  The  Misty   Mountains  divide   there  and
 between their arms lies the land (12) of Caron-dun the Red Valley.(13)          
 Our  way  lies   there:  over   the  Red   Pass  of   Cris-caron,(14) under
 Taragaer's  side,   and  into   Caron-dun  and   down  the   River  Red-
 way (15) to the Great River, and...' He stopped.                          
    'Yes, and where then?' asked Merry.                                  
    'To the  end of  the journey  - in  the end,'  said Gandalf.  'But at
 first  the  evergreen  forest  of  Fangorn, through  the midst  of which
 runs the  Great River.(16) But we  will not  look too  far ahead.  Let us
 be glad that the first stage is safely over. I think  we will  rest here
 for  a  whole  day. There  is a  wholesome air  about Hollin.  Much evil
 must befall  any country  before it  wholly forgets  the Elves,  if once
 they have dwelt there.'                                                 
                                                                        
    That morning they lit a fire in a deep hollow shrouded by two        
 great holly trees, and their supper was merrier than it had been        
 since  they  left  the  house  of  Elrond.  They  did  not hurry  to bed
  ' ' afterwards, for they had all the night to sleep in and did not mean
  to  go  on  until  the  evening  of  next day.  Only Trotter  was moody
  and  restless.  After  a  while  he  left  the  company   and  wandered
  about  on  the  ridge,  looking  out on  the lands  south and  west. He
  came back and stood looking at them.                                   
    'What is the matter?' said Merry. 'Do you miss the east wind?'       
    'No  indeed,'  answered  Trotter.  'But  I  miss  something.  I  know
  Hollin  fairly  well, and  have been  here in  many seasons.  No people
  dwell  here  now,  but  many  other  things  live  here,  or used  to -
  especially birds. But now it is very silent. I can feel it. There is no
  sound  for  miles  round,  and  your  voices  seem  to make  the ground
  echo. I cannot make it out.'                                           
    Gandalf  looked  up  quickly.  'But  what  do  you  think  the reason
  is?' he asked. 'Is there more  in it  than surprise  at seeing  a whole
  party  of  hobbits  (not  to  mention  Boromir  and  me)  where  people
  are so seldom seen? '                                                  

   'I hope that is it,' said Trotter. 'But I get a feeling  of watchful-
 ness and of fear that I have never had here before.'                   
   'Very well! Let us be more careful,' said Gandalf.  'If you  bring a
 Ranger with you, it is best  to pay  attention to  him -  especially if
 the  Ranger  is  Trotter,  as  I  have  found  before.  There  are some
 things  that  even  an  experienced  wizard  does  not  notice.  We had
 better stop talking now, and rest quietly and set a look-out.'         
   It  was  Sam's  turn  to  take  the first  watch, but  Trotter joined
 him. The others soon fell  asleep, one  by one.  The silence  grew till
 even  Sam  felt  it.  The breathing  of the  sleepers could  be plainly
 heard.  The  swish of  a pony's  tail and  the occasional  movements of
 his  feet  became  loud  noises.  Sam  seemed to  hear his  very joints
 creaking if he stirred or moved. Over all hung  a blue  sky as  the sun
 rode  high  and  clear.  The  last  clouds  melted.  But  away  in  the
 south-east a  dark patch  grew and  divided, flying  like smoke  to the
 north and west.                                                        
   'What's  that?'  said  Sam  in  a  whisper  to Trotter.  Trotter made
 no  answer, for  he was  gazing intently  at the  sky, but  before long
 Sam  could  see  what it  was for  himself. The  clouds were  flocks of
 birds  going at  great speed  - wheeling  and circling,  and traversing
 all the land as if they were searching for something.                  
   'Lie  flat  and  still,' hissed  Trotter, drawing  Sam down  into the
 shade of a holly-bush -  for a  whole regiment  of birds  had separated
 from  the  western  flock  and  came  back  flying  low right  over the
 ridge  where  the  travellers  lay.  Sam  thought  they were  some kind
 of  crows of  a large  size. As  they passed  overhead one  harsh croak
 was heard.                                                             
   Not  till  they  had  dwindled  in the  distance would  Trotter move.
 Then he went and wakened Gandalf.                                      
   'Regiments of  black crows  are flying  to and  fro over  Hollin,' he
 said. 'They are not  natives to  this place.  I do  not know  what they
 are after - possibly there  is some  trouble going  on away  south: but
 I think they are spying  out the  land. I  think too  that I  have seen
 hawks  flying  higher  in  the   sky.  That   would  account   for  the
 silence.(17) We  ought  to  move again  this evening.  I am  afraid that
 Hollin is no longer wholesome for us: it is being watched.'            
   'And in that case so is  the Red  Pass, and  how we  can get  over it
 without being  seen I  don't know,'  said Gandalf.  'But we  will think
 about   that  when   we  get   nearer.  About   moving  on   from  here
 tonight: I am afraid you are right.'                                   
   'It is as well that we let our fire make little smoke,' said Trotter.

 'It was out again  (I think)  before the  birds came  over. It  must not
 be lit again.'                                                           
    'Well,  if  that  is  not  disappointing!'  said Faramond.  The news
 had been  broken to  him as  soon as  he woke  (in the  late afternoon):
 no fire, and a move  again by  night. 'I  had looked  forward to  a real
 good meal tonight, something hot. All because of a pack of crows! '     
    'Well,  you  can  go  on  looking  forward,'  said   Gandalf.  'There
 may  be  many  unexpected  feasts  ahead  of  you!  Personally  I should
 like  a  pipe  of  tobacco  in  comfort,  and  warmer feet.  However, we
 are certain of  one thing,  at any  rate: it  will get  warmer as  we go
 south.'                                                                 
    'Too  warm,  I  shouldn't  wonder!'  said  Sam  to  Frodo.  'Not but
 what  I  would  be  glad  to  see  that  Fiery  Mountain,  and  see  the
 road's  end  ahead,  so  to  speak.  I thought  that there  Ruddyhorn or
 whatever  its name  is might  be it,  till Mr.  Gandalf said  not.' Maps
 conveyed  nothing  to  Sam,  and  all distances  in these  strange lands
 seemed so vast that he was quite out of his reckonings.                 
                                                                        
    The  travellers  remained  hidden  all  that  day.  The  birds passed
 over  every  now  and  again;  but as  the westering  sun grew  red they
 vanished  southwards.'  Soon  afterwards  the   party  set   out  again,
 and  turned  now  a  little  eastward  making for  the peak  of Taragaer
 which  still  glowed  dully  red  in  the  distance.  Frodo  thought  of
 Elrond's  warning  to  watch  even  the  sky  above,  but  the  sky  was
 now  clear  and  empty  overhead,  and  one  by  one white  stars sprang
 forth as the last gleams of sunset faded.                               
    Guided  by  Trotter  and  Gandalf  as  usual   they  struck   a  good
 path. It looked to  Frodo, as  far as  he could  guess in  the gathering
 dark,  like  the  remains of  an ancient  road that  had once  run broad
 and  well-planned  from  now  deserted  Hollin   to  the   pass  beneath
 Taragaer.  A  crescent  moon  rose  over  the  mountains,  and   cast  a
 pale light which was helpful - but was not welcomed by Trotter or
 Gandalf. It stayed but a little while and left them to the stars.(19) At
 midnight they had been going on again for an hour or more from
 their first halt. Frodo kept looking up at the sky, partly because of
 its beauty, partly because of Elrond's words. Suddenly he saw or
 felt a shadow pass over the stars - as if they faded and flashed out
 again. He shivered.
   'Did you see anything?' he said to Gandalf, who was just in
 front.
   'No, but I felt it, whatever it was,' said the wizard. 'It may be

 nothing, just a wisp of thin cloud.' It did not sound as if  he thought
 much of his own explanation.(20)                                         
   Nothing   more   happened   that   night.   The   next   morning  was
 even  brighter  than  before, but  the wind  was turning  back eastward
 and  the  air  was  chill.  For  three  more  nights  they  marched on,
 climbing  steadily  and  ever  more  slowly  as  their road  wound into
 the  hills  and  the  mountains drew  nearer and  nearer. On  the third
 morning  Taragaer  towered  up  before  them,  a  mighty   peak  tipped
 with  snow  like  silver, but  with sheer  naked sides  dull red  as if
 stained with blood.                                                      
   There  was  a  black  look  in  the  air,  and the  sun was  wan. The
 wind   was   now   gone   towards  the   North.  Gandalf   sniffed  and
 looked  back.  'Winter  is behind,'  he said  quietly to  Trotter. 'The
 peaks behind are whiter than they were.'                                 
   'And  tonight,' said  Trotter, 'we  shall be  high up  on our  way to
 the  red  pass  of Cris-caron.  What do  you think  of our  course now?
 If we are not seen in that  narrow place  - and  waylaid by  some evil,  l
 as would be easy there - the weather may prove as bad an enemy.'(21)     
   'I  think  no  good  of any  part of  our course,  as you  know well,
 Master  Peregrin,'  snapped  Gandalf.  'Still  we  have  to  go  on. It
 is no good whatever our  trying to  cross further  south into  the land
 of  Rohan.  The  Horse-kings  have   long  been   in  the   service  of
 Sauron.'(22)                                                             
   'No,  I  know that.  But there  is a  way -  not over  Cris-caron, as
 you are well aware.'                                                     
   'Of course I am. But I am not going to  risk that,  until I  am quite
 sure there is no other way. I shall think things  out while  the others
 rest and sleep.'(23)                                                     
                                                                         
   In   the   late   afternoon,  before   preparations  were   made  for
 moving,  Gandalf  poke  to  the  travellers.  'We  have  now   come  to
 our first serious difficulty  and doubt,'  he said.  'The pass  that we
 ought  to  take  is  up  there  ahead'  -  he  waved  his  hand towards
 Taragaer:  its  sides  were  now  dark  and  sullen,  for  the  sun had
 gone, and its head was in grey  cloud. 'It  will take  us at  least two
 marches to get near the top  of the  pass. From  certain signs  we have
 seen recently  I fear  it may  be watched  or guarded;  and in  any case
 Trotter  and  I have  doubts of  the weather,  on this  wind. But  I am
 afraid  we  must  go  on.  We  can't  go  back  into  the  winter;  and
 further  south  the  passes  are held.  Tonight we  must push  along as
 hard as we can.'                                                         
   The hearts  of the  travellers sank  at his  words. But  they hurried

 with their preparations, and started  off at  as good  a pace  as they
 could  make.  It  was  heavy  going.  The  winding  and  twisting road
 had  long  been  neglected  and  in  places  was  blocked  with fallen
 stones, over which they  had great  difficulty in  finding any  way to
 lead the  pack ponies.(25) The night  grew deadly  dark under  the great
 clouds;  a  bitter  wind  swirled  among the  rocks. By  midnight they
 had already  climbed to  the very  knees of  the great  mountains, and
 were  going  straight  up under  a mountain-side,  with a  deep ravine
 guessed  but  unseen  on their  right. Suddenly  Frodo felt  soft cold
 touches on his  face. He  put out  his arm,  and saw  white snowflakes
 settle on his  sleeve. Before  long they  were falling  fast, swirling
 from every direction into his eyes, and filling all the air.  The dark
 shapes of  Gandalf and  Trotter, a  few paces  in front,  could hardly
 be seen.                                                              
   'I don't like this,' panted Sam just behind. 'Snow is all right on a
 fine morning, seen from a window; but I like to be  in bed  while it's
 falling.' As a matter of fact snow fell very seldom  in most  parts of
 the  Shire  except  the  moors  of  the  Northfarthing.   There  would
 occasionally, in January or February, be a thin  white dusting  of it,
 but [it] soon vanished, and only rarely  in cold  winters was  there a
 real fall - enough to make snowballs of.                              
   Gandalf  halted.  Frodo  thought  as  he  came  up  by  him  that he
 already  looked  almost  like  a  snow-man.  Snow  was  white  on  his
 hood and  bowed shoulders,  and it  was already  getting thick  on the
 ground under foot.                                                    
   'This is a bad business! ' said the wizard.  'I never  bargained for
 this, and left snow out of my plans. It seldom falls  as far  south as
 this except on the high peaks,  and here  we are  not halfway  up even
 to the high pass. I wonder if the Enemy  has anything  to do  with it.
 He has strange powers and many allies.'                               
   'We  had  better  get  all  the party  together,' said  Trotter. 'We
 don't want to lose anyone on a night like this.'                      
   For  a  while  they  struggled  on.  The  snow  became   a  blinding
 blizzard, and soon it  was in  places almost  knee-deep. 'It'll  be up
 over  my  head  before  long,'  said  Merry.  Faramond   was  dragging
 behind  and  needed  what  help   Merry  and   Sam  could   give  him.
 Frodo felt his own legs like lead at every step.                      
   Suddenly  they  heard  strange  sounds:  they  may  have   been  but
 tricks of the rising wind in cracks and gullies of  the rocks,  but it
 sounded  like  hoarse  cries  and  howls   of  harsh   laughter.  Then
 stones began to fall whirling like  leaves on  the wind,  and crashing
 onto  the  path  and the  rocks on  either hand.  Every now  and again

 they  heard  in  the darkness  a dull  rumble as  a great  boulder rolled
 down thunderously from hidden heights in the dark above.                
   The  party   halted.  'We   can't  get   any  further   tonight,'  said
 Trotter. 'You can call it the wind if you like, but I eall it  voices and
 those stones are aimed at us, or at least at the path.'                 
   'I do call it  the wind,'  said Gandalf;  'but that  does not  make the
 rest  untrue.  Not  all the  servants of  the Enemy  have bodies  or arms
 and legs.'(26)                                                          
   'What  can  we  do?'  asked  Frodo.  His  heart  suddenly  failed him,
 and  he  felt  alone  and lost  in dark  and driving  snow, mocked  at by
 demons of the mountains.                                                
   'Stop  here  or  go  back,'  answered  Gandalf.  'We  are  protected at
 present by the high wall  on our  left, and  a deep  gully on  the right.
 Further up  there is  a wide  shallow valley,  and the  road runs  at the
 bottom  of  two   long  slopes.   We  should   now  hardly   get  through
 there without damage, quite apart from the snow.'(27)                   
   After  some  debate  they  retreated  to  a spot  they had  passed just
 before  the  snow  came   on.  There   the  path   passed  under   a  low
 overhanging  cliff.  It  faced  southwards  and   they  hoped   it  would
 give  them  some  protection  from  the  wind.  But  the  eddying  blasts
 whirled  in  from  either  side,  and  the  snow  came down  thicker than
 ever.  They  huddled  together  with  their  backs to  the wall.  The two
 ponies  stood  dejected  but  patiently in  front of  them and  served as
 some  kind  of  screen,  but  before  long  the  snow  was  up  to  their
 bellies   and  still   mounting.  The   hobbits  crouching   behind  were
 nearly  buried.  A  great  sleepiness  came  over  Frodo,  and   he  felt
 himself  fast  sinking  into a  warm and  hazy dream.  He thought  a fire
 was  warming  his  toes,  and  out  of  the  shadows  he   heard  Bilbo's
 voice  speaking.  'I  don't  think  much  of  your  diary,' he  heard him
 say.  'Snow(storm)  on  December  2nd:(28) there  was   no  need   to  come
 back to report that.'                                                   
   Suddenly   he   felt   himself   violently   shaken,   and   came  back
 painfully  to  wakefulness.  Boromir  had  lifted   him  right   off  the
 ground.  'This  snow  will  be  the  death of  the hobbits,  Gandalf,' he
 said. 'We must do something.'                                           
   'Give  them  this,'  said  Gandalf,  fumbling  in  his  pack  that  lay
 beside  him, and  drawing out  a leather  flagon. 'Just  a little  each -
 for all of us. It is very precious: one of Elrond's  cordials, and  I did
 not expect to have to use it so soon.'                                  
   As  soon as  Frodo had  swallowed a  little of  the potent  cordial, he
 felt new  strength of  heart, and  the heavy  sleepiness left  his limbs.
 The others revived as quickly.                                          

 
                                                                       
   Boromir  now  endeavoured  to  clear  away  the   snow  and   make  a
 free  space  under  the  rock-wall.  Finding  his  hands and  feet slow
 tools,  and  his  sword  not  much better,  he took  a faggot  from the
 fuel that they carried on one of the ponies, in  case they  should need
 fire  in  places  where  there  was  no  wood.  He  bound it  tight and
 thrust a staff in the midst, so that it looked like a large mallet; but
 he used it as a ram to thrust back the  soft snow,  till it  was packed
 hard  into  a  wall  before  them  and  could  not  be  pushed  further
 away.  For  the  moment  things  looked  better,   and  in   the  small
 cleared  space  the  travellers  stood and  took short  paces, stamping
 to keep their limbs  awake. But  the snow  continued to  fall unrelent-
 ing;  and  it  became  plain  that they  were likely  enough to  be all
 buried in snow again before the night was out.(29)                    
   'What  about  a  fire?'  said  Trotter   suddenly.  'As   for  giving
 ourselves  away:  personally  I  think our  whereabouts is  pretty well
 known or guessed already - by somebody.'                               
   In desperation they decided to light a fire if they could, even if it
 meant  sacrificing  all  the  fuel that  they had  with them.  It taxed
 even  Gandalf's  power  to  kindle the  wet wood  in that  windy place.
 Ordinary  methods  were  of  no  use,  though  each  of  the travellers
 had  tinder  and  flint.  They had  brought some  fir cones  and little
 bundles  of  dried  grass  for  kindling,  but no  fire would  catch in
 them,  until  Gandalf  thrust  his  wand  into  the  midst of  them and
 caused a great spark of blue and green flame to spring out.            
   'Well,  if  any  enemy  is  watching,'  he said,  'that will  give me
 away. Let  us hope  other eyes  are as  blinded by  the storm  as ours.
 But  anyway  a  fire  is  a  good thing  to see.'  The wood  now burned
 merrily and kept a clear circle all  round it  in which  the travellers
 gathered   somewhat   heartened;   but   looking   round   Gandalf  saw
 anxious   eyes   revealed  by   the  dancing   flames.  The   wood  was
 burning fast, and the snow was not yet lessening.                      
   'Daylight  will  soon  be  showing,'  said  Gandalf  as  cheerily  as
 he  could,  but  added:  'if  any  daylight can  get through  the snow-
 clouds.'                                                               
   The  fire  burned  low  and the  last faggot  was thrown  on. Trotter
 stood up and stared into the blackness above. 'I believe it  is getting
 less,' he said. For a long while the others gazed  at the flakes coming
 .....  down out  of the  darkness, to  be revealed  for a  moment white
 in the light of the fire; but they could see little difference. After a
 while,  however, it  became plain  that Trotter  was right.  The flakes
 became  fewer  and  fewer.  The  wind  grew  less.  The  daylight began
 to  grow  pale  grey  and  diffused. Then  the snow  ceased altogether.

   As  the  light grew  stronger it  showed a  shapeless world  all about
 them.  The  high  places  were  hid  in  clouds  (that  threatened still
 more  snow),  but  below  them  they  could  see  dim  white  hills  and
 domes  and  valleys  in  which  the  path  they   had  come   by  seemed
 altogether lost.                                                       
   'The  sooner  we  make  a  move,  and  get  down  again,  the better,'
 said Trotter.> 'There is more snow  still to  fall up  here! '  But much
 as they all desired to get down again it was easier to speak of  it than
 to  manage  it.  The  snow  round  about  was  already  some  feet deep:
 up to the necks of the hobbits  or over  their heads  in places;  and it
 was  still  soft.  If  they  had  [had]  northern  sledges  or snowshoes
 [they]  would  have  been  of  little  use.  Gandalf  could   only  just
 manage   to   get  forward   with  labour,   more  like   swimming  (and
 burrowing)  than  walking.  Boromir  was  the  tallest  of   the  party:
 being  some  six  feet  high  and  broad-shouldered  as  well.  He  went
 ahead  a little  way to  test the  path. The  snow was  everywhere above
 even  his  knees,  and  in  many  places he  sank up  to the  waist. The
 situation looked fairly desperate.                                     
   'I will go on down if I  can,' he  said.(31) 'As  far as  I can  make out
 our  course  of  last  night,  the  path  seems  to  turn right  round a
                                                                       
 or two below the turn we ought to come on to a flat space at the top ]
 of a long steep slope - very heavy going it was coming up. From        
 there I may be able to get some view and some idea of how the          
 snow lies further down.' He struggled forward slowly, and after a      
 while disappeared round the turn.                                      
   It was nearly an hour before he came back, tired but with some       
 encouraging news. 'There is a deep wind drift just the other side of
 the turn, and I was nearly buried in it; but beyond that the snow      
 quickly gets less. At the top of the slope it is no more than ankle-
 deep and it is only sprinkled on the ground from there down: or so     
 it seems.'                                                             
   'It may be only sprinkled further down,' grunted Gandalf; 'but       
 it is not sprinkled up here. Even the snow seems to have been          
 aimed specially at us.'                                                
   'How are toe to get to the turn?' asked Trotter.                     
   'I don't know!' said Boromir. 'it is a pity Gandalf can't produce
 flame enough to melt us a pathwav.'                                 
   'I daresay it is,' snapped  Candaif; 'but even I need a few          
 materials to work upon. I car. kindle fire not feed it. What you       
 want is a dragon not a wizard.'                                        
   'Indeed I think a tame dragon would actually be more useful at      

 
                                                                     
 the moment than  a wild  wizard,' said  Boromir -  with a  laugh that
 did not in any way appease Gandalf.                                  
    'At  the  moment, at  the moment,'  he replied.  'Later on  we may
 see. I am old enough to  be your  great-grandfather's ancestor  - but
 I am not doddery yet.  It will  serve you  right if  you meet  a wild
 dragon.'(32)                                                         
    'Well, well! When heads are at a loss bodies  must serve  they say
 in  my  country,'  said  Boromir. 'We  must just  try and  thrust our
 way through. Put the little folk on the ponies, two  on each.  I will
 carry the smallest; you go behind, Gandalf, and I will go in front.'
    At once he set  about unloading  the ponies  of their  burdens. 'I
 will come back for these  when we  have forced  a passage,'  he said.
 Frodo  and  Sam  were  mounted  on  one  of  the  ponies,  Merry  and
 Trotter  on  the  other.  Then  picking  up  Faramond  Boromir strode
 forward.                                                             
    Slowly  they  ploughed  their way  forward. It  took some  time to
 reach the bend, but they did so  without mishap.  After a  short halt
 they  laboured  on  to  the  edge  of  the  drift.  Suddenly  Boromir
 stumbled  on  some  hidden  stone,  and  fell headlong.  Faramond was
 thrown  from  his  shoulder  into  deep  snow  and  disappeared.  The
 pony  behind  reared  and  then  fell also,  tumbling both  Frodo and
 Sam  into  the  drift.  Trotter  however  managed  to  hold  back the
 second pony.                                                         
    For  some  moments  all  was  confusion.   But  Boromir   got  up,
 shaking the snow from  his face  and eyes,  and went  to the  head of
 the floundering and kicking pony. When he  had got  it onto  its feet
 again, he went to the  rescue of  the hobbits  who had  vanished into
 deep  holes  in  the  yielding  snow. Picking  up first  Faramond and
 then  Frodo  he  ploughed  his  way  through  the  remainder  of the
 drift and set them on  their feet  beyond. He  then returned  for the
 pony and Sam. 'Follow  now in  my track!  ' he  cried to  the remain-
 ing three. 'The worst is over! '                                     
    At  last they  all came  to the  head of  the long  slope. Gandalf
 bowed to Boromir. 'If I was testy,'  he said,  'forgive me.  Even the
 wisest  wizard  does  not  like  to  see  his  plans  go  awry. Thank
 goodness for plain  strength and  good sense.  We are  grateful to
 you, Boromir of Ond.'(33)                                          
    They looked  out from  the high  place where  they stood  over the
 lands. Daylight was now as full as it would be, unless  the heavy
 clouds  were  broken.  Far  below,  and  over the  tumbled country
 falling away from the foot of the incline, Frodo thought  he could
 see the dell from which they had started to climb the night before.

   
                                                                      
 His  legs  ached  and  his head  was dizzy  as he  thought of  the long
 painful  march  down  again.  In  the  distance,  below  him  but still
 high  above  the  lower  hills,  he  saw  many  black specks  moving in
 the air. 'The birds again,' he said in a low voice, pointing.         
   'It can't  be helped  now, said  Gandalf. 'Whether  they are  good or
 bad,  or  nothing  to do  with us,  we must  go on  down at  once.' The
 wind  was  blowing stiffly  again over  the pass  hidden in  the clouds
 behind; and already some snowflakes were drifting down.               
   It was late in the afternoon, and  the grey  light was  already again
 waning  fast  when  they  got  back  to  their  camp  of  the  previous
 night.  They   were  weary   and  very   hungry.  The   mountains  were
 veiled in a deepening dusk full of  snow: even  there in  the foothills
 snow was falling gently. The birds had vanished.                      
   They  had  no  fuel  for  a  fire,  and  made  themselves as  warm as
 they  could  with  all their  spare furs  and blankets.  Gandalf spared
 them  each  one   more  mouthful   of  the   cordial.  When   they  had
 eaten, Gandalf called a council.                                      
   'We cannot of course go on again tonight,'  he said.  'We all  need a
 good  rest,  and  I  think  we  had  better  stay  here  till  tomorrow
 evening.'                                                             
   'And  when  we move  where are  we to  go to?'  asked Frodo.  'It is
 no use trying the pass again; but you said yourself last night  in this
 very  spot  that  we  could  not  now  cross  the passes  further north
 because of winter, nor further south because of enemies.'             
   'There  is  no  need  to  remind  me,' said  Gandalf. 'The  choice is
 now  between  going  on  with our  journey -  by some  road or  other -
 or returning to Rivendell.'                                           
   The  faces  of  the  hobbits  revealed  plainly  enough  the pleasure
 they felt at the  mere mention  of returning  to Rivendell.  Sam's face
 brightened  visibly,  and  he   glanced  at   his  master.   But  Frodo
 looked troubled.                                                      
   'I  wish  I  was  back  in  Rivendell,'  he acknowledged.  'But would
 not  that  be  going  back  also  on  all that  was spoken  and decided
 there?' he asked.                                                     
   'Yes,'  replied  Gandalf.  'Our  journey  was  already  delayed  per-
 haps too long. After the winter it would  be quite  vain. If  we return
 it will mean the siege  of Rivendell,  and likely  enough its  fall and
 destruction.'                                                         
   'Then  we  must  go  on,'  said  Frodo  with  a  sigh,  and  Sam sank
 back into gloom. 'We must go on - if there is any road to take.'      
   'There  is,  or  there  may  be,'  said  Gandalf.  'But  I  have  not
 mentioned  it  to  you  before,  and  have  hardly  even thought  of it

             
                                                                    
 while there was hope  of the  pass of  Cris-caron. For  it is  not a
 pleasant road.'                                                     
  'If it is worse than the pass of Cris-caron it  must be  very nasty
 indeed,' said Merry. 'But you had better now tell us about it.'     
  'Have you ever heard of the Mines of  Moria or  the Black  Gulf?'(34)
 asked Gandalf.                                                      
  'Yes,'  answered  Frodo.  'I  think  so. I  seem to  remember Bilbo
 speaking of them  long ago,  when he  told me  tales of  the dwarves
 and goblins. But I have no idea where they are.'                    
  'They  are  not  far  away,' said  the wizard.  'They are  in these
 mountains.  They  were  made  by  the Dwarves  of Durin's  clan many
 hundreds of years ago,  when elves  dwelt in  Hollin, and  there was
 peace between the two races. In  those ancient  days Durin  dwelt in
 Caron-dun,  and  there  was  traffic  on  the  Great River.  But the
 Goblins  -  fierce  orcs (35) in great  number -  drove them  out after
 many wars, and most  of the  dwarves that  escaped removed  far into
 the North. They have often tried  to regain  these mines,  but never
 so  far  as  I  know  have  they  succeeded.  King Thror  was killed
 there  after  he  fled  from  Dale  when  the  dragon  came,  as you
 may  remember  from  Bilbo's tales.  As Gloin  told us,  the dwarves
 of  Dale  think  Balin  came  here,  but  no  news  has   come  from
 him. '(36)                                                          
  'How  can  the  mines  [of   the]  Black   Gulf  help   us?'  asked
 Boromir. 'It sounds a name of ill-omen.'                            
  'It  is  so, or  has become  so,' answered  Gandalf. 'But  one must
 tread the path need chooses. If there are orcs in the mines, it will
 prove ill for us. But  most of  the goblins  of the  Misty Mountains
 were destroyed  in the  Battle of  Five Armies  at the  Lonely Moun-
 tain. There is a chance that the mines are still deserted.  There is
 even a chance that dwarves are there, and that Balin lives in secret
 in some deep hall. If either of  these chances  prove true,  then we
 may  get  through. For  the mines  go right  through and  under this
 western  arm  of the  mountains. The  tunnels of  Moria were  of old
 the  most  famous  in  the  northern  world.  There were  two secret
 gates on  the western  side, though  the chief  entrance was  on the
 East  looking  upon  Caron-dun.(37) I passed  right   through,  many
 years  ago, when  I was  looking for  Thror and  Thrain. But  I have
 never been since - I have never wished to repeat the experience.'(38)
  'And  I  don't  wish  for  it  even  once,'  said Merry.  'Nor me,'
 muttered Sam.                                                       
  'Of course not,'  said Gandalf.  'Who would?  But the  question is,
 will you follow me, if I take the risk?'                            

   There  was  no  answer   for  some   time.  'How   far  are   the  western
 gates?'asked Frodo at length.                                               
   'About ten (39) miles south of Cris-caron,' said Trotter.                     
   'Then   you   know   of   Moria?'   said   Frodo,   looking   at   him  in
 surprise.                                                                   
   'Yes,  I  know  of  the  mines,'  said  Trotter  quietly.  'I  went  there
 once,  and  the  memory  is  evil;  but  if   you  want   to  know,   I  was
 always  in  favour  of  trying  that  way  rather  than  an  open  pass.>  I
 will   follow   Gandalf   -  though   I  should   have  followed   him  more
 willingly if we could have come to the gate of Moria more secretly.'        
   'Well,  come  now,'  said  Gandalf.  'I  would  not  put  such   a  choice
 to  you,  if  there  were  any  hope  in  other  roads,   or  any   hope  in
 retreat. Will you try Moria, or go back to Rivendell?'                      
   'We must risk the Mines,' said Frodo.                                     
                                                                            
   As I have said, it is remarkable  how substantially  the structure  of the
 story  was  achieved at  the very  beginning, while  the differences  in the
 dramatis personae are so great. It is  indeed very  curious, that  before my
 father  had  even  written  the  first  complete  draft  of 'The  Council of
 Elrond'  he  had  decided  that  the  Company  should include  an Elf  and a
 Dwarf (p. 397), as  seems now  so natural  and inevitable,  and yet  in 'The
 Ring  Goes  South'  we  have  only  Gandalf  and  Boromir  and  five hobbits
 (one of whom,  admittedly, is  the most  unusually far-travelled  and widely
 experienced Trotter).                                                       
   But as often in the history of The Lord of the Rings much of  the earliest
 writing remained, for example in the  detail of  conversation, and  yet such
 conversation appears  later shifted  into new  contexts, given  to different
 speakers, and acquiring new resonance as  the 'world'  and its  history grew
 and expanded. A striking example is given in note 8,  where in  the original
 text  'Trotter  sat with  his head  bowed to  his knees'  as they  waited to
 depart  from Rivendell,  while in  FR 'Aragorn  sat with  his head  bowed to
 his  knees;  only  Elrond knew  fully what  this hour  meant to  him.' The
 question  presents itself:  what is  really the  relation between  Trotter =
 Peregrin Boffin and Strider = Aragorn?                                      
   It would obviously not be true to say merely that there was  a role  to be
 played in the story, and that at first this role was played by a  Hobbit but
 afterwards by a Man.  In particular  cases, looked  at narrowly  without the
 larger context, this might seem a sufficient  or nearly  sufficient account:
 the  necessary  or  fixed  action  was  that  Sam Gamgee's  companion should
 hiss 'Lie flat and still' and pull him down into the  shade of  a holly-bush
 (p. 420, FR p. 298). But this says very little. I would be inclined to think
 that  the  original  figure  (the  mysterious  person  who   encounters  the
 hobbits  in  the  inn  at  Bree)  was  capable  of development  in different
 directions without losing important elements of his  'identity' as  a recog-
 nisable  character  - even  though the  choice of  one direction  or another

  would lead to quite different historical and racial 'identities'  in Middle-
  earth.  So  Trotter  was not  simply switched  from Hobbit  to Man  - though
  such a switch could take place in the case of Mr. Butterbur with very little
  disturbance.  Rather,  he  had  been  potentially Aragorn  for a  long time;
  and  when  my  father  decided  that  Trotter  was  Aragorn  and   was  not
  Peregrin Boffin  his stature  and his  history were  totally changed,  but a
  great  deal  of  the 'indivisible'  Trotter remained  in Aragorn  and deter-
  mined his nature.                                                           
    It may also be  thought that  in the  story of  the attempt  on Cris-caron
  Trotter is diminished from the role he had  played in  the narrative  of the
  journey  from  Bree  to  Rivendell,  in which,  though a  hobbit, he  is set
  altogether apart from the  others, a  wise and  resourceful leader  of great
  experience in  whom all  their hope  rests. Now,  in these  physical circum-
  stances, and beside Boromir, he  is one  of the  helpless 'little  folk', as
  Boromir  says,  to be  set on  a pony.  Of course,  this question  cannot be
  approached  without  hindsight;  if Trotter  had in  fact remained  a hobbit
  in The Lord of the Rings it would not arise. Yet considerations  along these
  lines  may  have  been  an  element  in  the  decision  about  him  which my
  father would now shortly take.                                              
                                                                             
                                     NOTES.                                   
                                                                             
   1. An  isolated  page,  certainly  of  this  time,  does  give   a  preliminary
      sketch  of  the  passage  that begins  approximately at  'As the  light grew
      stronger' on p.  426. The  writing is  at the  extreme limit  of legibility,
      in rapid pencil now very faint.                                         
        Grey  light  grew  revealing  a  snow...  world  in  which  the   path  by
      which  they  had  climbed  could  scarcely   be  seen.   The  snow   was  no
      longer falling but the sky threatened more to come.                     
           'The  sooner  we  move  and  begin  to  get  down  the   better,'  said
      Gandalf.   This   was   easier   said   than    done.   Hobbits.    One   on
      each   journey.   [Struck   out:   Boromir   carries   Frodo   (..  precious
      burden).]   Boromir   and   Gandalf   go   ahead  and   feel  the   way.  In
      places   Boromir   vanished   almost   to   his   neck.   They    began   to
      despair   for   the  snow   was  soft..........   With  great   labour  they
      had  gone  only  1/4  mile  down  and  were   all  getting   exhausted.  But
      suddenly  they  found  the  snow  less  thick  -  'even  that seems  to have
      been   specially   aimed  at   us'  said   Gandalf.  Boromir   strode  ahead
      and  came  back  reporting  that  it  was  [?soon   only  white].   At  lact
      when  daylight  was  broad  they  came  back  to  places  almost   clear  of
      snow.                                                                   
           G.  points  out   the  place   they  had   started  from   the  evening
      before. Council. What is to be done. Moria.                             
      The   page   continues  with   some  preliminary   strokes  for   the  scene
      outside the West Gate of Moria; see p. 444.                             

 2.  Dates  were  put  in marginally  against this  sentence: 'Nov.  7th?' and
     'Nov. 10 - 11'; in addition, 'a fortnight' was changed to '3  weeks' and
     'a week old or more' to 'nearly 2 weeks old'.                            
 3.  After  'as  far  as'  my  father  first  wrote Dimbar,  perhaps intending
     'Dimbar  in  the  Dimrill-dales'.  The  name   Dimbar  had   appeared  in
     the  Quenta  Silmarillion  (V.261),  of  the   empty  land   between  the
     rivers Sirion and Mindeb.                                                
       For  this  application  of  Dimrill-dale(s)  (north  of  Rivendell) see
     p.   360.  When   the  name   Dimrill-dale  was   transferred  southwards
     and to  the other  side of  the Misty  Mountains it  was replaced  in the
     north  by  Hoardale,  and  this  name  was  pencilled  later on  the text
     here.                                                                    
 4.  This  is  the  first  occurrence  of  the   names  Cladden   (River)  and
     Gladden  Fields.  The  river  had  been  shown  on  the  Map  of  Wilder-
     land  in  The  Hobbit,  with  marshy  land  at  its  confluence  with the
     Great River, suggesting a region where 'gladdens' would grow.            
       At the foot of the page is a  note that  applies to  the names  in this
     passage:  'These  names  are  given  in  Hobbit [fashion  >] translation.
     Their   real   names   were   Tum   Dincelon;  Arad   .Dain  (Annerchin);
     Crandir  Redway;  and  Palathrin  (Palath  =  Iris).'  Tum   Dincelon  is
     Dimrill-dale,  in  the  original application  (note 3).  I do  not under-
     stand  the  reference  of  'Arad  Dain  (Annerchin)'.  My   father  first
     wrote  Tar  and  struck  it  out before  writing Arad.  For the  names of
     the  River  Redway  see  note  15.  In   the  Etymologies   the  Noldorin
     word palath = 'surface' (V. 380).                                        
 5.  Cf.  the  Map  of  Wilderland  in  The Hobbit;  'Goblin Gate  and Eyrie.'
 6.  According  to  The  Tale  of  Years  in  LR  (Appendix  B)   the  Company
     left Rivendell on 25 December.                                           
 7.  This passage  was rewritten  over and  over again,  and it  is impossible
     to interpret the sequence precisely: but it is clear that my father first
     envisaged   the  Company   as  mounted,   with  Boromir's   'great  brown
     horse',  Gandalf's  white  horse,  and  seven ponies,  five for  the five
     hobbits,  and  two  pack-animals  (see  note  25). An  intermediate stage
     saw Boromir alone  on foot:  'There were  ponies for  all the  hobbits to
     ride  where  the  road  allowed,  and  Gandalf of  course had  his horse;
     but Boromir strode on foot,  as he  had come.  The men  of his  race did
     not ride horses.' The text printed is certainly the final  formulation at
     this stage, and is of course different from  that in  FR (p.  293), where
     the  sole  beast  of  burden  was  Bill  Ferny's  pony,  whom  Sam called
     Bill.                                                                    
 8.  Cf.  FR  p. 293:  'Aragorn sat  with his  head bowed  to his  knees; only
     Elrond knew fully what this hour meant to him.' See p. 430.              
 9.  This  is  the first  occurrence of  Hollin; but  the Elvish  name Eregion
     does  not  appear.  In  the  Etymologies  (V.356)  the  Elvish   name  of
     Hollin  is  Regornion.  -  In  FR (p.  296) Gandalf  says that  they have

                                         
                                                                           
       come 45 leagues, but that  was as  the crow  flies: 'many  long miles
       further our feet have walked.'                                       
  10.  See the Note on Geography, pp. 440- 1.                               
  11.  At  the  first occurrence  the name  of the  'red horn  mountain' was
       replaced over and over again:  first it  was Bliscarn,  then Carnbeleg
       or  Ruddyhorn,  then,  Tarager  see  the  Etymoloies,   V.391);  also
       written  on  the  margins  of  the  page  are  Caradras  = Ruddihorn,
       and  Rhascaron.  All  these  names  appear  on  the  contemporary map
       (p.  439).  At  the  next  occurrence   Carnbeleg  was   replaced  by
       Taragaer,  and  subsequently  the  name  first  written  was Caradras
       replaced  by  Taragaer,  and  finally   Taragaer.  I   give  Taragaer
       throughout, as  being apparently  the preferred  name at  this stage.
       Changes made in red ink at  some later  stage brought  back Caradras.
  12.  On  the  dividing  of  the  Misty  Mountains  into  an eastern  and a
       western  arm  see  the  Note on  Geography, p.  438. My  father wrote
       here first 'the great vale', and the replacement word is probably but
       not certainly 'land'.                                                
  13.  The name of the vale  was first  Carndoom the  Red Valley;  above was
       written   Carondun  and   Doon-Caron, but   these  were   struck  out.
       Elsewhere on this page is Narodum  = Red  Vale; and  the name  in the
       text was corrected in red  ink to  Dimrill-dale: Nanduhiriath  (in FR
       Nanduhirion). On the former application of  Dimrill-dale see  note 3.
       At  subsequent   occurrences  the   name  is   Carndoom,  Caron-doom,
       Caron-dun, Dun Caron, and at the last  the name  was replaced  in red
       ink by Glassmere  in Dimrilldale  (note 37).  Among these  forms, all
       meaning 'Red Valley', I have rather  arbitrarily chosen  Caron-dun to
       stand as the consistent form in the text.                            
  14.  The name of the pass was first written Criscarn, with Cris-caron as a
       rejected  alternative;  at  subsequent  occurrences both  appear, but
       with the preference  to Cris-caron  (also Cris-carron,  Cris Caron),
       which I adopt. Dimrill-stair  replaces it  twice in  red ink,  in the
       present  passage  thus:  'over  the  pass that  was [read  is] called
       Dimrill-stair (Pendrethdulur) under the side  of Caradras.'  The pass
       was afterwards called the Redhorn Gate,  the Dimrill-stair  being the
       descent  from  the  pass  on  the  eastern  side;  cf. note  21. With
       Pendrethdulur  cf. the  Etymologies, V.380,  pendrath 'passage  up or
       down a slope, stairway'.                                             
  15.  The River Redway, the later Silverlode,  has been  referred to  in an
       outline dated  August 1939  (p. 381),  and at  its occurrence  at the
       beginning of the chapter the Elvish name Crandir  is given  (note 4).
       Here, above  Redway, are  written the  names Rathgarn  (struck out);
       Rathcarn; Nenning   (struck   out);  and   Caradras or Redway.  Written
       in  the margin  is also Narosir =  Redway. At  this time  Nenning had
       not  yet appeared  in The  Silmarillion and  the Annals  of Beleriand
       as  the name  of the  river in  Beleriand west  of Narog,  .which was

      still  called  Eglor.  In red  ink the  name Celebrin  was substituted
      (Celebrant  in  FR).  The  river  is  called  Caradras on  the contem-
      porary map (p. 439).                                                   
  16. It was said in the outline  given on  p. 410  that Beleghir  the Great
      River  divided  into  many channels  in Fangorn  Forest. See  the map,
                                                                            
      p. 439.                                                                
  17. While  in  FR  (p. 298)  Aragorn says  that he  has seen  hawks flying
      high up, he does not say, as  Trotter does  here, 'That  would account
      for    the      silence.'
  18. southwards: changed in pencil from northwards.                         
  19. It  was  now 28  November (since  they walked  for three  nights after
      this  and  attempted  Cris-caron  on  2  December,  pp. 422,  424). In
      notes  on phases  of the  Moon (found  on the  back of  a page  in the
      previous  section  of this  manuscript) my  father gave  the following
      dates, showing that on the night of the 28th the Moon was in its first
      quarter:                                                               
                                                                            
      Last Quarter.    New Moon.     First Quarter.       Full Moon.                        
       Sept. 18.       Sept. 25.       Oct. 2.             Oct. 10.                                 
        Oct. 17.        Oct. 24.       Oct. 31.            Nov. 8.
        Nov. 15.        Nov. 22.       Nov. 29.            Dec. 7.
                                                                            
  20. This  incident  was  retained  in  FR,  but it  is not  explained. The
      Winged  Nazgul  had  not  yet  crossed  the  River  (The   Two  Towers
      pp. 101, 201).                                                        
  21. As written in ink, and before changes in  pencil produced  the passage
      given,  Gandalf  said:  'Winter is  behind. There  is snow  coming. In
      fact  it  has  come.  The  peaks  behind are  whiter than  they were.'
      Trotter's reply is the  same, but  he ends:  'we may  get caught  in a
      blizzard before we get over the pass.' In the margin my  father wrote:
      '? Cut out prophecy of snow - let  it come  suddenly.' He  struck this
      out, but the passage as  emended makes  the threat  of snow  seem less
      certain.                                                               
         The  words  'on  our  way  to  the  red  pass  of  Cris-caron' were
      emended in red ink to 'on our way up the Dimrill-stair'; see note 14.
  22. My father first wrote here (emending it to the text given at  the time
      of  writing):  'But  we  have  to  go  on,  and we  have to  cross the
      mountains  here  or  go  back. The  passes further  south are  too far
      away, and were all guarded  years ago  - they  lead straight  into the
      country  of  the  [Beardless   Men  Mani   Aroman  >]   Horsemen.'  In
      the rewritten passage, the reference  to the  passes further  south is
      removed, but it reappears a little later: 'further south the passes are
      held' (cf. FR  p. 300:  Further south  there are  no passes,  till one
      comes to the Gap of Rohan').                                           
         Before  the  name Rohan  was reached  several others  were written,
      Thanador,   Ulthanador,   Borthendor,   Orothan[ador].    After  Rohan
      is  written:  [=  Rochan(dor)  =  Horseland].  This  is unquestionably

      the  point  at  which  the  name  Rohan  arose.  Cf.  the  Etymologies,
      V.384: Quenya rokko, Noldorin roch, horse.                               
          A  scribble in  the margin  seems to  change 'The  Horse-kings have
      long been  in the  service of  Sauron' to  'Rohan where  the Horsekings
      or  Horselords  are.'  Cf. FR  p. 300:  'Who knows  which side  now the
      inarshals of the Horse-lords serve?'                                   
  23. In  the original  story Trotter  favoured the  passage of  Moria and
      Gandalf  the  pass;  in FR  (p. 300)  it was  Aragorn who  favoured the
      pass.                                                                  
                                                                            
  24. This passage, from 'Trotter and  I have  doubts of  the weather',  is a
      rewriting  in  pencil  of  a  much  longer  passage  in  which  Gandalf
      introduced at this point the subject of Moria. Gandalf says:           
          'Trotter thinks we are likely to  be caught  in a  heavy snow-storm
      before we get across [see note 21]. I  think we  shall have  to attempt
      it, all the same. But  there is  another way,  or there  used to  be. I
      don't  know  whether  you  have  heard of  the Mines  of Moria,  or the
      Black [Pit >] Gulf?'                                                   
      Gandalf  then  describes  Moria;  and  after  this  the  original  text
      continues:                                                             
          The hearts of the travellers sank at his words. All of them would
      have voted at once  for the  cold and  perils of  the high  pass rather
      than  for  the black  gulfs of  Moria. But  Gandalf did  not ask  for a
      vote.  After  a  silence  he  said:  'There is  no need  to ask  you to
      decide.  I  know  which  way  you  would  choose,  and  I   choose  the
      same. We will try the pass.'                                           
      The  introduction  of  Moria  was  postponed  until  after  the Company
      had been  forced back  from the  pass by  the snowstorm;  and Gandalf's
      words about it reappear there in closely  similar form  (see p. 429 and
      note  38).  The  second  occurrence  of the  passage is  in ink  and an
      integral part of the chapter.                                          
  25. 'pack ponies' is a pencilled emendation from  'horses and  ponies'; see
      note 7. But when the travellers  halt under  the overhanging  cliff the
      reference to 'the two ponies' (p.424) is in the text as  first written.
  26. This  sentence  was  marked  with  a query  and enclosed  within square
      brackets at the time of writing. Later my father  wrote here:  'Not all
      evil  things  are  Sauron['s]', and  'The hawks'  (referring presumably
      to  the  hawks  which  Trotter  saw  high  up  over  Hollin,  and  said
      'accounted for the silence', p. 420);  and in  the margin:  'Gimli says
      Caradras  had  an  ill  name  even in  days when  Sauron was  of little
      account' (see FR p. 303).                                              
  27. As first written (but at once rejected) the  content of  these speeches
      (from '"This is hopeless," said Gandalf. "You can call  it the  wind if
      you  like..."')  was  more   condensed  and   was  given   entirely  to
      Gandalf.                                                               
  28. In  the  same  passage  in  FR  (p. 303)  the date  is 12  January; the
      Company  had  left  Rivendell  on  25  December,  and  so  had  been in

       the  wilderness  for  nineteen  nights.  But  in  the original  story the
       journey  was shorter:  'when they  had been  about ten  days on  the road
       the  weather  grew  better'  (p.  418),  whereas  FR  (p.  295)   has  'a
       fortnight'.                                                              
  29.  This  sentence  replaced  (probably  at  once):  'But the  snow continued
       to  fall  unrelenting,  and  at length  Gandalf had  to admit  that being
       buried  in  snow  was at  the moment  the chief  danger.' With  the words
       had to admit cf. notes 23 and 30.                                        
  30.  'Trotter'  was  changed in  pencil to  'Gandalf'. In  the context  of the
       story at this stage Trotter would  be the  more likely  to say  this (see
       notes 23 and 29), but in the rough preliminary draft given  in note  1 it
       is said by Gandalf.                                                      
  31.  My  father   pencilled  here:   'Boromir  knows   snow  from   the  Black
       Mountains. He was  born a  mountaineer'; but  he struck  this out.  It is
       said  in the  outline given  on p.  410 that  Fangorn Forest  extended up
       to  the  Black  Mountains  (changed  from   Blue  Mountains,   which  are
       referred to on the contemporary map).                                    
  32.  Pencilled changes altered  the speakers  in this  passage, but  I believe
       that these are later. The question 'How are me  to get  to the  turn?' is
       taken  from  Trotter  and  given  to  Merry  (probably because  my father
       had  decided  that  Trotter  was  a  Man),  who  goes  on  'It is  a pity
       Gandalf  can't produce  flame enough  to melt  us a  pathway'; and  it is
       Merry,  not  Boromir,  who  makes   the  remark   about  a   tame  dragon
       and  a  wild  wizard.  But  since  subsequently  it  is  to  Boromir that
       Gandalf apologises for his  irritability, these  changes were  casual and
       not fully integrated into the narrative. Either at this time or later the
       remark  about  Gandalf's  melting   them  a   path  was   transferred  to
       Legolas  (cf.  FR  p.  305),  and  this   is  obviously   a  structurally
       irrelevant addition, like that concerning Gimli in note 26.              
  33.  The  descent  of  the  Company  through  the  deep  snow  was  first told
       quite differently,  though the  version given  replaced the  other before
       it  was completed.  As first  written, Gandalf  relented at  once towards
       Boromir (after 'It will serve you right if you meet  a wild  dragon') and
       since  he  appeared  already  tired gave  him a  further sip  of Elrond's
       cordial.  Boromir  was  to  carry  each hobbit  down separately  (cf. the
       preliminary  sketch  given  in  note  r)  and  began  with Frodo;  at the
       drift  he  stumbled  on  a  hidden stone  and Frodo  was thrown  into the
       deep  snow  and  disappeared,  but  Boromir  'soon  recovered  him'.  Sam
       was  brought  down  next  ('he  had  disapproved  greatly  of  his master
       (with  the  Ring)  being  left  alone  and  out  of  reach in  any sudden
       danger').  Boromir  was  then  too  tired  to   repeat  the   ascent  and
       descent  three  times  more,  and  this  version  ends  with  hasty notes
       telling  that  Trotter,  Faramond,  and  Merry  were  put on  the ponies,
       while   Gandalf  behind   and  Boromir   ahead,  carrying   the  baggage,
       'ploughed   their   way   down   dragging   and   thrusting   the  ponies
       forward.'                                                                

          My father  then wrote:  'Or alter  all above',  and proposed  that the
       whole  Company  should  go   down  together.   In  the   second  version,
       given  in  the  text,  he  neglected  to  mention  that  Boromir returned
       once  more  to  bring  down the  baggage. The  story in  FR is  of course
       entirely different since Trotter has become Aragorn.                     
  34.  Moria is translated  'Black Gulf'  in the  first, rejected  occurrence of
       this passage (note 24). An  isolated note  earlier in  the MS  has 'Moria
       =  Black  Gulf',  with  the  etymology  yago,  ia;   here  'Gulf'   is  a
       correction  of  some  other  word  which  I  cannot  interpret.  Cf.  the
       Etymologies,  V.400,  stem  YAG  'yawn,  gape',  where  Moria  is  trans-
       lated 'Black Gulf'.                                                      
  35.  This is not the first  use of  the word  Orcs in  the LR  papers: Gandalf
       refers  to  'orcs  and  goblins'  among  the servants  of the  Dark Lord,
       pp. 211, 364; cf. also pp. 187, 320. But the rarity of the usage at this
       stage  is  remarkable.  The word  Orc goes  back to  the Lost  Tales, and
       had  been  pervasive  in  all  my  father's  subsequent writings.  In the
       Lost  Tales  the  two  terms  were  used  as  equivalents,  though  some-
       times  apparently distinguished  (see II. 364,  entry Coblins).  A clue
       may be found in a passage that occurs in both the  earlier and  the later
       Quenta  (I  V.82, V.233):  'Goblins they  may be  called, but  in ancient
       days they mere strong and fell.' At this stage it  seems that  'Orcs' are
       to  be  regarded  as  a  more  formidable  kind  of  'Goblin', so  in the
       preliminary  sketch  for  'The  Mines  of  Moria'  (p. 443)  Gandalf says
       'there are goblins - of very evil kind, larger than usual, real  orcs.' -
       It is incidentally notable that in the  first edition  of The  Hobbit the
       word  Orcs  is  used  only  once  (at  the  end  of  Chapter  VII  'Queer
       Lodgings'),  while  in  the  published  LR goblins  is hardly  ever used.
  36.  Strangely, this is not at all in agreement  with what  Gloin had  said at
       Rivendell  (p.  391):  For  many   years  things   went  well,   and  the
       colony  throve;  there  was  traffic  once  more  between  Moria  and the
       Mountain, and many gifts of silver were sent to Dain.'                  
  37.  It is here that the  emendation in  red ink  to Classmere  in Dimrilldale
       is made (note 13). This is the first appearance of  the lake  in Dimrill
       Dale;  on  the   contemporary  map   it  is   marked  and   named Mirror-
                                                                               
  38.  Gandalf's account  of  Moria  here  differs  from  the earlier  form (see
       note 24)  only  in  that here  there is  mention of  Durin, of  the peace
       between  Elves and  Dwarves, and  of Orcs  (see note  35) -  the rejected
       version  refers only  to goblins.  In that  version it  is said  that the
       Dwarves of Caron-dun 'sent their goods down the Great River.'            
  39.  'ten' changed in pencil to '20'. In FR (p. 311) Gandalf  says: 'There
       was a  door south-west  of Caradhras,  fifteen miles  as the  crow flies,
       and maybe twenty as the wolf runs.'                                      
       See note  23. In  the margin,  probably made  at the  time of  writing of
       the manuscript,  is a  note: 'Trotter  was caught  there.' This contrasts
       with what was  said earlier,  at the  Council of  Elrond (p.  401): 'Thus

 it was that Frodo learned how Trotter had tracked Gollum  as he             
 wandered southwards, through Fangorn Forest, and past  the Dead             
 Marshes, until he had himself been caught and imprisoned by the             
 Dark Lord.'                                                                 
                                                                            
                Note on the Geography and the contemporary Map.              
                                                                            
 The   extremely   rapid,  rough,   and  now   tattered  map   reproduced  on
 p. 439 can with complete certainty, I think, be ascribed to the time  of the
 original writing of this chapter. It was my father's first representation of
 Middle-earth  south  of  the  Map  of Wilderland  in The  Hobbit -  which he
 had before him, as the courses of the rivers show.                          
 Going  from  North  to  South  on  the  map,  there  is  Carrock at  the top;
 and  Gladden  (River)  and  Gl[adden]  Fields  (see  p.  416  and  note  4).
 Hollin  is  named  and roughly  marked with  a broken  line; and  the names,
 struck  out,  to the  right of  the mountains  are Taragaer,  Caradras (with
 the  final  form  Caradras  beside  it in  pencil), Carnbeleg,  and Rhascarn
 (see  note  11).  The pass  is called  Dimrill, with  (probably) Cris-caron
 struck  out  (note 14);  and Mirrormere  is marked,  the first  occurrence of
 the name (see note 37).  West of  the mere  Moria is  marked; below  are two
 illegible names  and below  them Bliscarn  (note 11) and  again Carnbeleg,
 all struck out.                                                             
 The  division of  the Misty  Mountains into  two arms  here, referred  to by
 Gandalf in the present text (pp. 419, 429) and by Gimli in  FR (p.  296), is
 shown far  more markedly  on this  original map  than it  is on  my father's
 later ones - where the eastern arm is shown as actually less  extensive than
 it is on  mine published  in LR.  For the  names of  the valley  between the
 arms of the mountains see note 13.                                         
 The  vast  westward  swing  of  the  Great  River  {marked  great  bend)  is
 already in being, but the placing of  Fangorn Forest  (in which  my father's
 writing of  the word  Forest is  a sample  of his  more rapid  script) would
 later  be  wholly changed.  That the  Great River  flowed through  the midst
 of Fangorn is stated by Gandalf (p.  419 and  note 16). The  name Belfalas
 in  the  North-east  of  Fangorn  is  in red  ink (the  only item  that is);
 afterwards  Belfalas  was  a  coastal  region  of  Gondor,  and  since falas
 ('shore') was one of the most ancient of Elvish words (see 1.253) it is hard
 to see how it could be used to refer  to a  region of  forest far  inland. I
 suspect that my father wrote it on the page after, or before, the  making of
 this extremely rapid map and without any reference to it, so that it  has no
 significance in this context.                                                
 For  the  various  proposed  names  of  the  river  Redway  in the  text see
 note  15;  among  them  is  Caradras,  which  is  written  on  the  map (but
 struck through in pencil).                                                  
 Across  the  Misty  Mountains  further  south  is  written 'Place  this pass
 into  Rohan  further  south'  (on  passes  over   the  Mountains   south  of
 Caradras see note 22). At  the bottom  of the  map on  the left  is written:

(The earliest map of the lands south of the
       Map of Wilderland in The Hobbit.)    

                         
                                                                              
  'Rohan.  Horsekings   land  Hippanaletians...   [possibly  kn   standing  for
  kingdom]   Anaxippians   Rohiroth   Rochiroth.'   The    Hippanaletians   and
  Anaxippians ('Horse-lords') are surprising.                                  
     At  the  right-hand  corner  is:  Below  here  are  the Blue  Mts. Compare
  Gandalf's  words  in  the  first  sketching  of   'The  Council   of  Elrond'
  (p.  397):  'Giant  Treebeard,  who  haunts  the  Forest  between  the  River
  and the South Mountains'; the outline given  on p.  410 in  which it  is said
  that  Fangorn  Forest  runs up  into the  Blue (>  Black) Mountains;  and the
  rejected note  to the  present text  in which  it was  said that  Boromir was
  'born a mountaineer' in the Black Mountains (note 31).                      
                                                                              
     A question  arises concerning  the line  of the  Misty Mountains.  In this
  original text it is said (p. 418), as in FR (p. 295), that south of Rivendell
  the  mountains  bent  westward;  and  this  is  shown  on  the  Map   of  the
  Wilderland in The Hobbit. It will be seen that if the  line of  the mountains
  where  it  leaves  that  map,  some  distance  south  of  the sources  of the
  Gladden,  be  continued  without  further  westward  curving,  a  track  run-
  ning  south  from  the  Ford  of  Rivendell  will  strike the  mountain chain
  somewhere  near Caradhras.  This is  in fact  precisely what  is shown  on my
  father's three  maps that  exhibit the  whole range  of the  Misty Mountains.
  On  two  of  them  the  mountains  run  in  a  straight  line from  about the
  latitude  of  Rivendell  (as  also  on  my map  published in  LR); on  one of
  them (the  earliest) the  line curves  very slightly  westward from  some way
  north of Hollin;  but on  all three  a line  drawn south  from the  Ford must
  cut  the  mountains  at  an  acute  angle  in  the  region of  Hollin, simply
  because the line of the mountains is south-south-west.                       
     It is therefore curious that the original  sketch-map discussed  here does
  not really agree with the original text (p. 418). The travellers  went south
  from  the  Ford;  and  on the  borders of  Hollin 'far  away south  Frodo saw
  the dim shapes of mountains, that  seemed now  to lie  across their  path. To
  the left of this distant range a tall peak stood up like  a tooth':  that was
  Taragaer,  the  Redhorn  (Caradhras).   And  when   Faramond  said   that  he
  thought  that  they  must  have  turned  east, since  the mountains  were now
  in front of them,  Gandalf said  No, it  is the  mountains that  have turned.
  But  on the  old map,  a line  drawn south  from the  Ford would  only strike
  the  mountains  far south  of Moria  and the  Red Pass;  and this  is because
  my  father  bent  the  mountain-line  almost  due  south  in  the  region  of
  Hollin,  so  that  the  course  from  the  Ford  and  the  mountain-line then
  become  nearly  parallel.  This  is possibly  no more  than a  consequence of
  the  speed  and  roughness  with  which  the  map  was  made  -   the  merest
  guide;  but  it is  curious that  the dotted  line marking  the route  of the
  travellers  does  actually  turn strongly  south-east towards  the pass  - as
  Faramond thought that it had!                                                
     Barbara  Strachey,  writing  on  this  question  in Journeys of  Frodo (Map
  17),  remarks:  'The  mountains  bent westward  as they  went; more  so, in
  my  opinion,  than  appears  in  the maps  of Middle-earth,  especially south

  of  the  Redhorn  Pass.  Frodo  said that  they then  seemed to  "stand across
  the path" that  the Companions  were taking'  (FR p.  295). This  is arguable;
  but  the point  is strengthened  by Gandalf's  reply to  Pippin, who  has said
  that  they  must  have  turned east:  'No, but  you see  further ahead  in the
  clear  light.  Beyond  those  peaks [i.e.  the Mountains  of Moria]  the range
  bends  round  south-west'  (FR  p.  296).  On  none  of  my father's  maps is
  there  a  change  in  the  direction  of  the  main  mountain-chain  south  of
  Caradhras.  But  all  show   some  degree   of  mountainous   extension  west-
  wards  from  the  main  chain  at  the  point  where  the Glanduin  flows down
  towards  Greyflood:  very  slight  in  one (and  so represented  on my  map in
  LR),  more  marked  on a  second, and  on the  third (the  earliest) amounting
  to a virtual division  of the  range, with  a broad  arm of  mountains running
  southwest.  On  the  elaborate  map  in coloured  chalks that  I made  in 1943
  (see p. zoo) this is again a strongly marked feature.* It may  be that  it was
  to this that Gandalf was referring.                                           
    In  this  connection  it  may  be  mentioned  that  on  my map  published in
  LR   the   mountainous   heights   shown   extending   from  the   main  range
  westwards  north  of  Hollin  are  badly  exaggerated  from  what   my  father
  intended:  'about  the  feet  of  the  main  range there  was tumbled  an ever
  wider  land  of bleak  hills, and  deep valleys  filled with  turbulent water'
                                                                               
  (FR p. 295).                                                                  
                                                                               
  (* The map referred to here as 'the earliest' (cf. also p. 202) is my father's
  original elaborate working map of The Lord of the Rings (on which my 1943 map
  was closely based). This map will be studied in Vol, VII.)                   

                                    XXV.                                     
                             THE MINES OF MORIA.                             
                                                                            
 I  have little  doubt that  the first  draft of  this chapter  was written
 continuously from the end  of 'The  Ring Goes  South', both  from internal
 evidence and external (the nature of the manuscript). But there is  also a
 very interesting two-page 'Sketch of the Mines of Moria chapter'  which, I
 think, immediately preceded the writing of it. This 'Sketch'  is extremely
 difficult to read, and some words can only be guessed at.                   
                                                                            
  Their   adventures   must   be   made   different   from   Lonely   Moun-
 tain.  Tunnels  leading  in  every  direction,  sloping  up   and  running
 steeply down. stairs. pits. noise of water in darkness.                     
  Gandalf  guided  mainly  by   the  general   sense  of   direction.  They
 had  brought  one  bundle  of  torches in  case of  need, z  each. Gandalf  i
 won't   use   them   until   necessary.  Faint   spark  from   his  staff.
 Glamdring does not glow, therefore no goblins near.                         
  How  far  to  go.  How  long  will it  take. Gandalf  reckons at  least z
 days,   perhaps   more.   Thought   of   a  night   (or  two!)   in  Moria
 terrifies  them.  Frodo  feels  dread  growing.  Perhaps   his  adventures
 with  the  Ring  have  made  him  sensitive.  While  others   are  keeping
 up  spirits  with hopeful  talk he  feels the  certainty of  evil creeping
 over  him,  but  says  nothing.  He  constantly  fancies  he  hears patter
 of  feet of  [?some creature]  behind -  [? this] is  Gollum as  it proves
 long after.                                                                 
  It   was  about   ten  o'clock   in  the   morning  when   they  entered.
 They  had  had  little  rest.  They  went  on  (with  z  halts)  until too
 weary  to  go  much  further.  They  came  to  a  dark  arch leading  to 3
 passages  all  leading  in  same  general  direction,  but the  left down,
 the  right  up,  the   centre  (apparently)   level.  Gandalf   unable  to
 choose: he does not remember the place.                                     
  They  halt  for  the  night  in  a  small chamber  (almost like  a guard-
 room  watching  the  entrances)  just  to  [?their]  left.  A deep  pit to
 right.  A  loose  stone  falls  in.  Several  minutes  before they  hear a
 noise  of  it  reach  bottom.  After  that some  of them  fancy a  far off
 echo  of  small  knocks   at  intervals   (like  signals?).   But  nothing
 further  happens  that  night.  Gandalf  sleeps  little  trying  to choose
 the  road.  [? In  end]  chooses  the  right  hand  upward  way.  They  go
 for nearly 8 hours exclusive of halts.'(1)                                     

 Come  to  a  great  chamber.  Door  in  [?south]  wall.   Dim  light   -  a
 [!high?huge]  chimney  like  shaft  slanting   up.  Far   up  a   gleam  of
 daylight.  The  gleam  falls  on  a  great square  table of  stone [written
 above: a tomb].                                                            
   There  is  another  door  in  west  [written  above:  east]  wall.  There
 are lances and swords and [? broken lying] by both doors.                  
   The  gleam  of  light  shows  carved  letters.  Here  lies  Balin  son of
 Burin,  Lord  of  Moria.  In  the  recesses  are  chests  and a  few swords
 and  shields.  Chests  empty  except  one.  Here  is   a  book   with  some
 dwarf writing.                                                             
   Tells   how  Balin   came  to   Moria.  Then   hand  changes   and  tells
 how   he   died   -   of  [?an]   arrow  that   came  unawares.   Then  how
 'enemies'  invaded  the  east  gates.  We  cannot  get  out  of   the  west
 gates  because  of  the  'dweller in  the water'.  Brief account  of siege.
 Last scrawl says 'they are coming'.                                        
   I  think  we  had  better  be  going,  said   Gandalf.  At   that  moment
 there  is  a  noise  like  a  great  boom far  underneath. Then  a terrible
 noise  like  a  horn  echoed  endlessly.  Gandalf  springs  to  door. Noise
 like goblin feet.                                                          
   Gandalf  lets  out  a  blinding   flash  and   cries  Who   comes  there?
 Ripple of..... laughter - and some deep voices.                            
   Gandalf  says  there  are  goblins  -  of  very  evil  kind,  larger than
 usual,  real  orcs.(2) Also  certainly some  kind of  troll is  leading them.
 Plan   of  defence.   They  gather   at  east   door.  But   [?south]  door
 is  propped  ajar   with  wedges.   Great  arm   and  shoulder   appear  by
 the.....  door.  Gandalf  hews   it  with   Glamdring.  Frodo   stabs  foot
 with Sting. Horrible cry. Arrows whistle in through crack.                 
   Orcs   leap   in   but  are    killed.
 [? Boom] as great rocks hit door.                                          
   They  rush  out  through  east  door   -  opens   outwards  -   and  slam
 it.  [?They  Ay]  up  a  long  wide  tunnel  Noise  soon  shows  east  door
 is broken down. Pursuit is after them.                                     
   Here follows the loss of Gandalf.                                        
                                                                           
 In pencil in the margin against the account of the attack on the chamber is
 written:                                                                   
                                                                           
   Black-mailed orc leaps in and goes for Frodo with spear - he is          
 saved by the elfmail and strikes down the orc.                             
                                                                           
   This is  a very  striking example  of an  important narrative  passage in
 The  Lord  of  the  Rings  at  its  actual  moment  of  emergence.  Here as
 elsewhere  many  of  the  most  essential  elements  were present  from the
 first:  the junction  of three  roads, Gandalf's  doubt, the  guardroom, the

  falling  stone and  the subterranean  tapping that  followed, the  chamber of
  Balin's  tomb,  the  writing  in  the book,  the troll,  and much  else. That
  Gollum  should  be  following  them  in  Moria  had  been  proposed   in  the
  outline  given on  p. 410:  'Gollum must  reappear at  or after  Moria. Frodo
  hears patter.'                                                               
    Gandalf's   sword   Glamdring   (Foe-hammer),  which   he  took   from  the
  trolls'  lair  and  which (so  Elrond told  him) 'the  king of  Gondolin once
  wore', now reappears from The Hobbit.                                        
    Balin's  father  (Fundin  in  The  Hobbit  as in  LR) is  here surprisingly
  Burin;   this   dwarf-name  (found   in  Old   Norse)  had   previously  been
  given  to  Balin's  son,  in  the first  drafts for  'The Council  of Elrond'
  (pp.  395,  397),  before  he  was  replaced  by  Gimli  son  of   Gloin  (p.
  400).                                                                        
    The  story that  Bilbo gave  Sting and  his 'elf-mail'  to Frodo  before he
  left Rivendell (FR pp. 290 - 1) entered in the sketch given on p. 397.       
    This is not the first reference to the loss of Gandalf; see p. 381, and for
  the first sketch of the event see p. 462.                                    
                                                                              
    This  'Sketch'  begins  when  the  Company  is  already  inside  Moria. For
  the story of their approach  to the  West Gate  and the  opening of  the door
  there  seems  to  be  only  the  following  by  way  of  preparatory  outline
  (though  the  'dweller  in the  water' before  the West  Gate appears  in the
  'Sketch', p.443, in the words of  the book  found in  the chamber  of Balin's
  tomb). It follows  and was  written at  the same  time as  the sketch  of the
  descent from the Red Pass in the snow (p. 431, note 1).                      
                                                                              
    Moria's   west   gates   are   dwarf-gates   (closed   like   the   Lonely
    Mountain);  but  openable  not  at  a   set  time   but  by   a  [?special
    ?speech]  spell.  Gandalf   knows  or   [?thinks]  it   must  be   one  of
    [? three]  in  ancient  tongue  -  for  the  Elves  of Hollin  wrought the
    spell.                                                                     
       Holly  bushes  grow  before   these  gates.   Then  Gandalf   knows  it
    is an elf-spell.                                                           
                                                                              
  I give now the first  draft text  of the  chapter. It  was numbered  from the
  outset  'XIV',  presumably  because  my  father had  decided that  'The Ring
  Goes  South'  was  a  separate  chapter  and  so  should be  numbered 'XIII',
  though  he  never  wrote  that  number  on  the  manuscript.  My  description
  of the text of 'The Ring Goes South'  (p. 415) can  be repeated  here still
  more  emphatically.  The writing,  again in  ink not  pencil, is  even faster
  and  more  often  indecipherable,  the  amount  of  rejected  material (often
  not struck out)  even greater;  many passages  are chaotic.  There is  also a
  certain amount  of pencilled  correction, probably  made at  different times,
  and some of it obviously belonging to a later stage. In  one case,  my father
  made a quite careful insertion in ink, saying that Gimli  was of  little help
  to Gandalf in finding a  way through  Moria (cf.  FR p.  324), though  he put

                                                                    
                                                                          
 in  no  montion  of Gimli  anywhere else.  The text  is thus  difficult to
 interpret and still more difficult to represent.                          
    It will be seen that the entire story of the attack by the Wargs in the
 night after the  Company came  down from  the pass  (FR pp.  310 -  13) is
 absent.                                                                   
                                                                          
                            THE MINES OF MORIA.                            
                                                                          
 Next  day  the  weather  changed  again,  almost  as  if  it   obeyed  the
 orders  of  some  power  that  had  now  given  up   the  idea   of  snow,
 since  they   had  retreated   from  Cris-caron.   The  wind   had  turned
 southward  in  the  night.  In  the  morning  it  was  veering  west,  and
 rain  was  beginning  to  fall.  The  travellers  pitched  a  tent   in  a
 sheltered  hollow  and  remained  quiet  all  the  day till  the afternoon
 was drawing towards evening.                                              
    All  the  day  they  had  heard  no  sound  and  seen  no  sign  of any
 living  thing.  As  soon  as  the  light  began to  fade they  started off
 again.  A light  rain was  still falling,  but that  did not  trouble them
 much  at  first.  Gandalf  and  Trotter  led  them in  a detour  away from
 ',: ' the Mountains, for they planned to come  at Moria  up the  course of
 a  stream  that  ran  out  from the  feet of  the hills  not far  from the
 hidden  gates.  But  it  seemed  that  somehow  or  other  they  must have
 gone  astray  in the  dark, for  it was  a black  night under  an overcast
 sky.  In  any  case,  they  did  not  strike   the  stream,   and  morning
 found  them   wandering  and   floundering  in   wet  and   marshy  places
 filled with red pools, for there was much clay in the hollows.(3)         
    They  were  somewhat  comforted  by  a  change  in  the   weather:  the
 clouds  broke  and  the  rain  stopped.  The  sun  came  out   in  gleams.
 But  Gandalf  was  fretted  by  the   delay,  and   decided  to   move  on
 again  by  day,  after  only a  few hours'  rest. There  were no  birds in
 the  sky  or  other  ominous  signs.  They   steered  now   straight  back
 towards  the   mountains,  but   both  Gandalf   and  Trotter   were  much
 puzzled by their failure to find the stream.                              
    When  they  had  come  back  again  to the  foothills and  lower slopes
 they  struck  a  narrow  watercourse  in  a  deep  channel;  but   it  was
 dry,  and there  was now  no water  among [the]  reddish stones  in the
 bed.  There  was, however,  still something  like an  open path  on the
 left bank.                                                              
   'This is where  the stream  used to  run, I  feel sure,'  said Gandalf.
 'Sirannon  the  Gatestream (4) they  used  to call  it. Anyway  our road
 lies  up  this  course.'  The  night  was  now  falling,  but  though they
 were  already  tired, especially  the hobbits,  Gandalf urged  them to
 press on.                                                                 

   'Are  you  thinking  of  climbing  to  the  top  of   the  mountains
 tonight, in time to get an early view of the dawn?' asked Merry.
   'I should think of it if there was  any chance  of doing  it!' said
 Gandalf.  'But  no one  can scale  the mountains  here. The  gates are
 not high up, but in a certain place near the foot of a great  cliff. I
 hope I can find it - but things seem oddly changed,  since I  was last
 here.'                                                               
   Before  the  night  was  old  the moon,  now only  two days  off the
 full,(5) rose  through the  clouds that  lay on  the eastern  peaks, and
 shone  fitfully  down  over the  western lands.  They trudged  on with
 their  weary  feet  stumbling  among the  stones, until  suddenly they
 came to a wall of rock some thirty feet high. Over it ran  a trickling
 fall  of  water, but  plainly the  fall had  once been  much stronger.
 'Ah! Now I know  where we  are! '  cried Gandalf.  'This is  where the
 Stair-falls were. I  wonder what  has happened  to them.  But if  I am
 right there is a stairway cut in the stone at the left: the  main path
 goes further  round and  up an  incline. There  is or  was a  wide and
 shallow valley above the falls through which the Sirannon flowed.'
   Very  soon  they  found  the  stairway,  and  followed by  Frodo and
 Trotter  Gandalf  climbed  quickly  up.  When  they  got  to  the  top
 they discovered the reason of the drying up of the stream.           
   The  moon  was  now  sinking  westwards. It  shone out  brightly for
 a while, and they saw stretched before their feet  a dark  still lake,
 glinting  in  the   moonlight.  The   Gate-stream  had   been  dammed,
 and had filled all the valley. Only  a trickle  of water  escaped over
 the old falls, for the main outlet  of the  lake was  now away  at the
 southern end.(6)                                                     
   Before them,  dim and  grey across  the dark  water, stood  a cliff.
 The moonlight lay pale  upon it,  and it  looked cold  and forbidding:
 a final bar to all passage. Frodo  could see  no sign  of any  gate or
 entrance in the frowning stone.                                      
   'This way is blocked!' said Gandalf. 'At least it is, as far  as can
 be  seen  by  night.  I  don't suppose  anyone wants  to try  and swim
 across  by  moonlight  -  or  any  other  light.   The  pool   has  an
 unwholesome  look.  When  it  was  made  or  why  I  do not  know, but
 not for any good purpose, I guess.'                                  
   'We  must  try  and  find  a  way  round  by  the  main  path,' said
 Trotter. 'Even if there was no  lake we  could not  get our  ponies up
 the narrow stair.'                                                   
   'And  even  if  we  could, they  would not  be able  to go  into the
 Mines,'  said  Gandalf.  'Our  road  there  under  the  mountains will
 take us by paths where they cannot go - even if we can.'             

   'I  wondered  if  you had  thought of  that drawback,'  said Trotter.
 'I supposed you had, though you did not mention it.'                  
   'No  need  to  mention  it,  until  necessary,' answered  the wizard.
 'We  will  take  them  as  far  as  we can.  It remains  to be  seen if
 the [? other] road is not drowned  as well:  in which  case we  may not
 be able to get at the gates at all.'                                  
   'If the gates are still there,' said Trotter.                       
   They  had  no great  difficulty in  finding the  old path.  It turned
 away  from  the  falls  and  wound  northward  for  some   way,  before
 bending  east  again,  and  climbed   up  a   long  slope.   When  they
 reached the  top of  this they  saw the  lake lying  on the  right. The
 path  skirted  its  very  edge,  but  was not  submerged. For  the most
 part it was just above the water; but  in one  place, at  the northern-
 most end of the lake, where  there was  a slimy  and stagnant  pool, it
 disappeared  for  a   short  distance,   before  bending   south  again
 toward the foot of the great cliff.                                   
   When  they  reached  this  point  Boromir  went  forward,  and  found
 that  the  path  was  only  just awash.  Carefully they  threaded their
 way  in  single  file  behind  him.  The   footing  was   slippery  and
 treacherous;  Frodo  felt a  curious disgust  at the  very feel  of the
 dark water on his feet.                                               
   As  Faramond  the  last  of  the  party  stepped  onto the  dry land,
 there was a soft sound, a swish followed by a  plop, as  if a  fish had
 disturbed  the still  surface of  the water.  Turning swiftly  they saw
 in  the  moonlight  ripples  sharpened  [?with]  dark   shadows:  great
 rings  were  widening  outwards  from  some  point  near the  middle of
 the  pool.'  They  halted;  and  at  that  very  moment the  light went
 out,  as  the  moon  fell  and vanished  into low  clouds. There  was a
 soft bubbling noise in the lake, and then silence.                    
   It was too dark  to seek  for the  gate in  that changed  valley, and
 the rest of the night  the travellers  spent unhappily,  sitting watch-
 ful between the cliff and  the dark  water which  they could  no longer
 see. None of them slept more than briefly and uneasily.               
   But  with  the  morning  their  spirits  revived.  Slowly  the  light
 reached  the  lake: its  dark surface  was still  and unruffled  by any
 breeze. The sky  was clear  above, and  slowly the  sun rose  above the
 mountains  at  their  back,  and  shone  on  the  western  lands before
 them.  They  ate  a  little  food,  and  rested for  a while  after the
 cheerless night,  until the  sun reached  the south  and its  warm rays
 slanted  down,  driving  away  the  shadows of  the great  wall behind.
 Then  Gandalf  stood up  and said  that it  was high  time to  begin to
 search for the gates. The strip of dry land left by the lake  was quite

 narrow, and their  path took  them close  under the  face of  the cliff.
 When  they  had  gone  for  almost  a  mile   southward  they   came  to
 some  holly-trees.  There  were  stumps  and  dead  logs rotting  in the
 water  -  the  remains  of old  thickets, or  of a  hedge that  had once
 lined  the  submerged  road  across  the   drowned  valley.   But  close
 under the cliff there  stood, still  living and  strong, two  tall trees
 with  great  roots  that  spread  from  the  wall  to the  water's edge.
 From  far  across  under the  other side  in the  fitful moon  Frodo had
 thought  them  mere  bushes  on  piles  of stone:  but now  they towered
 above his head: stiff, silent, dark except for their  clustered berries:
 standing like sentinels or pillars at the end of a road.               
   'Well, here we are at last! ' said  Gandalf. 'This  is where  the elf-
 way  from  Hollin  ended.  The  holly-trees  were  planted by  the elves
 in  the  old  days  to mark  the end  of their  domains -  the westgates
 were  made  chiefly for  their use  in their  traffic with  the dwarves.
 This  is  the  end  of  our  path  -  and now  I am  afraid we  must say
 farewell  to  our  ponies.  The  good  beasts  would go  almost anywhere
 we told them to; but I do not think  we could  get them  to go  into the
 dark  passages  of  Moria. And  in any  case there  are behind  the west
 gate  many  steep  stairs,  and  many  difficult  and  dangerous  places
 where  ponies  could  not  pass,  or  would be  a perilous  handicap. If
 we are  to win  through we  must travel  lighter. Much  of the  stuff we
 have  brought  against  bitter weather  will not  be wanted  inside, nor
 when we get to the other side and turn south.'                         
   'But  surely  you  aren't  going  to  leave  the  poor beasts  in this
 forsaken  place,  Mr   Gandalf!'  protested   Sam,  who   was  specially
 fond of ponies.                                                        
   'Don't  you  worry,  Sam!  They'll  find  their   way  back   home  in
 time.  They  have  wiser  noses  even  than  most  of  their  kind,  and
 these  two  have  returned  to  Elrond  from  far  away  before  now.  I
 expect   they'll   make   off   west  and   then  work   back  northward
 through country where they can find grass.'                            
   'I'd  be  happier  if  I  might  lead  them  back  past  the  wash and
 down to the old falls,' said Sam, ' - I'd  like to  sort of  say goodbye
 and set them on the road as it were.'                                  
   'Very well,  you can,'  said Gandalf.  'But first  let us  unlade them
 and distribute the goods we mean to keep.'                             
   When  each  member  of  the  party  had  been  given  a  share accord-
 ing  to  his size  - most  of the  foodstuffs and  the waterskins  - the
 remainder  was  secured  again  on  the  ponies'  backs. In  each bundle
 Gandalf  put  a  brief  message  to  Elrond  written  in  secret  runes,
 telling him of the snowstorm and their turning aside to Moria.         

 Then Sam and Trotter led the horses off.                              
 'Now let us have a look at the gates!' said Gandalf.(8)              
 'I do not see any gates,' said Merry.                                 
 'Dwarf-gates are not made to be seen,' said the wizard. 'Many         
 are quite invisible, and their own masters cannot  find them  if their
 secret is lost. But these gates were  not made  to be  wholly (9) secret,
 and  unless  things  are  altogether  changed eyes  that know  what to
 look for may discover the signs. Let us go and see! '                 
 He  strode  forward  to  the  cliff-wall.  There  was  a  smooth space
 right  in  the middle  of the  shade of  the trees,  and over  this he
 passed  his  hands  to  and  fro,  muttering  words under  his breath.
 Then  he  stepped  back.  'Look!'  he  said.  'Can  you  see  anything
 now?  '  The  sun  shone  across  the  face  of the  wall, and  as the
 travellers stared at it, it seemed to them that  on the  surface where
 Gandalf's  hand  had passed  faint lines  appeared like  slender veins
 of silver running in the stone; at first they seemed like pale threads
 of gossamer so fine as only to be seen fitfully  where the  sun caught
 them;  but   slowly  they   broadened  and   their  design   could  be
 guessed. At the top, as high as Gandalf  could reach,  was an  arch of
 interlacing letters in the elvish character;  below it  seemed (though
 the  drawing  was in  places blurred  and broken)  that there  was the
 outline  of  an  anvil  and  hammer,  and  above  that  a crown  and a
 crescent moon. More  clearly than  all else  there shone  forth palely
 three stars with many rays.'                                         
 'Those   are  the   emblems  of   Durin  and   of  the   Elves,'  said
 Gandalf. 'They are of  some silver  substance that  is seen  only when
 touched  by  one  who  knows  certain  words  -  at  night  under  the
 moon  they  shine  most  bright."  Now  you  can  see  that   we  have
 certainly found the west gate of Moria.'                              
 'What  does  the  writing  say?'  asked  Frodo,  who  was   trying  to
 puzzle out the inscription. 'I thought I knew  the elf-letters,  but I
 cannot read these, they are so tangled.'                              
 'The  words are  in the  elf-tongue, not  in ordinary  language,' said
 Gandalf.  'But  they do  not say  anything of  much importance  to us.
 Certainly they don't tell the opening-spell, if that i's what  you are
 thinking.  They  merely  say:  The  Doors  of  Durin  Lord  of  Moria.
 Speak  friends  and  enter. And  underneath very  small and  now faint
 is: Narfi made them.(12) Celebrimbor of Hollin drew these signs.'       
 'What does it mean by "speak friends and enter"?' asked Frodo.       
 'That is plain enough,' said  Gandalf, '  - if  you are  friends speak
 the  password,  and  then  the  door  will  open  and  you  can enter.
 Some dwarf-gates will open only at special times, or for particular

 (The inscription of the West Gate of Moria.)

 persons;  and  some  have  keys  and locks  which are  necessary even
 when all other conditions are fulfilled. In the  days of  Durin these
 gates were not  secret: they  usually stood  open and  door-wards sat
 here.  But  if  they  were  shut  anyone who  knew the  opening words
 could speak them and pass in.'                                      
   'Do you know them then?'                                          
   'No! ' said Gandalf.                                              
   The  others  looked surprised  and dismayed  - all  except Trotter,
 who  knew  Gandalf  very  well. 'Then  what was  the use  of bringing
 us here?' asked Boromir wrathfully.                                 
   'And  how  did  you  get  in when  you explored  the Mines,  as you
 told us just now?' asked Frodo.                                     
   'The answer to your question, Boromir,' said  the wizard,  'is that
 I don't know - not yet. But we shall soon see; and, ' he  added, with
 a  glint  in his  eyes under  bristling brows,  'you can  start being
 uncivil, when it is  proved useless:  not before.  As for  your ques-
 tion,' he said, turning sharply on Frodo, 'the  answer is  obvious: I
 did not enter this way. I came from the East. If  it interests  you I
 may  add  that these  doors open  outwards with  a push,  but nothing
 can  open  them  inwards.  They  can  swing  out,  or  they   can  be
 broken if you have enough force.'                                   
   'What  are  you  going  to  do  then?' asked  Merry,(13) who  was not
 much  disturbed  by  Gandalf's  bristling  brows;  and  in  his heart
 hoped that the doors would prove impossible to open.                
   'I am going to try and find the  opening words.  I once  knew every
 formula  and  spell  in any  language of  elves, dwarves,  or goblins
 that was ever used for  such purposes.  I can  still remember  two or
 three hundreds  without racking  my brains.  But I  think only  a few
 trials should be necessary. The  opening words  were in  Elvish, like
 the written words  - I  feel certain:  from the  signs on  the doors,
 from the holly trees, and because of the use for  which the  road and
 gates were originally made.' He stepped  up to  the rock  and lightly
 touched with his wand the  silver star  that was  near the  middle of
 the emblems, just above the crown.                                  
                                                                    
               Annon porennin diragas venwed                        
               diragath-telwen porannin nithrad.(14)                 
                                                                    
 he said. The silver letters faded, but the grey  blank stone  did not
 stir.  Many many  times he  tried other  formulas one  after another,
 but  nothing  further  happened.  Then he  tried single  words spoken
 in  commanding tones,  and finally  (seeming to  lose his  temper) he

 shouted  Edro, edro!  and  followed  it  with  open!  in  every language
 he could remember. Then he sat down in silence.                        
   Boromir  was  smiling  broadly  behind his  back. 'It  looks as  if we
 may  be  wanting  those  ponies  back,'  he  said  in an  undertone. 'It
 would  have  been  wiser  to  have  kept  them   till  the   gates  were
 open.'(15) If Gandalf heard he made no sign.                              
   Suddenly  in  the  silence  Frodo  heard  a soft  swish and  bubble in
 the  water (16) as  on the  evening before,  only softer.  Turning quickly
 he  saw faint  ripples on  the surface  of the  lake -  and at  the same
 time  saw  that  Sam  and  Trotter  in  the  distance   [were]  crossing
 the  wash  on  their  return.  The  ripples  on the  water seemed  to be
 moving in their direction.                                             
   'I  don't  like  this  place,'  said  Merry,  who  had  also  seen the
 ripples.  'I  wish  we  could  go  back,  or   that  Gandalf   would  do
 something and we could go on - if we must.'                            
   'I have a queer feeling,' said  Frodo slowly,  ' -  a dread  either of
 the  gates  or  of  something  else.  But  I  don't  think   Gandalf  is
 defeated: he is thinking hard, I fancy.'                               
   It  appeared   that  Frodo   was  right;   for  the   wizard  suddenly
 sprang to his feet with a laugh. 'I have it! ' he cried. 'Of  course, of
 course!  Absurdly simple  - when  you think  of it!  ' Raising  his wand
 he  stood  before  the  rock  and  said  in a  clear voice:  Mellyn! (or
 Meldir!) (17)                                                           
   The  three  stars  shone  briefly  and went  out again.  Then silently
 a great door  was outlined,  though not  the finest  crack or  joint had
 been  visible  before.  Slowly  it  began  to  swing  outwards,  inch by
 inch until it lay right back against the  wall.' Behind,  the foot  of a
 shadowy   stairway   could   be   seen  climbing   up  into   the  gloom
 within. All the party stood and stared in wonder.                      
   'I  was  wrong  after  all,'  said  Gandalf.  'The  opening  word  was
 inscribed  there  all the  time. Speak  friends and  enter it  said, and
 when  I  spoke the  elvish word  for friends,  it opened.  Quite simple!
 And now we can enter.'                                                 
   But  at  that  moment  Frodo  felt  something seize  his ankle  and he
 fell.  At  the  same  moment  Sam   and  Trotter   who  had   just  come
 back  gave  a  yell  as  they ran  up. Turning  suddenly the  others saw
 that  a  long  arm,  sinuous  as  a  tentacle, was  thrust out  from the
 lake's  dark  edge. It  was pale  green-grey and  wet: its  fingered end
 had hold of Frodo's foot and was dragging him towards the water.       
   Sam  dashed  up  with a  drawn knife  and slashed  at it.  The fingers
 let  go  of  Frodo  and  Sam  dragged  him  away;  but  immediately  the
 waters  of  the  lake  began  to  heave  and   boil,  and   twenty  more

 writhing  arms  came  rippling  out,  making for  the travellers  as if
 directed by something in the deep pools that could see them all.      
   'Into  the  gateway!   Quick!  Up   the  stairs!'   shouted  Gandalf,
 rousing them from the horror that had held them rooted.               
   There  was  just  time.  Gandalf  saw  them  all  inside,   and  then
 sprang  back  upon  the  heels  of  Trotter,  but he  was no  more than
 four steps up  when the  crawling fingers  of the  dweller in  the pool
 reached the cliff.(19)                                                
   He  paused.  But  if  he  was  pondering  how to  close the  door, or
 what  word  would  move  them  from  within,  there  was  no  need. For
 the  arms  seized  the  door,  and  with  dreadful  strength  swung  it
 round.  With  a  shattering  echo  it  slammed  behind  them;  and they
 halted  on  the  stairs  in  dismay  as  the  sounds  of   rending  and
 crashing  came  dully  through  the  stones  from outside.  Gandalf ran
 down  to  the  door  and  thrust  up....  and  spoke   the....  words;>
 but though the door groaned it did not stir.                          
   'I am  afraid the  door is  blocked behind  us now,'  he said.  'If I
 guess right, the trees  are thrown  down across  it, and  boulders have
 been rolled against it. I am sorry for the trees - they  were beautiful
 and  old  and  had.....  so  long.(21) Well  now,  we can  only go  on -
 there is nothing left to do.'                                         
   'I am mighty glad I saw those poor beasts safe first,' said Sam.
   'I felt  that something  evil was  near,' said  Frodo. 'What  was it,
 Gandalf? '                                                            
   'I could not  say,' said  Gandalf, '-  there was  not time  enough to
 look  at  the  arms. They  all belong  to one  creature, I  should say,
 from the way they moved - but  that is  all I  can say.  Something that
 has.....  crept,  or  been  driven  out  of   the  dark   waters  under
 ground, I  guess. There  are older  and fouler  things than  goblins in
 the  dark  places  of the  world.' He  did not  speak aloud  his uncom-
 fortable  thought  that  the  Dweller  in  the Pool  had not  seized on
 Frodo among all the party by accident.(22)                            
   Gandalf  now  went  ahead  and allowed  his wand  to glow  faintly to
 prevent  them  from  walking  into  unseen  dangers  in  the  dark. But
 the  great   stairway  was   sound  and   undamaged.  There   were  two
 hundred  steps,  broad  and  shallow;  and  at the  top they  found the
 floor level before them.                                              
   'Let us have something to  eat here  on the  landing, since  we can't
 find  a  dining-room,'  said Frodo.  He had  recovered from  the terror
 of  the  clutching  arm,  and  was feeling  unusually hungry.  The idea
 was  welcome  to  all.  After they  had eaten  Gandalf again  gave them
 a taste of the cordial.                                               

   'It won't last much longer,' he said, 'but  I think  we need  it after
 that business at the gate. And we shall need all that is left  before we
 get  through,  unless we  have luck.  Go carefully  with the  water too!
 There  are  streams  and  wells  in the  Mines, but  they should  not be
 touched. We shan't  get a  chance of  filling our  bottles till  we come
 down in Dunruin.'(23)                                                  
   'How long are we going to take to get through?' asked Frodo.         
   'I  don't  know  that,'  answered  Gandalf.   'It  all   depends.  But
 going  straight  (without  mishaps,  or  losing   our  way)   we  should
 take  at  least  three or  four marches.  It cannot  be less  than forty
 miles  from  West-doors  to  Eastgate  in  a straight  line, and  we may
 not find the most direct passages.'                                    
   They rested  now only  for a  short while,  as all  were eager  to get
 the journey  over as  quickly as  possible, and  were willing,  tired as
 they  were,  to  go  on still  for several  hours. They  had no  fuel or
 means  of  making  torches,  and  would  be  obliged  to  find  the  way
 mostly in the  dark.(24) Gandalf  went in  front holding  in his  left hand
 his wand, the  pale light  of which  was sufficient  to show  the ground
 before  his  feet.  In  his  right  hand  he  held the  sword Glamdring,
 which he had kept ever  since it  was discovered  in the  trolls' lair.(25)
 No  gleam  came  from  it  -  which  was  some  comfort;  for   being  a
 sword of ancient  elvish make  it shone  with a  cold light,  if goblins
 were at hand.                                                          
   He  led  them  forward  first  along  the  passage  in which  they had
 halted. As the light of  his wand  dimly lit  their dark  openings other
 passages  and  tunnels  could  'be  seen  or  guessed:  sloping  up,  or
 running  steeply  down,  or  turning  suddenly  round   hidden  corners.
 It   was   most   bewildering.   Gandalf  was   guided  mainly   by  his
 general  sense  of  direction:  and  anyone  who had  been on  a journey
 with  him  knew  that he  never lost  that by  dark or  day, underground
 or above it: being better at  steering in  a tunnel  than a  goblin, and
 less likely to be lost in a  wood than  a hobbit,  and surer  of finding
 the  way  through  night  as black  as the  Pit than  the cats  of Queen
 Beruthiel.(26) Had  that  not been  so, it  is more  than doubtful  if the
 party  would  have  gone  a mile  without disaster.  For there  were not
 only  many  paths  to choose  from, there  were in  many places  pits at
 the  sides  of  the  tunnel,  and  dark  wells  in  which far  under the
 gurgling  of  water  could  be  heard. Rotting  strands of  rope dangled
 above   them   from   broken  winches.   There  were   dangerous  chasms
 and  fissures  in  the  rock,  and  sometimes a  chasm would  open right
 across  their  path.  One  was  so  wide  that  Gandalf  himself  nearly
 stumbled  into  it.  It was  quite ten  feet wide,  and Sam  stumbled in

 his  jump  and  would  have  fallen back  on the  further bank  if Frodo
 had not grabbed his hand and [? jerked) him forward.                   
   Their  march  was  slow,  and  it  began  to  feel  never-ending. They
 grew  very  weary;  and  yet  there  was  no comfort  in the  thought of
 halting  anywhere.  Frodo's  spirits  had  risen for  a while  after his
 escape  from  the  water-monster;  but  now  a  deep sense  of disquiet,
 growing  to  dread,  crept  over  him  once  more.  Though  he  had been
 healed in Rivendell of the knife stroke, it is  probable that  that grim
 adventure  had  left  its  mark,  and that  he was  specially sensitive;
 and in any case he  it was  that bore  the Ring  upon its  chain against
 his breast.(27) He felt the certainty of  evil ahead,  and of  evil follow-
 ing. But he said nothing.                                              
   The  travellers  spoke  seldom  and  then  only  in  hurried whispers.
 There  was  no  sound  but  the  sound  of  their  own  feet.   If  they
 stopped  for  a  moment  they  heard  nothing  at  all,  unless  it were
 occasionally  a  faint  sound  of  water  trickling  or  dripping.  Only
 Frodo  began  to  hear  or imagine  that he  heard something  else: like
 the  faint  fall  of  soft  feet following.  It was  never loud  or near
 enough  for  him  to  feel certain  that he  heard it;  but once  it had
 started  it never  stopped, unless  they did.  And it  was not  an echo,
 for when they halted  (as they  did from  time to  time) it  pattered on
 for some time, and then grew still.                                    
   It  was  about  10  o'clock  in  the  morning  when  they  entered the
 Mines.(28) They  had  been  going  for  many  hours  (with   brief  halts)
 when  Gandalf  came  to  his  first serious  doubt. They  had come  to a
 wide  dark  arch  opening  into  three  passages: all  three led  in the
 same  general  direction,  East,  but  the left  hand passage  seemed to
 plunge  down,  the  right  hand  to  climb  up,  while  the  middle  way
 seemed to run level (but was very narrow).                             
   'I  have no  memory of  this place  at all!  ' said  Gandalf, standing
 uncertainly  under  the  arch.  He  held  up  his  wand  in the  hope of
 finding  some  direction  marks  or  an  inscription  that  might  help.
 But nothing of the kind was to be seen.                                
   'I  am  too  tired  to  choose,'  he  said, shaking  his head;  'and I
 expect you are  all as  weary as  I am  or wearier.  We had  better halt
 here  for  the night  - if  you know  what I  mean. It  is all  night of
 course inside, but  outside I  fancy the  night is  already come.  It is
 quite ten hours since we left the gate.'(29)                           
   They  groped  about  in  the  darkness  looking  for  a   place  where
 they could rest with some feeling of security. To the left of  the great
 arch  was  a  lower  opening,  and  when  they  explored it  closer they
 discovered that it  was a  stone door  that was  half closed,  but swung

       
                                                                        
 back  easily  to  a  gentle  thrust.   Beyond  there   seemed  to   be  a
 chamber or chambers cut in the rock.                                    
   'Steady,  steady!'  said   Gandalf  as   Merry  and   Faramond  pushed
 forward,  glad  to  find  somewhere  where  they  could  rest  with  some
 sort  of  security.  'Steady!  You  don't  know  what  may  be  inside. I
 will go first.'                                                         
   He  went  cautiously  in  followed  by  the  rest.  'There!'  he said,
 pointing  with  his  wand to  the middle  of the  floor. They  saw before
 their feet a round  hole like  the mouth  of a  well. Rotting  strands of
 rope  lay  at  the edge  and trailed  down into  the dark  pit; fragments
 of broken stone lay near.                                               
   'One  of  you might  have fallen  in and  still be  waiting to  hit the
 bottom,'  said  the  wizard  to  Merry.  'Look  before  your  feet!  This
 seems  to  have  been  a  kind  of  guard-room  placed  to   watch  those
 passages,'  he  went  on.  'The  hole  I  expect  is  a  well,   and  was
 doubtless  once  covered  with  a  stone  lid.  But  that is  broken now,
 and you had better be careful of the fall.'                             
   Sam (30) felt  curiously  attracted  by  the  well;  and while  the others
 were making beds of blankets in dark corners of the room, as far  as pos-
 sible from the well, he crept to the edge  and peered  over. A  chill air
 seemed  to  mount  up  to  his  face  from  the  invisible  depths. Moved
 by a sudden impulse, he groped for a loose stone, and let it drop.      
   It  seemed  almost  a  whole  minute  before  there  was  any  sound  -
 then  far  below  there  was a  plunk, as  if the  stone had  fallen into
 deep  water  in  a  cavernous  place  - very  distant, but  magnified and
 repeated in the hollow rock.                                            
   'What's  that?'  cried  Gandalf.   He  was   relieved  when   Sam  con-
 fessed  what  he  had  done;  but  he was  angry, and  Sam could  see his
 eyes glint  in the  dark. 'Fool  of a  fellow!' he  growled. 'This  is a
 serious  journey,  not  a  hobbit  school treat.  Throw yourself  in next
 time, and then you'll be no further nuisance. Now be quiet! '           
   There  was  nothing  to  hear  for  several  minutes;  but  then  there
 came  out  of  the  depths  faint  knocks, that  stopped, and  were dimly
 echoed,  and  then  after  a  short  silence  were  repeated.  It sounded
 strangely  like  signals  of  some  sort.  But after  a while  the knocks
 died away altogether and were heard no more.                            
   'It  may  have  nothing  to  do  with that  stone,' said  Gandalf; 'and
 in any case it may have nothing  to do  with us  - but  of course  it may
 be  anything.  Don't  do  anything  like  that again.  Let's hope  we get
 some  rest  undisturbed.  You  Sam  can  go  on  the  first   watch.  And
 stay  near  the  door,  well  away  from  the  well,'  he grunted,  as he
 rolled himself in a blanket.                                            

   Sam  sat  miserably  by  the  door  in  the pitch  dark, but  kept on
 turning  round,  for  fear  some  unknown  thing  should  crawl  out of
 the well. He wished he could cover the  hole, if  only with  a blanket;
 but  he  dared  not  go  near,  even  though   Gandalf  seemed   to  be
 snoring.                                                              
   Gandalf  was  actually  not   asleep,  and   the  snores   came  from
 Boromir,  who  lay  next  him.  The  wizard  was  thinking  hard  again
 trying to recall every memory  he could  of his  former journey  in the
 Mines,  and  trying  to  make  up  his  mind about  the next  course to
 take. After about an hour he got up and came over to Sam.             
   'Get into a blanket and have a sleep,  my lad!  ' he  said in  a more
 kindly tone. 'You could sleep, I guess. I can't,  so I  may as  well do
 the watching.'                                                        
   'I know what is the matter  with me,'  he muttered.  'I need  a pipe;
 and I think I'll risk it.'  The last  thing Sam  saw before  sleep took
 him was a vision of the old wizard squatting on  the floor  shielding a
 blazing  chip  in  his  gnarled  hands between  his knees.  The flicker
 for a moment showed his sharp nose and the puffs of smoke.            
   It  was  Gandalf  who  roused  them  all from  sleep. He  had watched
 all alone for about  six hours  and let  the others  rest. 'And  in the
 meantime I  have made  up my  mind,' he  said. 'I  don't like  the feel
 of the middle way, and I don't like the smell of  the left  hand- there
 is foul air down there, or I am no guide. I shall  take the  right hand
 way - it's time we began to go up again.'                             
   For  eight   dark  hours,   not  counting   two  brief   halts,  they
 marched   on,  and   met  no   danger,  and   heard  nothing   and  saw
 nothing  but  the  faint  gleam of  the wizard's  light bobbing  like a
 will-o'-the-wisp  in  front  of  them.  The  passage  they  had  chosen
 wound steadily upwards, going,  as far  as they  could judge,  in great
 curves,  and  growing  steadily  wider.  On  neither  side  were  there
 now  any  openings  to  other  galleries  or  tunnels,  and  the floor,
 though  rough  in  many  places,   was  sound   and  without   pits  or
 cracks.  They  went  quicker  than  the  day  before,  and   must  have
 covered  some  twenty  miles  or  more, perhaps  fifteen in  a straight
 line eastwards. As  they went  upwards Frodo's  spirits rose  a little;
 but still he felt oppressed, and still at times he heard or  thought he
 heard  away  behind  and  through  the  patter  of  their  own  feet  a
 following footfall that was not an echo.                              
   They  had  gone nearly  as far  as the  hobbits could  endure without
 rest and sleep, and they were all thinking of a place  to halt  for the
 night,  when  suddenly  the  walls  to  right  and left  vanished. They
 halted.  Gandalf  seemed  well pleased.  'I think  we have  reached the

 habitable  parts,'  he  said,  'and  are  no great  way from  the eastern
 side. I can feel a change in the air, and guess we are in a wide  hall. I
 think I will risk a little light.' '                                    
   He  raised  his  wand  and  for  a brief  moment it  blazed out  like a
 flash  of  lightning.  Great  shadows  leapt  up  and  fled,  and  for  a
 second  or  two  they  saw  a  vast  roof  high  above  their  heads.  On
 every  side  stretched  a  huge  empty  hall  with  straight  hewn walls.
 Four  entrances  they  glimpsed:  dark arches  in the  walls: one  at the
 west  by  which  they  had come,  one before  them in  the east,  and one
 on either side. Then the light went out.                                
   'That is all  I shall  venture on  for the  present,' said  the wizard.
 'There  used  to  be  great  windows  on  the  mountain-side,  and shafts
 leading out to the  light and  the upper  reaches of  the mines.  I think
 that  is where  we are.  But it  is night  now, and  we cannot  tell till
 morning.  If  I  am  right,  tomorrow  we  may  actually  see  the  morn-
 ing  peeping  in.  But  in  the  meanwhile  we had  better go  no further
 without  exploration. There  will still  be a  good way  to go  before we
 are  through  -  the  East Gates  are on  a much  lower level  than this,
 and it is a long road down. Let us rest if we can.'                     
   They  spent  that  night  in  the  great  empty  hall,  huddled   in  a
 corner  to  escape  the  draught  -  there  seemed  to  be a  steady flow
 of  chill  air  in  through  the  eastern   archway.  The   vastness  and
 immensity  of  the  tunnels  and  excavations  filled  the  hobbits  with
 bewilderment.  'There  must  have   been  a   mighty  tribe   o'  dwarves
 here at one time,' said Sam; 'and every  one as  busy as  a badger  for a
 hundred  years  to  make  all  this  - and  most in  hard rock  too. What
 did  they  do  it  all  for? They  didn't live  in these  darksome holes,
 surely? '                                                               
   'Not  for  long,'  said   Gandalf,  'though   the  miners   often  took
 long  spells  underground,  I  believe.   They  found   precious  metals,
 and  jewels  -  very  abundantly  in  the  earlier  days.  But  the mines
 were  most  renowned  for  the  metal  which  was  only  found   here  in
 any quantity: Moria-silver, or true-silver  as some  call it.  Ithil (34) the
 Elves call it, and value it still above gold.(35) It is nearly as  heavy as
 lead,  and  malleable  as  copper,   but  the   dwarves  could   by  some
 secret of theirs make it  as hard  as steel.  It surpasses  common silver
 in all save beauty, and even in that it is  its equal.  In their  day the
 dwarflords  of   Uruktharbun (36) were   more  wealthy   than  any   of  the
 Kings of Men.'                                                          
   'Well,  we  haven't  clapped  eyes  on  any  kind  of silver  since we
 came   in,'  grunted   Sam;  'nor   any  jewels   neither.  Nor   on  any
 dwarves.'                                                               

   'I don't think we are likely to until  we get  further up (37) and nearer
 to the eastern entrances,' said Gandalf.                               
   'I hope we do  find dwarves  in the  end,' said  Frodo. 'I  would give
 a  great deal  to see  old Balin.  Bilbo was  fond of  him and  would be
 delighted  to  have  news  of  him.  He  visited  him  in  Hobbiton once
 long ago, but that was before I went to live there.'                   
   But  these  words  carried  his  thoughts  far  away  from  the  dark-
 ness;   and   memories   of   Bag-end  while   Bilbo  was   still  there
 crowded [? thickly] into his  mind. He  wished with  all his  heart that
 he  was  back   there,  mowing   the  lawn,   or  pottering   among  the
 flowers,  and  that he  had never  heard of  the Ring.>  It was  his turn
 to watch. As silence fell and one by one the others fell asleep  he felt
 the  strange  dread  assail  him  again.  But  though  he  listened end-
 lessly  through  the  slow  hours  till  he  was  relieved  he  heard no
 sound  of  any  footfall.  Only  once,  far  away  where he  guessed the
 western archway stood,  he fancied  he saw  two pale  points of  light -
 almost  like  luminous eyes.  He started  - 'I  must have  nearly fallen
 asleep,' he  thought; 'I  was on  the edge  of a  dream.' He  rubbed his
 eyes  and  stood  up,  and  remained  standing  peering  into  the  dark
 until he was  relieved by  Merry. He  quickly fell  asleep, but  after a
 while  it  seemed  to  him  in  his  dream that  he heard  whispers, and
 saw  two  pale  points  of  light  approaching.  He  woke  -  and  found
 that the others  were speaking  softly near  him, and  that a  dim light
 was  actually  falling  on  his face.  High up  above the  eastern arch,
 through  a  shaft  near  the  roof, came  a grey  gleam. And  across the
 hall  through  the  northern  arch  light   also  glimmered   faint  and
 distantly.                                                             
   Frodo  sat  up.  'Good  morning! '  said Gandalf.  'For morning  it is
 again at last. I was right,  you see.  Before today's  over we  ought to
 get  to  the  Eastern  Gate  and  see  the  waters  of  Helevorn  in the
 Dimrilldale before us.'(39)                                            
   All the same the wizard  felt some  doubt as  to their  exact position
 -  they  might  be  far  to the  north or  the south  of the  Gates. The
 eastern  arch  was  the  most  likely  exit to  choose, and  the draught
 that  flowed  through  it  seemed  to promise  a passage  leading before
 long to the outer  air; but  beyond the  opening there  was no  trace of
 light. 'If I could only see out  of one  of these  shafts,' he  said, 'I
 should  know  better  what  to  do.  We   might  wander   backwards  and
 forwards  endlessly,  and  just  miss  the  way   out.  We   had  better
 explore  a  little  before we  start. And  let us  go first  towards the
 light.'                                                                
   Passing   under   the   northern   arch   they   went   down   a  wide

 corridor   and  as   they  went   the  glimmer   of  light   grew  stronger.
 Turning  a  sharp  corner  they  came  to a  great door  on their  right. It
 was  half  open,  and  beyond  there   was  a   large  square   chamber.  It
 was  only  dimly  lit, but  to their  eyes, after  so long  in the  dark, it
 seemed  almost  dazzlingly  light,  and  they   blinked  as   they  entered.
 Their  feet  disturbed  deep   dust  and   stumbled  amongst   things  lying
 on  the  floor  within  the  doorway   whose  shapes   they  could   not  at
 first make out.                                                              
   They  saw  now  that  the  chamber  was  lit  by  a  wide  shaft  high  up
 in  the  far  wall  -  it  slanted  upwards  and  far  above a  small square
 patch  of  sky  could  be  seen  where  it issued  outwards. The  light fell
 directly  on  a  table  in  the  midst  of  the  chamber,  a   square  block
 some  three  feet  high  upon  which  was  laid  a  great  slab  of whitened
 stone.                                                                       
   'It  looks  like   a  tomb!'   [muttered  >]   thought  Frodo,   and  went
 forward  to  look  at  it  more  closely  with a  curious sense  of forebod-
 ing.  Gandalf  came  quickly  to  his  side.  On  the  slab  was  deeply cut
 in Runes:(40)                                                                
                                                                             
                       BALIN SON OF BURIN LORD OF MORIA.                      
                                                                             
   Gandalf and Frodo looked at one another. 'He is dead then. I               
 feared it somehow,' said Frodo.                                              
                                                                             
   Although  the  outline for  the story  of the  passage of  Moria continues
 well beyond this point (p.443), this  first draft  of the  narrative stopped
 here.  My  father  pencilled  some  barely  legible   notes  on   the  blank
 remainder of  the page,  and years  later (when,  as I  think, the  page had
 become detached from the rest  of the  chapter: see  note 40)  he deciphered
 them as follows.                                                             
                                                                             
   Balin  son  of  Burin  was  changed  to  Balin  son of  Fundin, as  in The
 Hobbit (see p. 444).                                                           
   At the end of the narrative in ink is written, as in  FR: 'Gimli  cast his
 hood over his face.'                                                         
   'Runes of? Dwarves'                                                        
   '(they)  look  about  and  see  broken swords  and ?axe-heads  and cloven
 shields'                                                                     
   'The?trodden  book  is  bloodstained  &  tossed  in  a  corner.  Only some
 can be read. Balin was slain in ? fray in Dimrill dale. They have  taken the
 gates they are coming'                                                       
                                                                             
  On the back of the page is a first scribbled sketch of a 'Page of Balin's
 Book' (see note 40).                                                         

  It may be that  my father  did not  at this  time feel  that he  had reached
  the end of a chapter, and intended to continue  the story;  but it  is known
  from  his  own  words  in  the  Foreword  to the  Second Edition  (1966), in
  which he set down some recollections  of the  stages in  the writing  of the
  book, that he stopped for a long time at precisely this point. He said there
  that by the end of 1939 'the tale had  not yet  reached the  end of  Book I'
  (and it is clear that he referred to Book I of FR,  not to  Volume I  of The
  Lord of the Rings); and that                                                
    In spite of the darkness of the  next five  years I  found that  the story
  could  not  now  be  wholly  abandoned,   and  I   plodded  on,   mostly  by
  night, till I stood by  Balin's tomb  in Moria.  There I  halted for  a long
  while.  It  was  almost  a  year  later  when  I  went  on  and  so  came to
  Lothlorien and the Great River late in 1941.                                
  This can only  mean that  the story  was broken  off in  Moria late  in 1940.
  It   seems   impossible   to   accommodate   these   dates  to   such  other
  evidence  as  exists on  the subject.  I think  it extremely  probable, even
  virtually certain, that these last chapters, taking the story from Rivendell
  to Moria, belong to the latter part of 1939; and  indeed my  father himself
  said, in  a letter  to Stanley  Unwin dated  19 December  1939, that  he had
  'never  quite  ceased  work'  on The  lard of  the Rings,  and that  'it has
  reached  Chapter  XVI'  (Letters  no.  37).  The  chapter-numbers   at  this
  stage are unfortunately so erratic that  the evidence  they provide  is very
  difficult  to  use;  but  when  it  is  observed  that  the number  'XV' was
  pencilled on the original manuscript of  'The Council  of Elrond',  and that
  the  chapter  which  afterwards  continued  the story  from the  point where
  the present text  ends -  originally called  'The Mines  of Moria  (ii)' and
  afterwards  'The  Bridge  of  Khazad-dum'  - is  numbered 'XVII',  it seems
  probable that it was to 'The Mines of Moria' that my father referred  in the
  letter  of  December  1939.  In  any case  'Chapter XVI'  could not  by any
  reckoning be one of the chapters of Book I  in FR.  I feel  sure, therefore,
  that - more than a quarter of a century later - he erred in his recollection
  of the year. But it would be out of the question that he  should err  in his
  recollection that he 'halted for  a long  while by  Balin's tomb  in Moria.'
  Internal  evidence  in  any  case  suggests that  the 'wave'  of composition
  which had carried the story from  the Council  of Elrond  to the  chamber of
  Balin's  tomb  came  to  an  end  here.  All  subsequent  texts  rest  on  a
  developed  form  of  the  Council  and  a   different  composition   of  the
  Company of the Ring.                                                        
                                                                             
    There this history  halts also.  But before  ending there  remains another
  outline scrap,  found on  the same  isolated page  as bears  the preliminary
  sketches for the descent from the Red Pass (p. 431, note  1) and  the spell
  that held the West Gate of Moria (p.444). It  is in  fact a  continuation of
  the 'Sketch of  the Moria  chapter' given  on pp. 442 - 3, which  ends with
  the words., Pursuit is after them. Here follows the loss of Gandalf.        
  Written in a faint pencilled scribble it is extremely difficult to read.

   They  are  pursued  by  goblins  and  a  B[lack]  R[ider]  [written
 above:  a  Balrog] after  escaping from  Balin's Tomb  - they  come to
 a bridge of slender stone over a gulf.                                 
   Gandalf  turns  back  and  holds  off   [?enemy],  they   cross  the
 bridge  but  the  B[lack]  R[ider]  leaps  forward  and  wrestles with
 Gandalf.  The  bridge  cracks  under  them  and the  last they  see is
 Gandalf falling  into the  pit with  the B[lack]  R[ider]. There  is a
 flash of fire and blue light up from abyss.                            
   Their grief. Trotter now guides party.                               
   (Of  course  Gandalf  must  reappear  later -  probably fall  is not
 as  deep  as  it  seemed.  Gandalf  thrusts   Balrog  under   him  and
 so.......  and  eventually  following   the  subterranean   stream  in
 the  gulf  he  found  a  way  out  -  but  he does  not turn  up until
 they  have  had  many  adventures:  not  indeed  until  they   are  on
 [?borders]  of  Mordor  and  the  King  of  Ond  is  being  beaten  in
 battle.)                                                               
                                                                       
   This seems to show clearly that before ever the story of the fall of
 Gandalf from the  Bridge of  Khazad-dum was  written, my  father fully
 intended that he should return.                                        
                                                                       
                                 NOTES.                                 
                                                                       
 1. To this point the text of this  'Sketch' was  struck through,  but the
    remainder was not.                                                  
 2. See  p. 437,  note 35;  and cf.  the corresponding  passage in  FR (p.
    338), where  Gandalf says:  'There are  Orcs, very  many of  them. And
    some are large and evil: black Uruks of Mordor.'                    
 3. In FR  (p. 313)  the Company  moved south  towards Moria  by day,
    and they 'wandered and scrambled in  a barren  country of  red stones.
    Nowhere could they see any gleam of water...'                       
 4. My father first wrote here  (changing it  at once):  'Caradras dilthen
    the  Little  Redway'. For  Caradras as  the name  of the  river Redway
    (later Silverlode)  on the  other side  of the  Mountains see  p. 433,
    note 15.                                                            
 5. It was now  the night  of 5  December, and  full moon  was on  the 7th
    (see p. 434, note 19).                                              
 6. This sentence  was enclosed  within square  brackets, and  the con-
    cluding words 'from  whence they  heard the  splash of  running water'
    struck  out.  These  changes  belong  with  the  writing of  the manu-
    script.                                                             
 7. Though the word 'pool' is used, the reference is  clearly to  the lake
    and not to the 'pool' which they  had just  walked through.  The 'soft
    bubbling noise' comes from the 'lake'.                              

  8.     The whole passage  from 'Well,  here we  are at  last' on  p.448  to this
        point is a rider on a slip, replacing the following in the original text:
        'Here  is  the  gate,'  said  Gandalf.  'This  is  where  the  road  from
        Hollin ended, and  the elves  planted these  trees in  old days;  for the
        west-gates  were  made chiefly for their  use in  their traffic  with the
        dwarves.'                                                                
        The  replacement  certainly  belongs  with  the  first  writing   of  the
        chapter,  for  the  dispatch  of  the  ponies  by  Sam  and   Trotter  is
        subsequently referred to in the text as written.                         
  9.    The word 'wholly' is enclosed in square brackets.                        
 10.    In  FR  (p.  318)  the  hammer  and  anvil  are  'surmounted  by  a crown
        with seven stars', and 'more clearly than all else  there shone  forth in
        the  middle  of  the door  a single  star with  many rays.'  The original
        draft has no mention of the two trees bearing crescent moons.            
  11.   In FR the  inscription on  the doors  is of  ithildin which  mirrors only
        starlight  and moonlight  (p. 318).  In this  original draft,  of course,
        the time-scheme is different -  the middle  of the  day, not  early night
        (see note 28).                                                           
  12.   This was first written: 'Narfi made the Doors'.                          
  13.   Merry   replaced  Frodo,   who  replaced   Boromir;  it   was  apparently
        said   of  Boromir   that  he   was  not   much  disturbed   by  Gandalfs
        bristling  brows,  and  that  he  secretly  wished  that the  doors might
        stay shut.                                                               
  14.   I  cannot  interpret  this. In  FR (p.  320) Gandalf's  invocation means:
        Elvish gate open  now for  us; doorway  of the  Dwarf-folk listen  to the
        word [beth] of my tongue.'                                               
  15.   The text of this passage, from 'Then he  sat down  in silence',  as first
        written read:                                                            
          Only   Trotter   seemed   troubled.   Boromir   was   smiling   broadly
        behind  his  back.  Sam  ventured  to  whisper  in  Frodo's   ear:  'I've
        never  seen  old  Gandalf  at  a  loss  for words  before,' he  said. 'It
        looks as if we were not meant to pass these gates, somehow.'             
             'I have a feeling of dread,' said Frodo slowly, 'either of the gates
        or  of something  else. But  I do  not think  Gandalf is  beaten -  he is
        thinking hard, I fancy.'                                                 
        Subsequently   Sam's   whispered   speech   to   Frodo   was   given   to
        Merry,  with the  addition: 'He  ought not  to have  sent off  the ponies
        till he got them open.'                                                  
  16.   Written in pencil here: 'Sound of wolves far  off at  same time  as swish
        in  water'.  But  this  would  have  been  added when  the time  of their
        entry  into  the  Mines  had been  altered; cf.  FR p.  321 and  note 28.
  17.   These  words  were  struck  out  in  pencil  and  the form  Melin substi-
        tuted.  In  the  Etymologies  (V.372),  stem  MEL,  are   given  Noldorin
        mellon and meldir 'friend', and also Quenya melin 'dear'.                
  18.   In  FR  there  are  two  doors;  and  despite  the single  door described
        here,  the  inscription  bears the  words 'The  Doors of  Durin'; Gandalf

       tells  them:  'these  doors  open  outwards,  but  nothing  can  open them
       inwards. They can swing out, or they can be broken...'                    
  19.  As  first  written  (and  not  struck  out) this  passage read:  'They had
       just  time;  Trotter  who  came  last  was  not  more  than four  steps up
       when  the  arms  of   the  creature   in  the   water  came   feeling  and
       fingering the wall.'                                                      
  20.  In the first of these lacunas the text seems  to read  in it,  or possibly
       with (in which case  his wand  was omitted;  cf. FR  p. 322,  'he thrust
       his staff against the doors').  In the  second, the  word looks  like open
       (perhaps for opening).                                                    
  21.  The illegible word is just a series of wiggles;  certainly not  stood, the
       word here in FR. Just possibly, survived.                                 
  22.  The  actual  reading  here  is  '  -  not by  accident'. The  sentence was
       enclosed  in  square  brackets  at  the  time  of  writing, but  a similar
       sentence remains in FR.                                                   
  23.  Dunruin   replaced,   apparently   at  the   time  of   writing, Carondoom
       (see  p.  433,  note  13).  Subsequently  Dimrilldale  was written  in in
       pencil.                                                                   
  24.  This  sentence  was  a  replacement (to  all appearance  made at  the time
       of  writing.,  see note  31) of:  In the  confusion of  the attack  at the
       Westgate  some  of  the  bundles  and  packages  had  been  left   on  the
       ground;  but  they  had  still  with  them  one  bundle  of  torches which
       they  had  brought  with  them  in  case  of need,  but never  yet used.'
  25.  The   words  following   Glamdring  are   enclosed  in   square  brackets.
       Glamdring  has  appeared  in  the  'Sketch'  for  the  chapter;   see  pp.
                                                                                
       442-4.                                                                    
  26.  This  sentence  was  changed  in  the  act  of  writing,   the  successive
       stages not being crossed out: 'than any  cat that  ever walked',  'than is
       the  cat  of  Benish  Armon',  'than   the  cats   of  Queen   [?Tamar  >]
       Margoliante Beruthiel' - both these names being left to stand.            
  27.  The  original   passage  that   follows  here   was  enclosed   in  square
       brackets and later struck out in pencil:                                  
          While the  others were  trying to  keep up  their spirits  with hopeful
       talk,   and  were   asking  whispered   questions  concerning   the  lands
       [struck  out:  of  Dunruin   and  Fangorn]   beyond  the   mountains,  the
       vale  of  Redway,  the  forest  of  Fangorn,  and  beyond,  he   felt  the
       certainty...                                                              
       This derives from the 'Sketch' for the chapter (see p.442).               
  28.  In the 'Sketch' (p.442) it is said, as here, that 'it was about 10 o'clock
       in  the  morning'  when  they  entered  the  Mines.  This  does  not agree
       with  what  is  said  on  p. 447, that  when 'the  sun reached  the south'
       Gandalf  'stood  up and  said that  it was  high time  to begin  to search
       for the  gates', and  the sun  was shining  across the  face of  the cliff
       when  he  made  the  signs  appear.  This  suggests  that  the   door  was
       opened  in  the  early  afternoon.  The  sentence  in  the  text  here was
       altered in pencil to 'five o'clock in the evening', but it is hard  to say

       to  what form  of the  story this  refers. In  FR it  was fully  dark -
       'the  countless  stars  were  kindled'  - when  they entered  the Mines
       (pp. 320, 326), and though it was  early December  it was  surely after
       five o'clock. A few lines below in the  present text,  however, another
       change  in  the  time-scheme  clearly  introduces   that  of   FR;  see
       note 29.                                                               
  29.  The words 'the night is already come'  were changed  in pencil  to 'the
       night  is  already  old', and  the following  sentence, which  had been
       enclosed  in  square  brackets, was  struck out.  As written,  the text
       agrees with the story that they  went into  the Mines  at about  ten in
       the  morning  -  it  would  now  be  about  8  p.m.  (see note  28). As
       changed, it agrees with FR, p. 326  ('outside the  late Moon  is riding
       westward and the middle-night has passed').                            
  30.  'Sam' replaced 'Merry' at the time of writing, since at the end of this
       episode it is Sam, not changed from  Merry, who  takes the  first watch
       as a punishment for casting the stone into the well.                   
  31.  This  passage  was  much  changed  in  the  course  of  composition. At
       first 'Gandalf allowed two torches to  be lit  to help  in exploration.
       Their light found no roof,  but was  sufficient to  show that  they had
       come (as they had  guessed) into  a wide  space high  and broad  like a
       great hall.'  It has  however been  said, by  a change  apparently made
       during the initial  composition (see  note 24),  that they  had neither
       torches nor means of making them.                                      
  32.  The passage in FR p.  329 from  'All about  them as  they lay  hung the
       darkness...'  to  'the  actual  dread  and wonder  of Moria'  was first
       drafted  in  the  margin  of  the manuscript  here, perhaps  quite soon
       after the writing of the main text.                                    
  33.  'Gandalf' is an early emendation from 'Trotter',  and in  the following
       speech.                                                                
  34.  Ithil is an early, perhaps immediate, change from Erceleb.             
  35.  This   passage   was   changed   in   the   act   of    writing   from:
       -  very  abundantly  in the  earlier days,  and especially  the silver.
       Moria-silver  was  (and  still  is)  renowned;  and  many  held   it  a
       precious                                                               
       This is where the conception of mithril first  emerged, though  not yet
       the  name  (see  note  34).  The  reference  to  mithril in  The Hobbit
       (Chapter XIII, 'Not at  Home') entered  in the  third edition  of 1966:
       until then the text  read: 'It  was of  silvered steel,  and ornamented
       with pearls, and with it went a belt of pearls and crystals.'  This was
       changed to: 'It was of silver-steel, which the elves call  mithril, and
       with it went a belt of pearls and crystals.'                           
  36.  Against  Uruktharbun  is   pencilled  Azanulbizar,   which  in   FR  is
       the  Dwarvish  name  of  Dimrill-dale.  If  Uruktharbun  is  Moria (and
       the next revision  of this  text has  'the dwarflords  of Khazad-dum'),
       Azanulbizar  may  have  been  intended  to  replace  it  and   to  have
       referred at first to Moria; on the  other hand,  my father  may perhaps

 have wished to name  the 'dwarflords'  as lords  in the  Dimrill-dale. It
 may  be  mentioned  that  placed  in this  manuscript, though  written on
 different  paper  and  presumably  belonging  to   a  later   stage  when
 Gimli  had  become  a  member  of  the  Company,  is  a sheet  of primary
 workings for his song in Moria; and in these occur the lines:            
            When Durin came to Azanul
            and found and named the nameless pool.                                   
    In notes written years later (after the publication of The Lord of the
 Rings)  my  father  observed  that  'the  interpretation  of   the  Dwarf
 names  (owing  to  scanty  knowledge  of  Khuzdul) is  largely uncertain,
 except  that,  since  this  region  [i.e.  Moria  and  Dimrill-dale]  was
 originally   a   Dwarf-home   and   primarily   named   by    them,   the
 Sindarin  and   Westron  names   are  probably   in  origin   of  similar
 senses.'  He  interpreted  (hesitantly)  Azanulbizar  as   containing  ZN
 'dark, dim', ul 'streams', and  bizar a  dale or  valley, the  whole thus
 meaning 'Vale of Dim Streams'.                                           
        The   name Khazad-dum   had  already   appeared  in   the  Quenta
 Silmarillion (V. 274), where it  was the  name of  the Dwarf-city  in the
 Blue Mountains which the Elves called Nogrod.                             
37. The word  up here  is odd  (and my  father later  put a  query against
 it),  since  the  statement  that  the East  Gates were  on a  much lower
 level than the great hall where  they now  were is  part of  the original
 composition.                                                             
38. This  passage  survives  in  FR  (pp.  331  -  2), but  there Frodo's
 thoughts  turn  to  Bilbo  and  Bag  End  for  a  different reason  - the
 mention  by  Gandalf  of Bilbo's  corslet of  mithril-rings. Moria-silver
 had  only  just  emerged  (note  35),  and  the  connection  with Bilbo's
 mailcoat had not been made.                                              
39. In  the previous  chapter the  name Dimrilldale  appears as  a correc-
 tion (p. 433,  note 13),  together with  the first  mention of  the lake
 in  the  dale,  there  called  Classmere;  Mirrormere  is  named   on  the
 map   reproduced  on   p.  439.   The  Elvish   name  Helevorn   (in  the
 Etymologies,  V.365,  translated  'black-glass')  given  to  it  here had
 appeared  in  the  Quenta  Silmarillion  as  the  name  of  the  lake  in
 Thargelion  beside  which  dwelt  Cranthir,  son  of  Feanor.   No  other
 Elvish  name  for  Mirrormere  is  recorded  in  published  writing,  but
 in the notes referred  to in  note 36  my father  said that  the Sindarin
 name,  not  given  in  LR,  was  in  fact  Nen  Cenedril  'Lake  Looking-
 glass'.   Translating   Kheled-zaram   as  'probably   "glass-pool"',  he
 noted:  'kheled  was certainly  a Dwarf  word for  "glass", and  seems to
 be  the  origin  of  Sindarin  beled "glass".  Cf. Lake  Hele(d)vorn near
 the  Dwarf-regions  in  the  north  of  Dor  Caranthir  [Thargelion]:  it
 means  "black  glass", and  is probably  also a  translation of  a Dwarf-
 name  (given  by  the  Dwarves:  the  same  is probably  the case  in the
 Moria   region)   such  as   Narag-zaram  (that   NRG  was   Khuzdul  for
 "black" is seen in the Dwarf-name for Mordor: Nargun).'                  

40. As  the  manuscript  of  this  chapter  was  found among  my father's
 papers it ended at the foot  of a  page, at  the words  'a great  slab of
 whitened  stone'  on  p.  460.  I  had  assumed  that  this was  where my
 father broke off, until, a few days  before the  typescript of  this book
 was  due  to  go  to  the  printers,  I  came  most  unexpectedly  upon a
 further page, beginning at  the words  '"It looks  like a  tomb!" thought
 Frodo',  which  had  evidently  been  separated  from  the  rest  of  the
 chapter  long  ago,  on  account of  the inscriptions.  It was  of course
 too late to reproduce these in  this book,  but an  account of  the runic
 alphabets as my father conceived  them at  this time  and of  the writing
 on  Balin's  tomb  and  in  the  Book  of  Mazarbul  will,  I   hope,  be
 published in Volume VII.                                                
        It may be noticed here, however, that it was at this point that my
 father  decided  to  abandon  the  Old  English  (or 'Hobbit')  runes and
 to use the real runes  of Beleriand,  which were  already in  a developed
 form.  The  inscription  on  the  tomb  (Balin  Son  of  Burin   Lord  of
 Moria)  was  first  written  in  the former,  and then  immediately below
 in 'Angerthas', twice, with the same words  but in  runes that  differ in
 certain points.                                                          
        On the back of this  newly discovered  page, and  as I  think very
 probably  dating  from  the  same  time,  is  a  very  roughly  pencilled
 design  of  a  'Page  of  Balin's  Book',  in runes  representing English
 spelt phonetically, which reads thus:                                    
                                                                         
                        We  drove  out  the  Orcs   fro(m)...  guard      
            .... (f)irst  hall. We  slew many  under the  bright sun      
            in  the  dale.  Floi  was  killed by  an arrow..........      
            We                did...................................      
            .........  We  have  occupied  the twenty-first  hall of      
            ......   north   end.   There   there   is..............      
            ...............          shaft         is...............      
            (B)alin has set  up his  chair in  the chamber  of Mazar      
            bul.........................    Balin    is    Lord   of      
            Moria...................................................      
                                                                         
    And on the right-hand bottom corner of the page, torn off from the     
    rest, is the name Kazaddum.                                           
