                               FOREWORD.                            
                                                                   
 The  title  of  this  book  comes  from  the  same  source   as  The
 Treason of Isengard, a set  of six  titles, one  for each  'Book' of
 The  Lord  of  the  Rings,  suggested by  my father  in a  letter to
 Rayner  Unwin  of  March  1953  (The  Letters  of  J. R.  R. Tolkien
 no.  136).  The  War  of  the  Ring  was that  proposed for  Book V,
 and  I  have  adopted  it  for this  book since  the history  of the
 writing of Book V  constitutes nearly  half of  it, while  the first
 part  concerns the  victory of  Helm's Deep  and the  destruction of
 Isengard.  The  second  part  describes   the  writing   of  Frodo's
 journey  to  Kirith Ungol,  and this  I have  called 'The  Ring Goes
 East', which was the title proposed by my father for Book IV.      
  In  the  Foreword  to  The  Return  of   the  Shadow   I  explained
 that  a  substantial collection  of manuscripts  was left  behind in
 England   when   the   bulk   of  the   papers  went   to  Marquette
 University  in  1958,  these  manuscripts  consisting  for  the most
 part of outlines and the earliest narrative drafts; and  I suggested
 that  this was  a consequence  of the  papers being  dispersed, some
 in  one  place  and  some  in  another,  at   that  time.   But  the
 manuscript  materials  for  The  Return of  the King  were evidently
 preserved  with  the  main  body  of  the  papers,  for  nothing  of
 Books  V  and  VI  was  left behind  beyond some  narrative outlines
 and the first draft of the  chapter 'Minas  Tirith'. For  my account
 of  Book  V therefore  I have  been almost  wholly dependent  on the
 provision  from  Marquette  of  great  quantities  of  manuscript in
 reproduction,  without  which  the  latter  part of  The War  of the
 Ring could  not have  been written  at all.  For this  most generous
 assistance I express my gratitude to all concerned  in it,  and most
 especially   to   Mr   Taum   Santoski,   who  has   been  primarily
 responsible  for  the  work  involved.  In  addition he  has advised
 me  on  many  particular  points  which  can  be  best   decided  by
 close  examination of  the original  papers, and  he has  spent much
 time  in trying  to decipher  those manuscripts  in which  my father
 wrote a text in ink on top of another in pencil.  I thank  also Miss
 Tracy  J.  Muench  and  Miss Elizabeth  A. Budde  for their  part in
 the  work  of  reproducing the  material, and  Mr Charles  B. Elston
 for  making  it  possible  for me  to include  in this  book several

 illustrations  from  manuscripts at  Marquette: the  pages carry-
 ing  sketches  of  Dunharrow,  of  the mountains  at the  head of
 Harrowdale, and of Kirith Ungol,  the plan  of Minas  Tirith, and
 the full-page drawing of Orthanc (5).                           
   This book follows the  plan and  presentation of  its predeces-
 sors, references to previous volumes in  'The History  of Middle-
 earth'  being  generally  given  in  Roman  numerals  (thus 'VII'
 refers to The Treason of Isengard),  FR, TT,  and RK  being used
 as  abbreviations  for  The  Fellowship  of  the  Ring,  The Two
 Towers, and The Return  of the  King, and  page-references being
 made  throughout  to  the  three-volume  hardback edition  of The
 Lord of the Rings (LR). In several parts of the book  the textual
 history is exceedingly complex. Since the story of  the evolution
 of The Lord of the Rings can of course only be discovered  by the
 correct  ordering  and  interpretation  of  the  manuscripts, and
 must be recounted in those terms, the  textual history  cannot be
 much simplified; and I have made much use of  identifying letters
 for the manuscripts in order to clarify my account and to  try to
 avoid  ambiguities.  In Books  IV and  V problems  of chronologi-
 cal synchronisation became acute: a  severe tension  is sometimes
 perceptible between narrative certainties and  the demands  of an
 entirely  coherent  chronological structure  (and the  attempt to
 right dislocation in time could very well lead to  dislocation in
 geography).  Chronology  is  so  important  in  this part  of The
 Lord of the Rings that I  could not  neglect it,  but I  have put
 almost all of  my complicated  and often  inconclusive discussion
 into 'Notes on the Chronology' at the end of chapters.          
   In this book I  have used  accents throughout  in the  name, of
 the Rohirrim (Theoden, Eomer, &c.).                            
   Mr  Charles  Noad  has  again  read  the  proofs  independently
 and checked the very large number  of citations,  including those
 to other passages  within the  book, with  a strictness  and care
 that  I  seem  altogether unable  to attain.  In addition  I have
 adopted  several of  his suggestions  for improvement  in clarity
 and consistency  in my  account. I  am much  indebted to  him for
 this generous and substantial work.                             
   I  am  very  grateful  for communications  from Mr  Alan Stokes
 and  Mr  Neil Gaiman,  who have  explained my  father's reference
 in  his  remarks  about  the  origins of  the poem  Errantry (The
 Treason of Isengard p. 85):  'It was.begun  very many  years ago,
 in an attempt to go  on with  the model  that came  unbidden into
 my mind: the first six  lines, in  which, I  guess, D'ye  ken the

                   
                                                                
 rhyme to porringer had a part.' The reference  is to  a Jacobite
 song  attacking  William  of  Orange as  usurper of  the English
 crown from his father-in-law, James II, and threatening  to hang
 him. The first verse of this song runs thus in the version given
 by  Iona  and  Peter Opie  in The  Oxford Dictionary  of Nursery
 Rhymes (no. 422):                                               
                                                                
            What is the rhyme for porringer?                     
            What is the rhyme for porringer?                     
            The king he had a daughter fair                      
                And gave the Prime of Orange her.                
                                                                
 The  verse  is  known  in  several  forms (in  one of  which the
 opening line is Ken ye the rhyme to porringer? and the  last And
 he gave her to an Oranger). This then is the unlikely  origin of
 the provender of the Merry Messenger:                           
                                                                
            There was a merry passenger,                         
            a messenger, an errander;                            
            he took a tiny porringer                             
            and oranges for provender.                           
