  PART ONE.
           
 THE FALL OF
   SARUMAN.

                                     I.                                   
                        THE DESTRUCTION OF ISENGARD.                      
                                                                         
                                (Chronology)                             
                                                                         
 The writing of the story from 'The  King of  the Golden  Hall' to  the end
 of  the first  book  of  The   Two  Towers   was  an   extremely  complex
 process.  The  'Isengard  story'  was  not  conceived  and  set down  as a
 series  of  clearly  marked 'chapters',  each one  brought to  a developed
 state  before  the  next  was  embarked on,  but evolved  as a  whole, and
 disturbances of the structure that entered as it  evolved led  to disloca-
 tions  all  through  the narrative.  With my  father's method  of composi-
 tion at this time - passages of  very rough  and piecemeal  drafting being
 built into a  completed manuscript  that was  in turn  heavily overhauled,
 the  whole  complex  advancing  and  changing  at  the  same  time  -  the
 textual  confusion  in  this  part  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  is only
 penetrable with great difficulty, and to set  it out  as a  clear sequence
 impossible.                                                              
  The essential cause  of this  situation was  the question  of chronology;
 and I think that the best way to approach the writing of this part  of the
 narrative is  to try  to set  out first  the problems  that my  father was
 contending with,  and to  refer back  to this  discussion when  citing the
 actual texts.                                                            
  The  story  had   certain  fixed   narrative  'moments'   and  relations.
 Pippin  and  Merry  had  encountered  Treebeard in  the forest  of Fangorn
 and been taken to his 'Ent-house' of  Wellinghall for  the night.  On that
 same  day  Aragorn,  Gimli  and  Legolas  had  encountered  Eomer  and his
 company  returning  from  battle  with  the  Orcs,  and   they  themselves
 passed the night beside the battlefield.  For these  purposes this  may be
 called 'Day 1', since earlier events  have here  no relevance;  the actual
 date according to  the chronology  of this  period in  the writing  of The
 Lord of the Rings was Sunday January 29 (see VII.368, 406).              
  On  Day  2,  January  30,  the  Entmoot  took  place;  and  on  that  day
 Aragorn  and  his  companions  met  Gandalf  returned,  and  together they
 set  out  on  their  great  ride  to Eodoras.  As they  rode south  in the
 evening  Legolas  saw  far  off  towards the  Gap of  Rohan a  great smoke
 rising,  and  he  asked  Gandalf  what  it  might  be:  to  which  Gandalf
 replied 'Battle and war! ' (at the end of the chapter 'The White Rider').
  They  rode  all  night,  and  reached  Eodoras  in  the early  morning of
 Day  3,  January  31.  While  they  spoke  with  Theoden   and  Wormtongue
 in  the  Golden  Hall at  Eodoras the  Entmoot was  still rumbling  on far

  away  in  Fangorn.  In  the  afternoon  of  Day  3  Theoden  with Gandalf
  and  his  companions  and  a  host  of  the  Rohirrim  set out  west from
  Eodoras across the  plains of  Rohan towards  the Fords  of Isen;  and on
  that  same  afternoon  the  Entmoot  ended,(1) and the  Ents  began  their
  march on Isengard, which they reached after nightfall.                  
    It is  here that  the chronological  problems appear.  There were  - or
  would be, as the story  evolved -  the following  elements (some  of them
  foreseen in some form in the outline  that I  called 'The  Story Foreseen
  from Fangorn', VII.435 - 6) to be brought  into a  coherent time-pattern.
  The Ents  would attack  Isengard, and  drown it  by diverting  the course
  of the river Isen. A great force would leave Isengard; the Riders  at the
  Fords  of  Isen  would  be  driven  back  over  the  river.  The Rohirrim
  coming  from  Eodoras  would  see a  great darkness  in the  direction of
  the  Wizard's  Vale,  and  they  would  meet  a  lone  horseman returning
  from  the  battle at  the Fords;  Gandalf would  fleet away  westwards on
  Shadowfax.  Theoden  and  his  host,  with  Aragorn,  Gimli  and Legolas,
  would  take  refuge  in a  deep gorge  in the  southern mountains,  and a
  great battle there would turn to  victory after  certain defeat  with the
  coming of the  'moving trees',  and the  return of  Gandalf and  the lord
  of  the  Rohirrim  whose  stronghold  it  was.  Finally,   Gandalf,  with
  Theoden,  Aragorn,  Gimli,  Legolas  and  a company  of the  Riders would
  leave the refuge  and ride  to Isengard,  now drowned  and in  ruins, and
  meet Merry and Pippin sitting on a pile of rubble at the gates.         
                                                                         
                                      I.                                  
                                                                         
    In  the  original  opening of  'Helm's Deep',  as will  be seen  at the
  beginning  of  the  next  chapter,  the  cavalcade  from  Eodoras  saw 'a
  great  fume  and  vapour'  rising  over Nan  Gurunir, the  Wizard's Vale,(2)
  and  met  the  lone horseman  returning from  the Fords  of Isen,  on the
  same  day  (Day  3,  January  31)  as  they  left  the  Golden  Hall. The
  horseman (Ceorl)  told them  that the  Riders had  been driven  back over
  the Isen with great loss on the previous day (Day 2, January 30);  and it
  must have been  'the smoke  of battle'  that Legolas  saw in  the evening
  rising  from  the  Gap  of Rohan  as they  rode south  from Fangorn  - it
  cannot  of  course  have  been  the  steam  rising  from the  drowning of
  Isengard by the Ents (see above). In this original story Theoden  and his
  men,  with  Aragorn,  Gimli  and  Legolas,  took  refuge  in  Helm's Deep
  (not yet so named) that same night (Day 3).                             
    A  chronological  dislocation  seems  to have  been already  present in
  this: for the events of Days 1-3 as set out above  were fixed  in relation
  to each other, and the Ents must  arrive at  Isengard after  nightfall of
  Day 3  (January 31);  yet according  to the  original opening  of 'Helm's
  Deep'  the  host from  Eodoras sees  the 'great  fume and  vapour' rising
  over  Nan  Gurunir  (unquestionably  caused  by  the  drowning  of  Isen-
  gard) in the evening of that same day.                                  

                           
                                                                        
                                   II.                                   
                                                                        
  This  time-scheme  was  duly  changed:  Theoden  and  his  host  camped
 in the plain on the first night out  from Eodoras  (Day 3,  January 31),
 and  it  was  in  the  morning of  the second  day of  the ride  (Day 4,
 February 1) that they saw the great cloud over Nan Gurunir:             
                                                                        
  As they  rode they  saw a  great spire  of smoke  and vapour,  rising up
  out of  the deep  shadow of  Nan Gurunir;  as it  mounted it  caught the
  light  of  the  sun  and  spread in  glowing banks  that drifted  on the
  wind over the plains towards them.                                     
  'What  do  you  think  of  that,  Gandalf?'  said  Theoden.  'One  would
  say that all the Wizard's Vale was burning.'                           
  'There  is ever  a fume  above that  valley in  these days,'  said Hama;
  'but I never saw anything like that before.'                           
                                                                        
 It is now in the evening of this second day of their ride that  they met
 the  horseman Ceorl  coming from  the Fords,  and on  the night  of this
 day  that  the  battle  of the Hornburg took  place. The  chronology was
 now therefore:                                                          
                                                                        
  (Day  3)   January  31   Gandalf,  Theoden   and  the   Rohirrim  depart
  from  Eodoras  and  camp  for  the  night  in  the  plains.  Ents  reach
  Isengard  after  nightfall  and  after  the  departure  of  the Orc-host
  begin the drowning of the Circle of Isengard.                          
  (Day  4)  February  1  The  host from  Eodoras sees  in the  morning the
  steams  rising  from  the  drowning  of  Isengard;  in the  evening they
  meet  Ceorl  and  learn  of  the  defeat  at  the Fords  of Isen  on the
  previous  day;  and  reach Helm's  Deep after  nightfall. Battle  of the
  Hornburg.                                                               
                                                                        
  It  seems  impossible  to  avoid  the  conclusion that  the end  of the
 chapter 'The White Rider' (Legolas'  sight of  the smoke  in the  Gap of
 Rohan  on  Day  2, January  30) escaped  revision when  the date  of the
 (Second) Battle of the Fords of Isen was changed to January 31.         
                                                                        
                                   III.                                  
                                                                        
  In  the  original  form  of  what became  the opening  of 'The  Road to
 Isengard'  Gandalf  and  Theoden,  with Aragorn,  Gimli and  Legolas and
 a party of Riders, set out from Helm's Deep shortly after the end of the
 battle of the Hornburg, without any rest; this was on Day 5,  February 2,
 and  they  reached  Isengard not  long after  noon on  the same  day. As
 they approached Nan Gurunir                                             
                                                                        
  they  saw  rising  up  out of  deep shadows  a vast  spire of  smoke and
  vapour; as it mounted  it caught  the light  of the  sun, and  spread in
  glowing billows in the sky, and the wind bore them over the plain.     
  'What  do  you  think  of  that,  Gandalf?'  said  Theoden.  'One  would
  say that all the Wizard's Vale was burning.'                           

   'There is ever  a fume  above that  valley in  these days,'  said Eomer;
 'but  I  have  never  seen anything  like this  before. These  are steams,
 rather than smokes. Some devilry Saruman is brewing to greet us.'         
                                                                          
 This dialogue was lifted straight from its earlier place at  the beginning
 of the 'Helm's Deep' story  (see II  above) -  with substitution  of Eomer
 for  Hama,  slain  at  the  Hornburg,  and  in  'Helm's  Deep'  a different
 passage was inserted, as found in TT pp. 131 - 2, in  which what  is seen
 in  the  North-west  is  'a  shadow  that  crept  down  slowly   from  the
 Wizard's Vale', and there is no mention of fume or steam.                 
 The  reason  for  these  changes  was  again  chronological:  the  host on
 its way from Eodoras is not to see  great steams  rising from  Isengard on
 Day 4,  but the  'veiling shadow'  of the  Huorns as  they came  down into
 the Wizard's Vale. Thus:                                                  
                                                                          
   (Day  4)  February  1 The  host from  Eodoras sees  in the  morning the
   shade  of  the moving  trees far  off in  the North-west;  the drowning
   of  Isengard  was  not  begun  till  night.  At  night  Battle  of  the
   Hornburg.                                                                
 (Day   5)   February   2  In   the  morning   Theoden  and   Gandalf  and
   their company ride to Isengard, and find it drowned.                    
                                                                          
                                     IV.                                   
                                                                          
 The  chronology  was  then  changed  to  that  of  'The Road  to Isengard'
 in  TT,  whereby  Theoden  and  Gandalf  and  their  company do  not leave
 Helm's  Deep  until  much  later  on Day  5, pass  the night  camped below
 Nan  Gurunir,  and  do  not  reach   Isengard  until   midday  on   Day  6
 (February 3). This chronology is set  out in  a time-scheme  (additions of
 mine in brackets):                                                        
                                                                          
   [Day 3] January 31 Ents arrive at Isengard, night. Break in.            
   [Day  4]  February  1  Dawn,  they  go  away  north  to make  dams. All
   that  day  Merry  and  Pippin  alone  until  dusk.  Gandalf  arrives at
   Isengard  at  nightfall,  and  meets  Treebeard.  Drowning  of Isengard
   begins late at night. [Battle of the Hornburg.]                          
 [Day  5]  February  2  Isengard  steams  all  day  and  column  of  smoke
   arises  in  evening.  [Gandalf,  Theoden,  &c.  see  this  from  their
   camp below Nan Gurunir.] Huorns return in night to Isengard.            
 [Day  6]   February  3   Morning,  Treebeard   returns  to   Gates.  Sets
   Merry   and    Pippin   to    watch.   Wormtongue    comes.   [Gandalf,
   Theoden, &c. arrive shortly after noon.]                                
                                                                          
 This is the chronology of  LR, as  set out  in The  Tale of  Years, though
 the  actual  dates  are  of course  different (in  LR March 2 = January 31
 in this scheme).                                                          
                                                                          
                                     *                                    

                             
                                                                        
   This, I believe, is how the chronology evolved; but as will be seen in
 the following chapters, earlier  time-schemes appear  in the  drafts for
 passages far on in the actual narrative, because as I have said all this
 part of LR was written as a whole. Thus for example  in the  first draft
 of Merry's story of  the destruction  and drowning  of Isengard  (in TT
 in  the  chapter  'Flotsam  and  Jetsam')  the  chronology  belongs  with
 the  scheme  described  in  II above,  and against  it my  father noted:
 'Drowning must not begin until night of Hornburg battle.'               
   Despite the way in which this part of the story  was written,  I think
 that  it will  in fact  be clearest  to break  my account  into chapters
 corresponding to those  in The  Two Towers;  this inevitably  entails a
 certain amount of advance and retreat  in terms  of the  actual sequence
 of composition, but I hope  that this  preliminary account  will clarify
 the shifting chronological basis in the different texts.                
                                                                        
                                  NOTES.                                 
                                                                        
 1. The  extra  day  of the  Entmoot (TT  pp. 87-8)  was not  added until
    much later: VII.407, 419.                                            
 2. Nan  Gurunir,  the  Valley  of  Saruman,  was  added  in  to  a blank
    space  left  for  the  name  in the  manuscript of  'Treebeard' (VII.420
    note 9).                                                             

                                    II.                                  
                                                                        
                                HELM'S DEEP.                             
                                                                        
 A first draft of this story, abandoned  after it  had proceeded  for some
 distance, differs so essentially from its form in The Two Towers  that I
 give  it  here  in  full.  This  text  bears  the chapter  number XXVIII,
 without title. For the chronology see p. 4, $I.                        
                                                                        
   There    was    a    much-ridden    way,   northwestward    along   the
 foothills  of  the  Black  Mountains.  Up  and  down  over   the  rolling
 green   country   it   ran,   crossing  small   swift  streams   by  many
 fords.  Far   ahead  and   to  the   right  the   shadow  of   the  Misty
 Mountains   drew   nearer.   Beneath  the   distant  peak   of  Methedras
 in  dark  shadow  lay  the  deep  vale  of  Nan  Gurunir;  a  great  fume
 and  vapour  rose  there  and  drifted  towards  them  over  the  plain.(1)
 Halting   seldom  they   rode  on   into  the   evening.  The   sun  went
 down before them. Darkness grew behind.                                 
   Their  spears  were  tipped  with  fiery  red  as  the  last  shafts of
 light   stained   the   clouds   above   Tindtorras;(2) the   three  peaks
 stood  black  against  the  sunset   upon  the   northmost  arm   of  the
 Black  Mountains.  In  that  last  red  light  men  in  the  van   saw  a
 horseman  riding  back  towards  them.   As  he   drew  near,   the  host
 halted, "waiting him.                                                   
   He  came,  a   weary  man   with  dinted   helm,  and   cloven  shield.
 Slowly   he  climbed   from  his   horse,  and   stood  there   a  while,
 panting.  At  length  he  spoke.   'Is  Eomer   here?'  he   asked.  'You
 come  at  last,  but  too  late  and  too few.  Things have  gone evilly,
 since  Theodred  fell.(3) We  were  driven  back  over  the  bend   of  the
 Isen  with  great  loss  yesterday;  many   perished  at   the  crossing.
 Then  at  night  fresh  forces  came  over  the  river against  our camp.
 All   Isengard  must   be  emptied;   and  the   Wizard  has   armed  the
 wild  hill-men  and  the  scattered  folk  of  Westfold,(4) and  these also
 he   loosed   upon  us.   We  were   overmastered.  The   shieldwall  was
 broken.   Trumbold   [>   Herulf   >   Heorulf](5) the Westmarcher  has
 drawn   off   those   he   could  gather   towards  his   fastness  under
 Tindtorras.   Others   are   scattered.   Where   is   Eomer?   Tell  him
 there  is  no  hope  ahead:  he  should  return  to  Eodoras,  before the
 wolves of Saruman come there!'                                          
   Theoden  rode  up.  'Come,  stand  before  me,  Ceorl!'  he   said.  'I

                                                    
                                                                  
 am here. The last host of the Eorlingas has  ridden forth.  It will
 not return unfought.'                                             
  The  man's   face  lightened   with  wonder   and  joy.   He  drew
 himself  up.  Then  he  knelt  offering  his  notched sword  to the
 King.  'Command  me, lord,'  he cried,  'and pardon  me! I  did not
 know, I thought - '                                               
  'You  though".  I  remained  in  Eodoras,  bent  like an  old tree
 under  winter  snow.  So  it  was  when  you went.  But a  wind has
 shaken  off  somewhat the  cold burden,'  said Theoden.  'Give this
 man  a  fresh  horse.  Let  us  ride  to  the  aid  of  Trumbold [>
 Heorulf]! '                                                       
  Forward  they  rode  again,  urging  on  their   horses.  Suddenly
 Gandalf  spoke  to  Shadowfax,  and  like  an  arrow  from  the bow
 the great  horse sprang  away. Even  as they  looked, he  was gone:
 a Hash of silver in the sunset, a wind in the grass, a  shadow that
 fled  and  faded from  sight. For  a while  Snowmane and  the horses
 of the King's guard  strained in  pursuit, but  if they  had walked
 they would have had as much chance of overtaking him.             
  'What  does  that  mean?'  said  Hama  to  a  comrade.   'Ever  he
 comes and goes unlooked-for.'                                     
  'Wormtongue,   were   he  here,   would  not   find  it   hard  to
 explain,' said the other.                                         
  'True,' said Hama, 'but for  myself I  will wait  till we  see him
 again.'                                                           
  'If ever we do,' said the other.                                 
                                                                  
  It was night and  the host  was still  riding swiftly,  when cries
 and  hornblasts  were  heard  from  the  scouts  that  rode  ahead.
 Arrows  whistled  overhead.  They  were  crossing  a  wide  vale, a
 bay   in   the   mountains.   On   the   further  side   the  Tind-
 torras  were hidden  in darkness.  Some miles  ahead still  lay the
 opening of the  great cleft  in the  hills which  men of  that land
 called  Heorulf's  Clough:(6) steep  and  narrow  it   wound  inward
 under the  Tindtorras, and  where it  issued in  the vale,  upon an
 outjutting  heel  of  rock,  was  built  the fastness  of Heorulf's
 Hold.(7)                                                          
  The   scouts  rode   back  and   reported  that   wolfriders  were
 abroad in the vale,  and that  a host  of orcs  and wild  men, very
 great  indeed,  was  hastening  southward  over  the plain  to gain
 the gates of the Nerwet.(8)                                       
  'We  have found  some of  our men  slain as  they fled,'  said one
 of the scouts;  'and scattered  companies we  have met,  going this

 way  and  that, leaderless;  but many  are making  for Herulf's             
 Hold, and say that Herulf is already there.'                                
   'We had best not give battle in the dark,  nor await  the day             
 here in the open, not knowing the number  of the  coming host,'             
 said Eomer, who had ridden up to the King's side. 'What is your             
 counsel, Aragorn?'                                                          
   'To drive through such enemies as are  before us,  and encamp             
 before the Nerwet Gate to defend if may be,  while the  men who             
 have fought rest behind our shield.'                                        
   'Let it be so!'  said Theoden.  'We will  go thither  in many             
 [separate comp]anies: let a man who  is nightsighted  and knows             
 [well the land] go at the head of each.'(9)                                 
                                                                            
   At  this  point  my  father  stopped, and  returned to  'It was  night and
 the host was still riding swiftly...' In the passage just given is the first
 appearance   of   Helm's   Deep  ('Heorulf's   Clough')  and   the  Hornburg
 ('Heorulf's  Hold')  on  its 'outjutting  heel of  rock'; Heorulf  being the
 precursor of Erkenbrand of Westfold.                                        
                                                                            
   Night  had  fallen,  and  still  the  host  was  riding  swiftly  on. They
 had   turned   northward,   and   were   bearing   towards   the   fords  of
 the  Isen,  when  cries  and  hornblasts  were   heard  from   their  scouts
 that  went  in  front.  Arrows  whistled  over  them.  At  this   time  they
 were  at  the  outer  end  of  a  wide  vale,  a  bay  in  the  mountains of
 the   south.   On   its   further   western   side   the   Tindtorras   were
 hidden  in  darkness;  beneath  their  feet  [>   the  peaks],   some  miles
 away,  lay  the  opening  of  the  great  cleft  in the  hills which  men of
 that  land  called  Heorulf's  Clough  [>  lay  the   green  coomb   out  of
 which  opened  a  great  cleft  in  the hills.  Men of  that land  called it
 Helm's   Deep],(10) after  some   hero   of  ancient   wars  who   had  made
 his   refuge   there.   Ever   steeper   and   narrower   it   wound  inward
 under  the  Tindtorras,  till   the  crowhaunted   cliffs  on   either  side
 towered  far  above  and  shut  out  the  light.  Where  it  issued  in  the
 vale,   upon   [added:   the   Stanrock,)  an   outjutting  heel   of  land,
 was   built   the  fastness   of  Heorulf's  Hoe (11) (Hold?). Stanrock.  [>
 was   built   the  fastness   of  Helmsgate.   There  Heorulf   the  Marcher
 had his hold.]                                                              
   A   scout   now   rode   back   and   reported   that    wolfriders   were
 abroad  in  the  valley,  and  that  a  host  of  orcs  and  wild  men, very
 great   indeed,   was   hurrying   southward   over   the    plain   towards
 Heorulf's Hold.                                                             
   'We  have  found  many  of  our  own  folk  lying   slain  as   they  fled
 thither,'  said   the  scout.   'And  we   have  met   scattered  companies,

                    
                                                                      
 going  this  way  and  that,  leaderless.  Some  are  making  for  the
 Clough  [>  Helmsgate],  but  it  seems   that  Nothelm   [>  Heorulf]
 is  not  there.  His   plan  was   changed,  and   men  do   not  know
 whither   he   has   gone.   Some   say   that  Wormtongue   was  seen
 today  [>  Some  say  that   Wormtongue  was   seen  in   the  evening
 going  north,  and  in  the  dusk  an old  man on  a great  horse rode
 the same way].'                                                       
  'Well, if Nothelm be in  the Hold  or not,  [> 'It  will go  ill with
 Wormtongue,    if    Gandalf    overtakes    him,'    said    Theoden.
 'Nonetheless  I  miss  now  both  counsellors,  old  and  new.  Yet it
 seems  to  me that  whether Heorulf  be in  his Hold  or no,]  in this
 need  we  have  no  better  choice  than  to  go  thither ourselves,'
 said  Theoden.  'What  is  your  counsel?' he  said, turning  to Eomer
 who had now ridden up to the King's side.                             
  'We  should  be  ill  advised  to  give  battle  in  the  dark,' said
 Eomer,  'or  to  await  the  day  here  in the  open, not  knowing the
 number  of  the  oncoming  host.  Let  us drive  through such  foes as
 are   between   us  and   Herulf's  Clough   [>  the   fastness],  and
 encamp  before  the  Hold  [>  its  gate].  Then  if  we  cannot break
 out, we  may retreat  to the  Hold. There  are caves  in the  gorge [>
 Helm's   Deep]   behind   where   hundreds   may   hide,   and  secret
 ways lead up thence, I am told, onto the hills.'                      
  'Trust  not  to  them!'  said  Aragorn.   'Saruman  has   long  spied
 out this land. Still, in such a place our defence might last long.'
  'Let  us  go  then,'  said  Theoden.  'We will  ride thither  in many
 separate  companies.  A  man  who  is  nightsighted  and   knows  well
 the land shall go at the head of each.'                               
                                                                      
  I interrupt the text here to discuss some aspects of this  story. The
 names present an apparently impenetrable confusion,  but I  think that
 the development was more or less as follows.  My father  was uncertain
 whether 'Heorulf' ('Herulf') was the present lord of the 'Hold' or the
 hero  after  whom  the  'Clough'  was  named.  When  he wrote,  in the
 passage just given, 'which men of that  land called  Heorulf's Clough,
 after some hero of ancient wars who had made his refuge there'  he had
 decided on the latter, and therefore  the name  of the  present 'West-
 marcher'  (precursor  of  Erkenbrand)  was changed,  becoming Nothelm.
 Then, changing  again, Nothelm  reverted to  Heorulf, while  the gorge
 was  named  after  Helm:  Helmshaugh  (note  10),  then  Helm's  Deep.
 The fastness (Heorulf's Hoe or Hold) standing on  the Stanrock  is now
 called Helmsgate, which in LR refers  to the  entrance to  Helm's Deep
 across which the Deeping Wall was built.                              
  The image of the great gorge and  the fortress  built on  the jutting

  heel or 'hoe' arose, I believe, as my father wrote this first draft of the
  new  chapter.   In  the   outline  'The   Story  Foreseen   from  Fangorn'
  (VII.435)  Gandalf's  sudden  galloping  off  on  Shadowfax   is  present,
  and 'by his help and Aragorn the  Isengarders are  driven back';  there is
  no suggestion of any gorge or hold in the hills to the south. So  again in
  the present  narrative he  says nothing  before he  rides off;  whereas in
  TT he tells Theoden not to go the  Fords of  Isen but  to ride  to Helm's
  Deep. Thus in the original story it  was not  until 'cries  and hornblasts
  were heard  from their  scouts that  went in  front' and  'arrows whistled
  over them' that the leaders of  the host  decided to  make for  the Hold;
  in  TT (where the  actual wording  of the  passage is  scarcely changed)
  the  host  was 'in  the low  valley before  the mouth  of the  Coomb' when
  these things happened.                                                    
    The  present  text  agrees  well  with  the  First Map  (redrawn section
  IV(E), VII.319). At  this time  the host  was 'at  the outer  end of  a wide
  vale, a bay in the  mountains of  the south';  and 'Heorulf's  Clough' lay
  somewhere near the western end of  this 'bay'.  The First  Map is  in fact
  less clear at this point than my redrawing makes  it, but  the map  that I
  made  in 1943,  which was closely based  on the  First Map  (see VII.299),
  shows  Helm's  Deep  very  clearly  as running  in towards  the Tindtorras
  (Thrihyrne) from a point well to the  north and  west of  the 'bay  in the
  mountains' - the Westfold Vale,  in the  present text  not yet  named (see
  note 4).(12)                                                              
    On  the page  of the  completed manuscript  in which  the final  form of
  this passage (TT p. 133)  was reached  the text  reads thus:  'Still some
  mile  away, on  the far  side of  the Westfold  Vale, a  great bay  in the
  mountains,  lay  a  green  coomb  out  of  which  a  gorge  opened  in the
  hills.' There is no question that this is correct, and that this  was what
  my  father intended:  the great  bay in  the mountains  was of  course the
  Westfold  Vale. In  the typescript  based on  this, however,  the sentence
  became,  for  some  obscure  reason   (there  is   no  ambiguity   in  the
  manuscript):  'Still  some miles  away, on  the far  side of  the Westfold
  Vale, lay a green coomb,  a great  bay in  the mountains,  out of  which a
  gorge  opened  in  the  hills.'  This  error  is  perpetuated  in  The Two
  Towers.                                                                    
    In this original narrative it was on the night of  the day  of departure
  from  Eodoras  that  the  host  came  to  the  hold  in the  hills; subse-
  quently (13) it was on  the night  of the  second day  (for the  chronology see
  pp. 4-5, $$ I-II). In the later story it is said (TT  p. 131)  that 'Forty
  leagues and more it was, as a bird flies, from Edoras to  the fords  of the
  Isen', and this agrees very well with  the First  Map, where  the distance
  is almost 2.5 an., or  125 miles  (= just  over 40  leagues). It  may have
  been  a  doser  look at  the map  that led  to the  extension of  the ride
  across the plain by a further day. On the  other hand,  there was  also an
  evident difficulty with the chronology as it now stood: see p. 4, $ I.     
    The original draft continues:                                           

   Aragorn  and  Legolas   rode  with   Eomer's  eored.   That  com-
 pany needed no  guide more  keen of  sight than  Legolas, or  a man
 who  knew  the  land,  far  and  wide  about,  better   than  Eomer
 himself. Slowly, and as silently as they  might, they  went through
 the  night,  turning  back  from the  plain, and  climbing westward
 into  the  dim  folds  about  the mountains'  feet. They  came upon
 few  of the  enemy, except  here and  there a  roving band  of orcs
 who fled ere the riders  could slay  many; but  ever the  rumour of
 war  grew  behind  them. Soon  they could  hear harsh  singing, and
 if they  turned and  looked back  they could  see, winding  up from
 the low country, red torches,  countless points  of fiery  light. A
 very wood of trees  must have  been felled  to furnish  them. Every
 now and then a brighter blaze leaped up.                          
   'It is a great host,' said Aragorn, 'and follows us close.'     
   'They  bring fire,'  said Eomer,  'and are  burning as  they come
 all that they can kindle: rick and cot  and tree.  We shall  have a
 great debt to pay them.'                                          
   'The  reckoning is  not far  off,' said  Aragorn. 'Shall  we soon
 find ground where we can turn and stand?'                          
   'Yes,'  said  Eomer.  'Across  the  wide mouth  of the  coomb, at
 some distance  from Helmsgate  there is  a fall  in the  ground, so
 sharp  and  sheer that  to those  approaching it  seems as  if they
 came  upon  a  wall. This  we call  [Stanshelf Stanscylf >](14) Helm's
 dike. In places it is twenty feet high, and on the top it  has been
 crowned  with a  rampart of  great stones,  piled in  ancient days.
 There  we  will  stand.  Thither  the  other  companies  will  also
 come. There are three  ways that  lead up  through breaches  in the
 cliff." these we must hold strongly.'                             
                                                                  
   It  was  dark,  starless  and  moonless, when  they came  to [the
 Stanshelf  >]  Helm's  dike.  Eomer   led  them   up  by   a  broad
 sloping path that climbed  through a  deep notch  in the  cliff and
 came  out  upon  the  new  level  some  way  behind   the  rampart.
 They  were  unchallenged.  No  one  was  there before  them, friend
 or foe.(16) At once Eomer set  guards upon  the [breaches  >] Inlets.
 Ere  long  other  companies  arrived, creeping  up the  valley from
 various  directions.  There  were  wide  grass-slopes  between  the
 rampart  and  the  Stanrock.  There  they  set  their  horses under
 such guards as could be spared from the manning of the wall.      
   Gimli stood  leaning against  a great  stone at  a high  point of
 the [Stanshelf >] dike not  far from  the inlet  by which  they had
 entered.  Legolas  was  on the  stone above  fingering his  bow and
 peering into the blackness.                                       

   'This is more to my liking,'  said the  dwarf, stamping  his feet
 on  the  ground.  'Ever  my  heart  lightens  as  we draw  near the
 mountains.  There  is  good  rock  here.  This  country   has  hard
 bones. I feel it under my feet.  Give me  a year  and a  hundred of
 my  kin and  we could  make this  a place  that armies  would break
 against like water.'                                               
   'I  doubt  it  not,'  said  Legolas.  'But  you're  a  dwarf, and
 dwarves are strange folk. I like it not, and shall like it  no more
 by the light of day. But you comfort me,  Gimli, and  I am  glad to
 have you stand by me with your stout legs and hard axe.'           
   Shapes  loomed  up  beside  them.  It   was  Eomer   and  Aragorn
 walking together along  the line  of the  rampart. 'I  am anxious,'
 said  Eomer.  'Most  have  now  arrived; but  one company  is still
 lacking, and also the King and his guard.'                         
   'If  you  will  give me  some hardy  men, I  will take  Gimli and
 Legolas  here,  and  go  a  little  down  the  valley and  look for
 tidings,' said Aragorn.                                            
   'And find more than you are looking for,' said Gimli.            
   'That is likely,' said Eomer. 'We will wait a while.'            
                                                                   
   A  slow  time  passed, when  suddenly at  no great  distance down
 the  valley  a  clamour  broke  out.  Horns  sounded.   'There  are
 some  of  our  folk come  into an  ambush, or  taken in  the rear,'
 cried Eomer. 'Theoden will  be there.  Wait here,  I will  hold the
 men  back  to the  wall, and  choose some  to go  forth. I  will be
 back swiftly.'                                                     
   Horns  sounded  again,  and  in  the  still  darkness  they could
 hear  the  clash  of weapons.  In brief  while Eomer  returned with
 twenty men-.                                                       
   'This errand I will take,' said Aragorn. 'You  are needed  on the
 wall.  Come,  Legolas!  Your  eyes  will  serve  us.' He  sped down
 the slope.                                                         
   'Where Legolas goes, I go,' said Gimli, and ran after them.      
   The  watchers  on  the  wall  saw  nothing  for  a   while,  then
 suddenly  there  were  louder  cries,  and  wilder  yells.  A clear
 voice rang, echoing in the hills. Elendil! It seemed that far below
 in the shadows a white flame flashed.                              
   'Branding goes to war at last,' said Eomer.                      
   A   horseman   appeared   before   the   main  breach,   and  was
 admitted. 'Where is Theoden King?' asked Eomer.                    
   'Among  his  guard,'  said.the  man.  'But  many   are  unhorsed.
 We  rode  into  an  ambush,  and  orcs  sprang  out  of  the ground

                               
                                                                       
 among  us,  hamstringing  many   of  our   steeds.  Snowmane   and  the
 King  escaped;  for  that horse  is nightsighted,  and sprang  over the
 heads  of   the  orcs.   But  Theoden   dismounted  and   fought  among
 his  guard.  Herugrim  sang  a   song  that   has  long   been  silent.
 Aragorn  is  with  them,  and  he  sends  word  that  a  great  host of
 orcs  is  on  his heels.  Man the  wall! He  will come  in by  the main
 breach if he can.'                                                     
   The  noise  of  battle  drew  nearer.  Those  on  the  rampart  could
 do  nothing  to  aid.  They  had  not  many  archers  among  them,  and
 these  could  not  shoot  in  the  darkness  while  their  friends were
 still  in  front.  One  by  one  men  of the  missing company  came in,
 till  all  but  five  were  mustered.  Last  came  the King's  guard on
 foot, with the King in their midst, leading Snowmane.                  
   'Hasten, Lord!' cried Eomer.                                         
   At  that  moment  there  was  a  wild  cry.  Orcs were  attacking the
 [breaches  >]  inlets  on  either  hand,  and   before  the   King  had
 been  brought in  to safety  out of  the darkness  there sprang  a host
 of  dark  shapes  driving  towards  the  great  breach.  A  white  fire
 shone.  There  in  their  path  could  be  seen  for  a  moment Aragorn
 son  of  Arathorn:  on   his  one   side  was   Gimli,  on   the  other
 Legolas.                                                               
   'Back   now,   my   comrades!'  cried   Aragorn.  'I   will  follow.'
 Even  as  Gimli  and  Legolas   ran  back   towards  the   rampart,  he
 leaped  forward.  Before  the  flame  of Branding  the orcs  fled. Then
 slowly  Aragorn  retreated  walking  backward.  Even   as  he   did  so
 step  by  step  one  great  orc  came  forward,  while  others  stalked
 behind  him.  As  Aragorn  turned  at  last  to run  up the  inlet, the
 orc  sprang  after  him:  but  an  arrow whined  and he  fell sprawling
 and  lay  still.  For some  time no  others dared  to draw  near. 'Sure
 is the  shaft of  the elven  bow, and  keen are  the eyes  of Legolas!'
 said  Aragorn  as  he  joined  the  elf  and they  ran together  to the
 rampart.                                                               
   Thus  at  last  the  King's  host  was  brought within  the fastness,
 and  turned  to  bay  before  the  mouth  of  Helm's  Deep.  The  night
 was  not  yet  old,  and  many   hours  of   darkness  and   peril  yet
 remained.  Theoden  was  unhurt;  but  he  grieved  for  the   loss  of
 so   many   of  the   horses  of   his  guard,   and  he   looked  upon
 Snowmane   bleeding   at   the   shoulder:   a   glancing   arrow   had
 struck him. 'Fair is  the riding  forth, friend,'  he said;  'but often
 the road is bitter.'                                                   
   'Grieve  not  for  Snowmane,  lord,'  said  Aragorn.  'The   hurt  is
 light. I will tend it, with such skill as I have, while the enemy still

 holds off. They have suffered losses more grievous than ours,             
 and will suffer more if they dare to assail this place.'                  
                                                                          
   Here the original draft ends as  formed narrative,  but continues  as an
 outline, verging on  narrative. This  was written  over a  faint pencilled
 text that seems to have been much the same.                               
                                                                          
   There   is   an   attack.   Endless   numbers.  Grappling   hooks,  lad-
 ders,  piled  slain.  Riders   block  breaches   with  stones   from  high
 places,  and  with  bodies.  Orcs  keep  on  getting  in. Riders  lose few
 men,  most  at  breaches.  Orcs  once  got  near   the  horses.   Late  in
 the  night  the  (waning?)   moon  shone   fitfully,  and   the  defenders
 see   a  boiling   throng  beneath   the  wall.   Slowly  the   dead  were
 piling up.                                                                
   Wild  men  in  steel  mesh   forced  the   north  breach,   and  turning
 south  began  to   drive  men   from  the   rampart.  Orcs  clamber  over.
 Dawn  sees  the  Men   of  Rohan   giving  way   all  along.   The  horses
 are   taken   away  to   Helm's  Deep,   with  the   King.  They   make  a
 shieldwall and retreat slowly up towards the Stanrock.                     
   The  sun  comes  out,  and  then  all  stare:  defenders  and attackers.
 A  mile  or  so  below  the  Dike, from   North  to   South  in   a  great
 crescent,  they   beheld  a   marvel. Men   rubbed  their   eyes  thinking
 that   they   dreamed   or   were   dizzy   with  wounds   and  weariness.
 Where   all   had  been   upland  and   grass-clad  slopes,   there  stood
 now  a  wood  of   great  trees.   Like  beeches   they  were,   robed  in
 withered  leaves,  and  like  ancient  oaks   with  tangled   boughs,  and
 gnarled  pines  stood   dark  among   them.  The   orcs  gave   back.  The
 Wild  Men  wavered  crying  in  terrified  voices,   for  they   came  from
 the woods under the west sides of the Misty Mountains.                    
   At   that   moment   from   the  Stanrock   a  trumpet   sounded.  Forth
 rode   Theoden   with   his   guard,   and   a   company   (of   Heorulf's
 men?).   They   charged   down   crashing   into   the   Wild    Men   and
 driving them back in ruin over the cliff.                                 
   'Wizardry is abroad!' said [?men]. 'What can this betoken?'             
   'Wizardry   maybe,'  said   Eomer.  'But   it  seems   not  to   be  any
 device of our enemies. See how dismayed they are.'                        
                                                                          
 A few lines of very rapid and partly illegible notes follow:              
                                                                          
    Their  horses  were  often  nightsighted;  but  the  men  were  not  so
   nightsighted  as  the orcs.  Rohan at  a disadvantage  in dark.  As soon
   as it grows light they are able to fight. The orcs are no match  for the
   horsemen  on  the  slopes  before  the  Stanrock.  Sorties  from  Helm's
   Deep  and  Stanrock.  Orcs  dive  back over  wall. It  is then  that the
   Wood is seen.                                                           

                     
                                                                         
  Orcs  trapped.  Trees  grab  them.  And  the  wood  is full  of Herulf's
 folk.  Gandalf  has  collected  the   wanderers,  [?About]   500.  Hardly
 any  of  the  attackers  escape.  So   hopelessness  turns   to  victory.
 Meanwhile  Herulf  told  by  Gandalf  to  hold  the  ....   rode  .......
 another  force  sent....  Eodoras.  This  is  now  caught  between Herulf
 and  the  victorious  forces  of  the  King.  In  a  battle on  the plain
 .........  terror   struck  by   Aragorn  and   Gandalf.  The   host  not
 wishing  to  rest  rides  down  the   fleeing  remnant   [?back  towards]
 Isengard.                                                                
                                                                         
 The  sentence  beginning  'Meanwhile  Herulf  told  by  Gandalf  to  hold
 the' might possibly, but very doubtfully  indeed, be  completed: 'eastern
 rode [for road] has resisted another force sent towards Eodoras.'        
 This  then was  the original  story of  Helm's Deep,  to become  far more
 complex  in  its  development  with   the  emergence   of  a   much  more
 elaborate  system  of  fortification across  the mouth  of the  Deep (the
 description  and   narrative  in   The  Two   Towers  can   be  followed,
 incidentally, very  precisely in  my father's  drawing, 'Helm's  Deep and
 the Hornburg', in Pictures by J. R. R. Tolkien, no. 26). In this earliest
 account the 'fastness' consisted only of the sudden  natural fall  in the
 land across the mouth of  the coomb,  fortified with  a parapet  of great
 stones;  in  this  there  were three  'breaches', a  word that  my father
 changed to 'inlets', perhaps to suggest that  they had  been deliberately
 made.  The  nature  of  the  'hold'  of  Heorulf on  the Stanrock  is not
 indicated; and all the battle of Helm's  Deep took  place along  the line
 of Helm's Dike.                                                          
 An  isolated  scrap  of  drafting  that  was  not finally  used evidently
 belongs with the original story and may be included here:                
                                                                         
 Aragorn   was   away   behind   the   defences   tending  the   wound  in
 Snowmane's   shoulder,   and   speaking  gentle   words  to   the  horse.
 As  the  fragrance of  athelas rose  in the  air, his  mind went  back to
 the  defence  on  Weathertop,  and  to  the  escape  from  Moria.  'It is
 a  long  journey,'  he  said  to  himself.  'From  one   hopeless  corner
 we  escape  but  to  find  another  more  desperate.  Yet alas,  Frodo, I
 would  be  happier  in  heart if  you were  with us  in this  grim place.
 Where now do you wander?'                                                
                                                                         
 Written on this same page is an outline in which the radical             
 alteration of the story of the assault first enters.                     
                                                                         
 When   Eomer   and   Aragorn   reach    Dike   they    are   challenged.
 Heorulf  has  left  watchers  on  Dike.  They  report  that the  fort of
 Helm's  Gate  is  manned   -  mainly   older  men,   and  most   of  the
 folk  of  the   Westmarch  have   taken  refuge   in  the   Deep.  Great
 store of food and fodder is in the caves.                                

 Then follows story as told above until rescue of King.(17)              
 Eomer and Aragorn decide that they cannot hold Dike in                  
 dark  (without  archers).  The  Dike  is  over  a  mile  -  2  miles?  -
 long.  The  main  host  and  King  go  to Stanrock.  The horses  are led
 to  the  Deep.  Aragorn  and  Eomer  with  a   few  men   (their  horses
 ready  in  rear)  hold  the  inlets  as  long as  they dare.  These they
 block with stones rolled from the rampart.                              
 The  assault  on  the  inlets.  Soon  drives  in  as  the  Orcs  clamber
 up  rampart  in  between.  Ladders?  Wild  men   drive  in   from  North
 Inlet.   The   defenders  flee.  Tremendous   assault  upon   the  mouth
 of  the  Beep  where  a  high  stone  wall  was  built. [Added  here but
 at  the  same  time:  breastwork  crowned  with  stones.   Here  G[imli]
 speaks  his  words.  Reduce  description  of  Helm's  Dike  - it  is not
 fortified.]  Orcs  boil  round  foot  of  the  Stanrock.   Then  describe
 the  assault  as  above.(18) Orcs  piling  up over the  wall. Wild  men
 dimb  on  the  goblins'  dead  bodies.  Moon...  men  fighting   on  the
 wall   top.(19) Disadvantage   of   the  Riders.   The  wall   taken  and
 Rohan   driven   back   into   the  gorge.   Dawn.  Eomer   and  Aragorn
 go to the Stanrock to stand by the King in the Tower.                   
 They see in the sunlight the wonder of the Wood.                        
 Charge   of   Theoden  (Eomer   left,  Aragorn   right).  [?   With  day
 fortunes  change.]  Men  issue  on horses.  But the  host is  vast, only
 it  is  disconcerted  by  the  Wood.  Almost  [?  the   watchers  could]
 believe it had moved up the valley as the battle raged.                 
 Trees  should  come  right  up  to   Dike.  In   the  midst   out  rides
 Gandalf  from  the  wood.  And  rides  through  the  orcs  as   if  they
 were rats and crows.                                                    
                                                                        
 My  father  began   a  new   text  of   the  chapter   before  important
 elements in the story and in the physical setting had been darified, and
 as  a  result  this  (the first  completed  manuscript) is  an extremely
 complicated  document.  It  was  only  after  he  had  begun it  that he
 extended  the  ride from  Eodoras by  a further  day, and  described the
 great  storm  coming up  out of  the East  (TT pp.  131-2); and  when he
 began it he had not yet realised that Helm's Dike was  not the  scene of
 the  great  assault:  'what really  happened' was  that the  men manning
 the Dike were driven in, and the defence of the redoubt was at  the line
 of a great wall further  up at  the mouth  of the  gorge -  the 'Deeping
 Wall' - and  the Hornburg.  At this  point in  the manuscript  the story
 can  be  seen  changing  as  my  father  wrote:  in  Eomer's   reply  to
 Aragorn's  question  'Shall we  soon find  ground where  we can  turn and
 stand?' (p. 13) he begins as before with an account of the fortification
 of the Dike ('crowned with a rampart of great  stones, piled  in ancient

                                                   
                                                                          
 days'), but by the end of his reply he is saying that  the Dike  cannot be
 held:                                                                     
                                                                          
 '...  But   we  cannot   long  defend   it,  for   we  have   not  enough
 strength.  It  is  near  two miles  from end  to end,  and is  pierced by
 two  wide  breaches.  We  shall  not  be  able  to stand  at bay  till we
 get  to  the  Stanrock,  and  come  behind  the  wall  that   guards  the
 entrance  to  the  Deep.  That  is high  and strong,  for Heorulf  had it
 repaired and raised not long ago.'                                        
                                                                          
  Immediately  after  this  the  Deeping  Stream   entered,  and   the  two
 breaches  in the  Dike were  reduced to  one: there  'a stream  flows down
 out of the  Deep, and  beside it  the road  runs from  Helm's Gate  to the
 valley.'(20) At this stage, however, the final story was still  not reached,
 but follows the outline just given (p. 18):                               
                                                                          
 The King and the main part of his host now rode on to  man the            
 Stanrock and Heorulf's  wall. But  the Westmarchers  would not            
 yet  abandon  the dike  while any  hope remained  of Heorulf's            
 return. Eomer and  Aragorn and  a few  picked men  stayed with            
 them guarding the  breach; for  it seemed  to Eomer  that they            
 might  do great  harm to  the advance-guard  of the  enemy and            
 then escape swiftly ere the main strength of the orcs and wild            
 men forced the passage.                                                   
                                                                          
  The  story  from  this  point  was  built  up  in  a  textually extremely
 complex  series  of  short drafts  leading to  more finished  forms, while
 earlier  portions  of  the  chapter  were   changed  to   accommodate  the
 evolving  conception  of  the  redoubt  as  the  scene  of the  battle. To
 follow this evolution in all its detail would require a very great deal of
 space,  and  I  record  only  certain rejected  narrative ideas  and other
 particular points of interest.                                            
  Before  the  story  (TT  pp.  138-40)   of  the   sortie  of   Eomer  and
 Aragorn  from  the  postern  gate emerged,  the repulse  of the  attack on
 the great gates of the Hornburg was differently conceived:                
                                                                          
  Now   with   a   great   cry   a   company   of   the   wild   men  moved
 forward,  among  them  they  bore  the   trunk  of   a  great   tree.  The
 orcs   crowded   about   them.  The   tree  was   swung  by   many  strong
 hands,   and   smote   the   timbers   with   a   boom.  At   that  moment
 there  was  a  sudden  call.  Among  the  boulders   upon  the   flat  and
 narrow  rim  beneath  the  fastness  and  the  brink   a  few   brave  men
 had  lain  hidden.   Aragorn  was   their  leader.   'Up  now,   up  now,'
 he  shouted.  'Out  Branding,  out!'  A  blade  flashed  like  white fire.
 'Elendil, Elendil!' he shouted, and his voice echoed in the cliffs.       

   'See,  see!'  said  Eomer.  'Branding  has  gone  to  war at  last. Why
 am I not there? We were to have drawn blades together.'                  
   None  could  withstand  the  onset  of  Aragorn,   or  the   terror  of
 his  sword.  The  orcs  fled,  the  hill-men  were  hewn  down,  or  fled
 leaving  their  ram  upon  the  ground.  The   rock  was   cleared.  Then
 Aragorn  and  his  men  turned  to  run  back  within  the   gates  while
 there  was  yet  time.  His  men  had  passed  within,  when   again  the
 lightning   flashed.   Thunder   crashed.  From   among  the   fallen  at
 the  top  of  the  causeway  three  huge  orcs  sprang  up  -  the  white
 hand  could  be  seen  on  their  shields.   Men  shouted   warning  from
 the  gates,  and  Aragorn  for   an  instant   turned.  At   that  moment
 the  foremost  of  the  orcs  hurled  a  stone:  it  struck  him  on  the
 helm  and  he  stumbled,  falling  to  his  knee.  The   thunder  rolled.
 Before he could get up and back the three orcs were upon him.            
                                                                         
   Here this story was overtaken by that of the  sortie from  the postern.
 In the  final manuscript  form of  this, Aragorn,  looking at  the gates,
 added after the  words (TT p. 139)  'Their great  hinges and  iron bars
 were  wrenched  and  bent;  many  of  their  timbers were  cracked': 'The
 doors  will  not  withstand  another  such  battering.' These  words were
 left out of the typescript  that followed,  but there  is nothing  in the
 manuscript to suggest that they should be, and it seems clear  that their
 omission  was  an  error  (especially  since they  give point  to Eomer's
 reply: 'Yet we cannot stay here beyond the walls to defend them').       
   Gimli's  cry  as  he  sprang  on  the  Orcs  who  had fallen  on Eomer:
 Baruk  Khazad!  Khazad  ai-menu!  appears  in this  form from  the first
 writing of the scene. Years later, after the publication of LR, my father
 began  on  an  analysis  of  all  fragments  of other  languages (Quenya,
 Sindarin, Khuzdul, the  Black Speech)  found in  the book,  but unhappily
 before he had reached the end of  FR the  notes, at  the outset  full and
 elaborate,  had  diminished  to  largely uninterpretable  jottings. Baruk
 he  here  translated  as  'axes',  without  further  comment;  ai-menu is
 analysed as aya, menu,  but the  meanings are  not clearly  legible: most
 probably aya 'upon', menu 'acc. pl. you'.                                
   A curious  point arises  in Gimli's  remark after  his rescue  of Eomer
 during the sortie from the postern  gate (TT  p. 140):  'Till now  I have
 hewn naught but wood since I  left Moria.'  This is  clearly inconsistent
 with  Legolas'  words  in  'The  Departure  of  Boromir',  when   he  and
 Gimli  came  upon  Aragorn  beside  Boromir's  body  near   Parth  Galen:
 'We  have hunted  and slain  many Orcs  in the  woods'; compare  also the
 draft  of  a  later passage  (VII.386) where,  when Aragorn,  Legolas and
 Gimli  set  out  in  pursuit  of the  Orcs, Gimli  says: '...  those that
 attacked  Boromir  were  not  the  only  ones.  Legolas  and  I  met some
 away  southwards  on  the  west  slopes  of  Amon  Hen.  We   slew  many,
 creeping  on  them  among  the  trees  ...'  I  do  not  think  that  any

                       
                                                                          
 'explanation'  of this  will serve:  it is  simply an  inconsistency never
 observed.(21)                                                             
  The  'wild  hill-men'   at  the   assault  on   Helm's  Deep   came  from
 'Westfold',  valleys  on  the  western  side of  the Misty  Mountains (see
 p. 8 and note 4), and this application of 'Westfold' survived until a late
 stage of revision of the manuscript: it was still present in  drafting for
 what  became 'The  Road to  Isengard'.(22) Until  the change  in application
 was made, the Westfold Vale was called 'the Westmarch Vale'.              
  In  this  connection  there  are  two  notable  passages.   The  dialogue
 between   Aragorn   and  Eomer   and  Gamling   the  Westmarcher   on  the
 Deeping  Wall,  hearing  the  cries  of the  wild men  below (TT  p. 142),
 takes this form in a rejected draft:                                      
                                                                          
  'I  hear  them,'  said  Eomer;  'but  they  are  only  as  the  scream of
 birds and the bellowing of beasts to my ears.'                            
  'Yet  among  them  are  many  that   cry  in   the  tongue   of  Westfold
 [later  >  in  the  Dunland  tongue],'  said  Aragorn;  'and  that   is  a
 speech of men, and once was accounted good to hear.'                      
  'True   words   you   speak,'   said   Gamling,   who  had   climbed  now
 on  the  wall.  'I  know  that  tongue.  It  is  ancient,  and   once  was
 spoken  in  many  valleys  of  the  Mark.  But  now it  is used  in deadly
 hate.  They  shout  rejoicing  in   our  doom.   "The  king,   the  king!"
 they  cry.  "We  will  take  their  king!  Death  to  the  Forgoil!  Death
 to   the  Strawheads!   Death  to   the  robbers   of  the   North."  Such
 names  they  have  for  us.  Not  in  half  a  thousand  years  have  they
 forgot  their  grievance,  that  the  lords  of   Gondor  gave   the  Mark
 to  Eorl  the  Young  as  a  reward  for  his   service  to   Elendil  and
 Isildur,  while  they  held  back.  It  is  this  old hatred  that Saruman
 has inflamed. ...'                                                          
                                                                          
 With  this compare  the passage  in drafting  of 'The  King of  the Golden
 Hall'  (VII.444)  where  Aragorn,  seeing on  one of  the hangings  in the
 Golden  Hall  the  figure  of  the  young  man  on  a  white  horse, said:
 'Behold Eorl the Young! Thus he rode  out of  the North  to the  Battle of
 the  Field  of  Gorgoroth'  - the  battle in  which Sauron  was overthrown
 by  Gil-galad  and  Elendil.(23) On the  enormously  much  briefer time-span
 that my father conceived at this time see VII.450 note 11.                
  An  extremely  rapid  initial  sketch  for  the  parley  between Aragorn,
 standing  above  the  gates  of the  Hornburg, and  the enemy  below shows
 an entirely different conception from that in TT (p. 145):                
                                                                          
    Aragorn and the Captain of Westfold.                                   
    Westfolder  says  if  the  King  is yielded  all may  go alive.  Where to?
  To  Isengard.  Then  the  Westmarch is  to be  given back  to us,  and all
  the .... land.                                                           

 Who says so? Saruman. That is indeed a good warrant.                  
 Aragorn  rebukes  Westfolder  for  [??aiding]  Orcs.   Westfolder  is
 humbled.                                                              
  Orc  captain  jeers.  Needs  must  accept  the  terms when  no others
 will serve. We are the Uruk-hai, we slay!                             
  Orcs shoot  an arrow  at Aragorn  as they  retreat. But  the Westfold
 Captain hews down the archer.                                         
                                                                      
 On  the  back  of  the  page  in which  the new  story of  the assault
 entered  (p.  17)  my  father  wrote  the following  names: Rohirwaith
 Rochirchoth    Rohirhoth   Rochann    Rohann   Rohirrim;    and   also
 Eomeark  Eomearc.  I  do  not  know  whether  Rochann,  Rohann  is  to
 be associated with the use of Rohan on pp. 16, 18 apparently as a term
 for the Riders.(24)                                                   
 In a draft for  the passage  describing the  charge from  the Hornburg
 the King rode with Aragorn at his right hand and Hama at his left. For
 Hama's death before the gates of the Hornburg see p. 41 note 8.       
 Lastly, at the end of the  chapter, Legolas,  seeing the  strange Wood
 beyond  Helm's  Dike,  said:  'This  is  wizardry  indeed! "Greenleaf,
 Greenleaf, when thy last shaft is shot, under strange trees shalt thou
 go." Come! I would look on this  forest, ere  the spell  changes.' The
 words  he  cited  were  from the  riddling verse  addressed to  him by
 Galadriel and borne by Gandalf ('The White Rider', VII.431):          
 Greenleaf, Greenleaf, bearer of the elven-bow,                       
 Far beyond Mirkwood many trees on earth grow.                         
 Thy last shaft when thou hast shot, under strange trees               
                                           shalt thou go!              
 His words were not corrected on the manuscript, and survived into the
 typescript that followed (see p. 420).                                
                                                                      
                                 NOTES.                                
                                                                      
1. For the subsequent history of this passage see pp. 4-6.             
2. Tindtorras: earlier name for the Thrihyrne; see VII.320.            
3. In the first version of  'The King  of the  Golden Hall'  the Second
 Master  of  the  Mark  was  Eofored,  and  when Theodred  appears he
 is  not  Theoden's  son  (see  VII.446 -  7 and  note 17).  The 'First
 Battle  of  the  Fords  of  Isen',  in  which  Theodred fell,  was now
 present  (VII.444  and  note   12),  and   in  a   contemporary  time-
 scheme  is  dated  January  25, the  day before  the death  of Boromir
 and the Breaking of the Fellowship (in LR February 25 and 26).        
4.  On  the  First  Map  (redrawn  section  IV,  VII.319)  Westfold was
 written  against  a  vale  on  the  western  side  of the  Misty Moun-
 tains,  south  of  Dunland  (though  afterwards  struck  out.  in this
 position  and  reinserted along  the northern  foothills of  the Black
 Mountains  west  of  Eodoras).  It  cannot  be  said  whether  Dunland

                       
                                                                        
     and  Westfold  originally  stood  together  on the  map as  names of
     distinct  regions,  or   whether Dunland   was  only   entered  when
     Westfold was removed.                                               
  5. The   change   from   Trumbold   to   Herulf,   Heorulf  (afterwards
     Erkenbrand) was made while  this initial  drafting was  in progress.
  6. My  father  first  wrote  Dimgraef, but  changed it  as he  wrote to
     Heorulf's  Clough;  above  this  he wrote  the Dimhale  (hale repre-
     senting Old English halh, healh, 'corner, nook of land'),  and after
     it Herelaf's Clough, this being struck out. In  the margin  he wrote
     Nerwet (Old English, 'narrow place'); and  at the  head of  the page
     Neolnearu  and   Neolnerwet  (Old   English  neowol,   neol  'deep,
     profound'),  also  the  Clough,  the  Long Clough,  and Theostercloh
     (Old  English  peostor  'dark').  Clough  is  from Old  English cloh
     'steep-sided valley or ravine'.                                     
  7. Following this  my father  wrote, but  struck out,  'Dimhale's Door,
     by some called Herulf's  Hold (Burg)';  and in  the margin  he wrote
     Dimgraf's gate, and Dimmhealh (see note 6).                         
  8. Nerwet: see note 6.                                                 
  9. The words enclosed  in square  brackets are  lost (but  are obtained
     from  the  following  draft) through  a square  having been  cut out
     of  the  page:  possibly  there  was  a  small  sketch-map  here  of
     'Heorulf's Clough' and the 'Hold'.                                  
 10. Before  Helm's  Deep  my  father   first  wrote   Helmshaugh,  haugh
     being  the  Northern  English  and   Scottish  development   of  Old
     English halh (note 6).                                              
 11. Heorulf's  Hoe:  Hoe  is  from  Old  English  hoh  'heel'  (used  in
     place-names in various senses,  such as  'the end  of a  ridge where
     the ground begins to fall steeply').                                
 12. The  map  redrawn  on  p.  269 is  anomalous in  this respect  as in
     many others.                                                        
 13. The extension of the ride across the plain by a  day, and  the shift
     in the date of the (second) battle of the Fords  of Isen  to January
     31,  entered  in  revision  to the  completed manuscript  of 'Helm's
     Deep': see p. 18.                                                   
 14. Stanscylf, beside Stanshelf, has the  Old English  form scylf  (sc =
     sh).                                                                
 15. the cliff: i.e. the Stanshelf, the great natural fall in the ground,
     constituting a rampart.                                             
 16. Cf. the two versions  of the  scout's report:  'many are  making for
     Herulf's Hold, and say that Herulf is already there' (p.  10); 'some
     are  making  for  the  Clough,   but  it   seems  that   Nothelm  [>
     Heorulf] is not there' (p. 11).                                     
 17. In the  first draft  the fastness  was deserted  when the  host from
     Eodoras arrived (p.  13). 'Then  follows story  as told  above until
     rescue of King'  refers to  the story  in the  first draft  given on
     pp. 13-16.                                                          

 18. This presumably  refers to  the outline  given on  p. 16,  where the
     assault  was  at  the  line  of  Helm's Dike,  unless some  other early
     account of the assault has been lost.                                  
 19. A  scrap  of  drafting  has the  phrase 'Fitful  late moon  saw men
     fighting on the top of the wall'; but  the illegible  word here  is not
     saw, though that may have been intended,                              
 20. It is subsequently said (but rejected) of the Deeping Stream in this
     manuscript  that  'far  to  the  north  it  joined  the Isen  River and
     made the western border of the Mark.'                                  
 21. The  second  of  these  passages  (VII.386)  was  lost  in TT  (p. 22).
     In  the  fair  copy  manuscript  of  'The  Departure  of   Boromir'  as
     originally  written  Legolas  in  the  first  passage  (TT p.  16) said
     only:  'Alas!  We  came  when  we  heard  the  horn,  but  we  are  too
     late.  Are  you  much  hurt?';  the  fuller form  of his  opening words
     on  seeing  Aragorn,  in  which  he  mentions  the hunting  and slaying
     of  Orcs  with  Gimli  in  the  woods,  was  added  later (both  to the
     manuscript  and  the  following typescript).  It is  therefore possible
     that  my  father  had  now  rejected  the  idea  that  appears  in the
     second  passage  ('We  slew  many'),  and did  not reinstate  it again
     until  after the  writing of  'Helm's Deep'.  But this  seems unlikely,
     and in any case does not  alter the  fact of  the inconsistency  in the
     published   work.   This   inconsistency   may   have   been   observed
     before, but it was  pointed out  to me  by Mr.  Ralph L.  McKnight, Jr.
 22. Another notable instance of the  overlapping in  this part  of the
       story  is  found  in  the  name  Erkenbrand.  This  appears  in  late
       stages  of  the  revision  of  the  completed  manuscript  of 'Helm's
       Deep',  but  it  was  a  replacement  of Erkenwald  (itself replacing
       Heorulf); and Erkenwald is still the  name of  the Lord  of Westfold
       in drafting for  what became  the chapter  'Flotsam and  Jetsam'. See
       p. 40 note 2.                                                        
 23.   In  TT  (p.  142)  Gamling  says: 'Not  in half  a thousand  years have
       they  forgotten their  grievance that  the lords  of Gondor  gave the
       Mark to Eorl the Young and made alliance with him.'                  
 24.   In  addition,  the  form  Rohir  is  found  in  this chapter;  this has
       occurred in the  manuscript of  'The White  Rider' (VII.433  note 8).
       Rohirrim  is  found  in  the completed  manuscript of  'Helm's Deep',
       but it was not yet established, for Rohir appears  in the  final fair
       copy  manuscript  of  'The  Road  to  Isengard'  (p.  40),  and  much
       later,  in  'Faramir'  ('The  Window  on the  West'), both  Rohir and
       Rohiroth are used (pp. 155-6).                                       

                                      III.                                   
                                                                            
                             THE ROAD TO ISENGARD.                           
                                                                            
 This  chapter  was  at  first  continuous  with 'Helm's  Deep', and  when the
 division  was  made  it  received  the  title  'To Isengard'  (Chapter XXIX).
 The  preparatory   drafting  was   here  much   more  voluminous   than  that
 of  'Helm's  Deep',  because  the  first  form  of  the  story had  reached a
 developed  form  and  a  clear  manuscript  before   it  was   rejected.  The
 interpretation  of  the  very confused  papers for  this chapter  is particu-
 larly difficult, since it is necessary to  distinguish between  drafts (often
 closely similar) for passages in the  first version  and drafts  for passages
 in the second.                                                              
  The  essential  differences in  the original  version from  the form  in The
 Two   Towers   are  these:   Gandalf  and   Theoden  and   their  companions
 left Helm's Deep shortly after the end of the battle (see p. 5, $  III); they
 did not see  the Ents  as they  left the  mysterious wood,  and they  did not
 go  down  to  the  Fords  of  Isen;  but  they  encountered, and  spoke with,
 Bregalad  the  Ent,  bearing  a  message  from  Treebeard,  in the  course of
 their  ride  to  Isengard,  which  they  reached  on  the  same day.  In this
 chapter  I  shall  give  those  parts  of  the  original  version  that  are
 significantly  different  from  the   later  form,   citing  them   from  the
 completed  manuscript  of  that  version  but  with  certain   passages  from
 the initial drafts given in the notes.(1)                                   
  First,  however,  there  is  an outline  that my  father evidently  set down
 before  he  began  work  on  the  chapter.  This  was  written  in  the rapid
 and often barely legible  soft pencil  that was  usual for  these preliminary
 sketches, but in this case a good deal of the outline was inked over.       
                                                                            
  Meeting  of  the   chieftains.  Eomer   and  Gimli   return  from          
 Deep.  (Both  wounded   and  are   tended  by   Aragorn?)  Gandalf          
 explains  that  he  had  ridden  ranged about  gathering scattered          
 men.  The  coming  of   the  King   had  diverted   Isengard  from          
 Eodoras. But  he [Gandalf]  had sent  some men  back to  defend it          
 against  marauders. Erkenbrand (2) had  been  [? ambushed]  and the          
 few horses remaining after the disaster at Isenford had been lost.          
 He had [?perforce retreated] into hills.                                    
  They  ask   Gandalf  about   the  Trees.   The  answer   lies  in          
 Isengard, he said. We go now thither speedily - such as will.               
  Aragorn,   Eomer,   Gimli,   Legolas,   King   Theoden   and  his          
 company  and  [?a  force] ....  to Isengard.  Erkenbrand. Gamling.          
 Repair of Hornburg.                                                         

   They  pass  down  a  great....  aisle  among   the  trees   that  [?seems
 now  to  have  opened].   No  orcs   to  be   seen.  Strange   murmurs  and
 noises   and   half-voices   among   the   trees.   [Added:   Gandalf  dis-
 cusses   his   tactics.  Gimli   describes  the   caves.  Here   the  over-
 writing in ink begins:]                                                    
   The  sun  shines  in the  plain. They  see a  tall giant  figure striding
 towards   them.   The   Riders   draw    swords,   and    are   astonished.
 The figure greets Gandalf.                                                 
   I    am    Bregalad    the    Quickbeam,   he    said.   I    come   from
 Treebeard.                                                                 
   What does he wish? said Gandalf.                                         
   He  wishes  you  to  hasten.  He  wants  to  know  what   he  is   to  do
 with Saruman!                                                              
   Hm! said Gandalf. That is a problem. Tell him I am coming!               
   What was that, said Theoden. And who is Treebeard?                       
   He was an Ent, said Gandalf. And so is Treebeard.                        
   They  hasten  and  enter  Nan  Gurunir.  There  they   find  a   heap  of
 ruins.  The  great  walls  of  Isengard  were  burst  and  flung   down  in
 confusion.  Only  the   tower  of   Orthanc  stood   alone  in   the  midst
 of    desolation,    from   which    a   great    smoke   went    up.   The
 great  arch  still  stands,  but  a  pile  of  rubble  stands   before  it.
 On  the  top  of  the  pile  sat  -  Merry   and  Pippin,   having  lunch.(3)
 They   jumped   up,   and   as   Pippin   had   his   mouth   full,   Merry
 spoke.                                                                     
   'Welcome,   lords,   to   Isengard!'   he   said.   'We  are   the  door-
 wardens:   Meriadoc   son   of   Caradoc   of   Buckland   is    my   name;
 and   my   companion   is   Peregrin  son   of  Paladin   of  Tuckborough.(4)
 Far  in  the  North  is  our  home.  The  lord   Saruman  is   within,  but
 [alas,  he  is  indisposed  and  unable  to  receive  guests.  o]   at  the
 moment   he   is   closeted   with   one   Wormtongue   discussing   urgent
 business.'                                                                 
   'It   is  possible   that  we   could  help   in  the   debate,'  laughed
 Gandalf.  'But  where  is  Treebeard?  I   have  no   time  to   jest  with
 young hobbits.'                                                            
   'So  we  find  you  at  last,'  said  Aragorn.  'You  have  given   us  a
 long journey.'                                                             
   'How long have you been at Isengard?' said Gimli.                        
   'Less than a day,' said Pippin.(5)                                       
                                                                           
   I turn now to the first version of the story, that is the first completed
 and   coherent   manuscript.   In  this,   Theoden's  words   with  Gandalf
 about riding to Isengard (TT p. 149) have a different outcome:             

             
                                                                             
  'Nonetheless   to   Isengard   I   go,'  said   Gandalf.  'Let   those  who
 are  weary  rest.  For  soon  there  will  be  other  work  to  do.  I shall
 not  stay   long.  My   way  lies   eastward.  Look   for  me   in  Eodoras,
 ere the moon is full!'                                                      
  'Nay,'    said    Theoden.   'In    the   dark    hour   before    dawn   I
 doubted.  But  we  will  not  part now.  I will  ride with  you, if  that is
 your   counsel.  And   now  I   will  send   out  messengers   with  tidings
 of  victory   through  all   the  vales   of  the   Mark;  and   they  shall
 summon  all  men,  old  and  young,  to   meet  me   at  Eodoras,   ere  the
 moon wanes.'                                                                 
  'Good!' said Gandalf. 'Then in one hour we ride again....'(6)              
  After  a  brief  hour  of  rest  and  the  breaking  of  their  fast, those
 who were to ride to Isengard made ready to depart.(7)                        
                                                                             
  The  account  of  the  treatment  of  the  men of  Dunland and  the burials
 (TT  p.  150)  reaches  the  final   form,(8) but the description   of  the
 departure of the trees in the night and of the valley  after they  had gone,
 told  in  almost the  same words  as in  TT,(9) first entered at  this point,
 whereas in  TT it  is postponed  till much  later in  the chapter  (p. 158).
 The  passage  of  the  wood,  and  Gimli's  description  to  Legolas  of the
 Caves  of  Helm's  Deep,  reach  in  the completed  manuscript of  the first
 version almost exactly  the form  in TT  (pp; 152  - 3),  but with  a slight
 structural  difference,  in  that  here  the  company  had already  left the
 trees  and  come  to  the  road-parting when  this conversation  took place:
                                                                             
  They passed through the wood  and found  that they  had come                
 to the bottom of the coomb, where the  road from  Helm's Deep                
 branched, going one way to Eodoras and the other to the fords                
 of the Isen. Legolas looked back with regret.                                
  'Those are the strangest trees that ever I saw,' he said...                 
                                                                             
 Thus at the end of their talk together the old version again differs:        
                                                                             
  'You have my promise,' said Legolas. 'But  now we  must leave               
 all that behind. How far is it to Isengard, Gandalf?'                        
  'It is about twelve [later > fourteen o eleven]  leagues from               
 the bottom of Deeping Coomb  to the  outer wall  of Isengard,'(10)           
 said the wizard, turning round.                                              
  'And what shall we see  there?' asked  Gimli. 'You  may know,               
 but 1 cannot guess.'                                                         
  'I do not know myself for certain,' answered Gandalf. 'Things               
 may have changed again, since I was there  last night.  But we               

                                             
                                                                      
 shall  all  know  before  long.  If we  are eager  for the  answer to
 riddles, let us quicken the pace!'                                    
  [Added:  'Lead  us!'  said  Theoden.  'But  do  not   let  Shadowfax
 set a pace we cannot keep!'                                           
  The   company   rode   forward   now   with   all  the   speed  they
 could, over the wide grasses of the Westemnet.]                       
                                                                      
 Thus the Caves of Helm's  Deep do  not receive  from Gandalf  here the
 name 'the Glittering Caves of Aglarond', which was  only added  to the
 typescript text at a later stage (see p. 77).                         
  The first version of the story now becomes decisively  different from
 that in The Two Towers (pp. 154 ff.).                                
                                                                      
  The  sun  shone  upon  the  vale  about  them.  After  the  storm the
 morning  was  fresh,  and  a  breeze  was  now  flowing from  the west
 between  the  mountains.  The  swelling  grass-lands  rose  and  fell,
 with  long  ridges  and  shallow  dales  like a  wide green  sea. Upon
 their left long  slopes ran  swiftly down  to the  Isen River,  a grey
 ribbon  that  bent  westward,  winding  away  out  of   sight  through
 the  great  Gap  of  Rohan  to  the   distant  shores   of  Belfalas.(11)
 Below  them  now  lay the  fords of  Isen, where  the river  spread in
 stony  shoals  between  long  grassy  terraces. They  did not  go that
 way.  Gandalf  led  them  due  north,  and  they  passed   by,  riding
 along the  high ground  on the  east of  the river;  yet as  they rode
 other   eyes   were   turned   towards   the   stony  fords   and  the
 battlefield where so many good men of the Mark had fallen.(12)        
 They  saw  crows  wheeling  and  crying  in  the  air, and  borne upon
 the  wind  they  heard  the  howling  of  wolves.   The  carrion-birds
 were  gathered  at  the  fords,  and  even  the  bright  day  had  not
 driven them from their business.                                      
  'Alas!'  cried  Theoden.  'Shall we  leave the  steeds and  riders of
 the  Mark  to  be  picked  and  torn by  fowl  and  wolf? Let  us turn
 aside! '                                                              
  'There  is  no  need,  lord,'  said  Gandalf.  'The  task  would take
 us long, were it still left to do; but it is not. No horse or rider of
 your  folk  lies  there  unburied.  Their  graves  are deep  and their
 mounds   are   high;   and  long   may  they   watch  the   fords!  My
 friends  have laboured  there.(13) It is with  the orcs,  their masters,
 that  the  wolves  and  carrion-birds  hold their  feast: such  is the
 friendship of their kind.'                                            
  'You  accomplished  much  in   an  evening   and  a   night,  Gandalf
 my friend,' said Theoden.                                             

            
                                                                  
  'With  the  help  of  Shadowfax  -  and  others,'  answered  Gan-
 dalf. 'And this I can report for your comfort:  the losses  in the
 battles of the ford were less grievous than  we thought  at first.
 Many  men  were scattered  but not  slain. Some  I guided  to join
 Erkenwald,  and   some  I   gathered  again   and  sent   back  to
 Eodoras. I found  that all  the strength  of Saruman  was hurrying
 to Helm's Deep; for the great force  that had  been ordered  to go
 straight  to Eodoras  was turned  aside and  joined to  those that
 had  pursued  Erkenwald.  When  it  was  known  that  you, Theoden
 King, were in the  field, and  Eomer beside  you, a  mad eagerness
 came   upon  them.   To  take   you  and   slay  Eomer   was  what
 Saruman  most  desired.  Nonetheless  I  feared  that  wolf-riders
 and  cruel  plunderers  might be  sent swiftly  to Eodoras  and do
 great  harm  there, since  it was  unmanned. But  now I  think you
 need  not  fear; you  will find  the Golden  Hall to  welcome your
 return.'                                                          
  They  had  been  riding  for about  an hour  since they  left the
 Coomb,   and   already   the   dark   mountainous   arms   of  Nan
 Gurunir  were  opening  wide  before them.  It seemed  filled with
 smoke.  Out  of it  the river  flowed, now  near upon  their left.
 Suddenly  they  were  aware  of  a  strange figure  striding south
 along the stream towards them.                                    
                                                                  
  This last paragraph was replaced by the following:               
                                                                  
  They  had  been  riding for  almost an  hour [>  It was  close on
 noon. They had been  riding for  two hours](14) since they  left the
 Coomb,   and   now   the   mountainous   arms   of   Nan   Gurunir
 began to stretch towards  them. There  seemed to  be a  mist about
 the hills, and they saw rising up out of deep shadows a vast spire
 of smoke and  vapour; as  it mounted  it caught  the light  of the
 sun, and spread in glowing billows in the sky,  and the  wind bore
 them over the plain.                                              
  'What  do  you  think  of  that,  Gandalf?'  said  Theoden.  'One
 would say that all the Wizard's Vale was burning.'                
  'There is  ever a  fume above  that valley  in these  days,' said
 Eomer; 'but I  have never  seen anything  like this  before. These
 are  steams,  rather   than  smokes.   Some  devilry   Saruman  is
 brewing to greet us.'                                             
  'Maybe,' said Gandalf. 'If so, we shall soon learn what it is.'(15)
  Out  of  the  steaming  vale  the  river  Isen flowed,  now close
 upon  their  left  hand.  As  they  were  gazing north,  they were
 suddenly aware of a strange figure striding  south along  the east

                      
                                                                         
   bank of the  stream. It  went at  great speed,  walking stilted  like a
   wading  heron,  and  yet  the  long  paces  were  as quick,  rather, as
   the beat  of wings;  and as  it approached  they saw  that it  was very
   tall, a troll in height, or a young tree.                              
        Many  of  the  horsemen  cried  aloud  in  wonder,  and  some drew
   their swords. But Gandalf raised his hand.                             
        'Let us wait,' he said. 'Here is a messenger for me.'             
        'A  strange  one  to  my  eyes,'  said  Theoden.  'What   kind  of
   creature may it be?'                                                   
        'It is long since you listened to tales by the fireside,' answered
   Gandalf;  'and  in  that  rather  than  in  white  hairs you  show your
   age,  without  increase  in  wisdom.'(16) There  are  children   in  your
   land  that  out  of  the  twisted  threads of  many stories  could have
   picked  the  answer  to  your  question  at  a  glance.  Here  comes an
   Ent,  an  Ent  out  of  Fangorn,  that  your  tongue calls  the Entwood
   -  did  you  think  the  name  was  given  only  in  idle  fancy?(17) Nay,
   Theoden,  it  is  otherwise:  to  them  you are  but the  passing tale:
   all  the  years  from  Eorl  the  Young  to  Theoden  the  Old  are  of
   little count to them.'                                                 
        Theoden  was  silent,  and  all the  company halted,  watching the
   strange  figure  with  wondering  eyes as  it came  quickly on  to meet
   them.  Man  or  troll,  he  was  ten  or twelve  feet high,  strong but
   slim,  clad  in  glistening  close-fitting grey  and dappled  brown, or
   else  his  smooth  skin  was  like the  rind of  a fair  rowan-tree. He
   had  no   weapon,  and   as  he   came  his   long  shapely   arms  and
   many-fingered  hands  were  raised  in  sign  of  peace.  Now  he stood
   before  them,  a  few paces  off, and  his clear  eyes, deep  grey with
   glints  of  green,  looked  solemnly  from  face  to  face  of  the men
   that  were  gathered  round  him.(18) Then  he  spoke  slowly,   and  his
   voice was resonant and musical.                                        
        'Is this the company  of Theoden,  master of  the green  fields of
   Men?' he said. 'Is Gandalf here? I seek Gandalf, the white rider.'     
        'I am here,' said Gandalf. 'What do you wish?'                    
        'I  am  Bregalad  Quickbeam,'  answered  the  Ent.  'I  come  from
   Treebeard.  He  is  eager for  news of  the battle,  and he  is anxious
   concerning  the  Huorns.(19) Also  he  is  troubled  in  his   mind  about
   Saruman,  and  hopes  that  Gandalf  will  come   soon  to   deal  with
   him. [Added: There is no sign or sound from the tower.]'               
        Gandalf  was  silent  for  a moment,  stroking his  beard thought-
   fully.  'Deal  with  him,'  he  said.  'That  may  have  many  meanings
   [>  That  may  have  more  meanings   than  one].(20) But  how   it  will
   go, I cannot tell till I come.  Tell Treebeard  that I  am on  the way,

 and  will  hasten.  And  in  the  meanwhile,  Bregalad,  tell  him  not to
 be  troubled  about   the  Huorns.   They  have   done  their   task,  and
 taken no hurt. They will return.'                                         
   'That  is  good  news,'  said  the  Ent.  'May  we  soon   meet  again!'
 He  raised  his  hand,  and  turned,  and  strode off  back up  the river,
 so   swiftly   that  before   the  king's   company  had   recovered  from
 their wonder he was already far away.                                     
   The  riders  now  went  at  greater   speed.  At   last  they   rode  up
 into  the  long  valley  of  Nan  Gurunir.  The  land  rose  steeply,  and
 the   long   arms   of   the   Misty   Mountains,  reaching   towards  the
 plains,  rose  upon  either  side:  steep,  stony  ridges, bare  of trees.
 The  valley  was   sheltered,  open   only  to   the  sunlit   South,  and
 watered  by  the  young  river  winding   in  its   midst.  Fed   by  many
 springs   and   lesser   streams   among   the   rain-washed   hills,   it
 flowed   and  bubbled   in  its   bed,  already   a  swift   strong  water
 before  it  found  the  plain;  and  all   about  it   once  had   lain  a
 pleasant fertile land.(21)                                                
                                                                          
   The  description  of  Nan  Gurunir  as  it was  now is  almost as  in TT
 (p.  159),  but after  the words  'many doubted  in their  hearts, wonder-
 ing to what dismal end their journey led' there follows:                  
                                                                          
   Soon  they  came  upon  a   wide  stone-bridge   that  with   a  single
 arch  spanned  the  river,  and  crossing  it  they  found  a  road  that
 with   a   wide   northward   sweep   brought    them   to    the   great
 highway   to   the   fords:   stone-paved    it   was,    well-made   and
 well-tended,  and  no  blade  of  grass   was  seen   in  any   joint  or
 crack.  Not  far  before   them  now   they  knew   that  the   gates  of
 Isengard  must  stand;  and  their  hearts  were  heavy,  but  their eyes
 could not pierce the mists.                                               
                                                                          
   Thus  the  black  pillar  surmounted  by  the  White  Hand   is  absent.
 Being on the east side of Isen they cross the river by a bridge,  and come
 to 'the great highway  to the  fords'. In  TT they  followed that  road on
 the west side of Isen up from the fords, and it was at this point that the
 road became 'a wide street, paved with great flat stones'.(22)            
                                                                          
   Already  in  preliminary  drafting  the  description  of  the  Circle of
 Isengard reached almost its form  in TT  (pp. 159-60),(23) but that  of the
 tower  of  Orthanc  underwent  many  changes,  which can  be related  to a
 series of contemporary illustrations. These  descriptions, for  clarity in
 my account, I label A, B, C, D.                                           
   The description in the preliminary draft is as follows:                 
                                                                          
 (A)   And in the centre from  which all  the chained  paths ran  was a
      tower, a pinnacle of stone.  The base  of it,  and that  two hundred

  feet  in  height,  was  a  great  cone  of  rock  left  by   the  ancient
  builders  and  smoothers  of  the  plain,   but  now   upon  it   rose  a
  tower  of  masonry,   tier  on   tier,  course   on  course,   each  drum
  smaller  than  the last.  It ended  short and  flat, so  that at  the top
  there  was  a  wide  space  fifty feet  across, reached  by a  stair that
  came up the middle.                                                     
                                                                         
 This  description  fits  the  picture  captioned  'Orthanc (1)'  that was
 reproduced  as  frontispiece  to  Vol.  VII,  The Treason  of Isengard,(24)
 except in one respect: in the  text there  was 'a  wide space  fifty feet
 across' at the top, whereas  in the  picture the  tower is  surmounted by
 three pinnacles or horns (see under 'C' below).                          
 In  the  completed  manuscript  of  the  first  version  the  description
 begins in the same way,(25) but after  'left by  the ancient  builders and
 smoothers of the plain' it continues:                                    
                                                                         
 (B)  ...  a  tower  of  masonry  marvellously  tall  and slender,  like a
  stone  horn,  that  at  the tip  branched into  three tines;  and between
  the  tines  there  was  a  narrow  space  where  a  man  could   stand  a
  thousand feet above the vale.                                           
                                                                         
 This  accompanies  the  drawing  labelled  'Orthanc  (2)',  reproduced on
 p. 33, where the basal cone is black, and steeper than in  'Orthanc (1)',
 and  the  tower  much more  slender. Against  this second  description of
 the tower my father subsequently wrote:                                  
                                                                         
   (C) Or - if first picture [i.e. 'Orthanc (1)'] is adopted (but with
       cone-like rock as in second picture) [i.e. 'Orthanc (2)']:
         [a tower of masonry] marvellously tall and strong. Seven
       round tiers it had, dwindling in girth and height, and at the top
       were three black horns of stone upon a narrow space where a
       man could stand a thousand feet above the plain.
                                                                         
 This precisely fits 'Orthanc (1)'. It seems likely then that that picture
 was made after the first description  'A' was  written, since  it differs
 from 'A' in that the tower possess three horns at the summit.            
 The  accounts  'B' and  'C' were  rejected together  and replaced  in the
 manuscript by the  following (all  this work  obviously belonging  to the
 same period):                                                            
                                                                         
 (D)  And  in  the centre,  from which  all the  chained paths  ran, there
  stood  an  island  in  a pool,  a great  cone of  rock, two  hundred feet
  in  height,  left  by the  ancient builders  and smoothers  [> levellers]
  of  the  plain,  black  and   smooth  and   exceeding  hard.   A  yawning
  chasm  clove  it  from  tip  to  middle  into  two  great fangs  and over
  the  chasm  was  a  mighty  arch  of  masonry,  and   upon  the   arch  a
  tower   was   founded,   marvellously  tall   and  strong.   Seven  round

                                         
                                                                         
 tiers  it  had,  dwindling  in  girth  and  height, and  at the  top were
 three  black  horns  of  stone  upon   a  narrow   space,  where   a  man
 could stand a thousand feet above the plain.                             
                                                                         
 This conception is illustrated in  the drawings  'Orthanc (3)'  and '(4)'
 on the  same page  as 'Orthanc  (2)' and  reproduced below  (the distinc-
 tion between the  two enters  into successive  descriptions of  the tower
 in  'The  Voice  of  Saruman',  pp.  61-2).  On  the  back  of  the  page
 bearing  'Orthanc  (1)'  my  father  wrote:  'This  is  wrong.  The  rock
 should  be  steeper  and  cloven, and  the tower  should be  founded over
 an arch (with greater "horns" at top), as is shown in small  sketch (3).'
 He  also  wrote here:  'Omit the  water-course', but  struck this  out. A
 stream or 'moat' surrounding the basal cone is seen in 'Orthanc  (1)'. In
 description 'D' the tower stands on 'an island in a pool' ('in the lake',
 see note 25).                                                            
 Finally,  a  rider  was inserted  into the  first manuscript  bearing the
 definitive description as found in TT (p. 160): 'A peak and isle  of rock
 it  was,  black,  and  gleaming  hard;  four  mighty piers  of many-sided
 stone  were  welded  into  one,  but  near  the  summit they  opened into

  (Orthanc '2', '3' and '4'.)

  (Orthanc '5'.)

  gaping horns, their pinnacles sharp  as the  points of  spears, keen-edged
  as knives'. The only difference here from the final text is that my father
  first  wrote that  the top  of Orthanc  was three  hundred feet  above the
  plain; but this was changed, perhaps at once,  to five  hundred as  in TT.
  On  this rider  he wrote:  'to fit  Picture (5)',  which is  reproduced on
  p. 34.  Here the  conception is  radically changed,  and the  'horns', now
  four,  are  no  longer  a  device  surmounting  the  tower  of diminishing
  cylindrical  tiers  but  are  integral  to  the  marvellous  structure  of
  Orthanc.(26)                                                              
    The successive versions of the description  of the  tower differ  in the
  statements  made  about  the  name  Orthanc  (the  earliest  statement  on
  the subject appears in a rejected note to  the manuscript  of 'Treebeard',
  VII.419:  'It  is not  perhaps mere  chance that  Orthanc which  in Elvish
  means "a spike of  rock" is  in the  tongue of  Rohan "a  machine".'). The
  preliminary draft, following description 'A', has:                        
                                                                           
    This  was  Orthanc,  the  citadel  of  Saruman,  the  name  of  which  had
    double  meaning  (by  design or  chance); for  in the  tongue of  the Mark
    Orthanc  signified  cunning  craft,  invention,  (machine  such  as  those
    have  who  fashion  machines),  but  in  the  elvish  speech it  means the
    stony heart, [? tormented] hill.                                        
                                                                           
  The original text of  the first  completed manuscript,  following descrip-
  tion 'B', has:                                                            
                                                                           
    ... for in the language of the Mark orthanc signified 'cunning          
    craft', but in the elvish speech it means 'Stone Fang'.                 
                                                                           
  To  this 'Cloven-hill'  was added  subsequently -  when the  conception of
  the great cleft in the basal cone arose.  Following the  description ('D')
  of that conception  the statement  about the  meaning of  the name  is the
  final form: 'for in the elvish  speech orthanc  signifies Mount  Fang, but
  in  the  language  of  the  Mark  of  old  the  Cunning  Mind.' It  may be
  therefore that  the translation  'Mount Fang'  actually arose  in associa-
  tion with the description of the cone as cloven 'into two great fangs'.
    From here on the text  of TT  was reached  at almost  all points  in the
  manuscript  of  this  version to  the end  of the  chapter (27) but there are
  some interesting points in the preliminary drafting.                      
    Gandalf's  reply  to  the  opening  address   of  Merry   (who  declares
  himself  'Meriadoc,  Caradoc's  son  of  Buckland'), ending  'or doubtless
  he  would  hasten hither  to welcome  such honourable  guests', originally
  took this form:                                                           
                                                                           
       'Doubtless  he  would,'  laughed  Gandalf.  'But  what  he  would say
    to  find  two  young  hobbits  mocking  him  before his  gates I  do not
    know.  Doubtless  it  was he  that ordered  you to  guard his  doors and
    watch for their arrival.'                                               

  Pippin's first observation and its effect on the Riders went thus:           
                                                                             
    '...  Here  we  are sitting  on the  field of  victory amid  the plundered
    ruins  of  an  arsenal  and  you  wonder  where  we   came  by   this  and
    that.'                                                                    
                                                                             
       All  those  of  the  Riders  that  were  near  laughed, and  none more
    loudly than Theoden.                                                      
                                                                             
  Theoden's loud laughter remained into the completed manuscript, but         
  then his gravity (at least of bearing) was restored and it was removed.     
    The dialogue concerning hobbits went like this in the draft:              
                                                                             
    '... This day is fated to be filled with marvels: for here I see alive yet
    others of the folk of story: the half-high.'                              
       'Hobbits, if you please, lord,' said Pippin.                           
       'Hobbits,'  said  Theoden.   'Hoppettan?(28) I will  try   to  remember.
    No tale that I have heard does them justice.'                             
                                                                             
  In  the  completed  manuscript  Theoden  said:  'Hobbits?  It is  a strange
  name,  but  I  will  not  forget  it.'  In  the  preliminary draft  he said
  subsequently: 'all that is told among  us is  that away  in the  North over
  many hills and rivers (over  the sea  say some)  dwell the  half-high folk,
  [holbylta(n)>] holbytlan  that dwell  in holes  in sand-dunes...'  This is
  where  the  word  Holbytla arose.(29) The   manuscript  follows   this,  and
  Theoden  does  not  say,  as  he  does  in  TT,  'Your tongue  is strangely
  changed.'                                                                   
    A  wholly  different  and  much   longer  lecture   on  the   subject  of
  tobacco  was delivered  by Merry  in the  first of  several drafts  of this
  passage:                                                                    
                                                                             
    'For  one  thing,'  said Theoden,  'it was  not told  that they           
  spouted smoke from their lips.'                                             
    'Maybe  not.  We  only  learned  the  pleasure  of  it   a  few           
  generations back.  It is  said that  Elias Tobiasson  of Mugworth (30)      
  brought  the weed  back to  Manorhall in  the South  Farthing. He           
  was a  much travelled  hobbit. He  planted it  in his  garden and           
  dried  the  leaves after  a fashion  he had  learned in  some far           
  country.  We  never   knew  where,   for  he   was  no   good  at           
  geography  and  never  could  remember names;  but from  the tale           
  of leagues that he reckoned on his fingers people calculated that           
  it was far South, 1200 miles or  more from  Manor Hall.  [Here is           
  written Longbottom.]'                                                       
    'In the far South it is said that men drink smoke,  and wizards           
  I have heard do so. But always I had thought it was part of their           

 incantations  or  a  process  aiding  in  the  weaving  of  their  deep
 thoughts.'(31)                                                         
   'My  lord,'  said  Merry,  'it  is  rest and  pleasure and  the crown
 of  the  feast.  And  glad  I  am  that  wizards  know  it.  Among  the
 wreckage  floating  on  the  water  that  drowned  Isengard   we  found
 two  kegs,  and  opening  them  what  should   we  discover   but  some
 of the finest leaf that ever  I fingered  or set  nose to.  Good enough
 is  the  Manorhall  leaf  -  but this  is...(32) It  smells like  the stuff
 Gandalf  would  smoke  at  times  when   he  returned   from  journeys.
 Though  often  he  was  glad  enough  to   come  down   to  Manorhall.'
                                                                       
   At this time, and still in the same context (conversation at the Gate
 of Isengard), my  father developed  Merry's disquisition  through three
 further drafts to  a form  approaching $2  Concerning Pipe-weed  in the
 Prologue  to  LR.  In the  next stage,  his account  to Theoden  of the
 history of tobacco in the Shire (33) proceeds thus:                       
                                                                       
   'It  is  said that  the art  was learned  of travelling  dwarves, and
 that  for  some  time  folk used  to smoke  various herbs,  some fairer
 and   some   fouler.  But   it  was   Tobias  Smygrave (34) of Longbottom
 in  the  Southfarthing  that  first  grew  the  true  pipe-weed  in his
 garden  in  the  year  902,  and  the   best  Home-grown   comes  still
 from  that  part.  How  old  Tobias  came  by  the  plant is  not known
 for  certain,  for   he  never   told,  and   the  Smygraves   own  all
 [> most (of)] the crops to this day.'                                  
   'In  the  far  East uncouth  men drink  smoke, or  so I  have heard,'
 said  Theoden.  'And  it  is  said  that  wizards  do  so  also.  But I
 supposed that this  was but  part of  their secret  lore, and  a device
 to aid the weaving of their thoughts.'                                 
   'Maybe  it  does, lord,'  said Merry,  'but even  wizards use  it for
 no  better  reason  than  common  folk.  It  is  rest and  pleasure and
 the crown of the feast....'                                            
                                                                       
   The remainder of this draft is as the first,  except that  Merry here
 says 'Good enough is Longbottom leaf, but this  far surpasses  it' (see
 note 32), and he says that Gandalf  'did not  disdain Longbottom  if he
 stayed until his own  store was  short. Before  Saruman took  to making
 worse  things  with  greater  labour,  he  must  once  have   had  some
 wisdom.'                                                               
   In  the  next  version  the  context  has  probably  changed  to  the
 conversation  between  the  hobbits  and  Aragorn,  Gimli  and  Legolas
 after  Gandalf  and  Theoden  had  gone (see  p. 49  and note  8). Here
 Tobias  (not  Tobold)  Hornblower  appears,(35) the date  of   his first
 growing of  the plant  in his  gardens becomes  953 ('according  to our

  reckoning'), and Merry says that 'some think that he got it in  Bree': to
  which Aragorn replies:                                                   
                                                                          
     'True   enough,  I   guess.  Bree-folk   smoked  long   before  Shire-
  folk,  and  the  reason  is  not  far  to  seek.  Rangers come  there, as
  you   may   remember,   unless   you   have  already   forgotten  Trotter
  the  ranger.  And  it  was  Rangers,  as  they  call  them  in  Bree, and
  neither  wizard  nor  dwarf  who  brought  the  art  to  the  North,  and
  found  plants  that  would  thrive  in  sheltered  places. For  the plant
  does  not  belong  there.  It  is  said  that  far away  in the  East and
  South  it  grows  wild,  and  is  larger  and  richer  in leaf;  but some
  hold  that  it  was  brought  over  the  sea.  I  expect Saruman  got his
  leaf  by  trade;  for  he  had  little  knowledge  or  care  for  growing
  things.   Though   in   old  days   the  warm   valley  of   Nan  Gurunir
  could have been made to grow a good crop.'                               
                                                                          
     Finally, and still in the same context, the passage was developed to a
  form  that  my  father  evidently  felt  had outgrown  its place,  for he
  marked it 'Put  into Foreword'.(36) Here the  date of  the first  growing of
  pipe-weed  at  Longbottom  by  'Old  Toby'  (still  standing  for Tobias)
  becomes  'about  the  year  1050',  'in  the  time  of Isengrim  Took the
  First';(37) and Merry now says of Old Toby:                                 
                                                                          
  '...  He  knew  a  great  deal  about  herbs,  but  he was  no traveller.
  It  is  said  he  went  often  to  Bree,  but  he  certainly  never  went
  further  from  the  Shire  than  that.  Some  think he  got the  plant in
  Bree;  and  I  have  heard  it said  that Bree-folk  claim to  have found
  its  uses  long  before  Shire-folk.  Certainly  it  grows  well  now  on
  the  south  side  of  Bree-hill.  And  it  was  probably  from  Bree that
  the   art   spread   in  the   last  couple   of  hundred   years,  among
  dwarves and such folk as ever come westward nowadays.'                   
     'Meaning  Rangers,'  said  Aragorn  smiling.  'They  go  to   Bree  as
  you  may  remember.  And  if  you  really  want  to  know  the   truth  I
  will  tell  it  you.  It  was the  folk that  Bree-folk call  Rangers who
  brought   the   plant   from   the   South.  For   it  does   not  belong
  natively  to Bree  and the  Shire, and  only flourishes  so far  north in
  warm   and   sheltered  places.   Green  [Fuilas   >  Marlas   >  Romloth
  >]  Galenas  we  called  that  kind.  But  it  had  long  run   wild  and
  unheeded. This  credit is  certainly due  to hobbits:  they first  put it
  into  pipes.  Not  even  the  wizards  thought   of  that   before  them,
  though  one  at  least  that  I  know  took  up  the  notion, and  is now
  as skilful in that art as in all other things he puts his mind to.'      
     'More  than  one,'  said  Merry.  'Saruman   likely  enough   got  the
  idea  from  Gandalf:   his  greatest   skill  seems   to  have   been  in

                 
                                                                          
 picking  other  people's  brains.  But  I am  glad of  it, in  this case.
 Among the wreckage floating on the water...'                              
                                                                          
  This  version  concludes  with  Merry's   saying  'Longbottom   Leaf  is
 good enough, but this  is better.  I wonder  where it  came from.  Do you
 think Saruman  grew it?'  And Aragorn  replies: 'I  expect so.  Before he
 took  to  making  worse  things  with  greater labour,  he must  have had
 some  wisdom.  And  this  warm  valley  would  grow   a  good   crop,  if
 properly tended.'                                                         
  The  decision  to  remove  most  of  this  to  the Foreword  had already
 been  taken when  the first  completed manuscript  was written,  for here
 Merry  says  no  more  than  the  few  words that  Gandalf allows  him in
 TT (p. 163) - with Tobias for Tobold and the date 1050.                   
  Lastly,  the  conversation  near  the end  of the  chapter in  the manu-
 script (there is no initial drafting for this) brings in the meeting with
 Bregalad on the journey to Isengard, and runs thus:                       
                                                                          
  'It  is  past  noon,'  said  Gandalf,  'and  we  at  least have  not yet
 eaten.  Yet  I  wish  to see  Treebeard as  soon as  may be.  If Bregalad
 took   my   message,  Treebeard   has  forgotten   it  in   his  labours.
 Unless,  as  does  not  seem  to  be  beyond  belief,  he  left  us  some
 word    with    these   door-wardens,    which   their    noon-meal   has
 driven from their minds.'                                                 
  'Bless  me!  yes,  of  course,'  said  Pippin,  tapping   his  forehead.
 '"One  thing   drives  out   another,"  as   Butterbur  would   say.  Of
 course.  He  said:  Greet  the  Lord  of   Rohan,  fittingly.   Tell  him
 that  Saruman  is  locked  in  Orthanc,  and  say  that  I  am  busy near
 the  north  gate.(38) If he  and  Gandalf  will forgive  me, and  will ride
 there to find me, I will welcome them.'                                   
  'Then why did you not say so before?' said Gandalf.                      
  'Because    Gimli    interrupted    my    fitting    words,'    answered
 Merry.  'And  after  that  it  appeared  that  hobbits  had   become  the
 chief wonder and matter of debate.'                                       
                                                                          
  The chapter did not at this time end with Pippin's  'A fine  old fellow.
 Very  polite',  but went  on with  'Gandalf and  the King's  company rode
 away, turning east to make the circuit of the  ruined Ring  of Isengard',
 which in TT is the opening of 'Flotsam and Jetsam'.                       
                                                                          
  Further  abundant  drafting,  again  discontinuous  and  closely related
 to the finished text, exists for the second stage  in the  development of
 the  chapter.  Here  can  be  seen  the  new or  altered elements  in the
 narrative  as  they  arose -  the postponed  departure from  Helm's Deep,
 the  Ents  at  the  edge  of the  Huorn wood (39) that displaced  the meeting
 with  Bregalad,  the  passage  of the  Fords, the  dry river,  the burial

  mound, the  Isen suddenly  running again  in the  night. At  first, though
  the  time  of departure  had been  changed to  the evening,  the encounter
  with  Bregalad  was  still  present  - but  ends differently:  for despite
  Gandalf's  message to  Treebeard, 'to  the surprise  of all  he [Bregalad]
  raised  his  hand  and  strode  off,  not back  northward but  towards the
  Coomb,  where  the  wood  now stood  as dark  as a  great fold  of night.'
  The scene at the Fords likewise evolved in stages: at  first there  was no
  mention  of the  burial mound,  then there  were two,  one on  either bank
  of the Isen, and finally the island  or eyot  in the  middle of  the river
  appeared.(40) The passage   describing   the   departure-of   the  Huorns
  from  the  Deeping  Coomb  and  the  Death  Down  (see  p.  27)  was first
  moved to  stand (apparently)  after Gandalf's  reply to  Legolas' question
  concerning  the  Orcs:  That,  I  think,  no  one   will  ever   know  (TT
  p. 151), for an isolated draft of it begins: 'And that proved true. For in
  the deep of the night, after the departure of the king, men heard  a great
  noise of wind in the valley ...' '                                        
    The  second  main  manuscript  of  the  chapter  was  a  fair  copy that
  remained so, being only  lightly emended  after its  first writing.  A few
  details  still  survived  from  the first  stage: Merry's  father Caradoc;
  Tobias  Hornblower  and  the  year  1050;  Eodoras;  and  the  form Rohir,
  not  Rohirrim  (the  two latter  being changed  later on  the manuscript).
  The assembly at Eodoras is still to be, as in the  first version  (p. 27),
  'before the waning of the  moon' (changed  later to  'at the  last quarter
  of the moon').                                                            
    Lastly, in the account of the burials after the Battle of  the Hornburg,
  there  were  not  only  the  two  mounds  raised  over the  fallen Riders:
  following the words 'and those of Westfold  upon the  other' (TT  p. 150)
  there  stands  in  the  manuscript  'But  the  men  of  Dunland  were  set
  apart  in a  mound below  the Dike'  (a statement  that goes  back through
  the first complete manuscript to the  original draft  of the  passage, see
  note  8).  This  sentence  was  inadvertently  omitted  in  the  following
  typescript (not made by my father), and the error was never observed.     
                                                                           
                                    NOTES.                                  
                                                                           
  1.   A  short  section  of initial  drafting was  written on  the back  of a
       letter to my father bearing the date 31 July 1942.                   
  2.   One  would  expect  Erkenwald:  see  p.  24,  note  22.  In  the  first
       occurrence  here  my  father  in  fact   wrote  Erkenw   before  changing
       it  to  Erkenbrand.  It  may  be  that  he  was   for  a   time  undecided
       between   the   two   names,   and   that   there   was   not   a   simple
       succession Erkenwald > Erkenbrand.                                   
  3.   Cf.  the  outline  'The  Story  Foreseen  from Fangorn',  VII.436: 'The

                   
                                                                              
      victorious  forces  under  Eomer  and  Gandalf  ride  to  the   gates  of
      Isengard. They find it  a pile  of rubble,  blocked with  a huge  wall of
      stone. On the top of the pile sit Merry and Pippin!'                     
  4.  Caradoc  Brandybuck:  see  VI.251  and   note  4.   This  is   the  first
      appearance of Pippin's father Paladin Took: see VI.386.                  
  5.  Less  than  a  day:  this   must  imply   the  shortest   possible  time-
      scheme (see Chapter I):                                                  
         Day  3 (January 31)  Ents  break  into  Isengard  at night  and divert
      the Isen; Theoden to Helm's Deep, Battle of the Hornburg.                
         Day 4 (February 1) Theoden, Gandalf, &c. to Isengard.                 
  6.  This  conversation  is  found  in  no  less  than  seven  separate  forms
      for  the first  version  of  the  story  alone. In  one of  these Theoden
      says   to   Gandalf:   'But   would   you   assault  the   stronghold  of
      Saruman  with  a  handful  of  tired  men?',  and  Gandalf  replies: 'No.
      You  do  not  fully  understand  the  victory  we have  won, Lord  of the
      Mark.  The  hosts  of  Isengard  are  no more.  The West  is saved.  I do
      not go to  an assault.  I have  business to  settle, ere  we turn  back -
      to  graver  matters,  and  maybe  to  harder  fortune.'  -  In  different
      versions   Gandalf   advises   Theoden   to   order   an    assembly   at
      Eodoras  'on  the  second  day  from  now'  and  'at  the full  moon four
      days from now.'                                                          
  7.  In  TT  the  company   did  not   leave  for   Isengard  until   the late
      afternoon,  and  on  the  way  they  camped  for  the  night   below  Nan
      Gurunir; see pp. 5-6, $$ III-IV.                                         
  8.  In  preliminary  drafting  for  this  passage  the  bodies  of  the  Orcs
      were  burned;  the  men  of  Dunland  were  still  the  men  of Westfold;
      it  was   Gamling  who   addressed  them,   not  Erkenbrand   ('Help  now
      to repair  the evil  in which  you have  joined ...');  the dead  of this
      people   were   buried   in   a   separate  mound   below  the   Dike  (a
      statement  that  was  retained  in  both  the  finished   manuscripts  of
      the  chapter,  though  lost  in  TT: see  p. 40);  the slain  Riders were
      buried   in   a   single  mound   (not  two);   and  Hama,   whose  death
      before  the  Gates  of  the  Hornburg  here  first  appears (see  p. 22),
      was  buried  among  them,  yet  he  gave  his  name  to  the  mound: 'the
      [Hamanlow >]  Hamelow it  was  called  in  after  years'   (i.e.  Old
      Engish  Haman  hlaw,  the   Mound  of   Hama).  In   TT  (p.   150)  Hama
      was laid in a grave alone under the shadow of the Hornburg.              
  9.  The  Death  Down,  where  the  bodies  of  the  Orcs  were   buried,  was
      first called the Barren Hill ('for no grass would grow there').          
                                                                              
 10.  See note 14.                                                               
                                                                              
 11.  See  the  First  Map  (redrawn   map  III,   VII.309),  where   the  Isen
      flows into the Great Sea in the region then named Belfalas.              
 12.  In the draft for  this passage  the battlefield  'was but  a mile  or two
      away'.   -   In  TT   the  company   crossed  the   Fords  of   Isen  (by
      moonlight)  in  order  to  follow  the  'ancient  highway  that  ran down
      from Isengard to the crossings'.                                         

  13.  That  the  slain  Riders  had  been  buried by  Ents is  stated subse-
       quently: see  pp. 47,  49, 54.  Contrast TT  (p. 157):  'More [Riders]
       were scattered than were slain; I gathered together  all that  I could
       find.... Some I set to make this burial.'                             
  14.  In this version the company  was riding  fast, but  even so  my father
       seems  to  have  been  working  on  the  basis   of  a   much  shorter
       distance  from  Helm's  Deep  to  Isengard:  contrast  TT   (p.  156):
       'They  had  ridden  for  some  four  hours from  the branching  of the
       roads  when  they drew  near to  the Fords.'  In a  chronology written
       at  this  time,  when  the  story  was  that  Gandalf and  Theoden and
       their  company  left  Helm's  Deep  very  soon  after  the end  of the
       Battle of the Hornburg (see p. 5, $ III), he said that they left about
       9 a.m. Changing  this to  the story  that they  stopped for  the night
       on the way (p. 6, $  IV), he  said that  they left  at 3.30  p.m., and
       noted: 'It is forty miles  and they  arrive about  12.30 p.m.  on next
       day,  Feb. 3.'  This is  followed by  notes of  distances that  are in
       close  agreement  with  the  First  Map  (see  p.  78  note   2),  but
       'Isengard  Gates  to  mouth  of  Deeping Coomb'  is given  as 33  > 41
       >  45  miles  (cf.  p.  27,  where  Gandalf's  estimate   was  changed
       from 12 to 14 to 11 leagues).                                         
          As well  as I  have been  able to  interpret the  First Map  here I
       make  the  distance  1  cm.  or  50  miles,  and my  map made  in 1943
       agrees.  Section  IV(E) of the  First  Map  (VII.319)  is stuck  onto a
       portion of IV that is totally hidden, and it is possible that  at this
       stage the  Gap of  Rohan was  less wide.  In any  case, considerations
       of distance as  well as  of chronology  evidently dictated  the change
       whereby  Gandalf  and  Theoden  did  not   reach  Isengard   till  the
       following day.                                                        
  15.  On  the  removal  of  this  dialogue  from  the  (revised)  opening of
       'Helm's  Deep'  and  the  chronological  considerations  that  led  my
       father to do so see pp. 5 - 6, $$ II - III.                          
  16.  This  extremely  squashing  (and  revealing)  remark  of  Gandalf's to
       the  King  of  Rohan  was  subsequently  very  firmly  struck  through
       on the manuscript.                                                    
  17.  Cf.  Aragorn's  words (at  once rejected)  in a  draft for  'The White
       Rider',  VII.429:  'The  Ents!  Then  there  is  truth in  the ancient
       legends, and the names that they use in Rohan have a meaning!'        
  18.  In  the  original  draft  for  this passage  'the strange  figure came
       quickly on to meet them  until it  was about  fifty [written  above: a
       hundred]  yards  away.  Then  it  stopped  and  lifting its  grey arms
       and  long  hands  to  its  mouth  it  called  in a  loud voice  like a
       [?ringing]  trumpet.  "Is  Gandalf  with  this  company?"   The  words
       were clear for all to hear.'                                          
  19.  The  page   of  the   manuscript  that   includes  this   passage  was
       replaced  by  another,  which  introduced  little  significant change;
       but in the rejected page Bregalad  and Gandalf  speak of  'the trees',

       and  only  in  the  replacement  do  they  call  them  'the  Huorns'.
       Several other terms in fact preceded Huorns: see pp. 47, 50, 52.     
  20.  In  the  rejected  page  referred to  in note  19 Bregalad  said that
       Treebeard  'wishes  to  know  what  to  do  with  Saruman',  at which
       Gandalf  'laughed  softly, and  then was  silent, stroking  his beard
       thoughtfully.  "Hm,"  he   mused,  "hm   -  yes,   that  will   be  a
       problem." ' Cf. the outline for the chapter (p. 26).                 
  21.  The  original  drafting  for  the  description  of Nan  Gurunir reads
       thus:                                                                
          On  either  side  the  last  long  arms  of  the  Misty  Mountains
       reached   out   down  into   the  plain,   bare  and   broken  ridges
       half-hidden  now  in  smoke.  And  now  they  came  upon   a  strange
       thing.  It  seemed  to  them  that  ruinous rocks  lay ahead,  out of
       which  in  a  new-riven  channel  came   the  river,   flowing  where
       they stood back into its  old course;  yet higher  up the  valley the
       former bed was dry.                                                  
            'Yes,  I  knew  it,' said  Gandalf. 'Therefore  I drew  you this
       way.  We  may  cross  with no  difficulty to  the Gates  of Isengard.
       As  some  of  you  who  have  journeyed  here  may  know, of  old the
       Isen  flowed  down,  fed  by   many  mountain-springs   and  streams,
       until  it was  already a  swift and  powerful water  ere it  left Nan
       Gurunir  -  it  swept  past  the  walls  of  Isengard upon  the East.
       That  river  you  claimed  as  your  boundary,  but  Saruman  did not
       agree. But things have changed. Come and see!'                      
       This was not used at all in the completed text  of the  first version
       of the story. It was not the first appearance of the diversion of the
       Isen:  cf.  'The  Story  Foreseen from  Fangorn', VII.436:  'At North
       end  [of  Isengard]  they  let  in  the  River  Isen but  blocked its
       outflow. Soon all the floor of the  circle was  flooded to  many feet
       deep.'                                                               
          In the passage just cited the meaning  must be  that the  Isen had
       not  been  sent back  into its  former course  after the  drowning of
       the Circle of Isengard,  but continued  to flow  in its  new channel.
       Gandalf's  words  'I  knew  it.  Therefore  I drew  you this  way. We
       may cross  with no  difficulty to  the Gates  of Isengard'  must mean
       that  that  is why  he had  led the  company along  the east  bank of
       the Isen from the Fords (p.  28), for  thus they  would only  have to
       cross the dry former bed of the river, to the east of its new course.
  22.  Later, in  'Flotsam and  Jetsam', Merry  told (TT  p. 171)  that when
       the  great  host left  Isengard 'some  went off  down the  highway to
       the  Fords,  and  some  turned  away  and  went  eastward.  A  bridge
       has  been  built  down  there,  about  a mile  away, where  the river
       runs in a very deep channel.' See p. 56.                             
  23.  Differences from the final form  were that  a part  of the  Circle of
       Isengard  on  the  western  side  was  formed  of  the  mountain-wall
       itself  (this  was  taken  up from  the draft  but rejected  from the

       completed  manuscript  in  the  act  of  writing);  there  were  two
       entrances, there being  in addition  to the  great southern  arch 'a
       small gate at the north, near the mountains'  feet'; the  circle was
       'almost two miles from rim to rim'  ('a mile',  TT); 'through  it by
       many  carven  channels  water  flowed,  entering  as  a  stream from
       the  mountains  beneath  the  northern  gate,  and watering  all the
       hidden  land';  and  the  windows  in  the walls  of the  circle are
       described  (in  the  preliminary drafting  only) as  'countless dark
       windows and deep, square-cut, menacing'.                            
  24.  This picture was  drawn on  the back  of a  page of  the examination
       script  of  the  poet   John  Heath-Stubbs,   who  took   the  final
       examinations in English at Oxford in 1942.                          
  25.  The opening  of the  description is  confused. Apparently  my father
       at first followed the draft 'A' very closely,  writing: 'And  in the
       centre ... was a tower, a  pinnacle of  stone. The  base of  it, and
       that two hundred feet in height, was a great cone of rock  ...', but
       altered this at once to 'was an isle of stone,  two hundred  feet in
       height, a great cone of rock  ...' Subsequently  he changed  'was an
       isle  of stone'  to 'there  stood an  island in  the lake.'  See the
       description 'D' in the text.                                        
  26.  On  the  back  of  this  drawing  my  father  wrote:  'This  picture
       should be combined with old one':  i.e. for  a final  version, which
       was  never  made,  features  of  'Orthanc  (1)'  should   be  incor-
       porated.  -  'Picture  5'   went  to   Marquette  with   the  second
       completed  manuscript  of  the  chapter,  whereas  the   others  re-
       mained  in  England.  -  The  conception  of  'Orthanc (5)'  is seen
       also in Pictures by J. R. R. Tolkien, no. 27,  viewed from  the side
       in which were the stairway and the door.                            
  27.  In  a  draft  of  the  paragraph  beginning  'A  strong   place  and
       wonderful  was  Isengard'  (TT  p. 160)  these words  were followed
       by  'or  Ang(ren)ost  in  elvish  speech'.  Angrenost  has  appeared
       before (VII.420); the variant Angost occurs subsequently (p. 72).
  28.  Perhaps  Hoppettan  was  Theoden's  turning  of  Hobbits   into  the
       sounds  and  grammatical  inflexion of  the language  of the  Mark -
       or  else  he  was  merely  struck  by  the  resemblance to  the (Old
       English) verb hoppettan 'to hop, leap, jump for joy'.               
  29.  Holbytla  'Hole-builder'  has  the  consonants  lt   (Holbylta)  re-
       versed, as in the closely related Old English botl, bodl beside bold
       'building' (see my note on Nobottle in the Shire, VII.424).         
  30.  This  name  can  be  read  either  as  Mugworth  or as  Mugwort, but
       the  latter  (a plant-name,  and one  of the  family names  in Bree)
       seems  very  unlikely  as  the  name  of a  place. Mugworth  is not
       recorded as a village name in England.                              
  31.  This  passage  about  tobacco  was  dashed  down  in a  single spurt
       without  any  corrections,  and  there is  no indication  that these

               
                                                                       
      sentences were spoken by  Theoden; but  that they  were so  is seen
      from the following draft.                                         
  32. The illegible word might possibly be 'grand'.                     
  33. A pencilled note suggests that  this should  be 'a  conversation at
      [the] feast'. See pp. 72-3.                                       
  34. Smygrave: with the first  element cf.  Smial (Old  English smygel).
      The second element is probably Old English graef.                 
  35. With  the  later  change  of  Tobias   to  Tobold   Hornblower  cf.
      Barliman for earlier Barnabas Butterbur.                          
  36. Cf.  my  father's  letter to  me of  6 May  1944 (Letters  no. 66),
      referring to Faramir, then newly arrived on the scene: 'if  he goes
      on  much  more  a  lot  of  him  will  have  to  be removed  to the
      appendices  -  where  already  some  fascinating  material  on  the
      hobbit  Tobacco  industry  and  the  Languages  of  the  West  have
      gone.'                                                            
  37. Isengrim Took the First and the date  1050: in  the Prologue  to LR
      in the days  of Isengrim  Took the  Second and  the date  1070. See
      the  original  genealogical  table  of  the Tooks  in VI.316  - 17,
      according to which  Isengrim the  First would  have been  400 years
      old  at  the  time  of  Bilbo's  Farewell  Party.  Since  the Shire
      Reckoning date 1418 (as in LR)  has already  appeared for  the year
      of  Frodo's  departure  from  Bag End  (VII.9), Isengrim  the First
      (afterwards Isengrim II) was born  in S.R.  1001. According  to the
      genealogical tree of the Tooks in LR Appendix C  the dates  of this
      Isengrim  were  S.R.  1020  -  1122. -  The varieties  of pipe-weed
      from  the  Southfarthing  are  here  given as  Longbottom-leaf, Old
      Toby, and Hornpipe Shag.                                          
  38. On the north gate of Isengard see note 23.                        
  39. In the draft of this scene  the three  Ents who  came out  from the
      trees were not wholly  indifferent to  the company:  'Silently they
      stood,  some  twenty paces  off, regarding  the riders  with solemn
      eyes.' But this was changed immediately.                          
        In a draft for the passage that  follows (TT  p. 155),  in which
      Theoden  reflects  on  the  Ents  and  the  narrow horizons  of the
      people of  Rohan, it  is Gandalf  who speaks  the thought  that the
      war  will  bring  about   the  disappearance   of  much   that  was
      beautiful in Middle-earth:                                        
         'You  should  be  glad,  Theoden King,'  said Gandalf.  'For not
      only your little life of  men is  now endangered,  but the  life of
      those  things  also  which  you  have  deemed  the  matter  of song
      and  legend.  Some  we  may save  by our  efforts, but  however the
      fortune of war goes, it may  soon come  to pass  that much  that is
      fair and wonderful shall  pass for  ever out  of Middle  Earth. The
      evil  that  Sauron  works  and  has  worked   (and  has   had  much
      help  of  men  in  it) may  be stayed  or ended,  but it  cannot be
      wholly cured, nor made as if it had not been.'                    

                               
                                                                           
  40.   The Fords of Isen in the plural appears earlier, however (pp. 10,      
        27 - 8,31).                                                         
  41.   For another proposed placing of the description of the passing of
        the Huorns see p. 70.                                               

                                    IV.                                  
                                                                        
                            FLOTSAM AND JETSAM.                          
                                                                        
 The  first   completed  manuscript   of  'The   Road  to   Isengard'  was
 originally  continuous  with  Chapter  XXVIII   'The  Battle   of  Helm's
 Deep' (the original title), but I think that the division  was introduced
 at  a  fairly early  stage, with  a new  chapter numbered  XXIX beginning
 with  the  meeting  of  Gandalf  and  Theoden  beside the  Deeping Stream
 after  the  Battle  of the  Hornburg. The  first completed  manuscript of
 XXIX,  of  which the  original title  was 'To  Isengard', ran  on without
 break  through  the  later  'Flotsam  and  Jetsam'  and  'The   Voice  of
 Saruman',   but   a  division   between  XXIX   and  XXX   ('Flotsam  and
 Jetsam')  was  made  before  it  was  completed:  XXX  then  included the
 later 'Voice of Saruman' as well. A very rough and difficult  outline for
 this  part  of  the  story  in fact  begins at  the end  of 'The  Road to
 Isengard', and the chapter was then expressly to end  with the  return to
 Eodoras.                                                                
                                                                        
  Gandalf asks where Treebeard is?                                       
  (Guarding Orthanc, says Merry. Some Ents  still demolishing.)          
  He takes Theoden off.                                                  
  Aragorn takes the hobbits aside and they sit and eat and chat          
 on   the   stone   heaps.   Aragorn  smokes.   Talk  about   wizards  and
 tobacco.                                                                
  Aragorn   and   Gimli   are   told   about   Orc-raid   and   Treebeard.
 Merry  gives  up  hope  of  describing  them;  says  you  will  see  them
 soon.  How  shall  I  describe  them   to  Bilbo?   (This  was   when  he
 first tried to collect his ideas.)                                      
  Describes   destruction   of   Isengard.    Saruman   not    strong   or
 brave.  Merry  tells  all  he  knows  about  the  battles  of  Ford.  How
 trees dogged orcs.                                                      
  Treebeard   knocks   on   gates   of   Isengard.   Arrows    no   good.(1)
 Saruman  flies  to  Orthanc  and  sends  up  fires  from floor  of plain.
 Scorched  Ents  go   mad.  But   Treebeard  stops   them.  They   let  in
 Isen  River  by  North  Gate (2) and  flood  the  bowl.  Terrific  fume  and
 steam.   Terrible  noises,   drowned  wolves   and  slaves   and  smiths.
 The  Ents  pull  the  wall  to  pieces.  They  send   Galbedirs  (Talking
 Trees) to help Gandalf. They bury dead at Fords.                        
  Gandalf's   speech   with   Saruman.  He   rides  over   flooded  cause-
 way.   Saruman   looks   out   of   window  above   door.  Asks   how  he

 dares  to  come  without  permission.  Gandalf  says he  thought that
 as  far  as  Saruman  was  concerned  he  was   still  a   lodger  in
 Orthanc.(3)                                                          
   'Guests  that  leave  from  the  roof  have not  always a  claim to
 come in by the door.' Saruman refuses to repent or submit.           
   Gandalf  gives  Treebeard  task  of  [?caring] for  him. 'I  do not
 doubt  there  are  delved   ways  under   Orthanc.  But   every  time
 water subsides let  it in  again, till  all these  underground places
 are  submerged.  Then  make  a  low  bank and  plant trees  round it.
 Guard Orthanc with Ents.'                                            
   Theoden  thinks  a  Nazgul  may  carry  him  off.  'Let  him!' says
 Gandalf.  'If  Saruman  thinks  of  that  last  treachery  ... cannot
 pity  him  for the  terrible fate  that awaits  him. Mordor  can have
 no love [for] him. Indeed what he will do                            
   Say  that  this  must  be clear  to Saruman  himself. Would  it not
 be  more  dramatic  to  [?make]  Saruman  offer  help:  Gandalf says
 no  - he  knows that  if Mordor  wins he  is done  for now.  Even the
 evidence  that  he  had  made  war  on  us  won't  help  him.  Sauron
 knows  that  he  did so  only for  [his] own  ends. But  if we  win -
 with his belated  help he  hopes to  re-establish himself  and escape
 punishment.  Gandalf  demands  his  staff  of  office.   He  refuses;
 then Gandalf orders him to be shut up, as above.(4)                   
   They rest the night in the ruins and ride back to Eodoras.         
   Feast  on  evening  of  their  return and  coming of  the messenger
 - that ominous dark-visaged man (5) should end this chapter.            
                                                                     
   Another outline (in ink over pencil, but the underlying text though
 briefer was not greatly different) reads as follows:                 
                                                                     
   Treebeard  (and  Merry and  Pippin) relate  events -  their arrival
 at  Isengard.  They  saw  Saruman   send  out   all  his   forces  to
 overwhelm  the  Riders  at   Isenford.  As   soon  as   Isengard  was
 well-nigh  empty, the  Ents attacked.  Merry and  Pippin tell  of the
 terrifying  anger  and  strength  of  the  Ents.  Saruman  really had
 little  power  beyond  cunning,  persuasive  words  -  when   he  had
 no slaves at hand  to do  his will  and work  his machines  or light
 his fires he could do little himself. All his studies had  been given
 to trying to  discover how  rings were  made. He  let his  wolves out
 -  but  they  were  useless.  A few  of the  Ents were  scorched with
 fire  -  then they  went mad.  They drowned  Isengard, by  letting in
 River and blocking the outlet.                                       
                                                                     
   All the day they were destroying and making havoc  of the          
 outer walls and all within. Only Orthanc resisted them. Then          

               
                                                                           
 just  ere  nightfall  Gandalf  came  riding  up  like  the  wind.(6) He told
 them    of   King    Theoden's   danger.    A   considerable    force   of
 walking  trees  had  already  stalked  after  the  orcs the  night before.
 The   Ents  now   sent  a   much  great[er]   force  and   commanded  them
 all  to  gather  at  the  mouth  of  the  Coomb  and let  no orc  come out
 alive.  A  few  Ents  had  gone  to  Isenford,  and  buried  the  dead men
 of the Mark.                                                               
                                                                           
  In  the  margin against  the last  sentences of  this outline  is written:
 'Shall there  be more  real Ents?'  Notably, a  sentence in  the underlying
 pencilled text reads: 'The Ents sent a force of  walking trees  (with split
 trunks). They crept on in darkness following the victorious orcs.'         
                                                                           
  There is not a great deal to notice in the scanty  initial drafting  or in
 the first completed manuscript  as far  as the  beginning of  Merry's story
 of  the  attack  on  Isengard  (TT  p.  170).  The  meal  provided  by  the
 hobbits  was  not  eaten  in  the  guard-house  by  the  gates:  Merry  and
 Pippin went off to get  the food  and returned  with it,  Pippin explaining
 that 'There is a door not far inside the  old tunnel  that leads  down into
 some well-stocked stores' (cf. the outline, p. 47: they sit and eat 'on the
 stone  heaps').  Of  Ents, where  in TT  (p. 167)  Pippin says:  'Oh, well,
 you have seen some  at a  distance, already',  here he  says 'Oh  well, you
 have seen Quickbeam'  - this  being of  course a  reference to  the earlier
 version  of  'The  Road  to  Isengard',  where  Gandalf  and   Theoden  and
 their  company  met  Bregalad  on  their  ride  from  Helm's Deep.(7) And he
 says also, as in the outline on p. 47: 'But  I wish  Bilbo could  have seen
 Treebeard:  how  we  shall manage  to describe  him to  the old  hobbit, if
 ever we get back, I can't think.'                                          
  In  a  draft  for the  discussion of  pipes (TT  pp. 167-8)  Aragorn leapt
 down  from  the  stone  heap  and   went  to   the  saddle-bags   that  lay
 nearby. 'From them  he drew  out an  old cloak,  and a  worn purse  of soft
 hide.  Coming  back  he  wrapped  himself  in  the  cloak,  and  opened the
 purse,  and  drew out  a blackened  pipe of  clay.' Before  Pippin produced
 his  spare  pipe,  Merry  said:  'There are  none to  be found.  Orcs don't
 smoke,  and  Saruman  did  not  give  his  leaf  to  his slaves.'  And when
 Pippin   said   'Look!  Trotter   the  Ranger   has  come   back!'  Aragorn
 replied:  'He  has  never  been  away.  I  am  Trotter  and   Aragorn,  and
 belong both to Gondor and the North.'(8)                                   
  A  few  other  details  in  the  opening  of  the  chapter  may  be noted.
 There is  no mention  of Aragorn's  returning of  the hobbits'  knives,(9) or
 of Pippin's brooch (TT p. 169). After Merry's story of Grishnakh (10)      
 Aragorn spoke at greater length about Sauron and Saruman:                  
                                                                           
  'All this about the orcs of Lugburz (Mordor, I suppose, from              
 the Red Eye) makes me uneasy,' said Aragorn. 'The Dark Lord                
 already  knew  too  much,  and  Grishnakh  clearly  got  some              

 message  across  the  River  after  the  quarrel.  [But  still  there are
 some  hopeful  points.  Saruman  is  in   a  cleft   stick  of   his  own
 cutting.  Gandalf  ought  not  to  have   much  difficulty   in  convinc-
 ing  him  that  a  victory  for   Mordor  would   not  be   pleasant  for
 him,  now.  Indeed'  (and  here   Aragorn  lowered   his  voice)   'I  do
 not  see  what can  save him,  except the  Ring itself.  It is  well that
 he  has  no  idea  where  it  is.  And  we  should   do  best   never  to
 mention  it  aloud:  I   do  not   know  what   powers  Saruman   in  his
 tower   may   have,   nor   what   means   of   communication   with  the
 East  there  may  be.)  From  your  tale  it  is  plain  that  he thought
 one   of   you   was   possibly   the   Ringbearer;   and   Sauron   must
 therefore  have  the  same  doubt.  If  so,  it  will  hasten  his attack
 westward:   Isengard   has   fallen   none  too   soon.  But   there  are
 some  hopeful  points.   All  this   doubt  may   help  poor   Frodo  and
 Sam.  But  at  any  rate  Saruman  is  in  a  cleft  stick  of   his  own
 cutting.                                                                 
                                                                         
   The part of this text (rather more  confused in  the manuscript  than I
 have  represented  it)  enclosed  in  square  brackets, was  rejected im-
 mediately  and  replaced  by  what  follows  ('From   your  tale   it  is
 plain ...'); this was rejected later, leaving only  the last  sentence. -
 Lastly,  Pippin  chants,  in addition  to Though  Isengard be  strong and
 barred  [sic],  the  Entish  Ta-ruta,  dum-da,  dum-da dum!  ta-rara dumda
 dumda-bum! (see VII.420).                                               
                                                                         
   In the original draft Merry's story (TT pp. 170 ff.) was at first very
 different from what it became, and I give this text (written in  ink over
 very faint pencil) in part. Of the opening of his  story my  father noted
 on the manuscript that he should know less:  'His account  of the  war is
 too detailed.'                                                           
                                                                         
 '...  We  came  down  over  the  last  ridge   into  Nan   Gurunir  after
 night  had  fallen. It  was then  that I  first got  an inkling  that the
 forest  was  moving  behind  -  or  a lot  of it  was: all  the Galbedirs
 [>  Lamorni  >  Ornomar]  were  coming,   as  the   Ents  call   them  in
 their  short  language  (which  seems  to  be  an  oldfashioned  Elvish):
 Talking  Trees,  that  is,  that  they  have   trained  and   made  half-
 entish.(11) All   this   must   have  been   happening  while   you  were
 riding  south.(12) As  far  as  I  can  make   out,  from   Treebeard  and
 Gandalf,  the  war  seems  to  have  gone   like  this:   Saruman  opened
 the  game  some  weeks   ago,  and   sent  raiders   into  the   west  of
 Rohan.    The   Rohan-men    sent   out    strong   forces,    and   they
 retreated  over  the  fords  of  Isen,  and  the  Riders   rather  rashly
 pursued   them   right   up  to   the  bottom   of  Nan   Gurunir.  There

                            
                                                                  
 they were ambushed  by a  host of  Saruman's folk  and one  of the
 chieftains of  Rohan seems  to have  been killed.  That must  be a
 good  many  days   ago.(13) Then more Rohan-men   arrived  coming
 from  Westfold (14) away  south,  and the  Riders still  remained on
 both  sides  of the  River keeping  the Isengarders  from breaking
 out of the valley. Up to then  Saruman was  only fencing;  then he
 struck.  Men  came  up  from the  land away  west, old  enemies of
 Rohan,  and  the  Riders  were  driven  over  the Fords.  The next
 stage we were just in time to see.                                
   'As  we  crept down  into Nan-Gurunir  - and  there was  no sign
 or challenge. [sic] Those Ents and their flocks can creep  if they
 wish. You stand still, looking at the weather and listening to the
 rustling  of the  leaves, maybe,  and then  suddenly you  find you
 are in the middle of a wood,  with trees  all round  you. "Creepy"
 is the word for it! It  was very  dark, a  cloudy night.  The moon
 got  up  late  -  and long  before it  rose there  was a  deep and
 sombre forest all round the  upper half  of Isengard  Ring without
 a sign of challenge. There was a  light gleaming  from one  of the
 windows in  the tower,  that was  all. Treebeard  and some  of the
 elder Ents crept on, right round to within sight of the  gates. We
 were with him.  I was  sitting on  Treebeard's shoulder  and could
 feel a trembling tenseness in him, but even  when roused  the Ents
 can be very  cautious and  patient: they  stood still  as statues,
 listening and breathing. Then all at once there was a  great stir.
 Trumpets  blared,  and  all the  Ring echoed.  We thought  that we
 had been spotted, and battle was  going to  begin. But  nothing of
 the  kind. It  seems that  news had  come in  that the  Riders had
 been defeated and driven over the Fords, but were still  trying to
 hold out  on the  east bank.  Saruman sent  out his  whole forces:
 he  pretty  well  emptied  Isengard.  Gandalf  says  that  he  was
 probably  in a  great taking,  thinking that  the Ring  might have
 gone  to  Eodoras,  and  meant  to  blot out  Theoden and  all his
 folk, before  they had  time to  do anything  about it.  But there
 were  one  or  two bits  of essential  information he  lacked: the
 return of Gandalf, and the rising of the Ents. He thought  the one
 was finished for  good, and  the others  no good,  old slow-witted
 back-numbers.  Two  very  bad  mistakes.  Anyway  that is  what he
 did.  I  saw  them  go  -  endless lines  of Orcs,  and squadrons/
 troops  of  them  mounted  on  great  wolves (a  Saruman notion?),
 and  whole   regiments  of   men,  too.   Many  of   them  carried
 torches, and by the flame I could see their faces. Some  were just
 Men, rather tall, dark-haired, not particularly evil-looking.'

  'Those would be Dunlanders,' said Aragorn. 'An upland folk              
 from the west of the Misty Mountains,  remnants of  the old              
 peoples that once dwelt in  Rohan and  all about  the Black              
 Mountains, south and north.'                                             
                                                                         
  The  following  dialogue,  concerning  the  'goblin-men'  reminiscent of
 the squint-eyed Southerner at Bree,  and Merry's  estimate of  the forces
 that left Isengard that night, is much the same as in TT (p. 171), except
 that  Aragorn  says  that they  had had  many of  the goblin-men  to deal
 with at the Hornburg 'last night' (see note 7), and that there is here no
 mention of the bridge over the Isen  over which  a part  of the  host had
 passed. Then follows:                                                    
                                                                         
  '...   I  thought   it  looked   black  for   the  Riddermark.   But  it
 seems  in   the  end   the  only   way  in   which  Saruman   could  have
 been    overcome.     One    wonders     how    much     Gandalf    knew,
 guessed,   or   planned.   But   Treebeard   anyway   let  them   go.  He
 said  that  his  concern  was  Isengard.  "Stone  -  that we  can fight,"
 he said.                                                                 
  'But   he   sent   off   a   whole   wood   of   the  Ornomi (15) down the
 valley  after  the  army,  as  soon as  the gates  of Isengard  were shut
 again.   I  don't   know,  of   course,  much   of  what   happened  away
 south down there; but you will tell us later.'                           
  'I  can  tell  you  now  briefly,'  said  Aragorn.  'The   Saruman  army
 came  down  on  both  sides  of   the  Isen   and  overwhelmed   the  men
 of  Rohan,  and  most  of  the  survivors   scattered.  A   strong  force
 under   Erkenwald   of   Westfold (16) fled   south   towards   the   Black
 Mountains.   We   met   a   survivor   of  the   battles  of   the  fords
 yesterday  evening,  and  were  just  in  time to  take refuge  in Helm's
 Deep, a gorge in the hills, before the whole pack came on us.'           
  'I  don't  know  how  you  survived,'  said   Merry.  'But   you  helped
 us.  As  soon  as  all   the  army   had  gone,   the  fun   began  here.
 Treebeard went up and began hammering on the gates....'                  
                                                                         
  Merry's  account  of  the  Ents'  destruction of  the gates  of Isengard
 was already in this preliminary draft very close to that in TT  (p. 172),
 but  his  estimate  of  Saruman  was  expressed more  largely and  with a
 degree of scornful  and rather  jaunty assurance  that his  experience of
 the  master  of  Orthanc scarcely  justified; and  Aragorn does  not here
 interrupt  him  with  a  more  cautious  view  of Saruman's  innate power
 (indeed  the  hypnotic  potency of  the wizard's  voice only  emerged, or
 was at any rate only fully realised, when  the meeting  with him  came to
 be written).                                                             

                
                                                                          
  'I   don't   know   what   Saruman   thought   was  happening.   But  all
 that  I  have  seen  since  leads  me to  think that  either he  was never
 really  a  first-class  wizard  (not  up  to  his  reputation,  which  was
 partly  due  to  Isengard,  and  that   was  not   his  making   to  begin
 with),   or  he   had  been   deteriorating  -   relying  on   wheels  and
 what  not,  and   not  on   wisdom.  And   he  does   not  seem   to  have
 much  heart  in  any  sense:  certainly   he  had   been  going   back  in
 plain  courage.  The  old  fool  had  really   become  dependent   on  all
 his  organized  slaves.  He  had  a  daunting  way  with  him:   power  of
 dominating   minds   and   bewildering   or   persuading   them   was  his
 chief  asset  all  along,  I fancy.  But without  his armies  to do  as he
 commanded,  he  was   just  a   cunning  old   man,  very   slippery,  but
 with no grit. And the old fool had sent all his armies off! ...'          
                                                                          
  Merry's  account  (given  to  Pippin  in  TT)  of  Saruman's  flight into
 Orthanc chased by Bregalad,  the spouting  of fires  and gases  from vents
 in  the  plain  of  Isengard  ('as  soon  as  Saruman  got  back  into his
 control-room  he  got  some  of  his  machinery  working'),  the scorching
 of  some  of the  Ents and  the quelling  of their  fury by  Treebeard, is
 present in the draft in all essentials, though more briefly told  (and the
 horrible  fate  of  the  Ent  Beechbone  does not  yet appear).  The time-
 scheme  was  still  at  the  stage described  in $  II on  p. 5,  with the
 drowning of Isengard beginning  later in  the same  night (31  January) as
 the Ents came there,(17) and so  the story  is much  condensed in  the draft
 text  by  comparison   with  that   in  TT.   Gandalf  came   to  Isengard
 'yesterday at 'nightfall' (i.e. 1 February, the night of the Battle of the
 Hornburg);  and  where  in   TT  (p.   175)  Pippin   says  that   he  was
 surprised  at the  meeting of  Gandalf and  Treebeard 'because  neither of
 them seemed surprised at all', here Merry says:                           
                                                                          
  '... I do not  know who  was most  surprised at  their meeting,          
 Gandalf or Treebeard.  Gandalf, I  think, for  once. For  from a          
 look he gave us when we first met I have  a fancy  Treebeard had          
 spotted Gandalf in Fangorn; but would not  say anything  even to          
 comfort  us.  He  has  very  much  to  heart  the elvish  saw of          
 Gildor's: Do not meddle in the affairs of wizards; for  they are          
 subtle and quick to wrath.'(18)                                           
  'But  Gandalf  knew  Treebeard  was on  the move,'  said Gimli.          
 'He knew there was going to be an explosion.'                             
  'But not even Gandalf  could guess  what that  was going  to be          
 like,' said [Merry >] Pippin. 'It has never happened before. And          
 even wizards know little about Ents. But talking  about surprise          
 - we were the surprised ones: coming on  top of  the astonishing          
 rage of the Ents, Gandalf's arrival was  like a  thunderclap. We          

                        
                                                                    
 had very little to  do, except  try and  trot round  after Treebeard
 (when  he  was  too busy  to carry  us) and  see the  fun. We  had a
 high  time  for  a  moment,  when  we  got left  alone, and  came in
 front  of  a  rush  of  some terrified  wolves, and  we had  a brush
 with two  or three  stray orcs.  [But when  Gandalf arrived,  I just
 stood  staring  with  my  mouth  open,  and  then  I  sat  down  and
 laughed.  >]  But  when  Gandalf's  horse   came  striding   up  the
 road, like a flash of silver in the dusk, well,  I just  gasped, and
 then  I  sat  down  and laughed,  and then  I wept.  And did  he say
 pleased  to  see  you  again?  No,  indeed.  He  said  "Get  up, you
 tom-fool  of  a  Took.  Where  in  the  name of  wonder in  all this
 mess  is  Treebeard?  Hurry, hurry,  hurry, my  lad! Don't  let your
 toes grow whiskers." But later he was  a bit  gentler, after  he had
 seen  the  old Ent:  he seemed  very pleased  and relieved.  He gave
 us a few minutes of concentrated  news, a  pat on  the head,  a sort
 of  hasty  blessing,  and  vanished  away south  again. We  got some
 more  news  out  of  Treebeard  after  he had  gone. But  there must
 be  much  more  to  tell.  We  should  have  been  far  more worried
 and anxious about you,  I expect,  only it  was difficult  what with
 Treebeard  and  Gandalf  to  really  believe   you  would   come  to
 grief.'                                                             
  'Yet  we  nearly did,'  said Aragorn.  'Gandalf's plans  are risky,
 and  they  lead  often  to  a  knife-edge.  There  is  great wisdom,
 forethought  and  courage  in  them  -  but  no certainty.  You have
 to do your part as it comes to you; or they would not work.'        
  'After  that,  said  Merry, 'the  Ents just  went on  and carefully
 and  neatly  finished  the  drowning  of  Isengard.  I   don't  know
 what else, do you?'                                                 
  'Yes,'  said  Aragorn,  'some  went to  the Fords  to bury  the men
 of Rohan who had  fallen there;  and to  gather all  the -  what did
 you  say  they  were  called  -  the  Ornomi,  the moving  woods, to
 the  Deeping  Coomb.  Aye,  that  was  a  wonder  and  a  victory as
 great as the one here. No orc is left. It was a long night,  but the
 dawn was fair.'                                                     
  'Well, let us hope that it is the beginning of better things,' said
 Gimli. 'Gandalf said the tide was turning.'                         
  'Yes,' said Aragorn, 'but  he also  said that  the great  storm was
 coming.'                                                            
  'Oh,'  said  Merry,  'I  forgot.  Not  long  before  Gandalf, about
 sunset,  a  tired  horse  came  up  the  valley   with  a   pack  of
 wolf-riders  round  it.(19) The Ents  soon  settled them,  though one
 of  Quickbeam's  folk,  a  rowan-ent,  got  a  bad  axe-stroke,  and

            
                                                                       
 that  enraged  the  Ents  mightily.  On  the  horse  there was  a queer
 twisted  sort  of man:  I disliked  him at  sight. It  says a  great deal
 about  Treebeard  and  Ents  generally,  if  you  think  about it  - in
 spite   of  their   rage,  and   the  battle,   and  the   wounding  of
 Bregalad's  friend  Carandrian,  that  the  fellow  was not  killed out
 of  hand.  He  was  miserable  in  his  fear  and  amazement.  He  said
 he  was  a  man  called  Frana,  and  was  sent  with urgent  messages
 from  Theoden   and  Gandalf   to  Saruman,   and  had   been  captured
 by  orcs  on  the  way  (I  caught  him squinting  at Treebeard  to see
 how   it   went,   especially  the   mention  of   Gandalf).  Treebeard
 looked  at  him  in  his  long  slow  way  for  many  minutes.  Then he
 said:   "Hoom,   ha,   well,   you   can   go   to  Saruman!   I  guess
 somehow  that  you   know  pretty   well  how   to  find   him,  though
 things  have changed  a little  here. But  false or  true, you  will do
 little harm now."                                                      
  'We  told  Gandalf  about  it.   He  laughed,   and  said:   "Well,  I
 fancy  of  all  the  surprised  people  he  had  the worst  shock. Poor
 Wormtongue!  He  chose  badly.  Just  for a  little I  feel hardhearted
 enough  to  let  those  two  stay  and  live  together.  They  will  be
 small  comfort  to  each  other.  And  if   Wormtongue  comes   out  of
 Orthanc alive, it will be more than he deserves." '                    
                                                                       
  Against  this  passage  my  father  wrote:  'No, Wormtongue  must come
 after  Gandalf';  and  at  the  foot  of  the  page:  'Shall Wormtongue
 actually murder Saruman?'                                              
                                                                       
  'Well,'  he  continued.  'Our  job  was  to   get  rooms   ready  and
 prepare  stuff  for  your  entertainment.  All  yesterday and  most of
 last  night  we  worked.  Indeed,  say  what  you  like,  we  did  not
 knock  off  till  close  on  noon this  morning. And  I don't  know if
 we  should  even  then,  only Pippin  found two  tubs floating  on the
 Water'                                                                 
                                                                       
  Here this draft breaks off. The first  completed manuscript,  from the
 point where Merry's story begins, was based fairly closely on the draft
 text (pp. 50-5) in its narrative, but moved far towards the text  of TT
 in  expression.  The  passage  about  the 'Talking  Trees' (p.  50) was
 developed thus:                                                        
                                                                       
 '... The  Ornomi  were  coming.  That  is  what  the  Ents   call  them
 in  their  "short  language",  which  seems  to  be   an  old-fashioned
 Elvish:  trees with  voices it  means, and  there is  a great  host of
 them  deep  in  Fangorn,  trees  that  the  Ents  have  trained  so long
 that  they  have  become  half  entish, though  far wilder,  of course,
 and crueller.'                                                         

   This was rejected, probably at once, and a passage  for the  most part
 very  close  to  that  in  TT  (p.  170)  substituted.  Ornomi  was here
 replaced by Huorns in the act  of writing  and is  the point  where that
 name  arose.  Merry  is  now  uncertain  about  their nature:  'I cannot
 make out whether they are trees that  have become  Entish, or  Ents that
 have become tree-like, or both.'                                        
   At first Merry was still  going to  give a  summary and  commentary on
 the course of the war:                                                  
                                                                        
 '...  It  seems  that  news  had  come  in  that  the  [Rohir  >] Horse-
 men  had  been   defeated  and   driven  back   across  the   Isen,  but
 some  were  still  trying  to  hold  out  on  the  eastern bank.  We got
 this  out  of  some  of  Saruman's  men  that  the  Ents   captured  and
 questioned.   Saruman   thought   that   no   more   was  left   of  the
 King's  forces,  except  what  he  would  keep  by  him  to   guard  his
 town  and  hall.  He decided  to finish  off the  Rohir with  a decisive
 blow.'                                                                  
                                                                        
 But it must have been at this point that  my father  noted on  the draft
 (p.  50)  that  Merry  should  be  much  less  well-informed   on  these
 matters, and the  passage just  given was  rejected and  the text  of TT
 (p. 171) substituted: 'I don't know much about this war ...'            
   Merry now tells (as he does not  in the  draft, p.  51) that  when the
 great  host  left  Isengard 'some  went off  down the  main road  to the
 fords, but still more turned off towards the bridge and the east side of
 the river'. This was changed in a hasty pencilled emendation  to 'turned
 off towards where I  believe Saruman  has recently  made a  bridge'. See
 p. 31 and note 22.                                                      
   Aragorn's  brief  account of  what had  happened southwards  was still
 retained from the draft (p. 52), and here  he adds  the surmise  (in the
 draft Gandalf's,  reported by  Merry, p.  51) about  Saruman's purposes:
 '... the whole pack came  howling after  us. They  had learned  that the
 King  was  in  the  field,  so  none  of them  went to  Eodoras. Saruman
 wanted the King and Eomer, his heir, dead or alive.  He was  afraid that
 the Ring might  get into  their hands  after the  battle from  which you
 escaped.' He also gives the information that the  force that  fled south
 from  the  Fords  to  the  Black  Mountains  numbered  about  a thousand
 men. With this passage  cf. Gandalf's  remarks to  Theoden as  they rode
 to Isengard (p. 29).
  Merry's  rather  overconfident assessment of  Saruman   was  reduced,
 in stages, virtually to  its compass in  TT, and  Aragorn's intervention
 now appears,  very much  as in  TT (p.  172), with  his emphasis  on the
 peril of private conversation with the master of Orthanc.               
   In this version a new  time-scheme had  entered, as  is seen  from the
 story of the drowning of Isengard:                                      

                                 
                                                                          
 '...   They   calmly   settled   down   to   carry   out   a   plan  that
 Treebeard   had  made   in  his   old  head   all  along:   they  drowned
 Isengard.  Day  was  dawning  by  that   time.  They   set  a   watch  on
 the tower,  and  the  rest  just  faded  away  in  the grey  light. Merry
 and  I  were  left  alone  most  of  that   day,  wandering   and  prying
 about.   The   Ents   went   north   up  the   valley.  They   dug  great
 trenches  under  the  shadow  of  the  Huorns,   and  made   great  pools
 and  dams,  and  when  all  was  ready,   last  night,   about  midnight,
 they  poured in  all  the  Isen,  and  every  other  stream   they  could
 tap, through a gap by the north-gate, down into the ring....'             
  'Yes,  we  saw  the  great  vapour  from  the  south  this   morning  as
 we rode from Helm's Deep,' said Aragorn....                               
  'By  morning  there  was  a  fog  about  a  mile  thick,'   said  Merry.
 '...  Treebeard  stopped  the  inflow  some  hours  ago,  and   sent  the
 stream  back  into  its  old  course.  Look, the  water is  sinking again
 already.   There   must  be   some  outlets   from  the   caverns  under-
 neath.   But   Gandalf   came   before   the   drowning  began.   He  may
 have  guessed  or  been  told  by  Treebeard  what  was  afoot,   but  he
 did   not   see   it   happen.   When   he   arrived   the   digging  and
 damming   was   not   quite   finished,   but   old  Treebeard   had  re-
 turned,  and  was  resting.  He   was  only   about  fifty   yards  away,
 soothing  his  arrow-smarts   by  pulling   down  a   bit  more   of  the
 southern wall in a leisurely fashion....'                                 
                                                                          
  This  is  still  not quite  the final  time-scheme for  the story  of the
 destruction of Isengard  (see pp.  5 -  6, $$  III-IV), because  the party
 from Helm's  Deep still  reached Isengard  in a  single day  (2 February);
 so  here  Pippin  tells that  it was  'last night'  (1 February)  that the
 drowning  began,  and  Aragorn  says that  they had  seen the  great cloud
 of steam as they rode up from Helm's Deep 'this morning'.                 
  All  the  last  part  of  what  would  become  the  chapter  'Flotsam and
 Jetsam'  was  discarded  from   this  manuscript   and  replaced   by  new
 pages, in which the text of TT (pp. 174 - 7, describing  the day  spent by
 Merry  and  Pippin  alone  while the  Ents prepared  the diversion  of the
 Isen,  Gandalf's  coming,  and  the  filling  of the  Ring of  Isengard by
 moonlight)  was  reached  save  for the  choice of  a different  word here
 and there. But the time-scheme of  the rejected  pages was  still present,
 with  the  extra  day still  not inserted  and the  time during  which the
 waters  of  Isen  flowed into  the Ring  correspondingly shorter.(20) On this
 account the last part of the hobbits' story still differs from that in TT,
 and Merry ends thus:                                                      
                                                                          
 '... By morning there was a fog about  a mile  high, but  it was           
 beginning to rise and sail away out of the valley. And the lake           

                                
                                                                          
  was  overflowing,  too,  and  pouring  out   through  the   ruined  gate,
  bringing  masses  of  wreckage  and  jamming  it   near  the   outlet  of
  the  old  tunnel.  Then  the  Ents  stopped  the  inflow,  and  sent  the
  Isen  back  into  its  old  course.  Since  then   the  water   has  been
  sinking  again.  There  must   be  outlets   somewhere  from   the  caves
  underneath,  or  else  they  are  not  all  filled up  yet. There  is not
  much  more  to  tell.  Our  part,  Pippin's  and  mine, was  chiefly that
  of   onlookers:   rather  frightened   at  times.   We  were   all  alone
  while  the  drowning  was  going  on,  and   we  had   one  or   two  bad
  moments.  Some  terrified  wolves   were  driven   from  their   dens  by
  the  flood,  and  came  howling  out.  We  fled,  but  they   passed  by.
  And  every  now  and  then  some  stray  orc  would   bolt  out   of  the
  shadows   and   run   shrieking   off,  slashing   and  gnashing   as  he
  went.  The  Huorns  were  waiting.   There  were   many  of   them  still
  in  the  valley  until  the  day  came.  I  don't  know  where  they have
  all  gone.  It  seems  very  quiet  now  after  such  a  night.  I  could
  sleep.'                                                                  
                                                                          
     But  the  coming  of  Wormtongue  is  now  placed  according   to  the
  direction  on  the  draft  text  ('Wormtongue  must come  after Gandalf',
  p. 55): he came 'early this morning', and the story of his arrival is now
  much  as  in  TT,  though  briefer.  Aragorn's  curiosity  about  tobacco
  from  the  Southfarthing  turning up  in Isengard  appears (see  note 8),
  and Pippin  reports the  same date  on the  barrels as  in TT: 'the 1417
  crop'.                                                                   
     After 'it is not a very cheerful sight', with which the  later chapter
  'Flotsam and  Jetsam' ends,  this text  goes straight  on to  'They passed
  through the ruined  tunnel', with  which 'The  Voice of  Saruman' begins.

                           NOTES.                                   
                                                                   
 1. Arrows no good: i.e., against Ents.                           
 2. On the North Gate of Isengard see p. 43 note 23.              
 3. He  was  still  a lodger  in Orthanc:  i.e., Gandalf  had never
    'officially' left after his enforced residence in the tower.
 4. This paragraph was enclosed in square brackets and marked with
    a query.                                                        
 5. That  ominous  dark-visaged  man: cf.  'The Story  Foreseen from
    Fangorn'  (VII.437): 'Return  to Eodoras....  News comes  at the
    feast  or  next  morning  of the  siege of  Minas Tirith  by the
    Haradwaith, brought by a dark Gondorian like Boromir.'          
 6. The time-scheme here is that described on p. 5, $ II.            
 7. In  that  version  Theoden  and Gandalf  and their  company left
    Helm's  Deep in  the morning  and reached  Isengard on  the same
    day, and  so here  in answer  to Pippin's  question (TT  p. 168)

               
                                                                       
     'What is today?'  Aragorn replies  'The second  of February  in the
     Shire-reckoning' (see p. 5, $ III). Pippin  then calculates  on his
     fingers that it was 'only a week ago' that he 'woke up in  the dark
     and  found himself  all strung-up  in an  orc-camp' (i.e.  from the
     night  of  Thursday  26  January  to  Thursday  2   February).  And
     again,  when  Pippin  asks  when  it  was  that Aragorn,  Gimli and
     Legolas 'caught a glimpse of the old villain, or so  Gandalf hints'
     (as  Gimli  said)  at  the  edge  of Fangorn  (TT p.  169), Aragorn
     replies: 'Four nights ago, the twenty-ninth.'                      
      These  dates  were  changed  on  the manuscript  to 'The  third of
     February', 'only eight days ago', and 'Five nights ago': see  p. 6,
     $ IV.                                                              
  8. In an earlier version of this Aragorn's reply (here  assembled from
     scarcely differing variants) was different:                        
        'For a spell,' said Aragorn, with a glint of  a smile.  'This is
     good leaf. I wonder if it grew in this valley. If so,  Saruman must
     have  had  some  wisdom  before  he  took  to  making  worse things
     with  greater  labour.  He had  little knowledge  of herbs,  and no
     love for growing  things, but  he had  plenty of  skilled servants.
     Nan  Gurunir  is  warm  and  sheltered  and   would  grow   a  good
     crop, if it were properly tended.'                                 
     With this cf. the passages given on pp. 37 - 9. - The  decision, or
     perception, that  the tobacco  had not  in fact  been grown  in Nan
     Gurunir,  but  that  Saruman  had  obtained  it  from   the  Shire,
     appears  in a  rider pinned  to the  first complete  manuscript, in
     which  Merry  tells  Gimli  that  it  is Longbottom-leaf,  with the
     Hornblower brandmarks on the barrels (TT p. 167).                  
  9. The finding of the hobbits' leaf-bladed knives and their sheaths at
     the site of the battle beneath Amon Hen (TT p.  17) is  absent from
     the  draft  and  the  fair  copy  manuscript  of 'The  Departure of
     Boromir' (VII.381).                                                
 10. Grishnakh  was  changed  on  the manuscript  at each  occurrence to
     Grishnak, a reversion to  the original  form (VII.409  - 10).  - On
     the back of  this page  is a  reference that  shows it  was written
     during or more probably after June 1942.                           
 11. This is the reverse of what  Merry says  in TT  (p. 170):  'I think
     they are Ents that have become almost like trees, at least  to look
     at.'                                                               
 12. Merry was  a day  out: the  march of  the Ents  on Isengard  was in
     the  evening  of  31 January,  and Aragorn,  Gimli and  Legolas had
     reached Eodoras early that morning (see pp. 3 - 4).                
 13. The death of Theodred in the First Battle of the  Fords of  Isen on
     25 January (see p. 22 note 3).                                     
 14. Westfold: see p. 21.                                               
 15. Ornomi: in  the underlying  pencilled text  the name  Galbedirs can
     be read. At the earlier occurrence in this draft (p.  50) Galbedirs

                     
                                                                      
      was  changed  first to  Lamorni and  then to  Ornomar -  all these
      names having the same meaning.                                   
  16. Erkenwald     of     Westfold:    see     p.    24     note    22.
  17. us Merry says  that 'by  morning there  was a  fog a  mile thick',
      Aragorn says 'we could see the great vapour from  the south  as we
      rode towards the Fords'  (i.e. as  the host  rode from  Eodoras on
      1  February),  and  my  father wrote  in the  margin of  the text:
      'Drowning must not begin until night of Hornburg battle'.        
  18. In the first complete manuscript this becomes: ' "Don't  be hasty"
      is his motto, and also that saying Sam says he picked up  from the
      Elves:  he  was  fond  of  whispering  it to  me when  Gandalf was
      peppery: "Do not meddle in the affairs of  wizards ..." '  For its
      original  appearance  see  'Three is  Company', FR  p. 93.  In TT
      (p. 196) Merry quotes it to Pippin a  propos Pippin's  interest in
      the palantir.                                                    
  19. Cf.  'Helm's  Deep'  in  TT (p.  134): 'Some  say also  that Worm-
      tongue  was  seen  earlier,  going  northward  with  a  company of
      Orcs.'  But  in  the  present  passage in  TT (p.  178) Wormtongue
      arrived alone.                                                   
  20. In  the  time-scheme  followed  here  it  lasted from  midnight on
      1 February till the morning of 2 February; in  the final  story it
      lasted till the night of 2 February (TT p. 177: 'The  Ents stopped
      the inflow in the night'), = 4 March.                            

                                    V.                                   
                           THE VOICE OF SARUMAN.                         
                                                                        
    Book III Chapter 10 'The Voice of Saruman' in The Two Towers is in
 ; the first completed manuscript simply the further extension of Chapter
 XXX (see  p. 47).  The opening  of this  part of  the narrative  is here
 almost  as in  the final  form (see  note 8),  but the  conversation with
 Gandalf is much briefer; after Merry's 'Still, we feel less ill-disposed
 towards Saruman than we did' it continues:                              
                                                                        
   'Indeed!' said Gandalf. 'Well, I am going to pay him a
 farewell visit. Perhaps you would like to come?'
   'I should,' said Gimli. 'I should like to see him, and learn if he
 really looks like you.'
   'You may not see him close enough for that,' laughed
 Gandalf. '[He has long been a shy bird, and late events may not
 have >] He may be shy of showing himself. But I have had all
 the Ents removed from sight, so perhaps we shall persuade him.'
   They came now to the foot of Orthanc.
                                                                        
  ,. In TT Gandalf's last remarks were developed to: 'And how will you
  learn that, Master Dwarf? Saruman could look like me in your eyes, if
  it suited his purpose with you. And are you yet wise enough to detect
 , all his counterfeits? Well, we shall see, perhaps. He may be. shy of
               showing himself before many different eyes together....'
        The description of Orthanc in this text at first ran like this:
                                                                        
 ".  A  few  scorings,  and   small  sharp   splinters  near   the  base,
 were  all  the  marks  it  showed  of  the  fury  of  the  Ents.  In the
 middle  from  two  sides,  north  and  south,   long  flights   of  broad
 stairs,  built  of  some other  stone, dark  red in  hue, climbed  up to
 the great  chasm  in  the  crown  of  the  rock.  There  they  met,  and
 there  was  a   narrow  platform   beneath  the   centre  of   the  great
 arch  that   spanned  the   cleft;  from   it  stairs   branched  again,
 ranning  up  west  and  east  to  dark  doors  on  either  side,  opening
 in the shadow of the arch's feet.                                       
                                                                        
   This is the general conception described in version 'D' of the passage
      'The Road to Isengard' (p. 32), and precisely illustrated in the

                                      
                                                                             
 drawing 'Orthanc (3)' reproduced on p. 33. But the text just given was,      
 replaced at the time of writing by the following:                            
                                                                             
 ...  the  fury  of  the  Ents.  On two  sides, west  and east,  long flights
 of  broad   stairs,  cut   in  the   black  stone   by  some   unknown  art,
 climbed  up  to  the  feet  of  the  vast  arch  that  spanned the  chasm in
 the  hill.  At  the  head  of  each  stair was  a great  door, and  above it
 a window opening upon a balcony with parapet of stone.                       
                                                                             
  This  is  the  rather  simpler  conception   illustrated  in   the  drawing
 'Orthanc  (4)'  reproduced  on p.  33. At  a later  stage this  was rejected
 and  replaced  on a  slip inserted  into the  manuscript by  the description
 in  TT,  where  of  course  the  conception  of  Orthanc  had  been  totally
 changed (pp. 33 - 5, and the drawing reproduced on p. 34).                   
  The   description  of   Orthanc  was   followed  immediately   by  'Gandalf
 led  the  way  up  the  western  stair.  With  him  went Theoden  and Eomer,
 and the five  companions.' There  is thus  no discussion  here of  who shall
 go up, or how close they shall stand.                                        
  From  this  point  initial drafting  (inked over  very faint  pencil, which
 is effectively illegible) exists for  the interview  with Saruman,  and this
 was  pretty  closely  followed  in  the  first  completed  manuscript. Saru-
 man's voice was at this stage differently described, and  this was  at first
 repeated   in   the   manuscript:   The   window   closed.    They   waited.
 Suddenly  another   voice  spoke,   low,  melodious,   and  yet   it  seemed
 unpleasant  [>  unpleasing:  its  tone  was  scornful).'(1) This  was changed,
 probably at  once, to:  'low, melodious,  and persuasive;  yet now  its tone
 was of one who, in spite of a gentle nature, is aggrieved.' All else that is
 said of that voice in TT (p.  183) is  here absent;  and the  description of
 Saruman  is  briefer:  'His  face  was  long  with a  high forehead;  he had
 deep  darkling  eyes;  his  hair   and  beard   were  white,   smudged  with
 darker strands. "Like and unlike", muttered Gimli.'                          
  With  the  opening  of  the  conversation  at this  stage (cited  here from
 the  completed  manuscript  rather  than  from  the  draft  text)   cf.  the
 original outline on pp. 47 - 8.                                              
                                                                             
  'Well?'  said  Saruman. 'You  have a  voice of  brass, Gandalf.             
 You  disturb  my  repose.  You  have  come  to  my  private door             
 without leave. What is your excuse?'                                        
  'Without  leave?'  said  Gandalf.  'I  had  the  leave  of such             
 gatekeepers as I found. But am I not  a lodger  in this  inn? My             
 host  at  least  has  never shown  me the  door, since  he first             
 admitted me!'                                                                
  'Guests that leave by the roof have no claim to re-enter by the             
 door at their will,' said Saruman.                                           

                                                               
                                                                        
    'Guests  that  are  penned  on  the  house-top  against   their  will
 have   a   right   to   knock   and  ask   for  an   apology,'  answered
 Gandalf.(2) 'What have you to say, now?'                                   
    'Nothing.  Certainly  not  in  your  present  company.  In  any  case
 I have little to add to my words at our last meeting.'                  
    'Have you nothing to withdraw?'                                      
    Saruman   paused.   'Withdraw?'   he   said   slowly.   'If   in   my
 eagerness   and   disappointment   I   said   anything   unfriendly   to
 yourself,   consider   it   withdrawn.  I   should  probably   have  put
 matters  right   long  ago.   You  were   not  friendly   yourself,  and
 persisted   in   misunderstanding   me  and   my  intentions,   or  pre-
 tending  to do  so. But  I repeat:  I bore  you no  ill-will personally;
 and  even  now,  when   your  -   your  associates   have  done   me  so
 much  injury,  I  should  be  ready  to  forgive   you,  if   you  would
 .  dissociate  yourself from  such people.  I have  for the  moment less
 power  to  help  you  than  I  had;  but  I still  think you  would find
 my  friendship  more  profitable  in  the  end   than  theirs.   We  are
 after  all  both  members  of  an  ancient  and  noble   profession:  we
 should  understand  one  another.   If  you   really  wish   to  consult
 me, I am willing to receive you. Will you come up?'                     
                                                                        
   This passage, whose original  germ is  seen in  the outlines  given in
 VII.212,  436,  was  developed  into  that  in TT  pp. 186-7.  The draft
 text (3) goes on  at once  to 'Gandalf  laughed. "Understand  one another?
 ..."', and there is nothing said about the effect of Saruman's  words on
 the  bystanders;  but  in  the  manuscript   his  speech   was  changed,
 apparently at once, to a form  somewhat nearer  to that  in TT  (with 'a
 high and ancient order' for 'an ancient and noble profession'), and this
 was  followed  by  the  passage  (TT  p.  187)  in  which  the  voice of
 Saruman 'seemed like the gentle remonstrance  of a  kindly king  with an
 errant  but  beloved minister'.  But here  the words  'So great  was the
 power that  Saruman exerted  in this  last effort  that none  that stood
 within hearing were unmoved' are absent; for of  all that  precedes this
 in TT', his  long opening  trial of  Theoden's mind  and will,  with the
 interventions of  Gimli and  Eomer, there  is no  hint or  suggestion in
 either draft or finished  text. The  interview is  conducted exclusively
 between the two wizards.                                                
                                                                        
   For  the  remainder  of  the  dialogue  between them  I give  here the
 original draft: (4)                                                     
                                                                        
   Gandalf   laughed.   'Understand   one   another?   I   don't   know.
 But  I  understand  you  at  any  rate,  Saruman -  well enough.  No! I
 do  not  think  I  will  come up.  You have  an excellent  adviser with
 you,   adequate   for   your   understanding.   Wormtongue   has   cun-

                                                      
                                                                  
 ning  enough  for  two.  But  it  had  occurred  to  me  that since
 Isengard  is rather  a ramshackle  place, rather  old-fashioned and
 in need of renovation and alteration, you might like to leave  - to
 take a holiday, say. If so, will you not come down?'              
   A  quick  cunning  look  passed  over  Saruman's face;  before he
 could  conceal  it,  they  had  a  glimpse  of  mingled   fear  and
 relief/hope.  cunning.  They  saw through  the mask  the face  of a
 trapped man, that feared both to stay and to  leave his  refuge. He
 hesitated.  'To  be  torn by  the  savage  wood-demons?'  he  said.
 'No, no.'                                                         
   '0 do not fear for your skin,' said  Gandalf. 'I  do not  wish to
 kill you -  as you  would know,  if you  really understood  me. And
 no one will hurt you, if I say no. I am giving  you a  last chance.
 You can leave Orthanc - free, if you choose.'                     
   'Hm,'  said  Saruman.  'That  sounds  well.  More  like  the  old
 Gandalf.  But  why  should  I  wish  to  leave  Orthanc?  And  what
 precisely is "free"?'                                             
   'The  reasons  for leaving  lie all  around,' said  Gandalf. 'And
 free means not a prisoner.  But you  will surrender  to me  the key
 of  Orthanc  -  and  your staff:  pledges for  your conduct.  To be
 returned, if I think fit, later.'                                 
   Saruman's  face  was  for  a  moment  clouded  with  anger.  Then
 he laughed. 'Later!' he said. 'Yes -  when you  also have  the keys
 of Baraddur,  I suppose;  and the  crowns of  seven kings,  and the
 staffs of the five wizards,(5) and have purchased yourself a  pair of
 boots  many  sizes  larger  than  those  you  have  now.  A  modest
 plan. But I must beg  leave to  be excused  from assisting.  Let us
 end  this  chatter.  If you  wish to  deal with  me, deal  with me!
 Speak  sense  -  and  do  not come  here with  a horde  of savages,
 and these boorish  men, and  foolish children  that dangle  at your
 tail.'                                                            
   He  left  the  balcony.  He  had  hardly  turned  away,   when  a
 heavy  thing  came  hurtling down  from above.  It glanced  off the
 parapet,  narrowly  missed  Gandalf,  and splintered  [struck out:
 into fragments] on the  rock beside  the stair.  It seemed  to have
 been a large ball of dark shining crystal.                        
   'The   treacherous   rogue,'   cried   Eomer,  but   Gandalf  was
 unmoved.  'Not  Saruman  this  time,'  he  said.  'It  came  from a
 window  above.  That  was   a  parting   shot  from   Master  Worm-
 tongue,  I  fancy. I  caught the  flash of  a hand.  And ill-aimed.
 Which  do you  think it  was meant  for, me  or Saruman?'  'I think
 maybe  the  aim  was  ill  because he  could not  make up  his mind

 
                                                                          
 which  he  hated  most'  (?  said   Gimli).  'I   think  so   too,'  said
 Gandalf.  'There  will   be  pleasant   words  in   the  Tower   when  we
 are gone.'                                                                 
  'And  we  had  better  go  quickly  out  of  stone's  throw  at  least,'
 said Eomer.                                                               
  'It  is  plain  to  me  that  Saruman   has  not   yet  given   up  hope
 [added:  in  his  own  devices],'  said  Gandalf.  'Well,  he  must nurse
 his hope in Orthanc.'                                                     
                                                                          
  Here this draft stops, the ending being very ragged.  It is  notable that
 in  this  text  there is  no mention  of Gandalf's  summons to  Saruman to
 return to the balcony  when he  turned away,  and so  the breaking  of his
 staff  does  not  appear (in  the original  sketches of  the scene  in the
 outlines  referred  to  above,  where  Saruman  was  not  in   his  tower,
 Gandalf took his staff from him and broke it with his hands).             
  Since there is no evidence  at all  that the  conception of  the palantir
 had arisen at any earlier stage or in  any earlier  writing, this  must be
 presumed  to  be  its first  appearance, but  the draft  does not  make it
 dear  whether  my  father  perceived  its  nature  at  the  moment  of its
 introduction  as  Wormtongue's  missile  -  Gandalf does  not say  what he
 thought  of  it,  nor  hint that  it might  be a  device of  importance to
 Saruman.  In  his  letter  to  W.  H.  Auden  of  7  June  1955  my father
 said  (immediately  following  the  passage  from  that  letter  cited  at
 the  beginning  of  The  Return  of the  Shadow): 'I  knew nothing  of the
 Palantiri,  though  the  moment  the  Orthanc-stone  was  cast   from  the
 window,  I recognized  it, and  knew the  meaning of  the 'rhyme  of lore'
 that  had  been  running  in  my mind:  seven stars  and seven  stones and
 one tuhite tree.'(7) On the other hand, in this initial version of the scene
 he saw the ball of crystal as shattered by  the impact,  and still  in the
 finished  manuscript  immediately  following  this  draft  he   wrote  that
 the ball 'splintered  on the  rock beside  the stair.  It seemed  from the
 fragments', before breaking off at this  point and  writing that  it smote
 the stair, and that it was the stair that cracked and splintered while the
 globe  was  unharmed.  What further  significance for  the story  could it
 have had if it were immediately destroyed?                                
                                                                          
  The  completed  text  develops  the  dialogue  of  Gandalf   and  Saruman
 a good  way  towards  the  form  in  TT, though  much still  remains from
 the  original  draft.  But  there now  enters, almost  in the  final form,
 Gandalf's  summons  to  Saruman  to  come  back,  his final  admonition to
 him,  and the  breaking of  his staff.  The crystal  ball now  rolled down
 the steps, and it was 'dark but shining with a heart of fire'. In reply to
 Aragorn's  suggestion  that  Wormtongue  could  not   make  up   his  mind
 whom he  hated most  Gandalf says:  'Yes, that  may be  so. There  will be
 some  debate in  the Tower,  when we  are gone!  We will  take the  ball. I

                                   
                                                                        
 fancy that  it is  not a  thing that  Saruman would  have chosen  to cast
 away.'                                                                  
  Pippin's running  down the  stair to  pick up  the globe,  and Gandalf's
 hasty taking of it and wrapping it in the folds of his cloak,  were later
 additions (see p. 79 note 12). Yet that the globe was to be  important is
 now plain. The scene ends thus in this version:                         
                                                                        
  'Yet  there  may  be  other  things to  cast,' said  Gimli. 'If  that is
 the end of the debate, let us go out of stone's throw, at least.'       
  'It  is  the  end,'  said  Gandalf.  'I  must  find  Treebeard  and tell
 him how things have gone.'                                              
  'He  will  have  guessed,  surely?'  said   Merry.  'Were   they  likely
 to end any other way?'                                                  
  'Not  likely,'  answered  Gandalf,  'But  I  had  reasons   for  trying.
 I  do  not  wish  for  mastery.  Saruman  has been  given a  last choice,
 and  a  fair  one.  He  has  chosen  to  withhold  Orthanc at  least from
 us,  for  that  is his  last asset.  He knows  that we  have no  power to
 destroy  it  from  without,  or  to  enter  it against  his will;  yet it
 might  have  been  useful  to  us.  But  things  have  not   gone  badly.
 Set  a  thief  to  hinder  a thief!  [Struck out:  And malice  blinds the
 wits.]  I  fancy  that,  if  we  could  have  come  in,  we  should  have
 found   few   treasures  in   Orthanc  more   precious  than   the  thing
 which the fool Wormtongue tossed down to us!'                           
  A  shrill  shriek,  suddenly  cut   off,  came   from  an   open  window
 high above. 'I thought so,' said Gandalf. 'Now let us go! '             
                                                                        
  The end of the  chapter in  TT, the  meeting of  Legolas and  Gimli with
 Treebeard, his  parting from  Merry and  Pippin, and  the verse  in which
 the Hobbits are entered into 'the Long Lists', is  present in  this first
 completed text all but word for word, save  only at  the very  end, where
 his last words are brief:                                               
                                                                        
  'Leave  it  to  Ents,'  said  Treebeard.  'Until  seven times  the years
 in  which  he  tormented   us  have   passed,  we   shall  not   tire  of
 watching over him.'(8)                                                  
                                                                        
                                   NOTES.                                
                                                                        
 1.  The draft has: 'low, rather  melodious, and  yet unpleasant:  it spoke
   contemptuously.'                                                      
 2.  Though  this  exchange  was  subsequently  lost,  the   reference  to
   Gandalf's   manner   of   departure   from   Orthanc  on   the  previous
   occasion was  brought in  at a  later point  (TT p.  187): 'When  last I
   visited  you,  you were  the jailor  of Mordor,  and there  I was  to be

               
                                                                        
     sent. Nay, the guest who has escaped from the roof will  think twice
     before he comes back in by the door.'                               
  3. The draft of Saruman's speech is very close to  that cited  from the
     completed   manuscript,   but  after   'We  should   understand  one
     another' Saruman says 'Building not breaking is our work.'          
  4. Not strictly the original draft, since as already noted it  is inked
     over a faint and illegible pencilled text.                          
  5. The first reference to the Five Wizards.                            
  6. In  drafting  for  the  end  of  the  chapter  Gandalf's   reply  to
     Treebeard's  'So  Saruman  would  not  leave?  I  did  not  think he
     would' (TT p. 192) runs thus: 'No, he is still nursing what  hope he
     has. He is of course pretending that he loves me  and would  help me
     (if I were reasonable - which means if I would  serve him,  and help
     him to  power without  [?bounds]). But  he is  determined to  wait -
     sitting among the ruins of his old plans to see what comes.  In that
     mood, and  with the  Key of  Orthanc and  his staff  he must  not be
     allowed to escape.'                                                 
  7. The need that the  palantir would  come to  fulfil had  already been
     felt, as is seen from Aragorn's (rejected) remarks on p. 50: 'And we
     should do best never to mention it [the Ring] aloud:  I do  not know
     what  powers  Saruman  in  his  tower  may have,  nor what  means of
     communication with the East there may be.'                         
  8. The  meeting of  Treebeard with  Legolas and  Gimli and  his parting
     from  Merry  and  Pippin  was very  largely achieved  in preliminary
     drafting, but was placed at a different point, since it begins: 'The
     afternoon was half gone  and the  sun going  behind the  western arm
     of  the  valley  when  Gandalf  and  the  King  returned.  With them
     came  Treebeard. Gimli  and Legolas  gazed at  him in  wonder. "Here
     are  my  companions that  I have  spoken of  to you,"  said Gandalf.
     The old  Ent looked  at them  long and  searchingly', &c.  This was
     how the part of the narrative afterwards constituting 'The  Voice of
     Saruman' originally began.                                          

                                   VI.                                 
                                                                      
                              THE PALANTIR.                            
                                                                      
 Drafts and  outlines for  the opening  of this  chapter show  my father
 very  uncertain  of  the immediate  course of  events when  the company
 left Isengard. These pages are extremely difficult to interpret  and to
 place in sequence, but I take the one that I give now to be  that first
 written, since it treats as the actual event  what would  become merely
 the  abandoned  plan  ('When  we  came,  we meant  to go  straight from
 Isengard  back  to  the  king's house  at Edoras  over the  plains', TT
 p. 194).                                                              
                                                                      
  The   sun   was   sinking  behind   the  long   western  arm   of  the
 mountains   when   Gandalf   and   his   companions,   and   the   King
 with his riders, set out from Isengard.                               
  Ents  in  a  solemn row  stood like  statues at  the gate,  with their
 long  arms  uplifted;  but  they  made  no  sound.  Merry   and  Pippin
 looked  back  as  they  passed  down  hill  and  turned  into  the road
 that led to  the bridge.(1) Sunlight was  shining in  the sky,  but long
 shadows  reached  out  over  Isengard.  Treebeard  stood  there  still,
 like  a  dark tree  in the  shade; the  other Ents  were gone,  back to
 the sources of the stream.                                            
  By  Gandalf's  advice  the  company  crossed   the  bridge   and  then
 struck   away   from   the   river,   southward   and    east,   making
 straight  across  the  rolling  plains  of  Rohan  back  to  Eodoras: a
 journey  of  some  forty-eight  leagues.(2) They were  to   ride  more
 with  secrecy  than  speed,  by  dusk  and night,  hoping to  reach the
 king's  house  by  nightfall  of  the  second  day.  By that  time many
 of  the  king's  men  who  had  fought  at  the  Fords  and  at  Helm's
 Deep would be gathering at Eodoras.                                   
  'We  have  gained  the  first  victory,' said  Gandalf, 'yet  that has
 some  danger.   There  was   a  bond   between  Isengard   and  Mordor.
 Of  what  sort  and  how  they   exchanged  their   news  I   have  not
 discovered.  But  the  eyes of  the Dark  Tower will  look now  in this
 direction, I think.                                                   
  'There  is  no  one  of  this  company,  I  think,  whose   name  (and
 deeds)  is  not  noted  now  in  the  dark  mind  of Sauron.  We should
 walk  in  shadow,  if  we  walk  abroad at  all -  until we  are ready.
 Therefore,  though  it  may  add  to the  miles, I  counsel you  go now

                  
                                                                         
 by  night,  and  go  south  so that  day does  not find  us in  the open
 plain.  After  that  we  may  ride   with  many   men,  or   ride  maybe
 [??back   to   the]   Deeping   Coomb   that   would   be    better   by
 ways  among   the  foothills   of  your   own  mountains   Theoden,  and
 come   thus   down   to   Eodoras...   long  ravines   about  Dunharrow.
                                                                         
  The last few lines are  a ragged  scrawl, across  which my  father wrote
 (at  the  same  time)  'They  meet Huorns  returning'. Since  against the
 statement that 'they passed down hill and turned into  the road  that led
 to  the  bridge'  he  noted  in  the margin  'No they  rode south  to the
 Fords',  and  against  'the company  crossed the  bridge and  then struck
 away from the river' he wrote 'No, they go south', it seems clear that it
 was as he was writing this first draft  of the  opening that  he realised
 that  the company  did not  in fact  make straight  for Eodoras  but went
 first to Helm's Deep - and therefore abandoned this text.(3)             
  In  a  rejected  speech  of  Aragorn's  (p.  67  note  7)  there  was  a
 suggestion that he had given  some thought  to the  matter, but  there is
 here the first clear expression  of the  idea that  there must  have been
 some  means  by  which  news  was   rapidly  exchanged   between  Orthanc
 and Barad-dur. Why Gandalf was  so certain  of this  is not  made plain,(4)
 and one might wonder whether  the idea  did not  arise from  the palantir
 rather than the other way about.                                         
  On  the reverse  of this  page is  an outline  that one  would naturally
 suppose to  have been  written continuously  with the  text on  the other
 side.  That it  followed the  abandoned narrative  draft is  obvious from
 the  fact  that  here  the  company  did  not  head straight  for Eodoras
 but  rode  down  from  Isengard  to  the  Fords.  The  writing   is  here
 exceptionally  difficult,  not  only  extremely  rapid  but  with letters
 idiosyncratically formed.                                                
                                                                         
  This   was   the   Orthan[c]   Stone   [written   above:   Orthancstone
 Orthankstone    Orpancstan]    which    kept    watch    on    movements
 in   neighbourhood   but   its   range   was   limited   to   some   100
 leagues?(5) It will help to keep watch on Orthanc from afar.               
  Night   comes  swiftly.   They  come   to  the   Fords  and   note  the
 river  is  failing  and  running  dry  again.(6) The starry  night.  They
 cross and pass the mounds.                                               
  They  halt  under  stars  and  see  the  great  black   shadow  passing
 between [?them] and stars. Nazgul.                                       
  Gandalf  takes  out  dark  globe  and looks  at it.  Good, he  said. It
 shows  little  by  night.  That  is  a  comfort.  All  they   could  see
 [?was]  stars  and  [?far  away]  small  batlike  shapes   wheeling.  At
 the  edge  was  a  river in  the moon.  The moon  is already  visible in
 Osgiliath said Gandalf. That seems the edge of sight.(7)                 

   As  they  draw  near   Helm's  Deep   a  shadow   comes  up   like  a
 mist.  Suddenly  they  hear  a  rustling  whisper  and  on  both  sides
 of  them  so  that  they  are  in  a  lane   ....  Shadows   pass  away
 northward. Huorns. Insert now page 3 of Ch.XXIX.                       
   Next  day  they  ride  with  many  men  in  the  Westfold   Vale  and
 ....  by  [?paths  winding]  among  the  mountains.  They   strike  the
 Dunharrow  ravine  on  the   second  day.   And  find   folk  streaming
 back to Eodoras. Aragorn rides with Eowyn.(8)                          
   Gandalf   looks   at  the   Dark  Crystal   on  the   terrace  before
 King's  House.  They  see  quite  clearly  Orthanc  -  Ents  [?moving]
 .....  water  all  very  [?small]  and  clear.  Horsemen   riding  over
 plain  from  west  and  north.  Strange  [?  figures of  various kind].
 And   from  Minas   Tirith.  It   only  shows   lights  and   men  [?no
 country].                                                              
                                                                       
   The reference to 'page 3 of Chapter XXIX' is  to the  first completed
 version  of  'The  Road  to  Isengard',  where  the description  of the
 departure  of  the  Huorn  wood  from  the  Deeping  Coomb  was  placed
 before Theoden and  Gandalf and  their company  left for  Isengard, and
 so before they passed through the wood (p.  27). It  is clear  from the
 passage of the Huorns at this point in the story  that the  final time-
 scheme had not yet been reached (see pp. 5 - 6, $$ III-IV): Theoden
 and  Gandalf  and  their  company  still  reached  Isengard on  the day
 (2 February) following the  Battle of  the Hornburg  and did  not spend
 the   night   of  2   February  encamped   below  Nan   Gurunir  (where
 in  TT, p.  158, they  heard the  Huorns passing,  and after  which the
 passage  about  the  departure  of  the  wood  from the  Deeping Coomb,
 and the Death Down, finally found its place).                          
   In this outline there is nothing to suggest that the 'dark globe' was
 the   means   of   communication  between   Orthanc  and   Barad-dur  -
 indeed, rather the reverse, since when Gandalf looks into  it somewhere
 near the Fords of Isen the range of  its sight  does not  extend beyond
 Osgiliath (although  his words  'It shows  little by  night. That  is a
 comfort' suggest that he had feared that it might make them  visible to
 a hostile eye). On  the other  hand, in  the preceding  narrative draft
 Gandalf  is  seen  to  be  much  concerned with  that question  of com-
 munication:  'There  was  a  bond  between  Isengard  and   Mordor.  Of
 what sort... I have not discovered.' It seems hard to believe that even
 though  Gandalf had  not yet  put two  and two  together my  father had
 failed to do  so. A  possible explanation  is that  when he  wrote this
 outline  he  did  indeed  already  know  the  significance of  the Dark
 Crystal, but that Gandalf had not yet fathomed the  full extent  of its
 range and powers, or did not yet know how to  make use  of them.  Or it
 may be truer to say simply  that in  these notes  we see  the formative
 moment in which the significance of the Seeing Stone  was at  the point

                         
                                                                         
 of emergence: the fateful 'device' - devised long before  - which  in the
 final  story  would  prove  to have  been of  vast though  hidden import-
 ance in the War of the Ring.(9)                                          
  A little scribbled note in isolation may be cited here:                 
                                                                         
 The black-red ball shows movements. They see the lines  of war           
 advancing. [? Ships are seen] and Theoden's men in Helm's Deep           
 and assembling in Rohan.                                                 
                                                                         
 The  context  of  this  is altogether  obscure: for  who is  seeing these
 things?                                                                  
  Another  text  -  a  brief and  tantalising set  of notes  scrawled down
 very rapidly in faint soft pencil, vestiges of fugitive thoughts  - shows
 further debate  on the  meaning of  the Orthanc-stone.  I cannot  see any
 clear indication of where it would be placed in the narrative, or even of
 where it stands in the sequence of these  preliminary papers;(10) but from
 various points it seems to have preceded the text that follows it here.
                                                                         
  I  said  that  Isengard  was  overthrown,  and   the  Stone   was  going
 on  a  journey,  said  Gandalf.  And  that  I  would  [look  o]  speak to
 it  again  later  when  I  could,  but  [?at  the]  moment  I  was  in  a
 hurry.                                                                   
 auctor   (No   I   think   the  dark   globe  to   be  in   contact  with
 Mordor is too like the rings)                                            
  Gandalf  discovers  that  the  Orthanc-stone  is  a  far-seer.   But  he
 could  not  make  out  [how]  to  use  it.   It  seemed   capricious.  It
 seems  still  to  be  looking  in the  directions in  which it  was last
 used, he said.                                                           
  Hence,  vision  of  the  [added:  7]   Nazgul  above   the  battlements.
 He was looking towards Mordor.                                           
  Can  one  see  back.  Possibly  said  Gandalf.  It  is  perilous  but  I
 have a mind to use it.                                                   
  He stands back. He has been seen [? bending over it].?                  
  No,  he  said,  this  is  an  ancient  stone  set  in  an  upper chamber
 of  the  tower  long  long  ago  before  the  Dark  Tower was  strong. It
 was   used   by   the   [?wardens]   of  Gondor.   One  also   must  have
 been   in   the   Hornburg,   and   in   Minas   Tirith,  and   in  Minas
 Morghul, and in Osgiliath. (Five).                                       
  They   saw   the   Hornburg.   They   saw   Minas   Tirith.   They   saw
 Nazgul   above  the   battlements  of   Osgiliath.  So   Saruman  learned
 some of his news he said.                                                
                                                                         
  The bracketing of the words 'No I think the dark globe to be in         
 contact with Mordor is too like the rings' and the marginal auctor       
 (meaning  that  this  was  my  father's  thought,  not   Gandalf's)  were

  added  in  ink.  The  implication of  these words  must be  that Gandalf,
  in  the  opening  sentences of  this text,  was speaking  to a  person in
  Mordor: and  if that  person was  none other  than Sauron  himself, there
  is a delightful  glimpse of  Gandalf telling  the Dark  Lord that  he was
  busy. -  That here  only five  of the  Seeing Stones  are named  (given a
  habitation) does not mean of course that  at this  stage there  were only
  five,  but  that  these  were  the  five Stones  of the  southern kingdom
  (Gondor).   In  subsequent   enumerations  there   were five   Stones  in
  Gondor, where in LR there were four.                                     
    Lastly, there is a brief outline, ending in a ragged scrawl, that seems
  to have preceded the first continuous drafting of  the chapter  in formed
  narrative.                                                               
                                                                          
    Conversation    with    Saruman    begins    about   3.15    and   ends
  about   4.30   (that   is   about   sunset).   Dark  comes   about  5.30.
  Gandalf  leads  them  south  in  the  dark  -   because  now   they  must
  be   more   secret   than   ever.   (Wonders   what  the   connexion  was
  between Saruman and Sauron.)                                             
    They  pass   out  of   Nan  Gurunir   at  about   9  p.m.   Camp  under
  shadow  of  the  last  western  hill.  Dolbaran. They  will ride  fast on
  morrow.   Two   men   are   sent  ahead   to  warn   men  that   king  is
  returning   to  Helm's   Deep  and   that  a   strong  force   should  be
  ready  to  ride  with  him.  No  men  more  than  two  or  three  are  to
  ride  openly  on  the  plain.  The  king  will   go  by   mountain  paths
  to Dunharrow.                                                            
    Then episode of Pippin and Stone.                                      
    Gandalf   says   this   is   how   Saruman   fell;   He   studied  such
  matters.   The   old   far-seers  of   the  Men   of  Numenor   who  made
  Amon    Hen    and    Amon    Lhaw    One    in    Hornburg,   Osgiliath,
  Minas     Tirith,     Minas     Morghul,    Isengard     [Angrenost    >]
  Angost.(11) That is how Saruman   got   news   -   though   Hornburg
  and  Minas  Tirith  were  'dark',  their  balls  lost  or  destroyed. But
  he tried to peep at Barad-dur and got caught.                            
    Nazgul.                                                                
  Feb.  4  They  ride  to  Fords  mid-morning  (11  a.m.),  rest  an  hour,
  and   reach  Deeping   Coomb  road-fork   at  3   p.m.  Helm's   Deep  at
  about  4.  They  rest,  gather  men,  and  ride  by  hill-paths  lost  to
  sight. Hobbits are given ponies - and Gimli!                             
  Feb. 5, 6 Journey.                                                       
  Feb.   7   Dunharrow.   Joy   of   people.   Eowyn   comes   forth.   The
  King   rides   down   the   mountain   valley   with  Eowyn   and  Eomund
  [read  Eomer]  on   either  side,   Gandalf,  Legolas,   Aragorn  beside
  them. The hobbits and Gimli ...                                          
    [?Regency.) Feast. Tobacco. Messenger.                                 

                         
                                                                         
 In  the  previous  text  (p.  71)  it  is  not  actually stated  that the
 Seeing  Stones  of  Gondor  'answered'  or  corresponded one  to another,
 but  the  idea  was  at  the  moment  of  emergence, as  is seen  from my
 father's passing  doubt whether  'the dark  globe to  be in  contact with
 Mordor is too like the rings', while 'Can one see back' seems  clearly to
 refer  to reciprocal  vision between  one Stone  and another  rather than
 to vision of past time. In the present outline  this conception  is fully
 present and accepted, and with it the  central idea  that it  was through
 his  knowledge  of  these  matters  that  Saruman  was  corrupted,  being
 snared by his use of the Stone of Orthanc to look towards Barad-dur.     
  The  'episode of  Pippin and  the Stone'  has arisen  (though so  far as
 the evidence goes it had not yet been  committed to  paper in  any form);
 and the various elements were now  coming to  interlock in  a beautifully
 articulated  conception.  The  original  idea (p.  69) that  when Gandalf
 looked into the dark globe he  saw 'small  batlike shapes  wheeling' will
 be retained but become  Pippin's vision,  and the  explanation of  why it
 should be that vision and no other (cf. 'It seems still to be  looking in
 the directions in which it was last used', p.  71) will  be found  in the
 constant  intercourse  of  Saruman  and  Sauron  by  means of  the Seeing
 Stones  (itself  answering the  question of  the method  of communication
 between  Isengard  and  the  Dark  Tower),  so  that  'the  Orthanc-stone
 [became]  so  bent  towards  Barad-dur  that,  if  any  save  a  will  of
 adamant  now  looks  into it,  it will  bear his  mind and  sight swiftly
 thither' (TT p. 204).                                                    
  The  final  time-scheme  had  now  entered  (see  p.  6, $ IV): Theoden
 and  Gandalf  and  their  company  came  to  Isengard  on 3  February and
 left that evening, two nights  after the  Battle of  the Hornburg.  It is
 remarkable  that  even when  the plot  had advanced  to this  stage, with
 the 'episode of  Pippin and  the Stone',  and the  first appearance  of a
 Nazgul west of Anduin,  blacking out  the stars  (already present  in the
 outline on p. 69), Gandalf was  not impelled  to ride  on ahead  in haste
 to Minas Tirith, but is present  at the  feast in  Eodoras -  that feast,
 often  foreseen,  which  would  never in  the event  take place.  For the
 significance of the reference to tobacco here see p. 37 and note  33. But
 pencilled notes added to this outline later show  the story  of Gandalf's
 sudden  departure:  'Feb.  4  Gandalf  and  Pippin  reach  Deeping  Coomb
 before  dawn',  and  'Feb.  4 -  5 Gandalf  rides all  night and  all day
 Feb. 5 reaching Minas Tirith at sunset on Feb. 5'.                       
                                                                         
  There are no other writings extant before we  come to  a first  draft of
 the chapter -  which extends  however only  so far  as the  conclusion of
 Gandalf's words  with Pippin  after his  vision in  the Seeing  Stone (TT
 p. 199).(12) This was  written very  fast and  apparently set  down without
 any preliminary workings, but the final text of the chapter to this point
 was achieved at once in all essentials  - there  are of  course countless
 differences  in  the  expression  and  a  few  in  very  small  points of
 narrative detail, and many of these differences  survived into  the first

  completed manuscript of the chapter.(13) The chief difference from the          
  final text comes as Gandalf knelt by Pippin's body (TT p. 198): 'He          
  removed the ball and wrapped it in a cloth again. "Take this and             
  guard it, Aragorn," he said. "And do not uncover it or handle it             
  yourself, I beg." Then he took Pippin's hand and bent over his               
  face ...' Thus Gandalf hands the globe to Aragorn simply as a bearer         
  whom he can trust, in contrast to the story in TT (pp. 199 - 200),           
  where the charging of Aragorn with the Orthanc-stone takes place at a        
  different point and is given much greater significance through Ara-          
  gorn's claiming it by right. But Pippin's account of what happened to        
  him when he looked into the globe and 'he came' was achieved at once         
  in this draft.                                                               
    From this point there is very little further preliminary drafting, and     
  for almost all the rest of the chapter the earliest available text is that of
  the first completed manuscript, much of which is written over erased         
  pencil. This manuscript was later given the chapter-number XXXI,             
  and the title 'The Orthanc-stone The Palantir', this being written           
  over an erased title of which only 'The' can be read.                        
    As this manuscript was first written Gandalf in his concluding,            
  words to Pippin said a good deal more than he does in TT (p. 199).           
  Some of this was moved to his conversation with Theoden and                  
  Aragorn after he had carried Pippin back to his bed: that Pippin had         
  saved him from the dangerous blunder of using the Stone himself, and         
  of Sauron's delusion that the Stone, and the hobbit, were in Orthanc.        
  But here Gandalf goes on:                                                    
                                                                              
    'Very odd, very odd how things work out! But  I begin  now to              
  wonder a little.' He stroked his beard.  'Was this  ball really              
  thrown to slay me after all? Or to slay me if it might,  and do              
  something else if it  missed? Was  it thrown  without Saruman's              
  knowledge?  Hm!  Things  may  have  been  meant  to go  much as              
  they have gone - except that you looked in,  not me!  Hm! Well.              
  They have gone so, and not otherwise; and it is so that we have              
  to deal with.                                                                
    'But come! This must change our plans. We are  being careless              
  and leisurely.                                                               
                                                                              
    Against  the   paragraph  beginning   'Very  odd,   very  odd   how  things
  work  out!'  my  father  wrote  in  the  margin:  'No!  because   if  Saruman
  had  wished  to  warn  Mordor  of  the  ruin  of  Isengard  and  the presence
  of  Gandalf  and  hobbits  he had  only to  use Glass  in normal  fashion and
  inform  Sauron  direct.?  But he  may have  wished (a)  to kill  Gandalf, (b)
  to  get  rid  of  the  link. Sauron  may have  been pressing  him to  come to
  the  stone?'  He  evidently  decided  that  these  were  unprofitable  specu-
  lations,   and   abandoning   the   direction   Gandalf's  words   had  taken
  returned to an earlier point in his final address to Pippin.                 


                                                                              
   The  text  in   this  first   manuscript  then   (with  rewriting   of  some
 passages,  obviously  belonging  to  the same  time) all  but reaches  that of
 TT  (pp.  199  -  203)  as  far  as  Gandalf's  opening  remarks   to  Pippin
 about   the  Seeing   Stones  as   they  rode   towards  the   Deeping  Coomb.
 Only  two  matters  need   be  noted.   When  Gandalf   gives  the   Stone  to
 Aragorn  (cf.  p.  74) he  says here:  'It is  a dangerous  charge, but  I can
 trust  you  even  against  yourself',  and  Aragorn replies  only: 'I  know the
 danger. I will not uncover it,  or handle  it.' Secondly,  there is  a curious
 series  of  shifts  in  the  precise  wording of  Gandalf's remarks  about his
 failure  to  understand  immediately  the  nature  of  the  ball  thrown  down
 from  Orthanc. At  first he  said: 'I  said nothing,  because I  knew nothing.
 I  guessed  only.  I  know now.'  In the  first rewriting  of this  passage he
 said:   'I  ought   to  have   been  quicker,   but  my   mind  was   bent  on
 Saruman.  And  I  did  not  guess the  full nature  of the  stone -  not until
 now.  But  now  I   know  the   link  between   Isengard  and   Mordor,  which
 has  long  puzzled  me.'  This  was  again  rewritten at  this stage  to read:
 'And I did not guess the nature of the stone, till I saw it in his [Pippin's]
 hands.  Not  until  now  was  I  sure.'  In  further  revision of  the passage
 carried  out  much  later  it  became:  'I  did  not guess  the nature  of the
 stone, until it was too late. Only now am  I sure  of it.'  In the  final form
 (TT  p.  200)  this  was  changed  once  more: 'I  did not  at once  guess the
 nature  of the  stone. Then  I was  weary, and  as I  lay pondering  it, sleep
 overcame  me.  Now  I  know!'  There  is,   to  be   sure,  among   all  these
 formulations  no  great  difference  in  the  actual   meaning,  but   it  was
 evidently   a   detail   that  concerned   my  father:   just  how   much  did
 Gandalf  surmise  about  the  palantir  before  Pippin's   experience  brought
 certainty, and how soon?                                                      
   An  element  of  ambiguity  does  in  fact  remain  in  LR.  Already  in the
 first  manuscript  of  'The  Voice  of  Saruman'  Gandalf  had said:  'I fancy
 that,  if  we  could  have  come  in, we  should have  found few  treasures in
 Orthanc   more   precious   than   the   thing   which  the   fool  Wormtongue
 tossed  down  to  us!'  The  nature  of   Wormtongue's  missile   cannot  have
 been  fully  apparent  to  my father  himself at  that stage:  it was  in that
 manuscript,  only  a  few  lines  above,  that  he changed,  as he  wrote, the
 initial  story  of  the  globe's  having  smashed into  fragments on  the rock
 (p.  65).  But  even  when  he  had  fully  established  the  nature   of  the
 palantir  he   retained  those   words  of   Gandalf  (TT   p.  190)   at  the
 moment  when  it  bursts  upon  the  story  -  although,  as  Gandalf  said at
 Dol  Baran,  'I  did not  at once  guess the  nature of  the Stone'.  But then
 why  was  he  so  emphatic,  as  he stood  beneath the  tower, that  'we could
 have  found  few   treasures  in   Orthanc  more   precious'  -   even  before
 Wormtongue's   shriek   gave   reinforcement  to   his  opinion?   Perhaps  we
 should  suppose  simply  that  this  much  at least  was immediately  clear to
 him,  that  a  great  ball of  dark crystal  in Orthanc  was most  unlikely to
 have been nothing but an elegant adornment of Saruman's study.                
   At  the  words  'Hobbits,  I  suppose,  have  forgotten  them'  (the  Rhymes

                                               
                                                                         
 of  Lore),  following Gandalf's  recital of  the words  of the  Rhyme Tall
 ships and tall kings/Three times three (TT  p. 202),  a brief  passage of
 original  drafting,  written  out  separately in  ink and  so not  lost in
 erasure of pencil as elsewhere, takes up: the  first framing  of Gandalf's
 declaration of the history of the Seeing Stones, here called  Palantirs, a
 word that so far as record goes now first appears.                       
                                                                         
 They  [the  Rhymes  of  Lore] are  all treasured  in Rivendell.          
 Treebeard  remembers most/some  of them:  Long [Rolls  >] Lists          
 and that sort of thing.  But hobbits  I suppose  have forgotten          
 nearly all, even those that they ever knew.                              
   And what is that one about: the seven stones and seven stars?          
   About the Palantirs of the Men  of Old,  said Gandalf.  I was          
 thinking of them.                                                        
   Why, what are they?                                                    
   The Orthanc stone was one, said Gandalf.                               
   Then  it was  not made,  Pippin hesitated,  by the  Enemy, he          
 asked [? at a rush].                                                     
   No, said Gandalf. Nor by Saruman; it is  beyond his  art, and          
 beyond Sauron's too maybe. No, there was no evil in it.  It has          
 been corrupted, as have so many of the things that remain. Alas          
 poor Saruman, it was his downfall, so  I now  perceive. Danger-          
 ous to us all are devices made  by a  knowledge and  art deeper          
 than we possess ourselves. I did not know that any Palantir had          
 survived the decay of Gondor and the Elendilions until now.              
   Seven they set up.  At Minas  Anor that  is now  Minas Tirith          
 there was one, and one at Minas Ithil,  and others  at Aglarond          
 the  Caves  of  Splendour which  men call  Helm's Deep,  and at          
 Orthanc.  Others  were  far away,  I know  not where,  maybe at          
 Fornost, and at  Mithlond [struck  out: where  Cirdan harboured          
 the ... ships ...] (in) the Gulf of Lune  where the  grey ships          
 lie. But the chief and master  .... [?of  (the) stones]  was at          
 Osgiliath before it was ruined.                                          
                                                                         
   In this passage are the first occurrences  of Aglarond  (see p.  28) and
 of  Fornost, which  on the  First Map  was named  Fornobel, and  still so
 on my map made  in 1943,  VII.304. Here  also is  the first  appearance of
 Cirdan in the manuscripts of The Lord of the Rings.                      
   In  the  first  complete  manuscript  this  was  developed  towards  the
 form  in  TT.  Gandalf  now  tells  that 'The  palantirs came  from beyond
 Westernesse,  from  Eldamar.   The  Noldor   made  them:   Feanor  himself
 maybe  wrought  them,  in  days  so  long  ago  that  the  time  cannot be
 measured in years.' He speaks of  Saruman as  he does  in the  final text;
 but here  he  ends:  No  word  did  he  ever speak  of it  to any  of the

                   
                                                                         
 Council.  It was  not known  that any  of the  palantirs had  escaped the
 ruin of Gondor. Their very  existence was  preserved only  in a  Rhyme of
 Lore  among  Aragorn's  people.'  This  was  changed  to:  'It   was  not
 known to us that any of  the palantirs  had escaped  the ruin  of Gondor.
 Outside  the  Council  it  was not  among elves  and men  even remembered
 that such things had ever been, save only  in a  Rhyme of  Lore preserved
 among Aragorn's people.'(14)                                             
  The remainder of the chapter in the first  manuscript reaches  the final
 form in all but a few respects. There were still five palantirs anciently
 in Gondor, one being still that of Aglarond (translated, as in the draft,
 'Caves  of  Splendour',  but  changed  to  'Glittering  Caves'),(15) Of the
 other two, Gandalf still says that  they were  far away,  'I do  not know
 where,  for  no  rhyme  says.  Maybe  they  were  at  Fornost,  and  with
 Kirdan at Mith[l]ond (16) in the Gulf of Lune where the grey ships lie.'     
  In  answer  to  Pippin's question  concerning the  coming of  the Nazgul
 (TT p. 204) Gandalf  here says  only: 'It  could have  taken you  away to
 the  Dark  Tower',  and  goes on  at once:  'But now  Saruman is  come to
 the last pinch of the vice that he has put his hand in.' He says that 'It
 may be that he [Sauron] will learn that I  was there  and stood  upon the
 stairs of Orthanc - with hobbits at my tail. That is what I fear.'(17) And
 at the end of the chapter he tells Pippin: 'You may see the first glimmer
 of dawn upon  the golden  roof of  the house  of Eorl.  At sunset  on the
 day after you shall see  the shadow  of Mount  Tor-dilluin fall  upon the
 white walls of the tower of Denethor.'(18)                               
                                  *                                      
  In  his  foreword to  the Second  Edition of  The Lord  of the  Rings my
 father said that in 1942 he 'wrote the  first drafts  of the  matter that
 now  stands  as  Book  III, and  the beginnings  of Chapters  1 and  3 of
 Book  V ['Minas  Tirith' and  'The Muster  of Rohan'];  and there  as the
 beacons   flared   in   Anorien   and  Theoden   came  to   Harrowdale  I
 stopped. Foresight had failed and there was no time for thought.'(19)    
 It  seems  to  have been  about the  end of  1942 or  soon after  that he
 stopped; for in a letter  to Stanley  Unwin of  7 December  1942 (Letters
 no.  47)  he  said  that  the  book  had reached  Chapter XXXI  'and will
 require at least six more to finish (these  are already  sketched).' This
 chapter  was  undoubtedly  'The  Palantir'  (not  'Flotsam  and  Jetsam',
 Letters p. 437, note to letter 47).                                      
  In  the  foreword  to  the  Second Edition  he went  on: 'It  was during
 1944  that  ...  I  forced  myself  to  tackle  the  journey of  Frodo to
 Mordor',  and  this new  beginning can  be very  precisely dated;  for on
 3 April 1944 he said in a letter to me (Letters no. 58):                 
                                                                  
  I have  begun  to  nibble at  Hobbit again.  I have  started to  do some
  (painful)  work  on  the  chapter  which  picks  up  the   adventures  of

 Frodo and Sam again; and to get myself attuned have been copying        
 and polishing the last written chapter (Orthanc-Stone).                 
                                                                        
 Two days later, on 5 April 1944 (Letters no. 59) he wrote to me:        
                                                                        
 I  have  seriously  embarked on  an effort  to finish  my book,  & have
 been sitting up rather late: a lot of re-reading and  research required.
 And it is a painful  sticky business  getting into  swing again.  I have
 gone  back  to  Sam  and  Frodo,  and  am  trying  to  work   out  their
 adventures. A  few pages  for a  lot of  sweat: but  at the  moment they
 are just meeting Gollum on a precipice.                                 
                                                                        
 The  'copying  and  polishing'  of  'The  Orthanc-Stone' that  my father
 did at this time is the second,  very finely  written manuscript  of the
 chapter. Well over a year had passed since the  first manuscript  of the
 chapter  was  written, but  not unnaturally  no changes  of significance
 were  made  m the  new text:  thus Aragorn's  reception of  the palantir
 remains in the simple form it had (p. 75); Gandalf does not refer to the
 possibility  that  Wormtongue  might  have  recognised  Aragorn  on  the
 stairs of Orthanc (note 17); Aglarond was still one of the ancient sites
 of the palantiri  of Gondor,  and Gandalf  still says  that he  does not
 know  where  the  others  had  been 'for  no rhyme  says', but  maybe in
 Fornost and with Cirdan at the Grey Havens.(20)                         
                                                                        
                                  NOTES.                                 
                                                                        
 1. On 'the road that led to the bridge' see p. 31, where coming in the
   other direction the company had crossed the bridge and 'found a       
   road that with a wide northward sweep brought them to the great       
   highway to the fords.'                                                
 2. In the notes on distances referred to on p. 42 note 14 Eodoras to
   Isenford is given as 125 miles, which agrees well with the First      
   Map (VII.319) and with the statement in TT ('Helm's Deep',            
   p. 131) that it was forty leagues and more: see p. 12. Eodoras to     
   Isengard is given in these notes as 140 miles (46-6 leagues), which
   again agrees closely with the First Map (about 2-8 cm.). Eodoras      
   to Helm's Deep or mouth of Coomb is 110 miles; in my -                
   redrawing this distance is 100 miles (2 cm.), but the map is here     
   very difficult to interpret and I have probably not placed Helm's     
   Deep at precisely the point my father intended: on my map made        
   in 1943 the distance as the crow flies is 110 miles. - The idea that
   after the visit to Isengard Theoden and his companions returned       
   to Eodoras goes back to the outline 'The Story Foreseen from          
   Fangorn', VII.437.                                                    
 3. There is a second draft of the opening, which need not be given in
   full. Here it is noted how they rode: 'Gandalf took Merry behind      
   him, and Aragorn took Pippin; Gimli rode as before with Eomer,        

       and Legolas was upon  Arod at  his side';  but this  was immediately
       changed  to  'Legolas  and  Gimli  rode  together  again.'  After  a
       further  hesitation,  whether  the  company went  down to  the Fords
       or passed over the bridge below Isengard and  went east,  this draft
       ends:                                                               
            Gandalf's plan had at first  been to  ride straight  to Eodoras
       from  Isengard.  But  he  said  'Victory   has  its   dangers',  and
       Theoden  had  best  ride  with  secrecy  now,  and  with  many  men.
       They   would   return   to  the   Deeping  Coomb   and  send   on  a
       messenger,   bidding   the   men   who   were  labouring   there  to
       hasten  their  work  and  be  prepared  to  ride  on  the  morrow by
       hill-paths. So now the company rode at a gentle [pace]              
 4.    Cf. Unfinished Tales  p. 405:  'It needed  the demonstration  on Dol
       Baran  of the  effects of  the Orthanc-stone  on Peregrin  to reveal
       suddenly  that  the  "link"  between  Isengard  and  Barad-dur (seen
       to exist after it was discovered  that forces  of Isengard  had been
       joined  with  others  directed  by  Sauron  in  the  attack  on  the
       Fellowship  at  Parth  Galen) was  in fact  the Orthanc-stone  - and
       one other palantir.'                                                
   5.  The  distance  from  Orthanc  to  Barad-dur  on  the  First  Map  is
       12-3 cm., = 615 miles or 205 leagues. - This  is a  convenient place
       to  notice  that  in my  redrawing of  section IV  of the  First Map
       (VII.319) what I have  represented as  a small  circle on  the west-
       ern side of the Wizard's Vale seems not to be so,  but is  rather an
       alteration in the line marking the edge  of the  vale. At  the upper
       end of the vale is a minute circle that must represent Isengard.
   6.  The  story  here  was that  the Ents  (who at  the beginning  of the
       draft on p. 68 are  said to  have gone  back to  the sources  of the
       stream,  leaving Treebeard  alone at  the gate  of Isengard)  had at
       once  obeyed  Gandalf's  parting  request to  Treebeard (TT  p. 192)
       that the waters of Isen be again poured into the Ring.              
   7.  From  Isenford  to  Osgiliath on  the First  Map is  8-6 cm.,  = 430
       miles or 143 leagues.                                               
   8.  Cf. VII.447: 'If I live,  I will  come, Lady  Eowyn, and  then maybe
       we will ride together.'                                             
   9.  Cf.  Gandalf  s  words  in  The  Two  Towers,   p.  203:   Alas  for
       Saruman!  It  was  his  downfall,  as  I now  perceive'; and  in The
       Return of the King, p.  133: Thus  the will  of Sauron  entered into
       Minas Tirith.'                                                      
 10.   It is written in fact on the back of one of the pages of the initial
       continuous  drafting  of  the  chapter (p.  73), but  seems entirely
       unconnected with it.                                                
 11.   Angost  was a  passing substitution  for Angrenost:  see p.  44 note
       27.                                                                 
 12.   One of the pages of this draft carries also drafting of  the passage
       in  'The  Voice  of  Saruman'  in   which  Gandalf,   seeing  Pippin

       carrying the palantir, cries out 'Here, my lad, I'll take that!  I did
       not ask you to handle it.' See p. 66.                                 
  13.  I  mention  the  following  as  examples  of  such differences  in the
       detail of this  part of  the story.  In Gandalf's  talk with  Merry as
       they rode from Isengard (TT  p. 194),  after saying  that he  had not
       yet  fathomed   what  the   link  was   between  Saruman   and  Sauron
       and  that  'Rohan  will be  ever in  his thought',  he used  again the
       words  found  in  the  soon  abandoned  draft for  the opening  of the
       chapter (p. 68):  'There is  no one  of this  company, be  sure, whose
       name  and  deeds  are  not  noted  now in  the mind  of Sauron  ., but
       my  father  bracketed  this,  with the  marginal note:  'No: Gandalf*s
       return hidden.' In  the night  halt beneath  Dolbaran (so  written, as
       also  in  the outline  on p.  72) Merry  and Pippin  lay not  far from
       Gandalf;  when  Pippin got  up from  his bed  'the two  guards sitting
       on their horses had their  backs to  the camp';  Pippin saw  a glitter
       from Gandalf's eyes as he slept  'Under his  long dark  lashes' ('long
       lashes' 11 ); the palantir lay beside the wizard's left hand.         
  14.  This was preserved in the First Edition of The Two Towers.            
  15.  As  in  TT, Gandalf  guesses that  the palantir  of Barad-dur  was the
       Ithil-stone.                                                          
  16.  Mithond must be a mere  slip, though  it was  left uncorrected.  It is
       curious that in the next manuscript, made in  1944 (pp.  77 -  8), the
       form in this passage was Mithrond, corrected to Mithlond.             
  17.  In TT 'That is what I  fear' refers  to additional  sentences inserted
       after 'with hobbits at my tail': 'Or that an heir of Elendil lives and
       stood  beside  me.  If  Wormtongue  was  not  deceived  by  the armour
       of  Rohan,  he  would  remember   Aragorn  and   the  title   that  he
       claimed.'  But  this  insertion was  made long  after (on  'the armour
       of  Rohan'  borne  by  Aragorn  see  TT  p.  127,  and  in  this  book
       p. 304 and p. 317 with note 9).                                       
  18.  Tor-dilluin   was   emended   to   Mindolluin.   The    mountain   was
       added  roughly  to  the  First  Map  and  not  named,   but  carefully
       shown  on  the  1943   map  (VII.310).   -  With   Gandalf's  forecast
       that  they will  come to  Minas Tirith  at sunset  cf. p.  73 (Gandalf
       reaches Minas Tirith at sunset on February 5).                        
  19.  Cf.  my father's  letter to  Caroline Everett,  24 June  1957 (Letters
       no. 199):                                                             
            I was  in fact  longest held  up -  by exterior  circumstances as
       well  as  interior  -  at  the  point  now  represented  by  the  last
       words   of  Book   iii  (reached   about  1942   or  3).   After  that
       Chapter  1  of  Book  v  remained  very  long  as  a mere  opening (as
       far  as  the  arrival  in  Gondor);  Chapter  2  [The  Passing  of the
       Grey   Company]   did   not   exist;   and   Chapter   3,   Muster  of
       Rohan,  had   got  no   further  than   the  arrival   at  Harrowdale.
       Chapter  1  of  Book  iv  [The  Taming  of  Smeagol]  had  hardly  got
       beyond  Sam's  opening  words  (Vol.  II  p. 209).  Some parts  of the

 adventures  of  Frodo  and  Sam  on  the  confines  of  Mordor   and  in
 it had been written (but were eventually abandoned).                    
    The last sentence evidently  refers to  the text  that I  called 'The
 Story Foreseen from Lorien', in VII.324 ff.                             
        In fact, there is very clear evidence that my father erred in his
 recollection  that  the  abandoned  beginnings  of  Chapters  1   and  3
 of  Book  V belonged  to the  time that  we have  now reached  (i.e. the
 end  of Book  III); see  pp. 231  ff., where  the question  is discussed
 in detail.                                                              
20.  The text has Mithrond  here, corrected  to Mithlond:  see note  16. -
 I  collect  a  few   further  details   from  this   second  manuscript.
 Palantirs  became Palantiri  in the  course of  writing it.  - Osgiliath
 is   named   Elostirion  (Elostirion   being  roughly   substituted  for
 Osgiliath  in the  first manuscript,  but very  probably at  this time).
 This  change  was   introduced  in   a  note   dated  February   9  1942
 (VII.423),  and  appears  in  the  outline  'The  Story   Foreseen  from
 Fangorn'  (VII.435).  Osgiliath  in  the  drafting and  first manuscript
 of  'The  Palantir'  was  thus  a  reversion,  and  Elostirion  in  1944
 another.   Finally   Elostirion   was   afterwards  corrected   back  to
 Osgiliath on the 1944 manuscript.                                       
        Lastly, there was  much hesitation  about the  phase of  the moon
 on  the  night  of  the  camp  below  Dol Baran.  In the  original draft
 no  more  was  said  than  that  'The  moon  was  shining'  when  Pippin
 got  up  from  his  bed.  In the  first manuscript  'The moon  had risen
 far  away  but  could  not  yet be  seen; a  pale sheen  was in  the sky
 above  the  bushes  and  the  eastern  rim  of  the  dell';   with  this
 compare  perhaps  the  early  notes  given  on  p.  69,   where  Gandalf
 looks  into  the  Seeing  Stone and  says 'The  moon is  already visible
 in  Osgiliath.'  This  was  changed  to  'The  moon  was   shining  cold
 and  white  into  the  dell  and   the  shadows   of  the   bushes  were
 black';  but  on  both  the  first  and  second  manuscripts  my  father
 then  shifted  back  and  forth  between  the  two statements,  until he
 finally decided on the latter, which is the reading of TT (p. 196).     
        On  the first  manuscript he  noted in  the margin  the following
 times   (which   show   a   much  more   rapid  journey   from  Isengard
 than  in  the  outline  on  p.  72):  'Sunset about  5 p.m.  They camped
 about  6   p.m.  This   [i.e.  Pippin's   looking  into   the  palantir]
 happened  about  11  p.m.  Moon  rose  6.34   p.m.'  According   to  the
 elaborate  time-scheme  that   was  made   after  the   introduction  of
 changes  in  October  1944  (VII.368),   the  New   Moon  had   been  on
 21  January,  the  First  Quarter  on  29  January,  and  Full  Moon was
 on 6 February, three nights after the camp beneath Dol Baran.           
