      PART TWO.     
                  
 THE RING GOES EAST.

                                      I.                                    
                                                                          
                            THE TAMING OF SMEAGOL.                          
                                                                          
 In his letter of June 1957 cited in note 19 to the last chapter (p.  80) my
 father said that  at the  time of  this long  break in  the writing  of The
 Lord  of  the  Rings  'Chapter 1  of Book  iv had  hardly got  beyond Sam's
 opening words (Vol. II  p. 209)'.  That beginning  of a  new story  of Sam
 and Frodo in Mordor,(1) for so  long set  aside, can  I think  be identified:
 it  consists  of  a  brief  narrative  opening that  soon breaks  down into
 outline form ('A'), and a portion of  formed narrative  ('B') that  ends at
 Sam's  words  (TT p.  210) 'a  bit of  plain bread,  and a  mug aye  half a
 mug of beer would go down proper'. The original draft A went thus:        
                                                                          
  'Well  Master  this  is  a  nasty  place  and  no  mistake,'  said  Sam to
 Frodo.   They   had   been   wandering   for  days   in  the   hard  barren
 heights  of  Sarn  Gebir.  Now  at   last  on   the  fifth   evening  since
 their  flight (2) they  stood  on the  edge of  a grey  cliff. A  chill east
 wind  blew.  Far  below  the  land  lay  green  at the  feet of  the cliff,
 and  away  S.W.  [read  S.E.]  a  pall  of  grey   cloud  or   shadow  hung
 shutting out the remoter view.                                            
  'It   seems   we   have   come   the  wrong   way  altogether,'   went  on
 Sam.  'That's  where  we  want  to  get,  or  we  don't  want  to   but  we
 mean  to.  And  the  quicker  the  better,  if  we  must  do  it.   But  we
 can't  get  down,  and  if  we  do  get  down  there  is  all   that  nasty
 green  marsh.  Phew,  can  you  smell  it.'  He  sniffed  the   wind:  cold
 as   it  was   it  seemed   heavy  with   a  stench   of  cold   decay  and
 rottenness.                                                               
  'We   are   above   the  Dead   Marshes  that   lie  between   Anduin  and
 the   pass   into   Mordor,'   said   Frodo.  'We   have  come   the  wrong
 way  -  [we  >)  I   should  have   left  the   Company  long   before  and
 come   down   from   the   North,  east   of  Sarn   Gebir  and   over  the
 hard  of  Battle  Plain.  But  it  would  take  us  weeks  on foot  to work
 back  northward   over  these   hills.  I   don't  know   what  is   to  be
 done.%hat food have we?'                                                  
  A couple of weeks with care.                                             
  Let us sleep.                                                            
  Suspicion of Gollum that night. They work northward.                     
  Next   day   footfalls   on   the   rock.  Frodo   sends  Sam   ahead  and
 hides   behind   a   rock   using   ring.(3) Gollum  appears.   Frodo  over-

 come with sudden  fear flies,  but Gollum  pursues. They  come to          
 a cliff rather lower and less sheer than that behind. In dread of          
 Gollum they begin to climb down.                                           
                                                                           
   Here my father abandoned this draft, and (as I think) followed at        
 once with a new opening (B), in which the text of TT is closely            
 approached at almost all points (but the hills are still named Sarn        
 Gebir, and the time is 'the [struck out: fourth or] fifth evening since     
 they had fled from the Company'). With Sam's longing for bread and         
 beer this manuscript ends, not at the foot of a page; and it is, I feel .
 sure, the abandoned opening of the chapter to which my father              
 referred.(4) When it was written, in relation to the work on Book III,       
 there seems no way of telling.(5)                                          
   'A few pages for a lot of sweat,' my father said in his letter of 5 April
 1944 (see p. 78), in which he told me of his turning again to the         
 adventures of Sam and Frodo; and 45 years later one can feel it,           
 reading these pages in which he struggled (in increasingly impossible      
 handwriting) to discover just how Sam and Frodo did in the end get         
 down out of the twisted hills into the horrible lands below.               
   When he took the chapter up again in 1944, he did not rewrite the        
 original opening (which survives with little change into TT), but          
 taking a new sheet began: 'The sun was caught into clouds and night        
 came suddenly' (cf. TT p. 210). This text, which I will call 'C', soon     
 degenerates into a terrible scrawl and at the end becomes in part          
 altogether illegible.                                                      
                                                                           
   The sun was caught into clouds and night came suddenly.                  
 They  slept  in  turns,  as  best  they could,  in a  hollow of  the rocks,
 sheltered from the easterly wind.                                          
   'Did  you  see  them  again,  Mr  Frodo?'  asked   Sam,  as   they  sat,,
 stiff  and  chilled,  munching  wafers  of  lembas  in  the  cold  grey  of
 early morning.                                                             
   'Yes,   once,'   said  Frodo.   'But  I   heard  the   snuffling  several
 times, and it came nearer than it has before.'                             
   'Ah!'  said  Sam.  'Growing  bolder,   it  seems.   I  heard   him,  too,
 though  I  saw  no  eyes.  He's  after  us  still:  can't  shake   him  off
 nohow.    Curse   the    slinking   varmint.    Gollum!   I'd    give   him
 gollum  if  I  could  get  my  hands  on   his  neck.   As  if   we  hadn't
 enough trouble in front, without him hanging on behind.'                   
   'If  only  I  dared  use  the  Ring,'  muttered  Frodo,  'maybe  I  could
 catch him then.'                                                           
   'Don't  you  do  that,  master!'  said  Sam.  'Not  out  up   here!  He'd
 see  you  -  not  meaning  Gollum  either.  I  feel all  naked on  the east
 side,  if  you  understand  me,  stuck   up  here   on  the   skyline  with

 nought  but  a  big  flat  bog  between  us  and  that  shadow over
 yonder.'(6) He  looked  hurriedly  over  his  shoulder   towards  the
 East. 'We've got to get  down off  it,' he  said, 'and  today we're
 going to get down off it somehow.'                                
   But  that  day too  wore towards  its end,  and found  them still
 scrambling  along  the  ridge.  Often  they  heard   the  following
 footsteps,  and  yet  however  quick  they  turned  they  could not
 catch sight of the pursuer. Once or twice they  lay in  wait behind
 a  boulder.  But  after  a  moment the  flip-flap of  the footsteps
 would  halt,  and  all  went  silent:  only  the wind  sighing over
 stones  seemed  to  remind  them of  faint breathing  through sharp
 teeth.                                                            
   Toward  evening  Frodo  and  Sam  were  brought  to a  halt. They
 came to a place  where they  had at  last only  two choices:  to go
 back  or  to  climb  down.   They  were   on  the   outer  eastward
 ridge of the Emyn  Muil,(7) that  fell away  sheerly on  their right.
 For many  miles it  had been  falling lower  towards the  wet lands
 beyond;  here  after  tending  northwards  it  reared  suddenly  up
 again  many  fathoms  in  a  single  leap  and went  on again  on a
 high level far above their heads. They were at the foot of  a cliff
 facing  S.W.,  cut down  as if  with a  knife-stroke. There  was no
 going further that way. But they were  also at  the top  of another
 cliff facing east.                                                
   Frodo looked over the edge. 'It's  easier to  get down  than up,'
 he said.                                                          
   'Yes, you can always jump or fall, even if  you can't  fly,' said
 Sam.                                                              
   'But look, Sam!' said Frodo. 'Either  the ridge  has sunk  or the
 lands at its feet have swelled up - we  are not  nearly so  high up
 as we were yesterday: about 30 fathoms,(8) not much more.'           
   'And  that's  enough,'  said  Sam.  'Ugh! How  I do  hate looking
 down from a height, and that's not so bad as climbing.'           
   'But  here  I  almost  think  we could  climb,' said  Frodo. 'The
 rock is different here.' The cliff was indeed no longer  sheer, but
 sloped  somewhat  backward,  and  the  rock  was  of  such  a  kind
 that great  flat slabs  seemed to  have split  away and  fallen. It
 looked rather as if they were sitting on the eaves of a  great roof
 of thin stone-shingles or tiles that had tipped over  leaving their
 rough edges upwards.                                              
   'Well,'  said  Sam, standing  up and  tightening his  belt. 'What
 about  trying  it? It'll  give that  flapping footpad  something to
 think about anyway.'                                               

   'If  we  are  going  to  try  today  we  had better  try at  once,' said
 Frodo. 'It's getting dark early. I think there's a storm coming.'         
   The  dark  smudge  of  the  mountains  in  the  East   was  lost   in  a
 deeper   blackness,   that   was   already   sending   out    great   arms
 towards  them.   There  was   a  distant   rumble  of   thunder.  'There's
 no  shelter  at  all  down  there,'  said  Frodo.  'Still,  come  on!'  He
 stepped towards the brink.                                                
   'Nay, Mr Frodo, me first!' cried Sam.                                   
   'Why   so   eager?'  said   Frodo.  'Do   you  want   to  show   me  the
 way?'                                                                     
   'Not  me,'  said  Sam.  'But  it's  only  sense.   Have  the   one  most
 like  to slip  lowest. I  don't want  to slip,  but I  don't want  to slip
 and come down atop of you and knock you off.'                             
   'But [?I'd] do the same to you.'                                        
   'Then   you'll   have   something   soft   to   fall   on,'   said  Sam,
 throwing  his  legs  over the  edge, and  turning his  face to  the wall..
 His  toes  found  a  ledge  and  he   grunted.  'Now   where  do   we  put
 our hands next?' he muttered.                                             
   'There's   a   much   wider   ledge  about   twice  your   height  below
 you,'  said  Frodo  from  above,  'if  you  can slide  down to  it.' 'If!'
 said  Sam.  'And  what  then?'  'Come,  I'll  get  alongside  and  try it,
 and  then  we  need  not  quarrel  about first  or  second.'   Frodo  slid
 quickly  down  till  he  stood  splayed against  the cliff  a yard  or two
 to  the  right  of  Sam.  But  he  could  find  no  handhold  between  the
 cliff-top  and  the  narrow  ledge  at  his  toes,  and  though  the slope
 lean[t]  forwards (9) he  had  not  the  skill  nor  the  head  to  make the
 passage to the wider foothold below.                                      
                                                                          
   From  about  this  point  the  text   becomes  increasingly   rough  and
 increasingly difficult to read:  I reproduce  a leaf  of the  manuscript on
 p. 90 (for the text of this leaf as best as I can interpret it see p. 91).
                                                                          
   'Hm!'  grunted  Sam.  'Here  we  are  side  by  side,  like  flies  on a
 fly-paper.'                                                               
   'But we  can at  least still  get back,'  said Frodo.  'At least  I can.
 There's a hold just above my head.'                                       
   'Then  you'd  best  get  back,'   said  Sam.   'I  can't   manage  this,
 and my toes are aching cruel already.'                                    
   Frodo  hauled  himself  back   with  some   difficulty,  but   he  found
 that  he  could  not  help  Sam.  When  he  leaned  down  as  far   as  he
 dared Sam's upstretched hand was just out of reach.                       
   'Lor,  this  is  a  pickle  I  am  in,'  said  poor  Sam, and  his voice

 began  to  quaver.  The  eastern  sky  grew  black  as  night.  The
 thunder rolled nearer.                                            
   'Hold up, Sam,' said Frodo. 'Just wait till I  get my  belt off.'
 He lowered it buckle first. 'Can you grasp it?'                   
   'Aye,' said Sam. 'A bit lower till I get my two hands on it.'
   'But now  I haven't  enough to  hold myself,  and anyway  I can't
 lean back or get my foot against a stop,' said Frodo.  'You'll just
 pull me over, or pull the belt out of my hands. 0 for a rope.'
   'Rope,' said Sam. 'I just deserve to hang here  all night,  I do.
 You're   nobbut  a   ninnyhammer  Sam   Gamgee:  that's   what  the
 Gaffer said to me  many a  time, that  being a  word of  his. Rope.
 There is one of those grey  ropes in  my pack.  You know,  that one
 we got with the boats in Lorien. I took  a fancy  to it  and stowed
 it away.'                                                         
   'But the pack's on  your back,'  said Frodo,  'and I  can't reach
 it, and you can't toss it up.'                                    
   'It  did ought  to be  but it  ain't,' said  Sam. 'You've  got my
 pack,' said Sam.                                                  
   [?'How's that?'].....                                           
   'Now  do  make  haste,  Mr  Frodo,  or  my  toes'll  break,' said
 Sam. 'The rope's my only  chance.' It  did not  take Frodo  long to
 tip up the pack, and there  indeed at  the bottom  was a  long coil
 of silk[en] grey rope. In a moment  Sam [?tied]  an end  round his
 waist  and  ...  clutched ...  above his  head [?with].(10) Frodo ran
 back from the brink and braced  his foot  against a  crevice. Half
 hauled,  half  scrambling  Sam  came  puffing  and  blowing  up the
 few feet of cliff that  had baffled  him. He  sat down  and stroked
 his toes.                                                         
   'Numbpate   and   Ninnyhammer,'   he   repeated.    'How   long's
 that  rope, I  wonder.' Frodo  wound it  [?round his]  elbows. '10,
 20,  30,  40, 50,  60, 70,  80 hobbit-ells,'  he said.  'Who'd have
 thought it.'                                                      
   'Ah,  who  would,' said  Sam. 'A  bit thin,  but it  seems mighty
 tough. Soft to the hand as milk. 80 ells.(11) Well, one of us  can get
 down, seemingly, or near enough, if your guess weren't far out.'
   'That  would  not  be  much  good,'  said  Frodo.  'You  down and
 me up, or the other way. Is there nothing  to make  an end  fast to
 up here?'                                                         
   'What,' said Sam, 'and leave all handy for that Gollum!'        
   'Well,'  said Frodo  after some  thought. 'I  am going  down with
 the rope on, and you're going to hold on  to the  end up  here. But
 I am only going to use the  rope for  a precaution.  I am  going to

 (A page from the first manuscript of 'The Taming of Smeagol'.)

 see if I can find a way down that I can use without a rope. Then I           
 climb  up  with  your help,  and then  you go  down with  the rope           
 and I follow. How's that?'                                                   
   Sam scratched his head. 'I don't  like it,  Mr Frodo,'  he said,           
 'but it seems the only thing to do. Pity we didn't think  out this           
 rock-climbing  business  before  we  started.  I'll have  to stand           
 down  there  [?staring]  and  waiting  to  catch  you.  Do  you be           
 careful.'                                                                    
   Frodo went to  the edge  again. A  few yards  from the  brink he           
 thought he saw a better point for a  descent. 'I  am going  to try           
 here,'  he  said.  'Get a  purchase somewhere  Sam for  your foot,           
 but don't let the rope [?saw] over a [?sharp...  edge]. It  may be           
 elf-spun, but I shouldn't  try it  too far.'  He stepped  over the           
 brink ... There was a ledge for his  feet before  he had  gone his           
 full height down: it sloped gently downward  to the  right. 'Don't           
 pull on the rope unless I shout,' he said, and he had disappeared.           
  * The  rope  lay  slack for  a long  while as  Sam stared  at it.           
 Suddenly  it  drew  taut, and  nearly caught  him at  unawares. He           
 braced  his  feet,   and  wondering   [read  wondered]   what  had           
 happened  and  whether  his  master  was  now dangling  in mid-air           
 at the far rope's end, but not [read  no] cry  came, and  the rope           
 went slack again. After a long while  as it  seemed he  thought he           
 heard a faint hail. He listened, it came again, and  cautiously he           
 crawled  to  the  brink  taking  in  the  slack  as  he  went. The           
 darkness was  drawing nearer  - and  it seemed  dim below;  but in           
 his grey  cloak Frodo  if he  was there  was quite  invisible. But           
 something white fluttered and the shout came  up clear  now. 'It's           
 all right, not too difficult at all except in one place. I'm down.           
 [?I've] 3 ells of rope to spare. Slowly [?to  take] my  weight ...           
 I'm coming up and shall use the rope.'                                       
   In  about  10  mins.  he  reappeared  over  the  edge  and threw           
 himself down by Sam. 'That's that,' he  said. 'I'll  be glad  of a           
 short rest. Down you go now - he  described the  route as  best he           
 could and direct[ed] Sam to hail when  he came  to the  bad place.           
 'I slipped there,' he said, 'and [?should have  gone] but  for the           
 rope, a little over halfway down, quite a drop [?start to finish].           
 But I think I can just ...  you.(12) Pay  it out  slowly and  take the           
 weight off on any ledge you come on. Good luck.'                             
                                                                             
 (*  At this point the text of the manuscript page reproduced on p. 90 begins,
 and continues to the end of the second paragraph.)                            

 With  a   grim  face   Sam  went   to  the   edge,  [?turned],   and  found
 the       first       ledge.       'Good       luck,'       said      Frodo.
 ...   [?time   to   time]   the   rope   went  slack   as  Sam   found  some
 ledge  to  rest  ...,  but  for  the  most  part  his  weight  was  taken by
 the rope. It was ..... minutes before Frodo heard his call.                 
   First  he  lowered  his  pack  by  the  rope,  then he  cast it  loose. He
 was  left  alone  at  the  top.  At  that  moment  there  was  a  great clap
 of  dry   thunder  overhead   and  the   sky  grew   dark.  The   storm  was
 coming   up   the   Emyn   Muil   on   its   way   to   Rohan  and   to  the
 Hornburg   far   away   where   the   riders   were   at   bay.(13) He heard
 Sam  cry  from  below,  but  could  not   make  out   the  words,   nor  see
 Sam's    pointing    hands.    But   something    made   him    look   back.
 There  not  far  away  on  a  rock   behind  and   overlooking  him   was  a
 black   figure   [?whose   glimmer(ing)]  eyes   like  distant   lamps  were
 fixed  on   him.  Unreasoning   fear  seized   him  for   a  moment   -  for
 after  all  it  was  Gollum  there,  it  was  not  a   whole..........,  and
 he  had  Sting  at  his  belt  and mithril  beneath his  jacket: but  he did
 not  stop   to  think   of  these   things.  He   stepped  over   the  edge,
 which   for   the   moment  frightened   him  less,   and  began   to  climb
 down.  Haste  seemed  to  aid  him,  and  all  went   well  until   he  came
 to the bad place.                                                           
                                                                            
   Perhaps my father was at just about this point when he wrote on           
 5 April 1944, in the letter cited on p. 78, that'at the moment they are     
 just meeting Gollum on a precipice'. - From here to the end of the          
 draft there are so many 'bad places' and even sheer drops that I shall      
 not attempt to represent the text as it stands. There follows an account
 of Frodo's descent: how he slipped again, and slithered down the            
 cliff-face clinging with his fingers till he came up with a jolt, nearly
 losing his balance, on a wide ledge - 'and after that he was soon           
 down.' There came then the great storm of wind and thunder, with a          
 torrent of rain lashing down; and looking up 'they could see two tiny       
 points of light at the cliff edge before the curtain of rain blotted them
 out. "Thank goodness you've done it," said Sam. "I near swallowed           
 my heart when you slipped. Did you see him? I thought so, when you          
 started to climb so quick." "I did," said Frodo. "But I think we've set ?
 him a bit of a puzzle for those [?soft padding] feet of his. But let's look
 about here. Is there no shelter from the storm?" '                          
   They looked for shelter, and found some fallen rocks lying against        
 the foot of the cliff, but the ground was wet and soggy; they               
 themselves were not drenched through apparently on account of the           
 elven-cloaks (this passage is very largely illegible). The storm passed     
 on over the Emyn Muil and stars came out; 'far away the sun had set         
 behind Isengard'. The draft ends with Sam's saying: 'It's no good          

                                          
                                                                          
 going  that  way  [i.e. towards  the marshes]  in the  dark and  at night.
 Even on  this trip  we've had  better camping-places:  but here  we'd best
 stay.'                                                                    
                                                                          
  There  was  very  evidently  great  need  for  a  better text:  my father
 himself  would have  had difficulty  with this,  when the  precise thought
 behind  the  words   had  dimmed.   He  began   again  therefore   at  the
 beginning  of  the chapter,  giving it  now its  title and  number (XXXII)
 and  the  completed  manuscript  ('D')  that evolved  from this  new start
 was the only one that he  made (i.e.,  subsequent texts  are typescripts).
 The  opening  of  the  chapter  (text  B),  which  went  hack to  the time
 before the long break  during 1943  - 4  (p. 86),  was written  out again,
 and  effectively  reached  the form  in TT  (but when  the story  opens it
 was still 'the fifth evening' since they  had fled  from the  Company, not
 as  in  TT  the  third:  see the  Note on  Chronology at  the end  of this
 chapter).                                                                 
  When  my  father  came  to  the  point where  his new  draft (C)  took up
 the  tale  ('The  sun  was caught  into clouds  and night  came suddenly',
 p. 86), beyond rounding  out the  expression and  making it  less staccato
 he did not at first change any feature of the story until the beginning of
 the  attempt to  climb down  - apart  from introducing  the point  that on
 the  last  day  in  the  Emyn  Muil Sam  and Frodo  had been  making their
 way  along  at  some  distance  from  the  outer  precipice,   perhaps  to
 explain why  it was  that they  had not  observed that  the cliff  was now
 less high and no longer sheer; but the long  gully or  ravine by  which in
 TT  they  made  their  way  to the  precipice when  their way  forward was
 blocked  was not  yet present.  The fir-trees  in the  gully would  have a
 narrative function in the final  form of  the story,  in that  'old broken
 stumps straggled on  almost to  the cliff's  brink' (TT  p. 212):  for Sam
 would brace his foot against one of those stumps, and tie  the rope  to it
 (TT pp. 215 - 16), in contrast to text C, p. 89 ('Is there nothing to make
 an end  fast to  up here?'  ... 'I  am going  down with  the rope  on, and
 you're going to hold on to the end up here').                             
  My father at first retained the story in  C (p.  88) that  Frodo followed
 Sam  over  the  edge  and  that  they  both  stood  splayed   against  the
 rock-face together, until Frodo  climbed back  up again.  But as  he wrote
 he changed this: before Frodo had time to say anything to Sam,            
                                                                          
  The   next   moment   he   gave   a   sharp   cry  and   slithered  down-
 wards.  He  came  up  with  a  jolt  to  his  toes  on  a   broader  ledge
 a   few   feet   lower   down.   Fortunately   the  rockface   leant  well
 forwards,  and  he  did  not  lose  his  balance.  He  could   just  reach
 the ledge he had left with his fingers.                                   
  'Well, that's another step down,' he said. 'But what next?'              
  'I  don't  know,'  said  Frodo  peering  over.  'The  light's  getting so
 dim. You  started  off  a  bit  too   quick,  before   we'd  had   a  good

               
                                                                         
  look.  But  the  ledge  you're  on gets  much broader  to the  right. If
  you   could   edge   along  that   way,  you'd   have  room   enough,  I
  think,  to  stoop  and  get  your  hands  down  and  try  for  the  next
  ledge below.'                                                           
      Sam shuffled a little, and  then stood  still, breathing  hard. 'No,
  I  can't  do it,'  he panted.  'I'm going  giddy. Can't  I get  back? My
  toes are hurting cruelly already.'                                      
      Frodo  leaned  over  as  far  as he  dared, but  he could  not help.
  Sam's fingers were well out of his reach.                              
      'What's  to  be  done?'  said  Sam,  and  his voice  quavered. 'Here
  am I stuck like a fly on a fly-paper, only flies can't  fall off,  and I
  can.'   The  eastern   sky  was   growing  black   as  night,   and  the
  thunder rolled nearer.                                                  
      'Hold on, Sam! '  said Frodo.  'Half a  moment, till  I get  my belt
  off.'                                                                   
                                                                         
      Having thus got  rid of  the unnecessary  incident of  Frodo's going
  down  to the  first ledge  with Sam  and then  climbing back  again, the
  new text then follows the  former (C)  - the  failure of  the experiment
  with the belt, Sam's sudden recollection  of the  rope, and  his telling
  Frodo that  they are  wearing each  other's packs  - as  far as  'He sat
  down well away from the edge and rubbed his feet' (p. 89; he felt 'as if
  he had been rescued from deep waters or a fathomless mine').            
                                                                         
      'Numbpate and Ninnyhammer!' he muttered.                           
      'Well, now you're back,' said Frodo, laughing with relief,          
  'you can explain this business about the packs.'                        
      'Easy,'  said Sam.  'We got  up in  the dim  light this  morning and
  you  just  picked  mine  up. I  noticed it  and was  going to  speak up,
  when  I  noticed  that yours  was a  tidier sight  heavier than  mine. I
  reckoned  you'd   been  carrying   more  than   your  share   of  tackle
  and what not ever since I  set off  in such  a hurry,  so I  thought I'd
  take a turn. And I thought less said less argument.'                    
      'Well  meant  cheek,'   said  Frodo;   'but  you've   been  rewarded
  for  the  well  meaning  anyway.'  They   sat  for   a  while   and  the
  gloom grew greater.                                                     
      'Numbpate,'  said   Sam  suddenly,   slapping  his   forehead.  'How
  long's that rope, I wonder.'                                            
                                                                         
      Here my father abandoned this story, feeling perhaps that it was all
  becoming  too  complicated, and  rejecting these  new pages  he returned
  again, not to the beginning of the chapter, but to the beginning  of the
  draft  C, that  is to  say to  the point  where Frodo  and Sam  awoke on
  their last morning in the Emyn Muil (p. 86), with  Frodo now  saying, in

             
                                                                              
 answer  to  Sam's  question  'Did  you  see  them  again,  Mr Frodo?',  'No, I
 have  heard  nothing  for  three  nights  now.'  From  this  point  the  final
 story was built  up  in  the  completed   manuscript  D.   Some  of   it  was
 written   out  first   on  independent   draft  pages,(14) but  some   of  the
 pencilled  drafting  was  overwritten  in  ink  and  included  in   the  manu-
 script. It is plain,  however, that  the final  story now  evolved confidently
 and clearly, and since there is very  little of  significant difference  to the
 narrative to be observed in those parts of  the initial  drafting that  I have
 been  able  to read,  I doubt  that there  is any  more in  those that  I have
 not.                                                                          
  My   father   now   saw  at   last  how   Sam  and   Frodo  did   manage  the
 descent  from  the  Emyn  Muil,  and  he   resolved  their   difficulty  about
 leaving  the  rope  hanging  from  the   cliff-top  for   Gollum  to   use  by
 simply  not  introducing  the  question  into  their  calculations  until they
 had  both  reached  the  bottom.  In  this  text  the  further  course  of the
 storm was described thus:                                                     
                                                                              
 The skirts of the storm were lifting, ragged  and wet,  and the               
 main battle had passed - hastening with  wind and  thunder over               
 the Emyn Muil, over Anduin, over the fields of Rohan, on to the               
 Hornburg where the King Theoden  stood at  bay that  night, and               
 the Tindtorras now stood dark against the last lurid glow.                    
                                                                              
 At a later  stage (see  the Note  on Chronology  at the  end of  this chapter)
 the following was substituted:                                                
                                                                              
 The skirts of the storm were lifting, ragged and wet,  and the                
 main battle had passed to spread its great wings over the Emyn                
 Muil,  upon which  the dark  thought of  Sauron brooded  for a                
 while. Thence it turned, smiting the vale of Anduin  with hail                
 and lightning, and rolled on slowly through the night, mile by                
 mile over Gondor and the fields of Rohan,  until far  away the                
 Riders on the  plain saw  its black  shadow moving  behind the                
 sun, as they rode with war into the West.                                     
                                                                              
 Sam's   uncle,   the  Gaffer's   eldest  brother,   owner  of   the  rope-walk
 'over by Tighfield', now appears (cf. VII.235), but he was at first called
 Obadiah Gamgee, not Andy.                                                     
  The  earlier  drafts  did  not  reach the  point of  Gollum's descent  of the
 diff-face,  and  it  may  be that  my father  had foreseen  it long  since. On
 the  manuscript  of  the  outline   'The  Story   Foreseen  from   Lorien'  he
 struck  out  his  first  ideas  for  the  encounter  of  Frodo  and   Sam  with
 Gollum,  and  wrote:  'Steep  place  where  Frodo  has  to climb  a precipice.
 Sam goes first  so that  if Frodo  falls he  will knock  Sam down  first. They
 see Gollum  come  down  by  moonlight  like  a fly'  (see  VII.329   and  note
 15).  But  there  is  no  way  of  knowing  when he  wrote this,  whether when

 he first began writing 'The Taming of Smeagol', or when  he took  it up
 again in April 1944.                                                    
   In  initial  drafting  the  discussion  between  Sam  and  Frodo after
 Gollum's capture, in which Frodo heard 'a voice out of the  past', went
 like this:                                                              
                                                                        
    'No,' said Frodo. 'We must kill him right out, Sam, if we do         
   anything. But we can't do that, not as things are. It's against the
   rules. He's done us no harm.'                                         
    'But he means to / meant to, I'll take my word,' said Sam.           
    'I daresay,' said Frodo. 'But that's another matter.' Then he        
   seemed to hear a voice out of the past saying to him: Even Gollum I
   fancy may have his uses before all's over. 'Yes, yes, may be,' he     
   answered. 'But anyway I can't touch the creature. I wish he could be
   cured. He's so horribly wretched.'                                    
    Sam stared at his master, who seemed to be talking to someone ..     
   else not there.                                                       
                                                                        
 At this stage in the evolution of the chapter 'Ancient History', at the
 point  in  his  conversation  with  Gandalf  at  Bag  End  which  Frodo
 was  remembering,  the  text of  the 'second  phase' version  (given in
 VI.264-5) had been little changed. The actual reading of  the 'current'
 ('fourth phase') text of 'Ancient History' (cf. VII.28) is:             
                                                                        
   '... What a pity Bilbo did not stab that vile creature, before he left
   him!'                                                                 
    'What nonsense you do talk sometimes, Frodo! ' said Gandalf.       
   'Pity! Pity would have prevented him, if he had thought of it. But he
   could not kill him anyway. It was against the Rules....'              
    'Of course, of course! What a thing to say. Bilbo could not do       
   anything of the kind, then. But I am frightened. And I cannot feel 
   any pity for Gollum. Do you mean to say that you, and the Elves, let
   him live on after all those horrible deeds? Now at any rate he is     
   worse than a goblin, and just an enemy.'                              
    'Yes, he deserved to die,' said Gandalf, 'and I don't think he can
   be cured before he dies. Yet even Gollum might prove useful for,      
   good before the end. Anyway we did not kill him: he was very old      
   and very wretched. The Wood-elves have him in prison ...'             
                                                                        
   It is not often that the precise moment at which my father returned
 to and changed a passage much earlier in The Lord of the Rings can be
 determined, but it can be done here. When he came to write the         
 passage in the manuscript (D) of 'The Taming of Smeagol', Frodo's      
 recollection of his conversation with Gandalf began at an earlier point
 than it had in the draft cited above:                                   
                                                                        
    It seemed to Frodo then that he heard quite plainly but far off      
   voices out of the past.                                               

 
                                                                           
       What a pity Bilbo did not stab the vile creature, before he left     
    him!                                                                    
      Pity! Pity would have prevented him. He could not kill him. It       
    was against the Rules.                                                  
      I do not feel any pity for Gollum. He deserves death.                 
                                                                           
 It was at  this point  that my  father perceived  that Gandalf  had said
 rather  more  to  Frodo,  and  on  another  page  of  drafting  for 'The
 Taming of Smeagol' he wrote:                                               
                                                                           
    Deserved it! I daresay he did I does, said Gandalf.  Many that  live do
    deserve  death. And  some that  die deserve  life. Can  you give  it to
    them?  Then  be  not  eager  to  deal  out  death even  in the  name of
    justice. For even the  very wise  cannot see  all ends.  I do  not much
    hope that Gollum can be cured                                           
                                                                           
 This was then (as I judge) written  into the  manuscript of  'The Taming
 of Smeagol', in a slightly different form:                                 
                                                                           
    Deserves  death!  I  daresay  he  does. Many  that live  deserve death.
    And some that die  deserve life.  Can you  give that  to them? Then be
    not too eager to deal out  death in  the name  of justice,  fearing for
    your own safety. Even the very wise  cannot see  all ends.  Maybe the
    Enemy  will  get  him.  Maybe  not.  Even  Gollum  may  do  some good,
    willy nilly, before the end.                                            
                                                                           
 It was certainly  at this  time that  my father  changed the  passage in
 'Ancient History'.  Omitting the  words 'fearing  for your  own safety',
 he joined the new passage into that given on p. 96:  '... Even  the wise
 cannot  see  all  ends.  I do  not much  hope that  Gollum can  be cured
 before  he  dies. Yet  even Gollum  might prove  useful for  good before
 the end.' The two passages, that in 'The Shadow of the Past' (FR  p. 69)
 and that in 'The Taming of Smeagol' (TT. p.  221), remain  different in
 detail of wording, perhaps not intentionally at all points.                
                                                                           
    Lastly, there  is an  interesting difference  between the  passage in
 which Gollum makes his promise to Frodo as it  was at  this time  and as
 it  stands  in  TT.  When  Gollum  said  'Smeagol  will  swear   on  the
 precious',  there followed  both in  initial drafting  and in  the manu-
 script:                                                                   
                                                                           
      Frodo  stepped  back.  'On the  precious!' he  said. 'Oh,  yes! And
    what will he swear?'                                                    
                                                                           
      'To  be  very,  very  good,'  said Gollum.  Then crawling  to Frodo's
    feet ...                                                                
                                                                           
 This was changed at once, again both in draft and manuscript, to:          
                                                                           
      Frodo stepped back. 'On the precious?' he asked, puzzled for a        
    moment: he had thought that precious was Gollum's self that he          

 talked to. 'Ah! On the precious!' he said, with the disconcerting          
 frankness that had already startled Sam [draft text: that surprised        
 and alarmed Sam, and still more Gollum].                                   
   'One Ring to rule them all and in the Darkness bind them.                
 Would you commit your promises to that, Smeagol? ...' (&c. as in          
 TT, pp. 224-5]                                                             
                                                                           
 The final text of this passage was not substituted till much later.(15)    

                              NOTES.                                    
                                                                       
  1. For the  earliest ideas  for this  part of  the narrative,  when Sam
     crossed   the  Anduin   alone  and   tracked  Frodo   together  with
     Gollum,  see  the   outline  'The   Story  Foreseen   from  Lorien',
     VII.328 - 9.                                                       
  2. See the Note on Chronology following these Notes.                  
  3. In  'The  Story  Foreseen from  Lorien', VII.328,  Frodo put  on the
     Ring to escape from Gollum.                                        
  4. An argument against this is that in the 1957  letter my  father gave
     the page-reference II.209, whereas this text extends to  II.210. But
     there are various ways of explaining this, and  the evidence  of the
     manuscripts seems to me to count more heavily.                     
  5. Together  with  these  earliest  manuscripts   of  'The   Taming  of
     Smeagol' was  found a  slip bearing  the following  pencilled notes,
     which may very well not have been written  all at  one time  (I have
     added the numbers)                                                 
  (1) Account of Rings in  Ch. II  ['Ancient History']  needs altering
     a  little.  It was  Elves who  made the  rings, which  Sauron stole.
     He  only  made  the  One  Ring.   The  Three   were  never   in  his
     possession and were unsullied.                                     
  (2)  Tom  could  have  got  rid  of  the Ring  all along  [? without
     further]....... - if asked!                                        
  (3)  The  Company  must  carry  ropes  -  either  from  Rivendell or
     from Lorien.                                                       
  (4)  Emyn  Muil =  Sarn Gebir  as a  knot or  range of  stony hills.
     [Sern  Erain  >]  Sarn  Aran  the  King  Stones   =  the   Gates  of
     Sarn Gebir.                                                        
     With  (1)  cf.  VI.404;  VII.254-5  and  259  -  60.  In  (2),  most
     frustratingly, I have not been able to  form any  guess even  at the
     altogether illegible  word. (3)  seems quite  likely to  have arisen
     while  my  father  was  pondering  the   descent  from   Sarn  Gebir
     (Emyn  Muil).  On  the  absence  of  the  mentions  in  LR  of Sam's
     having  no rope,  and the  absence of  the passage  concerning ropes
     at  the leaving  of Lothlorien,  see VII.165,  183, 280.  As regards
     (4), in the  long-abandoned opening  of the  chapter the  hills were

             
                                                                          
     still  called  Sarn  Gebir, but  when my  father took  it up  again in
     1944  they  had  become  the  Emyn  Muil  (note  7).   Many  ephemeral
     names  to  replace  Sam  Gebir are  found in  notes given  in VII.424.
     Sern  Aranath  replaced  the  Gates  of  Sarn   Gebir  on   the  manu-
     scripts of 'The Great River' (VII.362 and note 21).                   
  6. This sentence, little changed, is given to Frodo in TT (p. 211).      
  7. The first occurrence  of Emyn  Muil as  written in  a text  ab initio.
     See note 5.                                                           
  8. 30 fathoms: 180 feet.
  9. leant  forwards:  i.e.  sloped  down   outwards  from   the  vertical,
     what  my  father  earlier  in  this  account  called  'backward': 'The
     cliff  was  indeed  no  longer  sheer,   but  sloped   somewhat  back-
     ward.'                                                                
 10. In  the following  text the  corresponding passage  has: 'He  cast the
     end  to  Sam,  who  tied  it  about  his waist,  and grasped  the line
     above his  head with  both hands.'  In the  present text  the sentence
     seems to have been left unfinished and in the air.                    
 11. These  figures  were  much  changed. At  first, as  shown in  any case
     by  hobbit-ells,  my father  did not  intend the  'English ell'  of 45
     inches,  for  by  that  measure  80 ells  is 300  feet or  50 fathoms,
     getting on for double the height of  the cliff  as Frodo  had reckoned
     it:  whereas  Sam  thought  that  the rope  of 80  ells would  only be
     'near  enough'  to  Frodo's  guess  of  30  fathoms  or  180  feet. My
     father seems first to have  changed '80'  to '77',  and in  the margin
     he wrote '2 feet' and '154'. He then changed '2 feet' to  '2 1/2 feet',
     by which measure  77 ells  would give 192 1/2 feet.  At some  point he
     struck out hobbit- in hobbit-ells; and finally he substituted  50 ells
     for  the length  of the  rope. He  had then  evidently decided  on the
     measure of 1 ell  = 45  inches, according  to which  50 ells  would be
     equivalent to 187 1/2 feet, just a little longer than the height of the
     cliff  as  Frodo  had  estimated  it.  This  was  the measure  in TT,
     where the cliff  was about  18 fathoms,  and the  rope about  30 ells;
     taking these figures as exact,  there would  be 4 1/2 feet of  rope to
     spare  ('there  was  still  a good  bight in  Frodo's hands,  when Sam
     came to the bottom', TT p. 216).                                      
 12. The meaning is  presumably 'I  think I  can just  hold you',  but hold
     is certainly not the word written.                                    
 13. See the Note on Chronology below.                                     
 14. My  father  now  introduced  a  further  obstacle  to  the  sleuth  by
     using the  same piece  of paper  to write,  one on  top of  the other,
     drafts for wholly different portions of the narrative.                
 15. In these texts the word  precious when  referring to  the Ring  is not
     capitalised,  but  capitals  were   introduced  in   subsequent  type-
     scripts before the passage was changed to the final form.             

                            Note on the Chronology.                         
                                                                           
 In this chapter the narrative  opens on  the fifth  evening since  Frodo and
 Sam  had  fled  from  the  Company.  That  night  also  they  passed  in the
 Emyn Muil, and it was at  dusk on  the following  day (therefore  'the sixth
 evening') that they made their descent. Since  the date  of the  Breaking of
 the Fellowship  and the  flight of  Frodo and  Sam was  26 January  (for the
 chronology at this period  see pp.  3 -  4, and  VII.368, 406),  this should
 mean  that  the chapter  opens on  the evening  of the  30th, and  that they
 climbed  down  from  the  hills on  the evening  of the  31st. On  the other
 hand,  the great  storm is  described (p.  95) as  'hastening with  wind and
 thunder  over  the  Emyn Muil,  over Anduin,  over the  fields of  Rohan, on
 to  the  Hornburg  where  the  King Theoden  stood at  bay that  night'. But
 the  Battle  of  the  Hornburg  was  fought  on  the  night  of  1  February
                                                                           
 (pp.5-6).                                                                   
   Two brief time-schemes, which I will call Scheme 'A' and Scheme
 B', bear on the question of the chronology of Frodo's wandering in
 the Emyn Muil relative to events in the lands west of Anduin. Scheme
 'B', which begins at this point, is perfectly explicit:
    Thursday Jan. 26 to Wednesday Feb. 1 Frodo and Sam in Emyn
       Muil (Sarn Gebir).
    Night Feb. 1 - 2 Frodo and Sam meet Gollum. (Storm that reached
      Helm's Deep about midnight on Feb.1 - 2 passed over Emyn Muil
      earlier in the night.)
    Scheme 'A', also beginning here, has:
      Jan. 31 Cold night
      Feb. 1 Descend, dusk (5.30). Meet Gollum about 10 p.m. Journey
        in gully till daybreak.
  According to these, it would have been on the sixth evening since the
  flight of Frodo and Sam, not the fifth, that the chapter opens.
                                                                           
  Since  Vol.  VII  The  Treason  of  Isengard  was  completed  I  have found
 two  manuscript  pages  that  are  very   clearly  notes   on  chronological
 alterations  needed  that  my  father  made  in  October  1944,   some  four
 and  a  half  months  after  he  had  reached  the  end  of  The  Two Towers
 (see  VII.406 -  7). On  12 October  (Letters no.  84) he  wrote to  me that
 he  had  'struck  a  most   awkward  error   (one  or   two  days)   in  the
 synchronization',  which  would  'require  tiresome  small   alterations  in
 many  chapters';  and  on  16  October  (Letters  no. 85)  he wrote  that he
 had  devised  a solution  'by inserting  an extra  day's Entmoot,  and extra
 days into Trotter's chase and Frodo's journey ...'                         
  These  notes  refer  chapter  by  chapter  to the  changes that  would have
 to  be  made  (but  not  to  all).  Some  of  them  have   been  encountered
 already:  the  complex  alterations  to  'The Riders  of Rohan'  in VII.406;
 the  additional  day  of the  Entmoot in  VII.419; and  the changes  in 'The
 White  Rider' in  VII.425. Nothing  further need  be said  of these.  But in
 a note  on 'The  Taming of  Smeagol' the  question of  the storm  is raised;

                                  
                                                                         
 and  here  my  father  directed  that  the reference  to Theoden  and the
 Hornburg  should  be  cut  out,  because  it 'won't  fit'. He  noted that
 the thunderstorm over  the Emyn  Muil was  at about  five o'clock  in the
 evening of 31 January, while the thunder  in the  Battle of  the Hornburg
 was  about  midnight  of  1  February,  and  that  31  hours to  travel a
 distance  of  some  350  miles  was  too  slow;   but  no   solution  was
 proposed.                                                                
  I  have referred  (VII.368) to  an elaborate  time-scheme that  was made
 after the  changes of  October 1944  had been  introduced. This,  being a
 major working  chronology, is  in places  fearsomely difficult  to inter-
 pret, on account of later alterations  and overwritings  in ink  over the
 original pencil. It  is arranged  in columns,  describing 'synoptically',
 and fairly fully, the movements of all the major actors  in the  story on
 each  day.  It begins  on the  fifth day  of the  voyage down  Anduin and
 ends at the beginning of the ascent to the  pass of  Kirith Ungol;  and I
 would  guess  that  it  belongs with  the work  on chronology  in October
 1944, rather than later. On this scheme, which I will call 'S', my father
 afterwards wrote 'Old Timatal stuff' (Iceiandic timatal 'chronology').
  In  this  scheme  S  the  death  of  Boromir  and  the  Breaking  of the
 Fellowship was put back by a day, to Wednesday 25 January.               
                                                                         
  Jan.25 Company broken up. Death of Boromir.... Frodo and                
  Sam cross river eastward and fly into E. of Emyn Muil.                  
  Jan.26 Frodo and Sam wandering in Emyn Muil (1st evening                
  since flight).                                                          
  fan. 27 In Emyn Muil (2nd evening).                                     
  Jan. 28 In Emyn Muil (3rd evening).                                     
  Jan. 29 In Emyn Muil (4th evening).                                     
  Jan. 30 On brink of Emyn Muil. Spend cold night under a rock            
  (5th evening).                                                          
  Jan. 31 Descent from Emyn Muil at nightfall. Meet Gollum about          
  10 p.m.                                                                 
  Journey in the gully (Jan.31/Feb.1).                                     
                                                                         
 Here  therefore  the  opening  of the  story in  'The Taming  of Smeagol'
 was on the evening of Jan. 30, and that was explicitly the  sixth evening
 since the flight;  but my  father was  for some  reason not  counting the
 first evening in the Emyn Muil (Jan. 25), and  so he  called that  of Jan.
 30  the  fifth.  Perhaps  it  was  the  same  counting that  explains the
 discrepancy  between  Scheme  B  and the  text of  the chapter  (p. 100).
 And it may well  be in  any case  that the  records of  these complicated
 manoeuvres are insufficient, or that there are clues which I  have failed
 to perceive.                                                             
  In Scheme B,  as in  the completed  manuscript of  the chapter  (p. 95),
 it is explicit that the  storm over  the Emyn  Muil reached  the Hornburg
 later  that  same night;  it was  moving fast  ('hastening with  wind and
 thunder'). In Scheme S, however, this is not so; for (just as in  the note

  of October 1944 referred to above) the descent of Frodo and Sam         
  from the Emyn Muil was at nightfall of Jan. 31, but the Battle of the
  Hornburg began on the night of Feb. 1. S as written had no mention of
  the great storm, but my father added in against Jan. 31 'Thunder at      
  nightfall', and then subsequently 'It crawls west', with a line apparent-
  ly directing to Feb. 1. The storm over Rohan, slowly overtaking the      
  Riders as they rode west across the plains on their second day out of
  Edoras (at the beginning of the chapter 'Helm's Deep') and bursting      
  over the Hornburg in the middle of the night, was already present       
  when my father came to write 'The Taming of Smeagol'. The storm          
  over the Emyn Muil moving westwards, if not actually conceived for       
  the purpose, obviously had the desirable effect of drawing the now       
  sundered stories, east and west of Anduin, together. The revised         
  passage about the storm in 'The Taming of Smeagol' given on p. 95        
  was clearly intended to allow for another day in the storm's progress,
  and implies that Frodo and Sam climbed down out of the hills on the 
  day before the Battle of the Hornburg, as in S; and this resolves the
  problem of time and distance stated in the note of October 1944 by       
  asserting that the great storm did not 'hasten', but 'rolled on slowly
  through the night.'                                                      
    But in The Tale of Years the relative dating is entirely different:

                 Scheme S.               
                                        
 Frodo enters Emyn Muil. (25 Jan.) Day 1.
 In Emyn Muil.   (26 Jan.) Day 2.          
 In Emyn Muil.   (27 Jan.) Day 3.          
 In Emyn Muil.   (28 Jan.) Day 4.          
 In Emyn Muil.   (29 Jan.) Day 5.          
 In Emyn Muil.   (30 Jan.) Day 6.          
 Descent from Emyn Muil. (31 Jan.) Day 7.
 Battle of the Hornburg. (1 Feb.)  Day 8.
                                        
            The Tale of Years.            
                                        
 Frodo enters Emyn Muil. (26 Feb.) Day 1.
 In Emyn Muil.   (27 Feb.) Day 2.          
 In Emyn Muil.   (28 Feb.) Day 3.          
 Descent from Emyn Muil. (29 Feb.) Day 4.
                         (30 Feb.) Day 5.
                         (1 Mar.) Day 6.
                         (2 Mar.) Day 7.
 Battle of the Hornburg. (3 Mar.) Day 8.

 Thus in  the final  chronology the  Battle of  the Hornburg  took place
 four nights after the descent  of Frodo  and Sam  and the  meeting with
 Gollum.  Yet  the  revised description  of the  westward course  of the
 storm in 'The Taming of Smeagol' (p. 95) survived into the  proof stage

 of The Lord of the Rings. On the  proof my  father noted  against the
 passage:  'Chronology  wrong.  The  storm  of Frodo  was 3  days before
 Theoden's  ride'  (i.e.  29  February  and  2  March,  the day  on which
 Theoden  rode  from  Edoras).  The  passage  as  it  stands  in  TT, pp.
 215-16, was substituted at the eleventh hour: giving the great  storm a
 more widely curving path, and suggesting,  perhaps, a  reinforcement of
 its power and magnitude as it passed slowly over Ered Nimrais.        

                                    II.                                 
                                                                       
                        THE PASSAGE OF THE MARSHES.                     
                                                                       
 The writing of this chapter can again be closely dated from the letters
 that my father wrote to me in South Africa in 1944. On the 13th of     
 April (Letters no. 60) he said that on the previous day he had read his
 'recent chapter' ('The Taming of Smeagol') to C. S. Lewis and Charles
 Williams, and that he had begun another. On the 18th April (Letters
 no. 61) he wrote: I hope to see C.S.L. and Charles W. tomorrow         
 morning and read my next chapter - on the passage of the Dead          
 Marshes and the approach to the Gates of Mordor, which I have now      
 practically finished.'(1) And on the 23rd of April (Letters no. 62) he
 wrote: 'I read my second chapter, Passage of the Dead Marshes, to:     
 Lewis and Williams on Wed. morning [19 April). It was approved. I      
 have now nearly done a third: Gates of the Land of Shadow. But this
 story takes me in charge, and I have already taken three chapters over
 what was meant to be one!' The completed manuscript of 'The            
 Passage of the Marshes' was indeed first entitled 'Kirith Ungol' (that
 being still the name of the main pass into Mordor) - for he began      
 writing the manuscript before he had by any means finished the initial
 drafting of the chapter.                                               
  Essential ideas for this part of the narrative had in fact emerged a
 long time before, in the outline The Story Foreseen from Lorien        
 (VII.329 - 30) - when he estimated that the chapter would be num-      
 bered XXV, eight less than the event had proved. In that outline he
 wrote:                                                                 
                                                                       
  Gollum  pleads  for   forgiveness,  and   promises  help,   and  having
  nowhere  else  to turn  Frodo accepts.  Gollum says  he will  lead them
  over  the  Dead  Marshes  to  Kirith  Ungol.  (Chuckling to  himself to
  think that that is just the way he would wish them to go.) ...        
   They sleep in pairs, so that one is always awake with Gollum.        
   Gollum  all  the  while  is scheming  to betray  Frodo. He  leads them
  cleverly  over  the Dead  Marshes. There  are dead  green faces  in the
  stagnant pools; and the  dry reeds  hiss like  snakes. Frodo  feels the
  strength of the searching eye as they proceed.                        
   At  night  Sam keeps  watch, only  pretending to  be asleep.  He hears
  Gollum muttering to himself,  words of  hatred for  Frodo and  lust for
  the Ring.                                                             
   The  three  companions  now  approach   Kirith  Ungol,   the  dreadful
  ravine  which  leads   into  Gorgoroth.   Kirith  Ungol   means  Spider
  Glen: there dwelt great spiders ...                                   

    A single page of notes shows my  father's thoughts  as he  embarked at
  last on the writing of this  story. These  notes were  not written  as a
  continuous outline and not all were written at the same time, but I give
  them in the sequence in which they stand on the page.                   
                                                                         
    Food   problem.   Gollum   chokes   at   lembas   (but  it   does  him
  good?).  Goes  off  and  comes  back  with  grimy  fingers  [?and face].
  Once he heard him crunching in dark.                                    
                                                                         
                                Next chapter.                              
                                                                         
    Gollum  takes  them  down  into  the  water   gully  and   then  turns
  away  eastward.  It  leads  to  a  hard  point  in  the  midst   of  the
  Marshes.  Over  Dead  Marshes.  Dead  faces.  In   some  of   the  pools
  if  you  looked  in  you  saw  your  own  face  all  green and  dead and
  corrupted. To Kirith Ungol.                                             
    Change in Gollum as they draw near                                    
    Gollum  sleeps  quite  unconcerned  -  quietly at  first; but  as they
  draw   near  to   Mordor  he   seems  to   get  nightmares.   Sam  hears
  him  beginning  to  hold  colloquies  with  himself.  It  is  a  sort of
  good  Smeagol  angry  with  a   bad  Gollum.   The  latter   [?grows]  -
  filled  with  hatred  of  the  Ring-bearer,  in  longing  to   be  Ring-
  master himself.                                                         
    Laid  up  [?in]  rock  near  gates  see great  movements in  and out.
  Explanation of why they had escaped the war-movement.                   
    They lie up in day in beds of reeds                                   
    Feeling  of  weight.  Ring  feels  heavier  and  heavier   on  Frodo's
  neck as Mordor approaches. He feels the Eye.                            
                                                                         
  Another page, written at any rate  before 'The  Passage of  the Marshes'
  had proceeded very far, outlines the story thus:                        
                                                                         
    They  come  to  a  point  where  the  gully  falls  into  the marshes.
  Brief  description  of  these  (which  take  about  3   to  4   days  to
  cross).  Pools  where  there  are  faces  some  horrible,  some  fair  -
  but  all  corrupted.  Gollum  says  it  is said  that they  are memories
  (?)  of  those who  fell in  ages past  in the  Battle before  Ennyn Dur
  the  Gates  of  Mordor  in  the  Great  Battle.  In  the  moon   if  you
  looked  in  some  pools  you  saw  your  own  face  fouled  and  corrupt
  and  dead.  Describe  the  pools  as  they  get  nearer  to   Mordor  as
  like green pools and rivers fouled by modern chemical works.            
    They  lie  up  in  foothills  and  see  armed  men  and  orcs  passing
  in.  Soon all  is clear.  Sauron is  gathering his  power and  hiding it
  in Mordor  in   readiness.  (Swart   men,  and   wild  men   with  long
  braided hair out of East; Orcs of the Eye etc.)                         

   On the far (East) Horn of the  Gates is  a tall  white tower.            
 Minas Ithil now  Minas Morghul  which guards  the pass.  It was            
 originally  built  by  the  men  of  Gondor  to  prevent Sauron            
 breaking out and was manned by the guards  of Minas  Ithil,(2) but            
 it fell soon into his hands. It now prevented any coming in. It            
 was manned by orcs and evil spirits. It had been  called [Neleg            
 Thilim >] Neleglos [the Gleaming >] the White Tooth.(3)                    
                                                                           
 This  last  passage  is  accompanied  by  a  little  sketch,  reproduced on
 p. 108 (no. I). Until now, the pass and  chief entry  into Mordor  had been
 named  Kirith  Ungol  (cf.  the  citation  from  'The  Story  Foreseen from
 Lorien'  on  p.  104).  When contemplating  the story  ahead as  he drafted
 'The  Passage  of  the  Marshes'  my  father  saw  that  this  was  not so:
 Kirith  Ungol  was  a  distinct way  through the  mountains -  and (plainly
 enough)  it  is  this  path  that  Sam  and  Frodo   are  going   to  take.
 Concomitantly  with  this, he  was proposing  to change  the site  of Minas
 Morgul as he had long  conceived it,  and as  it appears  on the  First Map
 (see  Map  III,  VII.309).(4) There, the  pass of  Kirith Ungol  was guarded
 by  two  towers,  one  on  either side  (see VII.349,  note 41),  and Minas
 Morgul was  away to  the west,  on the  other side  of the  mountains (i.e.
 on  the  western  side  of  the  northern  extremity  of  the   Duath,  the
 Mountains  of  Shadow);  whereas  now  Minas  Morgul  is  to  be  the tower
 that  guards  the pass.(5) A virtually  identical sketch  to this,  in faint
 pencil, is found on a page of drafting for 'The Black  Gate is  Closed'. It
 clearly  does  not belong  with that,  however (the  later text  is written
 across  it),  but  with   the  present   passage;  and   accompanying  this
 pencilled version of the sketch is this note:                              
                                                                           
   It  is better  for the  later story  that Minas  Ithil (Morghul)  should be
   actually at the Gates of Mordor on its East side.                        
                                                                           
 The scene is thus depicted from the North.                                 
   On  a  page  used  also  for  drafting  of 'The  Passage of  the Marshes'
 there  is another  sketch of  the tower  and the  pass (also  reproduced on
 p. 108, no. II), very similar except in one  important respect:  whereas in
 Sketch  I  the  cleft  of Kirith  Ungol is  placed immediately  below Minas
 Morgul (which thus stands on  a high  ridge or  'horn' between  the 'cleft'
 and the 'pass'), in Sketch II Kirith Ungol lies on the far side of the pass
 from  the  tower.  The  scene  is again  depicted from  the North,  for the
 accompanying  text  reads: 'Kirith  Ungol is  not the  main entrance  but a
 narrow cleft to [S(outh) >] West.' I  think it  almost certain  that Sketch
 II represents a further  stage in  the development  of the  conception, not
 its first appearance.                                                      
                                                                           
   Most  of  'The  Passage  of  the  Marshes'   is  extant   in  preliminary
 drafting (and most of it in excruciatingly difficult handwriting);  in this

          
                                                                            
 chapter my father made no  use of  his method  of writing  a text  in pencil
 and then setting  down a  more finished  version in  ink on  top of  it. The
 narrative in the draft is not perfectly continuous, and it is clear that (as
 commonly)  he  built  up  the  completed  manuscript  -  the  only  one made
 of  this  chapter  -  in stages.  The initial  drafting is  mostly extremely
 rough,  written  at  great  speed,  and in  places the  completed manuscript
 (while perfectly legible - it was  the text  from which  my father  read the
 chapter  to  Lewis  and Williams  on April  the 19th)  is itself  really the
 primary  composition,  constantly  corrected  and  changed  in  the  act  of
 writing. Nonetheless the  story of  the passage  of the  Dead Marshes  as it
 appears  in  The  Two  Towers  seems  to  have been  achieved almost  to the
 form  of  every  sentence  (apart   from  certain   substantial  alterations
 made very much later) in that week of April 1944.                           
  Only  in one  respect did  the initial  drafting differ  significantly from
 the  story as  it appears  in the  manuscript. This  was primarily  a matter
 of the narrative structure, but I give most of the  passage in  question, so
 well as I can make it  out, as  exemplification. It  takes up  from Gollum's
 words  'Snakes,  worms  in pools.  Lots of  things in  the pools.  No birds'
 (TT p. 234).                                                                
                                                                            
  So passed the third day of their travelling with Gollum.(6)                
  All the night they went on with brief halts. Now it was really             
 perilous at least for the hobbits. They went slowly  keeping close          
 in  line  and following  every move  of Gollum's  attentively. The          
 pools  grew  larger  and more  ominous and  the places  where feet          
 could  tread without  sinking into  [?chilly] gurgling  mires more          
 and  more  difficult  to  find.  There  were  no  more  reeds  and          
 grasses.                                                                    
  Later  in  the  night,  after  midnight, there  came a  change. A          
 light breeze got up  and grew  to a  cold wind:  it came  from the          
 North and though it had a bitter  tang it  seemed kindly  to them,          
 for it bore at last a hint of untainted airs and drove the reeking          
 mists into banks  with dark  channels in  between. The  cloudy sky          
 was  torn and tattered  and the  moon nearly  full rode  among the          
 [?  wrack].  Gollum cowered  and muttered  but the  hobbits looked          
 up  hopefully.  A  great  dark shadow  came out  of Mordor  like a          
 huge  bird  crossed the  moon and  went away  west. Just  the same          
 feeling  came on  them as  at the.....  they cast  themselves down          
 in the mire. But the shadow  passed quickly.  Gollum lay  like one          
 stunned  and  they had  to rouse  him. He  would say  only Wraiths          
 wraiths  [?under]  the moon.  The precious  the precious  is their          
 master.  They  see  everything  everywhere.  He  sees.  After that          
 [?even]  Frodo  sensed  a  change  in  Gollum  once  more.  He was          
 [?even] more fawning [and] friendly  but he  talked more  often in          

 (Two early sketches of Kirith Ungol.)

 [his] old manner. They had great difficulty in making him go on       
 while the moon                                                     
                                                                      
   The last passage was then rewritten ('After that Sam thought he
 sensed a change in Gollum again' ...) and the draft continues with a
 description of Frodo's weariness and slowness and the weight of the
 Ring that approaches the text in TT (p. 238). Then follows:           

 He now really felt it as a weight: and he was getting conscious
 of the Eye: it was that as much as the weight that made him
 cower and stoop as he walked. He felt like someone hidden in a
 room (?garden) when his deadly enemy comes in: knowing that
 he is there though he cannot yet see him the enemy stands at
 gaze to espy all comers with his deadly eye. Any movement
 is fraught with peril.(7) Gollum probably felt something of the
 same sort. After the passing of the shadow  of the  Nazgul that
 flew to Isengard it was difficult to get him to move if there was
 light. As long as the moon  lasted he  would only  creep forwards
 on  his  hands  cowering  and  whimpering.  He  was not  much use
 as a guide and Sam took to trying to find a path for  himself. In
 doing  so  he  stumbled  forward and  came down  on his  hands in
 sticky mire with his face bending  over a  dark pool  that seemed
 like  some  glazed but  grimed window  in the  moonlight. Wrench-
 ing his hands out of the  bog he  sprang back  with a  cry. There
 are dead faces ..... dead faces in the pool he cried, dead faces!
 Gollum  laughed.  The  Dead  Marshes,  yes,  yess. That  is their
 name. Should not look in when the  White Eye  is up.(8) What are
 they, who are  they, asked  Sam shuddering  and turning  to Frodo
 who  came  up  behind  him.  I  don't know  said Frodo.  No don't
 master  said  Sam,  they're  horrible. Nonetheless  Frodo crawled
 cautiously  to  the edge  and looked.  He saw  pale faces  - deep
 under  water  they  looked:  some grim  some hideous,  some noble
 and fair: but all horrible, corrupted, sickly, rotting ..........
 Frodo crawled back and hid his eyes.  I don't  know who  they are
 but  I  thought  I  saw  Men  and  Elves and  Orcs, all  dead and
 rotten. Yes yes, said Gollum cackling. All  dead and  rotten. The
 Dead  Marshes.  Men  and  Elves  and  Orcs.  There  was  a  great
 Battle  here  long  long  ago,  precious,  yes, when  Smeagol was
 young and happy long ago:(9) before the  precious came,  yes, yes.
 They  fought  on  the  plain  over there.  The Dead  Marshes have
 grown greater.                                                   
    But are  they really  there? Smeagol  doesn't know,  said Gol-
 lum. You can't reach them. I  we tried,  yes we  tried, precious,

 once: but you can't touch them. Only shapes to see  perhaps, not           
 to touch, no precious! Sam looked darkly  at him  and shuddered,           
 thinking he guessed why Smeagol had tried to reach them.                   
   The moon was now sinking west  into cloud  that lay  above far           
 Rohan  beyond  Anduin.  They  went  on  and  Gollum  again  took           
 the lead by [read but] Sam and Frodo found  that he  [read they]           
 could not keep their [?fascinated] eyes from  straying whenever           
 they passed some pool of black water. If they did so they caught           
 glimpses of the pallid dead faces. At last they came to  a place           
 where Gollum halted, a wide pool ...... barred their way.                  
   The pools lit by will o' the wisp fire reveal dead faces. The           
 moon shows their own.(10)         
 ............  The  moon  came  out  of  its  cloud.  They looked           
 in. But they saw no  faces out  of the  vanished past.  They saw           
 their  own......  Sam  Gollum  and Frodo  looking up  with dead           
 eyes and livid rotting flesh at them.                                      
   Let's get out of this foul place!                                        
   Long  way  to go  yet said  Gollum. Must  get to  somewhere to           
 lie up before day.                                                         
                                                                           
   This section  of drafting  peters out  here. In  the manuscript  the text
 becomes that of TT  at almost  all points:  the sequence  of the  story has
 been reconstructed, so that the  change in  the weather  and the  flight of
 the  Nazgul  follows  the  passage  of  the  pools of  the dead  faces; and
 there  is  no  further  hint  of the  idea (going  back to  the preliminary
 notes,  p. 105)  that the  beholder's own  face was  mirrored as  dead when
 the moonlight shone on the pools.                                          
   It is notable that in the draft the Nazgul is said to have been flying to
 Isengard. In the  manuscript as  first written  this was  not said:  '... a
 vast  shape  winged  and  ominous:  it  scudded across  the moon,  and with
 a  deadly  cry  went  away  westward,  outrunning  the  moon  in  its  fell
 speed....  But  the  shadow  passed  quickly,  and   behind  it   the  wind
 roared  away,  leaving the  Dead Marshes  bare and  bleak.' After  the last
 sentence,  however,  my  father  added,  probably  not  long   after,  'The
 Nazgul  had  gone,  flying  to  Isengard  with  the speed  of the  wrath of
 Sauron.' The  rewriting of  the passage,  so that  the Nazgul  returns and,
 flying  lower  above  them,  sweeps  back to  Mordor, was  done at  a later
 time (see  the Note  on Chronology  at the  end of  this chapter);  but the
 words  in  TT  (p.  237) 'with  a deadly  cry went  away westward'  are in
 fact a vestige of the original conception.                                 
   Among   various   other  differences   and  developments   the  following
 seem the most worth remarking.                                             
   In the original draft, and at  first in  the manuscript,  Gollum's 'song'
 (TT pp. 227 - 8) was wholly different after the first line:               

   The cold hard lands
 To feet and hands        
   they are unkind.       
 There wind is shrill,
 The stones are chill;
   there's nought to find.

   Our heart is set
 On water wet        
   in some deep pool.
 O how we wish         
 To taste of fish
   so sweet and cool!

 There was no reference to 'Baggins' and the fish-riddle.                 
   The story that they  slept the  whole of  the day  after they  had come
 down from the  Emyn Muil  was not  present at  first. In  the preliminary
 draft of the opening of the chapter  Sam, after  testing that  Gollum was
 really asleep by saying fissh in his ear, did not fall asleep:           
                                                                         
   Time  seemed  to  drag;  but  after  an  hour  or  two  Gollum  sat  up
   suddenly  wide  awake  as  if  he  had   been  called.   He  stretched,
   yawned, got up and  began to  climb out  of the  gully. 'Hi,  where are
   you  off  to?'  cried Sam.  'Smeagol's very  hungry,' said  Gollum. 'Be
   back soon.'                                                            
                                                                         
 In the manuscript the final story appears,  to the  extent that  Sam does
 fall  asleep;  but  when  he  wakes  'the  sky above  was full  of bright
 daylight.'  This  however   was  changed   immediately:  Sam   and  Frodo
 slept the whole day  away, not  waking until  after sunset,  and Gollum's
 departure to find something to eat is postponed to the evening.(11)      
   There can be no doubt that  the geography  of the  region in  which the
 Dead Marshes lay had now  been substantially  changed. It  is said  in TT
 (p. 232):                                                                
                                                                         
   The  hobbits  were  now wholly  in the  hands of  Gollum. They  did not
   know, and could not guess in that misty light, that  they were  in fact
   only  just  within  the  northern  borders  of  the  marshes,  the main
   expanse  of which  lay south  of them.  They could,  if they  had known
   the lands, with some delay have retraced their steps a little, and then
   turning  east have  come round  over hard  roads to  the bare  plain of
   Dagorlad.                                                              
                                                                         
 This passage appears  in the  manuscript, and  is found  embryonically in
 the  original draft,  of which,  though partly  illegible, enough  can be
 made  out  to  see that  the new  conception was  present: 'They  were in
 fact  just  within  the  north-west  bounds  of  the  Dead  Marshes', and
 '[they could] have  come round  the eastern  side to  the hard  of Battle
 Plain.'  The First  Map (Maps  II and  IV(C), VII.305,  317) and  the large
 map based on it that I made in 1943 are entirely  at variance  with this:
 for  in  that  conception  the  No  Man's  Land  lay  between  Sarn Gebir
 (Emyn  Muil)  and  the pass  into Mordor.  There could  be no  reason for
 one  journeying  in  those hills  to enter  the Dead  Marshes if  he were
 making for the pass  (Kirith Ungol  on those  maps); nor,  if he  were at
 the  edge  of the  marshes, would  he by  any means  come to  Dagorlad if

  instead of going through them he went round to their east. Essentially
  what has happened is that the Dead Marshes have been moved                
  south-west, so that they lie between the Emyn Muil and the Gates           
  of Mordor - into the region marked 'No Man's Land' on the First           
  Map - and so become continuous with the Wetwang or Nindalf (see           
  VII.320-1 and below); this is the geography seen on the large-scale       
  map of Gondor and Mordor accompanying The Return of the King.(12)         
    In reply to Frodo's question whether they must cross the Dead          
  Marshes, Gollum answered in the original draft (cf. TT p. 233): ' "No     
  need. Back a little, and round a little" - his skinny arm waved away      
  north and east - "and you can come dry-foot to the Plain. Dagorlad        
  that is, where the Battle was fought and He lost the precious, yess" -
  he added this in a sort of whisper to himself.' The manuscript here has
  the text of TT; but subsequently, in Gollum's explanation of the dead     
  faces in the marshes (TT p. 235), he says: 'There was a great Battle      
  long ago, yes, so they told him when Smeagol was young, long ago,         
  before the Precious came. They took It from the Lord then, Elves and      
  Men took It. It was a great battle. They fought on the plain for days     
  and months and years at the Gates of Mornennyn [> Morannon]' (for         
  the original draft of this see p. 109). Gollum's reference to the story of
  the taking of the Ring from Sauron was removed much later.                
    The account of the morning after the night of the dead faces in the     
  pools and the flight of the Nazgul, and of the lands through which they
  passed after leaving the marshes, was different in important respects     
  from that in TT, pp. 238 - 9. The manuscript reads (following an initial
  draft):                                                                   
                                                                           
    When  day  came  at  last,  the hobbits  were surprised  to see  how close
    the  ominous   mountains  had   drawn:  the   outer  buttresses   and  the
    broken  hills  at  their  feet  were  now  no  more  than  a  dozen  miles
    away.   Frodo  and   Sam  looked   round  in   horror:  dreadful   as  the
    Marshes  had  been  in  their decay  their end  was more  loathsome still.
    Even  to  the  mere  of  the  dead  faces  some  haggard phantom  of green
    spring would come ... (&c. as in TT p. 239)                            
                                                                           
  The extended and  altered passage  that replaces  this in  TT, introduced
  at a  later stage,  was due  to considerations  of geography  and chronol-
  ogy.  With  this  new passage  two more  nights are  added to  the journey
  (see the Note on Chronology  at the  end of  this chapter  and the  map on
  p. 117), and during  this stage  of it  they pass  through a  country seen
  from  the  end  of  the  marshes  as  'long  shallow  slopes,  barren  and
  pitiless', and described  subsequently as  'the arid  moors of  the Noman-
  lands'.  Here   this  name   reappears  from   Celeborn's  words   to  the
  Company  in  'Farewell  to  Lorien'  (FR  p.  390) and  the old  maps: see
  VII.320-1 and above.                                                      

                                      
                                                                        
  An  isolated  page  carries  two distinct  elements, though  very prob-
 ably both were set down  at the  same time.  The change  of the  name of
 the  Gates  of Mordor  in the  act of  writing from  Ennyn Dur  (the name
 on  Sketch I,  p. 108)  first to  Morennyn and  then to  Mornennyn shows
 that this page preceded the point in the writing of the  manuscript text
 where  Gollum  speaks  of  the  dead  faces  in  the  pools,  for  there
 Mornennyn appears (p. 112), but it is convenient to give it here since it
 concerns the narrative of the end of the chapter  (and the  beginning of
 the next).                                                              
                                                                        
  The  famous  pass  of  [Ennyn   (Dur)  >   Morennyn  >]   Mornennyn  the
  Gates  of  Mordor  was  guarded  by  two  towers:  the  Teeth  of Mordor
  [Nelig  Morn  Mel  >]  Nelig  Myrn.  Built   by  Gondorians   long  ago:
  now  ceaselessly  manned.  Owing  to  ceaseless  passage  of  arms  they
  dare not  try to  enter so  they turn  W. and  South. Gollum  tells them
  of  Kirith  Ungol  beneath shadow  [of] M.  Morgul. It  is a  high pass.
  He  does  not  tell  them  of  the  Spiders.  They  creep in  to M[inas]
  M[orgul].                                                             
                                                                        
 This  text is  accompanied by  a further  sketch of  the site  of Kirith
 Ungol, reproduced on p. 114. It is clear from this that the transference
 of Minas  Morgul to  become the  fortress guarding  the Black  Gates was
 a passing idea now abandoned; and  it was  no doubt  at this  very point
 (Minas Morgul being restored  to its  old position  in the  Mountains of
 Shadow  a  good  way  south  of  the  Black  Gates)  that  the southward
 journey along the western side of the  mountains entered  the narrative.
 But it is also clear that the Tower of Kirith Ungol had not yet emerged:
 the cleft of the spiders passes beneath Minas Morgul, on the  south side
 (on the assumption that the scene is  depicted from  the West);  and the
 original story in the outline 'The Story Foreseen from Lorien'  is again
 present, that  Frodo and  Sam entered  Minas Morgul  (but there  is here
 no mention of Frodo's capture).                                         
  In  the  text  accompanying Sketch  I on  p. 108  it is  Minas Morghul,
 above  the Black  Gates, that  was called  'the White  Tooth', Neleglos;
 now there emerge  (or perhaps  re-emerge, from  the original  two towers
 guarding the pass, see p. 106) the Teeth of Mordor, Nelig Myrn.         
  It will be seen subsequently (p. 122) that at this stage 'the  Gates of
 Mordor',  'the  Black  Gates' (Ennyn  Dur, Mornennyn)  were specifically
 names of the pass, not of any barrier built across it.                  
  The  other  brief  text  on  this  page  places  Sam's  overhearing  of
 Gollum's disputation with himself (foreseen  already in  the preliminary
 notes to the chapter, p. 105) at this point in the narrative  (though it
 seems that at this stage my father envisaged them passing a night, not a
 day, before the Black Gates).                                           
                                                                        
  The  night  watching  the  [Ennyn  D(ur)  >]  Mornennyn. It  is Frodo's
  turn  to  watch.  Sam  sleeps  and  suddenly  awakes  thinking  he  has

  (Third sketch of Kirith Ungol.)

  heard his master calling. But he  sees Frodo  has fallen  asleep. Gollum
  is sitting by him, gazing at him.  Sam hears  him arguing  with himself:
  Smeagol versus 'another'. Pale light and a green light alternate  in his
  eyes. But it is not hunger or desire to  eat Frodo  that he  is battling
  with: it is the call of the Ring. His long hand keeps  on going  out and
  paw[ing]  towards  Frodo  and  then  is pulled  back. Sam  rouses Frodo.
                                                                        
  The actually  reported 'colloquy'  of Gollum  was developed  in stages.
 His references to 'She' ('She might help'), and Sam's passing reflection
 on  who  that  might be,  were added  subsequently, doubtless  when that
 part of the story was  reached. A  change made  much later  altered what
 the 'two Gollums' said about Bilbo and  the 'birthday  present'; roughly
 in  the  initial  draft,  and  then  in  the  manuscript  and subsequent
 typescripts, the passage read:                                          
                                                                        
          'Oh no, not if it doesn't please us. Still he's a Baggins, my
  precious, yes a Baggins. A Baggins stole it.'                          
    'No, not steal: it was a present.'                                   
    'Yes, steal. We never gave it, no never. He found it and he said     
  nothing, nothing. We hates Baggins.'                                   
                                                                        
  Lastly,  in  the  manuscript  and  following  typescripts  the  chapter
 ended at the words: 'In the falling dusk they scrambled  out of  the pit
 and slowly threaded their way through the  dead land'  (TT p.  242). All
 that  follows  in  TT,  describing  the menace  of a  Ringwraith passing
 overhead  unseen  at  dusk  and again  an hour  after midnight,  and the
 prostration of Gollum, was  added to  the typescripts  at a  later stage
 (see the Note on Chronology below).                                     
                                                                        
                                  NOTES.                                 
                                                                        
 1. My father went on to speak of  a letter  he had  written adjudicat-
    ing  a  dispute  in  an  army  mess  concerning the  pronunciation of
    the  name  of  the poet  Cowper (Letters  no. 61).  A draft  for this
    letter is found on a page of drafting for the passage  describing the
    change in the weather over the marshes, TT pp. 236 - 7.              
 2. This, I believe, is the first appearance of the conception that the
    fortresses  on  the  confines  of  Mordor  had  been   built  looking
    inwards and not outwards.                                            
 3. Cf. the Etymologies (V.376), stem NEL-EK 'tooth'.                     
 4. My  father  had  in  fact  moved Minas  Morgul further  north from
    its  position  as  originally  shown  on  the  First  Map   (east  of
    Osgiliath),  and  placed  it  not far  from the  northern tip  of the
    Mountains  of  Shadow  (see  VII..310).  With  this  cf.  'The  Story
    Foreseen  from   Lorien',  where   Minas  Morgul   was  said   to  be
    reached  by  a  path  that  'led up  into the  mountains -  the north
    horn  of  the Mountains  of Shadow  that sundered  the ashen  vale of

     Gorgoroth  from  the  valley  of  the  Great  River'  (VII.333). But
     Minas Morgul was still on the  western side  of the  mountains (i.e.
     on the other side of the mountains to the Pass of Kirith Ungol).     
  5. In notes at the end of 'The  Story Foreseen  from Lorien'  my father
     had suggested that Frodo should be taken  as captive  to one  of the
     guard-towers of the pass,  and in  a time-scheme  of that  period he
     changed  'Sam  rescues  Frodo  in  Minas  Morgul'  to  'Sam  rescues
     Frodo  in  Gorgos'   (see  VII.344);   and  again   (VII.412):  'The
     winding  stair must  be cut  in rocks  and go  up from  Gorgoroth to
     watch-tower.  Cut  out  Minas  Morgul.'  Now,  as it  appears, these
     conceptions  were  to  be  fused:  Frodo  was again  to be  taken to
     Minas  Morgul,  but   Minas  Morgul   was  itself   the  watch-tower
     above                            the                           pass.
  6. the third day: see the Note on Chronology below.                     
  7. This  passage  was developed  in the  manuscript thus,  before being
     changed to the text of TT (p. 238):                                  
                                                                         
        Frodo knew just where the  present habitation  and heart  of that
        will  now was.  He could  have walked,  or flown  straight there.
        He  was  facing  it: and  its potency  beat upon  his brow  if he
        raised it for a moment. He  felt like  someone who,  covered only
        by a  grey garment,  has strayed  into a  garden, when  his enemy
        enters. The enemy knows he is there,  even if  he cannot  yet see
        him, and he stands at gaze, silent, patient, deadly, sweeping all
        corners  with  the  hatred of  his eye.  Any movement  is fraught
        with peril.                                                       
                                                                         
  8. when  the  White  Eye  is  up:  throughout  this  part of  the story
     Gollum's  names   for  the   Sun  and   Moon  were   originally  the
     Yellow  Eye  and  the  White  Eye,  not  the  Yellow  Face  and  the
     White  Face.  -  TT  has  here,  as does  the manuscript,  'when the
     candles are lit': see note 10.                                       
  9. Cf. Gollum's words in TT (p. 235):  'There was  a great  battle long
     ago,  yes,  so  they  told him  when Smeagol  was young'.  His words
     in  the  present  draft  ('a great  battle here  long long  ago when
     Smeagol was  young') might  suggest the  far shorter  time-span (see
     p. 21, and VII.450 note 11); but the manuscript  had from  the first
     'so they said when Smeagol was young'.                               
 10. This was no doubt the point at  which the  idea of  the marsh-lights
     entered (ignis fatuus, u ill-o'-the-wisp, jack-o'-lantern). In TT, as
     in the manuscript, Gollum calls  them 'candles  of corpses',  and in
     time-schemes of this period my  father referred  to the  'episode of
     the  corpse-candles'.  Corpse-candle  is   defined  in   the  Oxford
     Dictionary  as  'a  lambent  flame seen  in a  churchyard or  over a
     grave, and superstitiously believed to appear as  an omen  of death,
     or to indicate the route of a coming funeral.'                       
 11. In  the  conversation  between  Frodo  and  Sam  that   follows  (TT

 (Frodo's journey to the Morannon.)

  p. 231), in Frodo's words 'If we can nurse our limbs  to bring  us to
  Mount Doom'  the name  is spelt  thus in  the preliminary  draft, but
  the  manuscript  has  'Mount  Dum':  this spelling  is found  also in
  the preliminary draft of Frodo's vision on Amon Hen, VII.373.       
12. The  large-scale map  of Gondor  and Mordor  was closely  based on
  a map  of my  father's. This  included the  track of  Frodo's journey
  from  Rauros  to'  the  Morannon,  and  I  have redrawn  this section
  from  the  original (p.  117). My  father's map  is in  some respects
  hard to interpret, for it was made  roughly and  hastily in  point of
  its actual  execution, the  'contour-lines' being  very impressionis-
  tic,  while  the Nindalf  and the  Dead Marshes  are shown  merely by
  rough  pencil  hatching,  for which  I have  substituted conventional
  reed-tufts; but I have attempted to redraw it as precisely as  I can.
  The  features  of  the uppermost  line of  squares were  only roughed
  in on the original, above the top of the  map, in  order to  show the
  track  of  the journey,  and my  version published  in The  Return of
  the King excluded this  element. The  squares are  of one  inch side,
  = 25 miles.                                                         
                                                                     
                        Note on the Chronology.                       
                                                                     
 As the story stood when the manuscript of this chapter  was completed
 but before those changes were made to it that belong to a later stage
 the chronology was as follows (proceeding from  the date  February 1,
 when Frodo and Sam climbed down out of the Emyn Muil, p. 100):       

         Feb. 1 - 2 Night. They advance along the gully. (Journey 1)
 (Day 1) Feb. 2 They sleep in the gully all day.
         Feb. 2 - 3 Night. They continue along the gully and come to
           its end towards daybreak. (Journey 2)
 (Day 2) Feb.3 They enter the marshes and continue the journey
           by day ('So passed the third day of their journey with
           Gollum', manuscript text and TT p. 234). (Journey 3)
         Feb. 3 - 4 Night. They see the dead faces in the pools. 'It
           was late in the night when they reached firmer ground
           again', manuscript text and TT p. 236; followed by change
           in the weather and flight of the Nazgul. (Journey 4)
 (Day 3) Feb.4 When day came 'the outer buttresses and broken
           hills' at the feet of the mountains were 'no more than a
           dozen miles away' (p. 112). They were among the slag-
           mounds and poisonous pits. Day spent hiding in a hole.
           At dusk they went on (night of Feb. 4 - 5). (Journey 5)
 (Day 4) Feb. 5 (Beginning of the next chapter) They reach the
           Black Gate at dawn.
                                                                     
   Both of the brief time-schemes of which the beginnings are given on
 p. 100 express precisely this chronology. Scheme B was written,      
 apparently, when  the story  had already  reached the  departure from

  Henneth  Annun,  but  A accompanied  the writing  of the  present chapter
  and scarcely extends beyond it. Notably,  in A  the actual  journeys they
  made  are  numbered  (as  I  have  numbered  them  in the  chronology set
  out above), and it may well be that '3' against  February 3  explains the
  statement cited above: 'So  passed the  third day  of their  journey with
  Gollum' - for it was the third journey, but not the third day.           
    Both schemes refer to the flight of the Nazgul. In B, under February 3,
  'Nazgul  passes  over  marshes  and  goes  to  Isengard',  with   a  sub-
  sequent  addition  'reaching  there  about  midnight'.  This  is  hard to
  understand, since already  in the  completed manuscript  'it was  late in
  the night when they  reached firmer  ground again',  and that  was before
  the change in the weather and the flight of the Nazgul. In  A it  is said
  that 'Nazgul goes  over at  early morning  before daybreak'  (of February
  4),  agreeing  with  the  text of  the chapter;  but Theoden  and Gandalf
  and  their  company  left  Isengard  on  the evening  of February  3, and
  camped  below  Dol  Baran  (over  which  the  Nazgul passed)  that night,
  so that this offers equal difficulty.                                    
    In  his  notes  of  October  1944  (see  p.  100) my  father commented,
  under  the  heading  'Passage  of  the  Marshes',  that 'the  Nazgul over
  marshes  cannot  be  the  same  as  passed  over Dolbaran',  and directed
  that the relevant passage in that chapter, and  also that  at the  end of
  'The Palantir', should be changed. It must have been at this  time, then,
  that the description of the Nazgul's flight over the marshes  was altered
  - it wheeled round and returned  to Mordor  (p. 110);  while at  the same
  time, in 'The  Palantir', Gandalf's  original words  to Pippin  'It could
  have  taken  you  away  to  the  Dark  Tower'  (p.  77) were  extended by
  Pippin's further question 'But it  was not  coming for  me, was  it?' and
  Gandalf s reply: Of course not.  It is  200 leagues  or more  in straight
  flight  from  Baraddur  to  Orthanc, and  even a  Nazgul would  take some
  hours to fly between them, or so I  guess -  I do  not know.  But Saruman
  certainly looked in the Stone since the orc-raid, and more of  his secret
  thought, I do  not doubt,  has been  read than  he intended.  A messenger
  has been sent to find out what he is doing....'                          
    Scheme  S (in  which the  dates of  Frodo's journey  are a  day earlier
  than in A and B, see p. 101) has the folIowing chronology:               
                                                                          
  (Day 2) Feb. 2 Journey in the marshes by day.
          Feb. 2 - 3 Night. 'Episode of corpse-candles' (see note 10).
  (Day 3) Feb. 3 Reach slag-mounds at dawn. Day spent hiding in a
            hole, going on at nightfall. Gandalf, Theoden, etc. leave
            Isengard at sunset and camp at Dolbaran.
  (Day 4) Feb. 4 Reach the Black Gate at daybreak and hide all day.
            Gandalf and Pippin sight Edoras at dawn.
                                                                          
    In the notes accompanying the changes made in October 1944 my          
  father also directed that 'the first Nazgul' should pass over Frodo and
  his  companions  at  dusk (5  p.m.) on  the evening  of February  3 'just

  about  when  they  start  from  the  slag-mounds',  and  reach  Dol  Baran
  about  11  p.m. 'The  second Nazgul,  sent after  Pippin used  the Stone',
  despatched  from  Mordor  about  one  o'clock  in   the  morning   of  the
  night of Feb. 3 - 4,  should pass  over Frodo  at the  end of  the chapter
  'Passage  of   the  Marshes'   before  they   reach  the   Morannon.  This
  Nazgul  would  pass  over  Edoras on  February 4,  about six  hours later.
  'But both may pass high up and only give them faint uneasiness.'          
    Scheme  S  is  confused on  the subject  of the  flights of  the Nazgul,
  offering different formulations, but in the result it agrees well with the
  notes  just  cited;  here  however  the  second  Nazgul leaves  Mordor 'at
  11 p.m.' or 'about midnight', and it 'scouts around  the plain  and passes
  over  Edoras at?  8 a.m.'  These movements  fit very  well with  the added
  conclusion  to  'The  Passage  of  the  Marshes'  {TT  pp.  242  -  3; see
  p. 115), which  I presume  was introduced  at this  time. Thus  the unseen
  Ringwraith  that  passed  overhead  soon  after  they  left the  hole amid
  the  slag-heaps,  'going  maybe  on  some  swift  errand  from Barad-dur',
  was the one that passed  over Dol  Baran six  hours later  (on its  way to
  Orthanc  to  'find  out  what   Saruman  was   doing');  and   that  which
  passed  over an  hour after  midnight, 'rushing  with terrible  speed into
  the  West', was  the one  sent in  response to  Pippin's looking  into the
  palantir.                                                                 
    In the final chronology as set out in The  Tale of  Years two  days were
  added  to  the  journey  to  the  Morannon,  during  which  Frodo  and his
  companions  passed  through  'the  arid  moors  of  the  Noman-lands' (see
  p. 112):                                                                  
                                                                           
  (Day 2) Mar. 1 Frodo begins the passage of the Dead Marshes at
            dawn.
          Mar. 1 - 2 Night. Frodo comes to the end of the Marshes
            late at night.
  (Day 3) Mar. 2 - 3 Night. Frodo journeys in the Noman-lands.
  (Day 4) Mar. 3 - 4 Night. Frodo journeys in the Noman-lands.
            Battle of the Hornburg.
  (Day 5) Mar. 4 Dawn, Frodo reaches the slag-mounds (and leaves
            at dusk). Theoden and Gandalf set out from Helm's Deep
            for Isengard.
  (Day 6) Mar. 5 Daybreak, Frodo in sight of the Morannon.
            Theoden reaches Isengard at noon. Parley with Saruman
            in Orthanc. Winged Nazgul passes over the camp at Dol
            Baran.
                                                                           
    Thus  according to  the final  chronology neither  of the  unseen Nazgul
  that passed over high up at the  end of  the chapter  'The Passage  of the
  Marshes'  (at  dusk  on  March  4,  and  again  an  hour  after  midnight)
  can  have  been  the  one  that  wheeled over  Dol Baran  on the  night of
  March  5,  nor  the  one  that  passed  over  Edoras  on  the  morning  of
  March 6. A rigorous chronology led to this disappointing conclusion.      

                                     III.                                   
                                                                          
                          THE BLACK GATE IS CLOSED.                         
                                                                          
 I have  already quoted  (p. 104)  my father's  letter of  23 April  1944 in
 which  he  said  that  he  had 'nearly  done' the  chapter which  he called
 'Gates of  the Land  of Shadow'.  Since in  the first  fair-copy manuscript
 of  this  chapter  the  text  goes  on  without  a  break through  what was
 subsequently  called  'Of  Herbs  and  Stewed Rabbit',  he had  probably at
 that  date  got  well beyond  the point  where 'The  Black Gate  is Closed'
 ends  in TT  (at Frodo's  decision to  take the  southward road};  and this
 is  borne  out  by  what  he  said on  the 26th  (continuation of  a letter
 begun  on  24 April,  Letters no.  63): 'At  this point  I require  to know
 how  much  later  the  moon  gets  up  each  night  when nearing  full, and
 how to stew a rabbit!'                                                    
  Here  I  restrict  my  account  to  the  portion of  the new  chapter that
 corresponds  to  'The  Black  Gate  is  Closed'.  This  was  a part  of the
 narrative that largely 'wrote itself',  and there  is not  a great  deal to
 record  of  its  development;  it  was  achieved,  also,  in  a  much  more
 orderly fashion than had been the case  for a  long time.  Here there  is a
 continuous,  and for  most of  its length  readily legible,  initial draft,
 which  extends  in  fact  to  the point  where 'The  Black Gate  is Closed'
 ends  in  TT,  and  then  becomes a  brief outline  that brings  Frodo, Sam
 and  Gollum  to  the  Cross-roads  and  up  the  Stairs  of Kirith  Ungol -
 showing  that  at  that  time  my  father  had  no  notion  of  what  would
 befall  them  on  the  southward  road.  He   headed  this   draft  'Kirith
 Ungol' (the original title of 'The Passage of the  Marshes', p.  104), sure
 that  he  could  get  them  there within  the compass  of this  new chapter
 (but 'Kirith  Ungol' now  bore a  different significance  from what  it had
 when he gave it to the previous chapter, see p. 106).                     
  The  draft  was  followed  by  a  fair  copy  manuscript (in  this chapter
 called  'the  manuscript',  as  distinguished from  'the draft')  which, as
 already  noticed,  extends  without  break  through  'Of  Herbs  and Stewed
 Rabbit', and here again the  first title  given to  it was  'Kirith Ungol',
 changed to 'The Gates  of the  Land of  Shadow' (the  title my  father used
 in his letter of 23 April), and then to 'Kirith Gorgor:  The Black  gate is
 Closed'.  At  some stage,  for some  reason, he  made a  further manuscript
 of the chapter (ending it at the point where it ends  in 11  ) in  his most
 beautiful script, and this was copied in the first typescript.  The chapter
 number is XXXIV.                                                          
  In the (first) manuscript  the text  as it  stands in  TT was  achieved in
 almost all points without  much hesitation  in the  writing; but  there was

  much  further  shifting  in  the  names  that  occur  in  this  region. The
  opening  passage  concerning  the  defences  of  Mordor  and  their history
  differed  in  some  respects  from  the  form  in  TT  (p. 244).  The words
  following  'But  the strength  of Gondor  failed, and  men slept':  and for
  long  years   the  towers   stood  empty,   are  lacking.(1) The  paragraph
  beginning 'Across the  mouth of  the pass,  from cliff  to cliff,  the Dark
  Lord had built a rampart of stone. In it there was a  single gate  of iron,
  and  upon  its battlement  sentinels paced  unceasingly' was  first written
  thus, both in draft and manuscript:                                       
                                                                           
      No rampart, or wall, or bars of stone or iron were laid across the
    Morannon;(2) for the rock on either side was bored and tunnelled          
    into  a  hundred  caves  and maggot-holes.  A host  of orcs  lurked there
        (&c. as in TT)                                                     
                                                                           
  This  was  changed in  the manuscript  as soon  as written  to the  text of
  TT, introducing the rampart of stone and the  single gate  of iron;  and it
  is thus seen that up  to this  point the  'Black Gate(s)'  was the  name of
  the pass itself.(3) So  also at  the beginning  of the  passage, where  TT has
  'between  these  arms  there  was a  deep defile.  This was  Cirith Gorgor,
  the  Haunted  Pass,  the entrance  to the  land of  the Enemy',  both draft
  and  manuscript  have 'between  these arms  there was  a long  defile. This
  was  the  Morannon,  the  Black  Gate,  the  entrance  to  the land  of the
  Enemy.'  When  the  rampart  and  iron  gate had  been introduced  this was
  changed  in  the  manuscript  to  'This  was  Kirith  Gorgor,  the Dreadful
  Pass, the entrance to the land of the Enemy.'(4)                           
    The  Mountains  of  Shadow  were  still  in  the  draft named  the Duath,
  as on  the First  Map (Map  III, VII.309);  in the  manuscript the  name is
  Hebel  Duath,  later  changed  to  Ephel Duath  (see VII.310).(5) The 'Teeth
  of  Mordor'  are  named  in  the  draft  Nelig  Morn  (cf.  Nelig   Morn  >
  Nelig  Myrn,  p. 113);(6) in  the  manuscript   they  are   Naglath  Morn,
  which was subsequently struck out and not replaced.                       
    It  is  convenient to  notice here  a few  other points  concerning names
  in  this  chapter.  The  name Elostirion  for Osgiliath,  used in  the fine
  manuscript of 'The Palantir' made  earlier in  April (p.  78 and  note 20),
  was  retained  in  the  draft (7) and  in  the  following manuscript  of 'The
  Black  Gate  is  Closed', with  Osgiliath later  substituted in  the latter
  (TT  p.  249).  The  name  of  Sauron's  stronghold  in   Mirkwood  remains
  Dol  Dughol,  the  change  to  Dol  Guldur being  made   at  a   very  late
  stage.(8)                                                                 
    A  curious  vestige  is  seen  in  the  name  Goodchild  pencilled  above
  Gamgee  in  Sam's  remark  'It's  beyond  any  Gamgee  to guess  what he'll
  do next' (TT p.  247). In  his letter  to me  of 31  May 1944  (Letters no.
  72) my father said:                                                       
                                                                           
    Sam  by  the  way  is  an  abbreviation  not  of  Samuel  but  of Samwise
    (the  Old E.  for Half-wit),  as is  his father's  name the  Gaffer (Ham)

 for  O.E.  Hamfast  or  Stayathome.  Hobbits  of  that class  have very
 Saxon  names  as  a  rule  -  and I  am not  really satisfied  with the
 surname  Gamgee  and  shd.  change  it  to Goodchild  if I  thought you
 would let me.                                                           
                                                                        
 I  replied  that  I  would  never wish  to see  Gamgee changed  to Good-
 child,  and  urged  (entirely missing  the point)  that the  name Gamgee
 was for me the essential expression of 'the  hobbit peasantry'  in their
 'slightly  comical'  aspect,  deeply  important  to  the  whole  work. I
 mention this to explain my  father's subsequent  remarks on  the subject
 (28 July 1944, Letters, no. 76):                                        
                                                                        
 As  to  Sam Gamgee,  I quite  agree with  what you  say, and  I wouldn't
 dream of  altering his  name without  your approval;  but the  object of
 the  alteration  was precisely  to bring  out the  comicness, peasantry,
 and if you will the Englishry  of this  jewel among  the hobbits.  Had I
 thought it out at the  beginning, I  should have  given all  the hobbits
 very  English  names  to  match the  shire.... I  doubt if  it's English
 [i.e.  the  name  Gamgee]....  However,  I  daresay  all  your  imagina-
 tion of the character is now bound up with the name.                    
                                                                        
 And so Sam Gamgee remained.                                             
 Turning now to the narrative itself, there are  only certain  details to
 mention.  The  distance  from  the  hollow  in   which  Frodo   and  his
 companions lay  to the  nearer of  the Towers  of the  Teeth was  in the
 initial drafting and in both manuscripts  estimated at  about a  mile as
 the crow flies (a furlong in TT, p. 245). The  description of  the three
 roads leading to the Black Gate (TT p.247) was present in all essentials
 from the outset (they  were in  fact marked  in by  dotted lines  on the
 First  Map,  though  not  included  on  my  redrawing),(9) as  were Frodo's
 stern  words  to Gollum  (TT p.  248), and  the conversation  about the
 southward  road;  but  Gollum's remembered  tales of  his youth  and his
 account  of  Minas  Morgul (11  pp. 249  - 50)  differed from  the final
 form in these respects. When  Frodo said:  'It was  Isildur who  cut off
 the finger of the Enemy', Gollum replied: 'The tales did not  say that';
 then  Frodo  said:  'No,  it  had  not happened  then' (becoming  in the
 second  manuscript  'No,  it  had  not  happened  when  your  tales were
 made').(10) Secondly,  Gollum's  reference  to  'the  Silent  Watchers' in
 Minas  Morgul  (TT  p.  250)  was  added  to  the  manuscript,  which as
 written  had  only:  'Nothing  moves on  the road  that they  don't know
 about. The things inside know.' Thirdly,  after Gollum's  explanation of
 why  Sauron  did  not fear  attack by  way of  Minas Morgul  (his speech
 beginning 'No, no, indeed. Hobbits must see,  must try  to understand'),
 Sam says:                                                               
                                                                        
 'I  daresay,  but  even  so  we  can't  walk  up  along   your  climbing
 road and pass the time of  day with  the folk  at the  gates and  ask if

 we're  all  right  for  the  Dark  Tower.  Stands  to reason,'  said Sam.
 'We might as well do it here, and save ourselves a long tramp.'           
                                                                          
   Thus  his  jibe  at Gollum  ('Have you  been talking  to Him  lately? Of
 just  hobnobbing  with  Orcs?'),  and  Gollum's  reply ('Not  nice hobbit,
 not sensible ... ) are lacking. With the expanded  text (written  into the
 manuscript  later)  there  enters  the  second  reference  to  'the Silent
 Watchers' (and Sam's sarcasm 'Or are they too silent to answer?').        
   The  brief  text  given  on p.  113 and  reproduced with  the accompany-
 ing sketch on p.  114, in  which Kirith  Ungol is  'beneath the  shadow of
 Minas  Morgul',  and  in  which  Frodo  and   Sam  actually   enter  Minas
 Morgul, shows that  only a  short time  before the  point we  have reached
 the  later  story and  geography had  not emerged.  But the  conception of
 the  entrances into  Mordor was  changing very  rapidly, and  the original
 draft  of 'The  Black Gate  is Closed'  shows a  major further  shift. The
 conversation  following Sam's  remarks about  the futility  of going  on a
 long  tramp  south   only  to   find  themselves   faced  with   the  same
 impossibility of entering unseen (TT p. 251) ran thus in the draft:       
                                                                          
   'Don't  joke  about  it,'  said  Gollum.  'Be  sensible  hobbits.  It is
 not sensible to  try to  ger in  to Mordor  at all,  not sensible.  But if
 master  says  I  will  go  or  I  must  go  then  he  must  try  some way.
 But  he  must  not  go  to  the  terrible  city.  That  is  where  Smeagol
 helps. He found it, he knows it - if it is still there.'                  
   'What did you find?' said Frodo.                                        
   'A  stair  and  path  leading  up  into  the  mountains  south   of  the
 pass,'  said  Gollum,  'and  then  a  tunnel,  and  then  more  stairs and
 then  a  cleft  high  above   the  main   pass:  and   it  was   that  way
 Smeagol   got   out   of   Mordor   long   ago.   But   it    may   [?have
 vanished]...'                                                             
   'Isn't  it  guarded?'  said  Sam  incredulously,   and  he   thought  he
 caught a sudden gleam in Gollum's eye.                                    
   'Yes  perhaps,'  said  he,  'but  we  must  try.  No  other   way,'  and
 he  would  say  no  more.  The  name  of  this  perilous  place  and  high
 pass  he  could  not  or  would  not  tell.  Its  name  was  Kirith Ungol,
 but  that   the  hobbits   did  not   know,  nor   the  meaning   of  that
 dreadful name.                                                            
                                                                          
   As  the  following  manuscript  was  first  written  this  was  not sig-
 nificantly changed (the path and stair are still 'south of the pass'); the
 passage  in  which  Frodo  intervenes and  challenges Gollum's  story that
 he  had  escaped from  Mordor, citing  Aragorn's view  of the  matter, was
 added in a rider to the manuscript later.(11)                                
   Thus  Kirith  Ungol  is  now  not  the  pass  guarded  by  Minas Morgul,
 as in the text given on p. 113, but a climbing stair high above it;  it is

  however very difficult  to say  how my  father saw  the further  course of
  the story at this time. In the text on p.  113 Frodo  and Sam  'creep into
  Minas  Morgul',  which  suggests  that  the  story  of Frodo's  capture in
  'The  Story  Foreseen  from  Lorien'  had  been  temporarily  abandoned  -
  though it is not clear why they should be obliged  to enter  'the terrible
  city'.  With  the new  geography, however,  it seems  that they  are going
  to  avoid  Minas  Morgul,  passing  through the  mountains high  above it.
  Does  it  follow  that  the  Tower  of  Kirith  Ungol  had   already  been
  conceived?                                                                
    There  is  nothing in  draft or  manuscript to  show that  it had  - but
  that proves little in itself, since in all texts  from the  original draft
  Gollum refuses to say clearly whether  Kirith Ungol  is guarded  (cf. 'The
  Stairs of Cirith Ungol', TT p.  319: 'It  was a  black tower  poised above
  the outer pass.... "I don't like  the look  of that!"  said Sam.  "So this
  secret  way  of  yours  is  guarded  after all,'*  he growled,  turning to
  Gollum').  The  gleam  in  Gollum's  eye  that  Sam  caught when  he asked
  him  if it  were guarded  certainly means  that Gollum  knew that  it was,
  but does not at all imply that it was guarded by a tower. I feel sure that
  Gollum was thinking of the spiders (at this stage in the evolution  of the
  story). The  only other  evidence is  found!n the  outline which  ends the
  original draft of 'The Black Gate is Closed':                             
                                                                           
    Frodo makes up his mind. He agrees to take the south way.         
    As soon as dusk falls they start. Needing speed they use the
  road though fearful of meeting  soldiers on  it hurrying  to the          
  muster  of  the  Dark  Lord.  Gollum says  it is  twenty leagues          
  perhaps  to  the  Cross  Roads in  the wood.  They made  all the          
  speed  they could.  The land  climbs a  little. They  see Anduin          
  below them gleaming in the  moon. Good  [?water]. At  last late          
  on the third [day of their daylight journey >] night  of journey          
  from  Morannon they  reach the  crossroads and  pass out  of the          
  wood.                                                                     
    See the moon shining on Minas Ithil Minas Morghul.                      
    Pass up first stair safely. But tunnel is black with webs [of]          
  spiders....  force  way and  get up  second stair.  They [??had]          
  reach[ed]  Kirith  Ungol.  Spiders  are  aroused and  hunt them.          
  They are exhausted.                                                       
                                                                           
  This  does  not  of course  imply that  the spiders  were the  only danger
  they faced in taking the way of Kirith Ungol, but possibly suggests it.
    However  this  may  be,  and  leaving  open  the  question   of  whether
  at  this  stage  my  father  had  already  decided  that Kirith  Ungol was
  guarded  by  its  own  tower,  it  would  be  interesting to  know whether
  that  decision  had  been  taken  when he  introduced into  the manuscript
  Gollum's references to 'the  Silent Watchers'.  The Watchers,  called 'the

  Sentinels',  had  already  appeared  in 'The  Story Foreseen  from Lorien'
  (see VII.340 - 3 and note 33); there of course they were the  sentinels of
  Minas  Morgul.  Here  too  Gollum  is  speaking of  Minas Morgul  (at this
  point in the chapter he  has not  even mentioned  the existence  of Kirith
  Ungol). It would  seem rather  odd that  my father  should bring  in these
  references  to  the  Silent  Watchers of  Minas Morgul  if he  had already
  decided  that  the  actual  encounter  with Silent  Watchers should  be at
  the  Tower  of Kirith  Ungol; and  one might  suspect therefore  that when
  he wrote them into the text the  idea of  that tower  had not  yet arisen.
  But this is the merest conjecture.(12)                                   
                                                                          
    The   passage   telling   where   Gandalf   was   when  Frodo   and  his
  companions  lay  hidden  in  the  hollow before  the Black  Gate underwent
  many changes. The original draft reads:                                  
                                                                          
  Aragorn  perhaps  could  have told  them, Gandalf  could have            
  warned them, but Gandalf was ? flying over the green [?plain]            
  of  Rohan  upon Shadowfax  climbing the  road to  the guarded            
  gates of Minas Tirith and Aragorn was marching at the head of            
  many men to war.                                                         
                                                                          
  This seems  to express  two distinct  answers to  the question,  where was
  Gandalf? - In the manuscript this becomes:                               
                                                                          
  Aragorn  could  perhaps  have  told  them  that  name  and its           
  significance; Gandalf would  have warned  them. But  they were           
  alone; and Aragorn was far  away, a  captain of  men mustering           
  for a desperate war, and Gandalf stood upon the white walls of           
  Minas Tirith deep in troubled thought. It was of  them chiefly           
  that he thought: and over the long leagues his mind sought for           
  them.                                                                    
                                                                          
  In  the  second  manuscript,  taking  up  a  revision  made to  the first,
  Gandalf is again riding over the plains:                                 
                                                                          
  ... But they were  alone, and  Aragorn was  far away,  a captain         
  of men mustering  for a  desperate war,  and Gandalf  was flying         
  upon Shadowfax over the fields  of Rohan  swifter than  the wind         
  to the white walls of Minas Tirith gleaming from afar. Yet as he         
  rode, it was chiefly of them that he thought, of Frodo  and Sam,         
  and over the long leagues his mind sought for them.                      
                                                                          
  This was changed afterwards to the text of TT (p. 252):                  
                                                                          
  ...  and Gandalf  stood amid  the ruin  of Isengard  and strove          
  with Saruman, delayed by treason. Yet even as he spoke his last          
  words to Saruman,  and the  palantir crashed  in fire  upon the          

 steps  of  Orthanc, his  thought was  ever upon  Frodo and                  
 Samwise, over the long leagues his mind sought for them in                  
 hope and pity.                                                              
                                                                            
 On  the  significance  of  these variations  see the  Note on  Chronology at
 the end of this chapter.                                                    
                                                                            
    The distant  flight of  the Nazgul  (TT p.  253) and  the arrival  of the
 southern  men  observed  and  reported  on  by  Gollum  differ   already  in
 the draft text in no essential points from the final text (except that it is
 Gollum  who  calls  them  Swertings);  but  Sam's  verse  of  the  Oliphaunt
 was  not  present.  It   is  found   in  abundant   rough  workings   and  a
 [          preliminary text before being incorporated in the manuscript; my
 father  also copied  it out  for me  in a  letter written  on 30  April 1944
 (Letters  no.  64),  when  the  story  had  reached the  end of  what became
 'Of  Herbs  and  Stewed Rabbit',  saying: 'A  large elephant  of prehistoric
 size, a war-elephant of the  Swertings, is  loose, and  Sam has  gratified a
 life-long  wish  to  see  an  Oliphaunt,  an  animal  about which  there was
 a   hobbit   nursery-rhyme   (though   it  was   commonly  supposed   to  be
 mythical).'(13)                                                             

                            NOTES.                                      
                                                                       
 1. In a  very rough  initial sketching  of the  opening of  the chapter,
    preceding  the  continuous draft,  the reading  is: 'They  were built
    by the  Men of  Gondor long  ages after  the fall  of the  first Dark
    Tower and Sauron's flight, lest he should seek to [? retake]  his old
    realm.' This was repeated in the  draft text  of the  chapter ('after
    the felling of the first Dark fortress'), but changed  immediately to
    'after the overthrow of Sauron and his flight'.                     
 2. The earliest sketch of the opening  passage, referred  to in  note 1,
    has a name  that ends  in -y;  it could  be interpreted  as Mornennyn
    with the final -n omitted, but is written  thus at  both occurrences.
    For Mornennyn, replacing Ennyn Dur, see pp. 112 - 13.               
 3. The Old English  word geat  'gate' is  found in  a number  of English
    place-names in the sense 'pass, gap in the  hills', as  Wingate (pass
    through which the wind drives), Yatesbury.                          
 4. It seems  in fact  that my  father did  not immediately  transfer the
    name  Morannon  to  the  actual  'Black  Gate'  built by  Sauron, but
    retained it for  a time  as the  name of  the pass:  so later  in the
    manuscript  text  (TT  p. 247)  Frodo 'stood  gazing out  towards the
    dark  cliffs  of  the  Morannon'  (changed  subsequently   to  Kirith
    Gorgor).                                                            
 5. Here appear also the  plain of  Lithlad (see  VII.208, 213)  and 'the
    bitter  inland  sea  of  Nurnen',  shown  on the  First Map  (Map III,
    VII.309).                                                           

  6. In the text given  on p.  113 and  reproduced on  p. 114  Nelig Myrn
     replaced Nelig  Mom at  the time  of writing;  yet it  seems obvious
     that that text was written during the  original composition  of 'The
     Passage of the Marshes'.                                             
                                                                         
  7. The draft text has in fact Osgiliath at one occurrence, in the first
     description  of the  southward road  (TT p.  247): 'It  journeyed on
     into  the  narrow  plain  between  the  Great  River  and  the moun-
     tains, and so on to Osgiliath and on  again to  the coasts,  and the
     far southern lands'. But Elostirion is the name in this same text in
     the passage corresponding to TT p. 249.                              
                                                                         
  8. The  name  Amon  Hen  was  changed  at its  first occurrence  in the
     manuscript  (TT p,  247) to  Amon Henn,  but not  at the  second (TT
     p.  252).  On  the  second  manuscript  the  name  was  written Amon
     Henn at both occurrences.                                            
                                                                         
  9. The  southward  road  is  shown  running  a  little  to the  east of
     Anduin as far as  the bottom  of square  Q 14  on Map  III, VII.309.
     The eastward  road runs  along the  northern edges  of Ered  Lithui
     as  far  as  the  middle  of  square O  17 on  Map 11,  VII.305. The
     northward  road divides  at 'he  bottom of  square O  15 on  Map II,
     the westward arm running  to the  hills on  the left  side of  O 15,
     and  the  northward  arm  bending   north-east  along   the  western
     edge of the Dead Marshes and then turning  west to  end on  the left
     side of N 15.                                                        
        The  passage  describing  the  southward  road was  several times
     changed  in respect  of its  distance from  the hollow  where Frodo,
     Sam and Gollum hid. In the original draft  it was  'not more  than a
     furlong or so';  in the  first manuscript  the distance  was changed
     through 'a couple of furlongs', 'fifty paces', and 'a  furlong', the
     final  reading  (preserved  in  the  second manuscript)  being '[it]
     passed  along  the  valley  at the  foot of  the hillside  where the
     hobbits  lay  and  not  many  feet  below  them.'  For  one,  rather
     surprising, reason for this hesitation see pp. 172 - 3.              
        In the First Edition the description  of the  topography differed
     from that in the Second Edition (TT p. 247), and read:               
                                                                         
       The  hollow  in  which  they  had  taken refuge  was delved  in the
       side of a low hill and lay at some little height above the level of
       the plain. A long trench-like valley ran between  it and  the outer
       buttresses  of the  mountain-wall. In  the morning-light  the roads
       that  converged  upon  the  Gate  of  Mordor  could now  be clearly
       seen,  pale  and  dusty;  one  winding  back   northwards;  another
       dwindling eastwards into  the mists  that clung  about the  feet of
       Ered Lithui;  and another  that, bending  sharply, ran  close under
       the  western  watch-tower,  and  then  passed  along the  valley at
       the foot of the hillside where the  hobbits lay  and not  many feet

 below  them.   Soon  it   turned,  skirting   the  shoulders   of  the
 mountains ...                                                         
    This is the text of the second manuscript.                       
10. Frodo's  meaning  must  be  that these  particular tales  known to
 Gollum,  concerning  the  cities  of  the  Numenoreans,  originated in
 the time before the Last Alliance and the overthrow of Sauron.        
11. As the rider was first written there was  this difference  from the
 text of TT (p. 251):                                                  
 For one thing he noted  Gollum used  I, as  he had  hardly done
 since  he  was  frightened  out  of  his  old   bad  wits   away  back
 under the cliff of Emyn Muil.                                         
 This  was  changed  to:  '...  Gollum  used  I,  and  that seemed
 usually  to  be  a  sign, on  its rare  appearances, that  Smeagol was
 (for the moment) on top', and then to the final text.                 
12. Even if this was so,  it cannot  be supposed  that my  father still
 thought   that   Frodo  and   Sam  would   enter  Minas   Morgul,  and
 encounter  the  Silent  Watchers  there.  The  outline with  which the
 draft text ends  (p. 125)  would obviously  have said  so if  that had
 been  in  his  mind. Moreover,  not long  after, in  his letter  of 30
 April 1944 (Letters no. 64), he said that 'in the  chapter next  to be
 done they will get to Kirith Ungol and Frodo will be caught.'       
13. It is hard to be sure, but  it seems  from the  manuscript evidence
 that  originally  Sam's  word  was  oliphant,  and that  oliphaunt was
 used  only  in  the  rhyme.  -  The  form  is  mediaeval   French  and
 English  olifa(u)nt.  There are  no differences  in the  texts, except
 that in the draft version and in the form cited in my  father's letter
 line 11 reads 'I've stumped' for 'I  stump', and  in line  15 'Biggest
 of all' is written 'Biggest of All'.                                  
                                                                      
                         Note on the Chronology.                        
                                                                      
 Where  was  Gandalf  when Frodo,  in hiding  before the  Morannon, was
 thinking of him? Four versions of the passage in question (TT  p. 252)
 have been given on pp. 126-7. The original draft (1) seems to leave it
 open whether  Gandalf was  riding across  Rohan or  was almost  at the
 end of his journey, climbing the road to the gates of Minas Tirith; in
 the following manuscript (2)  he was  standing on  the walls  of Minas
 Tirith; in the second manuscript (3) he was again riding across Rohan;
 and finally (4), as in TT, he was standing on the steps of Orthanc.
   These versions reflect, of course, the difficulty my  father encoun-
 tered in bringing the different threads of the narrative  into chrono-
 logical harmony. According to the 'received chronology' at  this time,
 the day in question here  (spent by  Frodo, Sam  and Gollum  in hiding
 before  the  Morannon)  was 5  February (see  p. 118);  while Gandalf,
 Theoden  and  their  companions  left  Isengard  in  the   evening  of
 3 February (pp. 6, 73), camping at Dol  Baran that  night -  the great

                                                
                                                                        
 ride  of  Gandalf  with  Pippin  therefore  began  during  the  night of
 3-4 February.                                                             
  At the end  of the  fine manuscript  of 'The  Palantir' that  my father
 had made at the  beginning of  April 1944  (p. 78)  Gandalf had  said to
 Pippin  as  they   passed  near   the  mouth   of  the   Deeping  Coomb,
 following the first manuscript of the  chapter: 'You  may see  the first
 glimmer of dawn upon the golden  roof of  the House  of Eorl.  At sunset
 on the day after you  shall see  the purple  shadow of  Mount Mindolluin
 fall upon the walls of the tower of Denethor.' This was  said, according
 to  the  chronology at  the time,  in the  small hours  of the  night of
 3-4 February;  and  Gandalf  was therefore  forecasting that  they would
 reach Minas Tirith at sunset on the fifth.                              
  This  is  the  chronology  underlying  the words  of the original draft
 (version  1).  Subsequent  shifting in  the dates,  so that  Gandalf and
 Pippin  reached  Minas  Tirith  later  and  Frodo  reached  the Morannon
 earlier, meant that Gandalf was less  far advanced  in his  journey, but
 his  ride  across  Rohan  still  coincided  with  Frodo at  the Morannon
 (version  3).  None  of  the  time-schemes,  however, allows  Gandalf to
 have actually reached Minas Tirith at  that time,  and I  cannot explain
 version 2.                                                              
  The final version 4 of this passage, as found in TT, reflects of course
 the  final chronology,  according to  which Frodo  was in  hiding before
 the  Black  Gate  on  the  same  day  {5  March)  as Gandalf  spoke with
 Saruman on the steps of Orthanc.                                        

                                     IV.                                  
                                                                         
                         OF HERBS AND STEWED RABBIT.                      
                                                                         
 For  this  chapter,  written  as  a  continuation  of  'The Black  Gate is
 Closed'  and  only  separated  from  it  and  numbered  'XXXV'  after  its
 completion, there exists a good deal of (discontinuous)  initial drafting,
 some  of  it  illegible,  and  a  completed manuscript,  some of  which is
 itself the primary composition. As in the last  chapter I  distinguish the
 texts as 'draft' and 'manuscript' (in  this case  no other  manuscript was
 made, see p. 121).                                                       
  On 26 April 1944, in a letter  to me  already cited  (p. 121),  my father
 said  that  on  the  previous day  he had  'struggled with  a recalcitrant
 passage in "The Ring" ', and then went  on to  say that  'at this  point I
 require  to  know  how  much  later  the  moon  gets  up  each  night when
 nearing full, and how to  stew a  rabbit!' From  drafts and  manuscript it
 is  easy  to  see  what  this  recalcitrant  passage  was:  the  southward
 journey  as  far  as  the  point  where  Sam's  thoughts  turned   to  the
 possibility  of  finding  food more  appetizing than  the waybread  of the
 Elves (TT p. 260).                                                      
  The original draft begins thus:                                         
                                                                         
  They  rested  for  the  few  hours  of  daylight  that  were left,  ate a
 little  and  drank  sparingly,  though  they  had   hope  of   water  soon
 in   the   streams   that   flowed   down    into   Anduin    from   Hebel
 Duath.  As   the  dusk   deepened  they   set  out.   The  moon   did  not
 rise  till  late and  it grew  soon dark.  After a  few miles  over broken
 slopes  and  difficult  [?  country]  they  took  to  the  southward road,
 for  they  needed  speed.  Ever  they  listened  with  straining  ears for
 sounds of foot or hoof upon the road ahead and behind ...                
                                                                         
  After  the  description  of  the road,  kept in  repair below  the Moran-
 non  but  further south  encroached upon  by the  wild, the  opening draft
 peters out, and at this point, probably,  my father  began the  writing of
 the  manuscript. Here  the single  red light  in the  Towers of  the Teeth
 appears,  but  they passed  out of  sight of  it after  only a  few miles,
 'turning  away  southward  round  a  great  dark  shoulder  of  the  lower
 mountains',  whereas  in  TT  this  took  place  'when  night  was growing
 old and they were  already weary'.(1) In this  text they  came to  the less
 barren lands,  with thickets  of trees  on the  slopes, during  that first
 night,  and  the  shrubs  which  in  TT  the hobbits  did not  know (being
 strange to them) were  here 'unrecognizable  in the  dark'. After  a short

  rest  about  midnight  Gollum  led  them  down  onto  the  southward road,
  the description of which follows.                                         
    The  precise  sequence  of  composition  as  between  drafts  and  manu-
  script is hard to work out, but I think that it was probably at this point
  that  my  father  wrote  a  very  brief  outline  for  the story  to come,
  together  with  notes  on names.  Frustratingly, his  writing here  has in
  places resisted all attempts to puzzle it out.                            
                                                                           
    After so  much labour  and peril  the days  they spent  on it           
  seemed  almost a  rest. In  Gollum's reckoning  it was  some 20           
  [changed  from  some  other figure]  leagues from  the Morannon           
  to  the  outer  wards  of  Minas  Morghul,  maybe  more. Gollum           
  finds food. Night of Full Moon, they see a white... far away up           
  in the dark shadow  of the  hills to  left, at  head of  a wide           
  [?re-entrant, sc. valley], Minas Morghul.(2) Next night they come           
  to the cross roads. An[d] a great [?stone] figure ... (3) back to           
  Elostirion  ... [Struck  out: Sarnel  Ubed.(4) Ennyn.  Aran] Taur           
  Toralt  [struck  out:  Sarn  Torath.]  Annon  Torath.  Aranath.           
  reminding Frodo of the Kings at Sern Aranath. or Sairn Ubed.              
    But his head was struck off and in mockery some orcs? had set           
  ... a clay ball with ... The red eye was ... [?painted over].(5)          
                                                                           
    For Sern Aranath as the name  of the  Pillars of  the Kings  see VII.366
  note 21; and cf. TT p. 311 (at the end of  'Journey to  the Cross-roads'):
  'The brief glow fell upon a huge sitting figure, still  and solemn  as the
  great  stone  kings  of Argonath.'  It is  not clear  to me  whether Sairn
  Ubed  is an  alternative to  Sern Aranath.  On this  same page,  later but
  not  much  later,  my father  made further  notes on  names (see  p. 137),
  and among these appears the following:                                    
    The two King Stones Sern Ubed (denial)                                  
                             Sern Aranath                                   
  The  word denial  makes one  think of  the description  of the  Pillars of
  the Kings in 'The Great River' (FR p.  409), where  in the  earliest draft
  of that passage (VII.360) 'the  left hand  of each  was raised  beside his
  head palm outwards in gesture of warning and refusal.'(6)                 
    It is plain from this text that at  this time  the emergence  of Faramir
  and  the  Window  on  the  West  was  totally  unforeseen,  while  on  the
  other hand the broken statue at the Cross-roads was already present.      
    The  next  step  in  the  development of  the 'recalcitrant  passage' is
  seen, I think, in what follows the  description of  the southward  road in
  the manuscript:                                                           
                                                                           
    After the labours and perils they had just endured the days             
  that they spent upon the road seemed almost pleasant, though              
  fear was about them and darkness lay before them. The weather             

 now   was   good,   though   the  wind   blowing  from   the  north-west
 over   the  Misty   Mountains  far   away  had   a  sharp   tooth.  They
 passed  on  into  the  northern  marches  of  that  land  that  men once
 called  Ithilien, a  fair country  of climbing  woods and  swift falling
 streams.  In  Gollum's  reckoning  it  was  some  thirty   leagues  from
 the  Morannon  to  the  crossing  of  the  ways  above  Elostirion,  and
 he  hoped  to  cover  that  distance  in three  journeys. But  maybe the
 distance  was  greater  or  they  went  slower  than  he  hoped,  for at
 the end of the third night they had not come there.                     
                                                                        
   This passage was rejected at once,  but before  this was  done 'thirty
 leagues' was changed to 'twenty', and it was perhaps at this time that a
 sentence was added  earlier, following  'But they  were not  going quick
 enough  for  Gollum'  (TT  p.  256):  'In  his  reckoning it  was twenty
 leagues  from  the  Morannon  to   the  crossing   of  the   ways  above
 Osgiliath,(7) and  he  hoped to  cover that  distance in  three journeys'
 (where TT has 'nearly thirty leagues' and 'four journeys').             
   My father  now, if  my analysis  of the  sequence is  correct, decided
 that  he  was  treating  the  journey  from the  Morannon to  the Cross-
 roads  too  cursorily;  and  his  next  step,  on the  same page  of the
 manuscript,  was  to  return  to  the  first  night  (which was  that of
 5 February):                                                            
                                                                        
   All that night they plodded on, and all  the next.  The road          
 drew ever nearer to the course of the Great River  and further          
 from  the shadow  of Hebel  Duath on  their left.  That second          
 night the moon was full. Not long before the dawn they  saw it          
 sinking round and yellow far beyond the great vale below them.          
 Here and there  a white  gleam showed  where Anduin  rolled, a          
 mighty  stream swollen  with the  waters of  Emyn Muil  and of          
 slow-winding  Entwash.  Far  far away,  pale ghosts  above the          
 mists, the peaks  of the  Black Mountains  were caught  by the          
 beaming  moon.  There  glimmered through  the night  the snows          
 on Mount Mindolluin; but though Frodo's  eyes stared  out into          
 the west wondering where in the vastness of  the land  his old          
 companions might now be, he did not know that under                     
                                                                        
   This passage was in its turn struck out. The last  words stand  at the
 foot of a page.(8)                                                      
   It  was now,  as it  seems, that  my father  decided to  introduce the
 episode  of  the  rabbits  caught  by  Gollum  (developing  it  from the
 passage where it first appears, given in note 6).                       
                                                                        
   All  that  night  they  plodded  on.  At  the first  sign of  day they
 halted,  and  lay  beneath  a  bank  in  a  brake  of old  brown bracken

 overshadowed   by   dark   pinetrees.   Water   flowed   down    not   far
 away, cold out of the hills, and good to drink.                           
    Sam   had  been   giving  some   earnest  thought   to  food   as  they
 marched.   Now   that   the   despair   of   the   impassable   Gate   was
 behind  him,  he  did  not  feel  so  inclined  as his  master to  take no
 thought  for  their  livelihood  beyond  the  end  of  their  errand;  and
 anyway  it   seemed  wiser   to  him   to  save   the  elvish   bread  for
 worse   times   ahead.   Two   days   or   more   had   gone    since   he
 reckoned  that  they  had  a  bare  supply  for   three  weeks.(9) 'If  we
 reach  the  Fire  in  that  time  we'll  be  lucky   at  this   rate,'  he
 thought.   'And   we   may   be   wanting   to   come   back.   We   may.'
 Besides  at  the  end  of  [?their]   long  night   march  he   felt  more
 hungry than usual.                                                        
    With  all   this  in   his  mind   he  turned   to  look   for  Gollum.
 Gollum  was  crawling  away  through  the  bracken.   'Hi!  '   said  Sam.
 'Where  are  you   going?  Hunting?   Now  look   here,  my   friend,  you
 don't  like  our  food,  but  if  you  could  find  something  fit  for  a
 hobbit to eat I'd be grateful.'                                           
    Yes, yess.                                                             
    Gollum  brings  back  2 rabbits.  Angry at  fire (a)  fear (b)  rage at
 nice  juicy  rabbits  being   spoiled.  Pacified   by  Frodo   (promise  of
 fish?).                                                                   
    Night of full moon and vision of Anduin.                               
    Third night. They do not reach the cross ways. [?Trying] to            
 hasten they journey by day through wood. They come  to cross              
 ways and peer at it out of thicket.                                       
    The headless king with a  mocking head  made by  orcs and              
 scrawls on it.                                                            
    That night they turn left. Vision of Minas Morghul in the              
 moon high up in re-entrant.(10)                                           
                                                                          
    Here  this  text  ends, and  was followed  by another  draft, beginning
 precisely as does that just  given, in  which the  story of  Sam's cooking
 was  developed  almost to  the final  form. On  one of  the pages  of this
 text my father pencilled  a note:  'Describe baytrees  and spicy  herbs as
 they  march.'  It was  thus the  cooking of  the rabbits  that led  to the
 account  of  the shrubs  and herbs  of Ithilien  (TT p.  258) -  'which is
 proving a lovely land', as he said in his letter of 30 April 1944 {Letters
 no. 64).                                                                  
    He  now  returned  again  to  the  fair  copy  manuscript,  and without
 changing, then or later, the  opening of  the chapter  he wrote  the story
 almost as it stands in  TT, pp.  258 ff.  (from 'So  they passed  into the
 northern marches of that  land that  Men once  called Ithilien').  At this
 stage, therefore, the chronology of the journey was thus:                 

  Feb.  5  Left  the  Morannon  at  dusk,  and  came  into  a  less  barren
  country   of   heathland.  Took   to  the   southward  road   about  mid-
  night (p. 132).                                                          
    Feb.  6  Halted  at  dawn. Description  of Ithilien  and its  herbs and
  flowers. Sam's cooking, and the coming of the men of Gondor.             
  With the introduction of a long  rider to  the following  typescript text
  an  extra  day  and  night  were  inserted into  the journey  between the
  Morannon  and  the  place  of  Sam's  cooking  (see  the  Note  on Chron-
  ology at the end of this chapter). At dawn of this  added day  they found
  themselves in a less  barren country  of heathland,  and they  passed the
  day hidden  in deep  heather (TT  p. 257);  at dusk  they set  out again,
  and only now took to the southward road.                                 
    At the end of the episode of 'Stewed Rabbit' there is a brief sketch in
  the manuscript of the story to come, written  in pencil  so rapid  that I
  cannot make all of it out; but it can be seen that Sam finds  that Gollum
  is not there; he puts out the fire  and runs  down to  wash the  pans; he
  hears  voices,  and  suddenly  sees  a  couple  of  men  chasing  Gollum.
  Gollum eludes their grasp and vanishes  into a  tangled thicket.  They go
  on up the hill, and Sam hears  them laugh.  'Not an  orc,' says  one. Sam
  creeps  back  to Frodo,  who has  also heard  voices and  hidden himself,
  and they see many men creeping up towards the road.                      
    Another page found  separately seems  quite likely  to be  the continu-
  ation of this outline, and  is equally  hard to  read. There  is to  be a
  description of men  like Boromir,  dressed in  lighter and  darker green,
  armed  with  knives;  the  hobbits  wonder  who  they  are  -   they  are
  certainly not scouts of Sauron.  The fight  on the  road between  the men
  of Harad and the men of Minas Tirith is mentioned; then follows:         
                                                                          
    A slain Tirith-man falls over bank and crashes down on them.           
  Frodo goes to him and he cries orch and tries to ... but falls           
  dead  crying  'Gondor!'  The  Harad-men  drive  the Gondorians           
  [?down] hill. The hobbits creep away through thickets. At last           
  they climb tree. See Gondorians fight and win finally. At dusk           
  Gollum  climbs  up  to  them.  He  curses  Sam  for [?bringing           
  enemies].  They  dare  not  go  back  to  road, but  wander on           
  through the wild glades of Ithilien that night. See Full Moon.           
  Meet no more folk.                                                       
    Strike the road to Osgiliath far down, and  have to  go back           
  long [?detour]  East. Deep  Ilex woods.  Gollum goes  [?on] by           
  day. Evening of third day  they reach  Cross ways.  See broken           
  statue.(11)                                                              
                                                                          
    The  story  of  the  ambush (12) of the  Southron men  thus seems  at this
  stage  to  have  had no  sequel. But  from the  point where  this outline
  begins (when Sam calls to Gollum  that there  is some  rabbit left  if he
  wants  to  change  his  mind,  but  finds  that  he  has  disappeared, 11

                                
                                                                         
 p. 264) the final form of the story, partly extant in rough  drafting, was
 achieved  without  hesitation  -  with,  however,  one  major  difference:
 the  leader  of the  Gondorians was  not Faramir,  brother of  Boromir. At
 this  time  he  was  Falborn  son  of  Anborn  (and  remained  so  in  the
 manuscript).  Mablung  and  Damrod,  the   two  men   who  were   left  to
 guard  Frodo  and  Sam,(13) told  them   that  Falborn   was  a   kinsman  of
 Boromir, and that 'he and  they were  Rangers of  Ithilien, for  they were
 descended  from folk  who lived  in Ithilien  at one  time, before  it was
 overrun' (cf. TT p. 267).                                                
    For  the  rest,  Falborn's  conversation  with  Frodo and  Sam proceeds
 almost  exactly  as  does  that   with  Faramir   in  TT.(14) Mablung  and
 Damrod  used  'sometimes  the   Common  Speech,   but  after   the  manner
 of  older  days,  sometimes  some  other  language  of  their   own',  but
 the  description  of  this  other  tongue  (TT  p. 267)  was added  to the
 typescript  that  followed  the  manuscript  at  some  later  time.  Their
 account  of  the  Southrons  scarcely  differs  from  the final  form, but
 where  Mablung  in  TT  (p. 268)  speaks of  'These cursed  Southrons', in
 the  manuscript  he says  'These cursed  Barangils, for  so we  name them'
 (subsequently  changed  to  the  later  reading).  The  name  Barangils is
 written on the First Map beside Swertings (see Map III, VII.309).       
    The  account  of  the  Oliphaunt was  never changed,  save only  in the
 name  by  which  the  great  beasts  were  known   in  Gondor   (Mumak  in
 TT).  In  the  original  draft  Mablung (15) cried  Andabund!,  and  this  was
 the  form  first  written  in  the  manuscript also.  This was  changed to
 Andrabonn,(16) then  to  Mumund.  These  were  immediate  changes,   for  a
 few  lines  later  appears  'the  Mumund of  Harad was  indeed a  beast of
 vast bulk',  where drafting  for the  passage has  Mumar. Soon  after, the
 form  Mamuk  was  introduced  in  both  passages:  this  was  the  form my
 father used in his letter to me of 6 May 1944 (Letters no. 66).          
    Lastly,  in  the  manuscript  Damrod  cries  'May  the  gods  turn  him
 aside',  where  in  TT  he  names  the  Valar;  gods  was  preceded  by  a
 rejected word that I cannot interpret.                                   
    On  30  April  1944  (Letters  no. 64)  my father  described to  me the
 course of the story that I had not read:                                 
                                                                         
    ['The  Ring']  is  growing  and sprouting  again ...  and opening  out in
    unexpected  ways.  So  far  in  the  new  chapters  Frodo  and  Sam  have
    traversed  Sarn  Gebir,(17) climbed  down   the  cliff,   encountered  and
    temporarily  tamed  Gollum.  They  have  with  his  guidance  crossed the
    Dead  Marshes  and  the  slag-heaps  of  Mordor,  lain in  hiding outside
    the  main  gates  and  found  them  impassable,  and set  out for  a more
    secret  entrance near  Minas Morghul  (formerly M.  Ithil). It  will turn
    out to be the  deadly Kirith  Ungol and  Gollum will  play false.  But at
    the  moment  they  are  in  Ithilien  (which is  proving a  lovely land);
    there  has  been  a  lot  of bother  about stewed  rabbit; and  they have
    been   captured   by   Gondorians,   and   witnessed  them   ambushing  a

                                                            
                                                                      
 Swerting  army  (dark  men  of  the South)  marching to  Mordor's aid.
 A large elephant  of prehistoric  size, a  war-elephant of  the Swert-
 ings,  is loose,  and Sam  has gratified  a life-long  wish to  see an
 Oliphaunt ... In the chapter next to be done they  will get  to Kirith
 Ungol  and  Frodo  will  be caught....  On the  whole Sam  is behaving
 well, and living up to repute. He treats Gollum  rather like  Ariel to
 Caliban.                                                              
                                                                      
 Since it was not until a week later that he referred to the sudden and
 totally unexpected appearance of Faramir on the scene, it seems  to me
 that when he wrote this letter he had  not progressed  much if  at all
 beyond the end of the Oliphaunt episode; for in the manuscript  of the
 chapter that became 'Of  Herbs and  Stewed Rabbit'  the leader  of the
 Gondorians is Falborn, not Faramir, and there is as yet  no indication
 that he will play any further part (cf. the outline on p. 135).(18)   
 This  chapter  (including  what  became  'The  Black Gate  is Closed')
 was read to C. S. Lewis on the first of May 1944 (Letters no. 65).
                                                                      
      This is a convenient place to set down the notes on names added
 later to the page transcribed on p. 132:                              
 Change Black Mountains to the White Mountains. Hebel                  
 [Orolos>] Uilos Nor[?ais]                                             
 Alter the Morannon to Kirith Naglath Cleft of the Teeth               
 Gorgor                                                                
 The two King Stones Sern Ubed (denial)                                
                            Sern Aranath                               
 Rohar?                                                               
 To these pencilled notes my father added in ink:                      
 Not Hebel but Ephel. Et-pele > Eppele. Ephel-duath. Ephel             
 [Nimras >] Nimrais. Ered Nimrath.                                     
 With Kirith Naglath cf. Naglath Morn, p. 122; and on the reference to
 Sern Ubed and Sern Aranath see p. 132. On the change of the Black     
 Mountains to the White see VII.433.                                   

                         NOTES.                                      
                                                                    
1. In the manuscript  as in  the draft,  'The moon  was not  due until
 late  that night';  in TT  'the moon  was now  three nights  from the
 full, but it did not climb over the mountains till  nearly midnight.'
2. That  the  illegible  word  is  re-entrant  seems  assured  by the
 recurrence  of  this word  in perfectly  clear form  and in  the same
 context in the text  given on  p. 134.  In the  present text  at this
 point there is drawn a wavy line; this clearly indicates the  line of
 the  mountains  pierced  by  a  very  wide valley  running up  into a
 point.                                                              

  3.  The illegible word is certainly not pointing. It begins with an f or
      a g and probably ends in ing, but does not suggest either  facing or
      gazing.                                                             
  4.  The  word  Ubed,  occurring  twice  here  and  again in  the further
      notes on names on this page  (where it  is translated  'denial'), is
      written at all occurrences in precisely the same way,  and I  do not
      feel at all certain of the third letter.                            
  5.  Before  the  words  'The  red eye'  were written  my father  drew an
      Old English S-rune (cf. VII.382), but struck it out.                
  6.  The remainder  of this  page carries  disjointed passages:  as else-
      where my father probably had it beside him and  used it  for jotting
      down  narrative  'moments'  as they  came into  his mind.  The first
      reads:                                                              
      that  great mountain's  side was  built Minas  Tirith, the  Tower of
      Guard, where Gandalf walked now deep in thought.                    
      On this see note 8. Then follows:                                   
         For a third night they went on.  They had  good water  in plenty,
      and  Gollum  was  better  fed.  Already  he  was  less  famished  to
      look at. At  early morning  when they  lay hidden  for rest,  and at
      evening  when  they set  out again,  he would  slip away  and return
      licking his  lips. Sometimes  in the  long night  he would  take out
      something   .....   and    would   crunch    it   as    he   walked.
      .....  and  lay  under  a  deep  bank  in  tall  bracken  under  the
      shadow  of  pine trees.  Water flowed  not far  away, cold,  good to
      drink.  Gollum  slipped  away,  and  returned  shortly,  licking his
      lips;  but  he  brought  with him  also a  present for  the hobbits.
      Two rabbits he had caught.                                          
      With Sam's having no  objection to  rabbit but  a distaste  for what
      Gollum brought, and  a reference  to his  prudent wish,  in contrast
      to  Frodo's  indifference,  to  save the  elvish waybread  for worse
      times ahead, these exceedingly difficult 'extracts' come to  an end.
      It was clearly here that the episode of  the stewed  rabbit entered;
      but it seems scarcely possible to define how my father related it to
      the whole sequence of the journey from the Black Gate.              
  7.  On  the  continued  hesitation between  Elostirion and  Osgiliath at
      this time see p. 122 and note 7.                                    
  8.  The last sentence is  in fact,  and rather  oddly, completed  by the
      first passage given in note 6, thus:                                
         There   glimmered   through   the  night   the  snows   on  Mount
      Mindolluin;  but  though  Frodo's  eyes  stared  out  into  the west
      wondering  where  in  the  vastness  of  the   land  his   old  com-
      panions  might  now  be,  he  did  not  know   that  under   /  that
      great  mountain's  side  was  built  Minas  Tirith,  the   Tower  of
      Guard, where Gandalf walked now deep in thought.                    
      See the Note on Chronology below.                                   
  9.  This sentence replaced a  form of  it in  which Sam's  reckoning had

       been that they had 'a bare ten  days' supply  of waybread:  that left
       eight.'  In  the  manuscript  of  'The   Passage  of   the  Marshes',
       corresponding to that  in TT  p. 231,  Sam said  'I reckon  we've got
       enough  to  last,  say,  10  days  now'. This  was changed  to 'three
       weeks  or  so', no  doubt at  the same  time as  the sentence  in the
       present text was rewritten.                                          
          In TT (p. 260) it is said at this point that 'Six days or more had
       passed'  since  Sam  made  his  reckoning  of  the  remaining lembas,
       whereas  here  it  is  'Two  days or  more'. Three  days had  in fact
       passed,  the  3rd,  4th  and  5th  of  February (p.  118). In  TT the
       length  of  the journey  had been  increased, both  by the  two extra
       days  during  which  they  crossed  the  Noman-lands {pp.  112, 120),
       and  by  an  extra  day  added to  the journey  from the  Morannon to
       the place of the stewed rabbit episode (p. 135).                     
  10.  re-entrant: see note 2.                                              
  11.  The brief remainder of this  outline is  illegible because  my father
       wrote across it notes in ink on another subject (see p. 145).        
  12.  It  is not  clear that  it was  first conceived  as an  ambush, which
       perhaps  only  arose  when  the  story came  to be  written -  and it
       was  then  that  my  father  added  to the  manuscript at  an earlier
       point  'They  had  come  to  the  end  of a  long cutting,  deep, and
       sheer-sided  in  the  middle,  by  which  the  road  clove   its  way
       through a stony ridge' (TT p. 258).                                  
  13.  In a pencilled draft so faint and  rapid as  to be  largely illegible
       another  name  is  found  instead  of  Mablung,  and   several  names
       preceded Damrod, but I cannot certainly interpret any of them.       
  14.  Rivendell is still Imladrist and the Halflings are still the Halfhigh
       (see   VII.146).  Boromir   is  called   'Highwarden  of   the  White
       Tower, and our captain general', as in TT (p. 266).                  
  15.  Damrod   in   TT;   the   speeches   of   Damrod  and   Mablung  were
       shifted about between the two.                                       
  16.  Cf.  the  Etymologies,  V.372,  stem  MBUD  'project':  *  andambunda
       'long-snouted',   Quenya   andamunda   'elephant',   Noldorin   anda-
       bon, annabon.                                                         
  17.  Sarn  Gebir:  an  interesting  instance  of   the  former   name  re-
       appearing   mistakenly   -   unless   my   father  used   Sarn  Gebir
       deliberately,  remembering  that  I  had  not  read  any of  Book IV,
       in  which  the  name Emyn  Muil was  first used.  Cf. however  p. 165
       note 7.                                                              
  18.  It is clear that in the manuscript the chapter halted at  Sam's words
       (TT p. 270) 'Well, if that's  over, I'll  have a  bit of  sleep.' The
       following  brief  dialogue   between  Sam   and  Mablung   (with  the
       hint that the hobbits will not be allowed  to continue  their journey
       unhindered:  'I  do  not  think  the  Captain  will  leave  you here,
       Master  Samwise')  was  written  in the  manuscript as  the beginning
       of  the  next chapter  ('Faramir'), and  only subsequently  joined to

 the preceding one and made its conclusion; and by then Falborn              
 had become Faramir.                                                         
                                                                            
                            Note on the Chronology.                          
                                                                            
        The brief time-scheme B has the following chronology (see pp. 118,
 135):                                                                       
 (Day  3)  Feb.  4  Frodo,  Sam  and  Gollum  come  to  the  Barren  Lands
        and   Slag-mounds.   Stay   there   during   day  and   sleep.  At
        night  they  go  en  12  miles  and   come  before   the  Morannon
        on Feb. 5.                                                           
 (Day  4)  Feb.  5  Frodo,  Sam  and  Gollum remain  hidden all  day. Pass
        southward to Ithilien at dusk.                                       
 (Day  5)  Feb.  6  Full  Moon.  Stewed  rabbit.  Frodo  and Sam  taken by
        Faramir. Spend night at Henneth Annun.                               
                                                                            
 There  are  two   other  schemes   ('C'  and   'D'),  the   one  obviously
 written shortly after the other,  both of  which begin  at February  4. As
 originally  written,  both  maintain the  chronology of  B, but  both give
 some information  about other  events as  well, and  in this  they differ.
 Scheme C reads thus:                                                        
                                                                            
 (Day 3) Feb. 4 Gandalf and Pippin  pass Fords  and reach  mouth of
        Coomb   about   2.30  a.m.   [Added:  and   rides  on   till  day-
        break and then rests in hiding. Rides again at night.]               
            Theoden   sets   out   from   Dolbaran   and   reaches  Helm's
        Deep soon after dawn.                                                
            Frodo  comes  to   the  Barren   Lands  and   Slag-mounds  and
        stays there during day.                                              
 (Day  4)  Feb.  5  Theoden   leaves  Helm's   Deep  on   return  journey.
        Aragorn rides on ahead with Gimli and Legolas.                       
            Gandalf  abandons  secrecy  and  after  short  rest  rides all
        day  to  Minas  Tirith.  He  and  Pippin  reach  Minas  Tirith  at
        sunset.                                                              
            At  dawn  on  Feb.   5  Frodo   comes  before   the  Morannon.
        Frodo,   Sam   and   Gollum  lie   hid  all   day  and   go  south
        towards Ithilien at nightfall.                                       
 (Day  5)  Feb.  6  Frodo  and  Sam  in  Ithilien.   They  are   taken  by
        Faramir.  Battle  with  the  Southrons.  Frodo  spends   night  at
        Henneth Annun.                                                       
                                                                            
 Scheme D, certainly following C, runs as follows (as originally             
 written):                                                                   
                                                                            
 (Day 3) Feb. 4 Gandalf and Pippin begin their ride to Minas Tirith
           (pass Fords and reach mouth of Deeping Coomb about 2 ]            
           a.m.). At dawn come to Edoras (7.30). Gandalf fearing             

   Nazgul rests all day. Orders assembly to go to Dunhar-                
   row. Nazgul passes over Rohan again.                                  
 (Day  4) Feb.  5 Gandalf  rides all  night of  4 -  5 and  passes into
   Anorien.   Pippin   sees   the   beacons   blaze   up  on   the  moun-
   tains. They see messengers riding West.                               
     Aragorn   (with   Legolas   and   Gimli)   rides   fast   by   night
   (4-5)   to   Dunharrow   via   Edoras,   reaches   Edoras   at   morn-
   ing   and   passes   up   Harrowdale.    Theoden   with    Eomer   and
   many    men    goes    by    mountain-roads   through    south   [sic]
   skirts of mountains to Dunharrow, riding slowly.                      
     Frodo   at   dawn   comes   before    the   Morannon.    At   night-
   fall Frodo with Sam and Gollum turns south to Ithilien.               
 (Day  5)  Feb.  6  Full  Moon  (rises  about  9.20  p.m. and  sets about
   6.30  a.m.  on  Feb.  7).  Gandalf  rides  all  night  of  5  -  6 and
   sights Minas Tirith at dawn on 6th.                                   
     Theoden    comes    out    of    west    into     Harrowdale    some
   miles    above    Dunharrow,   and    comes   to    Dunharrow   before
   nightfall. Finds the muster already beginning.                        
     Frodo   and   Sam   in   Ithilien;   taken   by    Faramir;   battle
   with Southrons; night at Henneth Annun.                               
                                                                        
 On   the   statement   in  scheme   D  that   Theoden  came   down  into
 Harrowdale  some  miles  above  Dunharrow  see  p.  259.  The  full moon
 of February 6 is  the full  moon of  February 1,  1942, as  explained in
 VII.369.                                                                
 It will be seen  that in  their dating  these time-schemes  proceed from
 the schemes A  and B  (see p.  118}, in  which the  day passed  by Frodo
 among  the  slag-mounds  was  February 4,  and in  which he  came before
 the  Morannon  at  dawn  on  February 5.  While these  schemes obviously
 belong  to 1944,  and were  made when  Book IV  was largely  or entirely
 written (pp. 182, 226), it seems  clear that  they preceded  the chrono-
 logical problems that my father  referred to  in his  letters of  12 and
 16 October 1944 (see p. 100): for in  the second  of these  he mentioned
 that he had made a small alteration in Frodo's  journey, 'two  days from
 Morannon to Ithilien', and this change is not present in  these schemes,
 C and D.                                                                
 Scheme  D  was revised  at that  time to  provide the  extra day  in the
 journey from the Morannon  to Ithilien,  and this  was done  by revising
 the  dates  backwards:  thus  Frodo  now  comes  before the  Morannon on
 February  4,  and  on  February  5 'lies  in heather  on the  borders of
 Ithilien' (see p. 135 and TT  p. 257);  thus the  episode of  the stewed
 rabbit still takes place on February 6. Since this scheme only begins on
 February  4  it  is  not  shown  how  the  earlier  arrival  before  the
 Morannon was achieved.                                                  
 It  is  clear  therefore  that  scheme  S  was  devised   following  the
 chronological modifications of 12-16 October  1944; for  in S  the extra

 day  in  the  journey  from  the  Morannon  was   present  from   its  making,
 and  the  date  of the  extra day  was February  5 (as  in Scheme  D revised),
 because  in  this  scheme  the  date  of  the Breaking  of the  Fellowship was
 put  back  from  January  26   to  January   25  (see   pp.  101,   119).  The
 chronology  in  S  I  take  therefore  to  represent  the  structure  when  my
 father wrote on 16 October 'I think I have solved it all at last':            
                                                                              
 (Day 3) Feb. 3 Frodo etc. reach slag-mounds at dawn, and stay in a
             hole  all  day,  going  on  at  nightfall.  Nazgul passes  high up
             on  way  to  Isengard  about  5  p.m.   Another  one   hour  after
             midnight.                                                         
                 Gandalf   and   company   leave    Isengard   and    camp   at
             Dolbaran.   Episode   of   the   Orthanc-stone.    Nazgul   passes
             over about 11 p.m.                                                
 (Day  4) Feb.  4 Frodo  etc. reach  dell in  sight of  Morannon at
             daybreak,  and  lie  hid   there  all   day.  See   the  Harad-men
             march in. At dusk they start southward journey.                   
                 Gandalf  and  Pippin   ride  east.   Sight  Edoras   at  dawn.
             Nazgul passes over Edoras about 8 a.m.                            
 (Day  5)   Feb.  5   Frodo  etc.   reach  borderlands   and  lie   in  heather
             sleeping all day. At night go on into Ithilien.                   
                 Gandalf passes into Anorien.                                  
 (Day  6)   Feb.  6   Frodo  etc.   camp  in   Ithilien.  Episode   of  Stewed
             Rabbit.   Frodo  captured   by  Faramir   and  taken   to  Henneth
             Annun.                                                            
                 [Gandalf and Pippin reach Minas Tirith.]                      
                                                                              
 The  original  entries  concerning  Gandalf  on  February  5  and  6  in  this
 scheme  cannot  be  read  after  the  words  'Gandalf  passes  into  Anorien',
 because  they  were  afterwards  overwritten,  but  it  is  clear  that  as in
 scheme D he reached Minas Tirith at dawn on February 6.                       
   In  this  chapter  relation  to  the  movements  of  other  members  of  the
 original  Company  arises   in  the   rejected  passage   given  on   p.  133,
 interrupted  in  the  manuscript  but  concluded  as  shown  in  note   8.  In
 this  passage,  written  before  the  episode  of  the  stewed rabbit  and the
 coming   of   the   men   of  Gondor   had  entered   the  story,   Frodo  was
 walking  southward  through  Ithilien,  and  in  the  late  night  of February
 6  -  7 (the  second of  this journey)  he saw  the full  moon sinking  in the
 West.  In  its  light  he   glimpsed  from   far  off   the  snows   on  Mount
 Mindolluin;   and   at   that  same   time  Gandalf   was  walking   'deep  in
 thought'  below  that   mountain  in   Minas  Tirith.   When  the   story  was
 entirely  changed  by  the  entry  of  Faramir  it  was  from  Henneth  Annun,
                                                                              
 that  night,  and  in  the  original  draft of  'The Forbidden  pool' appears
 his  sad  speculation  on  the  fate  of  his   former  companions   'in  the
 vastness  of  the  nightlands'  (TT  p.  293).  When  that  was  written  the

                      
                                                                       
 story  was  still  that Gandalf  and Pippin  had already  reached Minas
 Tirith.                                                                
  In the final chronology the relations were altered. Pippin riding with
 Gandalf on Shadowfax caught as  he fell  asleep on  the night  of March
 7 - S 'a glimpse of high  white peaks,  glimmering like  floating isles
 above the clouds as they  caught the  light of  the westering  moon. He
 wondered where Frodo was, and if  he was  already in  Mordor, or  if he
 was  dead;  and he  did not  know that  Frodo from  far away  looked on
 that same  moon as  it set  beyond Gondor  ere the  coming of  the day'
 (The Return of the King p.  20). That  was still  the night  that Frodo
 passed  in  Henneth  Annun;  but  now Gandalf  did not  ride up  to the
 wall of the Pelennor until dawn of the ninth of March.                 

                                      V.                                   
                                   FARAMIR.                                
                                                                          
 On  the  26th  of  April  1944  my  father  said (Letters  no. 63)  that he
 needed  to  know  how  to  stew a  rabbit; on  the 30th  (no. 64)  he wrote
 that  'A  large  elephant  of  prehistoric  size,  a  war-elephant  of  the
 Swertings,  is  loose'  (but  made  no  mention  of  anything  further); on
 the 4th  of May  (no. 65),  having read  a chapter  to C.  S. Lewis  on the
 1st, he was 'busy now with  the next';  and on  the 11th  (no. 67)  he said
 that  he  had  read  his  'fourth  new  chapter  ("Faramir")' to  Lewis and
 Williams  three  days  before.(1) It  seems, then,  that what  was afterwards
 called  'The  Window  on  the  West'  was  achieved in  not much  more than
 a  week.  That  must have  been a  time of  intense and  concentrated work,
 for  the  volume of  writing that  went into  this chapter,  the redrafting
 and reshaping, is remarkable. It  is also  very complex,  and it  has taken
 me  a  lot longer  than a  week to  determine how  the chapter  evolved and
 to try to describe it here. In what follows I trace the  development fairly
 closely,  since  in  'Faramir'  there are  bearings on  other parts  of The
 Lord  of  the Rings  and much  of special  interest in  Faramir's discourse
 on  ancient  history,  most  notably  in  his remarks  on the  languages of
 Gondor and the Common Speech (entirely lost in The Two Towers).           
   The  various  draft-sequences   that  constitute   the  history   of  the
 chapter are so confusing that I  shall try  to make  my account  clearer by
 using letters to distinguish  them when  it seems  helpful. There  was only
 one  manuscript  made,  titled  'XXXVI.  Faramir':(2) this  is a  good clear
 text,  not  extensively  emended  later,  and  in  it  the  final  form was
 achieved,  with  however  certain  important   exceptions.  It   must  have
 been  from  this  text  (referred  to  in  this  chapter as  'the completed
 manuscript',  or  simply 'the  manuscript') that  my father  read 'Faramir'
 to  Lewis  and  Williams  on 8  May 1944.  At this  time the  chapter began
 at Sleep while you may,> said Mablung: see p. 139 note 18.                
   The  original  draft  for the  end of  what became  'Of Herbs  and Stewed
 Rabbit', which I will call  'A', continued  on from  Sam's 'If  that's over
 I'll have a bit o' sleep' (TT p. 270) thus:                               
                                                                          
   He turned and spoke in Frodo's ear. 'I  could almost  sleep on          
 my  legs,  Mr  Frodo,'  he  said.  'And  you've  not   had  much          
 yourself. But these men are friends, it seems: they seem to come          
 from Boromir's country all right. Though they don't  quite trust          
 us, I can't see any cause to doubt them.  And we're  done anyway          
 if they turn nasty, so we'd best rest.'                                   

                          
                                                                        
  'Sleep  if  thou  wilt,'  said  Mablung.  'We   will  guard   thee  and
 thy  master  until  Falborn  comes.  Falborn will  return hither,  if he
 has  saved  his  life.  But  when  he  cometh  we  must   move  swiftly.
 All  this  tumult  will  not  go  unmarked,  and  ere  night  is  old we
 shall  have  many  pursuers.  We  shall  need  all  speed  to  gain  the
 river first.'                                                           
  It   seemed   to  Sam   only  a   few  minutes   before  he   woke  and
 found   that   Falborn   had   returned  and   several  men   with  him.
 They   were   talking   nearby.   Frodo  was   awake  and   among  them.
 They were debating what to do about the hobbits.                        
  Sam   sat  up   and  listened   and  he   understood  that   Frodo  had
 failed  to  satisfy  the leader  of the  men of  Gondor on  some points:
 which  part  he  had  to  play  in  the  company  sent  from  Rivendell,
 why  they  had  left  Boromir,  and  where  he  was  now  going.  To the
 meaning   of   Isildur's   Bane   he  kept   on  returning,   but  Frodo
 would not tell the story of the Ring.                                   
  'But   the   words   said   with   Isildur's   Bane   in   hand,'  said
 Falborn.(3) 'If  you  are  the  Half-high  then  you  should   have  that
 thing  in  hand,  whatever  it  be.  Have you  it not?  Or is  it hidden
 because you choose to hide it?'                                         
  'Were   Boromir   here   he   would   answer   your   questions,'  said
 Frodo.  'And  since  Boromir  was  many  days  ago  at  Rauros   on  the
 way  to your  city, if  you return  swiftly you  will learn  the answer.
 My  part  in  this  company  was  known  to  him  and  to  all   and  to
 the  Lord  Elrond  indeed.  The  errand  given  to  me  brings  me  into
 this  land,  and  it  is not  [?wise] that  any enemy  of the  Dark Lord
 should hinder it.'                                                      
  'I see there is more  in this  than I  first perceived,'  said Falborn.
 'But  I   too  am   under  command:   to  slay   or  take   prisoner  as
 [?reason justifies] all found  in Ithilien.  There is  no cause  to slay
 thee.'                                                                  
                                                                        
  Here this barely legible draft ends.  At the  end of  it is  written in
 pencil:  Death  of  Boromir  known.  This is  probably to  be associated
 with the following notes written across the outline given on p. 135 (see
 note 11 to the last chapter):                                           
                                                                        
    Is Boromir known to be dead?                                         
    Only  by  a  vision  of the  boat with  a light  about it  floating down
  the river and a voice. And by some things of his drifting?             
    This is  Feb. 6.  Gandalf only  arrives at  sunset on  Feb. 5  and the
  Rangers  must  have  left  Tirith  long  before  that.  Hardly  time for
  messenger from Edoras to Minas Tirith (250 miles).                     

  ..... Jan. 31 morning to [Feb. 4 o] night Feb. 3. 3 1/2 days.             
  Rangers must have left on night of Feb. 3rd.                             
  NO.                                                                      
                                                                          
 On  the  date  6  February see  pp. 140  - 2.  31 January  was the  day on
 which  Gandalf  came  with  Aragorn,  Legolas  and  Gimli  to  Edoras  and
 left with  Theoden, riding  west across  the plains  (see pp.  3 -  5). My
 father was evidently calculating that a man  riding 70  miles a  day could
 have  brought  the  news  of  Boromir's death  by word  of mouth  to Minas
 Tirith before Falborn and his men left the  city to  cross the  river into
 Ithilien, but decided that this was not what had happened.                
                                                                          
 A new draft  text ('B'),  at the  outset clearly  written, was  now begun,
 opening  with  Mablung's  words  'Sleep,  if  thou wilt,'(4) and continuing
 as in the original draft A (p. 145): there is thus still no  suggestion at
 this point that the hobbits will not be allowed  to go  on their  way (see
 note 18 to the last chapter), and the leader of the men of Gondor is still
 Falborn.  A  was  followed  closely  in this  new text  (which was  a good
 deal emended  subsequently) almost  to its  end,(5) but  at the  point where
 Frodo  says  'But  those  who  claim  to  oppose  the  Dark Lord  would do
 well  not  to  hinder  it'  the  dialogue moves  to the  same point  in TT
 (p.  272):  'Frodo  spoke  proudly, whatever  he felt,  and Sam  very much
 approved of  it; but  it did  not appease  Falborn', and  continues almost
 as in  the final  form, through  the wary  conversation about  Boromir, as
 far as Frodo's  'though surely  there are  many perils  in the  world.' At
 Falborn's  reply  'Many  indeed,  and  treachery not  the least'  Sam does
 not in this text intervene, and  Falborn continues:  'But thou  askest how
 do  we  know  that  our  captain  is  dead.  We  do  not  know  it  for  a
 certainty, but  yet we  do not  doubt it.'  And he  asks Frodo  whether he
 remembers  anything   of  special   mark  that   Boromir  bore   with  him
 among his gear, and Frodo fears  a trap  and reflects  on his  danger just
 as in TT (pp. 273 - 4). Then follows:                                    
                                                                          
 'I remember that he bore a horn,' he said at last.                        
 'Thou rememberest well, as one who hath verily seen him,'                 
 said Falborn. 'Then maybe thou canst see it in thy mind's eye: a          
 great horn of the wild ox  of the  [Eastern wilderness  >] East,          
 bound with silver, and written with his name, [struck  out: worn          
 upon a silver  chain]. That  horn the  waters of  Anduin brought          
 unto  us  maybe  [> more than]  seven nights  now gone.  An ill          
 token we thought it, and boding little joy to Denethor father of          
 Boromir; for the horn was cloven in  twain as  by sword  or axe.          
 The halves of it came severally to shore ...'                             
                                                                          
 Falborn's  account  of  how  the  pieces  of  the  horn  were   found  now
 follows as in TT (p. 276),(6) ending 'But murder will out, 'tis  said',- then
 he continues:                                                             

                                                  
                                                                           
  'Dost  thou  not  know  of  the  cleaving  of  the  horn,  or   who  cast
 it  over  Rauros  -  to  drown  it  for ever  in the  eddies of  the fall,
 doubtless? '                                                               
  'No,'  said   Frodo,  'I   do  not   know.  But   none  of   our  Company
 has  the  will  for  such a  deed, and  none the  strength unless  it were
 Aragorn.  But  though  it  may  be  a  token  of ill,  a cloven  horn does
 not prove the wearer's death.'                                             
                                                                           
  At  this stage,  therefore, Boromir's  death was  a supposition  in Minas
 Tirith depending solely on the finding of the  pieces of  his horn  in the
 river. But now there follows (and  at this  point my  father's handwriting
 speeded  up  markedly  and  becomes very  difficult, often  a sign  that a
 new  conception  had  entered   that  would   entail  the   rewriting  and
 rejection of what had preceded,  so that  what follows  slips back,  as it
 were, into a more 'primitive' stage of composition):                       
                                                                           
  'No.  But  the  finding  of  the  horn  followed  another  and            
 stranger thing,' said Falborn. 'And that sad chance  befell me,            
 and  others  beside  [changed  to:  No,  said Falborn.  But the            
 finding of the horn  followed another  and stranger  thing that            
 befell me, and others beside]. I sat at night beside the waters            
 of Anduin, just ere the first quarter of the moon, in  the grey            
 dark  watching  the  ever  moving  stream  and  the  sad  reeds            
 rustling....'                                                              
                                                                           
 The account of the boat bearing the  body of  Boromir is  for most  of its
 length very close indeed to  that in  TT (p.  274), and  it is  here, most
 curiously,  that  Falborn  becomes  Boromir's  brother,  though   he  does
 not change his name: 'It was Boromir  my brother,  dead.' It  is as  if he
 slipped  without  conscious  decision   into  the   role  that   had  been
 preparing  for  him.  What else  could he  be, this  captain of  Gondor so
 concerned  with  Frodo's  story  and the  fate of  Boromir? Foreshortening
 the  actual  development,  my father  wrote in  his letter  of 6  May 1944
 (Letters no. 66):                                                          
                                                                           
  A  new  character  has come  on the  scene (I  am sure  I did  not invent
  him,  I did  not even  want him,  though I  like him,  but there  he came
  walking  into   the  woods   of  Ithilien):   Faramir,  the   brother  of
  Boromir ...                                                               
                                                                           
  Falborn's story is different in its ending from the final form:           
                                                                           
 '...  The  boat  turned  into  the  stream and  passed into  the night.
 Others  saw  it,  some  near  at hand,  others from  far off.  But none
 dare  touch  it,  nor maybe  would even  the evil  hands of  those that
 hold Osgiliath dare to hinder it.                                          

   '[?This]  I  thought  was  a  vision  though one  of evil  boding, and
 even  when  I  heard  the  tale  of  others  we  doubted,   Denethor  my
 father  and  I, if  it were  more, though  it boded  evil. But  none can
 doubt  the  horn.  It  lies  now  cloven  in  twain  upon  the   lap  of
 Denethor.   And   messengers   ride   far   and   wide  to   learn  news
 of Boromir.'                                                            
   'Alas,'  said  Frodo.  'For  now  I  do  not  on  my  side  doubt your
 tale.  The  golden  belt   was  given   him  in   Lorien  by   the  Lady
 Galadriel.  It  was  she  who  clothed  us  as you  see us.  This brooch
 is  of  the  same  workmanship'  -  he  touched  the  [?enamelled]  leaf
 that  caught  his   cloak  about   his  neck.   Falborn  looked   at  it
 curiously. 'Yes,' he said, 'it is work of the same [?manner].'          
   'Yet even so,' said  Frodo, 'I  think it  can have  been but  a vision
 that  you  saw.  How  could  a  boat  have  ridden  the falls  of Rauros
 and  the  [?boiling]  floods,  and  naught  have  been spilled  but the
 horn, and founder not with its burden of water?'                        
   'I know not,' said Falborn, 'but whence came the boat?'               
   'From Lorien, it was an elven-boat,' said Frodo;                      
   'Well,'  said  Falborn,  'if   thou  wilt   have  dealings   with  the
 mistress  of  magic  that   ....eth  [added:   dwells]  in   the  Golden
 Wood  then  they   [sic]  must   look  for   strange  things   and  evil
 things to follow.'                                                      
   This   was   too   much   for   Sam's  patience.   He  stood   up  and
 walked  into  the  debate.  'Not  evil from  Lorien,' he  said. 'Begging
 your  pardon,  Mr  Frodo,'  he  said, 'but  I have  been listening  to a
 deal  of  this talk.  Let's come  to the  point before  all the  Orcs of
 Mordor   come   down   on  us.   Now  look   here,  Falborn   of  Gondor
 if  that  is  your  name'  -  the  men  looked  in  amazement   (not  in
 merriment)  at  the  small  ...  hobbit  planted  firmly  on   his  feet
 before  the  seated figure  of the  captain. 'What  are you  getting at?
 If  you  think  we  murdered  your  brother  and  then  ran   away,  say
 so. And say what you mean to do about it.'                              
   'I  was  in  mind  to  say  so,'  answered Falborn.  'Were I  as hasty
 as  thou  I  would  have  slain  thee long  ago. But  we have  taken but
 a  few  minutes  in  speech  to learn  what sort  ye be.  I am  about to
 depart   at   once.  Ye   will  come   with  me.   And  in   that  count
 yourselves fortunate!'                                                  
                                                                        
   Here  this  second  draft B  ends,(7) and  my father  now proceeded to a
 third version ('C'), beginning at the same point as did draft B (p. 146)
 with  Mablung's words  'Sleep, if  you will',  and extending  no further
 into the chapter, but C is written on odd bits of paper, much of it very
 roughly, is not continuous, and contains some sections of  the narrative

     in  divergent  forms.  It seems  clear therefore  that these  pages accom-
     panied the commencement of the completed manuscript.                      
       This  third   drafting  C,   in  which   Falborn  has   become  Faramir,(8)
     largely  retains the  structure of  B, while  at the  same time  moving in
     detail  of  expression  a  good  way  towards  the  form  of  the  opening
     dialogue  between  Faramir  and  Frodo  in TT  (pp. 271  - 6).  There were
     various  intricate  shiftings  and  displacements  and   new  conjunctions
     within the matter of  this dialogue  before my  father was  satisfied with
     its structure, and these I  largely pass  over. The  essential differences
     from  the  final  form  are  that  Sam's indignation  does not  explode at
     Faramir's  words  'and  treachery  not the  least', but  as in  the second
     draft B at his disparaging remark  about Lorien;  and that  Faramir's tale
     of how he heard far off, 'as  if it  were but  an echo  in the  mind', the
     blowing of Boromir's horn had not entered.                                
       There are  a number  of particular  points to  notice. At  the beginning
     of his interrogation  of Frodo  ('which now  looked unpleasantly  like the
     trial of a prisoner') Faramir no longer cites  the words  of the  verse as
     with Isildur's Bane in  hand (see  p. 145  and note  3), but  as Isildur's
     Bane  upholding,(9) and  continues -  in the  completed manuscript  as well
     as the draft -  'If you  be the  Halfling that  was named,  then doubtless
     you held it before the eyes of  all the  Council of  which you  speak, and
     Boromir  saw  it.'  In  TT  (p.  271),  when the  concluding words  of the
     verse  were  For  Isildur's  Bane  shall  waken,/And  the  Halfling  forth
     shall stand, Faramir says: 'But it was at the coming of the  Halfling that
     Isildur's Bane should  waken ...  If then  you are  the Halfling  that was
     named,  doubtless  you  brought  this thing,  whatever it  may be,  to the
     Council of which you speak, and there Boromir saw it.'                    
       When  Frodo says  that if  any could  claim Isildur's  Bane it  would be
     Aragorn,  Faramir  replies,  both  in  the  draft  and in  the manuscript:
     'Why so, and not Boromir, prince  of the  city that  Elendil and  his sons
     founded?', where in TT  (p. 271)  he speaks  of 'the  sons of  Elendil' as
     the  founders.  The story  that Elendil  remained in  the North  and there
     founded  his  realm,  while  his  sons  Isildur  and  Anarion  founded the
     cities  of the  South, appears  in the  fifth version  of the  'Council of
     Elrond'  (VII.144);  and  this  may  suggest  that  that  version  of 'The
     Council of Elrond' was written lacer than 1 have supposed.                
       As  already  mentioned,  the  sound  of Boromir's  horn blowing  far off
     was not yet present in this third  drafting C;  and Faramir  still relates
     the finding of the pieces of the horn before he tells of the  funeral boat
     passing  down  Anduin.  In  answer  to  Frodo's  objection that  'a cloven
     horn  does  not  prove  the wearer's  death' (p.  147) there  now follows:
     '"No,"  said  Faramir.  "But  the  finding  of  the  shards  of  the  horn
     followed another and stranger thing that befell me, as if it were  sent to
     confirm it beyond hope." '  Thus the  words '(that  befell me)  and others
     beside' in B are omitted; but in this tale of the boat that bore Boromir's
     corpse Faramir still declares  that he  was not  the only  one to  see it:

  'Others too saw it, a grey shadow of a vessel from  afar.' In  yet another
  revision of this passage before  the final  form was  reached he  ends: 'A
  vision out of the borders of dream I thought it. But I  do not  doubt that
  Boromir  is  dead,  whether  his  body  of  a  truth  has passed  down the
  River to the Sea, or lies now somewhere under the heedless skies.'        
    The  remote  sound  of  Boromir's  horn  blowing  only  entered  in  the
  manuscript, and Faramir there says that he heard it 'eight days ere  I set
  out on  this venture,  eleven days  ago at  about this  hour of  the day',
  where  TT  (p. 274)  has the  same, but  with 'five'  for 'eight'.(10) As my
  father  wrote this  passage in  the manuscript  he went  on, after  'as it
  might be only an echo  in the  mind': 'And  others heard  it, for  we have
  many  men  that  wander  far  upon  our  borders,   south  and   west  and
  north,  even  to  the  fields of  Rohan.' This  was apparently  struck out
  immediately.                                                              
    To  Sam's  indignant  and  courageous  confrontation  of this  great man
  from Minas Tirith Faramir's response in this draft was gentle:            
                                                                           
  '... Say what you think, and say what you mean to do.'                    
    'I  was  about  to  do  so,'   said  Faramir   smiling,  and   now  less
  stern.  'Were  I  as  hasty  as you  I might  have slain  you long  ago. I
  have spared  the short  part of  [? an hour]  in spite  of peril  to judge
  you  more  justly.  [?Now]  if  you  wish  to  learn   what  I   think:  I
  doubted  you,  naturally,  as  I  should.  But  if  I  am  a judge  of the
  words  and  deeds  of  men  I  may  perhaps  make  a  guess at  hobbits. I
  doubted  but  you  were  friends  or allies  of the  orcs, and  though the
  likes  of  you  could  not  have   slain  my   brother,  you   might  have
  helped or fled with some picking.'                                        
                                                                           
    Here  this  third  phase of  drafting (C)  ends.(11) -  It is  curious that
  in  the  completed  manuscript  Sam's   intervention  has   entirely  dis-
  appeared:  the  dialogue  between  Faramir  and   Frodo  in   the  passage
  where it originally took place now  reaches the  form in  TT (p.  275) and
  Faramir no longer  expresses so  conventional a  view of  the Lady  of the
  Golden Wood (cf. p. 148).                                                 
    It is plain, I  think, that  at this  point, at  Frodo's words  'Go back
  Faramir, valiant  captain, and  defend your  city while  you may,  and let
  me  go  alone  where  my  doom takes  me', the  writing of  the manuscript
  was halted, and that at  that time  nothing further  had been  written: in
  other words, this chapter, in terms of composition, falls into  two parts,
  all up to this point  (apart from  the absence  of Sam's  outburst) having
  been brought virtually to the final form before the story proceeded.      
                                                                           
    Very  rough  and here  and there  altogether illegible  outline sketches
  show  my  father's  preliminary  thoughts  for  its  continuation.  One of
  these, impossibly difficult to read, begins at the point where the draft C
  ends,  with  Faramir  still  speaking  to  Sam:  'But  you  have  not  the

  manners of orcs, nor their speech, and indeed Frodo your master  has an
  air that I cannot ..., an elvish air maybe.' In this text Faramir shows
  no hesitation about his course and does not postpone his  decision, but
  concludes sternly: 'You shall be well treated. But make no doubt of it.
  Until my father  Denethor releases  you, you  are prisoners  of Gondor.
  Do not try to escape, if you do not wish to be slain' (cf.  the passage
  given in note 7). Then follows:                                        
                                                                        
    In  a  few  minutes   they  were   on  their   way  again   down  the
  slopes.  Hobbits  [?tired].  Mablung  carries  Sam.  They  get  to the
  fenced  camp  in  a  dense  wood  of  trees,  10  miles away.  They had
  not  gone  far  before  Sam  suddenly  said  to  Frodo:  'Gollum!  Well
  thank  heavens  we've  lost  him!'  But  Frodo  not  so sure.  'We have
  still to  get into  Mordor,' he  said, 'and  we do  not know  the way.'
  Gollum rescues them                                                    
                                                                        
  The last three words are very unclear, but I have no doubt that this is
  what  they  are  -  though  what story  lay behind  them will  never be
  known.                                                                 
    Another short text reads as follows:                                 
                                                                        
  Faramir  says  he no  longer doubts.  If he  is any  judge of  men. But
  he says that much  [more) lies  upon it  than at  first he  thought. 'I
  should' he said  'take you  back to  Minas Tirith,  and if  things went
  ill my life would be forfeit. But I will  not decide  yet. Yet  we must
  move  at  once.'  He  gave  some  orders  and  the  men  broke  up into
  small   groups   and   faded   away   into   the  trees.   Mablung  and
  Damrod  remained.  'Now  you  will  come  with   me,'  he   said.  'You
  cannot  go  along  the  road if  you meant  to. And  you cannot  go far
  for  you  are  weary.  So  are  we.  We go  to a  secret camp  10 miles
  away. Come with us. Before morn we will decide.'                       
    They  ....  Faramir  spoke.'You   do  not   deal  openly.   You  were
  not  friendly  with  Boromir.  I  see  S.G.  thinks ill  of him.  Now I
  loved him, yet I knew him  well. Isildur's  Bane. I  say that  this lay
  between  you  in  some  way.  Heirlooms  do   not  breed   peace  among
  companions. Ancient tales.'                                            
    'And ancient tales teach us not to blab,' said Frodo.                
    'But  you  must  know  that  much  is  known  in  Minas  Tirith  that
  is  not  spoken  aloud.  Therefore  I  dismissed  my  men.  Gandalf was
  here.  We  the  rulers  know  that  I[sildur]  carried  off  the Ruling
  Ring. Now this is a  terrible matter.  I can  well guess  that Boromir,
  proud,  ever  anxious  for  the  glory  of  Minas  Tirith (and  his own
  renown)  might  wish  to  seize  it. I  guess that  you have  the Ring,
  though how it could ...                                                

  The rest of the sentence is illegible. The brief sketch ends  with Faramir's
  words 'I would not touch it if  it lay  by the  highway' and  his expression
  of his love for and desires for  Minas Tirith  (TT p.  280); the  last words
  are 'I could advise you if you would tell me more.'  It is  a pity  that the
  passage  about  the Ring  is so  brief and  elliptical; but  the implication
  must surely be that the rulers of the city knew that Isildur carried off the
  Ruling  Ring because  Gandalf had  told them.  This, of  course, was  not at
  all the way  in which  the story  would unfold  when it  came to  be written
  down.                                                                       
    Another  page  of  even  more  hasty  and  staccato  sketching   takes  up
  from the point reached in the first, and  may be  its continuation  (cf. TT
  p.  280,  where  Faramir's  words  'it  may  be  that I  can advise  you ...
  and even aid you' are followed by 'Frodo made no answer').                  
                                                                             
  Frodo  does  not  say  more. Something  holds him  back. Wisdom?            
  Memory  of  Eoromir?  Fear of  the power  and treachery  of what            
  he carried - in  spite of  liking Faramir.  They speak  of other            
  things.  Reasons of  decline of  Gondor. Rohan  (alter Boromir's            
  words  saying he  did not  go there).(12) Gondor gets  like Rohan,            
  loving war as game: so Boromir. Sam says little. Delighted that            
  Gollum  seems  forgotten.  Faramir falls  silent. Sam  speaks of            
  elvish power, boats, ropes, cloaks.  Suddenly aware  that Gollum            
  is padding behind. But when they halt he sheers off.                        
    Faramir in accord  with law  makes them  be blindfold  as they            
  reach  secret stronghold.  They talk.  Faramir warns  him, warns            
  against  Gollum.  Frodo  reveals that  he has  to go  to Mordor.            
  Speaks  of  Minas  Ithil.  Moonrise.  Faramir  bids  farewell in            
  morning.  Frodo  promises  to  come  back  to  Minas  Tirith and            
  surrender to him if he returns.                                             
                                                                             
    At  this  stage,  before  the chapter  proceeded further,  Sam's interven-
  tion  in the  initial interrogation  of Frodo  by Faramir  was reintroduced,
  at an earlier place in the dialogue (at 'and treachery not the  least'), and
  inserted into the manuscript on a rider.(13)                                
                                                                             
    The  latter  part  of  the  chapter is  extant in  continuous and  for the
  most  part  clearly  written  drafting,  with  a  good  deal of  my father's
  characteristic   'over-lapping'  -   when  the   narrative  takes   a  wrong
  direction or is  in some  respect unsatisfactory,  collapses into  a scrawl,
  and  is  replaced  by  a  new  page  beginning  at  an  earlier  point (thus
  producing sections of near repetition).  This drafting  led to  the finished
  manuscript,  in  which  there  were  still  important  differences  from the
  text  in  The  Two  Towers:  it will  be seen  that at  this time  there was
  much  development  still  to  come  in  the  past   history  of   Rohan  and
  Gondor.                                                                     

                         
                                                                         
  The  new  draft ('D')  begins (as  also does  the recommencement  of the
 manuscript, closely based on D) '  "I do  not doubt  you any  more," said
 Faramir.'(14) The narrative from this  point (TT  p. 276),  as far  as Sam's
 glimpse  of  Gollum  as  they walked  through the  woodland (TT  p. 281),
 already in the draft very largely achieved the final text; but  there are
 some interesting differences.(15)                                        
  It is here that the  Stewards of  Gondor first  appear, and  the passage
 concerning  them  (TT p.  278) was  written in  the draft  text virtually
 without  hesitation  or  correction,  although  there  is  no preliminary
 material extant. It is  notable that  from his  first appearance  in 'The
 Breaking  of  the  Fellowship'  (VII.375  -  6)  Denethor has  never been
 called  King: he  is the  Lord Denethor,  Denethor Lord  of the  Tower of
 Guard. It seems more than likely, therefore,  that this  cardinal element
 in  the  history   and  government   of  Gondor   was  already   of  long
 standing, though never until now  emerging into  the narrative.  The line
 of  Denethor  is  traced  in  the  draft  to  Maraher  the  good steward,
 changed probably  at once  to Mardil  (the name  in the  manuscript); but
 the last king of the line of Anarion,  in whose  stead Mardil  ruled when
 he went away to  war, was  not Earnur.  Both in  draft and  manuscript he
 is named King Elessar.                                                   
  Gandalf's  recital  of  his  names,  as reported  by Faramir  (who calls
 him  in  the  draft  'the  Grey  Wanderer':  'the  Grey  Pilgrim'  in the
 manuscript),  was  intricately  changed in  its initial  composition, but
 apparently developed thus:                                               
                                                                         
  [Added:   Mithrandir   among   the  Elves.   Sharkun  to   the  Dwarves.]
  [The  name  of  my  youth  in  the  West  is  forgotten  >]  [Olorion  >]
  Olorin  I  was  in my  youth that  is forgotten;  [struck out:  Shorab or
  Shorob  in  the  East,]  [Forlong  >]  Fornold in  the South,  Gandalf in
  the North. To the East I go not. [Struck out: Not everywhere]           
                                                                         
 The passage was then written out  again in  the draft,  in the  same form
 as it has in  TT, but  with the  names Sharkun  and Fornold,  this latter
 being  subsequently  changed  to  Incanus.  In  the   manuscript  Sharkun
 (for  later  Tharkun)  remains.  -  Here the  name Olorin  first appears,
 changed  from  Olorion.  On  Gandalf's  names  'in  the  South',  Forlong
 changed to Fornold, I can  cast no  light; I  do not  know whether  it is
 relevant  that  in  Appendix  F  to  LR  the  name  of  Forlong,  Lord of
 Lossarnach (who died in the Battle of the Pelennor Fields), is said to be
 among  the  names  in  Gondor  that  'were   of  forgotten   origin,  and
 descended  doubtless  from  days  before  the  ships  of  the Numenoreans
 sailed the Sea.'                                                         
  Faramir's  words  about  Gandalf's  eagerness  for  stories  of  Isildur
 were much changed: 'he was eager for  stories of  Isildur, though  of him
 we had less to tell, [for Isildur was of  the North  in Fornost,  and the
 realm  of  Gondor  held  from  Anarion.  >  for  to  Gondor no  sure tale

  had ever come  concerning his  end, only  rumour that  he perished  in the
  River  being  shot  by  orc-arrows.  >]  for  nought  was  ever  known for
  certain of his end.' For the first occurrence of the  name Fornost  in the
  texts, replacing Fornobel, see p. 76.                                     
    A last point here is that (both in draft  and manuscript)  Faramir says:
  'Isildur  took  somewhat  from  the  hand  of  the  Unnamed,  ere  he went
  away  from  the battle',  where in  TT (p.  279) he  says 'went  away from
  Gondor'.  Cf.  'The  Council  of  Elrond'  in FR  (p. 265),  where Gandalf
  says:  'For  Isildur  did  not  march  away  straight  from  the   war  in
  Mordor, as  some have  told the  tale', and  Boromir interrupts:  'Some in
  the  North,  maybe.  All  know  in  Gondor  that  he  went first  to Minas
  Anor  and  dwelt  a  while  with  his  nephew  Meneldil,  instructing him,
  before  he  committed  to him  the rule  of the  South Kingdom.'  Cf. also
  the  beginning  of  'The  Disaster  of  the  Gladden  Fields'  in Unfinished
  Tales.                                                                    
    At  the  point  where  Sam, listening  to but  not entering  the conver-
  sation,  and  observing  that  Gollum  was   never  mentioned,   sees  him
  slipping behind a tree, the draft text (which, since it was soon replaced
  by another, I will call 'D 1') continues thus:                            
                                                                           
  He opened his  mouth to  speak, but  did not.  He could  not be           
  sure, and 'why should I mention the  old villain  anyway, until           
  I'm obliged,' he thought.                                                 
    After a while  Frodo and  Faramir began  to speak  again, for           
  Frodo was eager to learn news of Gondor and its folk and of the           
  lands about them, and what hope they had in their long war.               
    'It is long since we had any hope,' said Faramir.                       
                                                                           
  These  last  words  appear much  later in  TT (p.  286). Thus  the entire
  story  in TT  pp. 281-6 is lacking  at this  stage: the  blindfolding, the
  coming  to  Henneth  Annun,  the  account  of  the  cave,  the  report  of
  Anborn about  the 'black  squirrel' in  the woods,  the evening  meal, and
  Frodo's stories of their  journey (although  the fact  that Frodo  and Sam
  would  be  blindfolded  before they  came to  the 'secret  stronghold' was
  known to my father: see the outline on p. 152). All this  is found  in the
  completed manuscript in virtually the final form.                         
    Faramir's  account  of  the  history  of  Gondor and  the coming  of the
  Horsemasters  (TT  pp.  286-7)  was  developed  in  two  stages  before it
  was  written  in  the  manuscript.  Already  in  the  first version  (D 1)
  Faramir  speaks  very  much  as  in  TT of  the evils  and follies  of the
  Numenoreans  in  the  Great Lands,(16) and of  their obsession  with death.
  But after 'Childless lords sat  musing in  hollow halls,  or in  high cold
  towers asked questions of the stars' he continues:                        
                                                                           
  '... But we were more fortunate than other cities, recruiting             
  our strength from the sturdy folk of the sea-coasts,  and the             

                                             
                                                                         
 hardy   people   of   the   White  Mountains (17) - where   lingered  once
 many  remnants  of   races  long   forgot.  And   then  there   came  the
 men   out  of   the  North,   the  [Horse-marshals   >]  Rohir.   And  we
 ceded  them   the  fields   of  [Rohan   >]  Elenarda   [written  above:
 Kalen(arda)]   that   are  since   called  Rohan,(18) for  we   could  not
 resist  their  rude  strength,  and  they  became  our  allies  and  have
 ever  proved  true,  and   they  learn   of  our   lore  and   speak  our
 speech.  Yet  they  hold  by  their  old  ways   and  their   own  speech
 among  themselves.  And  we  love  them  for  they   remind  us   of  the
 youth  of  men  as  they  were  in  the  old  tales  of  the wars  of the
 Elves  in  Beleriand.  Indeed  I  think  that  in  [?that]  way   we  are
 remotely  akin,  and  that they  are come  of that  old stock,  the first
 to  come  out  of  the  East  from which  the Fathers  of the  Fathers of
 Men   were   come,   Beren   and   Barahir   and   Huor  and   Hurin  and
 Tuor  and  Turin,  aye  and  Earendel   himself  the   half-elven,  first
 king  of  Westernesse.  So  does  some  kinship   in  tongue   and  heart
 still  tell.  But  they  never  crossed  the  Sea or  went into  the West
 and  so  must  ever  remain  [?alien].  Yet we  intermarry, and  if they
 have  become  somewhat   like  us   and  cannot   be  called   wild  men,
 we  have  become   like  them   and  are   no  longer   Numenoreans.  For
 now  we  love  war  and  valour  as  things   good  in   themselves,  and
 esteem   warriors   above   all  others.   Such  is   the  need   of  our
 days.                                                                    
                                                                         
  In  this  notable  passage  are  adumbrated  new  elements   of  ancient
 history that were no  doubt long  preparing before  they appeared  in any
 narrative text, though Eorl the  Young had  entered in  'The King  of the
 Golden Hall', riding out  of the  North to  'the Battle  of the  Field of
 Gorgoroth'  in  which  Sauron  was  overthrown  (see  VII.444   and  note
 11).  That  'between  Rohan  and  Ondor   there  was   great  friendship'
 appeared in the initial draft of 'The Riders of Rohan' (VII.393),  and in
 the  outline  'The Story  Foreseen from  Fangorn' (VII.437),  after 'News
 comes... of  the siege  of Minas  Tirith by  the Haradwaith',  was added:
 'Theoden  answers  that  he  does  not  owe  fealty  -  only to  heirs of
 Elendil.'                                                                
  The mention of Earendel as the  'first king  of Westernesse'  is strange
 indeed, but  I think  probably not  significant, a  passing inadvertence:
 see further p. 158 and note 26.                                          
  This draft  D 1  continues on  for some  way, written  fast, and  I will
 return to it; but it is convenient now to turn to the draft that replaced
 it ('D 2'), and which takes up with Sam's decision  to say  nothing about
 Gollum:                                                                  
                                                                         
 '...  why  should  I  remind  them of  the old  villain, if  they choose
 to forget him? I wish I could.'                                          

   After a while  Frodo and  Faramir began  to talk  again, and           
 Frodo asked many  questions concerning  Gondor and  its people           
 and the lands about them, and what hope they had in their long           
 war. He was interested in such matters, but also he  wished to           
 discover, if he could, how much Faramir knew of old  lore, and           
 how  he  knew  it.  He  remembered  now  that  at  the Council           
 Boromir  had  shown  much  knowledge  of these  things [struck           
 out: naming the number of the rings of].                                 
                                                                         
   The last part of this was changed to read:                             
                                                                         
 He  was  interested  in  such  matters,  but  also  he thought  of Bilbo.
 'He'll  want  accounts  of  all these  things,' he  thought. 'It  is long
 since  I  made  any  note  in  my  diary: tonight  perhaps, as  we rest.'
 Then  he  smiled  at  himself:  'But  he  lives  in  the House  of Elrond
 and  can  have  more  for  the  asking  than  all  that is  remembered in
 Gondor!  0  but  well,  he'll  like  it  best  from  a  hobbit,  personal
 recollections. He will, if ever I see him again, alas!'                 
                                                                         
   All  this  was  struck  from  the  page  subsequently, when  the later
 structure  of  the  narrative  was  imposed;  but  the  text  as  written
 continues  (cf.  p.  154):  '"What hope  have we?"  said Faramir.  "It is
 long since we had any hope....', and then proceeds to develop            
 Faramir's  discussion  of  Gondor  and  Rohan  to a  form much  closer to
 that in The Two Towers, though still with important differences.        
   Where in the first version  D 1  (p. 154)  he said:  'But we  were more
 fortunate than other cities, recruiting our strength from the sturdy folk
 of  the  sea-coasts, and  the hardy  people of  the White  Mountains', he
 now  says:  'But  we  were  wiser  and more  fortunate than  some; wiser,
 for we recruited the strength of our people from the  sturdy folk  of the
 sea-coasts  and  the   hardy  mountaineers   of  Hebel   Nimrath;(19) more
 fortunate in our foes that became  our friends.'(20) Faramir still  gives no
 indication  of  when  the  Horsemen  came  out  of  the  North, For  on a
 time  there  came  men out  of the  North and  assailed our  borders, men
 of fierce valour, but not servants of the Dark Lord, not the  wild hordes
 of the East, or the cruel hosts of the South. Out of the North came the
 Rohiroth,(21) the Eorlingas, and at the last  we ceded  to them  the fields
 of  Kalinarda (22) that are  since called  Rohan; for  long these  had been
 sparsely  peopled,  and  we  could  not  resist  the strength  of  these
 golden-haired  horsemen.  And  they became  our vassals  or indeed  our 
 allies ...' He continues very much as in  TT (p.  287). In  the completed
 manuscript Faramir gives  this indication  of the  date of  their coming:
 'On  a  time  in  the  days of  Mardil's son  there came  men out  of the
 North ...' But of course this conveys very little.                       
   Of  the  origin  of the  Rohiroth this  draft D  2 gives  the following

 version. The passage  was heavily  emended, and  I show  the significant
 alterations:                                                            
                                                                        
 '...  Indeed,  it  is said  by the  loremasters among  us that  they are
 somewhat   our   kin   in   blood   and   in  speech,   being  descended
 [from  those  of  the  Three  Houses  of  Men  who  went  not  over  sea
 into  the  West  >]  from  those  same  Three  Houses  of  Men  as  were
 the   Numenoreans,   from   Beor   and  Hador   and  Haleth,   but  from
 such  as  went  not  over  sea  into  the  West  at  the calling  of the
 Powers.  Thus  they  have to  us a  kinship, [such  as the  Exiled Elves
 that  linger  still  in  the West  (of such  indeed is  the Lady  of the
 Golden   Wood)   and   returned   not   to   Elvenhome  have   to  those
 who  departed.  But   they  have   never  returned.   >]  such   as  the
 High Elves  that do  here and  there abide  still in  the West  of these
 lands  have  to  those  who  lingered  and  went  never   to  Elvenhome.
 Such  is  the  kinship  of  the  Lady  of  the Golden  Wood to  the folk
 she  rules.(23) And  so,  as  the Elves  are divided  into three:  the High
 Elves,  and  the  Middle  Elves,  [the  Lingerers   the  Elves   of  the
 Woods  >]  their  kindred  that   lingered  on   the  shores,   and  the
 Wild  Elves  [the  Refusers  >]  of  the  woods  and  mountains,  so  we
 divide  Men,  calling  them  the  High  or  the  Men  of  [Light  >] the
 West,  which  are   the  Numenoreans,   and  the   Middle  or   the  Men
 of  Shadow,  such  as  the  Rohiroth  and  other  of  their  kindred  in
 Dale   and   Mirkwood,   and   the  Wild   Men,  or   the  Men   of  the
 Darkness.  And  of  the  truth  of  this  their  likeness of  tongue and
 heart   still  speaks.   Nonetheless  those   of  Numenor   passed  over
 the  Sea  indeed,  even  if  they  after  forfeited  their  kingdom  and
 returned,  and  so  they  became  a  people  apart  and   should  remain
 so.  Yet  if  the  Rohir  became  in   some  ways   more  like   to  us,
 enhanced  in  art  and  gentleness,  we  too   have  become   more  like
 to  them,  and  do  not  now  rightly  claim  the  title  High.  We  are
 become  Middle  Men,   of  the   Shadow,  but   with  memory   of  other
 things.                                                                 
                                                                        
   This was very  largely retained,  as emended,  in the  manuscript, but
 with  these  chief  differences: 'they  are come  from those  same Three
 Houses  of  Men  as  were  the  Numenoreans,  from  Hador   the  Golden-
 haired, the Elf-friend maybe, but from such  of their  sons as  went not
 over the Sea into the West, refusing the call';(24) there is no mention of
 the  Lady  of the  Golden Wood;  and 'the  Middle People  or the  Men of
 the Shadows, such as the Rohiroth and  others of  their kindred  in Dale
 and the upper waters of Anduin'.                                        
   The threefold division of the Elves here (lost in  The Two  Towers) is
 that introduced into  the Quenta  Silmarillion after  the return  of the

                                              
                                                                         
 manuscript  from  the  publishers at  the end  of 1937  (see The Lost Road
 pp.  200, 219):  the Elves  of Valinor;  the Lembi  or Lingerers;  and the
 Avari, the Unwilling.                                                    
  The  draft D  1, left  on p.  155, continues  through Faramir's  reply to
 Sam's remark about  the Elves,  and this  is of  great interest.  Though a
 good deal was retained in TT (pp. 287 - 8) I give it here in full.  At the
 end the writing becomes very fast and  the draft  ends in  scrawled notes.
 Passages in square brackets are thus bracketed in the original.          
                                                                         
  'You  don't  say  much  in  all  your  tales   about  the   Elves,  sir,*
 said  Sam,  suddenly   plucking  up   courage:  he   was  rather   in  awe
 of Faramir since his encounter on his master's behalf.                   
  'No,   Master   Samwise,'   said   Faramir,   'and   there    you   touch
 upon   another   point   in   which   we   have  changed,   becoming  more
 as  other   men.  For   (as  you   may  know,   if  Mithrandir   was  your
 guest;   and   you    have   spoken    with   Elrond)    the   Numenoreans
 were  elf-friends,  and   came  of   those  men   who  aided   the  Gnomes
 in  the  first  wars,  and  were  rewarded  by  the  gift  of  the kingdom
 in  the  midst  of  the  Sea,  within  sight  of  Elvenhome   whither  the
 High   Elves   withdrew   [written   above:    where   the    High   Elves
 dwelt).  But  in  the  Great   Lands (25) men and  elves   were  estranged,
 by   the   arts  of   the  Enemy   [who  had   suborned  most   men  (save
 only  the  Fathers  of  the  Numenoreans)  to  his  service]  and  by  the
 slow   changes  of   time  in   which  each   kind  walked   further  down
 their  sundered  roads.  Men  fear  and   misdoubt  the   Elves,  disting-
 uishing  not  between  the  High-elves  (that   here  and   there  remain)
 and   those  that   like  themselves   never  went   over  the   Sea.  And
 Elves   mistrust  men,   who  so   often  have   served  the   Enemy.  And
 we  grow  like  other  men,   like  the   men  even   of  Rohan   who  see
 them  not  if  they  pass  (or  persuade  themselves  that  they   do  not
 see),  and  who  speak  of  the  Golden  Wood  in  dread.  Yet  there  are
 Elf-friends   among   us   in   Condor   still,   more   than   among  any
 other  people;  for  though  the  blood  of  Numenor   is  now   run  thin
 in  Gondor,  still  it  flows  there,  indeed  even  Elvish  blood  maybe:
 for  our  kings  of old  were half-elven,  even our  first king  Elros son
 of  Earendel  and  brother  of  Elrond.(26) And 'tis  said  that Elendil's
 house  was  a  younger  branch  of  Elros.  Some   there  are   of  Gondor
 who  have  dealings  with  the  Elves,  some  even   still  fare   to  the
 Golden    Wood    (though    often   they    return   not).    One   great
 advantage  we  have:  we  speak  an   elvish  speech,   or  one   so  near
 akin that we can in part understand them and they us.'                   
  'But   you   speak   the   ordinary   language,'  exclaimed   Sam.  'Like
 as, or a bit old-fashioned like, if you'll pardon me saying so.'         

   'Yes,'  said  Faramir,  'we  do,   for  that   is  our   language.  The
 Common  Tongue,  as   some  call   it,  is   derived  from   the  Numeno-
 rean,  being  a  changed   form  of   that  speech   of  men   which  the
 fathers  used,   Beren  and   Turin  and   Earendel  and   those  others.
 [Hence   its  remote   kinship  with   the  tongues   of  Rohan   and  of
 Dale   and   of   Westfold   and   Dunland   and   other   places.]  This
 language  it  is  that  has  spread  through  the  western   world  among
 all  that  are of  good will,  and among  others also.  But the  lords of
 Numenor   spoke   the   Gnomish   tongue   of   the   Noldor    to   whom
 they   were   allied,   and   that    tongue,   changed    somewhat   and
 mingled,   still   lives   among   us,   though   we   do   not  commonly
 speak  it.  So it  is that  our earliest  names were  in the  High Elvish
 Quendian,  such  as  Elendil,  Isildur,  and  the  rest,  but  the  names
 we  have  given  to  places,  and  still give  to women  and men,  are of
 Elvish  sort.  Often  we  give  them  out  of  the   old  tales:   so  is
 Denethor, and Mablung, and many others.'                                 
                                                                         
   Here the draft D 1 peters out, and I return to D 2, left on p.  157, at
 the same point ('You don't say much in  all your  tales about  the Elves,
 sir'). In his reply to Sam Faramir here  says of  the Elf-friends  of the
 ancient  wars  of  Beleriand  that  they  'were  rewarded (such  as would
 take it) by the gift of the Kingdom in the midst of the Sea, within sight
 of Elvenhome, which they had leave  to visit.'(27) And he  continues: 'But
 in  the  Great  Lands  Men  and  Elves  were  estranged  in  the  days of
 Darkness  ...'  He  no longer  speaks of  the men  of Rohan  being unable
 to see the Elves, or pretending to themselves that they  do not  see them
 if they do, but as in TT says only that they shun them; and  he declares,
 again as in TT, that he would not  himself go  to Lothlorien,  judging it
 'perilous now for  mortal men,  at least  to seek  the Elder  People wil-
 fully.' But his answer  to Sam's  'But you  speak the  ordinary language!
 Same  as  us,  though  a  bit   old-fashioned  like'   was  substantially
 changed:                                                                 
                                                                         
   'Of  course  we  do,'  said  Faramir.  'For  that  is  our  own  tongue
 which  we  perhaps  preserve  better  than  you  do  far  in  the  North.
 The   Common   Tongue,   as   some   call   it,   is  derived   from  the
 Numenoreans,(28) being but   a   form   changed    by   time    of   that
 speech   which   the   Fathers   of   the   Three  Houses   [struck  out:
 Hador  and  Haleth  and  Beor]  spoke  of  old.   This  language   it  is
 that  has  spread  through  the  western  world  amongst  all   folk  and
 creatures  that  use  words,  to  some  only  a  second  tongue  for  use
 in   intercourse   with  strangers,   to  some   the  only   tongue  they
 know.  But  this  is  not  an  Elvish  speech in  my meaning.  All speech
 of  men in  this world  is Elvish  in descent;  but only  if one  go back

                                                              
                                                                            
 to  the  beginnings.  What  I  meant  was so:  [the lords  >] many          
 men  of  the  Three  Houses  long  ago  gave  up   man-speech  and          
 spoke  the  tongue  of  their  friends  the  Noldor  or  Gnomes:(29) a          
 high-elvish  tongue  [struck  out:  akin to  but changed  from the          
 Ancient  Elvish  of  Elvenhome].  And  always  the lords  of Nume-          
 nor knew that tongue and used  it among  themselves. And  so still          
 do  we  among  ourselves,  those  who  have  the blood  of Numenor          
 still  in our  veins, though  mayhap we  have changed  it somewhat          
 mingling it like our blood with other strains. Thus it is that all          
 our names of town and field, hill  and river  are in  that tongue,          
 and  the names  of our  women and  of our  men. [Struck  out: Only          
 in the oldest  days did  we use  the High  Ancient Elven  for such          
 purposes: of that sort are  Elendil and  Isildur.] Indeed  many of          
 these we still take from tales of the old  days: such  are Mablung          
 and  Damrod,  and  mine  own,(30) and   my  father's   Denethor,  and          
 many others.'                                                               
  'Well sir, I am glad you don't think ill of  Elves at  any rate,'          
 said Sam. 'Wonderful folk, I think, sir. And  the Lady  of Lorien,          
 Galadriel, you should see her, indeed you should,  sir. I  am only          
 a  hobbit,  if  you  understand  me,  and  gardening's  my  job at          
 home ...'                                                                   
                                                                            
  This  draft  D  2  continues  on  through Sam's  speech (essentially  as in
 TT  p. 288),  his blurting  out that  Boromir always  sought the  Ring, and
 Faramir's  response;  but  now  in  its  turn  it  becomes  quickly  rougher
 and less formed  (for its  continuation beyond  this point  see p.  163) and
 was  replaced  by  new  drafting  ('D  3')  beginning  at  'Indeed  many  of
 these we still take from tales of the ancient days ...'                     
  In  the  text of  the completed  manuscript the  draft D  2 just  given was
 repeated  with  scarcely  any  change  until  towards  the end.  Faramir now
 says of the Elvish tongue  spoken by  the lords  of Gondor  that 'we  can in
 part understand Elves  [struck out:  and they  us] even  when they  speak to
 one another secretly', but all  that he  says in  D 2  of the  Common Tongue
 is repeated exactly as far as: 'All speech of men in this world is Elvish in
 descent;  but  only  if  one  goes  back to  the beginnings.'  The following
 sentence  in  D 2  ('What  I meant  was so:  many men  of the  Three Houses
 long  ago  gave  up man-speech  and spoke  the tongue  of their  friends the
 Noldor  or Gnomes')  was at  first taken  up in  the manuscript,  but struck
 out in the act of writing and  replaced by  the following  (thus eliminating
 the reference  to the  abandonment of  their own  speech by  the men  of the
 Three Houses, see note 29):                                                 
                                                                            
  '... What  I meant  was so:  many men  of the  Three Houses                
 long ago learned the High-elven tongues, as they were spoken                

                                                                   
                                                                         
 [in Beleriand >] in Gondolin or by the  Sons of  Feanor. And             
 always the Lords of Numenor knew these tongues, and used the             
 Gnomish speech  among themselves.  And so  still do  we, the             
 rulers of Minas Tirith, in whom the  blood of  Numenor still             
 flows ...'(31)                                                           
                                                                         
 And Faramir,  giving examples  of names  taken 'from  tales of  the Elder
 Days', adds Diriel to those he gave before.                              
  Among  occasional  previous  references  to   the  Common   Speech  only
 once is its nature defined, and there in a wholly different way.  This is
 in an early draft for a passage in the chapter 'Lothlorien' (VII.239 note
 26), where it is said that  Frodo did  not understand  the speech  of the
 Elves of Lorien 'for the language  was the  old tongue  of the  woods and
 not  that  of  the  western  elves  which  was  in those  days used  as a
 common speech among many folk.'                                          
  With  the  present  passage,  in  its  various  forms,   concerning  the
 Common  Speech  and  the  knowledge  of  the  High-elven  tongue  of  the
 Noldor  among  the  lords  of  Gondor  may  be compared  what is  said in
 Appendix F to The Lord of the Rings:                                     
                                                                         
  The  Westron  was  a  Mannish  speech,   though  enriched   and  softened
  under  Elvish  influence. It  was in  origin the  language of  those whom
  the  Eldar  called  the  Atani   or  Edain,   'Fathers  of   Men',  being
  especially  the  people  of  the  Three  Houses  of  the  Elf-friends who
  came west into Beleriand in the  First Age,  and aided  the Eldar  in the
  War of the Great Jewels against the Dark Power of the North....         
    The  Dunedain  alone  of   all  races   of  Men   knew  and   spoke  an
  Elvish tongue;  for their  forefathers had  learned the  Sindarin tongue,
  and  this  they  handed  on  to  their  children  as  a  matter  of lore,
  changing  little  with  the  passing  of  the  years.  And  their  men of
  wisdom  learned  also  the  High-elven  Quenya  and  esteemed   it  above
  all  other  tongues,  and  in  it  they  made  names  for many  places of
  fame and reverence, and for many men of royalty and great renown.       
    But  the  native  speech  of  the  Numenoreans  remained  for  the most
  part their  ancestral Mannish  tongue, the  Adunaic, and  to this  in the
  latter days of  their pride  their kings  and lords  returned, abandoning
  the Elven-speech, save only those few  that held  still to  their ancient
  friendship with the Eldar.                                              
                                                                         
 There  follows  an  account  of the  spread of  Adunaic along  the coasts
 before  the  Fall  of  Numenor,  becoming  a   Common  Speech   in  those
 regions,  and  of  the  use  of it  by the  Elf-friends who  survived the
 Downfall  'in  their dealing  with other  folk and  in the  government of
 their wide realms', enriching it with many Elvish words.                 
                                                                         
    In the days of the Numenorean kings this  ennobled Westron            
  speech spread far and wide, even among their enemies; and it            

 became  used  more  and  more  by  the  Dunedain  themselves,  so  that at
 the  time  of  the  War of  the Ring  the Elven-tongue  was known  to only
 a small part of the peoples of Condor, and spoken daily by fewer.         
                                                                          
 This  much  more  complex  conception  seems  nonetheless   not  radically
 different  as  regards the  nature and  origin of  the Common  Speech from
 that which Faramir presents here: for  in both  accounts, early  and late,
 the  Common  Speech  was  directly  descended  from  the  ancestral tongue
 of the 'Fathers of Men'. It is thus curious to see that by later pencilled
 correction to the manuscript this was changed, Faramir now saying:        
                                                                          
 'Of  course  we  do  ...  For  that   is  also   our  own   tongue,  which
 we   ourselves   made,   and   here  preserve   better  perhaps   than  do
 you  far  in  the  North.  The  Common  Tongue,  as   some  call   it,  is
 derived    from    the   Numenoreans;    for   the    Numenoreans   coming
 to  the  shores  of  these  lands  took the  rude tongue  of the  men that
 they  here  found  and  whom  they  ruled,  and  they  enriched   it,  and
 it spread hence through the Western world ...'                            
                                                                          
 And at the end  of Faramir's  discourse on  linguistic history,  after his
 examples   of   Gnomish   names   in   Gondor,  he   now  adds:   'But  in
 intercourse  with  other  folk  we   use  the   Common  Speech   which  we
 made for that purpose.'                                                   
 Here   the  idea   that  the   Common  Speech   was  derived   from  'that
 speech which the Fathers of the Three Houses spoke of old' is denied.     
 In  his  letter  of  6  May  1944  my  father  continued from  the passage
 cited on p. 147:                                                          
                                                                          
 (A  new  character  has  come  on the  scene ...  Faramir, the  brother of
 Boromir)  -  and he  is holding  up the  'catastrophe' by  a lot  of stuff
 about   the  history   of  Gondor   and  Rohan   (with  some   very  sound
 reflections no doubt  on martial  glory and  true glory):  but if  he goes
 on  much  more  a   lot  of   him  will   have  to   be  removed   to  the
 appendices  -  where  already  some  fascinating  material  on  the hobbit
 Tobacco industry (32) and the Languages of the West have gone.                
                                                                          
 The  passage  on  linguistic  history  in  the  present chapter  (with the
 emendations  just  given  concerning  the  nature  of  the  Common Speech)
 survived  into subsequent  typescripts, and  was only  removed at  a later
 time;  thus  the  excluded  material  on  'the Languages  of the  West' to
 which  my father  referred in  this letter  was not  the account  given by
 Faramir.                                                                  
 As  already  remarked  (p.  160),  a  new  'overlapping'  draft D  3 takes
 up at the end of Faramir's exposition, and  in this  Sam shows  himself as
 more impressed by  what he  has been  told than  in the  previous version,
 and  has more  to say  about Elves  before he  gets on  to the  subject of
 Galadriel.  This  passage  was  retained  and  slightly  extended  in  the

 manuscript  (in  which  form I  cite it  here), and  it survived  in the
 following typescripts  until it  was removed  from the  chapter together
 with the account of languages that preceded it.                         
                                                                        
   Sam   looked   at   Faramir   wide-eyed  and   almost  with   awe.  To
 have  an  elvish  name,  and  even  a  possible  claim  to  Elvish blood
 however   remote,  seemed   to  him   royalty  indeed.   'Well  Captain,
 your  lordship,  I should  say, it  is good  to hear  you speak  so fair
 of  Elves,  sir.  1  wish  I  had  an elvish  name. Wonderful  folk they
 are,  aren't  they?  Think  of  the  things  they   can  make   and  the
 things  they  say!  You  don't  find  out their  worth or  their meaning
 all  at  once, as  it were:  it comes  out afterwards,  unexpected like.
 Just a bit of well-made rope in a boat, and  there it  is: one  day it's
 just  what  you  want,  and  it  unknots  itself  when  you  ask  it and
 jumps  to  your  hand.  And  the  boat:  I agree  with your  lordship; I
 think  it  rode  the  falls and  took no  harm. Of  course it  would, if
 that  was  needed.  It  was  an  Elven-boat,  sir; though  I sat  in one
 for many a day, and never noticed nothing special.'(33)                 
   'I  think  you  are  right,  Master  Samwise,'  said  Faramir smiling;
 'though some would say the White Lady had enchanted you.'               
   'And  she  did,  sir!'  said  Sam.  'The  Lady  of  Lorien! Galadriel!
 you  should  see  her,  indeed  you  should,  sir. I  am only  a hobbit,
 and gardening's my job at home ...'(34)                                 
                                                                        
   I  have  mentioned  (p.  160)  that  the  Draft D  2, now  become very
 ragged,   continued  on   through  Sam's   description  to   Faramir  of
 Galadriel, and his blurting out the truth, so long and so carefully con-
 cealed  by  Frodo,  that  'Boromir  wanted  the  Ring!'(35) In  this draft,
 where  in  TT  'Frodo and  Sam sprang  from their  stools and  set them-
 selves side by side with  their backs  to the  wall, fumbling  for their
 sword-hilts', and 'all the men in the cave stopped talking', all that is
 said is: 'Frodo and Sam sprang side by side, fumbling for their swords.'
 Faramir  sat  down  and  began  to  laugh,  and  then   became  suddenly
 grave. It is clear that he sat on the  ground, where  they were,  in the
 woods. The  last words  of this  draft before  it was  abandoned, barely
 legible, are:                                                           
                                                                        
   'Do not fear. I do  not wish  to see  or touch  it -  my only  fear is
 lest  I  see  it  and  be  tempted. But  now indeed  it becomes  my duty
 to  aid  you  with  all  that  I  have.  If  this  is  the   counsel  of
 Mithrandir,   that   this   [?dreadful]  Thing   should  be   sent  [?a-
 wandering]   in  the   borders  of   Mordor  in   the  keeping   of  two
 hobbits,  then  he  is  desperate  indeed  and at  his wits'  end. Come,
 let us get to cover as quick as we may.'                                

    It has been seen (pp. 154, 163)  that in  the drafting  (D 1  - 2)  for the
  latter  part  of  this  chapter  the entire  story of  the coming  to Henneth
  Annun  was  absent,  and  the  entire  conversation  that  in  TT  took place
  there  after  the  evening  meal  here  took  place  as  they  walked through
  the  woods.  When  we  come  to the  third overlapping  portion of  the draft
  (D  3), however,  at the  denouement, the  revelation of  the Ring,  they are
  in the cave, and all is as in TT. It is clear therefore that it was only when
  he had come  to the  very end  of the  chapter that  my father  realised that
  the  long   conversation  with   Faramir  had   been  interrupted   by  their
  coming  to  the  refuge;  and  perhaps  it  was  only  now that  he perceived
  what   that  refuge   was:  the   Window  of   the  Sunset,   Henneth  Annun.
  Drafting  for the  new passage  (TT pp.  281 -  6, from  'So they  passed on,
  until  the  woodlands  grew  thinner  ...')  is  found separately,  with very
  little  significant  divergence  from   the  finished   form.  There   is  no
  mention  of  Anborn  and  the  sighting  of  Gollum  in  the  woods  at dusk:
  this  first  appears  in  the  completed  manuscript;(36) and  Faramir  says  to
  Frodo  and  Sam  before  the  meal:  'Do  as  we  do,  I   pray.  So   do  we
  always,   look   towards  Numenor   that  was,   and  to   Elvenhome  beyond,
  and to that which is beyond Elvenhome, Valinor the Blessed Realm.'(37)       
    On  the  page  of  this  drafting  where  appear  Faramir's words  'This is
  the  Window  of  the   West'  (changed   to  'Window   of  the   Sunset')  my
  father   wrote   many    names   and    forms   before    achieving   Henneth
  Annun:    Nargalad,   Anngalad,    Carangalad;   Henneth    Carandun,   Hen-
  neth Malthen; Henlo Naur, Henlo n'Annun; Henuil n'Annun.                     

                        NOTES.                                      
                                                                   
1.  The 'new chapters' were: (1)  'The Taming  of Smeagol';  (2) 'The
 Passage of the Marshes'; (3) 'The Black Gate is  Closed' (including
 'Of Herbs and Stewed Rabbit'); (4) 'Faramir'. See note 2.          
2.  Since  'The  Taming   of  Smeagol'   was  Chapter   XXXII,  'The
 Passage  of the  Marshes' XXXIII,  and 'The  Black Gate  is Closed'
 XXXIV,  'Faramir',  the  'fourth  new  chapter',  should  be  XXXV.
 Its  actual  number  XXXVI  implies  that  'Of  Herbs   and  Stewed
 Rabbit'  had  already  been  separated off  as XXXV  - but  then of
 couse 'Faramir' became the  fifth new  chapter. Perhaps  the actual
 number XXXVI was written in subsequently. See further p. 171.      
3.  This refers to the form of the 'dream-verse  of Minas  Tirith' in
 which the second half ran thus (see VII.146):                      
                   This sign shall there be then                    
                   that Doom is near at hand:                       
                 The Halfhigh shall you see then                    
                   with Isildur's bane in hand.                     
4.  Throughout this draft Falborn addresses Frodo as 'thou', but this
 usage  was  emended  throughout   and  does   not  appear   in  the
 following text.                                                    

  5. The men of Gondor were in this  draft B  'sitting in  a ring,  in the
     middle  of  which  were  Falborn  and  Frodo.  It  seemed  that there
     was a debate going  on.' -  Frodo refers  to 'Elrond  of Imlad-rist':
     d. p. 139 note 14.                                                    
                                                                          
  6. In  a  rejected version  of this  'the other  half was  found further
     down the river above Osgiliath by other watchers,'                    
                                                                          
  7. On  the  same  page  are  written  other  passages that  were presum-
     ably potential ingredients in Sam's remonstration to Falborn:         
                                                                          
        It's  a  pity  the folks  against Mordor  fall out  so easy.  I should
        have thought it as plain as a pikestaff.                           
                                                                          
     Boromir  was  on  his  way  to  Minas  Tirith.  We  decided not  to go
     that  way  and  went   on  our   own  road.   Boromir  was   not  dead
     when  we  left,  but  orcs  knew  of  our  journey:  they  attacked us
     above the rapids beyond Sarn Gebir. What's in it?                     
          I daresay now we  made a  mistake. I  don't know  the lie  of the
     lands;  but  maybe  we'd   have  got   there  quicker   through  Minas
     Tirith.  But  here  we  would  have  come.  And  if  you drag  us back
     there'll  be  some  that  do  not  like  it.  Boromir  would  not. Nor
     Aragorn.                                                              
     With  Sarn  Gebir  here  for  Emyn  Muil  cf.  p. 136  and note  17. -
     Another passage here, in part totally illegible, is a draft for a more
     substantial  conclusion  to  the  interrogation  of Frodo  by Falborn:
     harshly  uncomprehending  in  tone  compared  to  the  later  Faramir,
     and  suggesting  that  no  further   conversation  between   them  had
     been thought of at this stage.                                        
          'Thou'rt  commanded  to  go  -  somewhere.  But  I  too  am under
     command:  to  slay  all  that  roam  in  Ithilien unanswerable,  or at
     least  to  take  them  prisoner  to Minas  Tirith. I  see no  cause to
     slay  you,  or  at  least  too  great  doubt. But  to Minas  Tirith ye
     shall  go.  And  if  Boromir  is  there  it  will  ...  with  you.  If
     Boromir's  death  be  proved  it  will  interest  Denethor   to  speak
     with  those  who  saw  him  last  before  he  died.  If  he  [?cometh]
     doubtless  ye  will  be  glad  -  maybe  not.   Of  your   own  errand
     .....  [the  following  sentences  are  effectively  illegible]  .....
     Maybe  if  you  would  say  more   of  the   truth  and   reveal  your
     errand  we  would  help  you  and  not  hinder.  But  if you  will not
     speak I have no choice in my doubt.'                                  
          'Maybe you  would, and  maybe not,'  said Frodo.  'But it  is not
     a matter  to speak  of to  such as  you are  - not  were the  walls of
     [?Mordor]  a  thousand  miles  away,  whereas  they   be  but   a  few
     leagues.'                                                             
     Also  here  are  inconclusive  rewritings  of the  second part  of the
     'dream-verse of Minas Tirith'.                                        
                                                                          
  8. Falborn was emended to Faramir (but not consistently) on the          

     second draft B, where also many other changes leading to the        
     third version C were entered.                                       
                                                                        
 9.  This line does not appear in the rewritings of the verse referred to
     at the end of note 7, but A sign shall be  upholden is  found there.
     It may be that no such form of the verse was ever  actually written.
     The manuscript at  first followed  the draft,  but was  then changed
     to 'But the words  said that  the Halfling  would hold  up Isildur's
     Bane'.  Halfling  for  Half-high  entered   by  emendation   to  the
     second  draft  B:  'If  you  be  the  Half-high'  >  'If you  be the
     Halfling'.                                                          
                                                                        
 10. The  date  of  Boromir's death  was 26  January (and  in one  of the
     time-schemes the hour of his death is stated to  be 'noon');  it was
     now  6  February,  eleven  days  later.  (In   the  margin   of  the
     manuscript  my   father  wrote   'twelve'  beside   'eleven',  which
     however  was  not  struck  out.  This  presumably  depends   on  the
     chronology  in  time-scheme  'S',  in  which  Boromir  died   on  25
     January: see pp. 101,  142.) In  The Tale  of Years  the correspond-
     ing  dates  are  26  February and  7 March,  also eleven  days later
     (February having  30 days).  In the  notes given  on p.  146 Faramir
     and  his  men  left  Minas  Tirith  on 3  February, thus  three days
     before; and both in the draft and in the  manuscript he  tells Frodo
     that  no  members  of  the  Company  had  reached  the city  when he
     left it three days before (where TT has  six days,  p. 272).  In The
     Tale of Years he left on 1 March, thus six days before.             
                                                                        
 11. A further isolated scrap of drafting may  be noticed.  It represents
     presumably  unused  words  of  Frodo's  when  he  spoke  to  Faramir
     about the boats of Lothlorien:  'These boats  are crafty  and unlike
     those of other folk. They  will not  sink, not  though they  will be
     laden more than  is their  wont when  you are  all aboard.  But they
     are wayward, and if mishandled' (the sentence ends here).           
                                                                        
 12. This apparently refers to a passage in 'Farewell to Lorien'.  In the
     fair copy  manuscript of  that chapter  Boromir's original  words 'I
     have not myself  been there'  (referring to  Fangorn) had  become 'I
     have not myself  ever crossed  Rohan' (VII.282,  293 note  36). This
     was  now  changed  on  that  manuscript  to  'I  have   myself  been
     seldom  in  Rohan,  and have  never crossed  it northwards'  (cf. FR
     p. 390).                                                            
                                                                        
 13. Rough  drafting  for  this  new  placing  of  Sam's  intervention is
     found. In this, rather oddly, Faramir's reply continues on  into his
     astute  guessing  about  Frodo's   relationship  with   Boromir  and
     about Isildur's Bane, and Frodo's quickly smothered desire  to 'tell
     all to this kindly but just man'. In TT this  passage, in  much more
     developed form, does  not arise  until after  they have  begun their
     journey  to  Henneth  Annun.  However,  this  was  clearly  no  more
     than  a sketching  of new  elements in  the dialogue;  it was  not a

                                         
                                                                          
      draft for the overhaul of all that had been achieved in  the chapter
      thus far.                                                            
  14. Cf.  the beginning  of the  sketch given  on p.  151. -  The passage
      that precedes this in TT p. 276, from  'For me  there is  no comfort
      in  our  speech  together'  to  'But  whatever  befell on  the North
      March, you, Frodo,  I doubt  no longer'  (in which  Faramir suggests
      that some of the Company are still  alive, since  who else  can have
      arrayed Boromir in the funeral boat), did not  enter till  later (it
      was added to the first typescript of the chapter).                   
                                                                          
  15. Various elements are lacking  in the  draft but  are present  in the
      manuscript:  such  are  'He  wished  this  thing  brought  to  Minas
      Tirith' (TT p. 278); and  the passage  concerning Gandalf  (p. 279),
      from 'Are you sure of this' to 'He got leave of  Denethor, how  I do
      not  know,  to  look at  the secrets  of our  treasury' -  where the
      draft text reads:  '... so  much lore  be taken  from the  world. He
      had leave to look at the secrets of our treasury ...' The draft text
      has a few features lost in the  manuscript: thus  after 'There  is a
      something, I  know not  what, an  elvish air  maybe, about  you' (TT
      p. 276) it continues: 'And that is not what I should look for, if old
      tales  and rumours  from afar  told the  whole truth  concerning the
      little  people.'  This  was  rejected and  replaced by:  'Some power
      greater than the  stature of  your kind',  also rejected.  And after
      'unlike they were, and yet  also much  akin' (TT  p. 280)  the draft
      goes on: 'Faramir  was doubtless  of a  different temper,  but Frodo
      feared the power and  treachery of  the thing  he bore:  the greater
      and wiser the stronger the lure and the worse  the fall.'  With this
      cf. the sketch given on p. 152.                                      
                                                                          
  16. Great Lands: this survival  of old  usage remains  at this  place in
      The Two Towers (p. 286),  its only  occurrence in  The Lord  of the
      Rings. At a  subsequent occurrence  of Great  Lands in  this chapter
      (p.  158)  TT  has  Middle-earth  (p.  288),  suggesting   that  its
      appearance in the first passage was an oversight.                    
                                                                          
  17. White  Mountains:  White  was  added,  but  almost certainly  as the
      text was in progress. Cf. the notes given on  p. 137:  'Change Black
      Mountains to the White Mountains'.                                   
                                                                          
  18. The  writing  of  the  name  Elenarda is  perfectly clear  and unam-
      biguous,  and it  was not  struck out  when Kalen(arda)  was written
      above it (but see p.  156 and  note 22).  It is  strange to  find it
      applied  to  Rohan;  for  this  old  mythological word  derives from
      the conception of  the three  'airs' in  the cosmology  expounded in
      the Ambarkanta.  There it  is translated  'Stellar Kingdom',  and is
      another  name  for the  middle region  of Ilmen,  in which  move the
      Sun,  the  Moon,  and  the stars  (see IV.240  - 3,  253). -  On the
      name Rohir in the preceding sentence see p. 22 and note 24.          
  19. Hebel  Nimrath  was  the  name  of  the  White Mountains  written in

       the   manuscript,   subsequently   changed   to  Ered   Nimras.  With
       these names cf. those given in the notes on p. 137.                   
  20.  In  the  manuscript  Faramir  says,  as  in  TT  (p.  286),  'But  the
       stewards were wiser and more fortunate.' The Stewards of              
       Gondor,  ruling  in  Minas  Tirith  after  the death  of the  last and
       childless king of the line of  Anarion, have  appeared already  in the
       earlier  part  of  the  dialogue  of  Frodo and  Faramir (p.  153). In
       the  manuscript  Faramir's  balance  of   phrases  ('wiser   and  more
       fortunate;  wiser  ...,  more  fortunate  ...')  was  preserved ('more
       fortunate,  for  our  most  dangerous  foes  became our  friends'); by
       alteration of the text here at a later time this was lost in TT.      
  21.  Rohiroth: see p. 22. In the first of these drafts (D 1) the form  is '
       Rohir (note 18); in the present draft (D 2) both Rohir and            
       Rohiroth  are  found  in  close  proximity.  In  the   manuscript  the
       form is Rohiroth.                                                     
  22.  In  the  manuscript my  father wrote  Kalin, striking  it out  at once
       and  writing  Calenardan,  then  altering  this  to  Calenardhon,  all
       these changes being made in the act of writing. See note 18.          
  23.  The difference  between these  formulations is  evidently that  in the
       rejected version the relationship is between the Noldor (such as      
       Galadriel)   who  remained   after  the   overthrow  of   Morgoth  and
       those  who  departed  and  went  to  Tol   Eressea;  whereas   in  the
       second   version   the   relationship  is   between  the   Noldor  who
       remained and the Elves who never went to Valinor (such as the         
       Elves of Lothlorien).  - Cf.  the passage  in the  chapter 'Galadriel'
       in VII.248, with note 12.                                             
  24.  In  TT  (p.  287)  the reading  is 'not  from Hador  the Goldenhaired,
       the  Elf-friend,  maybe ...'  This not  was inserted  by my  father on
       a late typescript of the chapter; it was put in very hurriedly, and it
       seems to me possible that he  read the  sentence differently  from his
       original  meaning  -  which  was  certainly  'They  may  be  descended
       from Hador indeed, but if so, then of course from those of            
       Hador's  descendants  who  did  not  pass  over  the  Sea.'  -  In the
       manuscript 'such  of their  sons' was  later emended  to 'such  of his
       people',  and this  seems to  have been  misinterpreted by  the typist
       as 'such of his sons and people'.                                     
         It may be noted here that  at the  same time  as this  correction to
       the  manuscript  the  words  'they  became a  people apart  and should
       remain so' were changed to 'and should have remained so'.             
  25.  Great Lands: here TT has Middle-earth; see note 16.                   
  26.  This  sentence  was  apparently  evolved  thus:  'even   Earendel  our
       first king and Elros brother [sc. of Elrond]' > 'even our first king
       Elros son of Earendel and brother of Elrond'. See p. 155.             
  27.  It  was  explicit  from  the  beginning  that  the   Numenoreans  were
       expressly forbidden by the Gods to sail westward beyond the           
       Lonely Isle (see the original outline and the original versions of

       The  Fall  of  Numenor  in  The  Lost  Road,   pp.  11,   14,  26).
       Elvenhome here means the Lonely Isle: for that isle lay in  the Bay
       of Elvenhome (cf. The Lost  Road p.  103: 'the  Isle of  Eressea in
       Elvenhome'); and this is the meaning  also in  the same  passage in
       TT  (p.  288),  where  the  words 'within  sight of  Elvenhome' are
       retained -  cf. the  passage in  the Akallabeth  (The Silmarillion,
       pp. 262  - 3)  where the  remote vision  from Numenor  of Avallone,
       haven of Eressea, is described.  This is  made certain,  apart from
       any other considerations, by the passage given on p. 164.          
  28.  The  word  Numenorean(s)  is  variously marked,  with an  accent on
       the first syllable or on the third, or no accent.  Here the  word is
       written Numenoreans, and I have extended this throughout.          
  29.  Cf. the later Annals of  Beleriand in  The Lost  Road, p.  131: the
       folk  of  Hador  abandoned  their  own  tongue  and spoke  with the
       speech of the Gnomes'; also the Lhammas $ 10, ibid. p. 179.        
  30.  The name Faramir does not appear in any earlier writing.           
  31.  By  later pencilled  correction of  the manuscript  Faramir's words
       were  changed  so  that the  reference is  only to  Noldorin: 'many
       men  of the  Three Houses  long ago  learned the  High-elven tongue
       of the  Noldor, as  it was  spoken in  Gondolin or  by the  Sons of
       Feanor.  And  always  the  Lords  of  Numenor  knew   that  tongue,
       and used it among themselves.'                                     
  32.  On the removal of the history of  Pipe-weed from  the text  see pp.
       36-9.                                                              
  33.  With these remarks of Sam's cf. the initial sketch given on p. 152:
       'Sam  speaks  of  elvish  power,  boats,  ropes, cloaks.'  This was
       written  before  the entry  of Faramir's  account of  language (the
       cause of its loss from the chapter in The Two Towers).            
  34.  In neither of  the draft  versions of  Sam's words  about Galadriel
       does Faramir interject: 'Then she must be lovely indeed. Perilously
       fair', leading (in the manuscript,  and in  TT) to  Sam's consider-
       ation of the justice of the word perilous as applied  to Galadriel;
       but  in  both  drafts  Sam  nonetheless  says  'I don't  know about
       perilous', and makes the same  observations. At  this stage  he was
       referring back to  Faramir's earlier  'I deem  it perilous  now for
       mortal men, at least to seek the Elder People wilfully' (p. 159).
  35.  In this draft (D 2) Sam's gaffe is preceded by the same words as in
       TT (p. 289), but he ends: 'and it's my opinion as soon as  he first
       heard of it he wanted the Ring.' Thus he does  not refer  to Lorien
       as the place where Boromir (in the words of the  final draft,  D 3)
       'first saw himself clear, and saw what I saw sooner'.              
  36.  The  man  who   saw  Gollum   was  first   named  Falborn   in  the
       manuscript,  later  altered  to  Anborn  (this change  was actually
       made  in  the  course  of  the initial  drafting of  'The Forbidden
       Pool'). In draft  and manuscript  of 'Of  Herbs and  Stewed Rabbit'

 (p. 136) Anborn  was the  father of  Falborn leader  of the  men of
 Gondor in Ithilien, who became Faramir.                            
37.  On Elvenhome  here (Tol  Eressea) see  note 27.  The manuscript
 has the  final text  (TT p.  285): '...  towards Numenor  that was,
 and  beyond  to  Elvenhome  that is,  and to  that which  is beyond
 Elvenhome  and  will  ever be.'  Cf. Letters  no. 211,  footnote to
 p.  281,  where  the  words  'that  which  is beyond  Elvenhome and
 ever will be' [sic] are interpreted as 'is beyond the mortal lands,
 beyond the memory of  unfallen Bliss,  beyond the  physical world.'

                                       VI.                                    
                               THE FORBIDDEN POOL.                            
                                                                             
 The  'fourth  new  chapter  ("Faramir")'  had  been  read   to  C.   S.  Lewis
 and Charles Williams on 8 May 1944 (see p. 144) - fourth, because            
 'The  Black  Gate  is  Closed'  and  'Of  Herbs  and  Stewed  Rabbit'  had not
 yet  been  separated  (see  p.  164,  notes  1  and  2). On  11 May  my father
 wrote  (Letters  no.  67)  that  another  chapter  was  in  progress, 'leading
 to   disaster  at   Kirith  Ungol   where  Frodo   is  captured.   Story  then
 switches  back  to  Gondor,  &  runs  fairly  swiftly  (I  hope)  to  denoue-
 ment.'  On  the  following  day  (Letters  no. 68)  he said  that 'we  are now
 in sight of Minas Morghul'; and he also quoted Faramir's words to            
 Frodo:  When  you  return  to  the  lands of  the living,(1) and we  re-tell our
 tales, sitting by a wall in the sun, laughing at old grief, you shall  tell me
 then.' In The Two Towers these words stand just before the end of            
 'The Forbidden Pool'. On the morning of 15 May 1944 (Letters no.             
 69) he read his '6th new chapter "Journey to the Cross Roads" ' to           
 C. S. Lewis.                                                                 
  Initial   drafting   for   what   became   'The   Forbidden  Pool'   runs  on
 continuously  into  what  became  'Journey  to   the  Cross-Roads',   and  in.
 the  completed  fair  copy  manuscript  likewise  the  two  chapters  are one,
 titled  'XXXVII.  Journey  to  the   Cross  Roads';   the  latter   title  and
 chapter-break  were  inserted  into  the  manuscript  later,  when   the first
 part  became  'The  Forbidden  Pool'.(2) Since  my   father  would   not  have
 called  his  'new  chapter'  'Journey  to  the  Cross  Roads'  if  Frodo,  Sam
 and  Gollum  did  not get  there in  the course  of it,  I conclude  that this
 was  where  they  were,  beside  the  broken  statue  in  the  ring  of trees,
 when  he  read  his  '6th  new  chapter'  to  Lewis  on  the  15th of  May (by
 this  time,  presumably,  he  had  divided  'Of   Herbs  and   Stewed  Rabbit'
 from  'The  Black  Gate is  Closed', so  making 'Faramir'  the fifth).  In his
 letter recording this (no. 69) he went on:  'So far  it has  gone well:  but I
 am  now  coming  to  the  nub,  when   the  threads   must  be   gathered  and
 the  times  synchronized  and  the  narrative  interwoven;  while   the  whole
 thing  has  grown so  large in  significance that  the sketches  of concluding
 chapters  (written  ages  ago)  are   quite  inadequate,   being  on   a  more
 "juvenile" level.'                                                           
  This  part  of  the  story  unfolded,  once  my  father  began  to  write it,
 virtually   without   any   hestitation  between   rival  courses;   there  is
 however  a  little  sketch  that  he wrote  for it,  exceedingly hard  to make
 out, when all was not yet plain.                                             

   They are roused late at night. Moonset over Mindolluin. Sam       
 grumbles at being waked only to see moonlight.                                
   They see Gollum fishing below the pool.                                    J
   Faramir says he must shoot to kill, or Frodo must help to                  I
 capture him.                                                                  
   Frodo and some men go out. Frodo calls Gollum and Gollum                    
 is caught still clutching a fish.                                             
   Faramir warns Frodo against Gollum.                                         
   [Struck out: Frodo tells him] No it is Gollum.                              
   Frodo begs for his life. It is granted if Frodo will induce                 
 Gollum to come and .....(3)                                                   
   Gollum is caught by guards and brought in.                                  
        He [? feigns) great delight at Frodo. Nice fish. Begs him not to       
 delay but start in morning.                                                   
   They go back to sleep till morning.                                         
   They go on through woods by day. No orcs. Farewell. They                    
 are out of reckoning, and take long[? er than)                                
                                                                              
 Here  these  notes  end.  The  sentences  'Frodo  and  some  men  go out.     
 Frodo  calls  Gollum and  Gollum is  caught still  clutching a  fish' are     
 marked with a line in  the margin,  which probably  implies that  this is   j
 the  version  to be  followed, rather  than 'Gollum  is caught  by guards   ]
 and brought in. He feigns great delight at Frodo.'  I cannot  explain the     
 rejected words 'Frodo tells him', followed by 'No it is Gollum'.              
   Drafting for the chapter (much of it in  handwriting so  difficult that     
 were it not generally already close to the final form parts of it would be
 virtually  uninterpretable)  suggests  extremely fluent  composition, and     
 there is very little to say of it. New elements entered in successive pages
 of drafting, but the  fair copy  manuscript, from  which the  chapter was     
 read to C. S. Lewis on  15 May,  reached the  text of  The Two  Towers in     
 all but a few minor points.                                                   
   Minor in itself, but very notable, is  what Faramir  says of  the Moon.     
 In  TT  (p.  293) he  says: 'Fair  Ithil, as  he goes  from Middle-earth,     
 glances upon  the white  locks of  old Mindolluin';  but in  the original     
 draft of the passage he said: 'Fair  Ithil touches  with her  fingers the     
 white  locks  of  old  Mindolluin',  and still  in the  manuscript, where     
 the text is otherwise  that of  TT, he  said: 'as  she goes  from Middle-     
 earth ...'(4)                                                                  
   In the original draft of Frodo's reply to Far" mir's  question concern-     
 ing Gollum ('Why does he  so?', TT  p. 294)  he says,  in support  of his     
 suggestion that Gollum  does not  realise that  men are  concealed there,     
 that 'He has night-eyes, but he is nearsighted  and I  doubt if  he could     
 see us up here.' In a second draft of the passage the last  phrase became     
 '... and sees to no great distance clearly'; in the manuscript,  '... and     
 distant things are  dim to  him.' Against  this, in  the second  of these     

  drafts,  my father  wrote (at  the same  time): 'Make  it not  Gollum who
  looked  out  at  Morannon  -  or  make  it 100  yards' (with  '200 yards'
  written  above).  But  the  reference  to  Gollum's  nearsightedness  was
  struck  from  the  typescripts  and  does  not appear  in TT,  and Gollum
  remained  the  one  who  looked  out  from  the  hollow  before  the Black
  Gate  and  saw  the  'very  cruel  wicked  Men' coming  up the  road from
  the south. My father  hesitated much  over the  distance from  the hollow
  to the road, and this was clearly one of the reasons for  it; see  p. 128
  note 9. - The 'froglike figure' that climbed  out of  the water  as Frodo
  and  Faramir  looked  down  on  the  pool  was  a subsequent  change from
  'spidery figure'.                                                        
    In very rough and  rapid initial  drafting for  the concluding  part of
  the  chapter  in  TT  (pp.  300-2)  Frodo says  no more  of the  way past
  Minas  Morghul  than  that Gollum  had said  that there  was such  a way,
  'up in a high  pass in  the mountains'.  Then follows  Faramir's declara-
  tion of the name  Kirith Ungol,  as in  TT. In  the fair  copy manuscript
  my father first wrote here:                                              
                                                                          
    'I  do  not  know clearly,'  said Frodo,  'but it  climbs, I  think, up
  into  the  mountains  on  the  southern   side  of   that  vale   in  the
  mountains  on  the  northern  side  of  which  the  old  city  stands. It
  goes up to a high cleft and so down to - that which is beyond.'          
                                                                          
  This was subsequently  changed to  the text  of TT.  On the  earlier idea
  that Kirith Ungol was on the south side of the valley see p. 113.        
    At the end of this initial draft my father briefly outlined the further
  course of  the story:  the blindfolding  of the  hobbits and  Gollum, the
  report of the scouts on the strange  silence and  emptiness in  the land,
  Faramir's advice to go by day through the woods  'skirting the  last fall
  of the land before the river vale', and his farewell. At the foot of this
  page is a pencilled note only a part of which can I make out:            
                                                                          
    K[irith]  U[ngol]  must  not  be  mentioned  before  Frodo ...  to tell
    Faramir of Gollum.                                                     
    Yes  he  found the  ring many  many years  ago, said  Frodo. He  is the
    means by which all this great matter has been set going.               
                                                                          
  Two  sentences follow  in which  I can  make out  nothing at  all, except
  perhaps 'where the ring had been'. But in any case  this was  evidently a
  very short-lived idea.                                                   
                                                                          
                                    NOTES.                                 
                                                                          
  1. The  original  draft  of  the  passage  in  'The  Forbidden  Pool' was
     almost as in TT: 'If ever you return to the lands of the living ...'
  2. A  subsequent  tentative  arrangement  was   to  put   'The  Forbidden
     Pool'  with  'Faramir',  calling  the  first   part  'Faramir   (1):  The

                                                        
                                                                           
     Window  of  the  West'  (not  'on  the West'),  and the  second 'Faramir
     (2): The Forbidden Pool'.                                              
  3. The illegible end of this sentence looks in fact more like  'visit them'
     than  anything  else. If  so, the  meaning is  presumably 'if  Frodo can
     induce   Gollum   to  leave   the  pool   and  come   up  with   him  to
     Faramir's  presence';  the  word  is  oddly  chosen,  but   these  notes
     were written at great speed.                                           
  4. she  was  corrected  to  he  on  the  first  typescript. Cf.  the Quenta
     Silmarillion  in  The  Lost  Road,  p.  241  $78:  'Varda  commanded the
     Moon to rise only after the  Sun had  left heaven,  but he  travels with
     uncertain pace, and still pursueth her ...'                            
        Another  matter  concerning  the  Moon  may  be  mentioned.   At  the
     beginning  of  the  chapter,  when  Faramir   waking  Frodo   says  'the
     full  moon  is setting',  my father  changed this  on the  manuscript to
     'rising';  when  they  came  out  from  the  stairway  in  the  rock the
     words  'Far  off  in  the  West   the  full   moon  was   sinking'  were
     changed  to  'Behind  him  the  round  moon,  full  and  majestic,  rose
     out  of  the  shadow  of   the  East';   and  Faramir's   'Moonset  over
     Gondor'  was  changed  to   'Moonrise  over   Gondor'.  This   would  of
     course  make  it  very  much  earlier  in  the  night.  But   all  these
     alterations  were  returned  to  the  original  readings,  presumably at
     once,  since  subsequently  'It  was now  dark and  the falls  were pale
     and  grey,  reflecting  only  the  lingering  moonlight  of  the western
     sky' (TT p. 295) was not changed.                                      

                                    VII.                                 
                                                                         
                         JOURNEY TO THE CROSS-ROADS.                      
                                                                         
 I have recounted  the original  relationship of  'The Forbidden  Pool' and
 'Journey  to  the  Cross-roads'(1) at  the  beginning  of the  last chapter.
 Preliminary drafting for this second part of  the original  single chapter
 runs continuously, in excruciatingly difficult handwriting, as far  as the
 coming  of  Frodo   and  his   companions  to   the  ridge   covered  with
 whortleberry  and  gorse-bushes  so  tall  that  they  could  walk upright
 beneath them (TT  p. 307).(2) The story  to this  point differed  from that
 in  The  Two  Towers.  The  journey  took  a  day less:  they came  to the
 road  from  Osgiliath  at  dusk  of  the  day on  which they  left Henneth
 Annun  in  the  morning;  and their  taking refuge  in the  great holm-oak
 was described at much greater length  (cf. TT  pp. 306  - 7,  from 'Gollum
 reluctantly agreed to this'):                                            
                                                                         
  Gollum  agreed  to  this,  and  the  travellers  turned  back   from  the
 road,   but   Gollum  would   not  rest   on  the   ground  in   the  open
 woodland.   After  some   search  he   chose  a   large  dark   ilex  with
 great  branches  springing  together  high  up  from  a  great  bole  like
 a  [?giant]  pillar. It  grew at  the foot  of a  small bank  [?leaning] a
 little   westward.   From   the   bank  Gollum   leaped  with   ease  upon
 the   trunk,   climbing   like   a   cat  and   scrambling  up   into  the
 branches.  The  hobbits  climbed  only  with  the   help  of   Sam's  rope
 and  in  that  task  Gollum   would  not   help,  he   would  not   lay  a
 finger  on   the  elven   rope.  The   great  branches   springing  almost
 from   the   same  point   made  a   wide  bowl   and  here   they  [?man-
 aged]  to  find  some  sort  of  comfort.  It  grew  deep  dark  under the
 great canopy of the tree. They could not see the sky or any star.        
  'We  could  sleep  snug  and  safe here,  if it  wasn't for  this dratted
 Gollum,'  thought  Sam.  Whether  he  was  really   as  forgiving   as  he
 claimed  or  not,  Gollum  at  least  had  no  fear   of his  companions,
 and  curled  up  like  some  tree-animal  and  soon  went  to   sleep,  or
 seemed  to.  But  the  hobbits  did  not  trust  it  -  neither   of  them
 (certainly   not   Sam)   were   likely   to  forget   Faramir's  warning.
 They  took  [it]  in  turn  to  watch  and  had   about  3   hours'  sleep
 each.  All  the  while  Gollum  did  not  stir.  Whether  the  'nice fish'
 had  given  him  strength  to  last  for  a  bit or  whatnot else,  he did
 not go out to hunt.                                                      

  Shortly before midnight he woke up suddenly and they saw               
 his pale eyes unlidded staring in the darkness.                         
                                                                        
  At  the  point  where  this  opening  draft   ended  my   father  wrote
 Thunder. But at this stage there  is no  suggestion in  the text  of any
 change in the weather or in the feeling of the  air. Other  points worth
 mentioning are that the staves  given to  Frodo and  Sam by  Faramir had
 'carven heads like a shepherd's crook'; that the tree of which they were
 made was  first named  melinon (the  last two  letters are  not perfectly
 clear), then lebendron, and finally lebethras,  all these  changes being
 made  in  the  act  of  writing;(3) and  that  though Faramir  warns them
 against drinking of any water that flows from the  valley of  Morghul he
 does  not  name  it  Imlad  Morghul  (but  the  name occurs  soon after:
 p. 223, note 25).                                                       
  A second draft  takes up  at the  beginning of  the passage  just given
 ('Gollum agreed to this'), and  the episode of  the oak-tree was
 rewritten. In this text appears  the first  reference to  an approaching
 change in the weather.                                                  
                                                                        
 They  were  steadily  climbing.   Looking  back   they  could   see  now
 the  roof  of  the  forests  they  had  left, lying  like a  huge dense
 shadow  spread  under  the  sky.  The  air   seemed  heavy,   no  longer
 fresh  and  clear,  and  the  stars  were  blurred,  and   when  towards
 the   end   of   the  night   the  moon   climbed  slowly   above  Ephel
 Duath (4) it  was  ringed  about   with  a   sickly  yellow   glare.  They
 went  on   until  the   sky  above   the  approaching   mountains  began
 to   grow   pale.   Gollum  seemed   to  know   well  enough   where  he
 was.   He   stood   for   a   moment   nose   upward    sniffing.   Then
 beckoning   to   them   he  hurried   forward.  Following   him  wearily
 they began to climb a great hogback of land....                         
                                                                        
  After the description of the great gorse-bushes and  their hiding  in a
 brake of tangled thorns and briars there follows (cf. TT p. 308):       
                                                                        
 There  they  lay  glad  to  be at  rest, too  tired as  yet to  eat, and
 watched   the   slow   growth   of   day.   As   the   light   grew  the
 mountains   of   Ephel-duath  seemed   to  frown   and  lower   at  them
 across   the   tumbled   lands   between.   They   looked   even  nearer
 than  they  were,  black  below  where   night  lingered,   with  jagged
 tips  and  edges  lined  in  threatening  shapes  against   the  opening
 sky.                                                                    
  Away  a  little  northward  of  where  the  hobbits  lay   they  seemed
 to  recede  eastwards  and  fall  back  in   a  great   re-entrant,  the
 nearer  shoulder  of  which  thrusting  forward  hid  the  view  in that
 direction.  Below  out  of  the  great  shadow they  could see  the road

 from  the  River  for a  short stretch  as it  bent away  north-east to
 join the southward road  that still  lay further  off [?buried]  in the
 crumpled land.                                                         
   'Which way do we go from here?' said Frodo.                          
   'Must  we think  of it  yet?' said  Sam. 'Surely  we're not  going to
 move for hours and hours?'                                             
   'No  surely  not,'  said   Gollum.  'But   we  must   move  sometime.
 ..... back to the Cross-roads that we told the hobbits about.'         
   'When shall we get there?'                                           
   'We   doesn't   know,'   said   Gollum.   'Before   night   is   over
 perhaps, perhaps not.'                                                 
                                                                       
 At this point the second draft breaks down into an outline of the story
 to  come,  and the  handwriting becomes  in places  altogether inscrut-
 able.                                                                  
                                                                       
   Gollum  away  a  large  part  of  the   day.  Reach   Cross-roads  in
 fact  owing  to  difficult  country  not until  evening. Start  at dusk
 about  5.30  and  do   not  reach   Cross-roads  and   headless  statue
 until  morning  [sic].  Gollum  in  a  great  state of  fright. Weather
 changed.   Sky   above   Ephel   Duath   absolute   black.   Clouds  or
 smoke?  drifting  on  an  East  wind.  Rumbles?  Sun  hidden.  In  this
 darkness  they  get  out  of  the  wood  and  see  Minas   Morghul.  It
 shines  amid a  deep gloom  as if  by an  evil moon  - though  there is
 no moon.                                                               
   Horror  of  hobbits.   Weight  of   Ring........  vale   of  Morghul.
 Where  road  went  away  to  the  north  shoulder  and  bases   of  the
 fortress  they  turned  aside  and  climbed  away  southward  to  other
 side  of  V  [i.e.  Vale  of  Morghul].  Frodo  and  Sam .......  see a
 track.  They  are  already  some  way  up  and   the  gates   of  Minas
 Morghul  frown  at  them  when  there  is  a  great  roll  and  rumble.
 Blast  of  Thunder  ....  rain.  Out  of  gates   comes  host   led  by
 B[lack] R[ider].                                                       
                                                                       
   It was in this text that the idea of the great cloud spreading out of
 Mordor emerged. In a third section  of drafting  my father  returned to
 the  point where  the second  had become  a sketch,  following Gollum's
 words about the Cross-roads: 'The sun that had risen  with a  red glare
 behind  the  Ephel-duath  passed  into dark  clouds moving  slowly from
 the  East. It  was a  gloomy morning.  The hobbits  took some  food and
 settled to rest ...'                                                   
   After  Gollum's  reappearance  from  his long  absence that  day this
 draft too turns to outline:                                            

 When he returns he says  they ought  to start.  Hobbits think          
 something has  worried him  (or ?).  They are  suspicious but          
 have to agree. The [early evening >) afternoon is threatening          
 and overcast. At evening they  come to  the Cross-roads  in a          
 wood.  Sun  goes down  bloodred in  the west  over Osgiliath.          
 Terrible darkness begins.                                              
                                                                       
   The completed fair copy  manuscript did  not in  this case  reach the
 form  of the  story in  The Two  Towers, for  Frodo and  his companions
 still only took two  days from  Henneth Annun  to the  Cross-roads, and
 a major later change was the lengthening of their journey by  a further
 day. This was achieved by the insertion of the following passage into a
 typescript of the chapter, following the words (TT  p. 305)  'The birds
 seemed all to have flown away or to have fallen dumb':                 
                                                                       
   Darkness  came  early  to  the  silent  woods,  and  before  the fall
 of  night  they  halted,  weary,  for  they  had  walked  seven leagues
 or   more  from   Henneth  Annun.   Frodo  lay   and  slept   away  the
 night  on  the  deep  mould  beneath  an   ancient  tree.   Sam  beside
 him  was  more  uneasy:  he  woke  many  times,  but  there  was  never
 a  sign  of  Gollum,  who had  slipped off  as soon  as the  others had
 settled  to  rest.  Whether  he  had  slept  by  himself  in  some hole
 nearby,  or  had  wandered  restlessly  prowling  through   the  night,
 he  did  not  say; but  he returned  with the  first glimmer  of light,
 and roused his companions.                                             
   'Must  get  up,  yes they  must!' he  said. 'Long  ways to  go still,
 south and east. Hobbits must make haste! '                             
   That  day  passed  much  the  same  as  the  day  before   had  done,
 except  that  the silence  seemed deeper;  the air  grew heavy,  and it
 began  to  be  stifling  under  the trees.  It felt  as if  thunder was
 brewing.  Gollum   often  paused,   sniffing  the   air,  and   then  he
 would mutter to himself and urge them to greater speed.                
   (As the third stage of their day's march drew on ...)                
                                                                       
   This was retained almost exactly in  TT. In  the manuscript  the text
 passes at once from  'The birds  seemed all  to have  flown away  or to
 have fallen dumb' to 'As the third stage of their day's march drew on',
 and thus in this narrative (as in the original draft, p. 175) they came
 to  the  Cross-roads  at sunset  of the  second day.  They had  come to
 Henneth Annun at  sunset on  6 February  (pp. 135,  141); they  left on
 the morning of the 7th, and  coming to  the Osgiliath  road at  dusk of
 that day passed the first part of the night in the great oak-tree; they
 went  on  again  'a  little before  midnight', and  passed most  of the
 daylight hours of 8 February hiding in the thorn-brake before  going on

  to the Cross-roads  (see further  the Note  on Chronology  at the  end of
  this chapter).                                                           
    Thus  the phrase  'As the  third stage  of their  day's march  drew on'
  referred,  when  it  was  written,  to  the  statement  then  immediately
  preceding: 'Twice that  day they  rested and  took a  little of  the food
  provided by Faramir'; as it stands in TT its reference is less clear.
    In  this  inserted  passage  occurs the  first reference  in TT  to the
  heaviness in the air and the feeling of thunder. In the manuscript  as in
  the draft (p. 176) the first reference to the change in the  weather does
  not appear until they set out again and began  to climb  eastwards, after
  spending the first part  of the  night (the  second night  in TT)  in the
  oak-tree; at this point in TT,  by a  later change,  'There seemed  to be
  a great blackness looming slowly  out of  the East,  eating up  the faint
  blurred stars.' On the following morning,  as they  lay hidden  under the
  thorns,  the  manuscript  retained the  story in  the draft:  the hobbits
  'watched   the   slow  growth   of  day',   and  saw   the  mountain-tops
  outlined  against  the  sunrise;  and  here  again  this  was  afterwards
  changed  to the  reading of  TT (p.  308): the  hobbits 'watched  for the
  slow growth  of day.  But no  day came,  only a  dead brown  twilight. In
  the East there was a dull red glare under the lowering cloud: it  was not
  the  red  of  dawn.'  Where  the  manuscript,  again following  the draft
  (p- 177), has 'The sun that had risen with a red flare behind Ephel-duath
  passed  soon  into  dark  clouds  moving  slowly  from  the East.  It was
  going  to  be  a gloomy  day, if  no worse'  TT has  'The red  glare over
  Mordor died  away. The  twilight deepened  as great  vapours rose  in the
  East  and  crawled  above  them.'   On  the   other  hand,   the  further
  references in  this chapter  to the  darkness (and  to the  deep rumbling
  sounds) were already present in the original version, and  at the  end it
  is said, almost as in TT (p. 311): 'There, far away, the sun was sinking,
  finding at last  the hem  of the  great slow-rolling  pall of  cloud, and
  falling in an ominous fire towards the yet unsullied sea.'(5)            
    Comparing  the text  as it  stands in  the manuscript  with that  in TT
  one might well suppose at first sight that all these  careful alterations
  show  my  father  at  a  later  time  (when  he   had  reached   Book  V)
  developing  the  original  idea of  a great  thunderstorm arising  in the
  mountains into  that of  the 'Dawnless  Day', an  emanation of  the power
  of Mordor that obliterated the sunrise  and turned  day into  night, that
  stroke of Sauron's that preceded his great assault. But it is  clear that
  this  is  not  so.  That  conception  was already  present. In  fact, the
  essential reason for  these changes  was chronological,  and they  are to
  be  associated  with the  extra day  of the  journey from  Henneth Annun.
  The  slow  approach  of  the  great  cloud  out  of  the  East had  to be
  advanced  at  each  succeeding stage  of the  journey to  the Cross-roads
  (see the Note on Chronology at the end of this chapter). It is also true,
  however, that the rewriting  of these  passages intensified  the Darkness
  and made it more potent and sinister.                                    

   Lastly, another later alteration to the text in the manuscript was the
 sentence  (TT  p.  306)  'and  the sound  of the  water seemed  cold and
 cruel: the voice  of Morgulduin,  the polluted  stream that  flowed from
 the Valley of the Wraiths.'                                             
   On  p.  181  is  reproduced  a  plan  of  the  Cross-roads  and  Minas
 Morghul.(6)                                                             

                                  NOTES.                                
                                                                       
1.  My father wrote  the word  'Cross-roads' very  variously, but  in this
 chapter I spell it thus throughout, as in TT.                          
2.  Cf. Unfinished Tales, p. 99 and note 15.                             
3.  In the fair copy manuscript it was still  said that  the heads  of the
 staves  were  in  the  form  of  a  shepherd's  crook,  though  this was
 subsequently  rejected  (see  p.  207),  but  the name  of the  tree was
 lebethron as first written.                                            
4.  In the first draft the form was still Hebel Duath. On this  change see
 p.  137.  -  This  reference  to  the  moon  climbing above  Ephel Duath
 'towards the end of night' is curious, in  view of  the opening  of 'The
 Forbidden  Pool',  where  towards  the  end  of  the previous  night the
 full  moon was  setting in  the West.  The original  draft here  is even
 odder:                                                                 
      The moon rose  at last  out of  [?high) shadows  ahead of  them. It
 hardly  showed  yet  any  ...  of  its  full  light,  but  already  away
 behind  the  mountains  and  the  hollow  land  and  the   empty  wastes
 day was beginning to grow pale.                                        
        'There  comes  White  Face,'  said Gollum.  'We doesn't  like it.
 And  Yellow  Face  is  coming  soon,  sss.  Two  faces  in  sky together
 at once, not a good sign. And we've got some way to go.'               
    My  father  was  certainly,  as  he  wrote  to  me  on  14  May  1944
 (Letters no. 69), having 'trouble with the moon'.                      
      In  the manuscript  the moon  is still  climbing above  Ephel Duath
 late in the night; only by a later  change does  it become  'the sinking
 moon' that 'escaped from the pursuing cloud' (TT p. 307).              
5.  The  words  in  TT 'beyond  sad  Gondor  now  overwhelmed  in shade'
 were a later addition.                                                 
6.  At the head of the first stair there is  evidently a  track and  not a
 tunnel, and therefore the  later conception  of the  ascent to  the pass
 is present (pp. 198-200).                                              
                                                                       
                          Note on the Chronology.                       
                                                                       
 The time-schemes referred to  as Scheme  C and  Scheme D  (pp. 140  - 1)
 both cover this part of the narrative.  Scheme C  reads as  follows (for
 comparison  with  the citations  from The  Tale of  Years that  follow I
 have added 'Day 1' etc. in both cases).                                

 (Minas Morghul and the Cross-roads)

 [Day 1]  Monday Feb. 6 Frodo  and Sam  in Ithilien.  They are  taken by
   Faramir.  Battle  with the  Southrons. Frodo  spends night  at Henneth
   Annun.                                                                 
 [Day 2]  Tuesday Feb.  7 Gollum  captured in  the Pool  of Annun  in the
   early  hours  (5.30-6).  Frodo  Sam  R   Gollum  leave   Faramir,  and
   journey all  day reaching  Osgiliath road  at dusk,  and go  east just
   before midnight.                                                       
    Faramir leaves Henneth Annun for Minas Tirith.                        
 [Day  3] Wednesday  Feb. 8  Faramir rides  to Minas  Tirith late  in day
   and brings news to Gandalf.                                            
    Frodo  lies  hid  in  thornbrake  until  late afternoon  (Gollum dis-
   appears  and  returns  about 4.30).  Sound of  drums or  thunder. They
   reach  the  Cross-roads  at  sunset  (5.5  p.m.). Pass  Minas Morghul,
   and  begin  ascent of  Kirith Ungol.  The host  of Minas  Morghul goes
   out to war.                                                            
 [Day  4]  Thursday  Feb.  9  Frodo  etc.  all  day  and  night   in  the
   Mountains of Shadow.                                                   
   Host  of Minas  Morghul reaches  Osgiliath and  crosses into  realm of
   Gondor.                                                                
                                                                         
   Here this scheme ends. Scheme  D is  precisely the  same in  dates and
 content,  but  continues  further  (see  p.  226)  and has  some entries
 concerning  Theoden's  movements: Feb.  7 'Theoden  prepares to  ride to
 Gondor.  Messengers  from  Minas  Tirith  arrive.  Also  tidings  of the
 invasion of North Rohan and  war in  the North';  Feb. 8  'Theoden rides
 from  Edoras'.  The  fully  'synoptic'  scheme  S  also  agrees,  and in
 addition mentions the coming on of 'the Great Darkness' on Feb. 8.       
                                                                         
 It will be seen that this chronology precisely fits the narrative as it
 stands in the manuscript, i.e. before it was altered by the insertion of
 the extra day. When that was done, the (relative) chronology of The      
 Tale of Years was reached:                                               
 [Day 1] March 7 Frodo taken by Faramir to Henneth Annun.                 
 [Day 2] March S Frodo leaves Henneth Annun.                              
 [Day 3] March 9 At dusk Frodo reaches the Morgul-road.                   
 [Day 4] March 10 The Dawnless Day. Frodo passes the Cross Roads,         
   and sees the Morgul-host set forth.                                    
                                                                         
   The synchronization of Frodo's story with that of  the events  west of
 Anduin required  both that  Frodo should  take longer  and that  'Day 4'
 should be the Dawnless Day.  Thus in  the original  story Frodo  and Sam
 see the red sunrise from their hiding in the thornbrake  on 'Day  3'; in
 the final form they are hiding in the  thornbrake on  'Day 4',  and there
 is no sunrise, but a  red glare  over Mordor  that 'was  not the  red of
 dawn'.                                                                   

                                   VIII.                                  
                                                                           
                                KIRITH UNGOL.                               
                                                                           
 In this chapter I shall describe the writing of the three last  chapters of
 The  Two  Towers:  'The  Stairs  of  Kirith  Ungol',  'Shelob's  Lair', and
 'The  Choices of  Master Samwise'.  As will  be seen,  this is  dictated by
 the way in which my father developed the narrative.                        
   This  is  the  last  part  of  The Lord  of the  Rings for  which precise
 dating  is  possible,  for  when  the doors  of the  Tower of  Kirith Ungol
 slammed  in  Sam's  face  my  father  halted  again  for  a long  time, and
 when  I   returned  to   England  in   1945  the   constant  correspondence
 between  us  naturally  ceased.  He  wrote  on  12  May  1944  (Letters no.
 68)  that  'we  are now  in sight  of Minas  Morghul'; and  a good  part of
 the  work  studied  in  this  chapter  must  have  been  done   during  the
 following ten days, for on 21 May (Letters no. 70) he said:                
                                                                           
   I  have  taken  advantage  of a  bitter cold  grey week  ... to  write: but
   struck  a  sticky  patch.  All  that  I  had  sketched  or  written  before
   proved  of  little  use,  as  times,  motives,  etc.,  have   all  changed.
   However  at  last  with  v.  great  labour,  and  some  neglect   of  other
   duties, I  have now  written or  nearly written  all the  matter up  to the
   capture  of  Frodo  in  the  high  pass on  the very  brink of  Mordor. Now
   I must go back to the  other folk  and try  and bring  things to  the final
   crash  with  some  speed.  Do  you  think  Shelob  is   a  good   name  for
   a  monstrous  spider  creature?  It  is  of  course  only  'she  +  lob' (=
   spider), but written as one, it seems to be quite noisome.               
                                                                           
 Adding to this letter on the following day, Monday 22 May, he said:        
                                                                           
   It  was  a  wretched  cold  day  yesterday  (Sunday).  I  worked  very hard
   at  my  chapter  - it  is most  exhausting work;  especially as  the climax
   approaches  and  one  has  to keep  the pitch  up: no  easy level  will do;
   and  there  are  all  sorts  of  minor  problems of  plot and  mechanism. I
   wrote  and  tore  up  and  rewrote  most  of  it  a  good  many  times; but
   I  was  rewarded  this  morning,  as  both  C.S.L.  and  C.W.   thought  it
   an  admirable  performance,  and  the  latest  chapters  the  best  so far.
   Gollum continues to develop into a most intriguing character.            
                                                                           
 At first sight the references in this letter seem inconsistent: in the past
 week  he had  written all  or nearly  all the  story up  to the  capture of
 Frodo;  he  had  just  spent a  day working  hard 'at  my chapter'  (in the
 singular);  and  that  morning  he  had  read 'it'  to Lewis  and Williams.
 There are  various ways  of explaining  this: my  guess is  that he  had at

  this time got the whole story  in draft,  which he  was still  working on,
  and which he thought of  as a  'chapter'; but  what he  read to  Lewis and
  Williams was 'The Stairs of Kirith Ungol'. That this last is certainly the
  case is seen from his letter of 31 May 1944 (Letters no. 72):             
                                                                           
    The  rest  of  my  time  ... has  been occupied  by the  desperate attempt
    to bring  'The Ring'  to a  suitable pause,  the capture  of Frodo  by the
    Orcs  in  the  passes  of  Mordor,  before I  am obliged  to break  off by
    examining.  By  sitting  up all  hours, I  managed it:  and read  the last
    2  chapters  (Shelob's  Lair  and  The  Choices  of  Master   Samwise)  to
    C.S.L. on Monday morning.                                               
                                                                           
    It  had  indeed  been  a great  labour. The  elements were  present: the
  climb to the high pass, the spider's lair, the webs in the tunnel, the use
  of the phial  of Galadriel,  the disappearance  of Gollum,  his treachery,
  the attack of the spider, the tower guarding the pass,  the coming  of the
  Orcs;  but they  long defied  a satisfactory  articulation. Perhaps  in no
  part of The Lord of the Rings  can the  work behind  the finished  text be
  more clearly discerned than here.                                         
                                                                           
    Already  when  drafting  the  chapter  'The  Black  Gate  is  Closed' my
  father  had  sketched  out  his  idea  of  the  approach  to  Kirith Ungol
  (p. 124): there Gollum tells Frodo and Sam  of 'A  stair and  path leading
  up into  the mountains  south of  the pass,  and then  a tunnel,  and then
  more stairs and then a cleft high above the main pass'. And in the outline
  that ends the original draft of that chapter (p. 125) it is  foreseen that
  after leaving  the Cross-roads  they will  see the  moon shining  on Minas
  Morghul; they will pass up the first  stair, force  their way  through the
  tunnel 'black with webs of  spiders', and  get up  the second  stair which
  will  bring  them  to  Kirith  Ungol;  but 'Spiders  are aroused  and hunt
  them.  They  are  exhausted.'  Whether  at  that  stage  Kirith  Ungol was
  guarded by a tower is not clear {see pp. 125-6).                          
    But long before  this, my  father had  written an  account of  the entry
  of  Frodo  and  Sam  into   Mordor,  which   beginning  as   outline  soon
  became  narrative  ('The  Story  Foreseen  from  L6rien',  in  The Treason
  of Isengard, pp. 330  ff.).(1) That  story was  very largely  concerned with
  Sam's  rescue  of  Frodo  from  Minas  Morghul,  which  does  not  concern
  us here; but the first part of it is very relevant, for  my father  had it
  before him in May 1944,  and I  cite a  portion of  it again  here (taking
  up the  various additions  made to  the text  that were  certainly present
  when he now turned to it).                                                
                                                                           
      The   three  companions   now  approach   Kirith  Ungol,   the  dreadful
    ravine   which   leads   into  Gorgoroth.(2) Kirith  Ungol   means  Spider
    Glen:  there  dwelt  great  spiders,  greater  than  those   of  Mirkwood,
    such  as  were  once  of old  in the  land of  Elves and  Men in  the West
    that is now under sea,  such as  Beren fought  in the  dark canons  of the
    Mountains   of   Terror   above   Doriath.   Already  Gollum   knew  these

                   
                                                                       
 creatures  well.  He  slips  away.  The  spiders  come and  weave their
 nets over  Frodo while  Sam sleeps:  sting Frodo.  Sam wakes,  and sees
 Frodo lying pale as death  - greenish:  reminding him  of the  faces in
 the pools of the marshes. He cannot rouse or wake him.                 
  The idea  suddenly comes  to Sam  to carry  on the  work, and  he felt
 for the Ring. He could not unclasp it, nor cut the  chain, but  he drew
 the chain over Frodo's head. As he did so he fancied  he felt  a tremor
 (sigh  or  shudder)  pass  through  the  body;  but  when he  paused he
 could not feel any heart-beat. Sam put the Ring round his own neck.
  Then  he  sat and  made a  Lament for  Frodo. After  that he  put away
 his tears and thought what he  could do.  He could  not leave  his dear
 master lying in the wild for the fell beasts and carrion birds;  and he
 thought  he  would  try and  build a  cairn of  stones about  him. 'The
 silver mail of mithril rings shall be his winding-sheet,' he said. 'But
 I will lay the phial of Lady Galadriel upon his breast, and Sting shall
 be at his side.'                                                       
  He  laid  Frodo  upon  his  back and  crossed his  arms on  his breast
 and set Sting at his side. And as he drew out the phial it  blazed with
 light. It lit Frodo's face and it looked now  pale but  beautiful, fair
 with  an  elvish beauty  as of  one long  past the  shadows. 'Farewell,
 Frodo,' said Sam; and his tears fell on Frodo's hands.                 
  But at  that moment  there was  a sound  of strong  footfalls climbing
 towards the  rock shelf.  Harsh calls  and cries  echoed in  the rocks.
 Orcs were coming, evidently guided to the spot.                        
  'Curse  that  Gollum,'  said  Sam.  'I  might  have  known we  had not
 seen the last of him. These are some of his friends.'                  
  Sam  had  no time  to lose.  Certainly no  time to  hide or  cover his
 master's body. Not  knowing what  else to  do he  slipped on  the Ring,
 and then he took also the phial so that  the foul  Orcs should  not get
 it,  and  girded  Sting about  his own  waist. And  waited. He  had not
 long to wait.                                                          
  In the  gloom first  came Gollum  sniffing out  the scent,  and behind
 him came  the black  orcs: fifty  or more  it seemed.  With a  cry they
 rushed upon Frodo. Sam  tried to  put up  a fight  unseen, but  even as
 he  was  about  to  draw  Sting  he was  run down  and trampled  by the
 rush  of  the  Orcs.  All  the  breath  was  knocked  out of  his body.
 Courage failed  him. In  great glee  the Orcs  seized Frodo  and lifted
 him.                                                                   
  'There  was  another,  yes,'  whined  Gollum.  'Where  is  he,  then?'
 said  the  Orcs.  'Somewheres  nigh.  Gollum  feels him,  Gollum sniffs
 him.'                                                                  
  'Well, you find him, sniveller,' said the Orc-chief. 'He can't  go far
 without  getting  into  trouble.  We've got  what we  want. Ringbearer!
 Ringbearer!'  They  shouted  in  joy.  'Make  haste.  Make  haste. Send
 one swift  to Barradur  to the  Great One.  But we  cannot wait  here -
 we  must  get  back  to  our  guard  post. Bear  the prisoner  to Minas

  Morgul.'  (Gollum  runs  behind  wailing  that   the  Precious   is  not
  there.)                                                                
    Even  as  they do  so, Frodo  seems to  awake, and  gives a  loud cry,
  but they gag him. Sam is torn between joy  at learning  he is  alive and
  horror  at seeing  him carried  off by  Orcs. Sam  tries to  follow, but
  they  go  very  speedily.  The  Ring  seems  to  grow  in power  in this
  region: he sees clearly in the dark, and seems  to understand  the orcs'
  speech.  He  fears  what  may  happen  if  he meets  a Ringwraith  - the
  Ring  does  not  confer  courage: poor  Sam trembles  all the  time. Sam
  gathers that they are going to Minas Morgul ...                        
                                                                        
 Sam  follows  the  Orcs  as  they march  off to  Minas Morgul,  and sees
 them entering the city; then he follows them in.                        
  My father now wrote a new outline,  and it  is clear  that he  wrote it
 before he had proceeded far with the story that constitutes  the chapter
 'The Stairs  of Kirith  Ungol'. The  original draft  of 'Journey  to the
 Cross-roads' in fact continued straight  on into  what would  become the
 next chapter,  but soon  became no  more than  a sketch.  Frodo's sudden
 crazed dash towards the bridge (TT  p. 313)  was absent;  after scarcely
 legible words corresponding to the later 'Frodo felt his  senses reeling
 and his mind darkening' follows:                                        
                                                                        
 Gollum   again   drew   him  away.   Not  that   way  .....   he  hissed
 .....  but  the  sound  seemed  to  tear  the  air  like a  whistle. Not
 that  way.  He  drew  them  aside  and  [?shrinking]  after   him  they
 left  the  road  and  began  to  climb  up  into  the  darkness  on  the
 northern  side  of  the  valley,  .....  their eyes  away from  the city
 on their right, but always looking back again.                          
                                                                        
 It is here that the placing of the high pass (Kirith Ungol) on the north
 side of the Morghul Vale first appears. Then follows:                   
                                                                        
 They  came  to  a  ....  and  steps  and  laboured  on.  As   they  rose
 above  the  exhalations  of  the  valley their  track became  easier and
 the [or their] steps  less heavy  and slow.  But at  last they  could go
 no  further.  They  were  in  a  narrow  place  where  the path  or road
 -  if  it  were  one  -  was  no more  than a  wide ledge  winding along
 the  face  of  the  mountain   shoulder.  Before   them  it   seemed  to
 vanish into the shadow or into the very rock itself.                    
  They  halted  and  at  that  moment  a  great  red  flash  lit  up  the
 valley.  In  that  place  of  shadow  and  pale phosphorescent  light it
 seemed   unbearable,  suddenly   fierce  and   cruel.  Two   peaks  with
 notches  between  sprang  suddenly  [?black]   into  view   against  the
 [?sudden)  fire  behind.  At  the  same  moment  a  great   [?crack]  of
 thunder .......                                                         

 There follows an illegible sentence that  seems to  refer to  the great
 screeching cry, and the text ends with a reference to the  coming forth
 of the host of Morghul.                                               
   At this  point the  new outline  for the  whole 'Kirith  Ungol' story
 begins. Written at great speed and in pencil,  it is  often exceedingly
 difficult to make out, and in one passage very hard to follow.        
                                                                      
   Description  of  the  endless  long  black  lines.  Rider  ahead.  He
 halts  and  sweeps  glance  round  valley.  Frodo's  temptation  to put
 on Ring. At last the host [?passes] away.                             
   The  [?stormJ  is  bursting  - they  are going  to Osgiliath  and the
 crossing  of  the  River  he said.  Will Faramir  be across?  Will army
 slay them?                                                            
   [Added: long [? journey] up. Frodo uses phial.]                     
   They   pass   into  the   tunnel.  Halfway   through  they   find  it
 blocked  with  webs.  Gollum  refuses  to  say  what  they  are.  Frodo
 goes ahead and hews a path with Sting. Sam helps.                     
   At  other end  after long  struggle in  dark he  finds a  stair. They
 can no longer see into valley,  as sheer  walls of  rock are  on either
 side.  The  stair  goes  up,  up  endlessly. [?Occasional]  webs across
 path.                                                                 
   Gollum   hangs   back.  They   begin  to   have  suspicion   of  him.
 Description  of  the  spiders?  There dwelt  great creatures  in spider
 form  such  as  lived  once  of old  in the  Land of  the Elves  in the
 West  that  is now  under the  Sea, such  as Beren  fought in  the dark
 ravines  of  the  Mountains  of  Terror above  Doriath. All  light they
 snared   and   wove   into   impenetrable  webs.   Pale-fleshed,  many-
 eyed,  venomous   they  were,   older  and   more  horrible   than  the
 black   creatures   of   Mirkwood.   Already   Gollum  had   met  them:
 he knew them well. But thought to use them for his purposes.          
   They  come  out at  last to  the head  of the  stair. The  road opens
 a  little.  There  is  still  an  ominous  glare.  They  see  the  road
 [?clearly]  ..  through  a  [?narrow]  cleft  and  now  the  right wall
 sinks  and  they  look  down  into  a  vast  darkness, the  great cleft
 which  was  the  head  of  Morghul  Vale.  On  the  left  sharp  jagged
 pinnacles  full  of  black  crevices.  And  high upon  one tip  a small
 black tower.(3)                                                       
   What  is  that  tower?  said  Frodo  full  of  suspicion. Is  there a
 guard?    Then    they    found   Gollum    had   slipped    away   and
 vanished.                                                             
   Frodo  is  full  of   fear.  But   Sam  says   Well  we're   up  this
 ....  near  very  top  of  mountains.  Further  than  we ever  hoped to
 get. Let's go on and get it over.                                     

   Frodo   goes   forward    and   Sam    follows.   Sam    is   suddenly
 lassooed  and  falls  back.  He  calls  out  but  Frodo  does  not come.
 He  struggles  up  and  falls  again  -  something  is  round  his feet.
 Slashes  himself free  in a  fury of  rage. Frodo  master he  cries, and
 then  sees  the  great  spider   that  has   attacked  him.   He  lunges
 forward  but  the  creature  makes off.  Then he  sees that  there [are]
 a  great  number  about  -  issuing out  of the  crevices, but  they are
 all  hurrying  forward  along  the  road,  taking  no further  notice of
 him.                                                                    
                                                                        
   Lines  are  drawn  on  the  manuscript  here,  and though  the immedi-
 ately preceding passage  was not  struck out  it was  obviously rejected
 at this point. Its meaning is not immediately plain: does 'him'  in 'the
 great  spider  that  has  attacked  him' refer  to Sam  or to  Frodo? On
 general grounds it might seem at first sight more likely to be Frodo: in
 both the earlier outlines it was Frodo who was the  victim, and  so also
 in the version that replaced this. That Frodo would  be the  victim here
 also cannot indeed be doubted; but it seems to me certain that  'him' is
 in fact Sam -  precisely because  he escaped  (and the  words 'lassooed'
 and 'slashes himself free' clearly refer to attack by a spider). Sam had
 to be delayed in some way so that  he was  not at  hand when  the attack
 on Frodo took place. The first idea was that one of the spiders went for
 Sam too, but  unsuccessfully; my  father then  saw at  once that  it was
 not a spider that came on  him from  behind, but  Gollum. What  idea lay
 behind the statement that the  other spiders  were all  hurrying forward
 along the path and taking no  further notice  of Sam  is not  clear, but
 presumably they were going after Frodo (instigated by Gollum?).         
   Returning  to  the  beginning  of  the  last  paragraph,  the  outline
 continues:                                                              
                                                                        
   Sam   suddenly   sees  the   spiders  coming   out  of   crevices.  He
 can't  see  Frodo  and  calls  out  in  warning, but  at that  moment he
 is  seized  from  behind.  He  can't  draw   sword.  Gollum   trips  him
 and  he  falls.  Gollum  tries  to  get  at  Sam's  sword. Sam  has long
 fight  and  eventually  gets  hand  on  his  stave  and  deals  Gollum a
 blow.  Gollum  wriggles  aside  and  only  gets   a  whack   across  his
 hands.  He  lets  go.  Sam  is  aiming  another  blow  at  him  when  he
 springs  away  and  going  like  lightning  disappears  into  a crevice.
 Sam  rushes  forward  to  find  Frodo.  He  is   too  late.   There  are
 great  spiders  round  him.  Sam  draws  sword   and  fights   but  they
 don't  seem  to  [?heed]  it.  Then  he  found  Sting  lying  by Frodo's
 outstretched arm. (2 or 3 dead spiders by him.)                         
   He  seizes  Sting  and  drives  off  the  spiders.  Frodo lying  as if
 dead.  Spiders  have  stung  him.  He  is  pale   as  death.   Sam  uses

 phial.  Reminds  Sam  of  his  vision  in  the  mirror  of  Galadriel.(4) All
 efforts  to  rouse his  master fail.  He can  hear or  feel no  heart beat.
 He  is  dead.  Sam  [?falls]  first  into  senseless  rage  against Gollum
 [?beating]  the  stones  and  shouting  at  him  to  come  out  and  fight.
 Then  into  a  black  despair  of  grief.   How  long   he  sat   there  he
 never  knew.  He  came  out  of  this  black  trance  to  find  Frodo still
 just  as  he  had  left  him,  but  now  greenish in  hue, a  horrible dead
 look with a ....(5)                                                        
   Sam  remembers  he  himself  had  said  that   he  had   a  job   to  do.
 Wonders  if  it  has  come  to  him  now.  He  takes  the  phial  and Sting
 and  buckles  belt.  Sam  the  two-sworded  he   says  grimly.   Prays  for
 strength   to   fight   and  avenge   Frodo.  At   that  moment   he  would
 have   marched   straight   to  death,   straight  to   the  very   Eye  of
 Baraddur.                                                                  
                                                                           
   Two  additions  were made  at the  time of  writing to  the text  on this
 page, the first directed to this point by an arrow:  'Lament see  5c'. This
 is a reference  to the  previous outline  story, where  the words  'Then he
 sat  and  made   a  Lament   for  Frodo'   (p.  185)   appear  on   a  page
 numbered  '5  continued'.   The  other   addition  is   conveniently  given
 here, since it is needed  to explain  the narrative  immediately following:
                                                                           
   Orcs have captured Gollum -  all his  little plan  of getting  Frodo tied
   up by spiders has gone [? wrong]. They are driving Gollum.               
                                                                           
   The text continues:                                                      
                                                                           
   Noise   of   [?approaching]   Orc-laughter.   Down   out   of   a   cleft
 Gollum   leading   comes   a   band   of   black   orcs.    Desperate   Sam
 draws  off  the  ring  from  Frodo's  neck  and  takes  it.  He  could  not
 unclasp  it  or  cut  the  chain  so he  slipped it  over Frodo's  neck and
 put  it  on.  As  he  did  so he  stumbled forward,  it was  as if  a great
 stone  had  been   suddenly  strung   about  his   neck.  At   that  moment
 up come orcs. Sam slips on Ring.                                           
   Frodo   cries  -   or  is   Sam's  motive   simply  that   [?wishing]  to
 bury   Frodo:   he   won't   see   Frodo's    body   carried    off.   Also
 wanting to get at Gollum.                                                  
                                                                           
   To  clarify  the  syntax  of  the  sentence  beginning 'Frodo  cries' the
 word wishing (?) might be read as wishes  (sc. 'he  wishes'), or  of might
 be  understood  before wishing;  but even  so my  father's thought  is most
 elliptically  expressed  and  difficult  to  follow.  However,   since  im-
 mediately  beneath  these  last  two  sentences  he   drew  lines   on  the
 manuscript,  implying  that  the  story  just  sketched  was  about  to  be
 modified, I think that  an interpretation  on these  lines may  be correct.
 'Frodo  cries'  is  to  be understood  in relation  to the  earlier outline

  (p. 186): when the Orcs take Frodo he 'seems to awake,  and gives  a loud
  cry'.  The  following  words  ('or  is Sam's  motive...') show  my father
  breaking off altogether,  and questioning  the rightness  of what  he had
  just outlined: perhaps this  story of  Sam's taking  the Ring  from Frodo
  because  of  the  approaching   Orcs  was   wrong.  Perhaps   Sam's  only
  'motive' (meaning his only purpose, or desire) at  this juncture  was not
  to leave  Frodo simply  lying where  he fell  (cf. the  previous outline,
  p. 185: He could not leave his dear master lying in the wild for the fell
  beasts  and  carrion  birds;  and  he thought  he would  try and  build a
  cairn of stones about him') - and his desire to  take revenge  on Gollum.
  I think that some such interpretation is borne out  by the  revised story
  that immediately follows.                                                
                                                                          
    Make  Sam  sit  long  by  Frodo  all  through  night.  Hold   phial  up
  and  see  him  elvish-fair.   Torn by   not  knowing   what  to   do.  He
  lays  Frodo  out,  and  folds  his  hands.  Mithril  coat.  Phial  in his
  hand. Sting at side.                                                     
    Tries  to  go  on  and  finish  job.  Can't  force  himself to.  How to
  die  [?soon].  Thinks  of  jumping  over  brink.  But  might as  well try
  to  do  something.  Crack  of  Doom?  Reluctantly  as  it  seems  a theft
  in  a  way  he  takes  Ring.  Goes  forward  on  the  path  in  a violent
  sorrow   and   despair.   [In   margin:  Red   dawn.]  But   cannot  drag
  himself  away  from  Frodo.  Turns  back  -  resolved  to  lie   down  by
  Frodo   till   death   comes.   Then   he  sees   Gollum  come   and  paw
  him.  He  gives  a  start  and  runs   back.  But   orcs  come   out  and
  Gollum  bolts.  Orcs  pick  up  Frodo  and  carry  him  off.   Sam  plods
  after  them.  Sam  puts  on  ring!  It  seems  to  have  grown  in  might
  and   power.   It   weighs   down  his   hand.  But   he  can   see  with
  terrible  clearness  -  even  through  the  rocks.   He  can   see  every
  crevice  filled  with  spiders.  He  can   understand  orc   speech.  But
  the ring does not confer courage on Sam.                                 
    It  seems  they  had  been  warned  for  special  vigilance.  Some  spy
  of  more  than  usual  importance  could  try  to  get  in   somehow.  If
  any   were   caught   messenger   to   be   [?sent].  Phial   taken.  Sam
  follows  up  a  long  stair to  the tower.  He can  see all  plain below.
  The Black Gate and Ithilien and Gorgoroth and Mt. Doom.                  
                                                                          
    Here this outline ends. As revised  in the  course of  its composition,
  the story now stood thus in its essential structure:                     
                                                                          
   -   They   enter   a   tunnel,   which  halfway   through  is   blocked  with
       webs. Frodo shears the webs with Sting.                             
   -   At the  end of  the tunnel  they come  to a  long stair.  (Description of
       the spiders, which are well known to Gollum.)                       

                  
                                                                         
 - At  the  top  of  the  stair  they see  the tower;  and find  that Gollum
 has disappeared.                                                         
 - Frodo  goes  ahead;  Sam  behind  sees  spiders  coming  and   cries  out
 to  Frodo,  but  at  that  moment  is  grappled  by  Gollum  from behind.
 Sam fights him off, and Gollum escapes.                                  
 - Sam  finds  Frodo  dead,  as  he  thinks,  stung  by  spiders.  He seizes
 Sting  and  drives  them  off;  he  sits  by  Frodo  all night;  puts the
 phial in his hand and Sting beside him.                                 
 - He  thinks  that  he  must  himself  attempt  Frodo's  task,   takes  the
 Ring and sets off.                                                       
 - But  he  cannot  do  this,  and  turns  back;  he  sees  Gollum  come out
 and  paw  at  Frodo,  but  as  he   runs  back   Orcs  come   and  Gollum
 flees.                                                                   
 - The Orcs pick up Frodo and carry him off.                                
 - Sam  puts  on  the  Ring,  and  follows  the  Orcs  up  a  stair  to  the
 tower.                                                                   
                                                                         
 Comparison  of  this  outline  with  the  old  one  shows  that  the  new
 narrative  was  a  development  from  it,  and  by  no means  an entirely
 fresh start; here and there even  the wording  was preserved.  The single
 Great  Spider  had  not  yet  emerged.  But   (considered  simply   as  a
 step-by-step structure) it  was already  transformed, partly  through the
 wholly different conception of the pass of  Kirith Ungol,  partly through
 the changed view of Gollum's role; and even  as the  new outline  was set
 on paper his role was changed further. At first the  Orcs were  guided to
 the spot by Gollum,  though he  was forced  to do  so, his  own nefarious
 plan being entirely based on the spiders; but by the  time my  father had
 reached the end of it he had decided that Gollum had  in fact  no traffic
 whatsoever with the Orcs.                                                
 The  idea  that  the  tunnel  was barred  by great  webs is  present, but
 since  Frodo was  able to  cut a  way through  with Sting  their presence
 does  not  affect the  actual evolution  of the  plot. The  words 'Gollum
 refuses to say what they are' suggest that they entered the story  as the
 explanation of what Gollum's 'little plan' had  actually been:  and that,
 I take  it, was  that Frodo  and Sam  should be  entrapped in  the tunnel
 and so delivered to the spiders. But  he had  not envisaged  that Frodo's
 elvish blade would be able to cut the strands.                           
 The   important   element  now   enters  that   Frodo  went   ahead  when
 they  issued  from the  tunnel (and  thus Sam  had become  separated from
 him when  he was  attacked by  the spiders),  although no  explanation of
 this is given.                                                           
 A very notable feature of this outline  is that  Sam's clarity  of vision
 when he wears the Ring is  not merely  retained from  the old  plot ('The
 Ring seems to grow in power in this region: he sees clearly in the dark',
 p. 186), but is greatly increased: he can even see through the  rocks; in
 TT  (p.  343), on  the other  hand, 'all  things about  him now  were not

                                                     
                                                                          
 dark  but  vague;  while  he  himself  was  there  in  a  grey  hazy world,
 alone, like a small black solid rock'. On  this question  see VII.373  - 4,
 380 - 1; and for the  further development  of this  element (the  effect of
 the Ring on Sam's senses) see pp. 212, 214.                               
  The  fair  copy  manuscript  was built  up in  stages. From  the beginning
 of the chapter 'The  Stairs of  Kirith Ungol',  as far  as 'Frodo  felt his
 senses reeling,  his limbs  weakening' (cf.  TT p.  313), it  was developed
 from the original draft (p.  186) and  virtually attained  the form  in TT;
 but  from  this  point  my  father  briefly  returned  to  his  frustrating
 practice of erasing his pencilled draft and  writing the  fair copy  on the
 pages  where  it  had  stood.  This  only  extends for  a couple  of pages,
 however,  and  some  words  and  phrases  escaped  erasure;  while  on  the
 third  page the  draft was  not erased  but overwritten,  and here  much of
 the original text can be read. This carries the narrative to the  point (TT
 p.  317)  where  the  host  out  of  Minas  Morghul  had  disappeared  down
 the  westward  road  and Sam  urged Frodo  to rouse  himself; and  there is
 no reason whatever to think that  the lost  pages of  the draft  were other
 than a more roughly expressed version of the final narrative.(6)           
  But  from  this  point  (where  the  pencilled  draft reads:  'Frodo rose,
 grasping his staff in one  hand and  the phial  in the  other. Then  he saw
 that a faint light was welling through his fingers and he thrust it  in his
 bosom')  the  original  narrative diverged,  and was  followed in  the fair
 copy  manuscript  (where  it  was  subsequently   replaced  by   the  later
 story). This first form of the fully-written story  may be  called 'Version
 1'. The textual situation at this point is  odd and  perplexing, but  it is
 sufficient  to  say  here that  the opening  of this  section (of  no great
 length) is lost, both in draft and fair copy, and the  story only  takes up
 again  with  the strange  smell that  the hobbits  could not  identify (cf.
 'Shelob's Lair' in TT, p. 326).(7)                                        
  I feel certain that the lost lines carried an account  of the  climbing of
 the first stair, leading  to an  opening in  the rock  which was  the mouth
 of  the  tunnel,  from  which  the strange  smell came  (whereas in  TT the
 text at this point tells how after the passage of the  ledge the  path came
 to  'a  narrow  opening  in  the  rock'   which  was   the  entry   to  the
 high-walled first stair). My father still had in mind the  series described
 in the draft text  of 'The  Black Gate  is Closed'  (p. 124),  where Gollum
 says 'a stair and path, and then a tunnel,  and then  more stairs  and then
 a cleft high above the main pass', and again in  the following  outline (p.
 125), where they  'pass up  first stair  safely. But  tunnel is  black with
 webs  of  spiders....  force  way  and  get  up  second stair.'  And again,
 in  the original  draft for  'The Stairs  of Kirith  Ungol' (p.  186), when
 they  began  to  climb up  from the  valley they  came to  'steps'. Further
 evidence in support of this will appear shortly.                          
  After the obliterated lines the original story continues thus.           
                                                                          
            ... a strange odour came out of it - not the odour of decay in

 the  valley  below,  an  odour  that  the  hobbits  did  not  recognize, a
 repellent taint on the air.(8)                                            
   Resigning   themselves   to   fear   they   passed   inside.    It   was
 altogether   lightless.  After   some  little   time  Sam   suddenly  tum-
 bled  into  Gollum   ahead  of   him  and   Frodo  against   Sam.  'What's
 up  now?'  said  Sam.  'Brought  us  to  a  dead  end,  have  you?'  'Dead
 end  -  that's  good,'  he  muttered.  'It  about  describes  it.' 'What's
 up, you old villain?' Gollum did not answer him.                          
   Sam   pushed   him   aside   and   thrust   forward,   only    to   meet
 something  that  yielded  but  would  not  give  way,  soft,   unseen  and
 strong  as  if  the  darkness  could  be  felt.  'Something's  across  the
 path,'  he  said.  'Some  trap  or  something.  What's  to  be   done?  If
 this  old  villain  knows  about  it,  as  I  bet  he  does, why  won't he
 speak?'                                                                   
   'Because   he  doesn't   know,*  hissed   Gollum.  'He's   thinking.  We
 didn't  expect  to  find  this  here,  did  we  precious?  No,  of  course
 not. We wants to get out, of course we does, yes, yes.'                   
   'Stand  back,'  said  Frodo,   and  then   suddenly  drawing   his  hand
 from  his   bosom  he   held  aloft   the  phial   of  Galadriel.   For  a
 moment  it  flickered,  like  a  star  struggling  through  the  mists  of
 Earth,  then  as  fear  left  him it  began to  burn (9) with  dazzling silver
 light,   as  if   Earendel  himself   had  come   down  from   the  sunset
 paths   with   the   Silmaril   upon   his   brow.  Gollum   cowered  away
 from  the  light,  which  for  some  reason  seemed   to  fill   him  with
 fear.                                                                     
   Frodo  drew  his  sword,  and  Sting  leapt  out.  The  bright  rays  of
 the  star-glass  sparkled  upon  the  blade,  but  on  its  edges  ran  an
 ominous  blue  fire  -  to  which  at  that  time   Frodo  nor   Sam  gave
 heed.                                                                     
                                                                          
   'Version 1' in the fair copy  manuscript stops  here, at  the foot  of a
 page,  the  remainder  having  been  taken  out  of  it when  rejected and
 replaced.(10) The next page  of 'Version  1' is  preserved, however,.  it was
 separated from  the other  'Kirith Ungol'  papers many  years ago,  and is
 now  in  the  Bodleian  Library  at Oxford,  among other  illustrations to
 The Lord of the Rings - for the verso of  the page,  in addition  to text,
 bears a picture  of the  ascent to  Kirith Ungol.  This was  reproduced in
 Pictures by J. R. R. Tolkien (no. 28, 'Shelob's Lair'), and  is reproduced
 again in this book (first frontispiece). That the recto of the page is the
 continuation of the text from  the point  reached is  assured both  by the
 page-number '[6]', following  '[5]' in  the fair  copy manuscript,  and by
 internal  association,  notably  Sam's words  when he  sees that  they are
 confronted  by spiders'  webs: 'Why  didn't you  speak, Gollum?'  (cf. his

  words  on the  preceding page:  'Something's across  the path...  If this
  old villain knows about it, as I bet he does, why won't he speak?'). The
  recto reads thus:                                                        
                                                                          
    Before  them  was  a  greyness  which  the  light  did  not  penetrate.
  Dull  and  heavy  it  absorbed  the  light.  Across  the  whole  width of
  the  tunnel  from  floor  to  floor  and  side  to  side  were   ....  (11)
  webs.  Orderly  as   the  webs   of  spiders,   but  far   greater:  each
  thread as thick as a great cord.                                         
    Sam   laughed   grimly   when   he  saw   them.  'Cobwebs,'   he  said.
  'Is  that  all!  Why  didn't  you  speak,  Gollum?   But  I   might  have
  guessed  for  myself!  Cobwebs!  Mighty  big  ones,  but  we'll   get  at
  them.'  He  drew  his   sword  and   hewed,  but   the  thread   that  he
  struck  did  not  break,  it  yielded  and  then   sprang  back   like  a
  bowstring,   turning   the   blade   and  tossing   his  sword   and  arm
  backward.   Three   times   Sam   struck,   and   at   last   one  thread
  snapped,   twisting   and   curling,  whipping   about  like   a  snapped
  harpstring.  As  an  end  lashed  Sam's  hand  and  stung  like  a  whip.
  [sic)  He  cried  out  and  stood back.  'It'd take  weeks this  way,' he
  said.  'Let  me  try  Bilbo's  sword,'  said  Frodo.  'I  will  go  ahead
  now:   hold   my   star-glass   behind   me.'   Frodo  drew   Sting (12) and
  made   a   great   sweeping  stroke   and  sprang   back  to   avoid  the
  lashing of the threads.                                                  
    The   sharp   elven-blade  blue-edged   sparkling  shore   through  the
  netted  ropes  and  that  web  was  destroyed.  But  there   were  others
  behind.  Slowly  Frodo  hewed  his  way  through   them  until   at  last
  they  came  to  a  clear  way  again.  Sam  came  behind  holding  up the
  light  and   pushing  Gollum   -  strangely   reluctant  -   before  him.
  Gollum kept on trying to wriggle away and turn back.(13)                 
    At  length   they  came   to  more   webs,  and   when  they   had  cut
  through these the tunnel came to an end.                                 
    The   rock   wall   opened  out   and  sprang   high  and   the  second
  stair  was  before  them:  walls  on  either  side   towering  up   to  a
  great  height  -  how  high  they  could  not  guess,  for  the  sky  was
  hardly  less  black  than  the  walls  -  and  could  only  be  discerned
  by  an  occasional  glow  and  flicker  of  red on  the underside  of the
  clouds.   The   stair   seemed   endless,   up,   up,  up.   Their  knees
  cracked.  Here  and  there  was  a  web  across  the  way.  They  were in
  the very heart of the mountains. Up, up.                                 
    At  last  they  got  to  the  stair-head.  The  road  opened  out. Then
  all   their   suspicions   of   Gollum   came  to   a  head.   He  sprang
  unexpectedly   out   of   Sam's  reach   forward,  and   thrusting  Frodo

 aside ran out emitting a shrill sort of whistling  cry, such  as they
 had never heard him make before.                                     
   'Come   here!   you   wretch,'   cried   Sam  darting   after  him.
 Gollum  turned  once  with  his  eyes  glittering, and  then vanished
 quite  suddenly  into  the  gloom,  and  no  sign  of him  could they
 find.(14)                                                            
                                                                     
   The verso of the page, numbered '[7]', carrying the picture  of the
 ascent to the pass,(15) has the following text.                          
                                                                     
   'That's that! ' said Sam. 'What I expected. But I don't like  it. I
 suppose  now  we  are  just  exactly  where  he  wanted to  bring us.
 Well,  let's  get moving  away as  quick as  we can.  The treacherous
 worm! That last  whistle of  his wasn't  pure joy  at getting  out of
 the  tunnel,  it  was  pure wickedness  of some  sort. And  what sort
 we'll soon know.'                                                    
   'Likely  enough,'  said  Frodo.  'But  we could  not have  got even
 so  far  without  him.  So  if  we  ever  manage  our   errand,  then
 Gollum and all his wickedness will be part of the plan.'             
   'So far, you say,' said Sam. 'How far? Where are we now?'          
   'About at the crest  of the  main range  of Ephel-duath,  I guess,'
 said  Frodo.  'Look!'  The  road  opened  out now:  it still  went on
 up,  but  no  longer  sheerly.   Beyond  and   ahead  there   was  an
 ominous glare in  the sky,  and like  a great  notch in  the mountain
 wall a cleft was outlined against it - so [here  is a  small sketch].
 On  their  right  the wall  of rock  fell away  and the  road widened
 till  it  had  no  brink.  Looking  down  Frodo  saw nothing  but the
 vast  darkness  of   the  great   ravine  which   was  the   head  of
 Morghul  dale.  Down  in  its  depths  was the  faint glimmer  of the
 wraith-road  that  led  over  the  Morghul  pass  from  the  city. On
 their  left sharp  jagged pinnacles  stood up  like towers  carved by
 the  biting  years,  and  between  them were  many dark  crevices and
 clefts. But high up on the left side of the cleft to which their road
 led  (Kirith  Ungol)  was a  small black  tower, and  in it  a window
 showed a red light.                                                  
   'I don't like  the look  of that,'  said Sam.  'This upper  pass is
 guarded  too.  D'you  remember  he  never  would  say  if  it  was or
 no. D'you think he's gone to fetch them - orcs or something?'        
   'No,  I  don't think  so,' said  Frodo. 'He  is up  to no  good, of
 course, but  I don't  think that  he's gone  to fetch  orcs. Whatever
 it is, it is no slave of the Dark Lord's.' 'I suppose not,' said Sam.
 'No,  I  suppose  the  whole  time  it  has  been  the ring  for poor

 Smeagol's   own.   That's   been   his  scheme.   But  how   coming  up
 here will help him, I can't guess.' He was soon to learn.              
   Frodo  went  forward  now  -  the  last  lap  -  and  he  exerted all
 his strength. He felt that if once he could  get to  the saddle  of the
 pass   and   look   over  into   the  Nameless   Land  he   would  have
 accomplished   something.   Sam   followed.   He   sensed    evil   all
 round  him.  He  knew  that  they  had  walked  into  some   trap,  but
 what?   He   had  sheathed   his  sword,   but  now   he  drew   it  in
 readiness.  He  halted  for  a  moment,  and  stooped  to pick  up his
 staff with his left hand                                               
                                                                       
   Here the text on the 'Bodleian page' ends, but the  further continua-
 tion  of  this  extraordinarily  dismembered  text  is found  among the
 papers  that  failed  to  go  to  Marquette.(16) The  next  page  is duly
 numbered '[8]' and '[9]', and continues as before in ink over pencilled
 drafting.                                                              
                                                                       
 -  it  had  a  comfortable  feel  to his  hand. As  he stood  up again,
 he  saw  issuing  out  of  a  crevice  at the  left the  most monstrous
 and   loathly   form   that   he   had   ever   beheld  -   beyond  his
 imagination.(17) Spider-like  it  was  in  shape,  but  huge  as  a  wild
 beast,  and  more  terrible  because  of  the  malice and  evil purpose
 in  its  eyes.  These  were  many,  clustered  in  its small  head, and
 each of  them held  a baleful  light. On  great bent  legs it  walked -
 the  hairs  of  them  stuck  out  like  steel spines,  and at  each end
 there  was  a  claw.  The   round  swollen   body  behind   its  narrow
 neck  was  dark  blotched  with  paler  livid  marks,   but  underneath
 its  belly was  pale and  faintly luminous  as its  eyes. It  stank. It
 moved  with  a  sudden  horrible  speed  running   on  its   arms,  and
 springing.  Sam  saw  at  once  that  he [sic]  was hunting  his master
 -  now  a  little  ahead  in the  gloom and  apparently unaware  of his
 peril.  He  whipped   out  his   sword  and   yelled.  'Look   out!  Mr
 Frodo!  Look  out!  I'm  -  '  But  he  did not  finish. A  long clammy
 hand  went  over  his  mouth  and  another   caught  his   neck,  while
 something  wrapped  itself  about  his  legs.  Taken  off his  guard he
 fell backwards in the arms of his attacker.                            
                                                                       
   'Got  you!'  hissed  Gollum  in his  ear. 'At  last my  precious one,
 we've got him  yes, the  nasty hobbit.  We takes  this one.  She'll get
 the  other.  O  yes.  Ungoliant   will  get   him.(18) Not   Smeagol.  He
 won't  hurt  master,  not  at  all.  He  promised.  But  he's  got you,
 you nasty dirty little thing!'                                         

    The description of the fight is closely similar to that in TT (p. 335),
  with some difference in the detail  of the  wrestling.(19) After  the second
  blow, falling across Gollum's back, the text continues:                  
                                                                          
  But   it   was   enough  for   Gollum!  Grabbing   from  behind   was  an
  old   game   for   him   -  and   had  never   before  failed   him.  But
  everything  had   gone  wrong   with  his   beautiful  plan,   since  the
  unexpected  web  in  the  path.  Here  now  he  was  faced  by  a furious
  enemy,  little  less  than his  own size,  with a  stout staff.  This was
  not  for  him.  He  had  no  time  even  to  grab at  the sword  lying on
  the   ground.   He   squealed  as   the  staff   came  down   once  more,(20)
  and  sprang  aside  onto  all  fours,  and  then leaped  away like  a cat
  in  one  big  bound.  Then  with  astonishing  speed  he  ran   back  and
  vanished  into  the  tunnel.  Sweeping  up  his  sword  Sam   went  after
  him  -  for  the  moment  forgetful  of all  else, but  the red  light of
  fury  in  his  brain.  But  Gollum  had  gone   before  he   could  reach
  him.  Then  as  the  dark  hole  and  the  stench   smote  him,   like  a
  terrible   clap  of   thunder  the   thought  of   Frodo  came   back  to
  Sam's  mind.  He  span  round,  and  rushed  on  up  the   road  calling.
  He was too late. So far Gollum's plot had succeeded.                     
    Frodo  was  lying   on  the   ground  and   the  monster   was  bending
  over  him,  so  intent  upon  her  victim  that  she  seemed not  to heed
  anything  else  until  Sam  was  close  at  hand.  It  was  not  a  brave
  deed  Sam  then  did,  for  he  gave   no  thought   to  it.   Frodo  was
  already   bound  in   great  cords   round  and   round  from   ankle  to
  breast,  and  with her  great forelegs  she was  beginning to  half lift,
  half  drag  him,  but  still  his  arms were  free: one  hand was  on his
  breast,  one  lay  spread  wide,  limp  upon  the  stone,  and  the staff
  of Faramir broken under him.                                             
                                                                          
    At  the  point  where  Sam  sees  that  Frodo is  bound with  cords the
  underlying pencilled draft stops; the  legible fair  copy in  ink written
  over it continues, but at the same point declines  very rapidly  into the
  handwriting characteristic  of initial  drafting, decipherable  only with
  labour and in this case often not at all.(21) This continues to the  end of
  the page ('9' in the Version I text, the last  page in  this numeration),
  with   Sam's   attack  on   'Ungoliant'.  Many   words  and   even  whole
  sentences are totally illegible, but enough can be made  out to  see that
  in this earliest form of the story it was Sam's  slash with  Sting across
  Ungoliant's belly that caused her to  leap back:  there is  no suggestion
  of  the  great  wound she  suffered when  she drove  her whole  bulk down
  onto the  point of  the sword  (TT p. 338). When  she sprang  back 'Sam
  stood reeling, his legs astride his master, but she a few paces  off eyed
  him: and the  green venom  that was  her blood  slowly suffused  the pale

  light  of  her  eyes.  Sting held  before him,  Sam now  .... and  ere she
  attacked  again  he  found his  master's hand  in his  bosom. It  was cold
  and limp, and quickly but gently he took from it  the glass  of Galadriel.
  And held it up.'                                                          
                                                                           
    This  rough  drafting  continues  on  other   pages  (not   numbered  on
  from '9', though that proves little); but I doubt that much more of it, if
  any, was written at this juncture  (see p.  209). The  question is  not of
  much importance in the study of  the evolution  of the  story, and  in any
  case it is more convenient to pause here in the original draft.           
    The fact  that my  father had  overwritten legibly  in ink  the original
  draft as far as  the stinging  of Frodo  by Ungoliant  suggests confidence
  in the story, while  the sudden  change from  'fair copy'  to 'preliminary
  draft'  at  this  point  suggests  that  he  now  realised  that important
  changes  were  required.  The  immediate  reason  for  this may  well have
  been  that he  observed what  he had  just written,  as it  were inadvert-
  ently:  'Then  with  astonishing  speed  [Gollum]  ran  back  and vanished
  into the tunnel....  Then as  the dark  hole and  the stench  smote him...
  the  thought  of  Frodo  came  back  to  Sam's  mind.  He span  round, and
  rushed on up the road calling.' But  in this  version the  far end  of the
  tunnel  was  immediately   succeeded  by   the  agonisingly   long  second
  stair, and it was only after they reached the head of  it that  Gollum ran
  off (p. 194). The picture of the ascent to the pass contained in this text
  (see p. 193) shows with perfect clarity the first stair climbing up  to the
  tunnel, and the second stair climbing  away beyond  it.(22) It  is obviously
  out  of the  question that  my father  imagined that  Gollum fled  all the
  way  down  the  second  stair  with  Sam  in  pursuit,  and that  Sam then
  climbed up  again! I  think that  the developing  narrative was  forcing a
  new topography to appear even as he wrote (see below).                    
    There  seem in  fact to  have been  several interrelated  questions. One
  was  this  of  topography:  the  relation  of the  stairs and  the tunnel.
  Another  was  the  time  and  place  of  Gollum's  disappearance.  In  the
  outline  (p.  187) he  is found  to have  vanished when  they come  to the
  head of the second stair; and in  the present  version he  ran off  with a
  strange  whistling  cry  when  they came  to that  place. And  another was
  the  question  of  Gollum's  plan  and  its  miscarriage.  My  father  had
  written  (p.  197):  'But  everything  had gone  wrong with  his beautiful
  plan, since the unexpected web in the path.' It certainly seems to  be the
  case  in  this  version   that  Gollum   was  very   put  out   when  they
  encountered it in the tunnel: 'We didn't expect to find this here,  did we
  precious? No, of course not' (p. 193); and after the  first webs  had been
  cut  through  Gollum  was  'strangely reluctant'  to go  on, and  'kept on
  trying to wriggle away and turn back.'                                    
                                                                           
    Leaving the 'Version I'  text, now  reduced to  very rough  drafting, at
  some point not determined, my father scribbled on a  little bit  of paper:

 Must  be  stair  -  stair  -  tunnel.  Tunnel  is  Ungoliante's  lair. The
 tunnel  has  unseen  passages  off.   One  goes   right  up   to  dungeons
 of  tower.  But  orcs  don't  use  it  much  because  of   Ungoliant.  She
 has  a  great  hole  in  the  midst of  path. Plan  fails because  she has
 made   a   web   across   path   and  is   daunted  by   the  phial-light.
 Stench  out  of  hole  which   phial  prevents   Frodo  and   Sam  falling
 into.  Gollum  disappears   and  they   think  he   may  have   fallen  in
 hole.  They  cut  their  way  out  of  web  at  far  end.  Ungoliant comes
 out of tunnel.                                                            
                                                                          
 Thus the series  'first stair  - tunnel  - second  stair' inherent  in the
 Version 1 story is changed. The reason for this was, I think,  as follows.
 The  arrangement  'stair  -  tunnel -  stair' arose  when there  were many
 spiders in the pass;  in the  outline the  tunnel seems  only one  part of
 their  territory,  and there  are webs  also across  the second  stair (p.
 187) - the impression is  given that  all the  cliffs and  crags bordering
 the  path  are  alive with  them. But  with the  reduction of  the spider-
 horde  to  one  Great Spider,  whose lair  is very  clearly in  the tunnel
 (where the great webs  were), her  attack on  the hobbits  at the  head of
 the second stair, high above  the tunnel,  becomes unsatisfactory.  It was
 therefore not long after the emergence in  Version 1  of Ungoliant  as the
 sole breeder of the terror of  Kirith Ungol  that this  version collapsed,
 and  my  father  abandoned  the  writing  of it  in fair  copy manuscript.
 Associated  with   this  would   have  been   the  decision   that  Gollum
 deserted Frodo and Sam while they were still in the tunnel.               
   The plot outlined in the brief text just given is not very clear; but at
 this  same  time,  perhaps on  the same  day, my  father wrote  the fuller
 note,  together  with  a  plan  of  the  tunnels,  that  is  reproduced on
 p. 201.  This also  is in  the Bodleian  Library (see  p. 193).  The title
 Plan  of  Shelob's  Lair  was  written onto  the page  subsequently, since
 the name of the Spider in the text is Ungoliant(e); cf. note 15.          
   This text reads:                                                        
                                                                          
   Must be Stair - Stair - Tunnel. Tunnel is Ungoliante's Lair.            
   This tunnel is of orc-make (?) and has the usual branching              
 passages.  One  goes  right  up  into   the  dungeons   of  the   Tower  -
 but  orcs  don't  use   it  much   because  of   Ungoliante.(23) Ungoliante
 has  made  a  hole  and a  trap in  the middle  of the  floor of  the main
 path.                                                                     
   Gollum's  plan  was  to   get  Frodo   into  trap.   He  hoped   to  get
 Ring,   and   leave   the   rest   to   Ungoliant.  Plan   failed  because
 Ungoliant  was  suspicious  of  him  -  ?  he  had   come  nosing   up  as
 far  as  the  tunnel  the  day  before?  -  and  she  had  put  a  web  on
 near  (west)  side  of  hole.  When  Frodo  held  up  the  phial  she  was
 daunted  for  [a]  moment  and  retreated  to  her  lair.  But   when  the

                                                  
                                                                          
 hobbits issued from tunnel she came out by side paths  and crept          
 round them.                                                               
  Phial prevents F. and S. falling into the hole; but  a horrible          
 stench comes out of it. Gollum disappears and  they fear  he has          
 fallen in the hole. But they do not go back - (a) they see tower          
 with a light on cliffs at head of  pass and  (b) while  they are          
 wondering about this and  suspect betrayal  the attack  is made:          
 Ungoliant  going  for  Frodo,  while  Gollum  grapples  Sam from          
 behind. Ungol[iant] specially wants  the star-glass?  (Frodo had          
 hidden it again when he came out of tunnel).                              
  Web at end of tunnel?                                                    
                                                                          
  The  plan  of  the   tunnel  was   mostly  drawn   in  pencil   and  then
 overdrawn  in  black  ink.  The  word pencilled  against the  minor tunnel
 to  the  north  of  the  main  passage  seems  to  read   'Bypas[s]'.  The
 pencilled  circle  in the  main passage  is marked  'Trap', and  the large
 black circle 'Ungoliant's lair'. Of the two  northward tunnels  that leave
 the  main  one  near  its  eastern  end,  the   westerly  one   is  marked
 'Underground   way   to  Tower',   and  the   broad  tunnel   (drawn  with
 several lines) that leaves this  one eastwards  will be  the way  by which
 Ungoliant  emerged  to  the  attack.  The  last  tunnel  branching  north-
 wards  from  the  main  one  was  added  in  blue  ball-point pen,  and is
 marked 'orc-path'.(24)                                                    
  Since  my  father  is  seen  in  these  notes  actually setting  down his
 decision  that the  second stair  preceded the  tunnel, it  was presumably
 at this juncture that (leaving aside the question of  how far  the further
 story  had progressed  at this  time) he  turned back  to the  point where
 the faulty conception entered the narrative  (see p.  192); and  indeed on
 the back of the first of these notes is found drafting for the new version
 of the story dependent on the decision (cf. TT p. 317):                   
                                                                          
  Following  him  they  came  to  the  climbing  ledge.  Not daring  to look
  down to their right they passed along  it. At  last it  came to  a rounded
  angle  where  the  mountain-side  swelled  out  again  before  them. There
  the  path suddenly  entered into  a dark  opening in  the rock,  and there
  before them was the first stair that Gollum had spoken of.               
                                                                          
 Then follows the description of the first stair. Thus the 'opening  in the
 rock'  was  neatly  transformed  from  the  mouth of  the tunnel  into the
 beginning of the stair (p. 192).                                          
  Continuous drafting  is found  for the  revised narrative  ('Version 2'),
 and the  story as  told in  TT was  very largely  achieved already  in the
 draft as far as the events in the tunnel: the climbs up the Straight Stair
 and the Winding Stair, the hobbits' rest  beside the  path, their  talk of
 the  need  to  find  water (25) leading  to  the  conversation  about  tales
 (written down ab initio in a form closely  similar to  that in  TT), their

                [Plan of Shelob's Lair (1)]              
 [(The compass-points N. and S. on this plan are reversed)]

  realisation  that  Gollum  had  disappeared,  his  return,   finding  them
  asleep (with the  description of  his 'interior  debate', looking  back up
  towards  the  pass  and shaking  his head,  his appearance  as of  'an old
  weary  hobbit  who  had lived  beyond his  time and  lost all  his friends
  and  kin:  a  starved  old  thing  sad and  pitiable'), and  Sam's unhappy
  mistaking  of  his  gesture  towards  Frodo  (TT  pp.  317-25,  where  the
  chapter 'The Stairs  of Cirith  Ungol' ends).  A few  passages in  TT are
  lacking in the  draft, but  they are  not of  importance to  the narrative
  and in any case they appear in the fair copy manuscript.                  
    A little pencilled sketch appears on the  page of  the draft  where they
  first see the tower  (TT p.  319) -  just as  there was  a picture  of the
  earlier  conception  of Kirith  Ungol at  this point  in Version  1 (where
  they had already passed  through the  tunnel). In  the foreground  of this
  sketch is seen the path from the head of the Second  Stair, where  (in the
  words of the draft text)  the hobbits  'saw jagged  pinnacles of  stone on
  either side: columns and spikes  torn and  carven in  the biting  years and
  forgotten  winters,  and   between  them   great  crevices   and  fissures
  showed  black  even  in  the heavy  gloom of  that unfriendly  place.' The
  place where they rested ('in  a dark  crevice between  two great  piers of
  rock') is marked by a spot on  the right  hand side  of the  track. Beyond
  is seen the 'great grey wall, a  last huge  upthrusting mass  of mountain-
  stone' (TT p. 326, at the beginning of 'Shelob's Lair'),  in which  is the
  mouth of the tunnel,  and beyond  it, high  above, the  'cleft ...  in the
  topmost  ridge,  narrow,  deep-cloven  between  two  black  shoulders; and
  on either shoulder was  a horn  of stone'  (TT p.  319). A  developed form
  of this sketch is found at  the same  place in  the fair  copy manuscript;
  this is reproduced on p. 204.(26)                                         
    The  draft  continues  on  into  'Shelob's Lair'  without break.  Of the
  narrative constituting the opening of the later chapter there is little to
  say.  In  the draft  the Elvish  name of  the tunnel  is Terch  Ungol 'the
  Spider's  Lair';  and the  description of  the stench  from the  tunnel is
  retained  from  Version  1 (pp.  192-3): 'Out  of it  came an  odour which
  they  could  not place:  not the  sickly odour  of decay  by the  meads of
  Morghul, but a repellent noisome stuffy smell: a  repellent evil  taint on
  the air.' In the fair copy my father first put Te, changing it as he wrote
  to Torech Ungol  'the Spider's  Hole', and  changing this  as he  wrote to
  'Shelob's  Lair'  (the  name Shelob  having been  already devised  when he
  wrote  this  manuscript).  Here  he  first  described  the  reek  from the
  tunnel in these words: 'Out of it came a stench: not  the sickly  odour of
  decay  from  the  meads  of Morghul,  but a  choking rankness,  noisome, a
  reek as of piled  and hoarded  filth beyond  reckoning, tainting  even the
  open  air  with  evil.'  But  he  queried  in  the  margin   whether  this
  description was  not too  strong: if  the stench  had been  so unendurably
  horrible  even  from  outside  'would  they  ever  have  gone   in?';  and
  replaced  it  immediately  with  the  description  in  TT  (p.   326).  He
  hesitated too about the width of the tunnel.                              

    The new story in the  draft version  reaches the  final form  in their
  realisation that there were side tunnels, and in the things that brushed
  against them as they walked, until they passed the  wide opening  on the
  left from which the stench and the  intense feeling  of evil  came. From
  this point the draft text reads:                                        
                                                                         
  ...  a  sense  of  evil  so  strong  that  for a  moment he  grew faint.
  Sam  also  lurched.  'There's   something  in   there,'  he   says.  'It
  smells  like  a   death-house.  Pooh.'   Putting  out   their  remaining
  strength  and  resolution  they   went  on.   Presently  they   came  to
  what  almost  seemed  a fork  in the  tunnel: at  least in  the absolute
  gloom they were in doubt.                                               
    'Which way's Gollum gone,' said Sam, 'I wonder.*                      
    'Smeagol!'  said  Frodo.  'Smeagol!'  But  his  voice  fell  back dead
  from  his  lips.  There  was  no  answer,  not   even  an   echo.  'He's
  really gone this time, I fancy.'                                        
    'Now  we  are  just   exactly  where   he  wanted   to  bring   us,  I
  fancy.  But  just  what  he  means  to  do  in this  black hole  I can't
  guess.' He had not to wait long for the answer.                         
    'What  about  that  star-glass?'  said  Sam.  'Did  not  the  Lady say
  it  would  be  a  light  in dark  places? And  we need  some to  be sure
  now.'                                                                   
    'I  have not  used it,'  said Frodo,  'because of  Gollum. I  think it
  would  have  driven  him  away,  and  also  because   it  would   be  so
  bright.  But  here  we  seem  to  have  come   to  a   desperate  pass.'
  Slowly  he  drew  his  hand  from  his  bosom and  held aloft  the phial
  of  Galadriel.  For  a  moment  it  flickered  like  a  star  struggling
  through  the  mists  of  Earth,  then  as  fear  left  them it  began to
  burn  into a  dazzling brilliant  silver light,  as if  Earendel himself
  had  come  down   from  the   sunset  paths   with  the   last  Silmaril
  upon  his  brow.  The  darkness  receded  from  it  and  it  shone  in a
  globe  of  space  enclosed  with  utter   blackness.  But   before  them
  within  the  radius  of  its   light  were   two  openings.   Now  their
  doubt  was  resolved,  for  the  one  to the  left turned  quickly away,
  while  the one  to the  right went  straight on  only a  little narrower
  than the tunnel behind.                                                 
    At  that  moment   some  prescience   of  malice   or  of   some  evil
  regard  made  them  both  turn.  Their  hearts  stood still.  [There was
  a  shrill  whistling  cry  of  Gollum?]  Not  far  behind,  ....  by the
  noisome  opening  perhaps,  were  eyes:  two  great  clusters  of  eyes.
  Whether  they  shone  of  their  own  light  or  whether   the  radiance
  of  the  star-glass  was  reflected  in  their  thousand   facets  .....
  Monstrous  and  abominable  and  fell  they  were:  bestial  yet  filled

  (Kirith Ungol.)

 with a malice and  purpose and  even with  a hideous  glee and           
 delight such as no beast's eyes can show. An evil mind gloated           
 behind that baleful light.                                               
                                                                         
   At this point  my father  stopped, and  noted that  the eyes  must come
 first, and then the star-glass (necessarily implying that the eyes of the
 Spider shone with their own light). An outline follows:                  
                                                                         
   The  creature   backs  away.   They  retreat   up  the   tunnel.  Frodo
 holds  glass  aloft  and  ..... (27)  and  each   time  the   eyes  halt.
 Then  filled  with  a  sudden  resolve  he   drew  Sting.   It  sparkled,
 and  calling  to  Sam  he  strode  back  towards   the  eyes.   They  ...
 [?turned]   retreated   and   disappeared.   Sam   full   of  admiration.
 'Now  let's  run  for  it!' he  said. They  ran, and  suddenly [?crashed]
 into   [?greyness]   which   0rebounded   and   turned   them   back.  Sam
 cannot  break  the  threads.  Frodo  gives  him   Sting.  And   Sam  hews
 while Frodo stands guard.                                                
   The   web   gives  way.   They  rush   out  and   find  web   was  over
 the  mouth  of  the  tunnel.  They  are  in  the   last  gully   and  the
 horn-pass ... before them.                                               
   'That's  the  top,'  said  Sam.  'And  we've  come   out  of   it.  Our
 luck's in still.  On we  go now,  and take  the last  bit while  the luck
 lasts.'                                                                  
   Frodo   ran   forward  placing   his  star-glass   in  his   bosom,  no
 thought  for  anything  but   escape.  Sam   follows  with   Sting  drawn
 -   constantly   turning   to   watch   the   mouth   of  the   tunnel  -
 thinking  too  little  of  the  craft  of Ungoliant.  She had  many exits
 from her lair.                                                           
   Frodo  was  gaining  on   him.  He   tried  to   run,  and   then  some
 way  ahead  he  saw  issuing  out  of  a  shadow  in  the  wall   of  the
 ravine   the   most   monstrous   and   loathsome   shape.   Beyond   the
 imagination of his worst dreams.                                         
                                                                         
   This  account  agrees well  with the  plan reproduced  on p.  201: they
 had  passed  the  wide  opening  on  the left  which led  to the  lair of
 Ungoliant, and the fork in the tunnel, where 'the one to the  left turned
 quickly away, while the one to the right went straight  on only  a little
 narrower  than  the  tunnel behind',  can be  readily identified.  But the
 story  has  shifted  radically  from  the  outline accompanying  the plan
 (pp.  199-200),  which  apparently never  received narrative  form, where
 the story ran thus:                                                      
                                                                         
    Ungoliant had stretched a  web on  the west  side of  the trap  (hole) in
    the main tunnel. The stench arose from the hole.                      

 - Frodo  held  up  the  phial  (cutting of  the webs  is not  mentioned) and
  Ungoliant retreated to her lair.                                            
 - By  the  light of  the phial  they avoided  the hole.  Gollum disappeared,
  and they feared he had fallen into it.                                      
  They   left   the   tunnel,   whereupon   Ungoliant,  having   come  round
  ahead  of  them  by  a  side  path,  attacked  Frodo, and  Gollum grappled
  Sam from behind.                                                            
                                                                             
 In  the  very  similar short  version of  this plot  (p. 199)  it is  said in
 addition that 'They cut their way out of web at far end.'                    
                                                                             
 The story  in  the  present  draft  has  moved  much  nearer  to   the  final
 form:  they  passed  the opening  to the  lair, whence  the stench  came, and
 there  is  no  mention  of  the 'trap'  or 'hole'  in the  floor of  the main
 passage,-  and  they came  to the  fork in  the tunnel.(28) But in  this version
 the  phial  of Galadriel  is used  at this  juncture, in  order to  show them
 which  tunnel  to  take;  and  turning  round  on  account  of  a   sense  of
 approaching evil  the light  of the  phial is  reflected in  the eyes  of the
 Spider.  My  father's  direction  at  this  point  that  the  eyes  must come
 before  the  star-glass  clearly  means  that  the  eyes, shining  with their
 own  light,  appeared  in  the  tunnel, and  that only  then did  the thought
 of the  star-glass arise.  The remainder  of the  episode is  now essentially
 as in  the final  form -  except that  as they  run from  the tunnel  Sam has
 Sting and Frodo has the phial of Galadriel.                                  
                                                                             
 The  fair  copy  manuscript  when  it  reached  this  point  still   did  not
 attain  the  final  story  in  all  respects,  and  this  section  of  it was
 subsequently  rejected  and replaced.  In the  first stage,  the idea  in the
 draft  that  the  phial  was  used  simply  to  illuminate  the  tunnel (with
 Frodo's  explanation  that  he  had  not  used  it before  for fear  it would
 drive  Gollum  away)  was  abandoned,  and  as  in  TT  it  was   the  sound
 only  of  the  Spider's  approach,  the  'gurgling,  bubbling noise'  and the
 'long  venomous  hiss',  that  inspired Sam  to think  of it  (thus reversing
 the decision that  the eyes  must come  first and  then the  star-glass); the
 light of the phial illumined the eyes  (although 'behind  the glitter  a pale
 deadly fire began  steadily to  glow within,  a flame  kindled in  some deep
 pit of evil thought'). But at this stage the idea that the light did, if only
 incidentally,  show  the  way  to  take,  was  retained:  'And  now  the  way
 was  clear  before  them,  for  the  light  revealed  two  archways;  and the
 one  to  the  left  was  not  the  path,  for it  narrowed quickly  again and
 turned  aside,  but that  to the  right was  the true  way and  went straight
 onward as before.'(29)                                                       
 The  pursuit  of  the  'eyes',  and  the  rout  of  the  Spider   when  Frodo
 confronted  her  with  the  phial in  his left  hand and  the blue-flickering (30)
 blade  of Sting  in his  right, is  in the  final form,  but my  father still
 followed  the  draft in  making it  Sam who  cut the  web at  the far  end of

                                                   
                                                                         
 the tunnel  with Sting.  The text  here reads  thus, from  Sam's 'Gollum!
 May the curse of Faramir bite him' (cf. TT p. 331):(31)                  
                                                                         
   'That  will  not  help  us,'  said  Frodo.  'Come! I  will hold  up the
 light  while  my  strength  lasts.  Take  my  sword.   It  is   an  elven
 blade. See what it may do. Give me yours.'                               
   Sam   obeyed   and   took  Sting   in  his   hand,  a   thrill  running
 through  his  hand  as  he  grasped  its  fair  hilt,  the  sword  of his
 master,  of  Bilbo,   the  sword   that  Elrond   had  declared   to  come
 out  of  the  great  wars  before  the  Dark  Years  when  the  walls  of
 Gondolin  still  stood.(32) Turning   he  made   a  great   sweeping  stroke
 and  then  sprang  back  to   avoid  the   lashing  [?   threads].  Blue-
 edged,  glinting  in  the  radiance of  the star,  the elven  blade shore
 through   the  netted   ropes.  In   three  swift   blows  the   web  was
 shattered  and  the   trap  was   broken.  The   air  of   the  mountains
 flowed in like a river.                                                  
   'It's clear,' Sam cried. 'It's clear. I can see the [?night]  light in
 the sky.'                                                                
   No!  Make  Sam  hold  light  and  so  Frodo  goes  out first,   and  so
 as he has the light Shelob attacks Frodo.                                
   Sam sweeps up Frodo's sword from ground.                               
   He drops the Phial in struggle with Gollum.                            
   Cut out the staffs.                                                    
                                                                         
 This is followed by a suggestion, not entirely  legible, that  the staffs
 should 'hang  on thongs',  and another  that Frodo  should tap  the walls
 of the tunnel with the staffs.  My father  was apparently  concerned here
 with  the  problem  arising  from  having  only  two  hands. No  doubt it
 was  at  this  time  that  the  reading  of the  fair copy  manuscript of
 'Journey to the Cross-roads', where the heads of the staves were still in
 the  form  of a  shepherd's crook  (p. 176  and note  3), was  changed to
 that of TT  (p. 303):  'staves ...  with carven  heads through  which ran
 plaited leathern thongs'. The text continues:                            
                                                                         
   When  Sam   cannot  hew   web,  Frodo   says:  'I   do  not   feel  the
 eyes  any  longer.   For  the   moment  their   regard  has   moved.  You
 take  the  light.  Do not  be afraid.  Hold it  up. I  will see  what the
 elven-sword may do.'                                                     
   Frodo   hews   the  webs   asunder.  And   so  the   trap  as   it  was
 planned  was   frustrated.  For   though  once   long  ago   he  [Gollum]
 had  seen  it,  the nature  of that  sword he  did not  know, and  of the
 Phial of Galadriel he had never heard.(33)                               
   They   rush   out.   Sam   comes   behind   and   suddenly   they   are
 aware  (a)  of  red  window  (b)  of  the  blue  light of  Sting. 'Orcs',

                                                  
                                                                          
 said  Sam,  and  dosing  his  hand  about  the  phial  hid it  beneath his
 cloak  again.   A  sudden   madness  (?)   on  Frodo.   He  sees   the  red
 deft  the  goal  of all  his effort  before him.  No great  distance, half
 a  mile.  Gain  itin  a  rush.  Run!  .....  Sam,  he  said. The  door, the
 path. Now for it, before any can stay us.                                 
  Sam tries to keep up. Then the spider attacks, and Gollum.               
                                                                          
  And so this  extraordinarily resistant  narrative was  at last  shaped at
 almost  all  points  to  my  father's  satisfaction:  'a sticky  patch' he
 described it, achieved with 'very great labour'; and further  drafting led
 to the final text of 'Shelob's Lair' in the fair copy manuscript. Yet even
 now  he  seems  not to  have been  entirely confident  of the  rightness of
 the story, for the manuscript carries also  a second  text of  the episode
 in  the  tunnel (marked  'other  version'), and  it seems  beyond question
 that this was written after the  other.(34) It  takes up  after the  words 'a
 gurgling, bubbling noise, and a long venomous hiss' (TT p. 328).          
                                                                          
 They  wheeled  round,  but  at  fin t  they saw  nothing. Still  as stones
 they  stood  waiting,  for  they  did  not  know   what.  Then,   not  far
 down  the  tunnel,  just  at  the  opening  where  they  had   reeled  and
 stumbled,   they   saw   a   gleam.   Very   slowly  it   advanced.  There
 were  eyes  in  the  darkness.  Two  great  clusters  of  eyes.  They were
 growing   larger  and   brighter  as   very  slowly   they.advanced.  They
 burned  steadily  with  a  fell  light  of  their  own,  kindled  in  some
 deep  pit   of  evil   thought.  Monstrous   and  abominable   they  were,
 bestial  and  yet  filled   with  purpose,   and  with   hideous  delight:
 beyond all hope of escape their prey was trapped.                         
  Frodo   and  Sam   backed  away,   their  gaze   held  by   the  dreadful
 stare  of  those  cold  eyes,  and  as they  backed so  the eyes  came on,
 unhurried,   gloating.   Suddenly   both   together,   as    if   released
 simultaneously  from  the  same   spell,  the   hobbits  turned   and  Bed
 blindly  up   the  tunnel.   [Struck  out:   The  left-hand   opening  was
 blocked    with   some    unseen  barrier;    wildly   they    groped   and
 found  the  right-hand  opening,  and  again  they   ran.]  But   as  they
 ran   they   looked   back,   and   saw   with-   horror  the   eyes  come
 leaping up behind.                                                        
  Then  there  came  a  breath  of   air:  cold   and  thin.  The  opening,
 the  upper gate,  the end  of the  tunnel -  at last:  it was  just ahead.
 Desperately   they   threw   themselves   forward,   and   then  staggered
 backwards.   The   passage   was   blocked   by   some   unseen   barrier:
 soft,  strong,  impenetrable.  Again  they   flung  themselves   upon  it.
 It  yielded  a  little  and  then like  taut cords  hurled them  back once
 more.  The  eyes  were   nearer  now,   halted,  quietly   watching  them,

 gloating,  glittering  with   cruel  amusement.   The  stench   of  death
 was like a cloud about them.                                               
   'Stand!'  said  Frodo.  'It's  no  use  struggling.  We're  caught.' He
 turned  to  face  the  eyes,  and  as  he  did  so,  he  drew  his sword.
 Sting  flashed  out,  and  about  the  edges of  the sharp  elven-blade a
 blue fire flickered.                                                       
   Sam,  sick,  desperate,  but  angry  more  than  all,  groped  for  the
 hilts  of  his  own  short  sword,  carried  so  far  and  to  so  little
 purpose   all   the   way   from   the    Barrowdowns.   'I    wish   old
 Bombadil  was   near.'  he   muttered.  'Trapped   in  the   end!  Gollum
 -  may  the  curse  of  Faramir  bite  him.'   Darkness  was   about  him
 and  a  blackness  in  his  heart.  And  then  suddenly  even   in  those
 last  moments  before  the  evil  thing made  its final  spring he  saw a
 light, a light in the darkness of his mind...                             
                                                                          
   The text continues  as in  the other  version (TT  p. 329),  but without
 the sentences 'The bubbling  hiss drew  nearer, and  there was  a creaking
 as  of  some  great  jointed  thing that  moved with  slow purpose  in the
 dark. A reek came on before it';  and it  ends at A  light when  all other
 lights go out! There is then  a direction  to 'proceed'  as in  the other
 version.                                                                  
   This  also  was  a  good  story.  There  is  here  a   formally  simpler
 disposition  of  the  elements:  for  Frodo  and  Sam are  caught directly
 between the monster  and the  trap -  trapped indeed  'beyond all  hope of
 escape',(35) and are  saved in  the very  last nick  of time  by the  Phial of
 Galadriel.                                                                
                                                                          
                      The Choices of Master Samwise.                      
                                                                          
 I  left  'Version  1',  the  original  narrative  in  which  there  was no
 encounter with the  Spider in  the tunnel,  and the  attack on  Frodo took
 place at the head of the  Second Stair  (above the  tunnel), at  the point
 where  my  father  abandoned  that  version  as  a 'fair  copy' manuscript
 and the text precipitously collapsed into fearfully difficult drafting: see
 pp. 197-8.                                                                
   It is difficult to be sure of the precise  development from  this point,
 because this very rough drafting runs on  continuously to  the end  of the
 story  in  The  Two  Towers, being  indeed the  original setting  down of
 the  narrative  of  'The  Choices of  Master Samwise',  and yet  it cannot
 have  been  an  uninterrupted  continuation  of Version  1. The  last page
 that was certainly a part of Version 1 ends with a  near-illegible initial
 account of Sam's attack on  Ungoliant and  his holding  up the  phial that
 he  took  from Frodo's  body  (p.  198). The  conclusion of  the encounter
 with  Ungoliant  may  belong  to  Version  1,  but  not  much   more,  for
 when  Sam,  arising  from  his  long trance  of  despair,  composes Frodo's

                            
                                                                           
 body  he  says:  'He  lent  me  Sting and  that I'll  take'. This  of course
 depends  on  the  developed  story (Version  2) in  which Frodo  gave Sting
 to  Sam  for  an  attack  on  the web  at the  end of  the tunnel  while he
 himself held the phial (see pp. 205-7)-                                    
    From  the  point  where  Sam holds  up the  phial against  Ungoliant the
 draft continues:                                                           
                                                                           
    'Galadriel!'  he  cried.   'Elbereth!  Now   come,  you   filthy  thing.
 Now  at  last  we  know  what  holds  this  path.  But  we  are  going  on.
 Come  on,  let's  settle  before  we  go.'  As  if  his  wrath  and courage
 set  its  potency  in  motion, the  glass blazed  like a  torch -  like [a)
 Hash  not  of  lightning  but  of  some  searing  star  cleaving  the  dark
 air  with  intolerable  radiance  white  and  terrible.  No  such  light of
 heaven had ever burned in her face before.(36)                             
                                                                           
    The account  of Ungoliant's  retreat is  largely illegible,  but phrases
 can  be  read:  'She  seemed ...  to crumple  like a  vast bag',  'her legs
 sagged,  and  slowly,  painfully,  she backed  from the  light away  in the
 opening  in  the  wall',  'gathering  her  strength she  turned and  with a
 last ..... jump and a foul  but already  pitiable ... (37) she  slipped into
 the hole.'                                                                 
    The  declaration  that  whatever might  have been  the fate  of Ungoliant
 thereafter 'this tale does not tell' appears in the draft, as does (in very
 rough  form)  the  passage that  follows in  TT (pp.  339-40) to  the point
 where Sam composes Frodo's body. Here the draft text reads:                
                                                                           
    He  laid  his  master  upon  his  back,  and  folded  his   cold  hands.
 'Let the silver mail of mithril be his winding sheet,' he said.            
 'He  lent  me  Sting  and  that  I'll  take, but  a sword  shall be  at his
 side.'  And  the  phial  he  put  into  his right  hand and  hid it  in his
 bosom.  'It's  too  good  for  me,' he  said, 'and  She gave  it to  him to
 be  a  light  in  dark  places.'  There  were  no stones  for a  cairn, but
 he  rolled  the  only  two  he  could  find  of  a   wieldy  size   one  to
 Frodo's  head   and  another   to  his   feet.  And   then  he   stood  and
 held   up   the   star-glass.   It   burned   gently   now  with   a  quiet
 radiance  as   of  the   evening  star   in  summer,   and  in   its  light
 Frodo's  hue  .....  [?pale]  but  fair,  and  an  elvish  beauty   was  in
 his face, as of one that is long past the shadows.                         
    And  then  he  strove  to  take  farewell.  But he  could not.  Still he
 held Frodo's hand and could not let it go.                                 
                                                                           
    An  arrow directs  that the  placing of  the phial  in Frodo's  hand and
 Sam's  words  'It's  too  good for  me ...'  should follow  '... as  of one
 long past the shadows'.                                                    

    The  account  of  Sam's  agonized  debate  was  not  different  from its
  form  in  The  Two  Towers  (pp.  341-2)  in   the  progression   of  his
  thoughts,  and  his  parting  words  and  the  taking  of  the   Ring  are
  virtually in the final form; but he does not take the phial, which in this
  version of the story remains  hidden in  Frodo's hand.  From this  point I
  give the original draft in full.                                          
                                                                           
    At  last  with  a  great  effort  he  stood  up  and  turned   away  and
  seeing   nothing   but   a   grey  mist   stumbled  forward   towards  the
  pass  now  straight  ahead.  But   still  his   master  drew   him:  Sam's
  mind  was  not  at  peace,  not  really  made  up.   (He  was   acting  as
  best  he  could  reason  but   against  his   whole  nature.)   He  hadn't
  gone  far   when  he   looked  back   and  through   his  tears   saw  the
  little dark patch in the ravine  where all  his life  had fallen  in ruin.
  Again  he  turned  and  went   on,  and   now  he   was  come   almost  to
  the  V  [i.e.  the  Cleft].  So  the  very  gate of  parting. Now  he must
  look back for the very last time. He did so.                              
    'No I can't do  it,' he  said. 'I  can't. I'd  go to  the Dark  Tower to
  find him, but I can't go and  leave him.  I can't  finish this  tale. It's
  for  other  folk.  My  chapter's  ended.'  He   began  to   stumble  back.
  And  then  suddenly  to  his  wrath  and  horror  he  thought  he   saw  a
  slinking  thing  creep  out  of  the  shadow  and  go  up  to   Frodo  and
  start   pawing  him.(39) Anger  obliterating   all  other   thoughts  blazed
  up   again.  'Gollum!   After  his   precious  -   thinks  his   plot  has
  worked  after  all.  The  dirty  -  '  He  began  to  run  silently. There
  wasn't  more  than  20  [?yards]  to   cover.  He   got  his   sword  out.
  Gollum! He ground his teeth.                                              
    But   suddenly   Gollum  paused   [and]  looked   round,  not   at  Sam,
  and  with  all  his  speed  bolted  diving  back  towards  the   wall  and
  to [the] same opening out of which Ungoliant had come.                    
    Sam   realized   that   Gollum   had   not   fled   from  him   or  even
  noticed  him.  Almost  at  once  he  saw  the  reason.  Orcs!   Orcs  were
  coming  out  of  the  tunnel.  He  halted  in  his  tracks.  A  new choice
  was  on  him  and  a  quick  one  this  time.  Then  from  behind  also he
  heard   orc-voices.   Out   of   some   path   leading   down   from   the
  tower   orcs   were   coming.  He   was  between   them.  No   going  back
  now  -  Sam  would  never  reach  the  Pass  of   Kirith  Ungol   now.  He
  gripped   on   Sting.   A   brief   thought   passed  through   his  mind.
  How  many   would  he   kill  before   they  got   him?  Would   any  song
  ever  mention  it?  How  Samwise  fell  in   the  High   Pass  -   made  a
  wall  of  bodies  for  his  master's  body.  No,  no  song,  for  the Ring
  would  be  captured  and  all  songs  cease  for  ever  [in]  an   age  of
  Darkness   ...   The   Ring.   With   a   sudden   thought   and   impulse

                     
                                                                
 he  put  it  on!  [Added:  His  hand   hangs  weighed   down  and
 useless.] At first he noticed nothing - except that he  seemed to
 see much clearer.  Things seemed  hard and  black and  heavy, and
 the  voices  loud.  The  orc-bands  had  sighted one  another and
 were shouting. But he seemed to hear both sides  as if  they were
 speaking  close-  to  him.  And  he  understood  them.  Why, they
 were  speaking  plain  language.  Maybe they  were, or  maybe the
 Ring  which  had  power  over  all  Sauron's  servants   and  was
 grown  in  power  as  the  place  of  its forging  was approached
 brought  the thought  of their  minds in  plain speech  direct to
 Sam.                                                            
  'Hola!  Gazmog,' said  the foremost  of the  orcs coming  out of
 the tunnel.                                                     
  'Ho  you  Zaglun.  So  you've  come  at  last.  Have  you  heard
 them? Did you see it?'                                          
  'See  what? We've  just come  through the  tunnel of  She-lob. o
 What should we see or hear?'                                    
  'Shouting  and  crying  out  here  and  lights.   Some  mischief
 afoot.  But  we're  on  guard in  the tower  and not  supposed to
 leave.  We  waited but  you didn't  come. Hurry  now for  we must
 get  back. There's  only Naglur-Danlo  and old  Nuzu up  here and
 he's in a taking.'                                              
  Then  suddenly  the  orcs  from  the tower  saw Frodo  and while
 Sam still hesitated they swept past  him with  a howl  and rushed
 forward. (Sting must  be sheathed.)  One thing  the Ring  did not
 confer was courage - rather the reverse, at any  rate on  Sam. He
 did not  now [?rush]  in -  or make  a hill  of bodies  round his
 master. There were about  three dozen  of them  in all,  and they
 were talking fast and excitedly. Sam hesitated. If he  drew Sting
 they'd see that. They  wouldn't ....:  Orcs never  did -  but 36!
 They [?read They'd] see where he was.                           
  No  -  above  won't  do,  he  must  see  Orcs  from   a  greater
 distance and follow them. The  cleft must  be no  great distance,
 100  yards?  from  Frodo's  body  and  that  20  - 30  yards from
 tunnel. Cut out Gollum.                                         
  Sam  sees  orcs coming  down from  tower as  he turns  back [for
 the] last time. They seem from afar to spot  the little  shape of
 Frodo and give a yell. It is answered by a yell - other  orcs are
 coming  out  of  the  tunnel!  Then  put  in  the part  about his
 thoughts of song as he runs back. Puts on  ring and  cannot wield
 sword.(41) Changes it to left  hand [broken  staff (Sam's  broke on
 Gollum)].(42) By  that time  orcs have  picked up  Frodo and  are off

 to  tunnel.  Sam  follows.  Ring confers  language knowledge  - not
 courage.                                                           
   Sam   follows  and   hears  conversation   as  they   go  through
 tunnel.  Orcs  discuss  Frodo. Special  vigilance ordered.  What is
 it?  Leader  [B......]  Zaglun  says (43) orders  are for  messages [or
 messengers]  to  go  to   Morgul  and   direct  to   Lugburz.  They
 [?groan]. Talk of Shelob and the worm (= Gollum).                 
   Big  things  are  on. Only  preliminary strokes.  News. Osgiliath
 taken  and   ford.  Army   has  also   left  North   Gate.  [?Other
 crossing]  away  up  north  somewhere  and into  the north  part of
 the  Horseboys'  land  -  no  opposition  there.  We'll  be  at the
 Mouths of  Anduin in  a week  and at  the Gulf  of Lune  before the
 summer's  out  -  and  then  nowhere  to  escape.  How  we'll  make
 'em sweat! We haven't begun yet. Big stuff's coming.               
   Big stick if you don't hurry.                                    
   Prisoner is  to be  stripped naked.  Teeth and  nails? No.  Is he
 half elf and man - [?there's] a fair blend  of folly  and mischief.
 Quick end better. Quick!                                           
   They  round  a  corner.  Sam sees  red light  in an  arch. Under-
 ground  door  to  tower.  Horrified  to  see  that  tunnel deceived
 him:  they're  further  ahead  than  he  thought.  He  runs forward
 but  the  iron  door  closes  with a  clang. He  is outside  in the
 darkness.                                                          
   Now go back to Gandalf.                                          
   [Added:  Make  most  of  goblin  conversation  await  the  rescue
 chapter?]                                                          
                                                                   
   In the next stage of development my father returned to  the words
 'At last with a great effort he stood up and turned away and seeing
 nothing  but  a  grey mist  stumbled forward  towards the  pass now
 straight ahead' (p. 211), and now continued thus (cf. TT pp. 342-3):
                                                                   
   He had not far to  go. The  tunnel was  some fifty  yards behind;
 the  cleft a  couple of  hundred yards  or less.  There was  a path
 visible in the dusk running now quickly up, with  the cliff  on one
 side,  and  on  the other  a low  wall of  rock rising  steadily to
 another  cliff.  Soon  there  were  broad  shallow  steps.  Now the
 orc-tower was right above him, frowning  black, and  in it  the red
 eye  glowed. Now  he was  passing up  the steps  and the  cleft was
 before him.                                                        
   'I  have made  up my  mind,' he  kept saying  to himself.  But he
 had not.  What he  did, though  he had  long to  think it  out, was
 altogether against the grain. To stick by his  master was  his true

 nature.  'Have  I   got  it   wrong,'  he   muttered.  'Was   there  some-
 thing  else  to do?'  As the  sheer sides  of the  cleft closed  about him
 and   before  he   reached  the   summit,  before   he  looked   upon  the
 descending   path   beyond,   he  turned,   torn intolerably   within.  He
 looked  back.  He  could  still  see like  a small  blot in  the gathering
 gloom  the  mouth  of  the  tunnel;  and  he  thought  he  could   see  or
 guess  where  Frodo  lay,  almost  he  fancied  there  was  a  light  or a
 glimmer   of  it   down  there.   Through  tears   he  saw   that  lonely,
 stony high place where all his life had fallen into ruin.                 
                                                                          
   What was the 'light, or a glimmer of it' (meaning, I suppose,  'a light,
 or the glimmer of a  light') that  Sam saw?  It survives  in TT  (p. 343):
 'He  fancied there  was a  glimmer on  the ground  down there,  or perhaps
 it was some trick of his tears'. Can the original  meaning have  been that
 there was a faint shining from the  Phial of  Galadriel, very  probably at
 this stage (see pp. 210-11) still left clasped in Frodo's hand?           
   From '"No  I can't  do it,"  he said'  (p. 211)  my father  repeated the
 original  text almost  exactly, but  excising the  return of  Gollum. When
 he  came  to  Sam's  putting  on  the  Ring  he wrote:  'The Ring.  With a
 sudden impulse he drew it  out and  put it  on. The  weight of  it weighed
 down  his  hand.  For  a  moment  he  noticed  no  change,  and   then  he
 seemed  to see  clearer.' But  at this  point he  stopped, marked  what he
 had written with an X, and wrote:  'No! hear[d]  clearer, crack  of stone,
 cry  of  bird,  voices,  Shelob  bubbling  wretchedly  deep in  the rocks.
 Voices  in  the dungeons  of the  tower. But  all was  not dark  but hazy,
 and himself like a black solid rock and the Ring like hot  gold. Difficult
 to believe in  his invisibility.'  The account  of Sam's  understanding of
 what the  Orcs said  here takes  this form:  'Did the  Ring give  power of
 tongues or did it give him comprehension of  all that  had been  under its
 power  [written  above:  Sauron's  servants],  so  that  he  heard direct?
 Certainly the voices seemed close in his ears and it was very difficult to
 judge their distance.'  With a  reference to  the Ring's  increasing power
 in that region and its  not conferring  courage on  its wearer  this draft
 ends, followed by an outline of the salient points in what Sam heard:     
                                                                          
   Why  such  a  long  delay  of  Orcs  to  come?  Terrified of  Shelob. They
   know  another  spy  is  about. Leader  says orders  are for  messengers to
   go  to  Morgul  and  direct  to  Baraddur  Lugburz.  Orcs  [?groan].  Talk
   of  Shelob  and  the  Spider's  worm  [who]  has  been  here  before. News
   of war.                                                                 
                                                                          
     In further drafting the coming of the Orc-bands is described thus:
                                                                          
 Then suddenly he heard cries and voices. He stood still.                  
 Orc-voices: he had heard them in Moria and Lorien and on the              
 Great River and would never forget them. Wheeling about he                

                   
                                                                         
 saw  small  red  lights,  torches  perhaps,  issuing  from   the  tunnel
 away  below.  And  only  a  few  yards  below  him,  out  of   the  very
 cliff  as  it  seemed,  through  some  gap  or  gate  near  the  tower's
 foot  he  had  not  noticed  as he  passed debating  on the  road, there
 were  more  lights.  Orc-bands.  They  were  come   at  last   to  hunt.
 The red eye had not been wholly blind.                                   
  And  a  noise  of  feet  and  shouts  came  also  through   the  cleft.
 Orcs were coming up to the pass out of Mordor too.                       
                                                                         
  This  conception  of  three  Orc-bands  converging  survived   into  the
 fair copy  manuscript, where  however it  was removed  at once,  or soon,
 for there is no further reference to it; here 'orcs were coming up to the
 pass out of the land beyond',  while 'only  a few  yards off'  lights and
 'black  orc-shapes'  were  coming  through  'some  gap  or  gate  at  the
 tower's foot'. In the event (TT p. 343)  the Orcs  of the  tower appeared
 from the far side of the Cleft.                                          
  The draft continues:                                                    
                                                                         
  Fear   overwhelmed   him.   How   could   he   escape?   So   now   his
 chapter  would  be  ended.  It  had   not  had   above  a   page  longer
 than  Frodo's.  How  could  he  save   the  Ring?   The  Ring.   He  was
 not  aware  of  any  thought  or  decision:  he  simply   found  himself
 drawing  out  the  chain  and  taking  the  Ring in  his hand.  The orcs
 coming towards him grew louder. Then he put it on.(44)                    
                                                                         
  The  achievement  of  the conversation  between the  leaders of  the two
 Orc-bands in the  tunnel took  a good  deal of  work, extending  into the
 fair copy, and to detail all the rearrangements, shifts of  speakers, and
 so on would require a great deal of space.  But there  is one  draft that
 deserves quotation in full, for very little of it survived. Here  the two
 Orcs,  and especially  he of  Minas Morghul,  are greatly  concerned with
 the precise timing of the various communications that had passed.        
                                                                         
  In  the  darkness  [of  the  tunnel]  he  seemed  now  more   at  home;
 but  he  could  not  overcome  his  weariness.  He  could see  the light
 of  torches  a  little  way  ahead,  but  he  could  not  gain  on them.
 Goblins  go  fast  in   tunnels,  especially   those  which   they  have
 themselves  made,  and  all  the  many  passages in  this region  of the
 mountains  were  their  work,  even  the  main  tunnel  and   the  great
 deep  pit  where  Shelob  housed.  In  the  Dark  Years  they  had  been
 made,  until  Shelob  came  and  made  her  lair  there,  and  to escape
 her  they  had  bored  new  passages,  too  narrow   for  her   [as  she
 slowly  grew  >]  growth,  that  crossed  and  recrossed   the  straight
 way.(45)                                                                  

   Sam  heard  the  clamour  of  their  many  voices  flat and  hard in
 the  dead  air,  and  somewhere  he  heard  two  voices   louder  than
 the  rest.  The  leaders  of the  two parties  seemed to  be wrangling
 as they went.                                                         
   'Can't  you  stop  your rabble's  racket?' said  one. 'I  don't care
 what  happens  to  them,  but  I  don't  want  Shelob  down on  me and
 my lads.'                                                             
   'Yours  are  making  more  than  half  the  noise,' said  the other.
 'But let  the lads  play. No  need to  worry about  Shelob for  a bit.
 She's  sat  on  a  pin  or  something,  and  none  of  us  will  weep.
 Didn't you see the signs then?  A claw  cut off,  filthy gore  all the
 way  to  that cursed  crack (if  we've stopped  it once  we've stopped
 it a hundred times). Let the  lads play.  We've struck  a bit  of luck
 at last: we've got something He wants.'                               
   'Yes,  we,  Shagrat.(46) We,  mark  you.  But  why  we're  going  to
 your  miserable  tower  I  don't  know.  We  found  the  spy,  my  lot
 were  there  first.  He should  be ours.  He should  be taken  back to
 Dushgoi.'(47)                                                           
   'Now, now, still at it. I've said before  all there  is to  be said,
 but  if  you  must  have more  arguments, they're  here: I've  got ten
 more  swords  than  you,  and  thirty  more  just  up yonder  at call.
 See? Anyway orders are orders, and I've mine.'                        
   'And I've mine.'                                                    
   'Yes,  and  I  know  them,  for  I  was  told  'em by  Lugburz, see?
 Yagfil (48) from  Dushgoi  will  patrol  until  he  meets  your  guard, or
 as  far  as  Ungol top:  be will  report to  you before  returning to
 report  to  Dushgoi.  Your  report  was  nothing.  Very   useful.  You
 can take it back to Dushgoi as soon as you like.'                     
   'I will, but I don't like [to] just yet. I found the spy, and I must
 know  more  before  I  go.  The  Lords  of  Dushgoi  have  some secret
 of  quick  messages  and  they will  get the  news to  Lugburz quicker
 than anyone you can send direct.'                                     
   'I  know  all  that,  and  I'm  not  stopping  you  taking  news  to
 them.  I  know  all  the  messages.  They  trust  me  in  Lugburz,  He
 knows  a  good  orc  when  he  sees  one.   This  is   what  happened:
 message   from   Dushgoi   to    Lugburz:   Watchers    uneasy.   Fear
 elvish  agent  passed  up   the  Stair.   Guard  pass.   Message  from
 Lugburz   to   Ungol:   Dushgoi   uneasy.  Redouble   vigilance.  Make
 contact. Send report by Dushgoi and direct. And there you are.'       
   'No,  I'm  not  there, not  yet. I'm  going to  take a  report back,
 my  own  report,  Master  Shagrat,  and  I  want  to know  this first.
 When  did  you  get  this  message?  We  set out  as soon  as possible

 after  the  forces  left,  and  we  see no  sign of  you till  we're right
 through  the  Tunnel  -  a  filthy  place  and  inside  your   area.  Then
 we  see  you  just  starting.  Now  I  guess  you  got that  message early
 today,  this  morning  probably,  and  you've   been  drinking   since  to
 give  you  the  guts  to  look  at  the  hole.  That's  what you  think of
 orders that don't suit you.'                                              
   'I've  no  need  to  account  for  myself  to  you   Dushgoi  horseboys,
 Master   Yagul.  But   if  you're   so  curious   to  know:   the  message
 from  Dushgoi  was  sent  out  late:  things  seem  a  bit slack  with the
 Lord  away.  Lugburz  did  not  get  it  till  last  night, mark  you, nor
 me   till   this   afternoon.   By   which   time  messages   were  hardly
 needed.  I'd   had  my   lads  out   some  time.   There  were   very  odd
 things  happening.  Lights  in  the   tunnel,  lights   outside,  shouting
 and  whatnot.  But  Shelob   was  about.   My  lads   saw  her,   and  her
 worm.'                                                                    
   'What's that?'                                                          
                                                                          
   The  remainder  of  this  text is  very rough  working for  what follows
 from this point in TT (pp. 348 - 50). In a following  draft Yagool  (as he
 is spelt) says of Frodo: 'What is it, d'you think? Elvish I thought by his
 nasty  smooth  peaky   face.  But   undersized.'  Here   the  conversation
 moves  closer  to  the  form  in  TT,  and  the  long  discussion  between
 Yagool  and  Shagrat  about the  messages is  greatly reduced,  though the
 messages  are  still  given, in  very much  the same  form; but  that from
 Minas  Morghul   begins  Nazgul   of  Dushgoi   to  Lugburz.   In  another
 brief passage of drafting this dialogue occurs:                           
                                                                          
                 'I tell you, nearly two days ago the Night Watcher smelt
 something, but will you believe me it was nearly another day              
 before they started to send a message to Lugburz.'                         
   'How do they do that?' said Shagrat. 'I've often wondered.'             
   'I don't know and I don't want to ...'                                  
                                                                          
   The   manuscript   of  'The   Choices  of   Master  Samwise'(49) was  in
 almost  all  respects  very  close  to  the  chapter  in The  Two Towers.
 Various points in which it differed  as first  written have  been noticed,
 but  there  remain  a  few  others.  The following  account of  Shelob was
 rejected as soon as written and replaced by that in TT (p. 337):          
                                                                          
   Shelob was not as  dragons are,  no softer  spot had  she save          
 only in her eyes; not as the lesser breeds of Mirkwood was their          
 dam, and her age-old  hide, knobbed  and pitted  with corruption          
 but  ever thickened  with layer  on layer  within, could  not be          
 pierced by any blade of  Middle-earth, not  though elf  or dwarf          

 should make it and all runes were written upon it, not though             
 the hand of [struck out: Fingon wielded it whose] Beren or of             
 Turin wielded it.                                                         
                                                                          
   Shagrat's reply to Yagul's opening sally ('Tired  of lurking  up there,
 thinking of coming down to fight?') took this form:                       
                                                                          
   'Tired!  You've  said  it.  Waiting  for  nothing,  except  to  be made
 into  Shelob's  meat.  But  we've  got  orders,  too.  Old  Shagram's  in
 a  fine   taking.  Your   lot's  to   blame.  These   Dushgoi  bogey-men:
 sending messages to Lugburz.'                                             
                                                                          
 This was rejected as soon as written, replaced by 'Orders to you.  I'm in
 command  of  this  Pass.  So  speak  civil',  and with  it went  the last
 appearance   of   the   name   Dushgoi   of   Minas  Morghul.   Who  'old
 Shagram' was is not clear, but he is evidently 'old Nuzu' of the original
 draft (p. 212), also reported to be 'in a taking', apparently because the
 garrison of  the Tower  of Kirith  Ungol had  been depleted.  Possibly he
 was  the  actual captain  of the  Tower, until  this point,  when Shagrat
 asserts  that  he himself  is the  commander of  the pass;  but Shagrat's
 words  in  the  draft  cited on  p. 216,  'They trust  me in  Lugburz, He
 knows a good orc when he sees one' suggest that he was so already.        
   Lastly, the words of Sam's Elvish invocation (TT p. 339) in  his fight
 with the Spider take in a draft for this  passage the  same form  as they
 did in the original verse chanted  in Rivendell  (VI.394), and  this form
 was retained in the manuscript as written, the only difference  being lir
 for dir in the third line:(50)                                            
                          O Elbereth Gilthoniel                            
                          sir evrin pennar oriel                           
                          lir avos-eithen miriel                           
 This was changed on the manuscript to give this text:                     
                          O Elbereth Gilthoniel                            
                          silevrin pennar oriel                            
                          hir avas-eithen miriel                           
                          a tiro'men Gilthoniel!                           
                                                                          
                                     *                                     
                                                                          
   It was  a long  time before  my father  returned to  Frodo and  Sam. In
 October  1944  he  briefly  took up  again the  stories 'west  of Anduin'
 from  where  he  had  left  them  nearly  two  years  earlier,  but soon
 abandoned them (see pp. 233 - 5).                                         
   On  29  November  1944  (Letters  no.  91),  when  he  was  sending  me
 the  typescripts  of  'Shelob's  Lair'  and 'The  Choices of  Master Sam-
 wise', he said that he had 'got the hero into such a fix that not even an
 author will be able to extricate him without  labour and  difficulty.' He
 had by this time  conceived the  structure of  The Lord  of the  Rings as

                                                                    
                                                                         
 five 'Books', of which four were written (cf. also his letter  to Stanley
 Unwin  of  March  1945,  Letters  no.  98);  and in  this same  letter of
 November 1944 he forecast what was still to come:                        
                                                                         
   Book  Five and  Last opens  with the  ride of  Gandalf to  Minas Tirith,
   with which  The Palantir,  last chapter  of Book  Three closed.  Some of
   this is written or  sketched.(51) Then  should follow  the raising  of the
   siege of Minas Tirith  by the  onset of  the Riders  of Rohan,  in which
   King  Theoden  falls;  the  driving back  of the  enemy, by  Gandalf and
   Aragorn,  to  the  Black  Gate;  the  parley   in  which   Sauron  shows
   various  tokens  (such  as  the  mithril  coat)  to  prove  that  he has
   captured Frodo, but Gandalf refuses  to treat  (a horrible  dilemma, all
   the same,  even for  a wizard).  Then we  shift back  to Frodo,  and his
   rescue by Sam. From a  high place  they see  all Sauron's  vast reserves
   loosed  through  the  Black  Gate,  and  then  hurry  on  to  Mount Doom
   through  a  deserted  Mordor.  With  the  destruction  of the  Ring, the
   exact manner of which is not certain - all these last bits  were written
   ages ago, but no longer fit in detail, nor in  elevation (for  the whole
   thing  has  become  much  larger  and loftier)  - Baraddur  crashes, and
   the  forces  of  Gandalf  sweep  into  Mordor.  Frodo and  Sam, fighting
   with the last Nazgul  on an  island of  rock surrounded  by the  fire of
   the  erupting  Mount  Doom,   are  rescued   by  Gandalf's   eagle;  and
   then the clearing up of  all loose  threads, down  even to  Bill Ferny's
   pony,(52) must take place. A  lot of  this work  will be  done in  a final
   chapter  where  Sam  is found  reading out  of an  enormous book  to his
   children,  and  answering  all  their questions  about what  happened to
   everybody  (that  will  link  up  with  his discourse  on the  nature of
   stories in the Stairs of Kirith Ungol). But the final scene will  be the
   passage  of  Bilbo and  Elrond and  Galadriel through  the woods  of the
   Shire  on  their  way  to  the  Grey  Havens. Frodo  will join  them and
   pass  over  the  Sea  (linking with  the vision  he had  of a  far green
   country  in  the  house  of  Tom  Bombadil).  So  ends  the  Middle  Age
   and  the  Dominion  of  Men  begins,  and  Aragorn   far  away   on  the
   throne  of  Gondor  labours  to bring  some order  and to  preserve some
   memory  of  old  among  the  welter  of  men  that  Sauron   has  poured
   into  the  West.  But  Elrond  has gone,  and all  the High  Elves. What
   happens to the Ents I don't  yet know.  It will  probably work  out very
   differently from this plan  when it  really gets  written, as  the thing
   seems to write itself once I get going, as if the truth comes  out then,
   only imperfectly glimpsed in the preliminary sketch.                   
                                                                         
   From a letter to Stanley  Unwin written  on 21  July 1946  (Letters no.
 105),  now  more  than  two  years  since  the  doors of  the underground
 entrance  to  the  Tower  of  Kirith  Ungol were  slammed in  Sam's face,
 and  getting  on  for  two  since  'the  beacons  flared  in  Anorien and
 Theoden  came  to  Harrowdale',  it  is dear  that he  had done  no more.
 He  was  then  hopeful  that  he  would  soon  be  able to  begin writing

 again; and in another letter to Stanley Unwin of 7 December 1946           
 (Letters no. 107) he was 'on the last chapters'.                           
                                                                           
                                    NOTES.                                 
                                                                           
  1.   This  text  went  back  in  turn  to an  earlier outline,  'The Story
       Foreseen from Moria', VII.209.                                       
  2.   At  that  time  Kirith  Ungol  was  the  name of  the main  pass into
       Mordor.                                                              
  3.   The first mention of the Tower of Kirith Ungol.                      
  4.   As  I  have  noted  in  VII.260,  Sam's  visions  in  the  Mirror  of
       Galadriel were  already in  the fair  copy manuscript  of 'Galadriel'
       almost  exactly  as  in FR  (p. 377);  the actual  words used  in the
       manuscript  of  this  vision  were:  'and  now  he  thought   he  saw
       Frodo lying fast asleep under a great dark cliff: his face was pale.'
       When  my  father  wrote  this  the  words of  the outline  'The Story
       Foreseen  from  Moria'  (VII.209)  had  already  been  written: 'Gol-
       lum gets spiders  to put  spell of  sleep on  Frodo. Sam  drives them
       off. But cannot wake him.'                                           
  5.   The illegible word might possibly be 'grin'.                         
  6.   The  fair  copy  manuscript,  with   some  correction   and  addition
       from  the  time  of  composition,  reaches  the   text  of   TT,  pp.
       312-17,  in  all respects  save one:  the passage  describing Frodo's
       dash  towards  the  bridge  is  still  absent.  The  manuscript reads
       here:                                                                
       ... Frodo felt his senses reeling and his limbs weakening.           
          Sam   took   his   master's   arm.   'Hold   up,  Mr   Frodo!'  he
       whispered, but  his breath  seemed to  tear the  air like  a whistle.
       'Not  that  way!  Gollum  says  not  that  way  -  thank  goodness! I
       agree with him for once.'                                            
          Frodo took a grip on himself and wrenched his eyes away.          
       The reading of TT,  introduced later,  thus in  part returns  to the
       outline given on p. 186.                                             
  7.   In general I do not go into the detail of textual problems,  but this
       is a very unusual case, and  the reconstruction  of the  evolution of
       the  story  to  some  degree  depends  on  the  view  taken of  it; I
       therefore give here some account of it.                              
        Page  4  of  the  manuscript,  on which  the pencilled  draft though
       overwritten  can  mostly  be  read,  ends  with  the words:  'Then he
       saw  that  a  faint  light  was  welling through  his fingers  and he
       thrust it in his bosom.'  Page 5  was likewise  originally a  page of
       rough, continuous, pencil  drafting. The  top of  this page,  some 14
       lines or so, was erased, and the later narrative was written  in this
       space  (ending at  'and there  it suddenly  entered a  narrow opening
       in  the  rock.  They  had  come to  the first  stair that  Gollum had

                     
                                                                          
     spoken  of',  TT  p.  317).  Towards  the end  of this  short section,
     however,  the  erasure  was  not  complete, and  the following  can be
     read:  'not the  odour of  decay in  the valley  below .....  that the
     hobbits  could  recognize, a'.  Thus the  original narrative  was here
     entirely different, for within a short space they  are already  at the
     mouth of the tunnel.                                                  
      The  strange thing  is that  from this  point the  original pencilled
     draft (continuing with 'repellent evil taint on the air'),  not erased
     any  further  but  overwritten,  was  overwritten  with  the  earlier
     narrative ('Version 1'). Thus as the text in ink  stands on  this page
     it reads:
     ...  and  there  it  suddenly entered  a narrow  opening in  the rock.
     They  had  come  to  the  first stair  that Gollum  had spoken  of [TT
     p.                                                               317].
     repellent evil taint on the air.                                      
     The  text  following  on  from 'that  Gollum had  spoken of'  is found
     on  another sheet.  The only  explanation that  I can  see is  that my
     father for some reason left the  first (approximately)  fourteen lines
     in  pencil, and  only began  to overwrite  it in  ink at  an arbitrary
     point ('repellent evil taint on the air'). The first part of  the page
     thus  fell  victim  to  erasure and  re-use when  the later  story had
     come  into  being,  but  from the  point where  it had  been overwrit-
     ten in ink the earlier story  (Version 1)  could not  be so  used, and
     was merely struck out.                                                
  8. This version of the sentence is found in isolation on a slip, slightly
     different  from and  beginning slightly  earlier than  the form  of it
     that can be read in the pencilled draft (see note 7).                 
  9. With  'then  as  fear  left  him  it  began to  burn' cf.  the derived
     passage  in  'Shelob's Lair',  TT p.  329: 'then  as its  power waxed,
     and hope grew in  Frodo's mind,  it began  to burn';  cf. also  'As if
     his  indomitable spirit  had  set  its  potency  in motion,  the glass
     blazed suddenly' (TT p. 339).                                         
 10. This  much  of  'Version  1'  (struck  through)  was preserved  in the
     manuscript  because  the  page carried  a portion  of the  later story
     also, as explained in note 7.                                         
 11. The Bodleian page '617', like  page '5',  is written  in ink  over the
     underlying  pencilled  draft.  At  this point  there is  an adjective,
     describing  the  webs  and  ending  in  -ing,  which  my  father could
     not  read;  he  therefore  merely  let   the  pencilled   word  stand,
     without writing anything on top of it.                                
 12. The  words  hold  my  star-glass  behind  me  are  underlined  in  the
     original  -  possibly  because  my father  was emphasising  to himself
     that  Frodo  had  actually  given  the  phial  to Sam,  though whereas
     in  TT (p.  334) Sam  did not  give it  back to  Frodo, later  in this
     version  (p.  198)  he  takes it  from Frodo's  hand during  his fight
     with Ungoliant.                                                       

          Frodo  drew  Sting:  on the  previous page  '5' of  the manuscript
       Frodo had already drawn Sting (p. 193), but this, I feel  certain, is
       no  more  than  an  oversight, and  does not  call into  question the
       succession of the two pages.                                         
  13.  In the margin is written here: 'Dis. into a side hole?', where 'Dis.'
       obviously  stands  for 'Disappears'.  This was  added later,  when my
       father  was  pondering  the  idea  that  Gollum  in  fact disappeared
       while they were still in the tunnel.                                 
  14.  At  the foot  of the  page is  written in  pencil: 'Make  Gollum come
       reluctantly back.' This clearly belongs  with the  underlying pencil-
       led  draft;  when  over-writing  the  draft  in ink  my father  put a
       query against these words.                                           
  15.  The  caption  of the  picture, Shelob's  Lair, was  added afterwards;
       at this time the name of the Great Spider was Ungoliant (p. 196).
  16.  At the time of  writing, page  415 of  'Version 1'  is in  the United
       States, page 617 in England, and page 819 in France.                 
  17.  This is the first appearance of the one Great  Spider (as  opposed to
       many spiders).                                                       
  18.  On  the  name Ungoliant(e),  derived from  The Silmarillion,  see the
       Etymologies, V.396.                                                  
  19.  When  Sam  twisted  round  as  Gollum  seized  him  from  behind,  in
       TT  Gollum's  hold  on  Sam's  mouth  slipped,  whereas in  Version 1
       it  was  his  hold  with  his left  hand on  Sam's neck  that slipped
       (down to his waist). Thus it is not said in Version  1 that  'all the
       while  Gollum's  other  hand  was tightening  on Sam's  throat'. When
       Sam  hurled  himself  backwards  and  landed   on  Gollum   'a  sharp
       hiss came out of him, and for a breathless second  his left  arm that
       was  about  Sam's  waist  relaxed'  (in  TT  'for  a second  his hand
       upon  Sam's  throat  loosened').  Sam's  second blow,  falling across
       Gollum's back,  did not  break the  staff, and  the third  blow aimed
       by Sam was with the staff, not with his sword.                       
  20.  Sam's staff was not  broken at  the second  blow, as  it was  in TT;
       see notes 19 and 42.                                                 
  21.  The handwriting is so difficult that my  father pencilled  in glosses
       here  and  there  where  he  had  evidently been  puzzled by  what he
       had written  not long  before. -  It is  often the  case with  a very
       difficult preliminary draft, which can really  only be  deciphered by
       recourse  to  the  following  text,  that some  particularly puzzling
       word  or  phrase  cannot be  solved in  this way:  another expression
       appears in its place; and in such  cases one  may often  suspect that
       my father could not make it out himself. Cf. note 11.                
  22.  On  the right  is seen  the 'Wraith-road'  from Minas  Morghul rising
       to the main pass in this region (p. 195).                            
  23.  The  brackets  round this  sentence, seen  in the  reproduction, were
       put  in subsequently,  and probably  the question  mark also.  On the
       tunnel being the work of Orcs see p. 215.                            

 24. I cannot read the word at the bottom of the plan of the tunnels,      
                                                                         
     also  in blue  ball-point pen,  though possibly  it also  reads 'orc-
     path'.                                                               
 25. Here appears the name Imlad Morghul (see p. 176).                    
 26. On  lines  3-4  of  the  page  reproduced  on  p.  204 are  the words
     'where  forgotten  winters  in   the  Dark   Years  had   gnawed  and
     carved  the sunless  stone.' In  TT (p.  319) the  words in  the Dark
     Years are absent. Seven lines from the  bottom of  the page  the text
     reads:  'or  so  it seemed  to him  in feeling  not in  reason', with
     pencilled correction to the reading of TT:  'or so  it seemed  to him
     in  that  dark  hour  of  weariness,  still  labouring  in  the stony
     shadows under Kirith Ungol.'                                         
 27. The illegible words look most like 'flies back'. If this is what they
     are, the  meaning must  be very  elliptically expressed:  Frodo flees
     and the eyes pursue, but  every time  he turns  round holding  up the
     phial the eyes halt.                                                 
 28. A trace of a stage in which the 'trap' or 'hole' in the floor  of the
     tunnel  was  present  as well  as the  branching ways  is found  on a
     slip carrying very disjointed drafting:                              
        Suddenly  a  thought  came  into  Frodo's  mind.  Gollum,  he  had
     been  ahead:  where   was  he?   Had  he   fallen  into   that  awful
     lurking  hole?  'Gollum!  I  wonder  whether  he's  all   right,'  he
     muttered. 'Smeagol! '                                                
           Groping in  the dark  they found  that the  opening or  arch to
     the  left  was  blocked  a  few feet  inside, or  so it  seemed: they
     could      not      push      their      way      in,      it     was
     he called or tried to call Smeagol! But his voice cracked and        
           They tried first the opening to the left,  but quickly  it grew
     narrower   and   turned   away   mounting   by  long   shallow  steps
     towards  the  mountain  wall.  'It  can't be  this way,'  said Frodo.
     'We must try the other.'                                             
           'We'll take  the broader  way,' said  Frodo. 'Any  passage that
     turns sideways .....'                                                
 29. Frodo's  cry  here  has  the  form  Alla Earendel  Elenion Ankalima,
     and   Alla  remained   through  the   following  texts,   only  being
     changed to Aiya after the book was in type.                          
 30. The word picked in TT p. 330 ('but at its edge a blue  fire flicked')
     is an error for flickered which was missed in the proof.             
 31. Perhaps  for  no  other  reason  than  that   this  section   of  the
     manuscript   had   become   very   ragged  through   emendation,  and
     would have to be  replaced, it  had well  before this  point degener-
     ated into  rough pencil,  at the  end becoming  an outline  very hard
     to read.                                                             
 32. The reference is to  The Hobbit,  Chapter Ill  'A Short  Rest', where
     Elrond,   speaking  of   the  swords   Glamdring  and   Orcrist  taken
     from the trolls' hoard, says (in the text  of the  original edition):

      'They  are  old  swords, very  old swords  of the  elves that  are now
      called  Gnomes.  They  were   made  in   Gondolin  for   the  Goblin-
      wars.'                                                               
                                                                          
  33. This sentence ('For though once  long ago  he had  seen it  ...') was
      at first  retained  in  the  final  fair  copy  manuscript,  with the
      addition: 'neither did he understand his master.'                    
  34. It  is  dearly  written  in  the  'fair  copy'  style, but  with some
      repetition  and  other  features  pointing to  immediate composition,
      and  it  was  corrected  subsequently in  pencil; I  cite it  here as
      corrected.                                                           
  35. These  words  are  used  also  in  the  story   in  The   Two  Towers
      (p.  330),  but there  only Shelob  knows of  the web  at the  end of
      the tunnel.                                                          
  36. If this part of the draft did in fact belong with Version 1 there had
      been no encounter with the Spider in  the tunnel,  so that  when this
      scene (surviving of course in TT, p. 339) was first written  this was
      the first  time  that  she  had  been  confronted  with the  light of
      Earendel's star in the Phial of Galadriel.                           
  37. The  words 'foul  but already  pitiable' are  read from  a subsequent
      gloss  of  my  father's.  He gave  up on  the next  word and  wrote a
      query  about  it;  it  may  perhaps  be  'scuttle'.  The  words  'but
      already  pitiable'  are  notable.  In  TT  there is  no trace  of the
      thought that Shelob, entirely hateful and evil,  denier of  light and
      life,  could  ever  be  'pitiable' even  when defeated  and hideously
      wounded.                                                             
  38. This  goes  back  to the  original outline  'The Story  Foreseen from
      Lorien'  (p.  185),  as  does Sam's  thought of  building a  cairn of
      stones, and the phrase later in this passage 'an elvish beauty  as of
      one that is long past the shadows', which survives in TT.            
  39. Cf. the initial outline, p. 190: Turns  back -  resolved to  lie down
      by  Frodo  till  death  comes.  Then  he  sees  Gollum  come  and paw
      him.  He  gives  a  start  and  runs  back.  But  orcs  come  out and
      Gollum bolts.'                                                       
  40. The first occurrence of the name Shelob (see p. 183).                  
  41. Cf. the sentence added earlier in this draft at  the point  where Sam
      puts on the Ring: 'His hand hangs weighed down and useless.'         
  42. In the  original account  of Sam's  fight with  Gollum his  staff was
      not  broken  (notes  19  and  20);  this  was  where,  and  why, that
      element  entered  the  story.  The  words  'The  staff   cracked  and
      broke' were added to the fair copy (TT p. 335).                      
  43. This  is  obscure.  A   proper  name   beginning  with   B,  possibly
      Ballung  or  something  similar,  is  followed by  a sign  that might
      represent  'and'  or  'or',  but  'and'  would  mean that  Leader and
      says  were  miswritten  for  Leaders  and  say,  and  though  in this
      exceedingly  rapid  script  words  are  frequently  defective  or mis-
      written  the sentence  reappears (p.  214), and  there the  words are

 again Leader and says. Perhaps my father intended 'or' and was              
 merely hesitating between two possible names for the Orc.                   
44.  On  this  page  of drafting  is a  hasty pencilled  sketch of  the final
 approach to the Cleft, and  a little  plan of  the tunnel.  In the  first of
 these  the  place  where  Frodo  lay  is  marked  by  an  X  on   the  path,
 and just to  the left  of it  in the  cliff-wall is  the opening  from which
 Shelob  came.  Another  entry  is  seen  in  the  distance  at  the  top  of
 the  steps leading  to the  summit of  the pass,  at the  foot of  the cliff
 on which the Tower stands.                                                  
   The  plan  of  the  tunnel is  reproduced here.  It will  be seen  that it
 differs  from  the  elaborate  earlier   plan  reproduced   on  p.   201  in
 that  only  one  passage  is  shown  leading  to  the  left  off   the  main
 tunnel   at   the   eastern   end,   curving  round   and  leading   to  the
 Tower.                                                                      
                                                     

 45.  With this account of the origin of the tunnels cf. the outline
      accompanying the plan (p. 199): 'This tunnel  is of  orc-make (?)
      and has the usual branching passages.' It survived into  the fair
      copy, where it was subsequently replaced by that in TT (p. 346).
 46.  The names of  the leaders  of the  Orc-bands were  rather bewilder-
      ingly changed in the drafts (and some  transient forms  cannot be
      read). At  first (p.  212) they  were Gazmog  (of the  Tower) and
      Zaglun (of Minas Morghul), and  in another  brief draft  of their
      genial  greetings  they  become  Yagul  and  Uftak  Zaglun   -  so
      written: Zaglun may have been intended to  replace Uftak,  but on
      the  other  hand  the  double-barrelled Orc-name  Naglur-Danlo is
      found (p. 212).  The name  Ufthak was  subsequently given  to the
      Orc found (and left where he was) by Shagrat  and his  friends in
      Shelob's larder, 'wide awake and  glaring' (TT p. 350).  In the
      present text the names were at  first Yagul  (of the  Tower) and
      Shagrat (of Minas Morghul), but  were reversed  in the  course of

  writing  (and  in  a  following  draft   the  names   became  reversed
  again  at  one  point,  though  not  I  think intentionally).  At this
  point,  where  the  Orc  from  Morghul  is  speaking, my  father first
  wrote Shag[rat), changed it  to Yagul,  and then  again changed  it to
  Shagrat.  See  note  48.  -  Yagul  was  replaced  by  Gorbag  in the
  course of writing the fair copy.                                     
 47.  Dushgoi: Orc name for Minas Morghul.                             
 48.  The  text actually  has Shagrat  here, but  this should  have been
  changed to Yagsil (see note 46).                                     
 49.  The  story of  the ascent  of the  Pass of  Kirith Ungol  was early
  divided  into  three  chapters,  with  the  titles  which  were never
  changed;  the  numbers  being   XXXVIII,  XXXIX,   and  XL.   See  my
  father's letters cited on pp. 183-4.                                 
 50.  After  the  verse  my father  wrote: 'such  words in  the Noldorin
  tongue as his waking mind knew not', striking this out at once.      
 51.  This was work done in October 1944: see pp. 233-4.                 
 52.  Cf. VII.448.                                                       
                                                                      
                         Note on the Chronology.                       
                                                                      
   Time-scheme D continues somewhat further than does C (see p. 182):
                                                                      
 Friday  Feb.  10  Frodo and  Sam come  to Shelob's  lair early  in the
 morning. They get out in the  late afternoon  - nearly  at top  of the
 pass. Frodo is captured and carried to orc-tower at night.            
 Saturday  Feb.  11  Attack at  dawn on  besieged Minas  Tirith. Riders
 of  Rohan  suddenly  arrive  and  charge,  overthrowing  the  leaguer.
 Fall of Theoden. Host of Mordor flung into River.                     
 Sunday   Feb.   12   Gandalf   (Eomer   and   Aragorn   and   Faramir)
 advance into Ithilien.                                                
                                                                      
 Time-scheme S goes no further than February 8.                        
 Pencilled  entries  were  added  to February  11 in  Scheme D:  'Sam at
 the Iron Door early hours of Feb. 11. Sam gets into orc-tower. Rescues
 Frodo.  They  fly  and  descend  into  Mordor';  and  'Ships  of Harad
 burnt'.                                                               
